A Court of Canters
See

Save my life and take all

Tip your (...) or I Will ^illy on

I will Revenge

an easy mort

I was huedin the Naskin

Claying the Lung

a prigam of prancers

I Will smoke yt Iacka^

I Will wap your bite

Kinchen (...) ye (...)



THE CANTING Academy, OR, THE Devils Cabinet Opened: WHEREIN IS SHOWN
The Mysterious and Villainous Practices of that wicked Crew, commonly known by
the Names of Hectors, Trapanners, Gilts, etc.

TO WHICH IS ADDED A Complete Canting-Dictionary, both of old Words, and such
as are now most in use.

With several New Catches AND SONGS, Composed by the choicest Wits of the Age.

A Book very useful and necessary to be read by all sorts of People.

London, Printed by F. Leach for Mat. Drew, and are to be sold by the
Booksellers. 1673.

To all sorts of Persons, But more especially, Innkeepers, Victuallers, and
TRAVELERS.
Courteous Reader:
YOu are not ignorant how little there is extant in Print of a way of speaking,
commonly known by the name of Canting, a Speech as confused, as the Professors
thereof are disorderly disposed; and yet you know how much it is in use among
some Persons, I mean, the more debauched and looser sort of people. I would not
advise any honest minded man, or one that valu^ (...) R^putation to run (...)
into a Rogues Company; but yet I know he cannot avoid falling into their
Company some times; if it should be your mishap, it will be a great convenience
to you to have some knowledge of what is contained in this ensuing Treatise: In
the first part you will know how to distinguish a Rogue from an honest Man, and
what the Properties of a Villain are; in the later part you may acquaint your
(...), with so much Canting, ^s will give you to understand what they say, and
what damned designs they are about.

The Canting-Dictionary English before Canting, and Canting before English is
more complete than any has been published (...) and I can assure (...) the
helps extant being so inconsidenable^ the pains I took in the Collection of
(...) Words is unima ginable; however I shall not (...) my pains, if it may
profit my Contrymen, whose welfare I have herein studied, and if this prove
acceptable, I shall (...) in deavon^ by laboring to serve you in something
else of this nature. Fare well.

R. Head.

THE CONTENTS.
THe Authors Design Page 1. The Form of the Oath, with the Articles, taken by
the Gypsies and Canters at their first admission. Page 3 Why they follow this
course of life. Page 5 1 Canting Song. Page 11 2 Canting Song called, The
Beggars Curse. Page 14 The same in English ibid. 3 Canting Song, A Wenches
Complaint for, and praise of her lusty Comrogue. Page 16 The same in English.
Page 18 4 Canting Song, or the Rogues delight. Page 19 Beggars Holiday Page 33
An Alphabetical Canting Vocabulary, Canting before English. Page 34 An An
Alphabetical Canting Dictionary English before Canting. Page 47 A Character of
the Ro^uish Professors of the Diabolical Gibberish called Canting. Page 58 A
Padding Song. Page 92 The Park Song. The vicious and remarkable Lives of Mother
Craftsby and Mrs. Wheedle. Page 109 Miscellanies, and other Jovial Paradoxes,
or the Canters Academy of Complements. Page 155 Several New Songs and Catches,
composed by the choicest Wits of the Age. Page 173 Examples of Covetousness,
Idleness, Gluttony, and Lechery.
Villainies Discovered: OR THE DEVILS CABINET Broken Open, etc.
THe task I have undertaken is so difficult, and the Persons I am about to
desoribe so many, and their Vices and Practices so Villainously various,
(though they all concenter in one Hellish design) that I know not how to begin,
nor how to end when I have begun, for their Rogueries are infinite, and would
everlastingly practice them, did not Hemp of their own beating, and a Rope of
their own making, put an end to the further progress of their matchless
Villainies.

However, I shall endeavor to give you an exact account of these Caterpillars,
with their hidden and mysterious way of speaking, which they make use of to
blind the eyes of those they have cheated or robbed, and inform one another
with what they have done, or design to do. There is no professed Rogue whatever,
(if he be qualified for his thieving faculty) but must be well versed in
Canting: and to the intent that they may not fall short of being excellent
proficients in all manner of Roguery, they lay the ground work thereof in
Canting, for by this they are able to converse with, and understand those of
the upper Form of Villainy, and by constant frequenting their company, become
acquainted with Canting words which are most new, and what are thrown aside as
too commonly known, the use whereof if not timely left off, may be the
Instruments which may unhappily betray them to their condign punishments.

The principal Professors of this Gibberish or Canting, I find, are a sort of
People which are vulgarly called Gypsies; and they do endeavor to persuade the
ignorant, that they were extracted from the Egyptians, a people heretofore very
famous for Astronomy, Natural Magic, the Art of Divination, with many other
occult Arts and Sciences; and these Strolers (that they may seem to have their
derivation from these ancient black Magi) are great pretenders to
Fortune-telling, and to color their impostures, they artificially discolor
their faces, and with this tawny hew and tatterdemallion habit, they rove up
and down the Country, and with the pretension of wonderful prediction, delude a
many of the younger and less intelligent people.

And that they may not prejudice their Society any ways by foolish babbling,
betraying the hellish secrets of the fraternity, they swear all that are
admitted into their Fellowship: for did they not take that course, they could
not be safe among themselves from homebred treachery. For as they live
together, so they lie promiscuously one with another; so that as they know not
how to claim a propriety in the children begotten, the Mothers ^nely being
sensible whose they are by conception, so all things else are in common among
them. This general interest ties them more firmly together, than if all their
rags were twisted into ropes to bind them indissolvably from a Separation.

However they have a Form of an Oath, with Articles annexed thereunto, which
though it binds but slightly, yet they keep it for the most part inviolably,
which every one must take before he is admitted into this ragged society,
administered by the principal Maunder, or Roguing Stroler.

The Form of the Oath, with the Articles thereunto annexed, which these Gypsies
and other Stroling Canters take, when they are first admitted into this Society.
HIs name is first demanded, and after some little pause, a Nickname given
him, by which he is ever after called, and in time his other name is quite
forgotten. Then up he stands in the middle, and directing his face to the
Principal, he swears in this manner; as it is dictated to him by one of the
most experienced:

I Crank Cuffin do swear to be a true Brother, and will in all things obey the
commands of the great tawny Prince, and keep his counsel, nor divulge the
Secrets of my Brethren.

I will take my Princes part against all shall oppose him, or any of us,
according to the utmost of my ability: nor will I suffer him, or any thereunto
belonging, to be abused by any strange Abrams, Rufflers, Hookers, Palliards,
Swadlers, Irish Toyls, Swig-men, Whip-jacks, Jark-men, Bawdy-baskets,
Dommerars, Clapperdogeons, Patric^es, or Curtalls, but will defend him or them
as much as I can against th^se or any other Outlyers whatever.

I will not conceal ought I win out of Libkens, or from the Rufmans, but will
preserve it for the use of the Company.

I will never leave nor forsake this Company but observe and keep all the times
of appointment either by day or by night, in any place whatsoever.

I will not teach any one to Cant, nor will I disclose ought of our mysteries
to them, although they flaug me to the death.

Lastly, I will cleave to my Doxy Wap stiffly, and will bring her Clothes,
Hens, Turkies, Piggs, Geese, or any thing else I can come at, as winnings for
her wapping.

Having adopted a new Brother, a general stock is raised for Booz; as for Peck,
that they can procure without money; the Booz being fetched, some are sent to
break the Rufmans, for firing, others to filch Tybs of the Buttery, Cackling
cheats, Margery Praters, Red-shanks, and Grunting cheats; their Morts are their
Butchers, who presently make bloody work with what living things are brought
them. The fire kindled under some remore hedge or obscure place, the food is
diversely dressed; you must not imagine that they had a Jack, or Dripping-pan,
to roast their meat with; or when it was dressed, they were overcurious of sauce,
napkins, or trenchers; but to work they go when all is ready, Tooth and Nail;
and having eaten more like Beasts than Men, they drink more like Swine than
humane Creatures.

The Reasons, or Causes, of their following this course of Life.
THey are a lazy and idle fort of people which cannot endure to take pains for
an honest livelihood, but rather then labor, strole up and down all the Summer
time in Droves or Companies, and by telling fortunes (that is, by deluding
young Country wenches, and other foolish and credulous people) they pick up a
great deal of Money, not only what is freely given, but they will dexterously
pick pocket whilst they are telling these simple people what shall hereafter
befall them. For whilst one of these cunning Gypsies holds the hand, pretending
to read therein strange things which shall come to pass, another secretly and
nimbly dives into their pocket; what money is taken from thence, is instantly
conveyed to another, and so to a third, and by a fourth so cunningly hid, that
the strictest search shall never find it out. If you tax them therewith, they
will make a thousand imprecations, oaths and protestations that they have none
of it, wishing the ground may open and swallow them up if they meddled
therewith, yet if some perty reward be offered to the discoverer, or the severe
lash produced, or soundly threatened, whatever was lost shall be instantly
restored.

I have heard when silver hatbands were in fashion, ^h^ several of them were
stolen off the hats of such who were so indiscreet as to inquire of these
roguish Impostors what shall befall them, and by such means, that one would
admire how it could be done, for whilst the Mother did earnestly look in the
hand, the child at the back pined up with a skewer (after the Irish fashion)
reaching over the Mothers head takes off the hatband; I am credibly informed
that these childeren were taught to do it ^t two year old. Besides picking of
pockets, they are very dextrous in stealing any thing that comes near their
hands, either within doors or without, which they instantly convert into Money,
and that into drink, of which they all share alike, all things being in common
amongst them; this is it which makes them take such delight in this villainous
way of living; in this following story you shall more fully understand their
way.

In the Year one thousand six hundred seventy and one, I rode from London to
visit some friends at Rochester, by the way I met with a crew of str^ling
canting Gypsies, whilst I was busying my eyes about them with more curiosity
than discretion, I was surrounded by them and so beset with them or every side,
that I knew not what to think, having before moso many palpable symptoms of
approaching danger; however, I thought it prudence not to express any fear, and
therefore undauntedly I demanded their business, and the reason of their thus
thronging about me? Sir, said one, which seemed to be the lustiest and most
confident fellow of the whole Company, we come from a far courtry (speaking in
a strange tone, and stranger English) and are the true children of the Wise men
of the East, we are skilled in the dark and secret mysteries of Nature, and
sucked from our Mothers breasts the knowledge of the stars, and can tell what
has or will befall mortals, by the lines in their hands; hereupon he desired
me to let him look into my hand, and he would tell me things I should be glad
and willing to understand. Whilst he was busying himself in telling me my
fortunes, I with much earnestness observed his countenance, which methoughts I
knew, notwithstanding its tawny dye; I viewed it again and again, and by often
comparing the present lineaments of his face, with those my memory had formerly
retained of him, I grew confident this man must be one of my former
acquaintance. Having thoroughly viewed my hand, and seemingly taking some
information from my face, he began to tell me some truths that I knew to be so,
(for like a cunning Rogue he had not forgot me) though he would not take the
least notice of me; and that I might not suspect him, he presently roved from
the discourse of what he experimentally knew of me, and talked at random of I
know not what; Having finished his predictions, instead of giving him a reward,
I desired that I might see his hand, and in requital of the pains he had taken
to tell me my fortune, I told him, I would tell him his; With some
unwillingness he gave me his hand, and looking into it, after some pause, I
spoke after this manner: Sir, I can but reverence and admire you for your great
skill, and must respect your person, in spite of the meaness of your apparel.
What you have informed me with, for the most part is so true, that had you been
my bosom and most familiar Friend, you could not have told me more; and that I
may make proof of my knowledge in your mysterious art of divination, give me
leave to tell you some things, the truth whereof your self shall be Judge of.

First, You are an English man, and have not one drop of Egyptian (...) in you;
the place of your nativity was Excester, where you made some proficency in the
learning at the Grammar School; but so notorious arch and Roguish you grew,
that before you arrived to sixteen years of age you had like to have been
hanged twice. From this famous Western City, you were transmitted to London,
where you had not served above half the time of your Apprenticeship, before you
had committed so many villainies, that London was resolved to spew you out of
your Native Country; for one fact (you wot of well) more notorious than the
rest, transported you to Virginia.

My skill in Palmestry, Physiognomy, and Astrology, will not inform me more
than what I have related: You know how you have behaved your self there, and
since your return, and You and I both know what will become of you at last, if
you do not shun this wicked and lazy course of life, and endeavor to live
other wise.

Hereupon I clapped spurrs to my Horse, but could not stir one foot, for this
sturdy Rogue had fast hold of my bridle Reins. Now did I think he would have
hindered me from ever telling Fortunes more, but I was soon convinced to the
contrary, when I saw in what humble manner he beseeched me to stay, that he
might have a little time to discourse with me: I granted his request, and did
so far prevail with me, as to lie that night at an house of his appointment.

Without much ceremony in taking leave of one the other, on I rid to the place
appointed for our meeting, it being not many miles distant from the place where
I met with this ragged crew of Tatterdemallions, I got in four hours before
Sunset: I might have been there sooner had it not been for the obscurity of the
place on which this stately Maunding Mansion, this Begging Dormitory stood,
which I found out more by the description my Captain Gypsy gave me of it, than
any other information I met with by the way.

Arriving at the house, with what tokens I brought with me, my reception was as
kind as they could make it; and preparations were instantly made, not only for
my sake, but for the welcome of the Strolers they expected.

The house was not very splendid you may imagine, yet large enough to contain
three times tha Company. Whilst I was pensively sitting, thinking on what I had
seen, and studying how I might divert my self till their coming, my Hosts
daughter brought me some Ale, of which I had no sooner tasted, but I was forced
to commend the goodness of it.

She was homely, yet cleanly clad, and very tall. The Father and Mother, what
with age and artificial means they heretofore used to discolor their faces,
looked like the twins of a lecherous He-Devil, begotten on an overgrown
age-ridden Lapland Witch; for it seems this pair of Housekeepers had formerly
used the trade of stroling and telling fortunes, but growing old and unable to
travel, had by the assistance of the Brotherhood, erected this Fabric for
their reception.

The goodness of the Ale made me drink freely of it, and the liberty I took to
indulge my appetite, made me as freely talk. This persuaded my Host and Hostess
that they might take some freedom to, nor was the daughter therein a jot behind
us; I might now properly say, we were as merry as so many Beggars: and that I
might not want Music to increase my mirth, the Father, Mother, and Daughter
did interchangably sing, but in such a language that I should never have
understood what they sung, had they not been so kind to be their own
interpreters. The songs which they sung in Canting I have added to this
treatise.

I drank to so high a pitch, that I was forced to forsake my Company and betake
my self to sleep, trusting them to do with me as they pleased, but awaking
after two hours, and considering how foolishly I had done, I examined my
pockets but found nothing missing, then turning my self about, there lay my
untouched Bedfellow, the Hosts daughter by my side, who tired with expectation
was fallen asleep, it was unkindly done of me to slight the present my loving
Landlady had sent me, and I could not but be troubled at the dissatisfaction I
read in the eyes and face of the poor fooled and cheated Girl.

By that time, I got up, in came the Egyptian Prince, according to his hour,
with his Concubines children and the rest of his retinue, who were instantly
conducted into the largest room in the house, commonly called the Hall, where
every one being seated, and store of booz and fogus, (Drink and Tobacco)
brought them, I was acquainted with their arrival, and of his Higness desire to
have some conference with me.

I obeyed the Summons who upon my approach ar^s^ and welcomed me into their
Society: there were few complements past between us, instead thereof the brown
bowl past often, none refusing their liquor, nay, these of four years old were
taught (...) the bottom of the cup; in an hours time the room and all in i^
became invisible, for nothing was to be seen, but the smoke that proceeded from
their Pipes of an inch long.

The fury of this smoking rage being somewhat abated, and having pretty well
drenched their Vesuvian throats, they began to sing their wild tunes:
endeavoring to make harmony out of the greatest discord imaginable.

I would fain have had some discourse with my old acquaintance, but he desired
me to defer it a little longer and hereupon he calls a lusty rogue to him, and
comands him to sing a Canting song, which was made upon the Budge, that is,
such who steal into houses in the night carrying off what next comes to their
hands; of which tribe, as he told me, he was formerly one, which he deserted
for the continual hazard attending the Professers thereof, and betook himself
to this, in which there is no great danger of life, only a fleaing of the skin
now and then or so; and thus he sang.

1. Canting Song.
Of the Budge.
THe Budge is one that slips into an house in the dark, and takes what next
comes to his hands and marche^h off with it.
Budge it is a delicate trade,
And a delicate trade of fame,
For when that we have Bit the blow, that is, done ^he fear, or committed the
theft or roguery of what nature soever.
bit the blow
We carry away the Cully
game.
But if the naps
Cully us; that is, the Person robbed apprehends them.
naps us,
And the Lurries, Money, Watch, Ring, or any other moveable.
Lurries from us take,
O then he Rubs (...) ^o the
rubs us to the Whi^, sends them to Newgate.
Whit,
Though we are hardly worth a Make, ha^ ^eny.
Make.
And when that we come to the Whit,
Our Darbies, irons, or Shackles or fetters for Fellons.
Darbyes to behold,
And for to do our penance there
We booz the Water cold;
But when that we come out again,
And the merry Hick, any person whatever of whom they can make a prey.
Hick we meet,
Weel File, to rob or cheat.
file him of his Cole Money of any s^rt.
cole,
As he As he pikes, as he walks o^ goes.
pikes along the street.
And when that we have filed him,
Perhaps of half a Half a job, ten shillings, or half a piece.
Job
Then every man to the Boozing Ken, an Alehouse or house of entertaintment.
Boozing Ken
And there to fence his hog, spend his shilling
fence his hog.
But if the Cully napps us,
As a thing it is unfit
To take away the cole from us
And rub us to the Whit.
And when we come unto the Whit
For garnish they do cry,
Marry fogh, Pox on you, you son of a bi^ch,
You shall have it by and by.
Then every man with his Mob, a Wench or Whore.
Mob in his hand,
And so we kiss and part,
From hence we are divorced
To the Nubbing cheat, the Gallows.
Nubbing-cheat in a Cart.
And when we come to the Nubbing-cheat
For running on the Budge,
There stands Jack Kitch, the proper name of the Common Hangman that is now in
being.
Jack Kitch, that son of a bitch,
Who owes us all a grudge;
For when that he has nubbed us,
And our friends Tips him no Cole, gives him no Money.
tips him no cole,
He takes his Chive, a Knife.
Chive and cuts us down
And tips us into the hole.
But if we have a friend stands by
Six and eight pence the usual fee which is given to carry back the body of the
executed Malefactor to give it Christian burial.
Six and eight pence for to pay,
Then they may have (...) back,
And carry us quite (...)
For at St Giles, or St. Martins
A burying place is still;
And there is an end of a running Budge,
And the Son of a whore has his will.
This song being ended, I was asked how I liked it, I told him the tune might be
passable, but in the composition there was much more impudence than sense or
reason; he presently replied, how grossly Sir you are mistaken, to expect from
such either sense or reason; for had they either, they could not be so impudent
as to continue in such courses which bring some or other of that Gang to the
Gallows every Sessions. I was somewhat surprised at this sudden reply from a
person so inconsiderable to outward appearance, but the remembrance of his
former good education and natural arts, lessened my admiration. Whilst I was
thus nusing with my self, another of this Hellish conregation put me out of my
dumps, by voluntary inging after this manner.

2. Canting Song.
The Beggars Curse.
THe Ruffin cly the nab of the Harmanbeck
If we maund Pannam, lap, or ruff peck
Or poplars of Yarum; he cuts bing to the Ruffmans,
Or else he boldly swears by the Lightmans,
To put our stamps fast in the Harmans,
The Ruffin cly the Ghost of the Harmanbeck.
If we heave a booth we cly the Jerk,
If we niggle or Mill a Boozing Ken
Or nip a bung that has but a win,
Or dup the Giger of a Gentry Coves Ken,
Straight to the Cuffin quire we bing,
And then to the Whit, to scour the cramprings,
From thence at the Nubbing-cheat we trine in the Lightmans
The Bube and the Ruffin cly the Harmanbeck and Harmans.
Thus rendered in English, word for word.
THe Devil take the Constables head
If we beg milk, bacon, butter or bread,
Milk, Pottage to the hedge bids us hie,
Or swears by this light in the stocks we shall lie.
The Devil haunt the Constables Ghost,
If we rob but a Cabin we are whipped at a post;
If a pitiful Alehouse we rob or break open,
Or cut a purse has but one single token,
Or come stealing in at a Gentleman's door,
To the Justice we are hurried though never so poor
Then next to the Goal to be sha^kled with irons
And then to the Gallows which many invirons,
Where up we are trussed in the day time; the Pox
Take the Constable and the Devil take the stocks.
Now it was thought high time to interline their inging with drinking, which
they did with a wit^ss. The strangeness of their adventure, as it ^ossest my
brains with admiration, so it seized my fancy with some kind of delectation,
and to expr^ some sense of satisfaction, I seemed in some measure as merry as
they; my complacency to their humors so obliged them, that striving to outdo
each other in singing, I thought with the Nightingal, they would have dyed in
the attempt; had not supper come in in the mean time to stop their Mouths. I
li^ed the cheer well enough, being good provision, and well dressed, but the
sight of the opposite Guests had so turned my stomach, that not one bit would
go down with me.

I could not forbear laughing outright, when I considered my sitting at the
table. I was seated at the upper end, as deserving the place by the merit of my
garme ^s, the two poles admitting of no greater difference than between their
clothes and mine. Any one of indifferent judgment seeing me so enthroned, would
have sworn I had been King of the Beggars, or that I had been some Low Country
Factor sent over to traffic with these Rag-merchants.

Our stomachs were so sharp, that we tock not the tithe of the time a Dutchman
does in the filling his belly; to be short, we fell again to drinking; and now
to gratify me for my company, the fair Barbarian Princess would needs take
upon her to sing also; this Princess you must know was the principal and most
beloved Concubine of this Gypsy King, and had been so to three before him, one
whereof was so severely (flaugg'd at the Tumbler) whipped at the Carts-arse for
several mis-demeaners, that he dyed thereof, the other was (nub'd) hanged, and
the last (marrinated) transported.

She was not so old but that her Prince acknowledged her the most bucksom thing
he ever saw, and ^ndeed by her countenance I could guess no less; but so foul
and ^athsome by reason of her Rags and Hellish paint, that he must have a
stronger stomach than I, that has a mind to swop his Jockum with her: the song
she sung was this.

3. Canting Song.
Being a Wenches complaint for, and praise of her lusty Rogue, who rambled the
Country with her.
NOw my Kinchin Cove is gone,
By the Rum pad maunded none,
In quarrons both for stamps and bone
Like my Clapperdogeon.
Dimber damber fare thee well
Palliards all thou did excel,
And thy Jocky bore the bell,
Glymmer on it never fell.
Thou the Cramprings never did scowre
Harmans had on thee no power,
Harmanbecks did never toure
For thee, though Drawers still had loure.
Duds and cheats thou often have won
Yet the Cuffin-quire could shun
And thy Deusavile did run,
Else the chates had thee undone.
Cank and Dommerar thou could play
Or Rum-Maunder in one day,
And like an Abram-Cove could pray
Yet pass with Jybes well jerk'd away.
When the Darkmans have been wet
Thou the Crackmans down did beat
For Glymmar whilst a quacking cheat,
Or Tib of the Buttery was our meat.
Red shanks then I could not lack,
Ruff-peck still hung at my back,
Grannam ever filled my sack,
With lap and poplars held I tack.
To thy Bughar and thy skew,
Filch and Jybes I bid adieu,
Though thy Togeman was not new,
Yet the Ruffler in it was true.
In English thus.
NOw my little Rogue is gone,
By the Highway begs there none,
In body both for length and bone,
Like my Clapperdogeon.
Pretty Rascal fare thee well,
Born beggars all thou do excel,
Thy Sweep-stakes still shall bare the Bell,
No Fire-ship yet aboard it fell.
Bolts my Bully ne'r^ did wear
Never thou the stocks did fear,
For thee no Constable did swear,
For thou had Money and to spare.
Clothes by stealth thou often have got,
Yet the Justice took thee not,
But through the Country thou did trot,
The Gallows else had been thy lot.
Dumb and Madman thou could play,
Or a drivling Fool all day,
And like a poor man thou could pray.
Yet stap'd with Passes sealed away.
When the Evening has been wet,
For Fire the Hedges down did bear.
Me then with stolen Duck did treat,
Or else a fat Goose was our meat
Mallards then I could not lack,
Bacon hung always at my back,
Nor Corn wanted in my sack,
With good Milk pottage I held tack.
To thy Dog and Dish adieu
Thy Staff and pass I never must view,
Though thy Cloak was far from new,
In it my Rogue to me was true.
And now Prince Prig could forbear no longer, but that he must put in for a
Continuer of this harmony; when he began to sing, he fixed his eyes steadfastly
on this fair, foul, bucksome, loathsome, courtly ragged Mistress of his, by
which I guest the lines might concern her; and so they proved by the sequel.

4. Canting Song.
The Rogues delight in praise of his Stroling Mort.
DOxy oh! Thy Glaziers shine
As Glymmar by the Solomon,
No Gentry Mort has prats like thine
No Cove e're wap'd with such a one.
White thy fambles, red thy began,
And thy quartons dainty is,
Couch a hogshead with me than,
In the Darkmans clip and kiss.
What though I no Togeman wear,
Nor Commission, Mish, or slate,
Store of strummel we will have here.
And in the Skipper lib in state.
Wapping thou I know do love,
Else the Ruffin cly thee Mort,
From thy stampers then remove
Thy Drawers and let us prig in sport.
When the Lightmans up does call
Margery Prater from her nest,
And her Cackling cheats with all
In a Boozing-Ken we will feast.
There if Lour we want I Will mill
A Gage or nip for thee a bung,
Rum booz thou shall booz thy fill
And crash a Grunting cheat that is young.
Bing awast to Rome-vile then
O my dimber wapping Dell,
We Will heave a booth and dock again
Then trining escape and all is well.
The English thereof.
MY honey Chuck, byth' Mass I swear,
Thine eyes do shine than fire more clear,
No silken Girl has thighs like thine,
No Do was ever buck'd like mine.
Thy hand is white and red thy lip,
Thy dainty body I will clip,
Let Us down to sleep our selves then lay,
Hug in the dark and kiss and play.
What though I no cloak do wear
And neither Shirt or Sheet do bear,
Yet straw we will have enough that is sweet
And tumble when in the Barn we meet.
What thy Grandam loved do thou,
The Devil take thee else I vow.
Off then with thy stockings and shoes
And let us do what others use.
When the morning up shall call
From her nest the Hen and all
Her tender Broodlings thou and I,
Will to the Alehouse swiftly fly.
If we cannot our reckoning pay
Something I Will filch and steal away,
Drink off thy liquor then thy fill,
Some suckling Pig for thee I Will kill.
7. Therefore to London let us hie
O thou my sweet bewitching eye,
There we will rob and kiss pell-mell,
Escaping Tyburn all is well.
Lastly, The most ill-shapen ill-look'd Rogue in the whole Company, sung as
follows.

5. Canting Song.
Sung commonly at their general Randezvous, or the night before they divided
themselves into Tribes or Parties, to strol the Country.
BIng out been Morts and tour and tour,
Bing out been Morts and tour,
For all your duds are bing'd awast
The been Cove has the lour.
I met a Dell, I viewed her well,
She was benship to my watch,
So she and I did stall and cloy
Whatever we could catch.
This Doxy Dell can cut been whids,
And wap well for a win,
And prig and cloy so benshiply
All the Deuseavile within.
The boil was up we had good luck
As well in frost as snow,
When they did seek then did we creep
And plant in Ruffmans low.
To stroling Ken the Mort bings then
To fetch lour for her cheats,
Duds and Ruffpeck romboil'd by Harmanbeck
And won by Maunders feats.
You Maunders all stow what you stall
To Rum-coves what so quire,
And wapping Dell that niggles well
And takes lour for her hire.
And Jybe well jerk'd tick rome confeck
For back by Glimmar to maund
To mill each Ken let Cove bing then
Through Ruffmans Jauge or laund.
Till Cramprings quire-tip Cove his hire
And Quire Ken do them Catch
A Canniken will quire Cuffin,
So quire to been Coves watch.
Been Darkmans then booz Mort and Ken,
The been Coves bing awast
On Chats to trine by Rum-Coves dine,
For his long lib at last.
Bing out been Morts and tour
Bing out of the Rome vile fine,
And tour the Cove that cloyd your duds
Upon the Chats to trine.
Thus in English.
GO forth brave Girls look out, look out,
Look out I say good Maids,
For all your clothes are stolen I doubt,
And shared among the Blades.
I met a Drab I liked her well,
With whom I used to dally,
What goods we stole we straight did sell,
And then abroad did sally.
This bouncing Trull can finely talk,
She will do for a penny,
Through every Town which she does walk
Fails not to filch from any.
The house being raised aside we step
And through the mire did wade
The Hue and Cry to shun we crept
In Hedges where we laid.
To the Brokers then my Hedg-bird flies,
For goods she brings good coin,
Which though the Constable after hies
Our tricks away purloin.
You Maunding Rogues beware how you
Do steal, for search is made,
And have a care you damned whore,
Who will not do till paid.
A License got with forged seal
To beg (as if undone
By fire) to break each house and steal
Ore hedge and ditch then run,
Till shackles soundly pay us home,
And to the Gaol compel us,
Hells plague the Justice heart consume,
So cruel to good fellows.
Sweet Wench, Alehouse and Beer good night,
The honest Rogues departed,
To hanging by the Justice spite
To his long home he is carted.
Away sweet Ducks with greedy eyes
From London walk up Holborn
Pursue him stole your Clothes; he flies
With hempen wings to Tyburn.
It now grew very late, which with the great quantity of drink made most of the
company betake themselves to sleep, dropping one after another, leaving none at
last but my former acquaintance and my self together, a thing I all along
desired.

Being alone, prithee, said I, give me a reason why thou do so degenerate
from thy Birth and Education as to follow so lazy and so damned a course of
life, than which their is nothing worse under the Cope of Heaven: have
patience, said he, and I will endeavor your satisfaction in every thing that
concerned me since my leaving the place of my nativity to this time, and that
in this short relation.

An account of the notable and notorious life of a late and eminent King of the
Gypsies, yet living, taken verbatim as he himself related it.
I Need not acquaint you, said he, with the passages of my life while I was a
Schoolboy at Excester, since I know they are not unknown to you; I shall
therefore inform you when I came to London to be an Apprentice, I presently
imagined I should not serve my time, that strict course of life being so
disagreable to my loose inclinations, and therefore from the first week I never
intended to mind my trade, although you know it was as credible and reputable
as most in the whole City.

I was naturally very lazy and slothful, and ever hated any thing that was
Gentile, I have often rose from dinner to make an end thereof with those who
begged at the door, and took as much delight therein as others sitting at
Noble-mens Tables; so slovenly, that though my Master brushed my coat for (...)
every day, yet he could not beat the sloving ^^^on't, nor that roguery, which
being bred in the (...) will never out of the flesh; when he saw nothing would
reduce me to observe the rules of de^ency and civility, he took an occasion
knocking late at his door to shut me out, and from thence I resolved never to
return to him again.

All the day time I rambled up and down the out parts of the City, and being
almost famished I ro^olv'd rather to beg than starve, which I did so
artificially, that I got victuals enough every where; at night I found
convenient bulks to lie on, it being then Mid-summer, I lay not in that manner
in fear ^ at thing cold.

I lived after this manner for a Month, and began to be much in love with my
begging Profession, and had continued it had I not accidentally fallen into the
acquaintance of a notable lazy companion like my self, whom I found sunning
himself in Lincolnsin-fields. With little difficulty and less time we became
intimately acquainted, and thereupon sworn brothers. We begged together, lay
together and louz'd together, and were inseparable; it was he that taught me
first to steal, and by his means first soundly whipped. For it was our custom in
the close of the Evening, to beg at doors, which if we found open, we boldly
entered, and if we espied none in the way, what was next at hand we rubbed off
with; if we saw any, we straightwaies applied our selves to our whining notes
and pitiful looks, begging for Gods sake to bestow their charity on two Orphan
Twins, who were both troubled with the Falling Sickness: some were so pitiful
and credulous as to give their Alms, but the most (seeing us sturdy and lusty
young Lads) fright'ned us away with the threats of the whiping Post, but these
menaces did not scare us from our continual filching notwithstanding. But the
Pitcher goes not so often to the Well but that it comes home broken at last.
For one night watching at a door for an opportunity, seeing the coast clear I
whipped up stairs, and happily the first thing my hands fastened on, was a
Hair-Chamlet Cloak; overjoyed with the goodness of the prize and minding not
the distance of the stairs from me, I came sooner to the Stair head than I was
aware of, and fell to the bottom of the stairs, making a noise like a Devil in
a Drum: this unexpected misfortune did put my experienced Tutor and Comrade to
the run, and with all so alarmed the house, that there was no hole left for me
to creep out at.

Search being made, I was found with my Cloak lying at the stair foot, not able
to stir; but my merciless foes did soon put life in me by by boxing and kicking
me one to another; they had done me a kindness had they kicked me out into the
street; but hold there, after all this mis-usage I was carried before a
Justice, who presently sent me to Newgate.

Sessions, as good luck would have it, was at hand, otherwise, I know not how I
should have lived a fortnight with a penny a day in Bread and Water: Being
brought to the old Baily, I had my Trial, and received sentence of severe
whipping, which was accordingly performed, and returned to Newgate to lie there
till I had paid my fees; which was so long (having no friend to help me) that I
there became intimately acquainted with the whole Gang of ROGUES, distinguished
by Files, Lifts, Gilts, Budges, Runners, Heavers, etc. Who seeing how forward I
was to be one of them, promised me, if ever we met abroad, they would instruct
me in a trade should bring me in a livelihood, which I found would have put me
out of one, had I longer followed their instructions.

I now despaired of coming out, and whilst I thought so, my little Tutor sent a
youngster to me (for he durst not come himself, being too well known by the
Keepers) who brought me more Money than would discharge my Fees, with
directions where I should find him.

I instantly addressed my self to the Master-Keeper, telling him that I had a
friend had sent me some money and therefore I desired to know what I was
indebted and I would pay it, provided I might be discharged; he readily told
me, and now we were possessed with one and the same joy, that he was freed from
me, and I from him.

I was no sooner out, but I fell a running, as if I intended to run out of my
wits, and never stopped till I came to my Comrade: you may imagine there was no
small joy at meeting, and to wash down sorrow, we concluded to booz it rumly.

Over our Ale he recounted me all his adventures since my surprizal, and how
successful he was in them all; then taking me by the hand, said, come boy never
be disheartened for one ill bargain I Will put thee in a way which shall recompense
thy whipping.

Night approaching we did several exploits and came off well, the next day and
night we continued them with the like success, and now we had got Money enough
to new cloth our selves, which we did, having first unhusk'd.

What I had promised me in Newgate, I had performed abroad, for meeting with
one of my fellow Collegiats, he was overjoyed to see me, and especially at
such a time when he could serve me; for, said he, I am now going to meet with
some according to appointment, who will make Us All, he might have added, Be
Hanged.

Taking my Comrade I went with him, where we found a jolly company drinking
after a strange rate to their good success that night; in a little time I
understood their meaning; for, said one, let us cease from this excessive
drinking, you know what a weighty business we are to go about, no less than
fifteen hundred pound in ready Money, besides Plate and Jewels: hereupon they
were advised, and fell immediately to plotting and rightly contriving the
business.

It was agreed upon, that I and my Comrade should be the Forelorne-hope, or
more properly the Perdues; for our charge was to get into this house designed
to be robbed, and abscond our selves in some obscure place and so at such an
hour let in our Masters.

At first I knew not what to make of it, judging it so hazardous, that I
trembled when I did but think thereon; my Comrade perceiving how timorous I
was, shook me by the hand, bidding me be of good courage, he would warrant all
well. Hereupon I resolved on the exploit and away we went together.

A little before night my Comrade had lodged himself, but I knew not where, and
being loath to be behind hand with him, I got underneath the stairs in a hole
descending into the Collar, so convenient, as if it had been made for my
purpose. There was a Clock in the house, which I watchfully told and observed,
and when it struck twelve (which was the fatal hour appointed) out I got and
met full-but with my Comrade, who was as diligent as my self to let them in,
they being ready without, entered and leaving us two Sentinels at Door, they
mounted the Stairs, and in a trice had secured all that were in the house by
Gagging and binding them; just as they were within ken of their booty; the
Gentleman of the house (who had been at play and had quarreled with some
Gentlemen,) came home attended by several Gentlemen, and guarded with a
Constable and strong watch, but wondered to see two young Sentinels at his door;
as soon as we saw him we betook our selves to our heels, having no time left to
acquaint the rest with the present danger; the Constable seeing us run, let
loose a couple of his Nighthounds, and stayed our farther progress; in the mean
time the Gentleman entered his house; they within finding themselves
discovered, drew, and attempted to cut their passage through; but the Constable
hearing a great noise with clashing of swords, securing me and my comrade,
presently ran to their assistance; and to be short secured them all, with whom
we were sent to bear them Company in the Counter that night: in the morning
being carried before the Justice, there was matter of fact, and proof enough to
send us to Newgate; being tried at Sessions, we were all found guilty of
Burglary and accordingly received sentence of Death, which was executed
accordingly, only I and my Comrade being very young, had the benefit of
Transportation.

Seven years in our exile, we did what our Masters commanded us and our time
being expired, we resolved to return for England, but death put an end to my
Comrades Voyage, however I altered not my resolution, but sailed for England,
where in several places I made trials to live honestly, but could not, For what
is bred in the bone will never out of the flesh.

Now knowing that if ever I was taken again on any Fellonious account, I should
assuredly be hanged; and being so lazy that I hated the thought of working, I
resolved to follow the life of a stroling Gypsy, into which Society I was
joyfully received: I grew so good a proficient in the mysteries of this trade,
that with a joint consent I was chosen at a solemn meeting, their Prince or
King; and for these reasons; First, because I was young and well proportioned;
Secondly, because I was lustier and stronger than the rest; And Lastly, because
I had more than common learning, and more wit than they had, put them
altogether.

Now the reasons inducing me to follow this life, were these; First, a lazy
disposition; Secondly, a lecherous inclination; And Lastly, profit. As to the
first, we do nothing for a livelihood but walk up and down in Summer time,
which is rather a pastime than pain; and in Winter, retire to such quarters as
are suitable to the season, not stirring thence till spring. As to the second,
our females are all in common among us, and though their skins be discolored,
they have as good flesh as can be coveted by an youthful appetite. And lastly,
as to profit; It is incredible to think how much we get by Fortune-telling,
among the ignorant, the poor wenches being ready to pawn their Petticoats to
procure us money, to tell them how fruitful they shall be, when Married; or
whether William or Thomas loves them or not: But the greatest profit we reap
is from our By-blows, these Children our Morts carry at their backs are all of
them Bastards, and most of them none of their own begetting; for when young
Gentlewomen have trod awry, and the Fathers are not to be disgraced, the
Bantlings for a good round sum are sent to us to be nursed, where they are
never like to come to the knowledge of their true Parents. Here he made an end,
if you shall approve of what is already written, I will shortly enlarge my self
on this subject.

Beggars Holiday.
CAst our Nabs and Cares away,
This is beggars Holiday,
In the world look out and see,
Where Is so happy a King as he?
At the Crowning of our King,
Thus we ever dance and sing.
Where Is the Nation lives so free,
And so merry as do we?
Be it peace, or be it War,
Here at liberty we are;
Hang all Harmanbecks, we cry,
And the Cuffinquiers too by.
We enjoy our ease and rest,
To the fields we are not pressed.
When the Subsidy's increast,
We are not a penny ceast;
Nor are we called into the Town,
To be troubled with a Gown;
Nor will any go to Law
With a Beggar for a straw.
All which happiness he brags,
He does owe unto his rags.
AN ALPHABETICAL Canting Vocabulary. Canting before the English.
A A A.
AUtem A Church Autem Mort A Married Woman Abram Naked Abram Cove A Poor Fellow
B B B.
Bluffer An Host Bounsing-cheat A Bottle Bughar A Dog Booz Drink Boozing-ken A
Tippling-house Board A Shilling Bung A Purse Been Good or well Beenshiply Very
well Benat Better Bing To go Bing awast To go away Bube The Pox. As for
Example, The Mort has tipped the Bube to the Cully. The wench has clapped the
Fellow. Bleating-cheat A Sheep Belly-cheat An Apron Betty An Instrument to open
a door. Bite To cheat or cozen As bite the Cully, that is, pu^ the Cheat on
such a Fellow. Or the Cove was bit, The Man was cheated. Bite the Roger Steal
the Portmanteau Budge One that steals Cloaks or ought else, slipping into an
house in the dark Brush To fly. As the Cully is brushed or rubbed, that is, He
is marched off, or broke. Beenship Worship Bulk and File The one jostles you up
whilst the other picks your pocket. Been darkmans Good night. Blower One man's
particular Wench. Batner An Ox Blow off on the Groundsils. O. Q. P. on the
Floar or Stairs Blot the Skrip and jark it. To be engaged or bound for any
body. C C C.
Coker A lie Cove, or Cuffin A Man Cuffin-Quire A Justice of Peace Cramprings
Bolts or Shackles Chats The Gallows Cank Dumb Crackmans Hedges Call or Togeman
A Cloak Couch To lie Couch a hogshead To go to sleep Mish or Commission A Shirt
Cackling cheat A Chicken Cassan Cheese Crashing cheats Teeth Cloy To Steal Cut
To Speak Cut been whids To Speak well Cut quire whids To Speak evilly Confeck
Counterseit Canakin The Plague Cly the jerk To be whipped Clapperdogeon A Beggar
born Cully A Fool or Fop Colquarron A Man's Neck Croppinken A Privy or Boghouse
Cracker An Arse Chaft Beaten or banged Clincker A Crafty Fellow Chap'd Dry, or
Thirsty Cackling Farts Eggs Cobble-colter A Turkey D D D.
Dimber Pretty Damber Rascal Drawers Stockings Duds Goods Deuseavile The
Country Dommerar A Mad man Darkmans Night or Evening Dell or Doxy A Wench
Deuswins Two pence Dup To enter or go into an house, As Dup the Ken, Enter the
House, Dup the Boozing-Ken, and booz a gage; go into the Alehouse and drink a
pot. Dancers Stairs Deuseavile-Stampers Country Carriers E E E.
Earnest A part or share, As for example, Tip me my Earnest, Give me my Share
or Divident. F F F.
Flicker A Glass. Flicker-snapt A Glass broken Flick To Cut As Flick me some
Pannam and Cash; Cut me some Bread and Cheese Flick the Peeter Cut the
Cloak-bag Fam-grasp the Cove To agree with an Adversary. Frummagen Choked
Filch A Staff with an hole in the end thereof, in which upon occasion, your
Rogues will fasten an hook, to pull things cunningly from an Hedge, or through
a Casement. Ferme An hole Fambles Hands Famble-cheats Rings or Gloves Flag A
Groat Flog To whip as in Bridewell, As the Prancer drew the Quire Cove at the
Cropping of the Rotan through the Rum pads of the Rum vile, and was flog'd by
the Nubbing-Cove. That is, The Rogue was dragged at (...) Carts-arse, through
the chief streets of London, and was soundly whipped by the Hangman. Fogus
Tobacco As tip me a gage of Fogus, Give me a pipe of Tobacco. Fencing Cully A
Receiver of stolen Goods Fib To beat, As Fib the Coves quarrons in the rum ^ad
for the lour in his burg. Beat the Man on the highway for the money in his
purse. Flog'd at the Tumbler Whipped at the Carts arse. Fence To spend As Fence
your Flag, Spend your Groat, Floggin Cove, The whipper of Bridewell, or any
other that whips people commonly called at Dublin in Ireland Bellores. G G G.
Gropers Blind men Glimflashy Angry Glimfenders Andirons Grunting peck Porke
Glymmer Fire Glazyers. Eyes Grannam Corn Gentry Mert A Gentlewoman Gage A pot
or pipe Grunting ch^at A Sucking pig Gigger A Door Gybe Any writing or Pass
Glazyer One that creeps in at casements, or unrips glass windows to filch and
steal. Gilt A Picklock, Where note that some of them are so excellent at it,
that they are furnished with all sorts of Gilts or Keys, f^o^n a Church door to
the smallest Cabinet, and almost at first sight will dexterously open any door,
t^unk, chest, or any lock whatever. Glym Jack A Link boy Glym Stick A
Candlestick Grinders Teeth Gigg The Nose As give him a rum snitch, or ^^^ichel
the Gigg, that is, Fillip him on the Nose. H H H.
Harmanbeck A Constable Harmans The Stocks Heave To Rob, As Heave a Booth, To
rob an house Half board Sixpence Husky lour A Guinny Hog A Shilling, As for
Example; You Darkman-budge, will you fence your hog with me, at the next
Boozing Ken. That is, do you hear you House-creeper, will you spend your shilling
with me, at the next Alehouse. Hoodwinkt Beneghted or belated Heaver A Breast I
I I.
Jague A ditch Jark A Seal Jo^kum gage A Chamber pot Job A Guinny K K K.
Ken An house Kinchin A little child Kinchin Cove A little man Kidnapper A
fellow that walks the streets, and takes all advantages to pick up the
younger sort of people, whom with lies and many fair promises he inticeth on
board a ship and transports them into foreign plantations. L L L.
Lour Money Lightmans Day, or Daybreak Libben A private dwelling house Lage
Water Libbedge A bed Lap Pottage Lurries All manner of clothes Lifter, or Plyer
A Crutch. M M M.
Mow heater A Drover Mower A Cow Mish topper A Coat Maund To beg Maunders
Beggars Margry Prater An Hen Mill To Steal Make An half penny Mynt Gold Muffling
cheat A Napkin Mumpers Gentile Beggars, Such as will not accept of Victuals,
but money or clothes, and these beg under the pretense of being decayed
Gentlemen, Tradesmen, or such who have been burned out or shipwrack'd Milken An
house breaker Muns The Face, As tout his Muns, Mark his face well Moon Cu^ser A
Link boy Marinated Transported into some sorreign Plantation. N N N.
Nabgirder A Bridle Nubbing Ken The Sessions house Neck stamper A Pot-boy
Napper of Naps A Sheep-stealer Nab An Head Nab-cheat An Hat Nap To take, or
cheat with the Dice, that is, by certainly securing one chance. Naskin A Goal,
or Bridewell Nazie Drunken Nazie Cove A Drunkard Nizie A Fool or Coxcomb Nub
The Neck Nubbing Hanging Nubbing Cove The Hangman Nubbing cheat The Gallows O O
O.
Ogles Eyes Old Mr Gory A piece of Gold P P P.
Panter An heart Prig-star A Rival in love Palliard One whose Father is a born
Beggar Papplar Milk pottage Prats Thighs Prigg To Ride Prigging Riding Priggers
of Prancers Horse-stealers Priggs Are all sor^t of Thieves Peck or Peckidg Any
sort of meat Pannam Bread Plant To lay, place, or hide Prancer An horse Prating
cheat A Tongue Peak Any lace Pike To run As Pi^e on the been, Run for it as
fast as you can. Peery Fearful Peeter A portmantle Pad The highway Plant your
whids, and stow them, Be careful what you say or speak Prig-napper. A
Horse-stealer Peeper A Looking glass, As track the Dancers and pikes with the
Peeper, Go up the stairs and trip off with the Looking-glass. Peeping Drowsy,
or Sleepy Q Q Q.
Quarron A Body Quacking cheat A Duck Queer Base or roguish Queer Ken A Prison
Queer Mert A pockie Baggage Queer Cove A Rogue R R R,
Rum gutlers Canary wine, As Rum hopper, tip us presently a Bounsing cheat of
Rum gutlers; Drawer fill us presently a bottle of the best Canary. Rum dropper
A Vintner Rarling Cove A Coatchman Rum glimmar King of the Link boys Rumboyle A
Ward or Watch Rum Gallant Rum Vile London. Ruffin The Devil, As the Ruffin nap
the Cuffin-quier, and let the Harmanbeck trine with his Kinchins about his
Colquarron; That is, Let the Devil take the Justice, and let the Constable hang
with his children about his neck. Rum boozing Welts A bunch of Grapes Roger A
Cloak-bag Ridgcully A Goldsmith Ruffler A notorious Rogue Ruff peck Bacon
Redshank A Mallard Rum pad The highway Rum Padders The better sort of Highway
men. Rum Cully A rich Coxcomb Rattling Mumpers Such who only beg at Coaches.
Romboyl'd Sought after with a Warrant Rum hopper A Drawer S S S.
Squeeker A Bar-boy Smacking Cove Coachman Scout A Watch Swag A Shop Smudge One
that lies underneath a bed, to watch an opportunity to rob the house. Shoplift
One that filcheth Commodities out of a Shop, under the pretense of cheapning or
buying them of the Shopkeeper. Stampers Shoes Stamps Legs Stock-drawers
Stockings Scour To wear Skew A Dish Slate A Sheet Skipper A Barnel Shoulder
sham Partner to a File Stam flesh To Cant; As the Cully Stams flesh rumly; He
Cants very well Stow your whids Be wary Stalling Ken A Brokers shop, or an
house that will recive stolen goods. Smelling cheat A Garden or Nosegay Solomon
The Mass Stow your Whids and plant 'em, for the Cove of the Ken can cant 'em,
Have a care what you say, the Man of the House understands you. Smiter An Arm
Stall whimper A Bastard Skrip Paper, As the Cully did freely blot the Skrip,
and so tipped me forty Hogs; that is, One entered into bond with me for forty
shillings. TTT.
Touting Ken A Tavern Bar Trundlers Pease Tour To look out Track up the Dancers
Go up the Stairs The Cul Snilches The man eyes you Tip the cole to Adam Tiler
Give your pick-pocket money presently to your running Comrade. Tip the Mish
Give the Shirt Tib of the buttery A Goose Tip To give Trine To hang: or Tyburn
Tick-rum A License Tres wins Three pence Toppin Cove The Hangman Tumbler A Cart
Topping cheat The Gallows WWW.
Win A penny Wicher-cully A Silver-smith Whit Newgate; As five Rum padders are
rubbed in the darkmans out of the Whit, and are pik'd into the Deuseavile: Five
Highway men in the night broke Newgate, and are gone into the Country. Witcher
Silver Witcher bubber A Silver Bowl; As for example, The Cull is pik'd with the
Witcher bubber; The Rogue is Marched off with the Silver Bowl. Witcher-tilter A
Silver-hilted sword Wicket A Casement; As tout through the Wicket, and see
where a Cully pikes with his Gentry Mort, whose Muns are the rummest I ever
touted before: Look through the Casement, and see where the man walks with a
Gentlewoman, whose face is the fairest I have ever seen.

AN ALPHABETICAL Canting Dictionary. English before the Canting.
AAA.
A Curious wench Rum Mort An Apron Belly cheat An Instrument to break a door
Betty A part or share Earnest An hole Ferm A Groat Flag A Receiver of stolen
goods Fencing Cully A fine Gentlewoman Gentry-Mort A Door Gigger Any writing or
Pass Gybe A Guiny, or Job Huskie lour A Little child Kinchin A Little man
Kinchin Cove A private dwelling house Libben All manner of clothes Lurries All
sorts of Thieves Priggs Any sort of meat Peck or Peckidge Any Lace Peak A
notorious Rogue Ruffler An Arm Smiter An Arse Cracker Andirons Glimfenders
Agree with a man Famgrasp the Cove Angry Glim flashy B B B.
Bar-boy Squeeker Beadle of Bridewell Floging Cove Better Benar Bridewell
Naskin Beggar born Clapperdogeon Boghouse or Privy Croppinken Bed Libbedge
Bottle Bounsing ckeat Beg Maund Beggars Maunders Bread Pannam Be careful of
what you say Stow your whids and plant 'em Bridle Nabgirder Bolts or Shackles
Cramprings Body Quarron Base or Roguish Queer Bacon Ruff peck Bastard
Stall-whimper Broker Fencing Cully Belated Hoodwinks Blind men Gropers Barn
Skippers Bar of an Alehouse or Tavern. Touting Ken Be wary Stow your whids
Brokers shop Stallen-ken Beaten Chaft Breast Heaver C C C.
Cart Tumbler Coach-beggars Rattling Mumpers Cloak-bag Roger or Peeter Cheat
Napper Coach Ratler Chamber pot Jockum-gage. Coachman Smacking-Cove Constable
Harmanbeck Candle stick Glym-stick Cut the Cloak-bag Flick the Peeter Corn
Grannam Clusters of Grapes Rum-boozing Welts Carriers Deuseavile Stampers
Choked Frummagem'd Crutch Lifter or Plyer Copulate Wap or Jockum cloy Country
Deuseavile Counterfeit Confeck Crafty fellow Clincher Crust Crakler Cheese Cash
or Cassan Chicken Cackling-cheat Cloak Call or Togeman Cheat or cuzen Bite
Church Autem Coat Mish-topper Cow Mower. D D D.
Drawers of Wine Rum hoppers Dog Bughar Drink Booze Drousie Peeping Dumb Cank
Ditch Jague Day, or Daybreak Lightmans Drunken Nazy Dry or thirsty Chapt
Drunkard Nazy-Cove Duck Quacking-cheat Devil Ruffin Dish Skew Drover Mow-heater
E E E.
Enter or go into an house Dup Eyes Ogles or Glaziers Ends of Gold and Silver
Spangles Eggs Cackling-farts F F F.
Fellows that pick up people for transportation commonly called Spirits
Kidnappers Face Muns Fool or Coxcomb Nizie Fearful Peery Fly or run Bresh Fop,
or one that may easily be wrought upon Cully Fire Glymmer. Feet Stampers. G G G.
Gold Mynt Gentile Beggars Mumpers Goal Naskin Gallows Trine Gallant Run^
Goldsmith Ridgcully Garden or Nosegay Smelling cheat Goes up the Stairs Track
up the Dancers Give Tip Glass Flicker Gallows Topping cheat Glass broken
Flicker snapt. H H H.
Highway Topping Cove High-way-men Rum pad Horse Rum padders Horse-stealer
Prancer Head Nab Hat Nab cheat Halfpenny Make House Ken Hands Fambles Hose
Drawers Hostess S^ pouch Heart Panter Host Bluffer. III.
Engage Blot the Skrip. KKK.
King of the Link-boys Rum glimmer Knavery Queer topping LLL.
Link-boy Moon-curser, or Glym-Jack Looking-glass Peeper London Rumvile L^gs
Stampers License Jukrum Look through the Casement Tout through the Wicker Lips
Gans Lie Coker MMM.
Mass Solomon Mallard Red-shank Milk-pottage Papplar Money Lour Married Woman
Autem-Mort Madmen Dommerars Man Cove. NNN.
Nose Gigg Neck Nuh Newgate Whit Night or Evening Darkman Naked Abram OOO.
One that slips into an house in the dark and steals what he can lay hands on
Budge One that creeps in at Casements and lets in others to rob the house
Glazier One that filcheth commodities out of a shop under the pretense of
Cheapning or Buying Shoplift One that lies underneath a bed, or in some other
covert place to watch an opportunity to rob the house Snudge One whose father
is born a Beggar Palliard O Q P on the stairs Blow off on the Grounds^ll PPP.
Pottage Iap Pork Grunting peck Pease Trundlers Partners to Files
Shoulder-shams Piece of old Gold Old Mr. Gory Portmantue Peeter Prison Queer
Ken Penny Win Picklock Gilt Pot or Pipe Gage Pretty Dimber Plague Cannakin Pox
Bube Purse Bung Poor Fellow Abram Cove QQQ.
Question Starter RRR.
Rascal Damber Rings or Gloves Famble cheats Rich Coxcomb Rum Cully Ride Prig
Riding Prigging Riders Priggers Rogue Queer Cove. S S S.
Shilling Board or Hog Sheep Bleating cheats Steal the Portmantue Bite the Roger
Shirt Mish Speak Cut Stockings Drawers Sucking Pig Grunting cheat Stocks
Harmans Sixpence Half a Hog Silver Witcher Silver bowl Witcher-bubber
Silver-smith Witcher-cully Straw Strummel Sheets Slates Stockings Stock drawers
Shoes Stamps Shop Swag Sought after with a warrant Romboyld Sheep-stealer
Napper of Naps Steal Mill or Cloy Seal Jark TTT.
Teeth Crushing cheats To lie Couch To go to sleep Couch a Hog shead To speak
well Cut ben whids To speak ill Cut queer whids To be whipped Cly the Jerk Two
penbe Deuswins Three pence Treswins Tobacco Fogus To take Tobacco Raise a cloud
To beat Fib To spend or lay out Fence Teeth Grinders To rob an house Heave a
Booth To tumble together Lib Transported Marinate To lay place or hide Plant
Tongue Prating cheat To rune away Pikes To wear Scour To look out Tour To hang
Trine The Sessions House Nubbing Ken Turkey Cobble-colter.

Our Canting Alphabet will not extend a Letter farther then T, as far as I can
find out; not knowing any Canting word beginning with V, X, Y, Z, although I
have made a strict inquiry from some of the most notorious Professors hereof: I
have consulted likewise what is printed on this subject, and have slighted no
help I could gather from thence, which indeed is very little; the greatest
assistance I had in this discovery, was from Newgate; which with much
difficulty I screwed out of the sullen Rogues, who would not speak a word till
I had suppled their tongues with the oil of Barley, or rather thawed their
obstinate silence with the heat of strong Liquors.

From these I understood, that the Mode of Canting altered very often, and that
they were forced to change frequently those material words which chiefly
discovered their mysterious practices and Villainies, least growing too common
their own words should betray them.

Here in this Vocabulary or little Canting Dictionary, You have all or most of
the old words which are still in use, and a many new never pubblished in print,
and but very lately minted, such too which have passed the approbation of the
Critical Canter. If I seem deficient in the quantity of words, let some else
supply my defects, having collected words sufficiently enough for one, if you
will have more, take the pains which I have done to be supplied, and in the
mean time be content with what is gathered to your hands.

A Character or Description of the Roguish Professors of that mysterious and
Diabolical Gibberish called Canting.
UNdoubtedly there were Rogues and Villains before ever this speech was
invented, for whilst the world was in swaddling clothes, we read of men that
acted very horrid and vile pranks, such as for their infamy are so registered,
as never to be forgotten whilst the world indures; and since evil example is
more prevalent then good Precept, who knows but the wicked seeds of their lewd
actions have been transimitted to posterity, by which means we have such an
infinite increase of all manner of Villainy, the Actors whereof I verily believe
are much more notorious then heretofore, showing much more ingenuity in their
Roguery than in ^imes past.

I shall begin to speak of the first I have read of, which were the Founders or
first public Professors of Canting, and I find their names male, thus recorded.

An Upright Man A Ruffler An Angler A Rogue A Prigger of Prancers A Palliard A
Frater A Quire Bird Mumpers Ben-Feakers An Abram Man A Whip-Jack A Patrico An
Irish Toil A Swigman A Kinchin Cove Clapperdogeons
Of all which according to the best light I have received, I shall endeavor to
give you an account; the first that falls in my way, is

The Upright Man.
THis was a name anciently used for the Principal of this Stroling, Maunding
and Prigging Crew, and he was elective; when this Upright man dyed (which was
seldom otherwise then on the Gallows,) then all of this cursed Fraternity
meant an appointed place, and their chose the lustiest stoutest Rogue in the
whole pack, to be their chief Leader, whom they called Upright man; and as the
Women loved him for his great limbs, whose bodies must be at his devotion when
ever he uncontroulably, so the Men had him in particular esteem, in that he was
more a Rogue than any, and could when he sat as President of their Coursel, in
great extremity, direct them best how to secure themselves from Justices,
Constables, and other Officers; and find out, and contrive notorious plots how
they might ab^se the Country by filching and stealing, to the further
continuance of their loathsome Bestiality; This fellow carries a shor^
Truncheon in his hand, which he calls his Filchman; whatsoever is gotten by the
whole Society he shares in it.

This Upright man shall sometimes have in company with him, young and old,
males and females, to the number of forty and upwards, and for the ease of some
of the women and children, shall have an Ass or two, or some poor Jade which
shall carry a pair of Panniers for the women as they grow weary by travail to
put their children in them, which smell more rank then stale fish in Summer
time coming from Yarmouth to Norwich in a pair of Dossers.

Some of the Gang are very ^dly clad with bells, and long sticks with ribbonds
hanging at the end ^angling, with many other mad contrived toys, merely to
draw the Country people about them wherever they came, and by pretending to
tell For^unes get some money of the foolish, by way of gift, and some by pic^ing
of pockets.

To be sure wherever they came, the poultry and sucking pigs went to wrack,
neither did Lambs, Sheep, and Calves escape their hands, if they had any
convenience to effect their purpose; all which they handle more severely than a
Malefactor having broke Prison and retaken by the Keeper of Newgate.

If a Goose come among hem, they have a trick to make him so wife, as never to
be taken for a Goose again. Having seized the Prey, they leave the bloody part
to be acted by their Morts or Women; who are so accustomed to nastiness, that
when they have dressed their Geese and Hens as well as possibly they can, you may
then swear those Birds are foul. The end of some large Heath or Fir-bush,
Common under some Covert, as an Hedge or so forth is their Rendezvous, where
having supt after their fashion, a consultation is had how to lie that night,
if in the height in the fields or in Hay time under an Hay-cock distributing
themselves every one with his Mort as he thinks most convenient; if it be at
the latter end of summer, to avoid cold dews and now and then rain, they then
apply themselves to some outlying Barn, and if the owner should discover them
he is fearful of molesting them, lest they do him a greater mischief, by making
his straw-thatcht Mansion too hot to hold him: and now by the way give me leave
to tell you a Notable story, very pertinent to this purpose.

A Crew of Gypsies continuing for some time about one Town in Glocestershire,
but divided in the day, though united in the night, all congregated to one
appointed place, which was a convenient Barn for their purpose, about an half
mile from this Town: Hither they resorted night after night, and in the morning
still early got up and separated themselves, looking the Barnes door by the
same art they unlocked it.

This Gentleman's Threshers wondered still when they came to see the sheafs of
Corn so disordered and flung here and there, and in the strangest confusion
imaginable; at first they suspected this disorder happened by their own
negligence or forgetfulness, but finding it so for a continued time; they
resolved to acquaint their Master with what they had observed. The Master being
informed of what had happened, would not believe his servants till he had
experimented the truth thereof himself; and thereupon goes to his Barn with his
two servants, and there caused them to place before his eyes every sheaf in
good order, and so locking the door went home; the next morning he calls up his
Threshers and away he went to the Barn, and there found the sheafs tumbled and
scattered up and down, as his men had told him; he very much wondered how this
should be done, and his Barn door locked; however, he was resolved to try once
more, and so caused the sheafs to be placed in order as formerly, and as
formerly he found them the fecond time so disordered, any, the third and fourth
time; this somewhat startled him, and coming home, concluded some evil spirit
owed him a spite, in thus disordering and spoiling his Corn: The Threshers
hearing their Masters judgment of this accident, on the morrow following,
instead of going to thresh, their Master coming down from his chamber, finds
his men gazing one upon the other in his Hall, whereas he thought they were at
the Barn, and demanding the reason hereof; they freely told him, that since
they understood from his own Mouth that he believed the Devil haunted the Barn,
the Devil should take the Barn ere they would be so mad to bear him Company;
The Gentleman smiled at their ridiculous fears; and to depose them utterly of
any such belief, produced several good arguments, that it could not be, and so
prevalent they were, as to persuade them to go to the Barn, with this proviso,
he would go with them and stay there an hour, agreed it was and away they went,
where as before they found all things in the like disorder, this made the poor
fellows scratch the head, not knowing what was best to be done; at length the
Master encouraging them, to work they went the Master standing by his full hour
and so went home; he was scarce got within the doors but his men at his heels,
and so out of breath that they gaped for air to keep them alive, like a fish
out of his proper Element.

The Gentleman seeing them in this strange posture began to be in as much
amazement as they were; the good Gentlewoman his Wife coming out accidentally,
and seeing the Husband and his two men in this gaping staring posture, knew not
what to think, but concluded them mad or possessed by some foul fiend, till she
asked one of them what he made there; Why forsooth (quoth he) you would not
believe our Barn was haunted, but now I will swear it, for if ever any body saw
the Devil I am sure we did, I was never scared so in my life with a broad face,
a crooked nose and a pair of Goggle eyes. It seems as soon as their Master was
gone, a very large dark gray Owl that sat upon a Beam just over against them,
was upon the merry pin, or had a mind to be mer^ily disposed, sell a hooting
and hollowing after a very extravagant rate, sometimes hissing; sometimes
snapping, and (I know not what joyful crochet got into his noddle) then fell to
a loud hooping; the men that before thresht in fear, were now scared out of
their wits, 'twas enough for them they saw a blackish thing with a broad
glouting Countenance, sitting on a Beam, hooting at them, which made them thus
betake themselves to their heels, each of them bidding the Devil take the
hindmost.

The report of these fellows alarmed the Town, possessing many with a belief
that this might be a truth as to the haunting the Barn. A bold fellow in the
Town, and one that had been a Trumpeter, makes his address to the owner of the
Barn, desiring his leave to lie in the Barn one night; it was granted by the
Gentleman with thanks; and the Trumpeter went that very night to the Barn with
his Trumpet, and locking the Barn to him, placed himself in a corner thereof
convenient for his observation.

About the usual time of these Gypsies repairing to the Barn, which was
somewhat late, they came and entered the Barn, every one endeavoring to settle
himself as well as he could; the Trumpeter seeing this, resolved to try whether
they were Devils or no by their dislike to Music, and thereupon sounded his
Trumpet, at the sound whereof, out ran the Gypsies as the Devil had drove them,
and the Trumpeter after sounding, the people there about ran out to know what
was the matter that a Trumpet should be sounded at that time of night; the
Trumpeter informed them that he had conjured the Devils out of the Barn they
had so haunted, and that they might now dispose of them as they pleased,
whereupon they seized as many as they could and securing them till next
morning, by a Justice they were ordered to be whipped out of Town: thus with my
story I have ended my discourse concerning an Vprightman; the next we are to
take cognizance of, is

A Ruffler.
A Ruffler ever goes under the pretense of a maimed Soldier, if he stroles the
Country, he lets not a Gentleman's house escape, having a Catalogue of them all
along as he goes for his more convenient calling upon them, he carries in his
pocket (for the help of his memory) a List of the old Commanders in the late
Civil Wars which were noted Royalists, neither is he ignorant of some of their
brave actions; he singles out the Heirs of such deceased Commanders, and then
tells them a formal story, that they had the honor to serve under the Command
of their worthy Father in such a Regiment, at such a fight, as Naseby, Edghill,
Newberry, Marston-Moor, etc. that in that service he was lamed, that he has
since suffered all the misfortunes of an old Cavalier, and that being unable to
work, he is now forced to beg because he scorns to steal; and thus he goes
from one to another, having a good tongue in his head, and his tale at his
fingers ends: but by the way, if he meets Country people coming late from
Market, or any other feasible booty, he will not stick to seize it, though he
be hanged for his pains; and thus the Ruffler is metamorphosed into a Low-Pad.

If his residence be in the City, then his usual stands are in
Lincolns-Inn-Fields or Covent Garden, where he scorns to beg of any under a
person of quality, and then nimbly hops or stumps to a Coach side, beseeching
their Honors to commiserate the pitiful condition of a great sufferer for his
Majesty, and has the impudence in a commanding way to crave an Alms, if he is
denied, he shakes the head and cries, It Is a sad thing that an old cripled
Cavalier should be suffered to beg for a Maintenance, and a young Cavalier that
never heard the whistle of a bullet should ride in his Coach.

If he sees a Gentleman coming that is his constant customer, he very civilly
vaileth his bonnet, without asking a Farthing, and this stops my Gentleman more
forceably than all the important prayers of a wide mouthed clamorous mendicant;
having received his boon, he pronounces as many blessings as will stand
between Temple Bar and Westminster; for the cunning Rogue knows this to be
the way to encourage him the more to a contribution hereafter.

I have been credibly informed that these Covent Garden Rufflers have their
Quarter Customers, and will never call on their Benefactors till their full
time of payment be expired, and then wherever they meet them, they will not let
them be quiet till they have discharged that which by custom they claim as a
due debt: these Rogues get a great deal of money, and some of them spend it as
freely, as for example, I knew a Gentleman a good Benefactor to one of these
Rufflers who had been at Speerings Ordinary, and having lost all his money,
going home one Saturday in the Evening, was accosted by his Pentioner, a subtle
Ruffler, who perceiving his Masters countenance somewhat cloudy, asked him
boldly what was the matter with him; the Gentleman slighting his question, bid
him be gone for a saucy fellow; nay, be not angry, quoth the Ruffler, you have
been at play I will lay my life on it and lost your Money that you are so
pettish; what then, said the Gentleman? What then, quoth the Ruffler, why never
trouble your self, I will lend you fifty pieces, if you will come and dine with
me to morrow.

This strangely surprised the Gentleman, who to try the truth of what he heard,
promised him, he would dine with him: according to the time and place appointed
by the Ruffler, the Gentleman came; the house was very poor to outward view,
but within very neat and handsome, a cloth was spread, but could not perceive
the least spark of fire whereby any meat could be dressed; whilst he was musing
to himself on the entertainment he was like to have, in came the Wife with a
large Sir-Loyn of Beef, the Son with two Stubble Geese in a dish, the Daughter
with a stately Turkey, and a Servant Maid with a very large Tart; look you Sir,
said the Ruffler, this is all the cheat you are like to have, wherefore fall
to; the Gentleman had much a do, to persuade the Father, the Daughter should
sit down, but with much importunity it was granted: I heard him say, though his
appetite was as keen as a Turkish Scymiter, yet he forgot to eat, his mind
running on other flesh, such as he protested exceeded, in his opinion, all that
he had ever seen before, such was this Maidens beauty, not set off with any
artificial imbellishments, but naturally shining in its own Orb; and least her
person should be despised, by reason of the baseness of her Fathers profession,
she was Gentilely clad, but better adorned within with the most approved
principles of a good education, befitting so good a Genius. Wine both French
and Spanish was not wanting; and Dinner being ended, to be as good as his word
or better, the Ruffler lent the Gentleman fifty Guynnyes, on this condition, he
would not divulge the kindness received.

There is a story somewhat like this of the blind Beggar of Bednall-Green, but
how true I cannot tell, but this relation carries so much of truth in it, that
thereon I will pawn my reputation.

Of Anglers.
ANglers are so called, because they have a Rod or Stick with an Iron hook at
the end of it, with which they Angle in the night at Windows or any other place
in which they cannot convey their hand, where all is fish to them that comes to
net; in the day time they beg from house to house to spy best where to plant
their designs, which at night they put in execution; I shall speak more of this
Angler when I come to Discourse of the Runner.

Of Rogues.
THe very name of Rogue denotes the nature; it is a general title, and
appertains to all such who are of dissolute lives and conversations; such who
scorning both the Laws of God and man, care not what they act or perpetrate, so
they may add to the increase of their sensuality and beastly manner of living.
Any criminal whose actions are cognizable by the Law may come under the
denomination of a Rogue, as Gilts, Shoplifts, Files, Bulkers, Runners, Padders,
Booth-heavers, Vouchers and the like.

All these have their particular Societies, and Confederacies, and they are so
linked together that they seldom separate till they hang together. If one be
in Prison the rest relieve him, wherefore they seldom discover one another,
for they are sworn, if one is taken not to betray the rest; and this Oath they
keep inviolably, though all others they break. They have their several Wenches,
and several places of meeting, where whatsoever they unlawfully obtain they
spend, and whatsoever they spend is to satisfy their unsatisfied lust;
wallowing in all manner of debauchery, converting the night into day and the
day into night, damning and sinking being four parts in five their discourse;
and the rest of their pastime, drinking and whoring. Their company is
dangerous, their lives detestable, and their ends miserable.

VVild Rogues.
THis term or appellation is obsolete, and now a days not in use. Wild Rogues
were formerly such who were begotten by very Rogues, such who had been burnt in
the hand or shoulder, or been whipped at the Carts arse, whose Mothers had been
frequent in Bride-well, and oftener in Newgate: these in their swaddling clouts
are marked for Villains; and are then taught all manner of Roguery as other
children are taught to read.

First, To go into Churches or great Crowds and to nim golden buttons off men's
Cloaks, and being very little are showed how to creep into Cellar-Windows, or
other small entrances, and in the night to convey out thereat whatever they can
find, to the thieyish Receivers, who wait without for that purpose; and
sometimes do open the door to let in such who have designed to rob the house; if
taken, the tenderness of their age makes an apology or an excuse for their
fault, and so are let alone to be hanged at riper years.

Priggers of Prancers.
PRiggers of Prancers, are Horse-stealers; for Prig is to Steal, and Prancer is
an Horse; these Rogues seldom go without a light Briddle in their pockets, and
a small pad Saddle, which they can easily carry in their breeches, and being
informed by their Spies abroad where good horses run at Grass, in the dead of
the night will take them up in a moment, and will as soon steal an Horse as
another look over the Hedge. If they fear to be discovered by the Field-keeper,
then two or three of them will go together and boldly attack him, and having
worsted him, bind and gag him, and so effect their purpose, and will be far
enough off, by break of day, from being overtaken; the nearest Fair is then
inquired after, where with all imaginable speed they sell their stolen Horses.

I have heard of some of these Priggers of Prancers that have been such notable
Artists, as that they could change the color of an Horses Cote, or make an
artificial star in an Horses forehead, which should last a considerable while,
by which means the eyes of the right Owner have been so blinded, that he knew
not his own Horse when he saw him: Nay, when they have been confident that they
have found their stolen Horse, and by several remarkable tokens are assured
thereof; yet the artificial star in the forehead has immediately spoiled that
belief; and so have seen their own Horses sold before their own faces and
toled, having always some notorious Rogue as himself to vouch for him. This
puts me in mind of a notable Story of a Serving-man, who was picked up by a pack
of Rogues in the stteets and drilled into a Tavern, where having drank very
high, they all took an opportunity to leave the Serving man for the Reckoning;
this poor man finding himself pawned. and not having so much money to discharge
the reckoning, watched his opportunity, and so gave the house the slip also;
three days after his Master appointed a dinner at this very Tavern, his man
used all the argument he could for to divert him from it, alleging there was
bad Wine, ill Attendance, and the like; but all would not prevail, but that
thither he went according to the appointed time; Dinner being on the Table, the
Master of the House was invited up for the sake of his good company, being a
very jolly and facetious man, at whose approach the Serving-man knew not what
to do. and had but one slender shift to keep him from being discovered, which
he did by shutting one of his eyes as if he had been blind, and so continued
keeping it shut whilst he served at table; the Vintner stared him so much in
the face that his Master took notice thereof, and asked him why he gazed so much
on his man; your pardon Sir, said the Vintner, if I say that your man is as
like a fellow that cheated me of an eighteen shilling reckoning as ever I saw
in my life, and I would swear that he is the same but that this wants an eye,
and the other had his sight perfect. At this the Master asked his man how he
came to be thus suddenly blind, having lost an eye in less than an hours time;
at which the man replied, being a notable crafty fellow, that if his Master
would be pleased to forgive him, he would tell him the whole truth; his Master
granted it, and hereupon the Serving-man informed him, how he had been deluded
by a pack of Knaves, and how to secure himself, was forced to make his escape;
that to conceal himself from the Vintners knowledge he had found out that
stratagem of winking with one eye; the Master was so well pleased with the
story, that he paid the Vintner what was left to pay, and the Vintner was so
well pleased to have reocived a debt so desperate, that he gave the Serving-man
a crown, to help to open his eye again.

But our Priggers Metamorphosing of beasts is much more undiscoverable, by
which means they frequently steal and safely sell other men's Horses; but let
them have a care; the pitcher goes not so often to the well, but that it comes
home broken at last.

Of Palliards or Clapperdogeons.
THese Palliards or Clapperdogeons are Beggars born, who have their Morts in
the streets, with children, either of their own, or borrowed ones, lying about
them on straw; and in this manner they beg, and with these they beg, extracting
thereby the greater pity; these jades know how to screw their faces into what
pitiful posture they please, and have melting words at their fingers ends; as
For Gods sake bestow your Charity on these poor Fatherless Children; My Husband
was killed at Sea, and I being sick and unable to work, am ready to starve,
with these poor Infants; by these and the like expressions, with the cries of
the children, which she forces them to, by pinching or otherwise, she picks up
a great deal of money, whilst he: Comrogue lies begging in the fields with
Clymes ^r artificial Sores. The way they commonly take to make them is by
Spere-wort or Arsnick, which will draw blisters; or they take unslaked Lime and
Soap, mingled with the rust of old Iron, these being well tempered together,
and spread thick on two pieces of leather, they apply to the leg, binding it
thereunto very hard, which in a very little time will fret the skin so, that
the flesh will appear all raw, then they take blood and rub it over the leg,
which being fully dried makes the leg appear black, letting the seeming sore
peep out of some holes out of the Matterish clouts that are wrapped about it.

I saw a fellow not long since sitting by the road side, on a Mudwall in the
way to Islington (this was his constant stand on Sabbath days, there being at
that time the greatest concourse of people if the Weather be fair) I say this
fellow had one hand tied up in a white cloth, and pinned to his breast, his
clothes were indifferent good, but had a better face by much, I mean an honest
harmless look, and seemed so bashful and modest that he begged of none but with
his pale face and pitiful looks: and this way of begging proved more prevalent
then the bawling of two or three fellows that lay a little above him on the
ground, with grievious sore legs, seemingly not able to stand or go of them.

I observed this fellow several times in this very place, not imagining this
silent Counterfeit was of the Society of those clamorous Rogues who lay nigh
him, till one day having an occasion to go o^ ver to the bank-side, in a Garden
house, there did I see this lame handed fellow with the other confederate
Cripples playing at Nine pins as nimble as a Squirrel in a Bell-Cage.

I took no notice of them at that time, no more then what my ears suffered by
the hideous din of their execrable Oaths; not being longer able to be near
them, I returned home, resolving to take the first opportunity to detect these
Rogues. Wherefore I went with two or three more to the place according to the
usual time where these Beggars took up their stand to beg, and approaching my
modest silent Mumper, I asked him what ailed his hand, or how he came by that
lameness? To tell you the truth Sir, said he, I am a poor Translator, or Cobbler
commonly called, and one day it was my mischance, (and then the tears stood in
his eyes) as I was working, to run the Awl quite through my hand; neglecting
it, it fester'd, so that now it is in a sad condition, and not being able to
work, I am ready to starve, having sold all my little stock already, either to
cure my hand, or maintain my self, but now all is gone. Alas poor man, said It
let me see your hand for I am a Chyrurgeon. O Sir, cried the fellow, I shall
die instantly if you open ie. Hereupon I grasped his pretended sore hand very
hard, and told him I would see it; at which he roared as if he had been on the
Dutch Rack at Amboyna; which noise gathered abundance of people about us, and
every one condemning my hardheartedness, till I told them what a cheat he was,
and bid them if they would nor credit me, yet believe their own eyes, and so
opened his hand, which was sound and not hurt in the least. Now good people
secure this fellow, and you shall see I will discover more of the Gang yonder;
the Cripples that lay a little way off hearing me say so, got up, and proved
such excellent footmen, notwithstanding their pretended lameness, that though
several followed them, yet none could come nigh them; which caused so great a
laughter, with shooting, that one would have thought the People half
distracted. This fellow whom I had caused to be secured was carried before a
Justice, and from thence to Bridewell, where he received the severe lash for
his abominable hypocrisy.

A Story much like this I have heard of, done in Dorsetshire. Once a year at a
place called Woodberry-hill, on the top thereof is kept a Fair, and because it
is somewhat considerable, thither resort the Beggars all round the Country,
lying at the bottom of the hill begging in heaps. An arch Crack that had
observed what counterfeit Rogues the major part of these were, went to the top
of the hill, and unpinning a wheel took it off and brought it to the brow of
the Hill, which was very high and indifferently steep, and crying out to the
Beggars below, have at ye blind Harpers, lets the Wheel go, hereupon the
Counterfeit cut the strings to their counterfeit lame legs, and ran for it, and
those that had not the time for it, roled one over other, and by this confusion
(which was the most pleasant and comical sight could be seen) their Knavery was
discovered losing the benefit of that present Fair, and many more afterward.
More might be said of the Clapperdogeon, but let this suffice.

Of Fraters.
FRaters are such, who with a Counterfeit Patent, beg for some Hospital or
Spittle-house, or they are such who pretend to have Patents for Briefs, and
have hereby within these few years, most intollerably cheated the Country, and
in the conclusion have brought their heads to the Pillory.

Of Quire Birds.
QVire Birds are such who have sung in the With, the Naskin; that is, Newgate,
Bridewell, or some Country Goal, who having got loose fall to their old trade
of Roguing and Thieving again, for indeed when once their hand is in, they
seldom give out, till they overtake the Gallows.

Of Abram Men.
ABram Men are otherwise called Tom of Bedlams; they are very strangely and
antickly garb'd with several colored Ritb^nds or Tape in their hat, it may be
instead of a Feather, a Fox tail hanging down a long stick with ribbonds
streaming and the like; yet for all their seeming madness, they have wit enough
to steal Poultry as they go, and will have his change of Wenches, oftener than
people change their Linen.

Of Whip Jacks.
WHip-Jacks are Counterfeit Mariners, who talk of nothing but Fights at Sea,
Pyracies, Drownings, and Shipwracks; they have always a Counterfeit Pass or
License which they call a Gybe, and the Seals thereunto Jarkes; under this
pretense they strole the Country, begging as they go, possessing the People
with strange beliefs of their great losses, and that they only beg to supply
their necessities in their way home; and for their own certain supply, they
will not stick to heave a Booth; that is rob a Booth at a Fair, or in some by
road rob an house, playing other very notorious prankes. These Rogues have
learned their Sea terms by which they have cheated such as have been very
expert in Sea-affairs, The Whip-Jack carrie^h his Mort or Wench with him too,
which he pr^ to be his Wife, whom he miraculously saved in the Shipwreck,
although all his children were drowned splitting on a Rock near the Lands end
coming from the West Indies with such like forgeries; but I have known these
discovered too, to be cheats, and being brought to the Whipping post have been
severely lasht for their pains.

Of Mumpers.
MVmpers are both Male and Female, a Gentiler sort of Beggars, for they scorn
to beg for food, but money or clothes, the money they lay out to pamper the
gut, and the clothes they sell to reimburse the pocket.

The Male Mumper in the times of the late Usurpation, was clothed in an old
t^rn Cassock begirt with a girdle, with a black cap, and a white one peeping
out underneath; with a formal and (...) countenance he steals up to a Gentleman
and whispers him softly in the ear, that he is a poor sequestered Parson, that
he has four small children with a siek wife, all ready to perish.

Sometimes he appaared in the habit of some decayed Gentleman, and then he
pretends what a great sufferer he has been for his Majesty, but lately come
our of Gaol, and not a penny to help himself.

Sometimes he appears with an apron before him, and a cap on his head, and begs
in the rature of a Broken Tradesman, who having been a ^ong time sick, has
spent all his remaining stock, and so weak he cannot work.

The Female Mumpers, with a torn black hood and scarf, will go confidently to
an house, and knock at the door, demanding to speak with the Mistress of the
house, where after an Apology made for her boldness, she acquaints her how
urgent her necessity is; having an husband very sick, with two small children,
ready to give up the Ghost; that she was born a Gentlewoman, but marrying
against her friends consent, she was by them thrown off and disowned, and so by
her husbands sikness reduced to this miserable condition.

Sometimes she appears as if big with child, and so begs clothes or linen to
make clouts: She is very busy in the Palace-Ya^d in Terme-time; but if she be
young, tollerably handsome, and she find Charity grow cold, she will endeavor
to repair her pretended misfortune by night-walking.

There is yet one gentiler sort of Mumper than any yet named, of which
qualification I never knew but two; these had their horses, and agreed between
themselves as to their particular tidings. Their business was to inquire out
among Booksellers small Treatises not long printed, yet unsaleable, of which
they would buy a quantity of a sort for waste paper or little more, and having
drawn up or caused to be drawn, a general Epistle Dedicatory, they left space
at top to insert the name and dignities of the Person they intended to dedicate
the book unto, carrying Letters and Ink with them, which they speedily did
print, and tollerably enough for that purpose; the Epistle was printed before,
so that they need add nothing but the name and dignities. I have heard them
confess they had from the meanest Donor, thrice the value of what the book was
sold for at first, and most commonly six-fold. Their traveling time was in the
Summer, wherein they got so much to keep them drunk all the Winter, but they
being deceased, I believe the Trade dyed with them.

Of Dommerars.
Dommerars or Dummerars, are such who counterfeit themselves dumb, and have a
notable art to roll their tongues up into the roof of their mouths, that you
would verily believe their tongues were cut out, and to make you have the
stronger belief thereof, they will gape and show you where it was done,
clapping in a sharp stick, and touching the tongue make it bleed, and then the
ignorant dispute it no farther.

Of Jack-men.
Jack-men are such who can both write and read, who make counterfeit Licenses
and Passes, for which he is well rewarded for his labor and pains.

Of Patrico's.
PAtrico's are the Strolers Priests, every Hedge is his Parish, and every
wandering Rogue and Whore his Parishoners; the service he says is the marrying
of couples, without the Gospel, or Book of Common Prayer, the solemnity whereof
is thus.

The parties to be married find out a dead horse, or any other Beast, and
standing one on the one side and the other on the other, the Patrico bids tham
live together till death them part, and so shaking hands the wedding is ended.

Of Irish-Toyls, or Swig Men.
THese Irish Toyls, or Swig-men, being much alike, I join them together, who
carry pins, points and laces, and such like wares about; who under the pretense
of selling such commodities, commit many Rogueries; I know not what to think of
Tour old Shoes, or old Boots, will you buy my Brooms? When the Brooms are
sold, that long staff they carried them on would serve to knock a man down,
with very much ease; and Have you any old suits, hats or cloaks, may make that
profession a good cloak to hide and cover stolen goods.

Of Kynchen Coes.
KYnchen Coes are little children whose Parent are dead, having been Beggars or
else young Boys, such as have ran away from their Master, and instead of a
Trade to live by, follow this hind of life to be lousy by. The first thing
these Kynchens are taught is Canting, then Thieving, and at last Hanging. But
before they come to take the height oe Tyburn, where the Pole is elevated so
many degrees, they sail many times along while in the troubled Ocean of sad
disasters, wherein they meet with nothing but Sorms and Tempests, raised by the
Hurricans of their own irregular actions; sometimes ready to fouader in the
large and dangerous Sea of Paddington, and continually ready to split against
the dreadful Rocks of Newgate, or Bridewell.

The Female and ancient Professors of the Art of Canting, were ranked under
these seven heads;

Glymmerers. Bawdy-Baskets. Autem-Morts. Strowling Morts. Doxies. Dells.
Kynchin-Morts.
Of Glymmerers.
THe Glymmerers are such as ^^vel up and down with Licenses to beg, under the
pretense that they have lost all by fire: they have their tears at command,
which they pour out in abundance, at the sad relation of their great losses,
telling a lamentable story, how the fire consumed their Barns, Stabies, and
Outhouses, and what excellent goods they had which were destroyed therein;
these Glymmerers are defended by Upright-men, who use not to walk with them,
but keep aloof.

Of Bawdy-Baskets.
BAwdy-Baskets are such who walk about with Baskets on their arms, wherein are
pins, needles, and laces; and in this number some of your band-string women may
come in, who are always taking great pains with their hands in the day, and
with their breeches at night.

Of Autem Morts.
AVtem-Morts are such who are married, having always children with them, one in
the arms, and another at the back, and sometimes leading a third in the hand.
You are not to ask what Church she was married in, or by what Parson, as long
as a To^^demallion shall swear he will justify himself the^ husband, before
any Justice of Peace in England, talk to him of a Certificate, and you were
a^good call him Son for a Whore.

Of Strowling-Morts.
STrowling-Morts are such as pretend to be Widows, traveling about from
County to County, making laces upon ^aves, as Beggars tape, or the like; they
are subtle Queans, hard-hearted, light-singred, hypocritical and dissembling,
and very dangerous to meet, if any Ruffler or Rogue be in their company.

Of Doxies.
DOxies are neither Wives, Maids, nor Widows; they will for good Victuals, or
for a very small piece of Money prostitute their bodies, and then protest they
never did any such thing before, that it was pure necessity that now compelled
them to do what they have done, and the like, whereas the Jades will prove
common: Hacknies upon every slight occasion: they are dexterous in picking of
pockets, which they mind most when they find the man's thoughts most employed on
somewhat else; they are destructive Queans, and oftentimes secret Murderers of
the Infants which are illegitemately begotten of their bodies.

Of Dells.
DElls are young bucksome Wenches, ripe, and prone to Venery, but have not yet
lost their Maiden-heads, which is commonly done first by the Vprightman, and
then they are free for any of the Brotherhood.

Of Kynchin-Morts.
KYnchin-Morts are Girls of an Year or two old, which the Morts their Mothers
carry at their backs in slates or sheets; if they have no children of their
own, they will steal or borrow them from others.

Let this suffice of what I have spoken of the old Professors of the Art of
Canting; I shall now proceed and give you a short Character, with the names of
such as are the late Professors hereof.

The High-Pad. The Low-Pad. The Gilt. The Budge. The Ken-Miller. The Huff, or
Hector. The Pimp. The File. The Bulker. The Moon-Curser.
Women.
The Bawd. The Shop-list. The Stroler. The Whore. The Diver. The Night-Walker.
LEt me take them in Order, and first for the High-Pad, or Knight of the Road;
Before he (...) this dangerous enterprise in hand, he first ^urni^heth himself
with a good Horse, Sword and Pistols, with supernumerary killing Instruments,
if need require; And thus equipt, sometimes singly, but most commonly in
company with others, he robs all he can meet with: his usual times for scouring
the Roads, is when the Sun begins to decline, and the place of sour, yet
advantageous for the prospect of the eye, so that it may quickly discern
approaching booties; thus enriching their own condition by the ruin of others,
each honest man's los^ being these Rogues gain.

They have a Vizard-Mask and Perruke to disguise themselves therewith, and by
that means obscure themselves from the knowledge of such as are constrained to
pay them an unwilling Tribute. Nay, they have a trick to alter their voice, so
that as their habit, face and hair are helps to their nondiscevery; so their
speech (which one should think) is undisguisable, adds very much to their
concealment and security.

When they meet with a prize upon the Road, they have a Watchword among
themselves, which is no sooner pronounced, but every one falls to his work.
This is the general rule they have among them, the strongest and best at grasp
seize first; the weaker only bid stand at first, and afterward fall in
according as occasion requires; the instructions given them, is to catch the
bridle by the left hand, and to have the sword in the right; if any opposition
be made to cut soundly, and if likely to be over-powred, to kill as fast as
they can, and then either with booty or without, to fly with all expedition. If
they are pursued by an Hue and Cry, they were wont to obscure themselves in
some place or other, and let it pass by them. How much the Roads of late have
been pestered by them is unknown to few, notwithstanding so many of them have
been taken and Executed at Tyburn; Now to the intent you may be wary of them,
take these following safe and wholesome Instructions.

First, If you are about to take a Journey, conceal the time as near as you can,
and the charge you intend to carry with you; it is a Custom no less common
then indiscreet, for persons to blaze abroad among their reputed friends, the
time of their intended departure, and out of mere vainglory, tell what sum of
money they carry with them; this has been often times the cause of their being
waylaid, for there is not so found a Flock of Sheep, but there may be one
scabby, so in a Society one Judas, that for gain to share a fourth of the
prize, will betray a man to these Bully-Ruffins of the Road.

Secondly, When you come into your Inn, have a care you discover nothing of
your concern to the Hostler, Chamber lain or Host himself; the two first are
commonly bribed, or are in Pention with the High-Pad, and the last in
expectation of a share, or good store of Money spent in his house profusely,
will either from your own mouth voluntarily, or by pumping, endeavor to
discover where the booty lies, and how much, and information instantly given
to the High-Pad.

Be not easily persuaded to associate your self with Strangers on the Road, but
rather endeavor to shun such as are too forward to press into your company; if
you have a suspicion of such company, lag a little behind; and if you see them
halt also before, by alighting or otherwise, provide for your safety with what
speed you can.

Suspect all those that disguise themselves in any manner, by throwing a long
Cloak over there shoulders, wearing a Vizard Mask, false be ard, Perruke, etc.
Or if they have none of these disguises, yet still appead suspicious, look
their full in the face, and if they turn their heads aside being unwilling to
be viewed by you; this is an infallible mark of an Highway man: there are many
more marks to discover these Desperado's, by which I omit, because they will
take up too much time in the Description.

I shall therefore give you some instructions for your safety in Traveling: If
you ride with a considerable Charge, choose rather to Travel by night then by
day; for this is held as an undeniable truth among these Catter-pillars, that
none will ride by night that are worth the robbing: besides, these Highway men
in prudence take up their Inn betimes, to avoid the suspicion of being
accounted and apprehended for Rogues by being abroad so late.

Choose when you travel, the By-Roads; for your Highway men generally select
the Roads which are most common and beaten, that they may have their choice of
booties, and not straightened in their prize.

If you are five or six in Company, keep a considerable distance one from the
other when you come to some noted place for Robbery, and do not huddle all
together; this will conduce much to your safety, for by this means the Pads
will be afraid to assault you thus straggling, least one or other escape and so
raise the Country: What else has been or may be said of this Subject, I shall
refer you to the first part of the ENGLISH ROGVE; wherein you may be more fully
informed.

I shall conclude this discourse of them, with this Padding-Song.

A Padding Song.
I Keep my Horse, I keep my Whore,
I take no Rents, yet am not Poor,
I Travel all the Land about,
And yet was born to never a foot.
With Partridg plump, and Wood-cock fine
I do at Midnight often dine,
And if my Whore be not in case,
My Hostess Daughter has her place.
The Maids fit up and watch their turns,
If I stay long the Tapster mourns,
The Cook-maid has no mind to fin,
Though tempted by the Chamberlin.
But when I knock, O how they bustle,
The Hostler yawns the Goldings justle,
If the Maid but sleep, O how they curse her,
And all this comes of Deliver your purse Si^.
Of the Low Pad.
A Low-Pad is a base Sheep-stealing halfpenny Rogue; the lowness and meanness
of whose Spirit will stoop for two shillings, though he hang for his pains.

He is not of ability to ride on Horseback, and therefore skulks under hedges
in the Road, and with a long Pole knock a man down as he rides along, or
immediately and suddenly starts out from his covert, and seizing the bridle
another comes and dismounts him, and so rob him.

The Fields about the Suburbs of the City, in Winter-season, use to be very
much pestered with these Vermin, these dangerous Villains: the most noted
places are between Anniseed-Clear and Newington, between Hollow-way and
Islington, between the Pinner of Wakefield and Kentish-Town, between Red-Lyon
Fields and Totnam-Court, and lastly, Woods-Close has been very remarkable for
these pilfering Rogues, skulking and lying up and down in ditches, and like
Quails calling on one the other with a sharp and loud return they will answer
each others shrill whistle; this they do to give notice to each other where
they lie, so that they may commodiously join with each other in the assaulting
of any person they intend to rob. They make choice of Winter Evenings, as most
convenient to obscure their dark purposes.

Of the Gilt.
THe Gilt is one that going into a Tavern or Alehouse, no room below stairs
will serve his turn, and therefore is showed room above; he carries his friend
with him, or more, as occasion shall require.

Being mounted aloft, he peeps into this room, and that, if he espies no body
in the way, he will boldly adventure in, and with his Gilts (from whence he
takes his name) he will readily find out (by frequent practice) one that shall
fit any Lock, whither Trunk, Desk, Cabinet or Chest, and if he have time will
(very civily) lock them with the same instruments he opened them; having done
their business, away they rub to some other place, till they are discovered,
and so sent to the Nubbing cheat for their art and ingenuity.

Of the Budge.
THe Budge by some is termed a Runner: his employment is in the dark of the
Evening, to go into any door that he sees open, and boldly entering the house,
takes whatever next comes to hand, and marches off therewith; if he meets any
upon his entrance, they shall not need to ask him what business he comes
about, for he will instantly ask whether such a Gentleman be within, if an
answer be returned they know no such person; he will straightways crave their
pardon, saying, he was mistaken in the house, and will not stay to hear any
reply; but if he meets with no opposition, his confidence will carry him three
pair of stairs, though he is sure for his labor to come down by the Rope.

The Ken-Miller.
HE is a fellow that waits any opportunity to commit Burglary, he never goes
alone, unless now of late time, wherein these Rogues have found out new ways to
rob houses, that is by getting in to new built houses unfinished, through which
they get into the Gutters of other houses inhabited, and so consequently into
the Windows thereof, and so convey what they get either out of the Garrets, and
other Rooms lower down, as far as they durst venture: This course these Rogues
take as soon as the day is shut in, and sometimes sooner; but the other
House-breakers watch their opportunity in the dead of the night; who have an
Instrument they call a Betty, with which in a moment they will force open any
door, at which entering they instantly Gag and Bind all in the house, and so
march off with their booty; but let them act ever so warily, these pranks help
them to break their necks at last.

The Huff.
THe Huff heretofore usually kept his Whore, which upon a plotted occasion must
acknowledge her self his wife, who having drawn in some young man to lie with
her, gives intelligence thereof to the Hector, who watches the minute,
catches them in the act; and with threats and God knows what, frightens the
young man into a compliance of recompencing the injury, either by present
satisfaction or by a Bond or so forth; but this has been so notoriously and
commonly used, that this practice is obsolete and quite out of fashion.

Ye^ still he has a being, though his way of living be somewhat different, for
now he at first sets up by taking a purse on the Road, which not only puts him
in stock, but furnishes him with good apparel, that may qualify him to keep
Gentile Company, as occasion shall offer. He understands a Dye very well, and
well he may; for, for some years that he was a Footboy, or so, there was not
an hour in the day past in which he did not exercise his hand with the Dice,
either for naughty halfpence, or Coffee-pence when fortune smiled, or else by
himself, that he might the better cope with his livery Companions, Lace-coated
Gamesters; besides, three parts of every nights dream is spent in Come at
seven, what chance of the Dye is soonest thrown, in topping, slurring, palming,
napping, with how to fix a Die for any purpose.

Practicing thus, Sleeping and Waking, he becomes an excellent Proficient in
all sorts of Gameing by which he endeavors to bubble all he meets with, but if
unkind Fortune by meeting with his match has robbed him of his Money, he knows
where to borrow or steal an Horse with which he may rob the Travailer to
Re-instock himself.

In short his Cloister is a Bawdy House, where all his devotions are tendered.

He is a Protector to all distressed Damsels called in our Vulgar Tongue Common
Whores, and that he may put a better Gloss on the matter, calls them Cozens,
and swears he will Vindicate their (Stinking) reputations with the Hazard of
his life, and that he may strike terror into the fearful; he will draw upon any
slight occasion not with an intent to hurt, but to wipe off the suspicion of
being a Coward: for this he knows that the opinion of Valor is a good
Protection to him that dares not use it.

In company there is no man more Exceptions and Choleric, but seldom lets his
anger swell into a quarrel; but hopes by his Huffing to blow over a sound
Basting.

Yet if he discovers a Coward, he will not rest tell he has found out some
means to quarrel with him, and there must not be expected a reconcilement, till
the Gentleman has given him satisfaction with a Silver sword.

No man more constantly imployeth his Brains then this Bully-Huff; For his life
is a daily invention, and each meal a Stratagem. When his Whores will not or
cannot supply him, he borrows of any that will lend him money, which sometimes
is lent him, not so much expecting a repayment, as that he will never trouble
them more.

To conclude with him, his Prayers are in the morning that his Cheats may take
effect that day, if not, that he may be Drunk before night; he sleeps with a
Tobacco Pipe in his Mouth, and dreams of nothing but Villainy; and when he dies
it is either on the Gallows, or like Hercules with (...) in his Bones.

The File and Bulker.
THe File was formerly called a Bung-Nipper! or Cutpurse because with a short
sharp Knife, and an horn Thumb, he would cut a Purse with all ease imaginable;
but since Purses are much out of fashion, the File or Pick-Pocket is a la Mode.

It was wonderful with what Dexterity and Celerity they will pick a Watch,
Money, or any thing else out of a man's Pocket; and least they should be
detected, and the goods found about them, they have one that attends the
Operator who as soon as he has done his work, immediately conveys what he has
got into the hands of his Comrogue, who trips off with it, so that if they be
suspected and searched, there is no such thing with which he is taxed found
about him. They have their appointed places to meet where they share.

Their Markets are Fairs, Crowds, Churches and places where great store of
People resort, the Bulker jastles them up, and the File does the work.

Before the great and dreaful Fire, I heard of a very Spruce File, who took up
his stand commonly on Ludgate Hill, there being frequently a great stop of
Coaches, if he could not pick the Pockets of those that were on foot, he would
pick out the pin of the wheel of that Choach in which he saw none but
Gentlewomen, and by their habit those of the better sort; he would wait on this
Coach particularly, for the stop being over as soon as ever the Coach began to
move one of the Wheels would drop off, then would he be as officious as might
be to hand the Lady's out, who seldom refused him, he being always well garbed
and as with one hand he lifted them, out with the other he drew out what was in
their Pockets, sometimes taking away the Watch that hung by their side.

I must not forget one notable story of late, which was this.

A Tradesman of my acquaintance having some business in the Strand, which
required not so much have but that he made a stop at the Pictures which usually
hung out near the Middle Exchange, gazing thereon, a Motherly Woman in good
habit came and stood by him, and asked him what such a Picture signified, Why
(said he) its the Story of Noah and his two Daughters; what is it I pray Sir
(said she, Iustling up closer to him) I am very deaf pray speak Louder; with
that the Man to satisfy her curiosity opened his throat to some purpose,
Speaking aloud that it was the Representation of Noah being drunk and lying
with his own Daughters: Marry is it so, (said she) then fie upon them for a
couple of Lecherous Queans, and He for an old doting Drunken Coxcomb; could he
find out no body else to do withal but his own flesh and Blood, however Sir I
thank you for your information, I have received a great deal of satisfaction
from you, and so it seems she had having picked his Pocket of what Money was
therein contained.

The Moon Curser.
THe Moon Curser is generally taken for any Link-Boy; but particularly he is
one that waits at some Corner of Lincolns-Inn-Fields with a Link in his hand,
who under the pretense of Lighting you over the Fields, being late and few
stiring, shall Light you into a Pack of Rogues that wait for the coming of
this Setter, and so they will all join in the Robbery.

Some of these were found to be Laborers so called, such who wrought all day
in the Ruins of the City and were paid by their Master Workmen, and at night
found an easier way to pay themselves by lying in the Ruins, and as they saw
occasion would drag in People into Vaults and Cellars and there rob them.

The Bawd Pimp and Whore.
I Put these together because it is pity to part the Devils Housholdstuf: and
indeed she is very much like him, her Envy running Parallel with his: For all
that the Devil endeavors to do, is to bring Mankind into the like state and
condition, and the nature of a Bawd is to make all fair Women as foul as her
self; now because their youth perhaps will not admit of it so soon; she hurries
them on to it by degrees; by the excess of Drink and Smoke, and Venery, and
that point by which she endeavors to set off her bad Commodity will in a little
time totally ruin.

If you visit her house she pretends to have no Drink, but will send for some
that she may be sure of your Money; if you touch her bedding it will infect
you, for few comes near it but they are troubled with a fit of the falling
Sickness; but yet this I shall tell you, shall well teach you temperance, not
suffering you to have too much Liquor for your Money: If she stays a year in a
place she is befriended by the Justices Clerk.

The Instruments in chief of a Bawds trade are an Hector or Huff, which seems
instead of the Giant to defend her enchanted Castle from being violated by
Knights Errant: The Pimp which brings Grist to the Mill, that is Bawdy
Customers to the house, which he picks up under this pretense; go along with
me and I will show you the fairest Wench in Christendom, or raise a discourse
of Bawdry, and then swear, there is not such a Curious fine Sinner in or about
the City as there is at such a place, etc.

But the Whore is the Main support of the House. The first will not swagger
unless he be paid, the next wont procure unless he may Sponge, and have his
Leachery for nothing, and the Whore will not ply unless she has half share of
her own Gettings besides a little Snicking by the by.

The Market places to which Bawds resort to buy Tools for her Trade are Inns,
where she enquires of the Carriers for Servant Maids, and according as they are
handsome she Entertains them, and trains them up in the Mysteries of her
Occupation, and having qualified them for the Profession of a Prostitute, the
Bawd furnishes them with Butter fly Garments, and other gaudy accoutrements
for which she has three shares, or as much as they can agree about.

I am sorry I have fouled my Fingers with such discourse, excuse what is
already Writ, if you will be better informed, have a care you do not Entertain
the Pox for your Companion; let me End with this Song.

The Park Song.
OF late in the Park a fine fancy was seen,
Betwixt an old Bawd and a bucksome young Queen,
Their parting of money began this uproar,
I Will have half says the Bawd, but you shall not says the Whore.
Why it is my own house,
I care not a louse,
I Will have three parts of ^our, or you get not a souse;
It Is I says the Whore that must take all the pains,
And you shall be damned e're you get all the gains,
The Bawd being vexed straight to her did say,
Come off with your Dud's and I pray pack away,
And likewise your Ribons, your Gloves, and your Hair,
For naked you came, and so out you go bare:
Then the Buttocks so bold,
Began for to scold,
Hurry-Dun was not able her clack for to hold,
Both Pell-mell fell to it, and made this uproar,
With these complements, you are a Bawd, you are a Whore.
The Bawds and the Buttocks that lived there round,
Came all to this case, the pockie and sound,
To see what the reason was of this same fray,
That did so disturb them before it was day;
If I tell you amiss,
Let me never piss;
This Buttock so bold, her name was called Siss,
By Quiffing with Cullies three pounds she has
got,
And but one part of four, must fall to her lot.
Then all the Bawds cried, let us turn her out bare,
Unless she will yield to return you half share,
If she will not we will help to strip off her cloat
And turn her abroad with a slit on her Nose.
Who when she did see,
There was no remedy,
For her from the tyrannous Bawds to get free;
The Whore from the money was forced to yield,
And in the conclusion, the Bawds got the Field.
Of the Shop lift.
SHe is most commonly well clad, and one that wants more Grace than Wit; She
has several large pockets about her, but that which stands her principally
instead, is her Gown or Petticoate so tuckt up before that it will contain any
thing without falling out: Thus prepared she will boldly go into a Mercers
shop, and there pretend to lay out a great deal of Money, whereas her whole
intent is to convey into her lap same Piece of Silk or Satin which will lie in
a little Compass, and that she may the better Facilitate her purpose, she will
be very troublesome to the Shop keeper, by causing him to show her much variety
of Commodity, to the intent that what she has stolen may not be easily mist;
and having sped in one Shop, she will attempt other Shops of a different
Profession; she has variety of Customers for these stolen Commodities, as
Tailors, Piece-Brokers, etc. Where she makes up her Merchandise.

Of the Night-Walker and Diver.
I Join them together as being but one and the same thing; for she that is a
Diver or Pick Pocket is an infallible stroler or Night-Walker.

This occupation is contrary to all others, for she opens her Shop windows when
all other Tiaders are about to shut them.

The night approaching she riggs her self in the best manner she can, with some
apparent outward Ensign of her Profession; having weighed Anchor and quitted
her P^rt she steers her course for some one principal street, as Cheap Side or
Cornhill; with a gentle breese she first sails slowly on the one side, and if
she meet nere a Man of War between Snow-Hill and the Poultry, she tacks and
stands away for the other side, but if she be a tolerable tight Frigate, she is
laid aboard before, made fast with the Grapplings, and presently rummaged in
the Whold; sometimes she sheers off and leaves my Man of War on Fire.

You shall know her by her brushing you, staring in your face, often haltings
in the street by gazing about her, or looking after some or other she has
brusht; but the most infallible Sign is asking of Questions, as what is it a
Clock, Or I am a stranger which is my way to such a place.

If she is picked up she will make an hard shift but she will give a man
something whereby he shall remember her as long as he lives; besides it is ten
Pound to a penny but she plays the Diver and picks his Pocket.

Of the Bawd and whore.
THe next sort of Cattle I intend to treat of is the Bawd and Whore, now
because the Subject is so copious their being so much Roguery Subtlety and
Villainy contained in the profession of either.

Give me leave to enlarge my self hereon, promising you in this discourse not
to offend the ears of any modest READERS, but shall endeavor to discover the
truth of their wicked and Lascivious practices, described in the ensuing lives
of a Crafty Bawd, and a most Notorious Whore.

Whom for the better carrying on their History, I shall call the first Mother
Craftsby and her Niece Mistress Wheedle.

The vicious and Remarkable Lives of Mother Craftsby, and Mistress wheedle.
THe World is full of Impostors, and indeed she her self is nothing else but a
complicated Cheat: Yet she feign would appear more splendid and better than she
is: Men and Women herein contained to imitate several of Natures production,
bad men would seem good though their Intentions and Actions tend not to that
Center, and that they may palliate their Rogueries, play the Counterfeit with
Virtue and Honesty; Pebbles well cut, and Bristol-Stones by their borrowed or
feigned Luster prove the Rivalls to Real Diamonds, and often delude the
ignorant, but when judiciously compared they prove but foils to the others true
Worth, and their glittering serves only to surprise the ignorant.

The constant Standards or Conveyers of light and Virtue are neglected, when
short lived Meteors ( Spawns of Bogs, and Extracts of Dunghills) drawn by the
Suns resistless power to a great er height then they themselves were capable of
attaining, to become the wonder of a gazing Multitude, and so much pride
therein that being possessed with a strange Phrenzy of Ambition, regard not what
they do or suffer, so that they make some bustle in the World.

The Persons of whom I do intend my Discourse were solely bent upon this
irregular Humor; Craftsby being now grown Old, the heat of whose youthful
blood being by Age now near upon extinguished, minded her profit only; and that
her Niece Mistress Wheedle might not too violently prosecute her pleasurable
inclinations, she stopped them in their career by a watchful Eye and Politic
Instructions.

The Subtle Bawd was glad to see her towering Spirit to soar above her mean and
low born fortune, to the supplying of which defect, she daily plumed her head
with Ingenious conceits, which in time might be wrought into such deceits as
she aimed at, and so it proved for dazzled with these false appearances, they
both forsook Virtue, the difficult yet the only direct road to Glory, pursuing
their satisfactions in the crooked and bypaths of Subtlety and Circumventing
all which come with in the verge of their power so to effect their purpose.

It matters not to tell you where they were born, neither do I think them half
so wise as they should be, who relating the life of a Malefactor contend about
the place of his or her Nativity; some placing it here, others, there, the
truest writer in the Moon, although the opinion savors somewhat of Lunacy; let
it suffice that my two female Whipper Snappers, were born in Terra Incognita
and traveled to London for profit, cariosity and pleasure.

It will be requisite I begin with the life of Mistress Craftsby, as an
introduction to that of Mistress Wheedle, since the former had but just began
to act her part on Loves Theater, when the other ( her Niece) was then as a
mere Novice in such Affairs, being but a blossom in the Cyprian Garden.

Mistress Craftsby had a very good natural Genius, quick of apprehension, and
though she had a very nimble invention, yet contrary to General observation she
had likewise a capacious Memory, its faculties were so retentive she never
heard any Ingenious expression once which was not afterward absolutely her
own; her beauty was not much famed though her face was very well featured and
fashioned, her stature was middle sized, her body plump and fleshy, her hair of
a dark brown and an eye as black as a slow, with eye brows so large and thick,
that Nature seemed prodigal in planting thereon so much, that if half could
have been transplanted 'twould have been more then sufficient to have adern'd
the face of some ancient Citizen made barren by the coldness of his over frigid
Nature.

She very much affected gaudy apparel, and was a great hater of labor and
pains taking, the first she could not purchase in the Country, by reason of the
poverty of her Relations, labor she was continually exercised in, which made
her enter tain so great an aversion to the Country, that nothing could oppose
her Resolution of seeing London, and that which hastened her departure, was the
insufferable dislike she took to the conversation of her Country Neighbors,
there being no proportion between her and their Humors, nor finding any thing
agreeable in their Rural pastimes. Susans intended departure (for that was her
Christian name) being generally spread abroad, a universal grief possessed the
Inhabitants of that Parish wherein she lived, but more especially two Young
men, the one a Wheel-Right and the other a Serving-Man; the last followed her
to London, and not finding her lost his Wits, and was put into Bedlam, where he
trifled away his time in Straw and making Congies to a post instead of his
Mistress, till he dyed; the other was no less forward in the purchasing of his
love than the former who went for London also, and missing his Mistress wheeled
off to Sea, whose flames were quenched in the bottom of the Ocean.

The time being come for her departure, she mounted on a pack, and sat as if
she was riding on a Cammel, in her best Country livery, that is to say, she
had a straw hat, a green Wastcoat, and red Petticoat, with Hob-naild shoo's
which would strike Fire at every step, the Emblem of what Fire works she would
make when she arrived at her journeys end.

Coming to London, the reputation of a harmless Country-Girle, and a good
comely Face, soon introduced her into a service, where having learned somewhat
more than she understood in the Country, and by her service having gotten good
Cloths on her Back, she imagined the place wherein she lived too low to advance
her to that height to which her fancy daily prompted her; neither were the
Amorous pretenses and insinvations of her Masters Apprentice able to detain,
although the grand Obligation of a promised marriage was contained therein; I
concieve the stay of three Years, was too long for one in her longing Condition.

The only place she inquired after was a Merchants House, as creditable in the
first place, and next, as there was more probability of advancing her fortunes
by matching with some deluded Casheer and she was encouraged to this confidence
by the many matches she had heard of in this nature by such who were as full of
hopes as she was, of thriving in this kind.

A Service she soon got in a House as she desired, which, for external splendour
and internal accommodations, was little inferior to any Merchants in the whole
City.

Here she behaved her self so well, that she gained the love and favor of the
whole House, and so craftily she counterfeited a becoming modesty that her
Masters Casheer entertained for her a love within his breast that is not
common, the more his Reason indeavored to suppress, it became more Violent, and
giving it no vent it was ready to break that wherein it was Contained.

She like a cunning Gypsy percieved well the malady of his mind, but would not
take the least notice of it, and instead of quenching that over grown flame
which she had blown up by her alluring subtle practices, her winning carriage
and seeming compliance to every thing he seemed to desire, added new fuel
thereunto daily.

He could now no longer keep in that which would have its free course in spite
of all oppositions whatsoever, and now it violently broke out like Powder
fired, making a report so much the greater by how much it is pent up in a
narrow Circumference.

When other careless Souls are dead in sleep, or suffer themselves to be led
Captive in leaden Chains, by that heavy headed God Morpheus, the careful Lover
is ever watchful, his eyes can find no rest, because of those continual Alarums
the panting Heart does beat on his troubled Amorous breast.

Thus stood the affair between our Lovers, Susan being informed that he would
relate something of importance that night to her, thought every hour seven till
the family was gone to bed, and he every hour seventy till he might have some
assurance of his bedding with his Love.

The house being now in a profound Silence, he steals out of his own Chamber,
and softly trips down the stairs into the Kitching where his Love attended his
coming.

Low was their talk but high was the passion they had reciprocally for each
other, that sighs and looks were forced to supply the place of speech,
discovering what their tongues were incapable of uttering, and Kisses supplyd
the defects of all the rest.

His warm touches and frequent embraces did melt her into complacency so that
on both sides never were their made so many Amorous promises as between these
two Lovers, he swore and damned himself a thousand times if ever he broke his
faith with her, and she vowed and protested she would never be unfaithful to
him, upon this Obligation she condescended the next night he should lie with
her with this Proviso, that if she be with Child he should marry her
incontinently, but if no such thing happened to defer it some time longer, this
agreement was Sealed interchangeably by Kisses on each side, and so they went
to their respective Chambers.

The Master of the House (whom we shall call Mr. Tradewell) had a Partner and
his Wife in the House with him, whom for the better carrying on the Story, we
must call by the name of Mr. Silware. this Merchant was gone into France about
some Affair that concerned the Partnership, and left his Wife behind him to the
care of Mr. Tradewell, who ever had a great respect for her, being a very
lovely Woman, and one whose beauty and every part exceeded his own Wives by
many degrees, the consideration of which had so inflamed his Heart, that he
only wanted an opportunity to make known to her the Fervency of his Affection.

This absence of her Husband gave him all the advantages a Lover could require,
neither was he backward in the using of such means that might accomplish his
irregular defires; he had made several attempts but still was repulst, at
length he resolved to summon together all his force and give her one home
Charge more, or one Vigorous assault before he would raise his Siege; the time
designed was the next day, after the night the Casheer and Susan had agreed to
the assignation of each others Maiden-Heads the night following.

The day being come and when one half or more thereof was spent, Mr. Tradewell
singles out his game ( fair to Admiration) and resolved to hit his mark.

You may therefore Swear he did not fright her Ear, with the dreadful stories
of horred Dutch cruelties in Amboyna, nor what will become of that ungrateful
Nation hereafter, but how he might make a Conquest over Chastity.

Mr. Selware heard his temptations with much seeing impatience and reluctance,
offering frequently to be gone, but easily stayed by her assailant; she fretted
and fumed at the walls as if they were accessory to her detention whereas the
door stood wide open, or had it been locked one Skreeke or two would have as
nimbly opened it as the Key thereunto belonging; having flounst and flung up
and down, She at length (recovering breath) thus capitulates with him: Where
note that Fortress or Citadel that admits of a Parley with her Assailent is
already half Surrendered.

O Mr. Tradewell I did not think you were a Man so loosly given, how can you
thus offer to injure four at once, your Wives Virtue, my Husbands friendship,
my Chastity, and most of all your own Soul.

Tradewell had a tongue most excellently well hung, with wit at will, by which
he so handled the matter, that he cleared these Scruples, making her believe
that foreign Nations publicly permitted (Adjutores Tori;) helpers in the
marriage bed; and that it was freely granted by the husband that she should
make choice of any one friend whom she pleased, that here at home such things
were winked at, else how comes it about it should grow so Fashionable for Women
to have a Gallant besides their Husbands, who shall not only participate of the
pleasure of the Wife, but the profits also of the Husband.

What harm then (said he) can your consent to my proposals do to your Husbands
friendship or your Honesty? as for my Wives Virtue if she thinks Chastity such,
let her live Cloistered up in my Arms only, if not, let her take the freedom I
freely give my self.

He added a thousand things more which his transported passion dictated to him,
and laid them so home that with a kind of willing unwillingness she yielded to
what he requested, but with many Cautions, as Constancy, Secrecy, etc.

These Amorous combatants had nothing now to consider of but to appoint the
field where this Battle must be sought which was the bed of her absent
Husband, the hour Eleven, and that he would take care the whole Family should
be in Bed by that time; in Order thereunto he gave Order that Supper should be
made ready betime, and that his intentions were to rise very early the next
day, and therefore he would go to Bed by time.

This news did not a little please Susan and the Casheer, as thinking they
should the sooner and longer enjoy their eagerly expected pleasures; every
finger that Susan had, supplied the place of a hand to dispatch Supper, which
being ready was disht up, and Mr. Tradewell and his Wise with Mistress Saleware
seating themselves.

Susan, according to Custom, waited on her Mistress and the Casheer on his
Master: Susan was then so bashful that least ought in her looks should betray
what was all-ready complotted, looked down continually, not daring to look up
least her wanton glances ( which she could not hinder) should prove the
Traitors to her expected bliss.

The Casheer in the mean time stood like a Statue either staring in Susans
face, or else his Eyes wandering he knew not whether, with his Wits in the sweet
contemplation of those delights he should be master of e're long, his thoughts
were so totally employed hereon, that he was no farther serviceably to the table
then for laughter, for if his Master called for Beer, he brought him a clean
plate, if his Mistress called for a Glass of Wine he presented it to the Maid,
and then to mend the Mistake to Mistress Saleware, which caused a great deal of
pleasant discourse what should be the occasion of this sudden disorder, none
took more notice of it than Mr. Tradewell, for her Husband was in the like
distraction, neither was Mistress Saleware in less confusion.

Mr. Tradewell partly by the strength of imagination and partly by those
flames, the incomparable beauty and over kind promises his Partners Wife had
kindled in him, made him even ready to dissolve as Snow against the Scorching
rays of the Meridean Sun; Fancy made him think he was already incircled in her
arms and clung as close as Jvies to the Elm; sometimes he thought he heard the
Ravishing twang of her harmonical Lace against her Bodice, making her self
unready to be the more ready to his devotion.

As Supper ended so did the discourse, for Mr. Tradewell counterfiting a bad
Sentinel fell fast a sleep pretendedly; this made Mistress Saleware retire, to
give opportunity to Mr. Tradewell to put her Husband to bed, who (understanding
from himself that his business would call him up very Early next morning)
awaked him out of his sleep desiring him to take his rest in Bed: Mr. Tradewell
starting as one too suddenly disturbed out of his sleep, answered (raising
himself and rubbing his Eyes) go to Bed Sweetheart, I will but go down and
give some instructions to my man what is to be done to morrow, and Order them
to go to Bed, I will instantly return; having given what Orders he thought
convenient below, coming up he renewed the former discourse with Mistress
Saleware and confirmed the contract; he returned to his own Chamber, where he
found his Wife in Bed, and undressing himself went to Bed also and to prevent
toying with his Wife fell immediately (but feignedly) into a profound sleep.

His wife that was not accustomed to be so served could not refrain shedding
some tears to be thus frustrated of th^se expectations natural heat had
engendered within her; but knowing how ill humored he used to be when pressed to
any thing he did not voluntary propound and fearing to displease him she
accomadated her contentment with hopes remitting the fruition of her desires to
some other time, upon these agreeable and self pleasing thoughts sleep closed
the portalls of her Eyes, so Captivating her senses that her sleep was as
profound as her Husbands was counterfeit.

Every one in the House were now paying the quiet Tribute due to Pains-taking,
indulgent Nature excepting the aforementioned Lovers: Mistress Saleware lay
(improperly) above Mr. Trade-well, Susan in a little room next him, the Casheer
a good way distant; Mistress Saleware and Susan placed their ears to the best
advantage that they might hear the first tread of their expected Amorous
visitants, you must think they hearkened with as much attention, as a dying
Patient would hear the Physicians sentence of Life or Death, privately
whispered into the Ear of some friend standing by.

Nor did the weary Traveller endure more pain and inquietude in waiting that
happy day which shall free him from those fears and dangers do on every side
environ him, then this our Tradewell did in having those doubts removed which
encompassed by the coming of the appointed Hour, before it was fully arrived
he left his loving Bed fellow, whose Face though not tinctured with a
Vermillion hue like a Morning Blush, yet was there nothing wanting in her which
appertained to her sex, but in every thing was rather redundant.

You may imagine he was very careful of treading hard, yet though he went
softly, he could not hinder the creaking of the boards, which caused a double
Alarm, the one to his Mistress of his approach, and the other of fear to
himself, least thereby he might awake his Wife and so she find him absent, the
consideration hereof made his heart to imitate a Drummer in the beating of a
point of War.

Coming to her Chamber door, he called to her in so low a voice he could not hear
himself; yet she could perfectly at a good distance and instantly give him
admission.

What they speedily went about you may imagine, and therefore it is needless to
give you an account of every Amorous folly these two Lovers were guilty of that
time, which lay in Action more than expression, and no wonder since kisses
barracaded up their speech.

Having tired each others lips, they then encountered with their Legs and
Arms, but how, my modesty will not give me leave to tell.

No doubt they ran their Posts or Stages with uncontrouled Eagerness; like an
high mettled Horse which at first mounting will Carvete and Caper, and without
the least touch of Switch or Spur will bounce and foam at mouth, nay fret it
self out of Breath; but let us leave these Champions of Venus, and give an
account of what happened in this interval, as a just reward and a remarkable
casual revenge on Tradewells infidelity.

About half an hour after this disloyal Husband had left the warm Bed of his
hitherto constant Bedfellow to go a catterwowling, his Cashier (who was about
the age of twenty, a handsome lusty Lad) got out of his Bed, having slept
against his will, and not knowing how much of the night had slipped away, rubbing
his eyes between sleeping and waking, he gropes his way in the dark to find out
Susans Chamber; but instead thereof, entered into that of his Mistresses: The
first thing he encountered with was the Bed, and finding it so quickly, doubted
not but that he was right, concluding the narrowness of the room guided him to
his intent and purpose; whereupon lifting up the clothes softly, he laid
himself down by her side; he was not long there, e're he began to bustle (not
as if he was settling himself in order to his repose) which soon awaked his
Mistress, who believing it was her Husband, embraced him with an ardent
affection, saying, My dearest Joy, how cold you are? Come, put thy legs within
mine, I Will warm them for thee; and then discharged a whole volley of kisses on
him: those being over, she talked to him again. My dear Husband, I Will tell thee
what I just now dreamt: Methought I heard your man open your maids Chamber
door, and talked of things not fit to be spoke; being thoroughly vexed my House
should be made a Brothel by your Servants, I endeavored to rise to prevent
them in their Roguery, struggling to get up, and feeling for thee to tell thee
what I was going about, I could not find thee in the Bed; this so strangely did
surprise my mind, that through fear, vexation, and I know not what, I instantly
awoke, and glad I am that it is but a Dream, and that I have thee in mine Arms.

These actions and expressions clearly convinced him that he was in an error,
and that she which expressed so many indearments, and which had so stricktly
shackled him within her arms, was his Mistress.

At first he was almost dead with fear, but having recollected his scattered
Spirits, and bethought himself of this stratageme to preserve himself from
discovery, all passages that ever he observed between his Master and Partners
Wife came fresh into his mind, and from all the circumstances concluded that
they were now consummating their loves. and that if he could but refrain from
speaking, he doubted not but that she would fall asleep again, and so have the
opportunity of stealing a way, to be as good as his promise.

But jealously in her dream had so kindled her fire, that abandoning for that
time the becoming modesty of her Sex, she grew so impatient of delays, that he
found himself incapable of resisting those emotions she had raised within him,
but suffered himself to be taught by her those Love-lessons, were designed him
by another Love-School Mistress; she had so warmed her Cashier, that had he
been Marble, or a Mysanthropos, a mortal enemy to Mankind, he must have then
laid aside his innate hate and emnity to be reconciled to such a loving Enemy.

This Combat lasted a long time without any considerable advantage perceivable
on either side, but being equally tired, they both willingly sounded a retreat.
And now it was time for her to consider that these embraces were more vigorous
and fierce than such which are the attendants to a Marriage Bed, unusually
accompanied with such frequent Repetitions: Besides his continued silence all
this while did strangely startle her, which with the former, gave her
sufficient grounds to suspect she was mistaken in her Bedfellow.

The poor foundred Cashier was in a peck of troubles, not knowing how to get
out of that Labyrinth he had casually wound himself into; each minute he
dreaded his Masters apprehending him in bed with his Mistress, and what
punishment could he expect less than his Masters Dagger plunged to the hilts in
his traitorous breast; hereupon an universal Palsy seized upon every Limb, but
this trepidation of his joints, his Mistress favorably interpreted the product
of his past delights, or of desire of enjoying more, and not at all the effect
of fear.

After a thousand distracting cogitations, the Cashier having weighed each
particular in the balance of his green understanding, considered that it might
be of a dangerous consequence to ask pardon of his Mistress for what had past
between them, and then again to rise when his Mistress was asleep without
discovering to her the mistake, would the next day undoubtedly betray the whole
matter, by her petulancy, or some little toying and wanton discourse between
her and his Master; and who knows not but that she might too amply acknowledge
his gratitude for his late supposed works of Supererrogation, which might give
him cause to conclude (as it was but just) that his man had supplied his last
nights absence, for none other in the family could be suspected. The
apprehension of danger from the discovery of a secret of this great importance,
did put him in so great a confusion, that it was not to be judged which was
greater, the pleasure he had obtained, or the trouble and fear he underwent in
the purchase thereof. Whilst his thoughts were engaged in this perplexity a
stratagem bolted into his head, which in all probability might remedy all; and
thus it was, he resolved to take no notice of any thing she uttered saving the
Dream, making her believe that he thought himself in bed with Susan and none
else, and therefore (grumbling a little first) he thus spoke:

Prithee, my Dear, what did thou mean by that Dream thou told'st me, the
matter I value not, but it is the manner of telling it troubles me; thy language
therein was more like my Mistress than my Love; Why do thou call me Servant
whenas I intend to be thy Husband? But I will not chide, since I did not think
to have been so favorably received by thee; and since I find thy love cordial
(speaking to her with a Kiss) were I interrupted from thy embracements, by the
interposition of an Arm of the Sea, wider and more dangerous than that loving
Leander once too often crossed swimming to see his sportive Hero, I would do it
with as much alacrity and willingness as for striding a Brook obtain a
Lordship. Dearest, said he, what is the matter? Why so silent? Fear nothing,
our Mistress, poor Gentlewoman, is fast asleep, she like an harmless innocent
little dreams of the ingratitude and treachery of her lascivious Husband, who
is now at this very nick of time in the height of his enjoyments with Mrs.
Saleware. At these words she became more surpised and amazed than ever Alcmene
was of old, after Jupiter had enjoyed her in the shape of Amphitreo.

But seeing there was no remedy for so strange an Accident which had made her
break her Marriage-Vow, she comforted her self in that the fault, if it was
any, was not designed by her, but all the guilt ought to lie on her disloyal
Husband; and indeed I know not how that can properly be called a fault which
was done unwittingiy; besides, she could not but applaud the Justice of Heaven,
punishing him in the same manner he had abused others. Mrs. Tradewel was
somewhat loath to part with the Company of her new Bedfellow, but reason
persuaded her to it for the avoiding danger, wherefore slipping a Diamond-ring
off her finger she conveyed it into the hands of her Servant, saying in a very
low voice, if you are discreet hug in silence your good fortune, otherwise you
shall find a reward suitable to your babbling folly.

Hereupon without replying a word, he got out of the Bed, and passing by the
Chamber of his poor cheated Susan, he entered into his own, and went to sleep;
how and in what manner she took and revenged this intolerable affront, I shall
anon give you a farther account.

Mr. Tradewel had not been in bed with his beloved Saleware above two hours,
but that Mr. Saleware being returned from France, and landing at Gravesend,
took a pair of Oars and came straight away for London with an affectionate
desire to have a speedy sight of his entirely beloved Wife, and about one a
Clock landed at Billingsgate, and thence with all speed went to his Habitation;
where coming he knock at the backdoor for the convenience of speedy entrance,
the Skulling-boy lying just over the Gate, and so soon got in, making the boy
to strike a light, and with it went directly to his Chamber, where these two
Lovers were more entangled with each other than Mars was by the craft of Vulcan
with the Cyprian Goddess. He knocked at the door two or three times, but his
Wife being other ways employed then to come out of a warm bed and endanger of
catching of cold, was as mute as a fish, neither could she in Reason speak till
the business she was about was consummated; but he without repeating his
knocks, she was forced at length to ask, who was there, in words imperfect, as
just disturbed out of a profound sleep. It is I, said her Husband. Who are you,
she replied. It Is I, your Husband, said Saleware, don't you know my voice? She
thus capitulated with him that she might have time to abscond her Lover; the
suddenness of the surprise would not permit her to consult long about it,
neither was there any other place of security, but underneath the Bed; which
Tradewel was forced to crawl under; that being done, seemingly in great haste
she ran to the door, speaking as she went, My Soul, O my dearest Heart, art
thou returned? The most welcome man to me in the world; whilst she thought in
her heart what envious Devil brought thee hither at this juncture of time, thus
to obstruct my early joys?

The door being opened, Mr. Saleware entered in, and as he was about to run and
catch her in his arms, the sight of her in a manner naked, displaying her
delicate Breasts, put him to a stand that he might please his eyes before he
feasted his other senses; this small time of absence had given him new
appetite, and so impatient he grew, that he thought undressing himself to be
the way about and too long for the renewing his delight, and therefore would
have cut it shorter; but she which already had had the satisfaction of a more
vigorous and active subject, knew how to defend her self against the weak
assaults of an impotent Husband: to qualify him, for the present the de sir'd
him to have patience, if not, he might be instrumental in bringing her into
some dangerous Distemper, by catching cold coming sweating out of a warm bed.
This persuasion made him the more hasty to go to bed, his Wife in the mean time
considering with what difficulty her Gallant almost starved with cold) must
creep from underneath the bed to acquit himself of the Chamber, and the danger
of staying longer in it, and withal knowing how impossible it would be to steal
from her Husband, or if she did, the creaking of the door might betray her, she
suddenly pumpt out of her invention, a pretty device to blind her Husband and
secure her friend: Women's wits are ever most ready at a push in the greatest
straights.

As her Husband was making himself unready, she caught him about the neck,
saying, hold, hold, my dear Heart, prithee let us drink a glass of Wine for joy
of thy return, I have half a dozen bottles which were lately sent me as a
present, the best thou did ever taste of in all thy life, prithee step down
into the Cellar, there is but one left, it stands in the farthest corner of the
Cellar: with all my heart, said her Husband; in order to his going down he
reputs on his Doublet, and having buttoned it by halves, he stands up to look
for his shoes which he had carelessly dropped off his feet, but could find but
one, the other it seems tumbled under the bed where Tradewel lay, he began to
grope with his hands underneath the Bed, which had like to have frighted our
Inamorata and and his Mistress out of their wits; but seeing his search was in
vain, he went to the Table to fetch the Candle, the wife seeing this, lept
nimbly out of Bed and pretending to be angry for his standing so long barefoot
on the cold ground, snatched the Candle out of his hand, saying, is it possible,
Husband, that you should be thus long looking for your shoe and not find it?
Come, you shall stand no longer on the bare bords, I Will rather suffer than you;
and thereupon looked for the shoe where she knew it was impossible to find it.
The Husband seeing his wife thus walk up and down barefoot, in a great passion
told her, that unless she was resolved to be accessory to her own death, she
would not do as she did; therefore, said he, let me command you to go to your
bed, and do not expose your tender body to those injuries which accompany a
cold winter season.

Let any one judge whether Mr. Tradewel were not in a sweet pickle at the
hearing of these words, and Mrs. Saleware was at her wits ends, thinking now
there was no hope of using any other fallacy, concluding the best Inventions
in this case barren, and that it lay not in the power of the sharpest and
craftiest wit to find out a way that may deliver them from this imminent danger.

Now did Mr. Saleware in a seeming rage adadvance to snatch the Candle from his
Wife; she pretending to prevent him, with an over-officious care not to put him
to the trouble, seemed to flumble (in her starting back) at the foot of the
Table, and thereby fell, and by her fall extinguished snuff and and all; whilst
her Husband was groping for the Candle, with all speed she got to the bed to
advise Tradewel that this was the time, if ever, to make his escape
undiscovered, she durst not speak, and therefore she did thrust her arm
underneath the Bed and caught him by the foot; Tradewel thinking that the hand
he felt was that of him he had so injured, and therefore now did justly fear,
knew not what to do, thinking it was to little purpose to endeavor his further
concealment, and judged he had no means left but to crawl out upon all four,
and in that posture confessing the whole matter, beg pardon of his injured
friend; but perceiving that the person that held him by the foot pulled him but
gently, without the utterance of one word, he alterr'd his resolution, knowing
it must be his Friend; after this she found the shoe and gave it her Husband,
who by this time had found the Candle, which she feared he had given to the
Devil to light, and now she entreats him afresh to go down into the Kitching,
and light the Candle (there being always some fire all night long) and thereby
fulfill her request; Saleware by the charming persuasions of his subtle wife,
condescended to every thing she desired; he was no sooner gone, but she hastened
her Gal^ lant with all speed imaginable out of the Chamber; who seeing himself
freed and at liberty was the joyfullest man living, notwithstanding he was so
benumbed with cold that he looked like the third Son of Ice-icle Winter, his
shirt (by removing himself on this side and that, for his better security) was
so black by rubbing the boards, that he looked like a Small-Coal-man, and his
Hair, which like Lime-twiggs had ensnared the Feathers underneath the bed, made
his head appear more like an Owls than a Common-Councelmans; and which was
worse, he had so bepist himself by the fright he was in, that he stunck like a
Polecat. In short, his looks were so ghastly, and his face so palled and wan,
that the most rational would have taken him for a Spectre or Phantasm, so
strange was his Metamorphosis in time of this short though sharp Purgatory; but
all this was nothing to what he suffered by his Cashier; one nights repose
would resettle him and restore his former quietude and serene temper, but the
injury he sustained in the abuse of his Wife was remediless: Besides had he
been discovered by his Partner, who knows the dangers that jealousy and
revenge might procure to prosecute an act so foul and so ungrateful: The
mischiefs are innumerarable they run themselves into, who slighting Heaven by
contemning the good Laws of man, are led away by their brutish appetites and
inordinate sensuality.

Consider then again, how blind and irrational some are who having wives whose
beauties may dispute for eminency with the choicest of the Creation, whose
discretion, modesty and prudence was never called in Question by any foul
miscarriage, whose honesty and nuptial fidelity is as spotless white as
innocence her self; yet I say, these very men regarding neither the Laws of of
God nor Nature ( More ferarum Quadrupedumque) by invading other men's rights,
endeavor their satisfaction with such whose Persons, Wit, Beauty and Behavior
fall as short of that which adorns their own faithful Companions, as the
splendor of the serene Sun outshines the gloominess of an eclipsed Moon. In
short, men should forbear entertaining such loose and unlawful desires, if not
for the sake of Heaven, yet for the love they ought to bear to their health and
honor: But to return where we left.

Tradewel, thus pickled in dust, feathers, and urine, durst not approach his
own bed, but thought it very expedient to go to the Chamber of his Cashier, but
before he could come at it he must pass by his Maid Susans Chamber Door, who
had not closed her eyes in all that time by reason of her longing desire of
enjoying her Friend. Impatient of waiting longer she had got out of Bed, and
having slipped on her Petticoat, she was going out with an intention of going to
visit her faithless Friend, at the same time her Master came tripping down the
stairs from Mr. Saleware; by a little glimmering light she perceived somewhat
in white, at first sight she was somewhat affrighted suggesting that this might
be some Spirit, had undoubtedly screekt out, had she not presently bethought
her self that in all probability this was her unfaithful Friend who had
slighted her for a more excellent beauty above, and was now returned from those
petulant delliances which properly belonged to her by Oaths, Vows, and
Protestations, imboldned with the consideration hereof, she seized suddenly on
his shirt as he was passing by, and not regarding the propinquity of her
Mistresses Chamber to hers, in these terms she upbraided him, O Sir, have I
caught you, are these the fruits of your last nights Promises, can the current
of your love so soon run in another Channel? Base perjured man, so quickly to
relinquish that, for which I must for ever languish.

Tradewel concluded himself surprised by his Wife, and thought she had by her
vigilancie discovered this amorous complotment, and being conscious of his own
guilt, he endeavored after this manner to appease the just anger of his
injured Wife: Dearest, I have offended, let my penitent Confession plead the
remission of a fault I never was guilty of before. To which she replied: The
first is a Crime of so high a nature, it can never be forgiven. What violate
your Maiden-Obligation and me who never yet knew man, nor never would know any
but for your sake, to whom I Am bound by promises extorted by you from me? Why,
did you promise only to delude? Could you not find some other way to abuse me,
but by this the most insufferable?

Tradewel (finding his mistake) soon banished his fear, and perceiving what had
past between his Maid and man, made the discovery of their folly his own
advantage; for presently, as if he had known her from the first interview, thus
spoke: Well Susan, I never thought you a light Huzzie till now, I had ever too
good an Opinion of your honesty by your seeming modest deportment, but for the
future I shall banish such good thoughts, so undeserved by you. Get you to your
Bed, I shall speedily find out some way that shall prevent Night-Walkers in my
house from such like sensual meetings; you may now take your rest to night for
you are not like to rest here much longer; but let this be your comfort, I will
go instantly to mine and your faithless Servant, and enquire of him what was
his reason that he violated that (Sacred) Promise he made, and thus basely
disappointed you in your first fruitions. Having uttered these words he left
her, but in a condition so distracted, that she knew not what to nor what to
think.

Tradewel eoming to the door where his Cashier lay, found it locked, whereupon
he softly knocked; the Robber of his Honor (who could not sleep for
contemplating on what had casually part between his Mistress and himself) asked
who was there: By the answer returned, he knew his Master was without:
Instantly his guilty Conscience flew into his face, accusing him of what he had
so lately done, and now verily believed that in oftentation his Mistress had
told her Husband how luckily (though not wittingly) she was revenged of his
base disloyalty, and that his Master not knowing how to wreak his revenge on
her was come to discharge it on him. As Vice is commonly the Original of fear,
so he who is afraid ever suspects the worst.

In short, fear had so universally possessed him, that there was no room left for
one rational consideration; all courage had forsaken this accidental offending
Smell-smock, and the expectation of his ensuing punishment had stewed him in a
a cold sweat, or rather was dissolving him into one of the Elements of his
first composition; you could not now call him Man, but the Decoction thereof
(Neither was man's limbs so shak'd with the cold fits of a Quartan Ague, as this
same quaking jelly was by his panick fear; sometimes he thought to leap out of
the Window, and adventure an arm or a leg rather than run the hazard of losing
-- he knew not what; altering that resolution, he thought it better to cast
himself on his knees at the feet of his Master, confessing his (not purposed)
fault, and implore his pardon; with this resolution, he opened the door, and
seeing by the light of the Moon (which was just then risen) the pallid and
bloodless hue of his shivering Masters face, looking more like that of a
Conjurer than one transported with a jealous passion, recollected himself and
took courage to speak to him. Tradewel seeing his man in so great a confusion,
could not but smile to himself, asking him what was the matter? O Sir, said he,
your low trembling voice from without, and your frightful appearance within
has so disordered me with fear, that I am like one besides himself.

Although Tradewel was in his shirt half starved with cold could not forbear
laughing, nor would he lose the pleasure of discoursing with his man at
present, although he was sure his body would suffer for it by some distemper
hereafter. Come Sirrah, said he, these pretenses shall not serve your turn, I
know your dissimulation, and your subtle practices, I know what contract you
made with my maid, how, and when you were to meet, though you disappointed her,
but that was, because you were afraid of my detecting your Roguery, knowing
this night I watched your appointment to prevent further mischief.

The Cashier was all wonder and amazement; he could not imagine who should
discover his dark designs, unless the Devil had don't by declaring himself his
professed Enemy: it was but a folly to suspect one or the other, or to blame any;
it was now only expedient to make confession and ask forgiveness, which as soon
as he had done, his Master granted him his request, with this Proviso, he
should never attempt the like again. But hold, said Tradewel, there is
something more to be said and done, and that is help me to one of your clean
shirts, and whatever you think, speak not a word, as you tender your own
welfare; let it suffice, that I tell you thus much, that I have been upon other
Discoveries this night than barely your lascivious appointment, but what they
are, they must be secret to you.

The Cashier got him presently a clean shirt, the sooner to be rid of his
Company, which as soon as Tradewel had put on, he returned to his own Chamber,
lying down by his Wives side, with as little noise as the gliding of a Snake
over a smooth Marble; she was in a profound sleep, as one extremely tired,
making it appear by her (unusual) snoring, the pleasure she took in sleeping,
and that she had traveled that night every whit as far as her Husband. Yet
though Tradewel was as cautious as might be of awakening her, yet he could not
avoid the tumbling of her legs to and fro, agitated by some pleasant fancies in
her dream, which falling on his (as cold, as if they had been pickled in snow,
and laid on the Alps a whole Winter) made her suddenly start out of her sleep,
no less tormented with that extreme cold, than others with the contrary
Element; Tradewel shrunk from her, and she pursued him, laying her hands on his
face, breast, and thighs, and dissembling her knowledge of his absence: My
Dear, said she, what means this strange and unusual coldness? Art well? Prithee
strike a light, I am confident that something is amiss; to which he replied,
that he was in good health, and that his coldness proceeded from the
bed-cloaths tumbling off. That cannot be, said she, the Bedstaffs would hinder
any such thing; and then laying her hands all about him, said she, is it
possible you can be so universally cold, and in a warm bed with a warmer
Bedfellow, come abscond the truth no longer, and what e're it be, discover it,
and I will not be offended. If then you will know the truth, Sweetheart, said he,
I have of of late suspected some irregular practices between my Cashier and my
maid Susan, and this night I was resolved to try whether I could detect them;
to which she suddenly and smartly replied, I now must detect you: Is it not
sufficient that you have a wife not loaded with years, her face not deformed,
her body fruitful, and her heart faithful, but that you must entrench on other
men's proprieties? Surely Mr. Saleware and you becoming Copartners, it was not
intended you should go Partner in his Wives Commodities: Could any man in the
world prove so ungrateful to two at once, one that he should love beyond the
world, a wife, the other which he should affect the next thereto, a Friend?
Would you be served so your self?

Tradewel had not a word to say in his own vindication, but pleaded guilty to
all that was alleged against him, earnestly beseeching his Wife she would pass
all by, and he would never commit the like again; upon that condition she
forgave him, and the sooner, as knowing she was no loser by his infidelity.

The morning approaching, Mr. Saleware came and caressed his Partner, thanking
him for the tender care he had of his Wife in his absence, and that they both
were much obliged to him for his love; Complements past on all sides, and a
general seeming satisfaction did o'respread the faces of them all, and now
every one betook himself to his proper business: Only Susan could do no
business at all, because her business was not done; she could not rest
satisfied till she had singled out her false Lover; and therefore quickly found
an opportunity, she first acquainted him with the greatness of her love, and
how it was abused by him; and to be short, if he would not tell her the whole
truth of the occasion of this breach of promise, she would never endure him
more. The Cashier hearing this sad sentence, if he were not real in his
Relation, and being re-inflam'd again with those adored eyes of hers, and her
insinuating pleasing language (forgetting his Mistresses threats) he tells her
the naked truth, informing her, that as he was coming with no other intent than
to fulfill his promise to her, by a mistake entering the wrong Chamber, he paid
her due Tribute to her Mistress, who was left alone by her ungrateful Husband,
who was gone to enjoy Mrs. Saleware in the absence of her Husband, his Masters
Partner.

Susan was ready to sink down to hear that in all probability she had utterly
lost her Sweetheart, knowing like a cunning Baggage, that now adays love is
less prevalent than interest: but prithee said she, How did she receive thee?
At first, she thought me to be her Husband, till she perceived how many Bars I
had out-thrown him, and finding her mistake, she seemed like a woman
distracted, complaining that her hitherto untainted Chastity was ruined, that I
was a Villain, for being the Murderer thereof, and that she wondered with what
impudence I durst approach her bed; I was forced at length to vindicate my self
from that bold attempt, to tell her what love I had for you, for the
acccomplishment of which we had appointed that night to receive the pawn on
each side of each others fidelity. And you have then, said she, discovered me
to be the wonton subject of her censure and reproach: no matter, said he. When
she understood that what was committed was by mistake, she seemed satissi'd,
and was thankful to Heaven that this mistake had revenged her Husbands
infidelity; then she charged me to be secret and be gone, and as a reward gave
me this Ring; before I took my leave I enjoined her to the same secrecy of our
Amor. In the assurance that this is a truth, I do forgive what is past,
conditionally you never enjoy your Mistress more.

Mr. Tradewel carried himself now very obligingly to his Wife, and
indifferently to his female Friend, and more than usual friendly to her
Husband, but continually quarrelling with his Maid Susan, to the intent that he
might make her weary of his Service, and so be gone; she perceiving this, was
resolved speedily to make Hay whilst the Sun shined, and knew no better way to
bring about her ends, then to carry her self most charmingly affectionate to
her Friend, the Cashier, and to grant him every thing he desired; when he
pleased he had the Command of her Bed, and dalliances with her where he
pleased, and as often as he listed, and being now solely Regent over his
affections (although now and then he accompanied his Mistress (more to please
her than himself) she resolved by his overthrow to raise her self; and thus she
plotted it: Notwithstanding the frowardness of he^ Master toward her for her
own benefit, she pretended a more than common respect to him, protesting more
reallity of service than invention can well hammer out; making this her
Prologue to her cunning design; she tells him, she knows that she was seduced,
and led away by the crafty allurements of his man, and that she could not but
yield after so many thousand Oaths and Vows of righting her wronged Virginity,
that instead thereof, all his performances were continual slightings; and now
at last inquiring strictly into the cause of this sudden alteration of his
love, she suspected that it might be occasioned by the hopes he has of his
Mistresses love toward him, that she had something more than bare suspicion to
make manifest what she said, and that in a little time, if he pleased, she
doubted not but to make it apparent how inconsiderately his Wives love is
misplaced on her Servant.

Mr. Tradewel heard this with no small perturbation of mind, however being
willing to know the truth hereof, he promised her a reward if she would make
him a speedy discovery thereof. In the prosecution whereof, one night when
Susan had got the Cashier in bed with her, and having according to custom
after tiring been used to sleep with her an hour or two (she being all this
while his waking Sentinel to raise him when it was time to return to his own
bed) I say, she then took the opportunity of conveying two Keys out of his
Pocket, the one of his Till, where his Masters Cash lay, the other of his
Trunck, which contained his wearing Apparel, with other things properly
belonging; She opens his Trunk first, by the help of a Candle she had placed
underneath her bed in a dark Lanthorn, and there finds the chiefest thing she
looked for, the Ring which his Mistress had given him as a pledge of her love,
she found what she looked for, and therefore locked the Trunck again, without
diminishing any thing therein contained, but the Ring. After this she trips
down the stairs softly into the shop, and opening the Till, took out one
hundred Guinny's, which was in a small bag by its self, and one hundred pound
bag of silver, locking the Till again, which money she hid in the Cellar, and
so went up again to her own Chamber, putting the Keys into his Pocket, he not
missing her all this while, being fast asleep. All things being effected
without the least remaining suspicion, she awak't her Lover, telling him she
had over-indulg'd his humor in letting him sleep so long, however she was well
content to have no rest (and enjoy his Company) so that he might have it; and
so with a hug and a buss they parted.

In the morning early she got up, and taking the money she had hid (with an
excuse of going but half a dozen doors off) she carried it off, and put it into
the hands of a very trusty Friend of hers, and making very little stay, returns
home.

By this time her Master was up, who found her as formerly, very diligent in
the Kitching, and being alone, asked her, what further progress she had made in
the discovery; I will tell you, said she, within an hour, if you will be sure
to step out and be in again; in the mean time I will show you a Ring, which
your Wife gave her man; which by his knowledge thereof, increast his jealousy.
He consented thereto, and she in the mean time steps up to her Mistress to know
what she would be pleased to have for dinner: Ask your Master said her
Mistress, forsooth, said she, he is gone (he told me as far as Blackwal, and it
is questionable whether he can come to dinner. Blackwal, how can that be! send
up the Cashier to me, he will give me better information where he is gone than
you can; I will rise by and by, in the mean time I Will think what to have for
Dinner.

Susan was overjoyed her plot took so well, and indeed but according to her
expectation; for she observed her Mistress always inquire where her Husband
was, if gone out, how far, and then according to the distance of place she knew
how to employ her time and exercise her self with her man. Coming down she did
not go immediately to acquaint the Cashier with his Mistresses Command, but
staid some time ere she told him, extracting from him at the same time
Protestations of Constancy.

Up he goes to his Mistress, but he had not been there long, e're Tradewel came
in, and being informed by Susan how affairs stood, he went softly up the
stairs, and thrusting at his Chamber Door, he found it locked; he knocked again
and again, but no answer; till at last he spoke aloud, Open the Door, and that
quickly too, or I Will force it open: Whereupon she came to the Door in her
Smock, and did let him in; she needed not to have confessed what she had bad been
doing, the disorder she was in, proclaimed more than her tongue could utter.

Tradewel in a rage asked her where her Minion was; she was so amazed, she could
not pronounce one syllable; hurried on with impatience, he searched the room
round, but found no body, till he looked underneath the bed (the Mother would
never have looked for her Daughter in the Oven, but that she had been there her
self) and there he espied his trusty Squire, having not room enough to kneel
for pardon; as he was about to drag him out, his wife that had recalled her
wandering spirits, took heart-a-grace, and staying her Husband by the sleeve,
said, I pray Sir, be not too rash, consider it was your own case once, and were
you not glad by the subtlety of a woman to escape that eminent danger which
hung over your head, pray Sir, let this Pattern or resemblance of your late
Condition intercede for him; your Polity availed you little in that straight,
neither will his in this exigencie; you were preserved by your Mistresses wit
and subtlety, he is undone by my indiscretion and folly, if you applaud the
former commiserate the later.

These melting, yet biting expressions took Tradewel off from the height of
fury, so that his Revenge knew not how to terminate any otherwise than
instantly to call his Cashier to an account about the Cash committed into his
charge; and therefore charged him to be gone immediately to that intent and
purpose.

The Cashier who was never called to an account before, by reason of the large
security his Parents gave his Master for his fidelity, which gave the greater
liberty to his credulity, in assisting his Brethren who had ran out of Cash,
and being conscious how far he had ran out himself, it startled him almost as
much as this unexpected surprise; as he was going down the stairs a sudden
resolution krept into his head to clear his accounts and free himself from the
approaching danger, he could not but in reason expect would suddenly fall upon
him, by one single act, and that was forthwith to acquit his Masters house, and
throw himself upon the guidance of Fortune, which accordingly he put in
execution; for immediately he got himself out of the doors with as much have
and fear, as one that had made his escape from a common confinement or his
Keeper; not carrying any thing more than what he had about him.

The News was soon brought to his Master Mr. Tradewel, who was not a jot
troubled thereat, but rather rejoyc't that he was rid of a sharer in his
Marriage-rights, knowing withal how to give himself satisfaction for what his
Servant had ran out.

This coming to the ears of Susan, made her transported with joy, how fully her
revenge was extended, and how well paid she was for the exeecution thereof,
being confident her Cheat could never in all probability be found out; besides
her Master to reward her Treachery, veiled with the pretense of fidelity gave
her fifty pieces, with a promise she might continue as long as she pleased in
hi, house, with an augmentation of her Wages; she thankt him, and gave him only
the hearing intending to stay no longer than she might make some considerable
purchase, and so march off.

In pursuance whereof, she singled out Mrs. Saleware at a convenient time, and
discovered to her the knowledge of all those amorous Intrigues which past
between her and her Master, instancing every remarkable particular, and laying
it so home, that Mrs. Saleware could not but acknowledge them all truths by her
silence; having wrought her Plot so far, she resolved to drive the nail home to
the head for what it was designed for, and therefore told her, that the ruin
of her credit lay at her disposal, but for her part she was so tender of the
Reputation of her Sex, that she scorned to be a Traitor to its infirmities.

Mrs. Saleware that was apprehensive enough, and knew very well by the method
of her discourse what she aimed at; rold her, she looked upon her more discreet
than to make so great a distraction in a Family she belonged to, by speaking of
such things, which if known, the differences that would thence arise would
never be reconciled; however said she, to seal your everlasting silence, accept
these Guinneys, and my everlasting friendship, if not murdered by your
falsehood, and so leaves her.

Susan carries this parcel to her former hoard of money, and not satisfied yet,
was resolved to cast her net for more before she left fishing in this Pool. She
now goes to her Mistress, and with tears (which she had always at Command)
makes a sad Complaint for the loss of her Love, telling her, that he was
betroath't to her, and had it not been for her disloyalty to her Husband, she
might have enjoyed him still; but now he was past recovery, and though she had
understood all those amorous Entertainments from his own mouth which were
enjoyed between them, yet she rather choose to suffer in his love, than stain
the credit of her loving Mistress; that all she required at present only was,
that she would be pleased to revenge her on that dishonest, faithless, and
lascivious woman, Mrs. Saleware, who was the source and original of all her
troubles, for had she not (said she) consented to the lose embraces of your
Husband, my Master, your Servant and my Husband that should be by a mistake in
his absence, could never have obtained the opportunity of enjoying you by
breaking his faith with me.

Mrs. Tradewel heard these Complaints with no small confusion and trouble of
mind, but however to gratify her own as well as her Servants revenge, she
consented to do herein what she would advise her to. All that I request you to
do, said Susan, is to acquaint her Husband how basely your Husband has abused
his Bed, but make him swear he will not discover one tittle you do relate to
him; aggravate every circumstance in such manner, that you may make his
jealousy swell beyond all sense and reason. This will put him upon strange
extravagant abuses at first, each of which will be a tickling pleasure to see
them executed, and this in a little time also will be the means to rid your
self of a Rival lodged within the bowels of all your concerns.

This advice was so well liked of by Mrs. Tradewel, that she could not rest
till she had acquainted Mr. Saleware with this secret, which in effect was none
at all, being known to more than two. Mr. Saleware when he heard it was ready
to run distracted, and could hardly be persuaded but that he would either lay
violently hands on himself or Wife immediately; but being qualified by his own
reason, and such as Mrs. Tradewel produced, he deferred his revenge till
another time Susan thinking she had done as mueh mischief as she could,
resolved to be packing, and therein followed the example of the Rats (according
to Report) which will fly from a falling house: She took her opportunity, and
getting together some of her Mistresses choice implements of gawdry, as a gold
Watch, Pendents, Rings, a Neck-lace of Pearl, with other things of value, she
tript off unsuspected, and absconded her self for a while. Not long after Mr.
Saleware confessed a Judgment, or Warrant of Attorney to a special friend of his,
for more by much than his own stock or Partners Mr. Tradewels would amount to;
which was his first revenge on his disloyal Friend, what revenging injuries he
inflicted on his Wife, I cannot relate, only you may imagine what an abused
Husband will do in such a case, when prompted thereto by jealousy and Revenge.

Mr. Tradewel looking on kis Wife as the occasion of this desperate and
irregular course, left her to the wide world, and went for Virginia, where he
died, his wise in his absence being exposed to a great deal of misery, what
through want and grief, died not long after.

Thus you see how suddenly two flourishing families were brought to ruin by
exorbitant lust and the subtilty of a revengeful woman; but this was but the
beginning or infancy of her early Projects, thousands whereof in the progress
of her life she nommitted far more cotorious than any hitherto related, I have
not room to describe them all, wherefore I shall briefly recount to you as many
as I may.

After her running away from her Master, she apparall'd her self as richly and
as modishly as most of the female Gallants about the Town, and went by the name
of Mrs. Craftsby, she took her lodging near to those places where the Gentry
most resorted, where she not only learned the counterfeit deportment of a
Gentlewoman, but likewise by her Habit skrew'd her self into the acquaintance
of such of her Sex, as were placed in the Spheres of Honesty and Honor.

She pretended her self the Relict of a Knight in Yorkshire, by which Lie she
obtained the Honor of being called Madam, and the advantage of being Courted
by men of good Estates, so many and so importunate, that her Lodgings from
morning to night were seldom cleared from one or more amorous visitants; and
although by the most fiery she was hotly beset, yet she would not surrender;
till fearing she might withstand her better fortunes, she yielded to the
importunities of a Gentleman well stricken in years, but one that had the best
estate of all her Suitors. They were not long married, before the old Gentleman
found her out what she was, not only a Cheat, but an insatiate Whore to boot,
having now a Cloak for her unbridled Lechery; the knowledge whereof made a
separation between them; however she sued for Alimony, and forced from him a
competent maintenance; she now no longer hid her self under the vail of seeming
Chastity, but walked with Vice barefoot every where; and now for profit as much
as pleasure, she prostituted her self to any thing that had money; nay, a Dog,
if he had but a shilling in his mouth: By these lascivious excesses she was so
often clapped, that she became a mere Hospital of Diseases, and was now no longer
in a Condition to maintain the reputution of a handsome Whore, being
metamorphosed into the likeness of a loathsome and deformed Bawd.

Yet still she had her Wits about her; and considering she could do nothing of
her self, unless she procured some assistance of other; she trotted all the
Town over to find out one fit for her purpose; Pat as she would have it, going
into a sinning-house near Whetstones-Park, she found a young Plyer there, whose
Countenance promised every thing she desired, and having discourst her, found
her what she seemed to be, and her own Niece: whereupon promising her greater
advantages than she could reap there, she allured her to her House, where as
Partners they lived together.

Her Name was Mistress Wheedle, a plump succulent Girl, with a face no way
contemptible, she had a quaint Wit, a charming Tongue, and an humor so brisk
and gay, as if no other Elements but fire and Air had club'd to her
composition; these attractions, and her petulant Deportment, drew on a number
of Smell-smocks, which courted her for that Trifflle which men so much covet to
enjoy and women to be rid of; but she like a ^^nning Market-woman plotting to
sell her Ware (...) the best advantage, received them all with pro^^^ing
Smiles, and dispensed the same indeared Ca^^^^es to every one. This brought her
in a large Harvest of presents, and the better to draw them in, she would for
such a Ring, Bracelet, or Necklace, etc. promise some Cully the great kindness;
if they were loath to purchase sin at so dear a rate, she woul fall in her
price, chosing rather to play at small game than sit out.

In a little time she was so generally known that she was compelled to study
new Artifices to allure in Customers, and those which she refused at first, she
was now glad to acept of, so that the house became the receptable of all forts
of Cullies; not only the Bleeding-Cully, but the Ruff-Cully, the Dark-Cully,
the Flogging-Cully, and the Fencing-Cully; in short, no persons how wicked
soever (Whores, Rogues, Pads, Gilts, Files) but were her daily Companions.

This house at length grew so notoriously infamous, that it was known and
pointed at almost by every Boy which past that way. Hereupon the Justice takes
Mrs. Craftsby the Bawd, to a severe account, and upon examination found her so
guilty (not only for Bawdry, but all manner of Roguery, frequently entertaining
such in her house, who being detected there, were afterward hanged) I say, for
these considerations, the Justice made her Mittimus and sent her to Prison;
Mrs. Wheedle having had timely notice hereof, made her escape, and soon after
the commitment of her Partner, sold all she had, and not contented with this,
she turned Night-Walker, whilst in the daytime she exercised other Professions
belonging to the ancient Society of Tyburn: Sometimes she played the part of a
File, and did it with dexterity, even to admiration; she was a cleanly
conveying Shop-lift, having a very large Pocket or Wallet underneath her under
Petticoat, in which she would, cheapning Commodities in diverse Shops convey
insensibly something of every thing; but at last endeavoring to play the Girl
in a Tavern with one of her Bully-Huffs, they were both discovered in the act,
carried before a Justice, and by him sent to Newgate; at the ensuing Sessions,
Mrs. Craftsby the Bawd received the Sentence of Carting, Mrs. Wheedle and her
Gallant, of being carted to Tyburn, where they ended their wretched lives,
whilst the other lived more hated than the last were pitied.

By this Story (which is a very truth) you may see the evil Consequences which
heavily wait on Lust and such exorbitant actions; and therefore my advice is to
all, that they imitate the Egyptian Niceta, by sailing by the Scylla of carnal
pleasure, and the Caribdis of incontinencie; and yet not endanger the Shipwreck
of their Chastity; and I could with I knew how to teach you to drink out of
Circes Cup, and not be converted into Swine; and how you may hear the Sirens
sweet and charming voices, and not yet be not enchanted by them. The best Rules
I can give you are contained in this Distich:

Otia, Mensa, Libri, Vaga, lumina Verba, Sodales,
Hoec toll, banc minue, hos muta, boec claude, hac fuge, vita hos.
Sloth, Dainties, idle Fellows, wandering Looks,
Shun with all speed, and change your wanton Books.
To begin with Idleness, Otia tell, be not unimploy'd, for that is the fittest
season the Devil has to persuade thee to any thing that is evil; and therefore
that man qui nil agit (which does nothing) may be truly said, male agere, to do
ill.

Otia si toll as peri^re Cupidinis are us
Contemptoeque jacent and sine luce faces.
Shun Sloth, and Cupids Bow thou wilt break
And's Torch contemned will shine but weak.
Next Mensam minue, that is, pamper not your self by feeding too high. Adultery
was never the Daughter of Temperance; Chastity ever lives more secure in low
Cottages, than in sublime Palaces.

Beware of obscene Books, as Drollery, wanton Poems, lascivious Stories, etc.
Ovid himself, Loves-School-master, gives good advice, when he faith, -- Teneros
ne tange Poet as. And yet his Art of Loving, or rather his Art of Bawdry, with
wanton Martial, lascivious Catull us, Tibull us and Propertius are taught in
Schools publicly; wherefore Ite mali versus animam qui perditis, ite.

Fourthly, Vaga lumina claude. Lust sometimes creeps into the Soul by a Kiss,
or through the Ears, but chiefly through the Eyes. Hence proceeded that Law of
Zeleucus, that punished Adultery by the loss of the eyes, as first promoter of
that sinful Act.

-- ruitque videndo.
Lastly, fuge Sodales, I mean shun only bad Companions. He that continually
wallows with Swine in the mire, must expect to be in the same filthy condition.
The Plague is not more spreadingly Infections than ill manners. Example is ever
more prevalent than Precept, and one scabbed sheep will infect the whole flock.

-- Sicut Grex totus in agris
Vnius scabie cadit --
Wherefore he that is engaged in a vicious Society, let him forsake it, and he
that is inconcern'd therein, let him have a care how he falls into it.

Hinc Niger est hunc, tu Roman c^veto.
Be of that mind that Apollonius Tyanaeus was of, when he desired the Gods,
that they would give him such a discerning mind, as Noscere bonos, malos
vitare, to know the good, and shun the bad.

To conclude, make other men your Example, lest you be made an Example to
others.

MISCELANIES, AND OTHER JOVIAL PARADOXES OR, THE Canters-Academy OF COMPLEMENTS.

MISCELANIES, and other JOVIAL PARADOXES: Or, the Canters-Academy OF
COMPLEMENTS.
QUestion. What is an idle Justice of Peace like?

Answer. The Picture of St. George on the Sign-Post with the Sword in his hand
drawn to no purpose.

Q. How may a Fool resemble a wise Man?

A. By concealing of his folly with silence; for he cannot speak, that knows
not wisely and seasonably how to hold his tongue: the common saying is, Vir
sapit qui pauca loquitur; which may be turned clean contrary, to, Vir loquitur;
qui pauca sapit.

Q. What Is he that has a fine wit in jest?

A. He that is a Fool in earnest.

Q. How comes it to pass that tall men for the most part are not wise?

A. For that the length of their bodies proceeds from great moisture and heat:
but dryness engen dreth Wisdom in man; and your Garrets have for the most part
nothing but lumber in them.

Q. Whether do thou profess thy self a Knave or a Fool?

A. A Fool at a Woman's service, and a Knave at a man's: thus I do distinguish, I
would cozen the man of his Wife, and do his drudgery, and I would present his
Wife my best respects to do her service, so I might subscribe my self both
Knave and Fool. Well, well, God give them Wisdom that have it; and those that
are Fools, let them use their Talent.

Q. What distinction do you make betwixt a Friend and a Foe?

A. Marry thus Sir, he that would seem a Friend and Praises me when I do not
deserve it, makes an Ass of me; now my Foe tells me plainly I am an Ass; so
that I am the worse for my Friend and the better for my Foe; for Plain-dealing,
till of late was ever counted a Jewel.

Q. How should a man behave himself to his Friends?

A. As if in time they might become his Enemies.

Q. What may a sample fellow in good Clothes be compared to?

A. At Cinnamon-Tree, the Bark is more worth than the whole Body.

Q. How are great Eaters said to be the most valiant men?

A. Because they never fight but with a good Stomach.

Q. Why are those that wear long hair in the readiest way to make Friars?

A. Because they promise to themselves bald Crowns without the help of a Barber.

Q. What men are dangerous in a Commonwealth?

A. Those that affect Novelties.

Q. What was the Opinion of Pythagoras concerning wild Fowl?

A. That the Soul of our Grandam might happily inhabit in a Bird; yet am not I
afraid to kill a Woodcock, for fear I should dispossess the Soul of my Grandam.

Q. But what think you of his Opinion?

A. I think nobly of the Soul, and no way approve of his Opinion.

Q. Why is it said to be no Charity to give a blind man an Alms?

A. Because he would be glad to see him hanged that relieves him.

Q. On whom ought not benefits to be bestowed?

A. Not to young Children, nor to old men, nor to dishonest persons: because
young Children have not the wit to apprehend a Courtesy done them before they
come to the Age of Knowledge; and Old men do quickly forget them; nor upon
dishonest persons, for they are too subtle to requite them.

Q. Why do the Women in Newgate beg singing?

A. Because Newgate is a Cage of Canary-birds.

Q. Why is Prison a good Instrument of Reformation?

A. Because it makes many Rogues and lewd Fellows stayed men.

Q. Do you not wonder that there should be so many Pick-Pockets about the
st^eets, notwithstanding that there is a Watch in every corner?

A. That Is all one, for a Pick-Pocket would as willing^y meet with a Watch as
any thing else.

Q. Why is a Midwife so commendable a Trade?

A. Because they live not by the hurts of others as Chyrurgions do; nor by the
falling out of Friends as Lawyers do: but by the agreement betwixt party and
party.

Q. What Is the best remedy for a woman that is troubled with the falling
sickness?

A. It may be cured by a spell of the only crossing her Legs. Probatum est.

Q. Why did the Ancients paint Fortune with a double forehead, the one side
bald, and the other hairy; and why also blind?

A. The backside bald signified adversity, when we do not take opportunity by
the forehead top; the hairy part Prosperity, which we enjoy when she pleases.
She is pictured blind, because many times she bestows her favors upon unworthy
persons, and for that she blinds her pursuers.

Q. Why do Foot-boys for the most part wear linen stockings?

A. Because they are troubled with running Legs.

Q. What do several sorts of Colors signify?

A. White signifies Truth or Innocence, it resembles the Light; Green, Hope,
or Youth, Yellow, Gladness, or Jealousy; Straw Color, Plenty; Orange,
Cuckold, or Covenant-Colour signifies diminution of Honor, or Spiteful; Blew,
the Scotch-bonnet-Colour, Treachery: Carnation, Sorrow; Violet, Inconstancy;
the Azure is most pleasant to the eyes of any color, because Nature in the
Azure seemed as if she had meant all the rest; Red, betokens the nobleness of
Courage; Purpure, or Purple, was a Color in Ancient times only worn by Kings
and Princes; Tawny is a Color of Worship, most commonly born amongst the
French-Gentry; Murrey in Blazon-Sanguine, is a Color in ancient times
appertaining to the Prince of Wales; All mixed or midling Colors, are reckoned
more Noble or Ignoble by participation either of the Nobility of White which is
Light, or of black which is a deprivation of Light.

Q. Why is a Choleric man said to be no wiser than an Horse?

A. Because he cannot bridle his Passion.

Q. Why is a Miller said to be the fittest Husband for a Scold?

A. Because when the Mill goes, though her tongue be never so loud, it cannot
be heard.

Q. Why are Scriveners said to be hard-hearted Fellows?

A. Because they never rejoice so much as when they put others into Bonds.

Q. Why is it better to fall into the Claws of Crows and Ravens than of
Flatterers?

A. Because Crows and Ravens do but eat us when we are dead, but flatterers
devour us alive.

Q. Why had a Barber more reason to be honest and trusty than another Trade?

A. Because whosoever employs him, though but for a Hairs matter, puts his life
into his hands.

Q. Why is a Barber said to be such an active man?

A. Because if once he take out his wooden Comb, he will so box a man about his
Ears, yet he shall take no exceptions, for he shall scarce feel it.

Q. Why do many hold that there is a World in the Moon?

A. Because they are Lunaticks.

Q. How may a man use Tobacco that it may do him good?

A. He must keep a Tobacco-shop and sell it.

Q. Why may Tobacco shops be said for to be such dangerous places for to come
into?

A. Because there is no man that ever frequented them, but that he smoakt for it.

Q. Why is a Hypocrite said to be odious to God, to man, and to the Devil.

A. God hates him because he is not what he seems; Man hates him because he
seems what he is not; and the Devil hates him because he seems not what he is,
a very Raskal.

Q. Why are Smiths of all other Trades said to be the most irregular and wicked?

A. For that they never think themselves better employed than when they addict
themselves to their Vices, according to the old Verse.

I heard that Smug the Smith for Ale and Spice Sold all his Tools, and yet he
kept his Vice.

Q. What Is the first Commodity a young Shopkeeper puts off?

A. His Honesty.

Q. Why do Soldiers love Beef so well.

A. Because it is powdered.

Q. Why are Musketeers of all other Soldiers said to be the most lazy?

A. Because they are always at their Rest.

Q. Why do Lawyers-Clerks write such wide Lines?

A. It Is done to keep the Peace, for if the Plaintiff and the Defendant should
be in the next, the lines being too close, they might perhaps fall together by
the Ears.

Lay John there, lay Lilburn there about,

For if they both should meet they would fall out.

Q. What may a good Client be compared to?

A. A study Gown, that fits in the cold himself to keep his Lawyers warm.

Q. Why did Nature allow of Mercury?

A. To make Alchymists Fools, and covetous men poorer.

Q. Why do we usually say that the Philosophersstone and need to turn all
Metals into Gold?

A. Because the study of it turns all a man's Gold into Metal

Q. What is a Prodigal like?

A. A Brush which spends it self to make others go handsome.

Q. Why is a Hangman said to be one of a contemplative life?

A. Because he never goes to work, but he is put in mind of his own end.

Q. Which of the two is more sufferable a Tyrant, or a Hangman?

A. You might as well have said Oliver or Dun; I shall give it clearly for Dun;
the Hangman, he executed those that were condemned by Law; but Oliver that High
Court of Justice-Devil caused them to be put to death that were innocent
without any Law.

Q. How are Painters called cunning Fellows?

A. Because they have a Color for whatsoever they do.

Q. How are Trumpeters said to be subject to sickly Distempers?

A. Because commonly when they are most in health they will fall a sounding.

Q. Of all things that you know which do you esteem most precious?

A. As for the word precious, I look upon it as an Epithet belonging to
Stones. I confess I love a Diamond, a Ruby, an Emerald, etc. But above all
precious stones, there are none like those which make a perfect man, and a Maid
a Mother.

Q. Why do fat men love their ease so much?

A. Because the Soul in a fat body lies soft, and is therefore loath to rise.

Q. Why have many men no Beards?

A. Because they have their pores so great, that the Nutriment wherewith their
Hair should be nourished and entertained is consumed of adust and burnt
vapors: To the Tune of, Let Simons Beard alone:

Let Simons Beard alone,
For it is no disgrace
To spit in his face,
For Beard he never had one.
Q. Wherefore is it that we are for the most part ill conceited of them that
have their Hair of one color and their Beard of another?

A. Martial shall answer for me in his Epigram against Zoilus, Englished thus:

Zoilus red headed and black bearded too;
What squint-eyed and stump-footed in thy shoe?
Thus marked, thou art a Knave, or else there is none;
Thou art not good, ten thousand it is to one.
Q. Why are Citizens Wives so affected with Hats?

A. Because they love to be covered.

Q. What is the Diet so much esteemed of by Citizens wives?

A. Though they love flesh better than fish, yet for their better varieties
they so diet themselves, that at Noon they feed upon Carps, at Night upon
Cods-head, and when they go abroad, they are very well pleased with Place.

Q. Why have Hosts usually such red Noses?

A. They are given them by Nature, to show to the world an experiment of the
virtue of what they sell.

Q. Why is a Tooth-drawers said to be an unconscionable Trade?

A. Because he takes away those things whereby every man is said to get his
living.

Q. Why are Saylors so seldom rich?

A. Because they are never so well pleased as when they go down the Wind
fastest.

Q. Why are Glasiers said to be good Arbitrators?

A. Because they are continually composing of Quarrels; and unfit to be
Constables, because they are constant Quarrellers.

Q. Why are Fiddlers compared to Camelions?

A. Because they live by the Air.

Q. Why are they called unfortunate men?

A. Because they do all against the Hair.

Q. How are Players said to be Philosophical?

A. Because they are better contented in their Rags, when they get Money by the
Beggars-Bush, or the Jovial Crew, then when they act in their best Clothes a
Courtiers Play, though of an Emperor, and it does not take, to get them so
much Money.

Q. How may Cobblers be said to be good men?

A. Because they set men upright, and are ever mending of Soles.

Q. Why are Carpenters said to be civil, well informed, and governed men as any
in a Commonwealth?

A. Because they never do their business without Rule.

Q. Why are Tapsters said to be well esteemed?

A. Because they are not only of High Calling, but also of great Reckoning.

Q. Why are Printers said to be the most lawless men in a Kingdom?

A. Because they commit Faults cum Privilegio.

Q. Why are Carriers said to be wise men?

A. Because they will not meddle with any thing but they will know of what
moment or weight it is.

Q. How is a Cook said to be a man of the worst digestion?

A. Because as soon as he has eaten his meat, he will be sure to spit it up
again.

Q. What Spice does a City-Sergeant love best?

A. Mace.

Q. Why is he that draws Beer not called a Drawer, as well as he that draws
wine?

A. Because the Beer makes a man but piss, but it is the Wine that makes him
draw.

Q. What may a Tailor be chiefly commend ^ for?

A. For one of the most sanctified Members of a Commonwealth; for how many
crooked and untoward bodies does he make straight, that they may be the
uprighter in their Lives and Conversations.

Q. Why are Tailors like Woodcocks?

A. Because of their long Bills; and the long time before they are paid, he
that pays them is a Woodcock that does not make them shorter by the one half,
and then they will be long enough in all Conscience.

Q. What is a Drunkard like?

A. A Fool, a Mad man, and a Drowned Man: one Draught too much makes him a
Fool, the second makes him a mad man, and a third full Flagon Drowns him; the
Crowner is the only man at that time fit to fit upon him.

Q. Why do the eyes of a (...) for the most part water?

A. It proceeds from the humors that the Drink has engendered in the Brain,
wherewith feeling it self laden, it sends the same again to the eyes, which
are full of pores, as if they wept he should be such a Beast.

Q. Why do those that are drunk in beholding of one thing think that they see
many?

A. This aris^th from the continual and sudden motion of the eyes, proceeding
from exhalations and vapors; so the jealousy of the Cuckold makes him imagine
that there is one a bed with his Wife, when there is only one hid under the
Bed; and to imagine there is some body in the room, when he can find none there
forsooth, but is good wife and himself.

Q. How does a Drunka^d make himself known to the sober men of this life?

A. By the Pimples of his face, the rich Rubies on his Nose, the redness of his
Eyes, the trembling of his Body, the stink of his Breath, and lastly, by his
expatiating and staggering, by which he seems to claim a right to the Kings
whole high way to tumble, fall, or lie in the Kennel, or any other dirty place
where his heavy head weighs him down.

Q. What said the Drunkard to those that pe^swaded him to pay his money, and
not to put himself to so public disgrace as to sit in the Stocks?

A. Good sober People, quoth^he, I thank you kindly, but I shall not do so, few
(...) are best, rest you contented, that money I should pay not to sit here,
will make me drunk three or four times more.

Q. What difference is there betwixt a Drunkard and a Brewers-horse drawing of
a Dray laden with full barrels of Beer?

A. No other, but that the Drunkard has all the load of drink in his belly,
and the Horse all on back.

Q. Why are bitter Almonds eaten in the time of tippling, said to preserve for a
good space of time from Drunkenness?

A. Because they dry the body, hinder the filling of the veins, and resist the
strength of the Wine; but such as receipts do for the most part obstruct the
tender and more friendly operations of Nature are dangerous; the best remedy
against Drunkenness is Sobriety. Probatum est.

Q. Why are not Women so soon Drunk; but old folks suddenly oovercome with Wine?

A. Because the Wine remains longer in the stomachs of old People, they being
dry by nature; even as the water does in a trough of wood, dry and half
putrifi'd: but women are cold and moist, by means whereof, they do the better
resist the force of the wine, and withal they have whisking waterworks for
evacuation.

Q. What are the Companiens of Bacchus?

A. I shall answer with the Poet for his Drunkards:

Panthers, Tigers, Satyrs, follow Bacchus; ( us. (...) Lust, fury, these and
the Devil to boot will thwack

Q. Can there be no remedy for this Vice?

A. Plautus was of the mind, that it was easier to dye Ivory to perfect black
with Ink, which cannot be; Horace (though he was a Drunkard himself) was of
Opinion that a man may sooner part two Bulls in sight, than prevail to stint
two Drunkards of their Liquor; they have a Song which signifies no less:

Friends, why do you chide,
And stem my drinking tide,
Thinking to make me sad,
I will, I will be mad, etc.
Q. Who are those that draw death out of which others preserve life?

A. The Drunkard and the Glutton.

Q. What is the pleasure of Drunkenness?

A. Small Beer in the morning.

Q. Whether is a fault committed in Drunkenness to be punished or remitted?

A. He that in Drunkenness commits any offense is worthy of a double
punishment: first, for being drunk, next, for the injury committed; according
to the common saying, He that kills a man when he is Drunk, must be hanged when
he is sober.

Q. What may come into thy mind by recording of the Musical Vowels, Ut, Re, Me,
Fa, Sol, La, M^.

A, The Custom of Drunkards when they d^^nk, they begin to quaff at Vt,
savingly; and Re, regularly; at Me, marvellously; they hold on to drink in Fa,
familiarity; in Sol, solemnly; but always conclude in La, Mi because the end of
Drunkenness is lamentable and miserable.

Q. Why do Drunkards begin from halves te whole ones, and from Pints to
Gallons, as if they were at the Discipline of the Old Bailey, from Calves to
Bulls and from Bulls to Calves.

A. Not without Reason (till without Reason) for lesser Draughts cannot so soon
intoxicate as the great ones: Nature would be disturbed by the greater
quantitins of Draughts, but by the lesser (as it were by use) she will bear ^he
greater; as Milo carried his Calf, and by continual Custom carried him till he
was an Ox; and Drunkards are so often from home, that oftentimes before they
can reel thither, their foreheads are so branched, that they can scarcely get
their Horns in at their own doors.

Q. What Employments, or Places of Command have any of this Society of
Drunkards at Sea-service? Who is Admiral amongst them of the narrow Seas?

A. He that utters his Stomach in his next follows Boots.

Q. Who is the Vice Admiral?

A. He that pisseth under the Table on their Shoes and Stockings.

Q. Who is Master of a Ship?

A. He that is flawed in the Company before the rest.

Q. Who is Masters Mate?

A. He that is the second who is drunk at the Table.

Q. Who is Swabber?

A. He that like a sloven spils his Liquor upon the Table.

Q. Who is Pyrat of the Narrow Seas?

A. He that privately and closely steals his Liquor.

Q. Who is Master-Gunner?

A. He that is troubled with the Hickup.

Q. Who is the Cook?

A. He that is still smoking with a Pipe at his Nose.

Q. Who is Trumpetter?

A. He that belcheth either backward or forword.

Q. What other Officers, have they in Respect and Dignity, Civil or Martial?

A. Every Office is filled and thronged.

Q. What are their Civil Officers, who is their Mayor-Domo or Grand Steward?

A. He that is unruly in his Cups, swaggers, flings Pots and Drawers down
stairs, breaks Glasses, and beats the Fiddlers about the room.

Q. Who is Mr. Comptroler?

A. He that cuts down signs and bushes.

Q. Who is Principal Secretary?

A. He that wins the favor of his Hostesses-Daughter to lie with her.

Q. Who is Mr. of the Ceremonies?

A. He that stands upon his strength and begins new Healths.

Q. Who is Oliver, or Master of the Novelties?

A. He that begins new frolicks.

Q. Who is a Mr. of Misrule?

A. He that flings Cushions, Napkins, Trenchers, Pint-Pots, Quart-Pots,
Tobacco-Pipe, etc. about room.

Q. Who is Mr. of the Wardrobe.

A. He that wanting Money, pawns his Cloak.

Q. Who is Clerk of the Kitching?

A. He that calls for Rashers, pickled Oysters, Anchovies, etc.

Q. Who is Proctor?

A. He that talks much and speaks Nonsense.

Q. Who is Register?

A. He that tells tedious and long Tales.

Q. Who is publlick Notary?

A. He that takes the Tale out of another mouth.

Q. What are their Martial Preferments; who amongst them is Colonel of a
Regiment?

A. He that drinks in his Boots and gingling Spurs.

Q. Who is Captain of a foot Company?

A. He that drinks in silk Stockings and silk Garters.

Q. Who is Marshal of the Field?

A. He that flings Pottle and Quart-pots down the stairs.

Q. Who is Mr. of the Ordnance?

A. He that begins three Healths together round the Table.

Q. Who is Camp Master?

A. He that calls first for a Looking-glass.

Q. Who is Corporal of the Field?

A. He that washes the Faggots with pissing in the Chimney.

Q. Who is Drum Major?

A. He that thunders in the room and beats the Drawer.

Q. Who is the Ensign-Bearer?

A. He that looks red and Colors in his drink.

Q. Who is Gentleman of a Company?

A. He that thrusts himself into a Company, and hangs upon others.

Q. Who is Lanspresado?

A. He that keeps Company, and has but two pence to spend.

Q. Who is Sutler?

A. He that pockets up Gloves, Knives and Handkercheifs.

Q. Who is an old Soldier?

A. He that drinks three days and nights together. Exempli gratia. H.

Q. Who is an Intelligencer?

A. He that swears, and lies in his drink.

Q. What Orders have they amongst them for their better Government? Who is
Tenant amongst them in Fee-simple?

A. He that makes himself a laughing stock to the whole Company.

Q. Who are Tenants in Dower?

A. When two or three Women meet twice or thrice a week to take a Gossips Cup.

Q. Who is a Freeholder?

A. He whose Wife goes with him to the Alehouse.

Q. Who is Tenant at Will?

A. He whose Wife uses to fetch him home.

Q. Who is Foreman of the Jury?

A. He that ingrosseth all the talk to himself.

Q. What are their Penal Statutes, Forfeitures and W^its?

A. No man ought to call a good Fellow a Drunkard; but at any time he sees a
defect in his Neighbour'ow; he may without a forfeit say, he is foxt, he is
flaw'd, fluster'd, cup shot, cut in the leg or back, he has seen the French
King, or, His Mother, he has swallowed a Hare, or White-foot tumbled him
backwards, he has bit his Grannam, he is bit by a barn Weesel, etc.

Q. What is their Writ of, By what Right?

A. If a Drunkard sits long in the Tavern and shall be fetched home by his Wife.

Q. What are the Books that they chiefly study.

A. Some of them are of the old Translation as Tankard, the Black-Jack, the
Quart-pot rib'd, etc. Those of the New Translation, are, the Tug, Mug, Bottle,
Beaker, Single- Can^e, or Black-pot, Bran.+dy-bottle, with Pipes ready filled
with Tobacco

Q. Who is he that studies the Metaphysics?

A. He that builds Castles in the Air.

Q. Who is he that shudies Cosmography?

A. He that brags of his Travels. Ir. B.

Q. Who is an expert Geometrician?

A. He that reels from one side of the kennel (being led) and falls into the
Highway.

Q. Who is a good Navigator?

A. He that going homewards falls in the dirt, or Ditch with a Gown.

Q. What are the Customs of this Learned Society of Drunkards, which they have
ordained like the Laws of the Medes and Persians, to be unalterable?

A. Not to drink to any man, if a Woman be in presence. Not to drink to the
Tapster, or Drawer, upon pain of drinking twice. To keep the first man, and to
know to whom you drink. To have a care to see your self pledged. That you see
the health go round.

I shall break up School with Anacreon, the Poets drunken Verses.

The parched Earth drinks the Rain,
Trees drink off that ag ain:
Rivers the Se as do quaff,
Sol drinks the Ocean off.
And when the Health is done;
Pale Cynthia drinks the Son.
SONGS In Fashion, Since the publishing the last New Academy of Complements.
Captain Digby's Farewell.
Farewell fair Amida. my Joy and my Grief;
In vain I have loved you, and hoped no relief:
Undone by your Virtue, too strickt and severe;
Your Eyes gave me Love, and you gave me Despair.
Now called by my Honor, I seek with content,
The Fate which in pity you would not prevent.
To languish in Love, were to find by delay
A Death, that is more welcome the speediest way.
On Seas, and in Battles, in Bullets, and Fire,
The danger is less, than in hopeless desire.
My deaths-wound you gave me, though far off I were;
My fall from your sight, not to cast you a Tear,
But if a kind Flood or a Wave should convey,
And under your Window my body would lay;
The Wound on my Breast when you happen to see,
You will say with a figh 'twas given by me.
A Lover dying with delight.
WHilst Alexis lay pressed, in her arms he loved best;
With his hands round her neck, and his head on her breast,
He found the first pleasures too stay,
And his Soul in the Tempest was flying away.
When Celia saw this, with a sigh and a kiss
She cried, Oh, my Dear! am I robbed of my bliss,
'Twas unkind to your love, and unfaithfully done,
To leave me behind you, and die all alone.
The Youth though in have, and breathing his last,
In pity di'd slowly, whilst she di'd more fast,
Till at length she cried, now my Love, now let us go,
Now die my Alexis, and I will die too.
Thus intranc'd they did lie, till Alexis did try,
To recover more breath, that again he might die,
Thus often they di'd, oh! the more they did so,
The Nymph di'd more quick, and the Shepherd more ^low.
The Lover in a Quandary.
ALl day do I sit inventing,
While I live so single alone,
Which way to wed to my contenting,
And yet can resolve upon none.
There Is a Wench whose Wealth would enrich me.
But she not delights me:
There Is a Wench whose wealth does enrich me.
There Is another Eyes do bewitch me;
But her fashion frights me.
He that herein
Has a Traveller been,
And at length in his longing sped,
What shall I do,
Tell me whom, I shall woo,
For I long to be lustily Wed.
Shall I with a Widow marry?
No, no, she such watch will bear,
To spy how my self I do carry.
I shall always live in fear:
Shall I to a Maid be a Wooer:
Maidens are loved of many:
Knowing not whom to be sure,
Are very unsure to any.
Marry to Youth,
There is love without Truth;
For the Young cannot long be just.
And Age if I prove,
There Is Truth without Love,
For the Old are too cold to lust.
An Item for Marriage.
TO Friend and to Foe,
And to all that I know,
That to Marriage estate do prepare;
Remember your days,
In several ways
Are troubled with sorrow and care.
For he that does look
In the married man's Book
And read but his Items all over,
Shall find them to come
At length to a Sum,
Shall empty Purse, Pocket and Coffer.
In pastimes of Love
When their labors do prove,
And the fruit begins to kick;
For this and for that,
And I know not for what,
The Woman must have or be sick.
There Is Item set down
For a loose bodi'd Gown;
In her longing you must not deceive her:
For a Bodkin, a Ring,
Or the other fine things,
For a Whisk, a Scarf, or a Beaver.
Delivered and well,
Who is it cannot tell;
Thus whilst the Child lies at the Nipple,
There Is Item for Wine
Amongst Gossips so fine,
And Sugar to sweeten their Tipple.
There Is Item, I hope
For Water and Soap,
There Is Item for Fire and Candle:
For better and worse,
There Is Item for Nurse
The Babe to dress and to dandle.
When swaddled in lap,
There Is Item for Pap,
And Item for Pot, Pan, and Ladle;
A Corral with Bells,
Which custom compels,
And Item ten Groats for a Cradle.
With twenty odd Knacks,
Which the little One lacks;
And thus does t^y pleasure bewray thee:
But this is the sport
In Country and Court;
Then let not these Pastimes betray thee.
A Sigh for She knows not what.
TO little or no purpose I spent many days
In ranging the Park, the Exchange, and the Plays;
Yet never in my rambles till now did I prove
So lucky, to meet with the man I could love.
Now oh! how I Am pleased to think of the man
That I find I must love, let me do what I can.
How long I shall love him, I can no more tell
Than had I a Fever, when I should be well;
My passion shall kill me before I will show it;
And yet I would give all the World he did know it.
Then oh! how I sigh! when I think he should woo me;
I cannot deny, what I know, would undo me.
The pleasant Dream.
LAst night I dreamed of my Love,
When sleep did overtake her,
It was a ptetty drowsy Rogue,
She slept, I durst not wake her.
Her Lips were like to Corral, red,
A thousand times I kist'em;
And a thousand mere I might have stoll'n,
She never could have mist'em.
Her crisped Locks like threads of Gold
Hung dangling or'r the Pillow;
Great pity was that one fair,
Should ever wear th'Green-willow.
I folded down the Holland-sheet,
A little below her Belly;
But what I did you never shall know,
Nor is it meet to tell ye.
Her Belly's like to yonder Hill,
Some call it Mount of Pleasure;
And underneath there springs a Well,
Which no man's depth can measure.
Not a Word of the Pudding.
You Are undone, ye Women in Town,
If with speed you prevent not your ruin:
The pride of your Flesh must come down,
Here are Plots and severe ones a brewing.
Whilst like Cats you play with your Tails,
To be thought to care little for ours:
Youmind not how drinking prevails,
And much lessens the value of yours.
Inflamed with our Wine, we disdain
To remember the Chains we have worn,
And till you dou do prize them again,
Your repentance shall equal your scorn.
You may think, Dear Hearts, what you please,
We Are resolved to dispute your Commands.
Until we bring -- on her Knees,
Not a -- shall be kind, though it stands.
The Women's Answer.
You Are deceived in your Plots and your Tricks,
To think to rob us of our pleasure:
Since we raised up the pride of your --
Upon Hector and Huff without measure.
You Pimps, you can sooner be damned,
Than to live a whole Lent upon Fish.
Drink on Bully-Fops, and be drunk,
Be mad, and profuse of your Coin;
That leads you the way to your Punk;
It Is the only effects of good Wine.
But then if your spirits should move,
You Would be glad to make us amends;
And rather than lose what you love,
You Would be glad to kiss -- and be friends.
A Catch.
THe Pot and the Pipe, the cup and the Can,
Have quite undone, quite undone many a man.
The Hawk and the Hound, the Dice, and the Whore,
Have quite undone, quite undone as many more.
The flames of Desire.
DO not ask me charming Phillis,
Why I lead you here alone,
By this bank of Pinks and Lillies,
And of Roses newly blown.
It Is not to behold the beauty
Of those Flowers which crown the Spring:
It Is to -- but I know my duty,
And dare never name the thing.
It Is at worst but her denying,
Why should I thus fearful be;
Every minute gently flying,
Smiles, and says, make use of me.
What the Sun does to those Roses
Whilst the Beams play sweetly in;
I wu'd -- but my fear opposes,
And I dare not name the thing.
Yer I die, if I conceal it,
Ask mine eyes, or ask your own;
And if neither dare reveal it,
Think what Lovers think alone.
On this bank of Pinks and Lillies,
Might I speak what I wu'd do
I wu'd with my lovely Phillis,
I wu'd, I wud, ah, wu'd you.
The Art of loving.
COme hither young Sinner,
Thou raw young beginner;
I Will show thee if thou can understand me,
All the ways of a Wench,
Be she English or French,
More than Ovid, de Anti Amandi:
I Will reach thee to know
Borh the who, and the how,
And the when, and the where to delight;
If she simper or Saint it,
Or patch it or paint it,
I Will warrant thee, Boy, she is right.
If she jigg with her Thighs,
Or twinkle with her Eyes,
She bids you come on, if you like her;
If without joys or fears,
She can laugh and shed tears;
It Is the only true trick of a Striker:
If she sighs when she speaks,
Or does use many freaks,
She is deeply in love, by this light;
If you tread on her Toe,
And she answer thee so,
I Will warrant, etc.
She Will smile, and she will frown,
She Will laugh and lie down,
At every turn you must tend her:
She Will peep in her Glass,
And dispraise her own Face,
On purpose that you may commend her:
With Love-tales and Fancies
Picked out of Romances,
She Will angle to try if you will bite.
If she speak in a passion,
Or make application.
I Will warrant, etc.
If she stand at a distance,
There is no resistance;
Her very retreat is a Call:
She Will stare in your Eyes,
Like a Pyrate for a Prize;
As if she would say, have at all.
She Will show you her brew,
To guess at the rest,
The Fountain of Love and delight:
If she sit in thy lap,
Beware of a trap.
I Will warrant, etc.
She Will hit and she will miss,
She Will be coy, and she will kiss,
To try and find out what you are:
One action shall say,
Pray Sir, go away;
And another, Come on, if you dare:
She Will give you a glance,
Like Heaven in a trance,
No Diamond nor Saphir so bright.
If she drink Wine and Burrage.
And kiss with a courage.
I Will warrant, etc.
She Will set you more snares,
Than her tire has hairs;
She Is subtle and swift in invention:
If you jest and mean loosly,
Though never so reclusely,
She Will show you her quick apprehension:
Her Plots are abounding,
She fits has of sounding;
If she call on your name in the f^ight,
Blind Cupid has hit her,
And you too may fit her.
I Will warrant, etc.
When Nol stole the Scepter,
She canted in Scripture,
And went to St. Antholines Lecture:
But now she does trade,
Like a right Reformade,
And is a Decoy for the Hectors.
She Will swear she is free
From all men but thee,
And blush like a Bride the first night.
If she squint through her hood,
It Is to heighten thy blood.
I Will warrant, etc.
Her turn and her windings,
Are past your out-findings.
She has so many changeable tempers:
She Will give you a look,
Like a Virgin forsook,
With another Command like an Empress:
This sign never misses,
If she squeak when she kisses,
And glimmers like Stars in the night:
If she give thee a trip
With her lose lower-lip,
I Will warrant, etc.
She Will kiss and cry Quarter,
Unlosen her Garter,
That you may take it up as a favor;
When you ty't on again,
She Will cry, What do you mean:
You Are a man of a loose behavior:
Yet thus will she play,
To direct you the way
To the Center and seat of delight:
If she is troubled with qualms,
And sweat in the palms,
I Will warrant, etc.
She Will bid you forbear,
You Are uncivil, my Dear,
She tempts in her very denial s
When tongue cries, Be gone;
Her looks cry, Come on,
The ticklings are only for trials:
When Rams do retreat;
More courage they get;
And tilt wit with redoubled might:
No sight can so move,
As the Landscape of Love.
I Will warrant, etc.
She Will give you to wear
A bracelet of Hair,
And that as a fetter she will lock on:
But let me persuade ye,
One hair of a Lady,
Will draw more than ten Team of Oxen.
Thus have I in brief,
Told the marks of the Thief,
That filches affection by slight:
But if she prevail,
You Are a slave in a Goal,
And Honor will bid thee good night.
The Rapture.
CAlm was the Evening, and clear was the Sky,
And new budding Flowers did spring,
When all alone went Amyntas and I
To hear the sweet Nightingal sing.
I sat, and he laid him down by me,
And scarcely his breath he could draw;
But when with a fear,
He began to come near,
He was dashed with an ah ah, ah.
He blushed to himself, and lay still for a while,
And his modesty curbed his desire,
But straight I convinced all his fears with a smile,
Which added new flames to his fire.
Ah, Sylvia! said he, you are cruel,
To keep your poor Lover in awe;
Then once more he pressed,
With his hands to my breast,
But was dashed with on ah, ah, ah.
I knew 'twas his passion caused all his fear,
And therefore I pitied his case;
I whispered him softly, there is no body near,
And laid my cheek close to his face:
But as he grew bolder,
A Shepherd came by us, and saw;
And just as our bliss
Began with a kiss,
He burst out with ha, ha, ha, ha,
I bad him be quiet for fear of the Swain,
And follow me down to the Grove,
Where we crope in a Cave, and chatter'd again,
The dangers that prosecute Love,
He played with my pretty white shooe-strings;
My legs he did tickle and claw;
But do what I could,
Yet he forced my blood,
And I squeek't with an ha, ha, ha.
The small of my leg he did prettily praise,
And my calf that so roundly did rise;
I winked and I frowned at his foolish delays,
Which made him skip up to my thighs:
He played with my soft panting Belly;
I bad to his fingers no law:
But when he did touch
What he loved so much,
He burst out with an ha, ha, ha.
A Song of Nothing.
I Will Sing you a Sonnet that never was in Print,
It Is truly and newly come out of the Mint,
I Will tell you beforehand, you will find nothing in it.
On nothing I think, and on nothing I write,
it is nothing I court, yet nothing I slight,
Nor care I pin, if I get nothing by it.
Fire, Air, Earth, and water, beasts, birds, fish and men,
Did start out of nothing, a Chaos, a Den;
And all things shall turn into nothing again.
It Is nothing sometimes makes many things hit
As when fools among wise men do silently sit,
A fool that says nothing, may pass for a Wit.
What one man loves is another man's loathing,
This Blade loves a quick thing, that loves a slow thing,
And both do in the conclusion love nothing,
Your Lad that makes love to a delicate smooth thing,
And thinking with sighs to gain her and soothing,
Frequently makes much ado about nothing.
At last when his patience and purse is betra'id,
He may to the bed of a Whore be betrayed;
But she that has nothing, must need be a Maid.
Your slashing, and clashing, and slashing of wit,
Does start out of nothing, but Fancy and fit;
It Is little or nothing to what has been writ.
When first by the ears we together did fall,
Then something got nothing, and nothing got all;
From nothing it came, and to nothing it shall.
That party that sealed to a Covenant in haste,
Who our 3 Kingdoms, and Churches lie waste;
Their project, and all came to nothing at last.
They raised an Army of Horse and Foot,
To tumble down Monarchy, Branches and Root;
They thundered and plundered, but nothing would do 't.
The organ, the altar, and Ministers clothing
In Presbyter Jack begot such a loathing,
That he must needs raise a petty New nothing.
And when he had robbed us in sanctified clothing
Perjured the people by faithing and trothing;
At last he was caught, and all came to nothing.
In several Factions we quarrel and brawl,
Dispute, and contend; and to fighting we fall;
I Will lay all to nothing, that nothing wins all.
When war and rebellion, and plundering grows,
The Mendicant man is freest from foe s,
For he is most happy has nothing to lose.
Brave Caesar and Pompey, and Great Alexander,
Whom Armies followed as Goose follows Gander,
Nothing can say it is an action of slander.
The wisest great Prince, were he never softout,
Though conquer the world, and give mankind a rout,
Did bring nothing in, nor shall bring nothing out.
Old Nol that arose from Low-thing to High-thing,
By brewing Rebellion, Micking, and Frothing,
In sev'n years distance was all things and nothing.
Dick. (Olivers Heir) that pitiful slow-thing,
Who was once invested with purple-cloathing,
Stands for a Cipher, and that stands for nothing.
If King killers bold are excluded from bliss,
Old Bradshaw (that feels the reward on it by this)
Had better been nohing, than what now he is.
Blind Colonel Hewson, that lately did crawl
Te lofty degree, from a low Cobblers stall,
Did bring Aul to nothing, when Aul came to all.
Your Gallant that Rants in delicate clothing,
Though lately he was but a pitiful low-thing,
Pays Landlord, Draper and Tailor with nothing.
The nimble-tongu'd Lawyer that pleads for his pay
When death does arrest him and bear him away,
At the General Bar will have nothing to say.
Whores that in silk were by Galants embraced,
By a rabble of Prentices lately were chac't,
Thus courting, and sporting comes to nothing at last.
If any man tax me with weakness of wit,
And say that on nothing, I nothing have writ;
I shall answer, ex nihilo nihil fit.
Yet let his discreetion be never so tall,
This very word nothing shall give it a fall;
For writing of nothing, I comprehend all.
Let every man give the Poet his due,
'Cause then it was with him as now it is with you;
He studi'd it when he had nothing to do.
This very word nothing, if took the right way,
May prove advantageous, for what would you say,
If the Vintner should cry, there is nothing to pay.
A Catch, of Something,
WIll it please you to hear a fine Ditty,
In praise of a six footed Creature,
That lives both in Country and City:
She is wondrous loving by nature,
She profereth her service to any,
She Will stick fast but that she will prevail:
She is entertained by many,
Till death, no master will fail.
She Will venture as far in the Battle,
As any Commander that goes:
She commonly plays Jack-a-both sides,
She cares not a (...) for her Foes;
For she is sure to be shot free,
To kill her no Sword will prevail;
But if she be taken prisoner,
She Is crushed to death with a nail.
She perfectly hates a neat Laundress,
And all those that set her on work;
For all her delights in foul linen,
In the seams she does privately lurk:
For she is for him that is nonsuited,
Or any good Fellow that lacks.
She will be as good Friend to him,
As his shirt that sticks to his back.
More plainly I cannot describe her,
For she had her beginning at first;
She Sprung from the Loins of great Pharaoh,
And that by his Queen she was nursed:
But if you should be displeased,
It is but in vain for to fight her;
I have no more now to say of her,
But that she is a back-biter.
A Song.
WHen Aurelia first I courted,
She had youth and beauty too,
Killing pleasures when she sported,
And her Charms were ever new;
Conquering Time does now deceive her
Which her glories did uphold,
All her Arts can never retrieve her,
Poor Aurelia's growing old.
The airy Spirits which invited,
Are retired, and move no more;
And those Eyes are now benighted,
Which were Comets heretofore.
Want of these abate her merits,
Yet I Have passion for her name,
Only kind and amorous Spirits
Kindle and maintain a flame.
A New Song.
ALl the flatt'ries of Fate,
And the pleasures of state,
Are nothing so sweet, as what Love does create.
If this you deny,
It Is time I should die,
Kind Death's a Reprive if you threaten to hate:
In some close shady Grove,
Will I wander and rove
With the Nightingal, and Disconsolate Dove,
With down-hanging Wing,
I will mournfully sing,
The tragic Events of unfortunate Love.
With our plaints wel'l conspire,
To heighten Loves fire.
Still vanquishing life, till at length we'll expire.
And when I am dead,
In a cold leasie Bed,
Be interred with the Dirge of a desolate Quire.
Another.
I Will go to my Love where he lies in the deep,
And in my embraces my dearest shall sheep,
When we wake, the kind Dolphins together shall throng,
And in Chariot of Shells shall draw us along.
The Orient has Pearls, whith the Ocean bestows,
And mixed with Coral a Crown to compose
Though the Sea-nymphs do spite us, and even our bliss,
We will teach them to love, and the Cockles to kiss.
For my Love lies now in watery Grave,
And has nothing to show for his Tomb but a Wave,
I Will kiss his dear Lips than the Coral more red,
Thar grows where he lies in his watery Bed.
Ah, Ah, Ah, my Love's dead;
There Is not a Bell,
But a Triton's Shell,
To ring, to ring out his Knell.
A Song.
I Pass all the Night in a shady old Grove,
But I live not the day that I see not my Love;
I survey every walk now my Phillis is gone,
And sigh when I think we were there all alone:
O then it is, O then it is, I think there is no Hell,
Like loving, like loving too well.
But each Grove, and each conscious Bank when I find,
Where I once happy, and she has been kind,
And spy where her print in the green does remain,
And imagine the pleasures may yet come again;
O then it is, O then it is, I think no joys above,
Like the pleasures, the pleasures of Love.
But while I repeat to my self all her charms,
She I love may be locked in another man's arms,
She may laugh at my cares, and so false may she be,
To say all the kind things, she before said to me,
O then, it is, O then, it is I think there is no Hell,
Like loving, like loving too well.
But when I consider the truth of her heart,
Such innocent passion so kind without Art,
I fear I have wronged her, and hope she may be,
So full of true love, to be jealous of me.
O then it is, O then it is, I think it no Joys above,
Like the pleasures, the pleasures of Love.
The Thief-Ketchers Song.
Good People give ear whilst a Story I tell,
Of twenty black Tradesmen were brought up in hell,
On purpose poor people to rob of their due
There Is none shall noozed, if you find but one true;
The first was a Coyner that stamped in a Mould,
The second a Voucher to put off his Gold:
Tour you well,
Hark you well,
See where they are rubbed,
Up to the Nubbing-Cheat,
And there they are nubb'd.
The the third was a Padder, that fell to decay;
And when he was living, took to the High way.
The fourth is a Mill-ken, to crack up a Door;
He Will venture to rob both the Rich and the Poor,
The fifth is a Glasier, who when he creeps in:
To pinch all the Lurry, he thinks it no sin.
Tour you well, etc.
The sixth is a Foyl-cloy, that not one Hick spare.
The seventh is a Budge, to track up the stairs:
The eighth is a Bulk, that can bulk any hick;
If the Master be napt, then bulk he is sick.
The ninth is a Ginny, to lift up a Grate;
If he sees but the Lurry, with his hooks he will bate.
Tour you well, etc.
Th tenth is a Shoplist that carries a Bob,
When he ranges the City the Shops for to rob.
The eleventh is a Bubber, much used of late,
He goes to the Alehouse, and steals there the Plate.
The twelfth a Trapan, if a Cull he does meet,
He nips all his Cole, and turns him in the street.
Tour you well, etc.
The thirteenth a Famble, false Rings for to sell,
When a Mob he has bit, his Cole he will tell.
The fourteenth a Gamester, if he sees the Hic sweet,
He presentry drops down a Cog in the street.
The fifteenth a Prancer, whose courage is small;
If they catch him horse-coursing he is noozed for all.
Tour you well, etc.
The sixteenth a She-napper, whose Trade's so deep,
If he is caught in the Corn, he is marked for a sheep.
The seventeenth a Dun-aker, that will make vows,
To go in the Country, and steal all the Cows.
The eighteenth a Kid-napper, Spirits young men,
Though he tip them the piks, they nap him again.
Tour you well, etc.
The nineteenth is a Prigger of the Cacklers,
Go. into the Country to visit the Farmers,
He steals their Poultry, and thinks it no sin,
When into the Hen-roost in the night he gets in.
The twentieth a Thief-catcher, so we him call,
If he nap a poor Tradesman, he pays for all.
Tour you well, etc.
There Is many more Craftsmen which I could name,
That do use such like trades, yet think it no shame:
These may a young Convert confess to his grief,
Are all the black Trades of a Gentleman Thief:
Who though a good Workman, is seldom made free,
Till he rides on a Cart to be nooz'd on a Tree.
Tour you well,
Hark you well,
See where they are rubbed,
Up to Nubbing-Cheat,
And there they are nubb'd.
THE EPILOGUE: OR, Vices SAD CATASTROPHE.
Of Covetousness.
THe better hap a man has to attain to Riches, the more he is accursed, in
being more tormented with the fevers of the mind and unquietness. This Vice is
held to be the root of all evil, lacking as well those things which it
enjoys, as which it wants.

THe Scithians only make no use of Gold and Silver, for ever detesting and
condemning the monstrous sin of covetousness. Solinus.

Caligula, was so covetous, that there was no kind of lucre, or mean to get
money by, how unlawful soever it were, which he sought not out, insomuch as he
laid a tribute upon Urine, and sold his Sisters Gowns, whom he had sent into
banishment. Vale^ius.

Calipha, King of Persia, having filled a Tower with Gold, Jewels, and precious
Stores, and being in war with Allan King of Tar^ary, was so ill^ succored of
his own people, because he would not give them their pay, that he was taken of
Allan, and famished in that Tower where all his Treasure lay.

Dionysius the Elder, advertised of one that had hid great store of money,
commanded him upon pain of death to bring it to him, which he did, although not
all; but with the remainder dwelt in another place, and bestowed it upon an
Inheritance, when Dionysius heard thereof, he sent him that which he took from
him, saying, Now thou know how to use riches, take that I had from thee.

Hermocrates, ready to die, bequeathed his goods to himself.

One at the hour of his death, swallowed many pieces of God, and sewed the rest
in his Coat, commanding that it should be buried with him Atheneus.

One besieged in the Tower of Cassilino by Hannibal, chose rather to sell a Rat
which he had taken for 200 Roman pence, than to satisfy hi^ hunger, whereof he
died ^raight after, but the other saved his life by that dear meat. Valerius.

The Popes Camera, or Eschequer, is like unto the Sea, wherein to all Rivers do
run, and yet it overfl^weth not. P. Martyr.

The old Clergy being asked why they cannot live by (...) liness but by
covetousness, answered, Nunc aliud tempus, alii pro tempore mores. Polychr.

Demonica betrayed Ephesus to Brennus of Senona for Gold, who demanded her
reward of him, who brought her to a great heap of gold, and loaded her so heavy
therewith, that she died under the burden.

Euclio, had hidden such treasure under the ground, that he durst go out of his
house for fear of robbing, nor tarry in it for fear of killing. Plautus.

Adrian, surnamed Sophista, when a neighbor of his had sent him a few dainty
fishes, for a present in a silver dish; he took both the silver dish and the
fishes, saying to the Messenger, Thank thy Master, and tell him, I take his
fishes for Novelties, and his silver dish for a present.

Simonides, when he was requested to do any thing gratis, id est, for nothing,
said, That he had two Chests, the one shut up for thanks, the other open for
money. Plut.

Vespasian, when he heard that a silver Image of great substance should be made
for a Monument of his worthiness, he straight held out his hand, saying,
Behold, here is a place ready to set an Image, a sure foundation from falling.

Vespasian, of pure misery, niggardship, and covetousness, commanded in Rome to
be made public places to receive Urine, not to keep the City more sweet, but
to the end they should give him more rent. Suetouius.

Simonides, being demanded why he hoo^ded up money toward the end of his old
age, Because ^quoth he) I had rather leave my goods to mine enemies, than to
have need of the relief of my friends while I am alive.

Virgil, in his sixth book of Aeneiads, puts those persons in Hell, which
have done no good to their friends, kinsfolk, and neighbors, but have been
wholly wedded to their riches, without imparting them to others. Virgil.

Ochus, King of Persia, would never go into the Country of Perseland, because
that by the Law of the Realm, he was bound to give to every woman that had born
children, one French crown, and to every woman with child two.

Plato, thought it almost impossible, for a man very rich to be honest, yet
Solon as wise as he, desired to have riches, but not to get them by wrong. Plut.

Anacreon, having received of Polycrates five talents for a gift, was so much
troubled for the space of two nights with care, how he might keep them, and how
to employ them best, that he carried them back again, saying, That they were
not worth the p^ins he had already taken for them.

Socrates, being sent for by K. Archelaus, to come and receive store of Gold,
sent him word that a measure was sold in Athens for a penny double; and that
water cost him nothing.

Lyc^rgus, abrogated the use of Gold and Silver coin, and appointed Iron money
to be current, by this means he banished from them the desire of Riches.

Caligula, took of every Curtezan, as much of her gain as she could get of any
man at once.

Pertinax, being advanced to the degree of Emperor, did not forget his
niggardliness, but parted Lettice and Ar^ichooks in two, that the one half
might be for his dinner, and the other for his Supper. Eutropius.

The Parsimony of Fabritius, is not to be condemned, for the age wherein he
lived, ought to excuse him, in the which all magnificence was unknown to the
Romans.

Justinian the Emperor, for himself procured Riches, and for the Devil he
cheapned Souls, he was covetous, and maintained the heresy of the Pelagians.

Epimenides, curse of Riches was, that all the Treasures hoarded up by the
covetous, should be wasted by the prodigal.

The Romans, and the Carthaginians, were friends a long time, but after they
knew there was in Spain great mines of Gold and Silver, immediately arose
between them Civil Wars. P. Diaconus.

Darius, being very rich and covetous, sent to Alexander in scorn, to know
where he had treasure to maintain such an Army, who answered, Tell thy Master
that he keepth in his Coffe^s his Treasures of Metals. and I have no other
Treasure than the hearts of my friends. Plutarch.

Angelot, a Cardinal, was so covetous. that by a false door he descended into
the Stable, and every night stole away the Oats which his Horse-keepers had
given his Horses, and continued it so long, till one of the Horse-keepers
hiding himself in the stable, did so belabour him with a Pikefork, that he had
much ado to crawl away. J. Pontanus.

Of Sloth.
In this Vice, Wit, Understanding, Wisdom, and all honest endeavors are
buried, as it were in a grave, from which arises the loathsome stench of
corrupt manners and disordered life, making of men women, of women beasts, of
beasts monsters.

ALexander, an Emperor of the East, given to to great idleness, demanded if he
had long to live, they answered him, Yea, If he could take away the teeth of a
brazen Boar that stood in the Marketplace; meaning thereby, that he should
shorten his days, except he gave over his idleness. Zonarus.

A Senator of Rome, who was falured by an other, riding in his Chariot,
answered, I will not say God save you, since in going thus at your ease, you
show you have no desire to live long.

Epaminondas, discharged all his Soldiers that grew fat, saying, That as a
woman too fat does not easily conceave, so does fat hinder a man from doing his
charge, as Arms which are too heavy.

Scipio, being arrived at his Camp, banished all Soldiers slaves, and Pages,
and all unprofitable people, and made each one to carry his own Armor.

The Sabies, having abundance of all kind of Riches, spent their times
slothfully.

The Nabathies, having nothing but what they get by their virtue and labor,
are good husbands, and abandon all idleness,

Metellus, when he was arrived in Africa, he took away whatsoever might seem to
no^ri^h slothfulness, and caused Proclamation to be made, that none should
presume to sell either bread or any other food dressed; that the Carriers of
water should not follow the Camp, that the Soldiers should have no Pages, no
Beasts of Carriage, that each one should keep his rank, cast his Trench, and
carry his Victuals together with his Furniture. Salust.

In the Islands named Bal^ares in Spain the Children might not eat, until they
with their slings they had stricken down their meat, which their Parents used
^o set for them upon an high beam or pool. Pliny.

Epaminondas killed one of his Soldiers being asleep, that was set to watch,
saying, that he left him in the same estate that he found him.

The Kings of Persia and Macedonia, were every morning awaked, to put them in
mind to take care of that which God had committed to their charge. Herodo^.

At certain Games of Olympus, there came a Philosopher of Thebes, which had
made all the apparel he wore himself; the Assembly marvelling that one could do
all this; he answered, The sloth of man is the cause that one Art is divided
into diverse; for ^e that knows all Arts together, must needs know one alone.
He was reputed a valn glorious Phil^sopher.

More hurtful was the City of Carthage to Rome after her destruction, than
during the whole course and season of Wars which the Romans had with her; for
that whilst they had enemies in Africa, they knew not what vices meant in
Rome. Guevara.

The great Numantia in Spain could never be won (notwithstanding fourteen years
siege of the Romans) till Scipio purged his Camp of loyterers, perfumers, and
Harlots.

Darius plunged the Babylonis in all manner of idleness, that they might not
have the heart afterward to rebel.

The same policy used Cimon to diminish the force of his Allies, by granting
them whatsoever they required.

The carelessness and negligence of Dionysius the Younger, getting the
upper-hand of him, carried him to women and lechery, and at length did break in
sunder his Adamant chains; that is, the greatnumber of his warlike Soldiers,
and his store of Galleys, of whom his Father had boasted that he left his
Kingdom fast chained to his Son.

Sardanapalus through his slothfulnes was overcome by Artabactus, and lost the
Monarchy of Assyria.

The Pheacons counted it the greatest felicity that might be, to do nothing,
(...).

The Romans used to punish idleness so sharply, that the husbandman whose
ground was found barren, and his pastures unoccupied, was presently put from
the place, and his ground given to another man.

Macarius and Diogenes, for that they would not be accounted idle persons, the
one would remove heaps of sand from place to place, and the other would tumble
his tub up and down.

Augustus did win the Soldiers unto him with rewards, the common sort with
plenty of Victuals, and all generally with the pleasure of ease. Tacitus.

When Augustus reproached a certain Player becayse through his occasion there
was a tumult among the people, he answered, It is good for thee, O Casar, that
the people be with held by our idle exercises, from busying their brains about
other matters.

Of Gluttony.
This deadly enemy to health, replenisheth the body with Humors, Wind,
Inflammations, Distillations and Operations; and change of Meats draws
pleasure out of the bounds of sufficiency; Pleasure, in all things which
pleases, where as in simple and uniform things, delight never exceeds the
appetite and natural necessity.

THe Arigentines builded as though they should always live, and did seed as
though they should always die. Plato.

The Emperor Septimus Severus and Jovinianus died with eating and drinking too
much.

Valentinianus a famous Emperor, died suddenly of a surset.

Lucullus being asked one day by his Servant, whom he had invited to his feast,
seeing so much meat prepared? answered, Lucullus shall dine with Lucallus. Plut.

Vitellius Spinter, was so much given to gluttony and excess, that at one
supper, he was served with two thousand several kind of fishes, and with 7000
flying Fowl.

Muleasses King of Tennis, after he was deprived of his Kingdom, in his return
out of Almaign, being without hope that the Emperor Charles the fifth would
help him at all, he spent one hundred Crowus upon a Peacock dressed for him.

Maximilian the Emperor devoured in one day forty pounds of flesh, and drunk an
hogshead of Wine.

Geta the Emperor, for three days together continued his Festival, and his
delicates were brought in by order of the Alphabet.

Astydamas being invited by Ariobarzanes to a Banquet, eat up all that alone,
which was provided for diverse Guests.

There was a Contention between Hercules and Lepreas which of them both
should-first devour an Ox, in which attempt Lepreas was overcome; afterward
he challenged him for drinking, but Hercules was his Master.

Aglais, whose practice was to sound the Trumpet, devoured at every meal twelve
pounds of flesh, with as much bread, as two bushels of wheat would make, and
three gallons of Wine.

Philoxenes, a notorious glutton, wished he had a neck like a Crane, that the
sweet meat which he eat might be long in going down. Ravisius.

Lucullus at a solemn and costly feast he made to certain Ambassadors of Asia,
among other things, he did eat a Griph boiled, and a Goose in paste.

Lucullus took great pains himself in furnishing of a Feast, and when he was
asked why he was so curious in setting out a banquet, he answered That there
was as great disrcetion to be used in marsh^lling of a Feast, as in the
ordering of a Battle, that the one might be terrible to his enemies, and the
other acceptable to his friends. Plut.

In Rhodes, they that love fish, are accounted right courteous, and
free-hearted men, but he that delights more in flesh, is ill thought of, and
to his great shame is reputed a bondslave to his belly.

Sergius Galba was a devouring and gluttonous Emperor, for he caused at one
banquet seven thousand birds to be killed.

Xerxes having tasted of the figs of Athens, swear by his Gods that he would
eat no other all his life after, and went forthwith to prepare an Army to
conquer Grecia, for no other cause but to fill his belly full of the figs of
that Country.

The Sicilians dedicated a Temple to Gluttony, and erected Images to Bacchus
and Ceres, the God and Gods of Wine and Corn.

M. Manlius, in times past made a Book of diverse ways how to dress meat, and
another of the tastes, sauces and diverse means of services, which were no
sooner published, but by the decree of the Senate, they were burned, and if he
had not fled speedily into Asia, he had been burned with them.

There was a Law in Rome called Fahia, by which it was prohibited, that no man
should dispend in the greatest Feast he made, above an hundred Sextexterces.

Nisoeus a Tirant of Syracuse, when he understood by his Soothsayers that he
had not long to live, what he had left, he spent in belly-chear and
drunkenness, and so died.

Mar. Anthonius set forth a book of his drunkenness, in which he proved those
pranks when he was overcome with wine, to be good and lawful.

Darius had written upon his grave this inscr^iption; I could drink store of
Wine, and bear it well.

Ptolomey, who in a mockery was called Philopater, because he put to death his
Father and Mother, through wine and women died like a beast.

Aruntius a Roman, being drunken, deflowred his own Daughter Medullina, whom he
forthwith killed.

Tiberius Caesar was preferred to a Pretorship, because of his excellency in
drinking.

Diotimus, was surnamed Funnel, or Tunnel, be cause he gulped down wine through
the channel of his Throat, which was poured into a Funnel, the end whereof was
put into his mouth, with out interposition between gulps.

In the Feast of Bacchus a Crown of Gold was appointed for him that could drink
most.

Cleio a woman, was so practiced in drinking, that she durst challenge all men
and women whatsoever, to try masteries who could drink most, and overcome all.

Cleomenes King of Lacedemonia, being disposed to carouse after the manner of
the Scythians, drank so much, that he became and continued e ver after
senceless.

Cyrillus Son, in his drunkenness, wickedly slew that holy man his Father, and
his mother great with Child, he hurt his two sisters, and deflowred one of them.

Androcides a Gentleman of Greece, hearing of Alexanders excess in Drunkenness,
wrote a Letter to him, wherein was a Tablet of Gold, with these words thereon
engraven, Remember Alexander when thou drinkest wine, that thou do drink the
blood of the earth.

Those of Gallia Transalpina, understanding that the Italians had planted Vines
in Italy, came to conquer their Country; so that if they had never planted
Vines, the Frenchmen had not demanded the Country.

Four old Lombards being at Banquet together, the one drank an health round to
the others years, in the end they challenged two to two, and after each man had
declared how many years old he was, the one drank as many times as he had
years, and likewise his companion pledged him, the one was 58. the second 63.
the third 87. the last 92. so that a man knows not what they did eat or
drink; but he that drank least, drank 5^. cups of Wine.

Of Lechery.
T is bewitching evil, being an unbridled appetite, in whomsoever it reigns,
kills all good motions of the mind, alteretr, dries, and weakneth the body,
shortning life, diminishing Memory, and Understanding.

CYrena, a notorius strumpet, was surnamed Dode camechana, for that she found
out and invented and found out twelve several ways of beastly pleasure.

Proculeius the Emperor, of an hundred Sarmatian Virgins he took captive, he
deflowred ten the first night, and all the rest within fifteen days after.

Hercules in one night deflowred fifty.

Johannes a Casa, Archbishop of Benevento, and Legate in Venice, writ a Book in
praise of the abominable vice of Sodomitry.

Sigismund Malatesta, strived to have carnal knowledge of his Son Rohert, who
thrustinst his dagger into his Fathers bosom, revenged his wickedness.

Cleopatra, had the use of her brother Ptolomeus company, as of her husbands.

Antiochus stayed a whole winter in Chalcidea, for one maid which he there
fancied.

Lust was the cause of the Wars between the Romans and the Sabines.

Thalestris Queen of the Amazons came 25 days journey to lie with Alexander.

Adultery in Germany is never pardoned.

Messalina and Popilia were so incontinent, that they contended with most
shameful harlots, prostituting themselves without respect of time place, or
company, to any, though never so base.

Claudius deflowred his own sisters, and Semiramis burned in beastly lust
toward her son Ninus.

Nero caused Atticus a Roman Consul to be slain, that he might the more
conveniently enjoy the company of his wife

Commodus, not contented with his three hundred Crncubines, committed incest
with his own sisters.

Caligula did the like, but the one was slain by his wife, the other by his
Concubine.

Adultery was the cause of the first alteration of the City of Rome.

Sempronia a woman, well learned in the Greek, and Sappho, no less famous,
defended luxury and last by their writings.

Cleopatra invited Anthony to a Banquet in the Province of Bithinia in the wood
Sesthem, where, at one instant, of threescore young Virgins, fifty and five
were made Mothers.

Cleophis a Queen of Tridia, saved her Kingdom and Subjects from destruction,
by a nights l^dging with Alexander, by whom she had a Son called Alexander, who
was afterward King of India; she was ever after called Scortum Reginum.

Helogabalus, not only deflowred, but also married a Virgin Vestal, saying it
was reason that Priests should marry Nuns, because that in times past he had
been Priest of the Sun.

Jane Quen of Naples was hanged up for her advoutry, in the very same place
where she had had hanged her husband Andreas before, because he was not (as she
said) able to satisfy her beastly desire.

Feron King of Egypt had been blind ten years, and in the eleventh the Oracle
told him that he should recover his sight, if he washed his eyes in the water
of a woman which never had to do ^t any but her husband; whereupon, he first
made ^l of his ^w^wif, (...) ^ha^ did him no good; after, (...) insinite o^h^
which did him all as little, five only one, by (...) he recovered his sight,
and then he put (...) death.

Julia he Daug^ r^ (...) so immodest, shameless, and ^ch^ (...) ^mperour was
never able to reclaim her; (...) adm^nished to forsake her ba^ (...), and to
f^llow chastity as her Father did, (...) answered, That her ^ather forgot he
was Casar, but as for her self, she knew well enough that she was Casars
Daughter.

Cornelius Gallus, and Q. Elerius two Roman Knights, died in the very action of
their filthy lust.

Arichbertus, eldest Son unto Letharius King of France, died even as he was
embracing his whores.

Alcibiades was burned in his bed with his Curtezan Timandra.

The Egyptians punishments against adultery, was, to cut off the nose of the
woman, and the privy parts of the man.

Alexander when a woman was brought to him one evening, demanded of her why she
came so late? she answered, that she stayed until her husband was gone to bed.
Which he no sooner heard, but sent her away, being angry with them that had
almost made him commit adultery.

He was angry with Cassander, because he would by force kiss a Minstrels maid.

Roduldus King of Lombardy being taken in adultery, was slain by the woman's
Husband whom he abused.

Roderigo King of Spain was deprived of his Kingdom and life by the Sarazens,
who were called in by an Earl called Julian, that he might be avenged of his
King for forcing his daughter.

Calius Rhodoginus in his 11 Book of Antiquiquities, tells of a certain man,
that the more he was beaten, the more he fervently desired women.

The widow of the Emperor Sigismund intending to marry again, one persuaded her
to spend the remainder of her life after the manner of the Turtle Dove, who
has but one mate; If you counsel me (quoth she) to follow the example of
Birds, who do you not tell me of Pigeons and Sparrows, which after the death
of their mates, do ordinarily couple with the next they meet

Hiero King of Syracusa banished the Poet Epicharmus for speaking wantonly
before her wife, and that very justly, for his wife was a true mirror of
chastity.

Sulpitius Gallus, put away his Wife by divorce, because she went abroad
unmasked.

Pompey caused one of his Soldiers eyes to be put out in Spain, for thrusting
his hand under a woman's garment that was a Spaniard; and for the like offense,
did Sertorius command a footman of his band to be cut in pieces.

If Caracalla had not seen his Mothers thigh, he had not married her.

Speusippus the Philosopher, one of Platoes folowers, was slain for his
adultery.

Tigellinus died among his Concubines.

FINIS.

