The Heads of the Judges Arguments for the Deceased Duke of Norfolk, in the
Case between him and his Brother Mr. Charles Howard, with some Observations on
the Lord Chancellor Nottingham's Arguments.
THE Judges all agreed that the Limitation to Charles Howard was a void
Limitation of the Trust; and that the Bill ought to be dismissed, grounding
their opinions on the following Reasons.

1. All the Trust of the whole Term was vested in Henry by the Limitation of it
to him and the Heirs Males of his Body, which in Law is a Disposition of the
whole Interest: such a Trust being indeed greater in its nature, than a Term of
years is capable of, in regard it cannot go to Heirs Males, but therefore has
been often resolved to contain the whole Interest. And where a term for years
is under such a Limitation that will admit no Remainder, there can be no
Contingent Remainder limited of such a Term; and to make that Limitation which
could not be effectual by the Rules of Law, as a Remainder to take effect by
calling it a springing use, is but a Quibble too light to have the countenance
of the Law.

2. It Is contrary to the Rules of Law, to limit an Interest either in Law or
Equity of a Term, to take effect after any ones dying without Issue of his
Body, and of a dangerous Consequence; for it would tend to make Perpetuities
and fetter Estates: inasmuch as it is allowed of all hands, that if there can
be such a Limitation by Law, allowed after a dying without Issue Male, there is
no possibility of docking or destroying the Interests that are under such
Limitations; so that such Estates can never be sold or parted with, no
Recoveries reaching them, nor no Method in the Law nor possibility to do it,
which would make Estates stagnate in a Family, and discourage all Ingenuity and
Industry, which the Law perfectly abhors -- And this the Lord Chancellor allows
in his Arguments in this Case in his third Conclusion. And it mends not the
matter, to say that this is under a Limitation of Thomas his dying without
Issue in the Life of Henry; for

3. 3. Note, the Lord Chancellor (finding himself pincht with this Reason, in
his Argument endeavors to answer it by saying, he would stop any where when he
should find an Inconvenience by allowing such a Limitation, which is a poor
Evasion, and the Judges conceived would be too late when it should have gained
the Countenance of such a solemn Precedent and Resolution, and conceived it
more agreeable to the Prudence and Policy of the Law, to prevent such
Inconveniences when foreseen, than to distinguish ones self out of them, or
retract opinions by a ( non putarem.)
This is a stretch farther than ever before was endeavored, the Judges have
gone as far as is fit in indulging men's dispositions of Terms to take effects
by Limitations after Lives -- If this Limitation should be admitted (if Thomas
dye without Issue in the Life of Henry, then the next strain would be to limit
a Term over upon ones dying without Issue during the Lives of two or three, and
then of twenty men: and then if he should dye without Issue within seven years,
for that is equal to a Life, and then within twenty years, then why not within
a hundred years, and then why not within a thousand, or during the term, etc.
for all these are less Interests in the eye of the Law, than a Freehold, and
where should we end or stop; for it must be confessed that there is the same
reason for all these, as it was by experience found upon the Judgment of Matthew
Manning's Case, when it was once allowed that a term for years might be limited
to one, and if he died within the term then to another; it was soon found that
there was the same reason to allow a Limitation of it after two as twenty
Lives, which has been the occasion of Fettering Estates exceedingly by such
Limitations of terms to take effect after Lives, and made the Judges often
repine at that Judgment, and declare that if it were now a new Case, since they
have seen the Inconveniences of it) it would never have been so adjudged. So
Bridgeman in the Case of Grigg and Hopkins. Siderfin's Report fo. 37.

4. It Is agreed on all hands that there is the same reason and ground of
allowing Limitations of terms for years at Law, as there is for allowing
Limitations of trusts of terms for years in Equity and no other: Now there has
never been any Judgment that the Limitation of a Term to one, after another
dying without Issue was good -- It has been often endeavored, and (if it
could have gained the Precedent of such a solemn Resolution) would no doubt of
it, be too often practiced. But it has always been disallowed, and many
Judgments against it -- Leventhorp and Ashby Pasc. 11 Car. 1. in B. Reg. Rolls
611. Sanders and Cornish Rolls 611, 612. Rolls 2. Rep. 1 Cro. Backhurst and
Bellinghams Case. Mod. Rep. 115. and Burgis Case there reported.

And Child and Bayley's Case Trin. 15. Jac. Rot. 183. in Banc. Reg. which is a
Judgment in the very Point -- William Heath being possessed of a term for 76.
years, by his Will devised it to his Wife, and afterward to William his Son,
provided that if William his Son should dye without Issue of his body then
living at the time of his death, then Thomas his eldest Son should have the
term; William did dye without Issue, living Thomas, yet Thomas could not have
the term, because the whole Court of King's Bench adjudged that the Limitation
to Thomas after the death of William without Issue (tho this Contingent was
confined to a Life, as here it is) was void, for the reason before mentioned.
And this Judgment afterward affirmed in a Writ of Error in the Exchequer
Chamber, by all the Judges of the Common Pleas and Barons of the Exchequer, so
that it was a solemn Judgment of all the Judges of England, and which alone
were enough to rule the Case in question.

Yet the Lord Chancellor Decreed this Limitation to Charles to be a good
Limitation, and that he should hold the Barony during the residue of the term,
and have an account of the Profits thereof from the death of Duke Thomas.
Declaring his reasons to be as follows.

1. 1. Note this is true, but it does not follow that he may dispose them
contrary to the Rule of Law.
Some men have no Estates but Terms of years; and he that has a term of years,
has as much right to dispose of it, as he that has a Fee-Simple.

2. 2. Note this has no weight, for many words are often inserted in Settlements
that are idle; and operate nothing, and these are not the only words in this
that are idle, for the Lord Chancellor allows here, that the Limitation to
Edward and all after him are void.
Unless these words (if Thomas dye without Issue in the Life of Henry) have the
effect of excepting this out of the common Cases of limitting terms over upon
ones dying without Issue -- The words are idle and of no effect.

3. 3. This is so weak a Reason, that it requires no answer.
This might have been done in another way ( viz. by making the first term to
cease upon this Contingency, and limitting a new one to Charles) and therefore
shall be taken to be good this way.

4. 4. This answered in the Judges third Reason supr.
That the meanness of a Term for years or Chattel Interest, is not to be
regarded in Limitations of it. -- It was at first disputed, whether it might be
limited over, after a Life, and some opinions against it: but that afterward
obtained; and though the Judges would not allow a Limitation of it over after a
dying without Issue; but he saw no Reason why it might not be allowed after a
dying without Issue in such a ones Life; for that is but equal to a Limitation
after a Life.

Then the Lord Chancellor seeks to evade the Case of Child and Baylie, Note,
this Case of Child and Bailey was adjudged by all the Judges of England, First
in the King's Bench, and then in the Exchequer Chamber, and has been approved
and cited by many Judges in many Cases since, and made the ground of several
Judgments, and never denied for Law, as in Love and Windham, and Grigg and
Hopkins, and other Cases, till now by the Lord Chancellor, being thus hard put
to it to maintain this opinion of his.
by making several distinctions between that and the Case in question, which
it is plain that he himself looked upon but as frivolous, and saw there was no
real difference between them; and therefore to fortify his own Resolution, he
is driven at last in plain downright terms to deny it to be Law, calling it a
single Resolution, that never had any like it before or since.

And he opposes to this Resolution in Child and Baylie's Case, two other Cases;
the one of Heath and Cotton, (which is nothing to the purpose, there being no
Limitation after a dying without Issue, but only after a Death) the other of
Wood and Sanders; Note, this touches not this Case of the Duke of Norfolk, for
there John never had any Limitation took effect at all, for it was to commence
upon condition, which never happened; so it was all one, as if there had been
no Limitation at all.
where a Term is limited to the Father for his Life; then to the Mother for
hers; then if John survive his Father and Mother, to him; and if he die in
their Lives, and leave Issue, to his Issue; if he die without Issue in their
Lives time, then to Edward his Brother; he died in their Lives time without
Issue, and holds that the Limitation to Edward was good.

Nevertheless the Lord Chancellor made such a Decree, That Charles should hold
the Land during the residue of the term; urging further for his so doing, that
it was the Will of Hen. Frederick, Father of the Plaintiff and Defendant, who
was owner of the Estate; and therefore that it was equitable and just to decree
that it should go accordingly; not allowing that men's Wills and Intentions are
to be bounded by the Rules of Law, and no farther to prevail, than the Methods
and Rules of Law warrant them.

There being afterward a Bill of Review brought upon this Decree, before the
now Lord Keeper; and his Lordship finding the said Decree grounded upon great
Mistakes, and likely to be a ground it self of great Inconveniency, did reverse
the said Decree, as being erroneous, and against Law, and dismissed the said
Charles Howard's Bill.

Whereupon the Appeal is now brought in the Lords House.


