The True METHOD Of Curing Consumptions.

Wherein 1. The Vulgar Method is discovered to be useless and pernicious. 2. A
New Method, by safe, pleasant, and effectual Remedies is described. 3. The
Original and, Immediate Cause of this Distemper, explained. And 4. Several
Remarkable Observations on persons lately Cured by the same Method, related.


Particularly The Case of Mr. Obrian, whom the Author undertook by his
Majesty's Command; with an Account of a Cure performed on a Person of Quality
at Paris, and several others.

By SAMVEL HAWORTH. M. D.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Smith at the Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1683.

TO Charles II. KING OF Great BRITAIN FRANCE and IRELAND.
May it please your Majesty,
AS there is no Science, Art, or Faculty, so much improved of late, as that of
Physic; so I am certain there is no Prince in the World ever gave so great
Encouragement to the Promoters of this Faculty, as your Sacred Majesty. For
what greater Reward can a dilligent Enquirer into Natures Mysteries be
ambitious of, than the Smiles and Candid Aspect of so gracious a Sovereign upon
his painful Endeavors?

Among the many Aspirers after some noble Attainment in the Medic Faculty, whom
your Majesty has graciously vouchasafed to take notice of, I the unworthiest
of your Majesty's Subjects do here (with all due Submission and Thankfulness to
your Majesty) reckon my selfone. For no sooner did the rumor of my success in
Curing Consumptive Persons by a new and differing Method, arrive to your
Majesty's Ears, but your Majesty resolved to satisfy your Royal Curiosity in
the truth of it: whereupon your Majesty Ordered me to endeavor the Cure of Mr.
Kenedy Obrian, which was accordingly performed to your Majesty's great
satisfaction; since which several other Cures have been Effected in Cases of
the like Nature. The deplorable Condition Mr. Obrian was in, when I first
undertook him, your Majesty well remembers.

Now the sense of your Majesty's Candor and Benevolence toward me in this
thing, has encouraged me to prefix your Majesty's Name to his small unpolished
Tract; Presuming that I have already (tho undeservedly) obtained so great a
measure of your Majesty's Favor, as to implore your Royal Patronage.

Withal, I cannot but humbly acquaint your Majesty, that although your Majesty's
Candor toward me, next to that Divine Providence, which makes my Endeavors
successful, has been my greatest Encouragement; yet my Enemies abroad have
been almost indefatigable of discourage me; Envy and Malevolence have so
predominated in the hearts of some, that they have made a randevouz of all
their Strength and Forces, those mischievous Machines and Engines of Malice,
Hatred, Obloquy, Prejudice, Lies, Backbitings, and uncharitable Censures to
blast and ruin me. So that it is easy to conjecture how this Innocent Partus
will be received by the hands of those cruel Censurists, who so malign its
Author: It is not hard to fancy how it will be kicked about and buffeted,
hissed at and derided, damned and obraided by their desperate Tongues. It is
impossible such a pitiful, helpless Infant should survive the successive
Clamours of those whose Interests it is to hate and back-bite me; unless so
Gracious and Compassionate a Patron as your Majesty, will deign to cherish it?
It is just now going to run the Gantlet, and 'twill certainly perish and be
knocked down to the ground by the innumerous thumps and blows of those
Malevolent Persons that stand prepared to strike it, unless it be clothed and
defended by the Coat Armor of your Royal Favor.

It is therefore, Great Sir, with all possible Submission and Reverence, that I
lay this Treatise at the Feet of your Gracious Majesty, humbly assuring your
Majesty that although it be already Printed, yet it shall never be published to
the Eyes of the World, unless your Majesty will first signify your gracious
Acceptance of it. The Copies that are now Printed shall either lie dormant till
they are eaten by Worms, or else be given to the Flames, as unworthy of humance
Inspection, if your Majesty refuse to receive and countenance it.

But I have already so far Experienced your Royal Candor, as that I cannot now
despair of your Gracious Clemency. That your Majesty may live for ever, that
your Royal Blood may eternally Circulate in its proper Vessels, that every part
of your Sacred Body may regularly perform their proper Functions to Perpetuity,
that your Health and Wealth may be Adequate to your Grace and Goodness, and
that a Crown of Glory may be your everlasting Portion; is the real desire of

Great Sir, Your Majesty's most Submissive and most Devoted Subject Haworth.
November 13th 1682.
The Authors Apology for some Invectives in the ensuing Discourse.
INvectives are sometimes very opportune, especially when against those whose
Malevolent Minds cause their extravagant Tongues to utter such uncharitable
censuring Expressions as justly deserve them: That what sharp Invective
Expressions may be let fall in the ensuing Discourse, are nothing but what I
have been highly provoked to, any judicious person may easily determine; for
whatsoever Reflections there may be upon any particular persons, tho not
therein nominated, they are only upon those persons who have railed against,
calumniated, back-bited, and belied me; tho what I have here dicovered of them
is the real truth. There are some Physicians in London, who because some of
their Patients have left them and consulted me, have been so wickedly
censorious, as to tell the World I was a mere Pretender; and so far from being
a Scholar, as that I could not write my own Name, or speak a Word of Greek or
Latin; when they themselves never discoursed with me in their lives. Others
have made it their whole business to pry into my concerns, to find fault with
my proceedings, and if a Patient happened to die under my hands, that perhaps was
almost resigning when I was first called for, this is proclaimed by them as a
grand Miscarriage; when their Patients do all successively retire into another
World, and not the least notice taken. So that the two grand Arguments that
they insist upon in their Endeavors to make me odious, and so discourage their
Patients from coming to me, are to impose upon the Faith of People that I am
illiterate and insuccessful; in answer to the first, it would be impertinence
and immodesly for me to tell the World that I am a Scholar; but thus much I am
urged to declare in my own Defense, that my Education and Advantages have not
come short of theirs; and if I still remain illiterate, I am a Fool and a Dunce
for not improving them: besides he that condemns me for an Illiterate Emperie,
is impudent in reflecting upon the Honorable College of Physicians in London;
for I was examined by the President and Electors of that College, and by them
deemed worthy to be admitted to Practice Physic, as appears by the Diploma
which they gave me with the Seal of the College. In Answer to the second Basis
or Foundation on which they build the Superstructure of their Railery; I must
likewise declare that this also is groundless. For it is only the success which
attends my Labors, that makes them hate me. I can with a safe Con^cience
avouch, that since I have Practiced at London among the many Patients I have
there had, there have not ten persons died under my hands, and those were
desperate when I first saw them; yet those Industrious Enemies of mine, when
they heard of but one Patient that was dead, did triumph, rejoice and glory, as
if the world was little enough to proclaim my ruin and downfall, which they ever
insatiably desired: But God knows their Prayers remain yet unanswered; these
are those that would put a stop to the improvement of Physic, because they
cannot improve it themselves.

Let the Impartial Reader therefore now judge if I have not been justly provoked
to vindicate myself, and to detectr the ridiculous Buffooneries of these
Practice in this Distemper: I only desi^^ their Method and mine may be put
together into a Balance of serious Consideration, then we shall see which will
preponderate, and which is most shallow and impertinent; or if they be both
compared by the touchstone of Experience, I am sure ours will appear most
successful.

I hope now the Reader will not wonder at some passages in this Tract, which if
I had not premised this, they might otherwise have seemed a little uncouth. Let
them persist in their peremptory abusive Censures. I hope out Care and
Industry, with a continued Success attending our Labors, will manifestly
contradict them; and in time make them as ridiculous as they would willingly
render me: so that indeed when these Squint-eyed and Envious Contemners, have
quite exonerated themselves of those Reproaches, which are nothing but the
faetid Excrements of a spiteful mind, they must either then hold their Tongues,
or again lick up their own Ordure, and swallow it by mouthfuls; and tho their
chief design and desire is to be-smear me with these turpid and malicious
Slanders, endeavoring hereby to destroy my Reputation, and to expunge and
obliterate my Name out of the World, and if it were possible to extirpate the
very thoughts of me out of the Minds of all Men; yet all the Detriment and
Mischief they can possibly do me, is only to excite and stimulate me to greater
Diligence and Circumspection, which will at last render me apparently
undeserving of such forged Impeachments.

Let me also here premise to prevent the Readers misapprehension of what I have
exposed to public view in the following Discourse, that I do not in the least
design to detract from the Renown, Learning, and Gravity of many Eminent
Physicians in and about London; I own their Skill, acknowledge their Worth and
Eminence, and honor their Learning: But yet there are many who have attained
to a competent measure of Learning, and are become somewhat Famous and Popular,
that abhor that any but themselves should have any Esteem in the World; they
cannot endure to be outdone by any, and if they hear of any whose success in
one particular Distemper goes beyond theirs, they are restless in seeking his
Ruin; that there are such among the Physicians of London, their daily abusing
and inveighing against me, does apparently evince: It is against these that the
Reflections in this Discourse are levelled: so that those who are angry with
this Tract, and damn i^ as a pragmatic, conceited, censorious Piece, are the
persons I have here been discribing, who because they see their own ugly Faces
in this Glass, they presently curse and condemn it. I would not have the Reader
think me such a Buffoon as to condemn the whole Tribe of Physicians of
Ignorance and Idleness: No, for how many Generous and Heroic Souls are there,
who out of a mere Principle of being serviceable in their Generations, have
laid out good part of their Estates, spent much of their Time, and not a little
impaired their Health in unripping the Bowels of Nature, to find out the Virtue
of those excellent Medicaments, which to encourage Industry, are only revealed
to the diligent Enquirer? and these Men are of such Noble Spirits, that they
resolve while their Eyes remain Susceptive of Visible Objects, and while their
Ingenious Souls are cloistered in these Humane Tabernacles, to search and pry
into the absconded Mysteries and private Recesses of Nature, their Adored
Mistress. While they live among Men who are liable to Diseases, obnoxious to
sundry Maladies, often variating in Symptoms and Critic Circumstances, they
will think no time lost or misspent in searching out expedient and effectual
Remedies, and aspiring after a more particular knowledge of that curious
Structure, the Microcosm of Man's Body. These are they to whom the World knows
not how much it stands engaged. It is no wonder that the Heathen World adored
Aesculapius, when the Worship of the true God was wanting among them. Not
undeservedly does our Harvey's Name still Circulate through all the parts of the
Knowing World, for the Invention of the Bloods Circulation, tho he himself be
dead: and we hope our Lower will have his Name perpetuate in the Memories of
after Ages for his more exact Account of the Motion of the Crimson Juice, in
his most Excellent Treatise of the Heart. Can we ever forget Dr. Willis,
another of our own Contrymen, for his great Learning, and his Charity in
communicating his Notions, the effects of much Study and Labors; especially
those of the Bloods Fermentation, and the Nervous Juice. Is not Dr. Wharton's
Fame still continued for discovering the use of Glandules, and Dr. Glissons for
his Discourse of the Rickets, and another of the Liver. Can the Honorable Mr.
Boil ever die, who has been so indefatigably laborious in searching into
Natures Secrets, and watching her Motions; to his great Charge and Expense, and
to the apparent prejudice of his own Health; and then communicating all to the
public in such a Style and Language, as discovers it self to be the Offspring
of a Noble Mind. The World already rings of his Rare Experiments and choice
Inventions; into how many Tongues are his Works translated? We may read of his
Discoveries in his own Experimental Philosophy, and in the Transactions of the
Royal Society, and in the Catalogue and Description of the Rarities belonging
to the Royal Society, lately published by the Ingenuous Dr. Nehemiah Grew.
Several of his Inventions are now to be seen in that Magazine of Rarities in
Gresham College: So that we do not question but that there are some such among
us, that would willingly sacrifice their Strength, their Time, Estates and
Health, and if need be, venture their own Lives for the good and benefit of
their Fellow Creatures. Yet such is the Ingratitude of some, that they will
sooner encourage Ignorance and Conceit in Illiterate Pretenders; than any way
contributeto the Ingenuity of the modest Naturalist: Such is the folly and
precipitant rashness of others, that they will sooner venture their Lives in
the hands of a bragging Emperie, then trust the Veracity of a Faithful,
Knowing, and Experienced Physician; and such is the Credulity of many, that a
practicing Apothecary or an ignorant Quack-salving Medicaster, that never read
six lines, or at least never understood two of any rational Physic Author,
shall so impose upon their Judgments (I would say phansies) as to insinuate
themselves into their favor, and become Eminent in their Esteem, and all this
while the confident Impostor is telling Stories of his rare Exploits in Physic:
And so the modest Physician, that from his very Cradle endeavored to improve
himself in the Noble Faculty of Physic; because he will not bragg, must be
contemned: But a true Physician must have other Ingredients in him then a good
stock of Confidence, and a considerable quantity of Ignorance: Otherwise he can
never become a true Handmaid of Nature, to watch her in every Motion, to
assist her when she is impotent and almost overcome by the prevalence of any
Distemper, to put forth a helping hand in her greatest Extremity, to refresh
her when weary with struggling, by some Rich Aetherial Spirits, to enlighten
her when clouded, by some Irradiating Sulphur, to renew Vigor in her by some
choice Elixir of Life, to foresee dangers that may befall her, to prevent
whatsoever external Accidents may occasion a Relapse, to apply such Remedies as
may promote, and not thwart her Intentions.

Having thus apologized for whatsoever in this Treatise may seem reflecting,
there remains nothing more to add, only to beg the Readers Candor in the
perusal of it; desiring him to excuse the plainness of its Style, and overlook
what may not be so congruously worded as it might be expected, for I wrote most
of it since I returned from France, and that at several times, and in haste;
for when the former part of it was Printed, I was called into the Country
before I had composed the latter; therefore the Method may not be so exact, nor
Style so smooth, nor Words so pertinent, as they might otherwise have been.
Having desired this Favor of the Courteous Reader, I must assure him that I am.

His Real Servant Samuel Haworth.
From my House at Brumpton near Knight-bridge November 13th 1682.
In virum Clarissimum Dominum SAMVELEM HAVORTVM, Medicinae Doctorem
Expertissimum; Carmen(...)
OVtinam merit is possem te xtoll ere Musis
Havorte, O Patriae gloria magnatuae!
Nam tibi dant veteres palmam pariterque recentes,
Qui morbis medicas applicuere manus.
Corpora restituis longis tabentia morbis;
Languentes Animae relliquiasque foves.
Pellis et innumeros vario Medicamine morbos,
Aegraque latifico Membra vigore novas.
Ergo jure tuae celebrat praeconia laudis
Rumor, and altisona tollit in astratuba.
Nectantum in Patria splendet tua gloria Terra
Sed resonant lands Gallica Regna tuas.
Galliate propri is Medicis diffisa vocavit,
Arque salutiferae senserat artis opem.
Rursus and ad proprios quibus es carissimus Anglos
Vertis iter, placidaes puppe s^can evias.
Gratus ades cunctis: Regagratissimus ipsi
Nam stupet Ingenium CAROLUS ipse tuum.
Ipse oculis namque ipse suis conspexerat agrum
Pallentem a stygiis te revocare vadis.
Saepe etiam laetus Regali exceperat aure
Morbida te Medica Membra levass^ manu.
Vsque Adeo innumeras volitat tua fama per urbes
Et celebrant nomen dulcia rura tuum.
Alma salus tibi juncta manet, comitatur cuntem.
Et rapiunt morbi, te veniente, fugam,
Vive diu Patriaeque salus and gloria Terra:
Nestoreos utinam transgrediare dies!
G. H.
In Authorem.
O Patriae lux clara tuae, lux clara Parentum
Gloria praesentis, veteris victoria saecli!
Quis merito celebrare potestte carmine? vel quis
Digna salutiferae referat praeconia dextrae?
Hippocratis priscique, tibi jam fama Galeni
Cedit, nee meritam Paracelsi industria Palmam
Invidet, and tacitis rubefit jam victus in umbris.
Quicquid enim veteres Medici, Medicive recentes
Ingenio invenere suo, comprendis in unum.
Magna quidem, sed non satis hac; nam summa tuarum.
Non ibi consistit laudum: quippe art novata,
Antiquis ignota, tibi patefacta salutis
Est via: languidulae pellis contagia tabis,
Atque novo miseros superas Medicamine morbos.
Quosque alii liquere, tuae solertia dextrae
Restituit, revocatque suum per Membra vigorem.
Nen veterum jam more putes Mendacia vatum
Fingere me, mihi testis adest Terra Anglica, nee non
Gallica, quae miseris oppressa est utraque morbis
Donec Havortaeae sensit Medicamina dextra.
Namque novas nunc ille vires Artesque medendi.
Repperit, and diram procul omnia limine mortem.
Ille abigit, vitamque ipsis afaucibus orci
Eripit: Idcirco in cunctis memorabile terris
Nomen habet, lateque suum diffudit honorem.
Qua redit, and liquidas qua sol descendit in undas.
Hunc vulgus proceresque colunt, hunc
CAROLUS Ingens
Ardit and ingenii miratur pignora docti,
Vive, precor, longumque trahas feliciter aevum,
Tempora tu Pyliae superes aetate senectae,
Cum dulcis consorte tori, lectique jugalis
Participe eximiae decorat quam gratia formae;
Foemineum quae sola genus splendore corusco
Praeradiat, stellas v^lutinter Luna minores
Eminet, aetheriae decus and Regina Ch^raea.
Spectantum illa oculos ad se trahit undique cunctos
Offunditque stupore animos and pectora, posses
Credere saxificae faciem vid sse Medusae:
Etveneres roseis insunt charitesque labellis,
Cum loquitur, dulcique canit cum vocc marinam.
Seirena innocuae superat dulcedine linguae.
Sit longum comes illa tibi multosque per annos
Floreat, and pulchrafaciat te proleparentem.
Et proles vos prole nova sine fine perennet,
Vestraque perpetuis revirescat Gloria Saeclis.
The True METHOD Of Curing Consumptions, etc.
IT is not here necessary to entertain the Reader with a long Preliminary
Discourse, or to perplex him with strained far-fetcht Apologies to usher in
this Tract; but I shall thrust it naked into the open World, knowing its Design
and Intention to be innocent: Let the Critic Censurists of this Age carp and
snarl at it, let the envious, malevolent Backbiter sputter what he pleases
against it, he may assure himself, I imagined what he would say before I began
to write it, knowing the Principle that actuates him to be nothing but spite.
The impartial and genuine Reader will see, that I him at nothing but the
Improvement of the noble Faculty of Physic, and the real benefit of Mankind, he
will heartily pass by the Enormities which may unwittingly be committed in it:
So that the Censurist may as well surceass his Scoffs and Calumnies, and
believe, that we are more encouraged by the Candor of the courteous Reader, by
the daily Success which attends our Labors, and by his Majesty's Gracious
Favor in taking notice of our Endeavors, that we can be discouraged by those
base Reflections that he spues forth from his sordid Mind, which are the
products of nothing, but Hatred and Malevolence. I shall therefore here present
the Reader with some Observations of my own upon Consumptive Persons; and by
those Observations, make it evident, that the trite vulgar Method will never
reach the bottom of this Disease, but that another kind of Method is absolutely
necessary.

It Is not the Pectoral Decoction, so much used by Physicians, that will remove
the Cause of this spreading Malady. What does it signify to dawb and plaster
the inward Parts with Balsoms, Lohoch's, or Eclegms, and such like nasty,
sticking Medicines? When all their Virtue (if they have any) is gone before
they can attach the part affected, what benefit can be expected from greasing
the Whistle with Oils? And what do the cooling Emulsions, the insipid
Snail-water, and other refrigerating Slops profit? None of these things are
refined enough, to penetrate into the obscure Recesses where the Seeds of the
Distemper lurk; nor do they consist of Particles any way adapted to relieve
distressed Nature. Thousands are every day hurried out of this World, for want
of better Remedies. Is it rational to believe, that feeble Nature is any way
cherished by such dull and clogging, or cold, spiritless stuff? Are there no
Etherial Spirits, nor Eradiating Sulphurs, nor rich Mineral Tinctures, nor
brisk Elixirs to be foud by Art, which may prove Restoratives? O the idleness
of slothful Man! Can a Physician, who would be esteemed (...) Minister of
Nature, content himself to go on in a trite beaten road, and prescribe for weak
emaciated Bodies, nothing but fulsome Hodge-podges, and loathsome Mixtures?
Certainly the true genuine Sons of Aesculapius are more diligent and
conscientious. Is it not a shame to our Profession, for a Patient to languish
under a Physician's hands, perhaps for a whole year, in a deep Consumption, and
have nothing prescribed but mixtures of Oil of Almonds and clogging Syrups,
Milk-water, Snail-water, the nasty Syrup of Garlic, Conserve of Roses, the
Syrup or Juice of Turnips, the fulsome indigested Syrup of Brimstone, and such
like Medicines? Perhaps a stinking Issue may be prescribed, or a troublesome
Seton, as if the Distemper would jump out at the Vent; sometimes cruel
tormenting Blisters, and the Head must be shaved forsooth, because we would not
prescribe out of the Fashion; and Plasters must be applied, which by a
Magnetic Influence keep the Rheum from falling upon the Lungs. But will this
cure a Consumption? No sure. I do here challenge any Physician that dares to
say he ever cured one Patient of a confirmed Phthisis or Consumption, by any of
the abovementioned things, notwithstanding the are so much applauded and used.
Now, what can the reason be, that those Physicians, who pretend to be exactly
Methodic and Dogmatic in their Practice, will still persist in their old
threadbare Method, notwithstanding they find no success in it? I am apt to
fancy the reason is, because they know no better Medicines, and are very loath
to bestow the pains to find them out: and perhaps, they being so unaccustomed
to search into the hidden Mysteries of their Mistress Nature, think it but in
vain to begin, and so content themselves with the Medicines of honest old Galen
and Hippocrates, and their followers; and so let them go on, we know better
things. I can by my own particular Experience declare, that there are such
Medicines in the World, which by degrees will exterminate and destroy those
male-figur'd Particles, which are the Tormentors of Man's Body in this
Distemper; provided the Body be not reduced to so infirm a condition, that
Nature cannot be supported till such Remedies have affected what they would
otherwise undoubtedly do. There is a particular Remedy, which immediately abates
that Fever which usually attends this Malady; which is no cooling Medicine,
but is impregnated with a Faculty of stopping the motion of those Particles
which create that fervor in the Blood, and in time, of freeing the Blood of
them all. This is the Fever which Physicians improperly call a Hectic Fever,
or an Habitual Fever: They will tell you, it is a Fever in the Flesh and
Muscular Parts of the Body, and not at all in the Blood; though I cannot for my
life but think, that there is no such thing as an Habitual Fever, nor a Fever
of the Flesh; a Fever being an actual Ebullition of the Blood, which in a
Ph^hisis is not constant, but arises at some particular times, especially an
hour or two after eating, or in an evening; and this Ebullition of the Blood (I
should say of the Flesh) is caused by the motion and agitation of some
incongruous Particles. Besides, the little Logic that I have obtained, tells
me, that an Habitual Fever, which is an much as an Habitual Motion,
Ebullition, or an Habitual Action, is no less than a contradiction.

There are other safe and most potent Medicines, which I frequently exhibit in
these difficult Cases, that will absorb those tickling and pricking Particles
which produce the Cough, and hereby great ease to the Patient is immediately
procured. We have other penetrateing Medicines, which reduce the Functions of
the Body to their Eutaxy and regular Order; and so when the Cause of the Malady
is removed, and the Functions regulated, Nutrition is again augmented, and the
Body grows fatter and stronger every day, the whole Crasis of the Body is
meliorated; at last, all bad Symptoms cease, and the wonted and desired sanity
does then ensue.

Is it not most censentaneous to reason, that those Medicines, whether Vegital,
Animal, or Mineral, wherein the pure, balsamic, lively Parts, are separated by
Art from the more impure, grossy and dreggy Feculencies, are most effectual
Medicines to answer the Indications of this Malady? Certainly, the most refined
and depurate Medicines, the very Quintessences of Drugs, excel those that
retain in them their earthy and phlegmatic Parts, which are exhibited without
any Depuration, either by Digestion, in which is comprehended Fermentation,
Solution, Extraction and Putrefaction, or Distillation: which Preparations are
not easily performed, and therefore so much rejected. There is required no
small Labor and Diligence to the true Preparation of any good Medicine; but to
find out Remedies which do exactly quadrate with the Symptoms of any one
particular Distemper, is a work of extraordinary pains, study and scrutiny, and
is to be endeavored by none, but such as are resolute, fixed and indefatigable
in diging in the secret Mines of Nature. It Is reasonable, that those who seek
Jems and precious Minerals, should dig to find them; and what Jewel is
comparable to a duly prepared Medicine, effectual in the Cure of any one
Distemper? The several Remedies which I exhibit in a Phthisis or Consumption,
are most refined and purified Medicines, which indeed were not obtained without
much labor and industry.

Now in the sequel of this Discourse, it cannot be expected I should divulge
the Ingredients of which those particular Remedies are compounded, and the
manner of their Preparations, they being Elixirs, Tinctures, Powders, Extracts,
etc. adapted to every particular Symptom of this Malady, and not one
particular Receipt or Medicine, as some have ignorantly conjectured. Yet, thus
far I shall gratify the Reader, to acquaint him in what kind of Method I
proceed in these cases; which Method I esteem most Dogmatic, and I am sure, it
is most effectual and beneficial, how methodic soever the dull comun Method may
seem to those that dote upon it. I do likewise here declare, that the following
Method has cured several persons, when they have been given over by eminent
Physicians, after they had used their utmost endeavors for their Recovery. I
do also aver (that by Gods blessing) where the Distemper has not made too
great a procedure, and so far vitiated the Functions of the Noble Parts, as to
render the Parts themselves putrid, rotten and exulcerated; which does not
usually happen, till the Patient has labored a considerable time under this
Malady, or perhaps received prejudice from the unprofitable and pernicious
Medicines vulgarly exhibited; this Method will in a short time perfectly
restore them: and if they come in the beginning, the expected Success will
certainly ensue. To this purpose, as soon as I am sent for to a Patient
languishing under this Distemper, or laboring under any particular Symptoms
of it, I first inquire what Physicians he has made use of, and what kind of
Medicines he has taken? I comunly find a whole train of Galenic Medicines upon
the Table or Cupboards-head: I then adjure him, by his expected future health,
to meddle with none of them, but to throw away all those stuffing Electuaries,
Lohoch's, Eclegms and Bolus's contained in the Gally-pots; and likewise whole
Bottles of raw, cold, phlegmatic distilled Waters; also the thick, muddy,
pectoral Decoction, and the stupefying Narcotic Pills or Potions, and all
manner of crude indigested Drenches: for these are the only Medicines I ever
find, where a Galenist had been tampering. I likewise forbid him the use of all
salt Meats, all Food hard of Digestion; as Beef, Pork, Bacon, etc. and all
crude Sallads, Herbs and Roots; all Beer and Ale, unless now and then one small
Draught to gratify him; all sorts of Wine, unless sometimes a Glass of good
old Malago, qualified with the Yolk of a raw new laid Egg, which I allow but to
some, in some particular cases. The Diet I prescribe him is Capons, Chickens,
Veal, Lamb, Rabbits, Partridge, and such like easily concocted Flesh, but to be
eaten in a small quantity once a day; at other times Water Gruel, Milk-pottage,
Rice-milk diluted with a proportionate quantity of Water, and such kind of
Spoon-meat which is soon assimulated: and to gratify a Patient, we permit him
to eat Jellies of Trotters, Calfs-feet, Hartshorn and Ivory, tho they signify
little in reference to strengthen or nourish, as is vulgarly credited. His
common Drink is either Milk and Water boiled, or a Ptisan which we order for
him to drink of constantly; if there be no looseness, a Glass of Mead now and
then is safely permitted.

As for the Therapeutic and Medicinal Part, if we find the Vesicles of the
Lungs obstructed, which causes difficulty of breathing, we then exhibit some
Doses of a curious flesh-colour'd Powder, dissolved in a fit Vehicle; which
Powder is so penetrating, that it immediately opens those grand Obstructions
and soon removes that-straitness of Breast, and Astmatic shortness of Breath,
which very much afflicts the Patient: and to qualify that thin, salt,
corroding Liquor, which creates a Catarrh, falling upon the Lungs, with a kind
of tickling upon the Aspera Arteria and Larynx, and fretting the Lungs, we give
a few drops of a Golden Tincture, mixed in an apposite and proper Vehicle;
hereby that Juice or Liquor which is secerned by the Glandules of the Throat,
and not distilled from the Brain, as the stubborn Galenist would have it, (the
contrary being evidently demonstrated by some late ingenuous Writers) is
qualified, and the Catarrh stopped: But if this has already proceeded farther,
and fixed upon the Lungs an inveterate Cough, very troublesome and painful; we
then give several Doses of our grand Antiphthisic Elixir, which being
constantly taken, according to order, methodically with other Medicines ordered
for other Symptoms, will gradually abate the Cough, and give speedy ease to
the Patient.

For the Fever which usually attends a Phthisis, which is one grand and
wasting Symptom, I prescribe an Antifebrile Essence or Extract, which soon
quells that spurious Fermentation or Ebullition in the Blood, and consequently
takes off that heat which afflicts the Body, and more especially predominates
in the Palms of the Hands and Soles of the Feet. But when the Body is, by a
continued accumulation of vicious Particles in the Blood and Juices, rendered
lean, the Blood being fraught with them, becomes depauperate, and Nutrition
hindered, the Members of the whole Body impoverished and emaciated; we then
exhibit our grand Antiphthisic Elixir, with a penetrating white alkalisate
Powder, and a restorative red transparent Liquor, of which we order the Patient
to drink freely and frequently. By which Method, we seldom miss of the expected
issue and success; for those male-figur'd Corpuseles are abforb'd and licked up
by our white Powder; all manner of Obstructions opened by our brisk sprightly
Elixir; and Nourishment highly promoted and augmented by our restorative
Liquor. If a Diarrhaea or looseness attend the other Symptoms, which
oftentimes proves very dangerous, and quickly reduces the Patient into a weak
condition; we do not presently bung it up with binding restringent Medicines,
which are comunly, but perniciously given; but we order such Medicines as
immediately correct the sharp freting Humor, and the looseness cease of it
self; we use a sweetning or edulcorating Mixture, and a corrected red Powder.
We have several other safe and effectual Medicines, appropriated to other
smaller Symptoms and lesser Accidents, which occasionally happen in this
Malady. But these being the most remarkable Symptoms, and the mentioned
Medicines the strongest Hinges on which our Practice in this Distemper hangs;
it is not now requisite to nominate the lesser Symptoms, or our less valuable
Remedies. We shall therefore refer the Reader to our Observations, cited in the
sequel of this Tract, for a more full Narration of our Method, and a
Confirmation of the efficacy of our Medicines. But this I have in short to
premise, in vindication of our Method, which is, that all our Medicines do more
exactly answer the three grand Intentions of Physic, than any other Medicines
in the World ever yet found out. The three grand Intentions are, to cure cito,
tuto and jucunde, quickly, safely and pleasantly. As to the first, I can safely
say, that whereas consumptive, Phthisic and emaciated Men and Women, have been
kept under Cure a whole year, taking the cold, mortal Julebs, the insipid
refrigerating Snail and Milk Waters, Medicines devoid of all Life, Spirit or
Energy; and the puddle Water, or thick Pectoral Decoction, or clogging,
stuffing, obstructing ^ohoch's and Electuaries. I say, when they have taken all
manner of these kind of Slops that can be invented, and be continued a whole
year in such a Method, without the least benefit or amendment; the very same
persons have, by our Method and Energetic Medicines, been restored in less than
one quarter of the time, to perfect Health^ witness the subsequent Observations.

As to the second grand Intention, I dare upon my oath avouch, that there is
not one Medicine I use but what is so safe, that a Child of a month old may
take it without any prejudice. And tho they are pure, refined, volatile,
etherial, subtle and penetrating Medicines; yet they are as innocent as Mothers
Milk: and to satisfy the incredulity of any, I will at any time take twice the
quantity my self, of any Medicine that I exhibit to any Patient. I likewise
challenge the whole World to accuse me, of having ever given one Grain of
Physic to any particular person, whereby there ensued any apparent prejudice.
But that the trite comun Method is dangerous and destructive to thousands, is a
matter of no great difficulty to prove.

As for the third Intention, I must needs declare, that no Medicines in the
World can possibly be pleasanter, than those I mentioned. And although in the
vulgar Method, such sulsom, nasty Medicines are prescribed, that the Patient
loathes the very sight and smell of them, and by taking them, his Appetite is
quite obtunded, and a continual nauseating and aversion to all Food and Physic
too attends him; nay, besides vast quantities of filthy Potions which he is
compelled to gusle down, and the bitter-sweet, maukish Electuaries, and
strong-scented Pills which he is forced to swallow frequently, at the very
thoughts of which, his Stomach rises; yet besides all this, he must, and that
by all means, have a foetid Issue running upon his Arm or Leg, whereby those
Members, especially the Arm, are much weakened and emaciated, the Matter and
Steam which reaks from it while dressing, is enough to give a Horse a vomit,
the Arm or Leg in the mean time is galled, sore and inflamed; all which, if it
would any way conduce to the Patients recovery, might be dispensed with, but we
never find any success attend these formal Prescription; only the Doctor
resolves to prescribe something for his Fee, hit or miss; and thinks the most
probable way to hit, is to imitate the comun Vogue of Physicians: whereby
likewise he shall show himself to be a Methodic and Dogmatic Physician, because
his Bills forsooth upon the Apothecaries file, do exactly agree with the
fashion and custom of other Prescribers, and so he passes for an Able Man, a
Man of excellent Judgment; when all this while what he prescribed is nothing
but that which any one may read in Sennertus or Riverius's Praxis. Thus the
Patient is to no purpose tormented, and that extensive, noble, and improvable
Faculty of Physic is imagined to have arrived at its Ne plus ultra, and these
rare Doctors have hoarded up every inch and scrap of it in their profound
Noddles, witness their learned Bills in the Apothecaries Shops. But on the
contrary, our Medicines are so pleasant and grateful to the Stomach, that never
any Patient complained of them, neither do we ever prescribe those
unprofitable, painful Issues and Setons, etc.

That which the next occurs to our Consideration and Enquiry before we relate
our Practic Observations in Consumptions, is to examine the Cause of this
Distemper; which if we a little explain, the manner of the Operation or our
Medicines, will the better be understood.

The immediate proxim Cause of those Affects which appear in Consumptions
tending to Exulceration, says Riverius, is a sharp eroding Humor flowing in
upon the Lungs, or generated in them.

The Renowned Franciscus De Le Boe Sylvius in his Praxis Medicinae, tells us,
That a Phthisis or Consumption proceeds from some Vitiated Lympha falling down
upon the Aspera Arteria, and so in time Affecting the Lungs.

Both which Op^nions are much what the same, and tho I am unwilling to thwart
or oppugn the Sentiments of either of those worthy Authors, yet I shall
endeavor to search more narrowly, and enquire whether the true original Cause
of this Distemper may not more probably be somewhat yet unexplain'd by the
above cited Authors. I am apt to believe that the cause of the sharpness and
eroding Quality of this Humor is yet in the dark, and consequently the true
Cause of the Distemper as latent as before. It is an easy matter to say Pains
in the Head, Belly, Limbs, and other Acute Dolours, proceed from a Humor, as
Vulgar Physicians express it; but this is only to stop the Mouths of the
Inquisitive Patient, when he inquireth after the Cause of his Malady.

That which I have to offer to the perusal of the unbyassed Reader concerning
the Cause of the Disease we are discoursing of, is this:

When God first made Man, he gave him Temperamentum ad Pondus, or such an exact
Temperament, that his Body would have been perennial, and have remained as
vigorous and spritely to the extensive duration of perpetuity as it was at its
first Creation, had he continued in that State, but when he by his folly had
revolted from h^s Maker, he justly reduced him to a State of Mortality; not by
immediately altering the Crasis or Constitution of his Body, but by mixing a
variety of ill figured Particles inimical to the texture of a Humane Body, with
that Air which he must necessarily receive into his Lung and Blood, and also
with that Food from which he must expect his Sustenance; and thus these
Particles find shelter in our Bodies, some of them being received from our
Parents, and so hereditary; others afterward imbibed from the Air, and from our
own Nutriment; these were some of the Effect, of Gods Curse for our wilful
Rebellion: It is from these Particles that our Juices are vitiated, the Vessels
of our Bodies obstructed, its Organs impaired, the whole Crasis of the
Microcosm reduced to an Ataxy, and the Genuine Functions of Nature diverted,
and hereby a Thousand Maladies accost a Humane Body. For as there are several
sorts of these Particles differing in Figure and Magnitude, some of which
impregnate the Air at some Seasons in some places, and also inhabit some kinds
of Diet; and other shaped Particles, either bigger or lesser ones, swim about
in the fluid Air at other Seasons in other Places, and are multiplied in some
other sorts of Food: So variety of Diseases are hereby created, the Symptoms
differing according to the Number, Shape, and Motion of these several sorts of
Particles, when they praedominate in the Humane Body. Thus from a great
quantity of some Particles heterogeneous to the Particles of the Humane Blood,
or to the several Pores which Nature has formed in the Body for Secretion,
several great Disorders arise; when from few of the same, smaller
Indispositions have their rise and origin; sharp pointed, pungent, crooked and
hooky Particles vellicate the Membranes, cause Acute Pains, and are difficultly
removed, while the smoother ones glide about with more ease, and are sooner
exterminated; some are bigger in magnitude, and apt to create Obstructions,
especially when their shape is not adaequate to the several pores of the Body
destined for Secretion, and the small Ductus's, some sticking and glutinous
Particles of the Blood are linck'd in with them, and so great Obstructions
made; while the lesser Corpuscles cannot so much injure the parts; likewise
those that are violently agitated in the Blood cause greater Ebullitions, and
consequently do more mischief, when those that are more dull and slow in Motion
cannot hurry the Juices about with that velocity, and consequently not hurt so
much: For instance, There are some Particles which often affect our Bodies
which are Tetrahedic or Pyramidal in Figure, somewhat large in Magnitude, but
slow in Motion; these we call Frigorific or Cold Particles: which when our
Bodies are exposed to a great company of them, they sometimes enter the Pores
of the Body, and join themselves with the serous or phlegmatic Particles of the
Blood, and are then secerned by some of the Glandules, and thrown off by the
Emunctories of the Body, either upon the Pallat into the Nostrils, or upon the
Lungs, whence Catarrh's, Coryza's and Bronchus's do proceed. Sometimes the
Particles quite close the Pores, hinder Perspiration, by not permitting Nature
to expel other unwelcome Particles which were before in the Blood, and which
she continually thrusts out that way; which Particles when pent in by their
pricking Points, corroding Angles, or Velocity of Motion forthwith cause
Inflammations; and end in Quinsies, Pleurisies, Reumatisms, Empyems, Fevers,
or other Acute Maladies. That there are such Particles as these, and that Cold
is no Negative, but a Positive Quality, is evidently enough demonstrated by
Gassendus in his. Epicurean Philosophy, and by our own Countreyman Dr.
Charleton in his Philosophia Epicuro-Gassendo-Charletoniana, and likewise by
the Honorable Robert Boil the Mirror of this Age for Learning and Sagacity:
That these Particles do not always injure the Body by Obstructing the Pores,
and hindering Perspiration, but likewise by entering the Body, and uniting
themselves with the Serum or thinner part of the Blood, is manifest, because we
often experience the Body to be injured by Cold, when only one part has been
exposed thereto, and the whole Body besides enjoy a free Perspiration; as for
instance, let a Man put his Foot or any other Member into cold Water, where I
am sure a good number of these Frigorific Particles float, especially in
Winter, and continue it there for some, considerable space, and in the mean
time let the other parts of his Body perspire, being kept as warm or warmer
than at other times, yet he shall receive apparent prejudice from this
Experiment. For either a Cough, Running at Nose, Hoarsness, or some other
Symptoms, shall convince any one that he has got a Cold, as the vulgar
express it. There are other Particles of a quire differing Nature, viz.
sphaeric or round in Figure, exile or small in Magnitude, and swift in Motion;
these we call Calorific or Hot Particles. The chief Seminary of these Particles
in Unctious Matter, as Oils, Grease, Fat, and Sulphurous Things. That Hot and
Cold Particles are the Seminaries of several Diseases is to me very
demonstrable, but besides these there are certainly numerous forts of Particles
of different Figures.

Now this Hypothesis is so far from being a fois;ted Fiction of my own, that
although it was never yet prosecured with that strict scrutiny and diligence as it
might deservedly have been, yet it is that which many of our later Authors
drive at: For what reason can we give why one Distemper is Epidemic at one
time, another at other Seasons? But because the Air at those Seasons is fraught
with swarms of such contagious Particles as are the banes of those dire
Pestilential Griefs, as our Exquisite Dr. Sydenham declares in his Learned
Treatise of Acute Distempers. Mr. Boil also seems to be a Strenuous Abettor of
the Doctrine of Particles in his Corpusculorian Philosophy; and the Famous Dr.
Willis is a great Friend to this Hypothesis (tho I must confess he favors the
Doctrine of the Five Chymic Principles) in his Pharm. R^^ or a Treatise of the
Operation of Medicines upon Man's Body: Whence have Emetics, Diuretics,
Diaphoretics, Cathartics, Hypnotics, etc. their various Effects upon the Body,
but from their consisting of Particles of various Configurations? What
occasions those cruciating pains in the Gout, but some of the more Austere
Particles of Claret or pungent Corpulcles of some other ingested Matter
sticking to the Nerves or Tendons, and so pricking their tender Fibers? The
Phenomenon of many more Distempers might be thus solved. It is agreed upon by
all our Modern and Ingenious Philosophers and Physicians, That all Smells are
made by the small Effluviums of Bodies, and distinguished by their differing
Figures whereby they affect the Olfactory or Smelling Nerves, and cause
Sensation; See Boil of Colors.
That Colors arise from nothing but the different Reflection of Light,
according to the Position and Configuration of the Particles that are visible
on the superfice of Bodies affecting the Optic Nerves: That Tastes are
discriminated by nothing but the differing shapes and figures of Particles in
Meats and Drinks, and things offered to the Gust, and striking the Organs of
Taste differing ways.

Thus an Acid or Sour Taste proceeds from exceeding sharp Particles pricking
upon the Nerves destined for Taste, as in Vinegar, the Austere Taste is when
those Acid Particles are blunted and made more obtuse by the union of some
grosser Terrestrial Particles with them; as in Claret, etc. It is also granted
by some of our best Authors, that the Spirits, Boyle's Skeptical Chemist.
Sulphurs, Salts, Phlegm, and Earth, extracted from Bodies, and received for
Principles of mixed Bodies, were never praeoxstent in those Bodies from which
they are extracted, but are only the Particles of Bodies artificially reduced
to that form and fashion by the force of Fire: How do Pearl, Coral, Crabs Eyes
and other Alkali's sweeten the Blood, as we commonly tell the Vulgar they do?
not from any intrinsic dulcifying property in them, but by their absorbing and
licking up those sour and unwholesome Particles mixed with the Blood and
Juices; for we find by common Experiment, that an Alkali will unite it self
with an Acid, and closing in with its hooks, it will obtund its sharpness and
pungency; as may be seen by the mixing of Salt of Tartar with Spirit of
Vitriol, and likewise if you Distill Coral, Pearl, Crabs Eyes, or almost any
Alkali with the sowrest Vinegar, it will utterly deprive it of allits
sharpness, and make it an imsipid Liquor, merely by licking up the Acid
Particles that gave it that sour Relish.

Then if Colors, Tastes, Smells, and other supposed Qualities, which daily
affect our Senses, if the Operation of Medicines on Humane Bodies, and the Cure
of Distempers, be all performed by Particles of sundry shapes, who will deny
that the Basis, Source, Fountain, and Minera of whatsoever Diseases at any time
insult over the exquisitely fabricated Humane Body, is to be attributed solely
to the differing Figures, Mixtures, Motions, and Magnitudes of Particles?

From hence it is evident that since the Fall Man is continually obnoxious to
some Distemper or other, and his Body never free from some or other of these
unwelcome Particles; yet the most robust Constitutions, and those that are
careful to secure their Health by forbearing those Meats that are most fraught
with these Particles avoiding that Air that abounds with them, and preventing
those External Accidents that may put them into violent Motions in the Body, I
say these persons are less prejudiced by them than others. Thus the Distempers
which accost the tender Bodies of Infants proceed from some Male-figured
Particles affecting them; for Infants are no more secured from the Influx of
such Corpuscles, than Bodies of greater bulk and maturity.

The very Seed whereof Infants are generated, is not exempted from all manner
of Heterogeneous Corpuscles, neither is that Liquor that nourishes, the Foetus
in the Womb abstracted from whatsoever Corruption; the Air, Food, and Body of
the Mother imparting several of these contaminating Effluviums; and when the
Embrio becomes a perfect Foetus, and extricates it self from the close
confinement of it is Mothers Womb, the number of those Particles is augmented,
and these hereditary ones are soon visited and accompanied with adventitious
ones; every mouthful of Air and drop of Sustenance contains in it some Seminals
of future Maladies; unless either Nature by her own natural Evacuations, or
else some of her Handmaids, Ministers or Auxiliaries, I mean Physicians, by
proper, safe, and adapted Remedies, banish and expel them: For tho Nature for
the most part does throw off these troublesome guests through her proper
Emunctories with the Excrementitious Parts unfit for Nourishment; and this
successively as fast as they enter the Body; yet often times, especially in such
delicate Bodies, Nature cannot but be too impotent to engage with them all;
being frequently diverted by some external Accidents and Irregularities, from
performing her expected Functions; hence several Heterogeneous Particles throng
in upon the poor Babe, and affect it according to their Figures, Motions, etc.
and if special care be not taken in applying fit Remedies, the Disease soon
surpasses the Skill of the ablest Physician to cure it.

They Seminalities of all Diseases consisting in some kind of Particles,
Consumptions must proceed from a particular sort, or perhaps more than one sort
of Inimical Corpuscles affecting the Lungs, so that the prime and original
Cause, which is nevertheless the immediate Cause of a Consumption, is here more
than probably demonstrated; for that a Phthisis or Consumption proceeds from
some Particles either Vitiating or Impeding some Functions of the Body is
evident from the contagion and spreading Quality of the Disease, and from its
being Endemic.

There is no one Distemper belonging to Man's Body (the Plague, Pox, and
Leprosy excepted) so contagious or catching as a Consumption; for we see
oftentimes, if a healthful, lusty, vigorous Man marry a Consumptive Woman, he
shall hardly live with her many years without some Symptoms of the same
Distemper in his own Body: Nay if we will believe Credible Authors, the wearing
the Clothes of Consumptive Bodies, drinking after them, or sitting near them,
and so drawing in some of their Breath, has been the occasion of several
persons falling into this lingering Malady; and which way this can be imagined
to be done, unless the Doctrine of Particles be admitted, I cannot conjecture.
This therefore (by the way) may caution us how indiscreetly those persons act,
who permit young Children to lie with old or consumptive persons, and how
dangerous and destructive it is to the Bodies of those tender Creatures. Those
Morbific Particles which swarm in the Diseased Bodies of Consumptive Persons,
wherewith their very Breath is contaminated, and which fly out through the Pores
of the Body in perspiration, do enter the Bodies of those who do accompany
them, and so create the same Effects in their new Tabernacles. What other
Reason can be alleged why this Distemper should be more frequent and endemic
in some Countries than in others, but because those Particles which occasion
it, Dr. Sidenham De Morbis Acutis.
nfluence some particular Climate more than others; being some malign Steams
from the Earth or Sea, or else some Venomous Effluvia brought by the Wind from
some remote parts of the World. It Is by these pernicious Particles that the
Noble Ferment of the Stomach is depraved and turned into another spurious
Ferment, and hereby the Foundation of the Distemper is first laid; for no
sooner is this unparallelled Ferment of the Stomach vitiated, but the Nutritive
Juice receives such different Alterations from what it should be, as that it is
deprived of its Balsamic Nourishing Faculty: For the Chyle being vitiated in
the Stomach, becomes the Seminary of this Disease, which being transmitted,
thus corrupted and depraved, into the other Digestions, draws them likewise
into consent, and so vitiates one Digestion after another until the Disease it
self appears in its full dimensions and latitude of Symptoms. It is by these
spurious Particles that the Succus Pancreaticus, or Pancreatic Juice, is also
vitiated, which is another step to this Distemper; from hence likewise the
Chyle becomes Crass and Viscid, and cannot pass through the Glandules of the
Mesentery; which Glandules are by Nature instituted for Strainers to Se^^^^
that Liqoor from its Foeces or Excrements: Hereby these Glandules become hard
and knotty, as it is manifest in the Diffection of Bodies defunct of this
Malady; so that now only the more thin and serous parts of the Chyle are
transmitted into the Thoracic Duct, and thence to the Heart; hence the Blood in
time must needs be depauperated for want of a supply of better Chyle, and
hereby a Marasmus or Consumption must needs ensue. It Is from some of these
Mortal Particles that all Rheums and Catarrhs have their origin, and that a
continued Catarrh does at last produce a Phthisis and Tabid Consumption is
confirmed by the woeful Experience of Thousands, who at first slighting this
small primary Symptom, it has quickly terminated in a Cough difficult enough
to Cure. That a Catarrh is created from the mixture of Frigorific or Cold
Particles, which Particles are very destructive to Man's Health, is evident,
because upon the taking of great Cold, a Rheum or Catarrh does most usually
ensue, as likewise a Cough and Hoarsness; this may caution us to endeavor to
avoid Cold, as very destructive to Humane Sanity; for these cold Pyramidal
little Bodies, mixing themselves with the more thin and serous parts of the
Blood, are by the endeavors of Nature to free the Blood of what is
Heterogeneous or Dissimular to it, thrown off upon the Glandules of the Throat;
this falling upon the Larynx already alienated by the in jury of Cold, is
sometimes turned into a copious Mucous Matter frequently expelled by Coughing*
But if the Layrnx happen to be debilitated through a continual Defluxion thereof,
then it falls upon the Lungs where it perverts the Alimentary Juice of that
part, turns it into a putrelaginous corrupt Matter, which as wormed up by the
force of Coughing, still increases as fast; so that at length fretting upon
the spongy substance of the Lungs, it creates an Ulcer in the Lungs, and hereby
renders the Distemper for ever Incurable. Hence we gather how dangerous a thing
it is to neglect to seek a present Remedy for a Catarrh or Defluxion of Rheum,
which being neglected, frequently throws the Patient e're he is aware into the
profound Lake of a confirmed Tabes: We may likewise hence take notice how
ridiculous the Opinion of the Galenists is concerning the Cause and Origin of a
Catarrh, viz. That it proceeds from Vapors ascending from the Stomach, which
being condensed by the coldness of the Brain, Distill through the small Channel of
the Pallat down the Windpipe to the Lungs; for if we consult Anatomy, we sall
find that the structure of those parts is such as can never admit of any
Defluxion or Distillation of Rheum from the Brain, as is exquisitely manifested
by that Eminent Physician Dr. Richard Lower in his Dissertatio de Origin
Catarrhi, at the end of his Book, De Cord; besides we deny that Vapors arise
from the Digestion of Meat in the Stomach, so as to reach the Brain; for as
soon as the Stomach has received its Food or Pabulum, its upper Mouth or
Orifice is immediately shut, and the Aesophagus closes it self together, so
that no Vapors can pass it. Innumerable are the Absurdities which attend this
Opinion of Vapors; for then no sooner would the Meat and Drink be taken into
the Stomach, but the heat and moisture would forthwith send up Vapors; we
should thereupon be constantly troubled with Catarrhs; also the most sound,
strong Stomachs, whose heat is lively, would certainly always breed Catarrhs,
because of sending up most powerful Vapors from the Liquld Parts of Food: Also
in Cold Winter, from the forcible injury of the cold Air working upon the
Brain, and causing a cold Distemper there; we should never be kept free from a
Catarrh: Not to say what a constant dropping would there be at the Pipe of the
Alembick the Nose, enough to fill a Receiver in a little time, and to make
every one go with one hung at his Nose. Also it would follow that all
Defluxions of Rheums should have but one taste, and that insipid too, because
Vapors, from whatsoever things they may ascend, yet when they are condensed,
become Elementary simple Water: Whence therefore according to their Doctrine
should the variety of Consistence and Tastes proceed; that one should be salt,
another sharp and fretting; one thin, another more thick? So that this Doctrine
of Vapors is on every side beset with Difficulties and Absurdities.

I might now at large explicate how and which way these Particles, Enemies to
Man's Body, do predominate over, and oft-times conquer several noble Functions
of the Body; but the necessity of contracting my Discourse within the limits of
a brief Tract will not permit so great a Digression: The cause of this grand
Evil being thus explicated, it follows that those Medicines are most rationally
and dogmatically used, which consist of such Particles as are most contrary and
opposite in Figure to those injurious Particles which are the bane of this
grief; or such that are so figured as that they may absorb and swallow up the
Morbific Particles by linking their Hooks with the Angels of the pernicious
Particles. They must likewise be penetrating, otherwise they will not reach the
Distemper, nor be nimble enough for their desired prey, but if a brisk
penetrating Medicine, consisting of such shapes as are mentioned be exhibited,
the Particles of this Medicine, will like so many little Ferretts pass into all
the smaller Vessels and narrow Passages, and rout the Enemies out of their
holes: Such as these are the Medicines which I have already mentioned.

Having proceeded thus far, it might be expected I should treat more fully of
the Secondary Causes of this Distemper, and likewise discourse of the
particular Symptoms of it; as likewise the kinds and sorts of Consumptions,
and their particular differences; also the Signs, both Diagnostic and
Prognostic, but this being a Work besides our present Design, we shall refer
our Reader to those Authors that have wrote concerning them, till leisure will
permit me to write a more full and particular Discourse of this Malady; which
perhaps I may hereafter do if God spare life and health. Therefore now to
evince and demonstrate the truth and reality of what he have asserted
concerning our Method of Curing this Distemper, and the effectual Virtue of our
Medicines; I thought it necessary to publish these Observations, which are no
Fictions of my own, I being able to produce sufficient Testimonies to assert
the reality of every one of them, and will readily do it to satisfy any
scrupulous or incredulous person.

Observation the First.
THe Case of Mr. Obrian being very Remarkable, and differing ways related, it
will not he here amiss to give the Reader a faithful account of all the
particular Circumstances of it, which was as follows:

About the middle of April last, after I had Cured several persons of
Consumptions, two of which had some Relation to the Court, His Majesty came to
be informed of this my success by His Royal Highness, who had first had
Intimation of it; whereupon his Majesty being immediately willing to satisfy
his Royal Curiosity in this thing, Ordered me to attend the Court, and desired
that Worthy and Deserving Gentleman Colonel Oglethorp (then altogether a
Stranger to me, tho since my very good Friend) to find out some person about
the Court in a deep Consumption, for me to make an Experiment upon; whereupon
after some search the Colonel heard of Mr. Kennedy Obrian a Gentleman of the
Guards, who had been languishing above a year, in no Capacity of performing his
Duty, and was never expected to be seen upon the Guards again; being so
impotent and infirm, that he could hardly stand or walk; extremely wasted and
emaciated, perplexed with an inveterate Cough, and a constant Tickling Rheum, a
continual Wheazing and Shortness of Breath; and cold, faint, frequent Sweats,
with a burning Fever attending all these Symptoms; his Urine was high
Colored, without any Sediment, he constantly complained of a great straitness
and oppression at his Breast: While in this Condition he had consulted three
Physicians successively one after another, but received no apparent Relief or
Benefit; in these direful Circumstances, and while attended with all these
discouraging Symptoms, he was brought before the King, his Majesty examined
his Condition, and was soon satisfied that his Distemper was a deep Consumption
which Distemper was then legible enough in his Looks and Countenance. I being
then present, was ordered by his Majesty to undertake him, and to endeavor his
Cure; the Nobility that were there looking upon him as a Dying Man, and deeming
it utterly impossible, I should ever recover him, admired at my readiness to
undertake him; and some of them dissuaded me from ventring my own Credit in
undertaking a person so probably irrecoverable; however, tho in deed I could
not but be doubtful of his Cure, his Condition being so apparently disperate,
yet because His Majesty was so graciousin condescending to take notice of me,
and had ordered the Patient to be brought to White Hall on purpose to gratify
his Royal Pleasure, I thought I could ^ot refuse to undertake him; besides His
Majesty's Command obliged me at least to endeavor his Cure: and hereupon I
resolved to do my utmost: I then took him home with me to my House in the
Country; and the first thing I prescribed him was our Antifebrile Extract,
mixed with some of our White. Alkalizate Powder, and made up into Pills,
because he chose to take it in that Form; of these he took Six Night and
Morning, whereby his Fever, which is called the Hectic, in three days time
very much abated; I still continued to exhibit the same Medicine, because I
found his Strength and Spirits were most wasted by the continuance of this
Fever; and because I hoped when this troublesome Symptom was removed, the
others would yield with less Reluctance; in a Weeks time his Fever was quite
gone, his Temper appearing to be as moderate as a healthful Man's; by this I was
encouraged to hope his other Symptoms would shortly disappear as well as this;
to which end I prescribed him every Night some drops of our Grand Antiphthisic
Elixir in a proper Vehicle: likewise ordered him every Morning a Glass of good
old Malago with a new laid Egg, without any suspicion that this would occasion
a return of his Fever, this Fever not proceeding originally from heat, or the
taking of hot things, but from the mixture of some putrid Particles with the
Blood, whereby a spurious Fermentation or Ebulition of that Crimson Liquor is
created; the Diet I assigned him was Chickens, Rabits, Veal, Lamb, and Meats of
easy Digestion; his ordinary Drink was our Restorative Liquor, now and then
allowing him a Glass of Ale; by this means I perceived he gathered strength,
for by the help of our Grand Elixir his Cough gradually decreased, and the
Tickling left him; his Muscles now began to plump, and Calves of his Legs to
rise, and he was supplied with a continual addition both of Strength and Flesh
every day: The shortness of his Breath, and straitness of his Breast was now
hardly perceivable. To finish and perfect this Cure, I prescribed him Three
Doses of our White Alkalizate Powder every day, to be taken dissolved in a
Glass of our Restorative Liquor; hereby the residue of those malign Particles,
which remained in his Body, were absorbed and licked up; he continued ten days
to take these Powders. So that in five Weeks by the Blessing of Almighty God he
was perfectly restored to his former health; he was now able to walk and run,
jump and ride, and was fit for any kind of Exercise; in so much that all that
saw him admired at this so great and so sudden Alteration; he being thus
restored beyond expectation. I first brought him to Colonel Oglethorp's House,
who not a little surprised, rejoiced at his, speedy Recovery: We then, went to
Windsor (the Court being then there) to persent him to the King, and to prevent
suspicion that he was only patched and not perfectly Cured, the Colonel
resolved to make this Experiment, he walked a Mile or two in the Park at
Windsor, as fast as he could well go, after that to the Ferry, to wait on the
Duke of York, who was then going to London, designing to take Coach on the
other side the Water; from the Ferry the Colonel sent Mr. Obrian to the Castle
on a Message for the Duke; pretending great have, Mr Obrian being ignorant of
the Design, and imagining the business to be of extraordinary moment and
consequence, did run very swiftly to the Castle, and back to the Ferry without
resting, which is computed two long Miles; immediately after this, he was
presented to the King in his Majesty's Bedchamber, his Majesty being then not
perfectly recovered from a Fit of Illness; the Colonel did there acquaint his
Majesty what Method he had taken to try whether be was sound; and his Majesty
did hereupon declare himself fully satisfied, and in several kind Expressions
did manifest his Royal Favor to me.

It Is now half a year since Mr. Obrian was Cured, and he still continues in
perfect Health, and performs his Duty upon the Guards, tho some have
maliciously reported, he afterward relapsed and died; which is so contrary to
all appearance of Truth, that he has hardly been indisposed since, tho he lost
a Considerable Quantity of Blood, not long ago by a Wound which he received in
a Quarrel. He is likewise ready to testify the Truth of what I have here
Related; and not only he, but Hundreds that were Eyewitnesses of his
deplorable and desperate Condition when I first undertook him. Thus I have
concisely Related the whole Story.

Observation the Second.
THe next Case which I design to relate, is a Cure very lately performed upon a
Person of Quality at Paris.

On the 15th of September last I was sent for to Paris to visit a Person of
Quality there; and tho I was somewhat averse to the thoughts of so tedious a
Journey, and unwilling to leave my Patients here for so long a time, yet the
urgent persuasions of a Person in England, whom I esteem and honor, together
with the promise of a very considerable Reward, prevailed with me to go: the
Person I went to was about five and thirty years of Age, a Man of a Melancholy
Complexion, who had about two years ago been visited with a Quartan Ague, for
which he made use of various Remedies to no purpose, only now and then upon
taking a good Quantity of the Pulvis Patrum or Jesuits Powder, he would miss
three or four Fits, but it always returned, and that more violently than
before; at last he being weary with tampering, resolved to let it have its
Course; and take nothing more to prevent it: thus his Ague continued to afflict
him every third day, till a full Year and a Quarter, from the time that it
first accosted him, was expired, and then it went off of it self. But in this
time his Juices were so vitiated and his Blood reduced to that degree of
Sourness, that a worse Distemper succeeds his Ague; for now Myriads of
unwholesome Particles are accumulated in his Body, whole Troops of Malign
Corpuscles are now concatenated and linkt together in every Vein, Artery; and
Nerve; whereby he became extremely debilitated: and that which indeed much
contributed to, and was no doubt one great occasion, of this vitiated Crasis
and habit of Body (besides his Ague) was his excess of drinking, which he had
accustomed himself, to, both before and at the beginning of his Ague. He found
now an ugly Cough increase upon his Lungs, with a constant ^aintness and Decay
of Spirits: and whereas he was wont to be cheerful, and easy on his
intermitting Days, during the Continuance of his Ague, he is now constantly
uneasy; his Appetite to his Food is quite obtunded, and a sensible decay of
flesh daily atttends him; he was likewise Afflicted with a Looseness, which
sometimes was very Immoderate, he made abundance of Water, and had a Diabetes
upon him for 10 Weeks before I came to him; he perceived himself very Hot,
especially in an Evening, about the Hands and Feet. He spit very much, which
was sometimes yellowish and discolored; he had frequent Sweatings, especially
toward Morning, which much wasted and debilitated him; these Sweatings were
occasioned by nothing but the strenous endeavors of Nature, to thrust forth
(her Enemies) those Venomous Particles through her Sluices the Pores of the Body:
so a Diabetes or Profuse Pissing, that often happens in this Distemper, is
occasioned by Natures endeavor to expel those Morbific Particles through her
Fludgates the Reins; so likewise a Diarrhea or Looseness is the striving of
Nature to wash them away by the Latex or Serum, and send them forth through the
Guts. He had made use of several Eminent Physicians of Paris, who had frequent
Consultations about him, but from all their Remedies he obtained no Relief what
they had exhibited I know not, he having nothing left by him but an Aromatic
Electuary and the Relicts of a Linctus of Oil of Almonds, mixed with some
Pectoral Syrup. In these Circumstances I found him languishing at his
Countrey-House, whither he had retired for the benefit of the Air, tho he
received but small relief by it: I resolved to take what course I thought might
be most speedy and expeditious for his Recovery, the time I had to stay with
him being very short, my business at London in the mean time being neglected,
and I having promised a sudden return to several Patients there. I therefore
first prescribed him our Golden Tincture, of which I gave him once in twelve
hours a considerable Dose in a Glass of our Restorative Liquor I likewise gave
him Four Doses of our Restorative Flesh-coloured Powder every day, and once in
three days I ordered a Dose of our Red Powder for his Looseness; in five days
his Sweatings and Diabetes cease, in eight days his Looseness left him, and his
Fever vanquished; then instead of the Powders I prescribed two Doses of our
Grand Elixir every day, and a Pint of a nourishing and strengthening Gelly (not
of Trotters or Calves Feet) every Morning: His constant Drink was our Red
Liquor, and sometimes a Draught of Goats Milk was allowed him, his Strength now
excreased, and his Appetite became sharp, his Blood and Juices were renewed,
and laudible: After this I precribed a Balsamic Pectoral Essence, and an
Aetherial Tincture; all which Medicines answered my Intentions exactly, and
were exhibited with greater success than I ever expected: for in eight days
after I came to him, he was very brisk and cheerful, finding himself in much
ease; he went then with me in his Coach to the City of Paris, conveyed me to
the University, where several Ingenuous Scholars expressed their joy at the
hopes of his Recovery, and were every amicable and courteous to me: from thence
he conducted me to the House of a Nobleman, where several of his Friends and
Relations met him, and were not a little elevated at the great presumption and
strong confidence they had of his future Health, seeing him in so fair a
prospect: In three or four days after this, he went with me from Paris to
Versaile, and honored me so far, as to show me the Splendour and Glory of the
Kings Palace. Some few days after this he was able to Hunt, and found himself
more refreshed than tired with the moderate Exercise of Riding. I had not been
quite a Month with him, but he was to all apprearance perfectly recovered,
having not one bad Symptom upon him; and since my return to London, by a
Letter from his own hand I am informed of the continuance of his Health. Thus I
have briefly related this Case, and the reason why I inserted it in this place,
there being several o there Cures hereafter mentioned which in the order of time
preceded this, is because this came more fresh to my Memory while scribbling;
neither is it a matter of any moment, to be so unnecessarily curious or exactly
methodic, as to pen these Cures down in that Order which they were performed in.

Observation the Third.
THe next memorable Case that occurs, Is of a Gentleman in Leicester Fields,
who by an intemperate Course of Life, and immoderate Drinking, fell into a deep
Consumption; a few Weeks ago, he sent for me from my Lodgings in the Pall Mall.
I found him very low and weak, having been confined to his Bed for above three
Months, and having a very sore Cough, with no small Fever, spitting an
extraordinary quantity of fetid yellow Matter, at least a pint every Night;
besides this he had profuse Sweatings, with an excessive Looseness; by all
which Mortal Symptoms he was reduced to a mere Skeleton, only his Bones were
wrapped in skin; he had not strength to sit upright in his Bed, nay he was so
feeble that he could not turn himself; before I came he had advised with three
Galenic Physicians (one of which was my grand Enemy and Backbiter) who after
several Consultations, prescribed variety of Medicines, as I perceived by the
Apothecaries Shop upon the Table in the Chamber; there being all sorts of
Nauseous Mixtures, Syrups, and strong Electuaries, with which the Nurse was
ordered to cram him, almost every moment: But at last these Physicians finding
their Remedies ineffectual (as who could imagine they would prove otherwise)
were forced to leave him, and passing sentence upon him, they gave him over;
likewise limiting his time, they said it was impossible he should live above
three days. I finding him in this Condition, had likewise no hopes of doing him
good, judging him in no probability of living many days. I therefore refused to
meddle with him, acquainting his Friends and Relations that I deemed his Case
very desperate; but yet no denial would satisfy their urgent desires of my
undertaking him, earnestly beseeching and entreating me, protesting by all that
was sacred and dear to them, that they would abundantly gratify me whether he
lived or died, if I would but prescribe something for him, and only try my
Skill upon him; he himself likewise was restless till he saw me, and was
possessed with so strong a fancy I should do him good, that no Arguments
could dissuade him from that his settled Opinion: I alleged that my
undertaking would be a voluntary throwing of my own Reputation at the Stake,
and if he should die under my hands, which in all probability he would do, it
would prove so great a Reflection upon me, that my Enemies would hereby have
some ground to Censure and Back-bite me; but at last the constant urgency of
their desires, and the commiseration I had to his Condition, overbalanced this
my Objection, grounded on nothing but my own Interest: I ventured to give him a
Dose of a very safe Restorative Medicine, tho I expected little or no success;
the Neighboring Apothecary who had compounded the Medicines according to the
Prescriptions of the former Physicians, hearing that I had exhibited something
to him, very pleasantly laughed at and derided me, because I prescribed for him
after such able Physicians (which in his Apprehension were little
god-a-mighties) had given him over. This Apothecary having no small spleen
against me, because I prescribed to my own Apothecary, presently run to his
adored Doctor, one that constantly prescribed to his Shop, and told him I had
been there, and ordered something for him that night. Whereupon the Doctor, as
I am credibly informed, expressed no small joy, not doubting but he should now
have advantage enough against me, heartily wishing (as it is easy to
conjecture by these Circumstances) that the Patient would die under my hands:
But it seems the event proved otherwise; for the next Morning a Messenger came
to my House at Brumpton, desiring me to hasten to him, and that he longed to
see me. When I came, I found him strangely revived, whereat all his Relations
were exhilerated and elevated with joy above measure or expression; this
encouraged me to proceed in prescribing for him, I repeated a Dose of the same
Medicine the next Night, which indeed was nothing but a Mixture of our Grand
Elixir, and some drops of our Golden Tincture in a Glass of our Restorartive
Liquor; the next day I found him still better, to the confirmation of our joy,
and no small discontent of my Enemies, especially the Censorious Doctor and
Pragmatic Apothecary, who were continually listening and inquiring concerning
our success. I now ordered him to drink freely of our Restorative Liquor, which
being a very pleasant Drink, much pleased him; of this he drank a Quart or
three Pints every day: I continued him in this Method for three Weeks, in which
time he gradually gathered strength, tho but slowly, yet in a Months time he
was able to rise and walk about his Chamber; his Sweatings continued still in
some measure, and his Looseness was not gone. I then ordered him our altering
Red Powder, and another pleasant Qualifying Medicine, which quite took off the
cause of his Looseness in ten days; his Sweatings also ceased. All this while
his Cough troubled him, tho not with that vehemence which it did before; it
being much easier and his spitting not so abundant, I now prescribed a dose of
our Golden Tincture to be taken every four or five hours in the Restorative
Drink. In eight or nine Weeks after I first undertook him, he being able to
ride, came to my House to see me, and can now both walk and ride about his
occasions; having an indifferent habit of Body, tho he will never be perfectly
cured, there being an Ulcer in his Lungs, which by reason of the constant
motion of that part in respiration is rendered incurable; yet by the help of
our Medicines he may probably live several years. He still continues in a
Method of Physic under my hands, and I believe will so do to his dying day, so
that I can not boast of this as a perfect Cure, yet I thought it necessary to
relate it, it being as undeniable an argument to evince the true virtue and
efficacy of our Antiphthisic Medicines, that they will patch, preserve, and in
some measure restore a Man, when reduced to a Condition beyond all hope, as
well as perfectly restore those that make use of them in the beginning of this
Malady; yet I must needs here confess that this Gentleman was in the worst
Circumstances of any Patient I ever undertook that lived. If any question the
truth of this Relation, upon their desire I will show them the Gentleman, who
with all his Relations, Friends, and Acquaintance, will attest the verity of
what I have here faithfully related.

Observation the Fourth.
A Gentleman's Son in the City of London, about Ten years of Age, of a
Melancholy Complexion, Mr. John Etherson an Attorney in Sithes-lane.
and thin Habit of Body, Weak and Infirm from his very Cradle, having been
sensibly Consumptive about three Years, had an extreme Cough, and was much
emaciated; but his Parents consulting a very eminent Physician a near Relation,
Dr. Demon in Covent Garden.
who advising him Change of Air, and some particular Remedies, did in a great
measure restore him; but he afterward returning to London relapsed, and his
Distemper seized him more violently than before; the same Worthy and Ingenious
Physician was again Consulted, who prescribed for him the same Remedies which
formerly r^^eved him with the change of Air, but the expected success did not
ensue; for his Cough increased daily, insomuch that at last his Fits of
Coughing were so frequent and violent, that he had hardly respite to recover
his Breath, but was black in the Face, and almost strangled several times in an
hour; yea at last such was his Condition, that whatsoever he had eaten or drank
for almost three Weeks time, was forced up again by the Motion of Coughing; he
spit abundance of White Viscid Elegm, which was very troublesome to him, by
reason it was tough and roapy; he had a continual slow Fever, frequent Sweats,
his Spirits were very low; in fine, he was much debilitated and emaciated: the
mentioned Physician, whose Learning I honor, whose Person and Works I much
esteem and value, was so Ingenious as to tell his Parents, he thought his
Distemper to have got so great an Empire over his Body, as that it could not be
routed; at least, by any Remedies that he knew of or had experienced.

His Relations were much discouraged when the Doctor gave him over; but the
tender Affections they beared toward him, made them still inquisitive after
some means, either to prolong his Life, or recover him: hereupon they resove^d
to leave no Stone unturned in pursuit of such a Design. It happened ^^out his
time that the Cure of Mr. Obrian was just perfected, the rumor of which, in a
few days after I had presented him to the King, came to their Ears; at which
they did not a little rejoice, and with all expedition went to my Lodgings to
enquire for me; but I was then in Devonshire, being called to a Person of
Quality in that Country, who then labored under the same Circumstances; but my
stay was not long there, for leaving my Apothecary with him to administer what
I prescribed; I came post to London; after I had been two Nights with him, at
my return to London, they brought the Child to me in the Condition and
Circumstances already mentioned; the Mother with Pathetic Expressions of her
Affection to him, and with Tears in her Eyes, related to me how his Distemper
gradually came upon him, and what means had been administered; beseeching me to
take all possible care of her Jewel (for so she called him) and to use all
imaginable endeavors for his speedy recovery; which I promising to do, advised
them to take Lodgings for him somewhere near my House, both by reason of the
Air, and because I might see him often; he was accordingly placed at little
Chelsey, where I attended him, and administered what I thought most requisite:
The first thing I prescribed for him was a Dose of an Essential Balsamic
Extract, which he took Night and Morning in the form of a Bolus for five days
together, which soon gave him much relief, in abating the violence of his
Cough; after this I ordered him three Doses of our White Alkalisate Powder
every day in a Draught of our Red Restorative Liquor, and now and then a Dose
of our Grand Elixir, in an appropriated Vehicle; also some few Grains of an
Antifebrile Medicine dissolved in an apt Menstruum: His Fever by this means
was gradually removed, he now began to Eat and Drink with some kind of
Appetite, and what was ingested stayed with him; his strength increased, and a
better habit of Body attended him; after this I ordered a Mixture, compounded
of a rich Balsamic Tincture, Restorative Powders, and several sorts of
Distilled Waters, of which Mixture he drank freely every day: by all which
Remedies in five or six Weeks time his Cough was quite removed, his Fever
vanished, his Appetite was sharpened, Digestion facilitated, all the Concoctions
meliorated, his Strength and Flesh increased: In short, he now possessed a better
State of Health than he had enjoyed before for many years: I then restored him
to his Parents perfectly recovered, to their exceeding joy and comfort, and he
still remains vigorous and lusty at a School in Hertford-shire; and whoever
doubts of the truth of what is here exposed to public view, may if they please
inform themselves by Enquiry.

Observation the Fifth.
A Housekeeper in Arundel Buildings in the Strand, of about Forty years of
Age, of a Phlegmatic Temparament and Gross Habit of Body, complained a long
tome of a troublesome Stoppage at his Breast, which afterward terminated in an
inveterate Cough and an Astmatic Wheazing; he perceived constantly a Tickling
Rheum fall upon his Lungs, hereby he was rendered feeble and unfit for business;
in the Night he was always restless by reason of his Cough. Besides these
Symptoms, he every day, for some years together, voided a considerable number
of strange Worms when he went to Stool, for which he had taken several things,
but nothing proved effectual to destroy them; they were about an inch and an
half long, their color was white and glistring, they would contract and shoot
forth their Bodies with much Agility as soon as he voided them, but in a little
time they died: Thousands of these Animals came from his Bowels; which Worms I
conjecture were generated of the same putrid Particles that occasioned the
other Symptoms: In this condition, he came to consult me at my House at
Brumpton; I first prescribed him our Grand Elixir, and our
Flesh-coloured-Powder, which Medicines alone in three Weeks time perfectly
freed him from his Cough, straitness of Breast, shortness of Breath, and
Wheazing; his Worms likewise came from him dead in great numbers; after this,
to exterminate and destroy these Insects, I ordered him a Brown Powder, two
Doses of which he took every day, and likewise a particular Mixture every
Night, which within one Weed totally destroyed the very Seed of these Vermin.
Finally, because his Body was somewhat foul and gross, I ordered him a gentle
Emetico-Cathartic Powder, which scoured him both upwards and downwards, and
cleared him of all sorts of malign Morbific Particles; so that he now enjoys a
good measure of Health, free from all the abobe-cited Maladies.

Observation the Sixth.
THe next memorable obvious Case which I design to relate, Is of a poor
Herds-man in France. I being at the House of a person of Quality near Paris,
and the noise of my success there, striking the Ears of the Vulgar about the
Neighborhood; a Farmers Wife came and begged me to go with her to see a poor
Man at her House, whom they all judged dying: I yielded to her entreaties, and
went with her, but when I came to the House, I was denied entrance into the
Room where the Sick-man lay, there being two Father Confessors with him. I
heard them whisper together a great while, and looking through the Crack of the
Door, I saw one of them with a Dish of Cold Water in his hand, sprinkle the
Face and Body and Hands of the Sick Person; at last I heard one of them say to
him in Latin these words, Deus te absolvat, and ego te absolvo: Let God absolve
thee, and I absolve thee. I had now waited above an hour with much patience,
and when I heard the Absolution pronounced I thought they had done, but they
still continued with him; at which I told the people of the House the Man's
Condition being in all probability disperate, that their so long continuance
with him might prevent the applying of such Remedies as at that instant were
necessary, and so consequently occasion his death: whereupon I with some
violence thrust open the Door, and with some boldness, in Latin told these
Capuchin Fathers, That instead of saving him, they took the readiest course to
ruin him. They hereupon immediately left their Devotion, but told me, He was a
dead man, 'twas in vain to meddle with him.

The Condition I found him in was this, He having accustomed himself to lie
upon the ground to watch Cattle, hereby took an extraordinary Cold, the
Frigorific Particles from the damp Earth penetrating his Skin, and mixing
themselves with his Blood and Juices, occasioned these dire Affects; for the
endeavor of Nature to expel these numerous unwelcome Guests, was brought upon
him a great Looseness and Vomiting, a tedious Cough, attended with a desperate
Peri-Pneumonia, which is an Inflammation of the Lungs; insomuch that through the
violence of the Cough, the constancy of straining to Vomit, and the acuteness
of the Inflammation, he was often almost strangled; they had let him Blood
twice, which gave him some ease for the present; but the same Symptoms
returned more impetuously in some hours after Bleeding.

When I came to him his strength was almost spent, his Pulse very unequal,
sometimes scarce perceivable; the pain of his Breast intolerable, his Breath so
short, that those that saw him panting, judged him departing; his straining to
Vomit continued almost without ceasing: Considering all these Circumstances, I
expected not his life, but being willing to endeavor to ease him, I ordered a
large Cupping Glass to be immediately applied to the pit of his Stomach, which
no sooner was it fastened, but it kept down his Stomach, and so stopped that
Motion to Vomit: I ordered him half a score Glisters of nothing but Chicken
Broth to be injected one after another, so that as soon as one came away,
another was given him; hereby these pungent Particles in the Guts which created
his Looseness, were diluted and washed away, and his Looseness then ceased; I
likewise ordered him a Powder, which I successfully use in Peri-pneumonia's
Pleurisies, Quinsies, and such like Imflamations; continuing all this time the
Cucurbitula at his Stomach; all these Remedies succeeded beyond expectation,
for his Looseness being taken away by the Glysters, his Vomiting by the Cupping
Glass, and his Inflammation by the Powder, he was now in great Ease, tho very
weak and saint: I now prescribed a Cordial Mixture to refresh him, and a Dose
of our Grand Elixir, of which I happened to have a little Glass in my pocket, and
so left him; the next day I found him much cheered and revived, his Cough was
very easy which before was painful, and he spit a great quantity of thick
digested Matter with much pleasure. I ordered him to take more of our Elixir,
and prescribed another Mixture for him, and so left him in a very hopeful way
of Recovery; and tho in two days after this, I came from thence for England,
yet I do not much question but by this time he is perfectly recovered.

Observation the Seventh.
THis puts me in mind of one more Observation upon a Tradesmans Wife at Paris.
She was about Fifty years of Age; had been long troubled with an Astma and
extreme Shortness of Breath, with a gradual falling away of her flesh; these
Astmatic Paroxisms came upon her three or four times every day, in which Fish
coughed so extremely, that her Face and Hands were rendered black; I gave her a
little Glass of our Grand Elixir, and a few Doses of a curious Preparation of
Sulphur, ordering her to take twenty Drops of the Elixir every Night in a Glass
of warm Milk, and a Dose of the other Preparation every Morning in a little
Marmalade; and tho I stay there but five days after I had given her these
things, yet the day before I departed, she sent me a Gratuity, acquainting me
that she had not had one Fit of Coughing since the first Dose she took: and
that her Breath was strangely relieved: I ordered her to continue in the same
Method, and I hope by this time those perplexing Symptoms have quite left her.

A young Virgin likewise at Paris almost in the same condition, was relieved by
the same Medicines.

Observation the Eighth.
A Gentleman at Westminster a bout 36 years a Age, of a Choleric Complexion and
lean Habit of Body, had been long troubled with a Looseness and faint
Sweatings, was constantly hot aad feverish, he had little or no Cough, but was
much wasted and weakened; he came to me, and desired my Assistance in order to
his Recovery, upon which Request I ordered him to take a Dose of our
Antifrebile extract thrice a day in about six spoonfuls of an altering Mixture;
by which Medicines alone in twenty days time his Fever was wholly taken off,
his Looseness stayed, and his faint Sweats ceased; he is now become Strenuous
and Robust, and enjoys his former Sanity.

Observation the Ninth.
A Person in Covent Garden of a Choleric Complexion, about 30 years of Age had
for several years been de-clining in a Consumption, and was at last reduced to
little more than Skin and Bones; he spit great quantities of fetid yellow
Matter, and coughed almost perpetually, being very disconsolate about his
Condition, and having tried several Physicians to no purpose; he at last came
to me, beseeching me to undertake him; he told me he had taken several sorts of
Syrrups, Lohoch's, Eclegms, Balsoms, and Electuaries, but received not the
least benefit from any of them. I told him I expected not to cure him, because
the Matter he spit being faetid, argued an Ulcer in his Lungs, but I would
endeavor to give him ease, and preserve his life; to which end I prescribed
him a Correborating Confection of a Scarlet Color; I likewise ordered him
sixteen drops of our Grand Elixir every Night; and by this means in five Weeks
time, he was reduced to a good Habit of Body; his Cough was much mended, and
that which he spit not so discolored; he now became brisk and cheerful, and is
at this time in a probable way of living many years, tho I cannot say sound or
recovered.

Observation the Tenth.
A Tradesman at Lewis in Sussex having Married a Consumptive Wife; Mr. John
Warts Linen Draper.
after he had lived some few years with her, fell into the same Distemper; she
having consulted all the Physicians in those parts without any success, at last
yielded to the dire Symptoms of that Malady, and departed this Life; her
surviving Husband, not withstanding his being now freed from the Conversation
of her, whose Contagigious Body gave him the Infection, still declined: he
advised with an Eminent and Learned Physician in that Town, Dr. Benjamin White.
and likewise with an illiterate Pretender there; Mr. H. P.
but found no Apparent Relief from the Prescriptions of either; at last they
both gave him over, and he himself expected nothing but his last Enemy to seize
him; his Circumstances were such, that his Strength failed him, his Sleep had
left him, his Cough perplexed him, faint Sweats frequently attended him, his
Voice was very hoarse, and his Breast sore and straightened; his Breath exceeding
short, his Flesh quite wasted, his Countenance an exact Facies Hippocratica, so
that indeed he was hardly a Breathing Ghost, and far enough from a walking
Spectrum, being scarce able to stand: He being in this Condition about two year
ago sent for me to see him, an Empiric in the Town, that had been tampering
with him, hearing of it, declared, That if I ever set him upon his Legs (to use
his Expression) he would forfeit his whole Study of Books, which he said cost
him Ten Pounds; but how the Medicaster was out in his Prognostic's, the sequel
of this Observation will manifest; for the first Dose that I ordered him, put a
stop to all those dreadful Symptoms that before seemed to be the immediate
Messengers of Death and the Scene was now wholly inverted, for the next Morning
I found him cheerful and pleasant, who before was pining and dejected. His
Relations were now filled with hopes and presumption of his life; who before
had dispairingly resigned him* I proceeded in prescribing the same Dose for him
the next Night, and accordingly the ensuing Morning I found him still more
revived and strengthened; I now ordered him a Suffi^us compounded of several
Engredients in a gross Powder, a little of which I ordered to be strewed upon a
Chafing Dish of live Coals, and with a Funnel I ordered him to receive the
Balsamic Fume or Smoke that ascended, into his Lungs with his Breath, covering
the Coals with the great end of the Funnel, and holding the little end in his
Mouth, and so by Inspiration draw in, and receive those wholesome healing
Particles: I ordered him the use of this twice a day, from which he soon found
sensible benefit; I likewise ordered him a sort of small Ale to be brewed with
several Ingredients, and a Pectoral Balsamic Mixture: By the frequent use of
which Remedies, I had so far patched him in one Month, that I might have
lawfully challenged the Ten Pound Library; I should then have been furnished
with Culpeppers English Dispensatory, his Midwife, his Legacy, his Translation
of Riverius, and perhaps his Translation of Veslmgius's Anatomy; I should
likewise have had Salmon's English Dispensatory, his Synopsis, and his Doron
Medicum, and almost a hundred more English Receipt Books, out of which I might
have picked Recipe's enough to cure all the Horses in England*

For now the Patient had gained such a measure of Strength, that he was able to
walk about the Town, and ride three or four Miles at at time; his Cough was
much mitigated, his Breath lengthned, and his Breast eased; his Muscles plumped
and enlarged, his Rest and Sleep composed, his Appetite sharpened: Himself and
Relations not a little transposed with joy and hopes. I still ordered him
Medicines of the same Nature, in which method he persisted a Week or two
longer, and then found himself so invigorated, that he thought it needless to
take any thing more, and therefore desired me to desist; hereupon because he
might not suspect that my Design in continuing him in that course and method,
was to squeez his Pocket, as many Patients are apt to mistrust their Physicians
of such a design, I accordingly desisted; and tho I knew there was an absolute
necessity of his persisting in this course and method, his Lungs being
putrified and exulcerated, required constant and continual patching; yet such
was my temper, that I hated to expose my self to the censure of such base
pecuniary Intentions: But in five Weeks after this, that which I foresaw and
expected, happened; for by his riding upon those Downs, and walking out in the
cool Evenings, such Bodies being very obnoxious to the injury of Cold; he
relapsed, and all the former Symptoms returned: I was now again sent for, and
entreated to use my skill and endeavor to restore him; to which purpose I
repeated the former Remedies with some small alterations, which again so far
recovered him, as to enable him to walk abroad or ride as before: But still the
Purse being disgusted, grumbled at parting with Fees, and paying the
Apothecaries Bills, so that the Patient being possessed that he should do very
well without the constant use of those Restoratives which before kept him
alive, dismissed me a second time, and instead of living according to
prescription, nothing would please his Pallat but Salt Beef, Pork, Red
Herrings, Neats Tongues, Bacon, Cabbage, and the most unwholesome Food he could
invent, he always phansied; particularly one Night he Invited some of his
Relations to Supper with him, when sitting up very late, he crammed his Stomach
with a large quantity of Salt Roast Beef, where with his Blood was immediately
surfeited, and the next Morning a high Fever enflamed his whole Body, and now
all the cited Symptoms return with impetuous violence. I was now a third time
sent for, but too late; for when I came I found him panting upon the Bed,
unable to stir or speak: I ordered him a high Restorative Cordial, but all in
vain, so that in a few hours, his Breath being so extreme short, and his
Spirits and Strength quite exhausted, he died; his Relations were all satisfied
that his days were shortened by his own neglect.

From the time of my coming to him to the time of his Death, it was a whole
year; all which time he was kept alive merely by Art, and he might probably
have been alive to this day, had not his carelessness (I would not willingly
mention Covetousness) been his ruin. If any mistrusts the truth of what is here
mentioned, his surviving Brother and other Relations now in the same Town
were Eyewitnesses of every thing here related, and cannot but attest it.

Observation the Eleventh.
THe Case I have last mentioned re-minds me of a Cure since performed upon a
Consumptive Body in the same Town, which was as follows: About Sixteen Months
ago a Shopkeeper in Lewis, Mr. Edward Burten-shaw Woollen Draper.
Twenty three years of Age, of a brisk sanguine Complexion, by inordinate
heating his Blood, drinking while hot, and too suddenly cooling himself, got an
extraordinary Surfeit, which terminated in a very Acute Pleurisy. He was then
at his Fathers House at New Haven, about five Miles from Lewis, whither he sent
for Dr. White an eminent and ingenious Physician in that Town, who ordered a
considerable quantity of blood to be detracted from his Arm; but his Pleurisy
not being quelled by the first Lance, he ordered Phlebotomy to be repeated, and
took away several Ounces more from him; he was a third time let blood: At last
the Inflammation ceased, and the Pleurisy left him, but by the profuse quantity
of Blood, which he lost in so short a time, he was much debilitated, and that
Blood which remained in his Veins and Arteries was so depauperated, that it was
altogether unable to free it self from those Heterogeneous Particles it had
imbibed in the Surfeit; so that the Mass of Blood still remained impure, the
Concoctions depraved, and his Appetite obtunded; several altering Medicines
were judiciously prescribed, but nothing helped him, he still grew weaker,
fainter, and leaner, and instead of Agility, increase of Strength and Appetite,
a slow Fever crept gradually upon him, so that three Months were spent in
following the Prescriptions of this Physician, without any success (unless in
reference to the Pleurisy) at last a Neighboring Gentleman, Uncle to the
Patient, asked the Doctor his real thoughts of him; his answer was, That he had
no hopes of his Life, but did believe that he would die in a little time. I
mention this not in the least to reflect on the Doctor, but only to evidence
the apparent danger the Patient was in; hereupon by the desire of the Sick
Person, with the consent and advice of his Friends, Neighbors, and Relations,
I was sent for; I found him in a very deplorable Condition, and was the more
discouraged, because his Uncle told me that Dr. White (whom I knew to be a
Person of excellent Skill and Success) judged him desperate: His Pulse was very
quick, but languid; he had a great Catarrh and a very bad Cough, which came
upon him by Fits, in a most violent and impetuous manner; he was emaciated in
every part of his Body, and that which was the most discouraging Symptom, was
his Urine was almost as black as Ink: But notwithstanding all these
discouragements which might have justly deterred me from undertaking him, by
the prevalence of his own and his Relations Entreaties, I was persuaded to
endeavor his Cure: I ordered him a Mixture of some Drops of our Golden
Tincture and our Grand Elixir, in a proper Vehicle every Night, which soon
stopped his Catarrh; I likewise prescribed him three or four Doses of our
Flesh-coloured Powder every day to be taken in a Mixture prepared on purpose; I
also enjoined him to drink of our Red Restorative Liquor, with some Balsamic
drops in it; for his constant Drink, forbidding him the use of Beer or Ale; by
this method he was perfectly restored in five Weeks time: For his Water was now
reduced to a laudible consistence and its wonted color, his Flesh was much
increased; a fresh Color was now seen in his Cheeks, which before were covered
with paleness; his Fever was quite banished, and his Blood brought to a good
Diathesis; and that which is most observable, is that, tho he before had
frequent Fits of Coughing, and that with such vehemence, that sometimes he
could hardly recover his breath; yet from the time he took the first Dose I
ordered for him, to the final perfection of his Cure, he had but one of these
Fits, and that too was very merciful and moderate: He is now grown very Fat,
and remains brisk and lively to this day; as any jealous minded or scrupulous
persons may inform themselves by Inquiry.

Observation the Twelfth.
A Young Virgin of the same Town, who had strange Epileptic and Convulsive
Fits, which were conjectured to be the Effects of Love, was by the continuance
of these Fits reduced to a Marasmus, attended with a Fever and large
Sweatings; she was at last wasted to a perfect Skeleton, and had no Appetite to
supply Nature with Nourishment. The Empirical Quack-Salver which I mentioned in
the Tenth Observation, came and administered Physic to her, making use of his
blind Receipts, but without any success or advantage; for she found after the
use of his Medicines a violent pain in her Head, accompanied the other
Symptoms; when I first saw her I had little hopes of her life, but she found
such Relief by the first Dose I prescribed her, that I was encouraged to
proceed, which I accordingly did, and by keeping her in a strict method of such
Remedies as I judged exactly to answer her Malady, I perfectly cured her in two
Months, and tho when I first saw her, she appeared deformed by reason of
leanness, yet afterward she became a fresh colored beautiful Virgin; and she
now remains a living Testimony of what is here related.

Observation the Thirteenth.
The next is an Account of a Cure performed since my return from France, which
was thus:

An eminent Merchant in London, about Sixty years of Age, having been always
addicted to Catarrhs, being of a Phlegmatic Constitution or Temperament, upon a
great Cold acquired an extraordinary Catarrh which increasing upon him, created
a great soreness at his Breast, with a very tedious Cough, at last a Fever;
Faintness, want of Appetite, and a falling away of his flesh, accompanied his
Catarrh; he had all along used a Linctus of Oil of Almonds and Diacodium,
whereby he had formerly found benefit, of this he frequently licked, using a
Liquorish Stick, but he found not the same success as before; he was then
advised to take Mathews Pill, not by any Physician, he having been always
averse to a Doctor; this Pill having Opium in its Composition stopped his
Catarrh, but made him extreme Drowsy, and so clogged him up that he could
hardly breath. The use of which hereupon he left off, and Drank of the Pectoral
Decoction which he had made for him in the house, he having got the Receipt
from some old Woman or Receipt-monger; but his Catarrh returned and fixed a
hoarsness upon him: at last his voice was scarce audible, and all the mentioned
Symptoms were now at their highest Ebb; his Relations all persuaded him to
send for a Physician, he thereupon resolved to send for me. I being then in
France, but expected every day, he concluded to stay till I returned, and would
hear of no other; having a strong fancy I would cure him; at my return I went
to see him, and was discouraged at his Age; but finding his Case not apparently
desperate, I undertook him: I ordered him first our Grand Elixir in a Glass of
a particular distilled Water, with thirty drops of a Balsamic Tincture, which
dose the very first night gave him great ease and very much lessened that
defluxion of Rheum called a Catarrh. The next morning I prescribed for him a
large Dose of our Red Gelly, which was repeated for three or four Mornings;
after that he took a Dose of our Alkalizate Powder thrice a day in three or
four spoonfuls of proper Julap; his water now which was high colored, became
altered, and had a very good Sediment, his Cough and Tickling every day
declined, his strength increased, and by the continuance of this Method he is
now almost recovered; and notwithstanding his Age, being much mended both as to
his Cough, Tickling, Hoarsness, Fainting, Shortness of Breath, and whatsoever
Symptoms of the like Nature.

Observation the Fourteenth.
AT Tradesman in Southwark, about Thirty years of Age of a very Melancholic
Temperament; fell into a Marasmus, which was occasioned not by any intemperance
or disorder in living, his converse having always been among sober Persons, and
his course of life very moderate; but as it may probably be conjectured by some
particular passages and circumstances which I observed (by reason of which I
forbear to mention his Name) this Malady was occasioned by some Mental Dolor,
by reason of Crosses; it being most certain and observable that great
Intenseness of Mind arising from perplexing Cares, are very prejudicial to the
Sanity of Man's Body: He was much fallen away in his Flesh, troubled with great
Sweatings and Weakness in his Limbs, tho he had little or no Cough; his
Appetite to Food as well as his Strength and Flesh, was daily diminished: He
first advised with an ancient Physician in London, whose method and intentions
to recover him I will not censure, neither will I condemn the Medicines he
ordered him as ineffectual, yet so it happened, that after he had continued some
time under his hands, he resolved to leave this Physician and consult me; whom
when I saw in the Condition above described, I advise ^o take Lodgings at
Kensington, where by the constant use of our Restorative Liquor and our
Flesh-coloured Powder, he recovered in one Month, and returned to his own House
in a competent measure of Health; having acquired much Strength; and a very
keen Appetite: his Faintness and Sweatings quite ceasing.

Observation the Fifteenth.
A Person of Qualities Child, about two years of Age, had from its very Birth
been frequently surprised with Spasm's or Convulsive Fits, and was at last
hereby so much weakened, and emaciated, that it was not expected to live many
days; but after several Physicians had endeavored to relieve the poor Babe, by
prescribing it Cephalic Plasters to be applied to the Feet, Blisters to the
Neck and behind the Fars, Oil of Amber to anoint the Temples, Spirit and
Tincture of Castor, Spirit of Sal Ammoniac and Hearts horn, and Compound Spirit
of Lavender, to be taken in Black Cherry Water, with other things of the like
Nature, without any success or benefit; by some few Doses of our Antepileptic
Powder, one or Two Doses of our Brisk Elixir, not only the Fits left it, but
also the other Symptoms in a short time vanished, and the Child became as
healthful and thriving as if its tender Body had never underwent the rigor of
painful Spasms.

Observation the Sixteenth.
I Was lately called to another Child about the same Age, that fell unhappily
into the Rickets when it was but Six Months old, and was so cruelly handled by
this unmerciful Disease, that its Spine or Backbone was Inflected, its Breast
was sharp and straightened, its Legs crooked; it had a great Cough, difficulty of
Breathing, and a constant Looseness: and by reason of the Spinal Marrows being
affected, and the whole Nervosum Genus, according to Famous Dr. Glisson, an
unequal distribution of Nourishment is hereby caused, and certainly from an
(...), or improportionate Nutrition, nothing can result but extreme leanness
and poverty of Spirits; and although this Distemper be properly termed (...), The
Rickets, yet it is more than probable that a confirmed Rickets is a perfect
Tabes or Consumption; an Example of which is the present Case; for although the
original Malady was the Rickets, yet that this terminated in a Phthisis or
Consumption, the mentioned Symptoms are a sufficient Manifesto: The Parents of
this Child had consulted two or three Physicians, who prescribed an Issue in
the Neck, Glysters, Ligatures, Powders, Apozems, and a Diet Drink, Frictions
and Unguents; but all proved unsuccessful, the Cause being laid too deep to be
routed by these superficial Remedies; after this the Parents were desirous I
should try if I had any Medicines powerful enough to extirpate the Cause of
this Disease, whereupon I ordered for it some of our Balsamic Drops to qualify
its Cough, and a White Powder dissolved in Milk to facilitate Distribution; I
likewise prescribed a strengthening Unguent wherewith to anoinr its Back and
Breast, Belly and Joints, at least twice a day; and by the continuance of these
means, and the help of Nature assisting each other, it out-grew all those dire
Symptoms, and was in less than two Months freed both from the Rickets and
Consumption.

Observation the Seventeenth.
A Young Lady in the City of London, having an Hereditary Phthisis, her Parents
and Relations having been always addicted to this Distemper, and she likewise
from her very Cradle upon the least alteration of Weather, finding her Body
alter accordingly; in Winter Coughing and Spitting abundantly, the last Summer
got a great Surfeit, whether by eating Fruit, raw Sallads, etc. or by
over-heating her self in Walking, or taking Cold, I know not; but she hereupon
fell into a very desperate Condition, her Cough, which before was usually very
moderate in the Summer, was now suddenly become untameable; frequent Faintings
and Swoonings, great Sweatings, a constant pain at the Stomach, and an almost
intolerable pain in her Head, a Swelling in her Belly, difficulty of
Breathing, and a sensible decay of Flesh, all at once surprised her, I having
before cured a near Relation of hers, she forthwith resolved to cast her self,
into my hands without the least thoughts of consulting any other Physician
according to her request, I took her in hand, I found her very exact, strict,
and regular in taking what I ordered for her; and tho she always had an
Aversion to Medicines, tho never so pleasant, yet now being sensible of her
danger, and valuing the sweetness of Life, she relying on my endeavors, became
very punctual and observing, and accordingly both her expectation and mine were
fully answered, for by the use of our Scarlet Restorative Confection, our
Alkalizate Powder, our Balsamic Drops, and our Grand Elixir; she was in six
Weeks time restored to her wonted state of Health, and is like so to continue,
tho she must expect her Cough in some measure every Winter during her Life, by
reason it is Hereditary.

Observation the Eighteenth.
A Gentleman at the Court, that had a sore Phthisical Cough for many years,
spiting large quantities of foul discolored matter, complaining of great
shortness of Breath and Faintness, was relieved in six Weeks time by our
Corroborating Confection and Golden Tincture, and is now in good Health, and
ready to testify the same.

Observation the Nineteenth.
THere are several more Observations of the like nature which I could nominate,
but I hope these may be sufficient to convince any judicious unprejudiced
person of the Virtue and Efficacy of our Preparations. I shall therefore in the
Epilogue of this Tract only mention the Case of a Patient now under my hands,
to whom I was but last Week sent for to visit.

A Young Gentleman in Trinity Parish in Cambridge, who from a Child had been
inclinable to this Distemper, but then in a desperate Condition, hearing of my
success in these Cases desired his Father in Law, a Reverend Divine in
Cambridge, to Write his Case and send it me to know my Opinion of him, who
accordingly did it in the words that follow:

SIR,
THe Person is between One and Two and Twenty years of Age: He was from his
Cradle very Tender, and always subject to Catarrhs and Colds, and a Wheazing in
his Windpipe usually accompanied them when he lay in his Bed. He is of a
melancholy and timorous Nature, reserved and thoughtful, and his Mind seems
to have preyed upon his Body, for this later was always lean and emaciated; the
straightness of his Breast contributeth naturally to his shortness of Breath,
with which he is much troubled, especially when he stirs. A Cold seized on him
the last March, and with that, a great Cough, which has continued ever since,
and cannot be removed by any Medicines he has made use of. This hinders his
sleep in the Nights, together with the disturbance of his Spirits by
Melancholy Fumes. He is very Heavy and Dull in the day time, and yet he cannot
improve this drowsiness into a Sleep. After Dinner this Heaviness takes place
chiefly, and he finds his Head loaded and clogged: Then likewise he feels
Gripings and Gnawings in the hole of his Stomach, it is probable by reason of
Wind; for upon Belching he finds Ease, and so he does when he breaks Wind
downward: He can eat nothing but Flesh-Meat, as Mutton, Veal, Chicken, etc and
he finds that other things, as Broaths, disagree with him. He eats the former
with a pretty good Appetite, but he is ill allt he Afternoon ensuing. The
corners of his Mouth are broken out and are sore, and the skin of his Tongue
has been off, or his Tongue has been sore and tender, and very red ever since
his Cough seized on him. He is Hectical, and burns most toward the Evening,
but some part of the day he is also Chill and Shivering. The other
Circumstances of his Distemper are such as these, his Urine is high colored;
and comes from him always with a great Sediment. He is very Laxative, and goes
to Stool twice or thrice a day or more: He has had a Hoarsness ever since his
Illness, and of late it is increased: He is more lean and wasted in his Flesh
than he was before. The Phlegm that he raises is generally of a yellowish
color: His Limbs are weak and feeble, and he cares not for stirring from the
place where he sits. About a Month ago his Ankles began to swell, and they
continue to do so still at Night, and the Flesh is soft and dented, but the
Swelling goes down in the Morning.


I having read his Case, would not venture to prescribe any thing for him at
such a distance; upon which they wrote again to me to desire me to come down to
Cambridge with all possible speed; I immediately took Post, and when I came to
him, I found him in such a desperate Condition that I expected not his Life
three days; I acquainted his Father in Law and others with my Opinion, who were
satisfied that it was in vain to prescribe any thing for him; but the Mother
whose Affections were more than ordinary passionate toward this her only
Child, desired me to endeavor to give him some Relief: I being willing to
gratify her, prescribed for him some Drops of our Grand Elixir at Night, and
about half a Pint of our Red Strengthening Gelly the next Morning and Afternoon;
I stayed two days with him, forbidding him to drink Beer or Ale, and confining
him to Milk and Water. Before I left him, I found some small Amendment, his
Looseness which he had in a great measure when I came to him, was abated, and
he was somewhat refreshed; but yet i had little or no hopes of his living many
days: I returned to London, leaving the same things with them, which I ordered
them to give him: At my return to London I wrote to his Father in Law
acquainting him that I did despair of his Life, but for the satisfaction of his
tender Mother, from whom I was forced to keep my Opinion, I desired them to
continue him in this Method.

In Answer to my despairing Letter I had in three or four days this following
Answer.

SIR,
WE received yours, and thank you for remembering us; but when you say in the
Close there is very small hopes or probability of Recovery; you forget what I
told you: Those words have almost killed them both. I pray by pleased in your
next to add a Dose of Comfort, and truly there may be some reason for it, for
his Looseness and Cough are both much abated, and he sleeps far better than he
did, but is still very Hoarse and Dispirited sometimes, so that you must
speedily send him a Cordial; I hope your fears and depair of him will vanish,
and beyond your expectation he will get up again: However you have Sir some
Encouragement, seeing these Indications abovenamed are ceased, which is a
considerable progress; you have some ground to send him a cheering Word, which
I desire you would not forget, because he must needs see your Letter: I pray
write too morrow, if you can possibly, and order him what you think fit, suit
something to his present Temper and Disposition.

Sir, Nothing more at present, but that we wish you success in your
Undertaking, which if it prove prosperous; will be great Credit to your self,
and Comfort to Mr. L's Relations, especially to

Sir, Your Humble Servant J. E.


By this Epistle I was not a little surpised, the Contents of it being so much
beyond my hopes or expectation: they had before advised with the best and most
Learned Physicians of that University, but he found no benefit by all their
Prescriptions, yet at the very last, when all probability of recovery was past,
all hopes ended, and surprising Death expected, he found more Relief and
Comfort by these our Medicines, than by any thing in the World besides; which
has a little encouraged me to proceed, so that there shall be no means, care
or diligence wanting on my side, in order to his Recovery, much less expect.

I designed not to puiblsh this Observation, yet this small Amendment and
Progress toward Recovery, being so abundantly beyond Expectation, it happening
while the other Observations were in the Press, I ventured the exposing my self
to the Censure of Impertinence in relating it; which although the Young Gentleman
shall not recover (as I cannot believe he will) yet what I have here mentioned
concerning him, is as great a Manifesto of the real Virtue of our Medicines and
Efficacy of the described Method, as any of the preceding Observations.

From my House at Brumpton near Knightsbridge November 12th 1682.
FINIS.

