Loyalties Severe SUMMONS TO THE BAR of CONSCIENCE: OR, A Seasonable and Timely
CALL TO THE People of England, UPON THE, Present Iuncture of Affairs.

BEING An EPITOME of the several Praeliminaries, or Gradual Steps the Late
Times took to Their (never-to-be forgotten) RUIN, by Their Civil Dissentions,
through a needless Fear of the Subverting, Losing, and Destroying of Religion,
Liberty of the Subject, and Privileges of Parliament.

With a COLLATTERAL COMPENDIUM of Our Own, Exactly and Impartially drawn; Our
Follies and Extravagances Disclosed, and laid Open.

Together, With such Favorable Admonitions, and Timely Remedies, as will ('it is
hoped) Administer toward the Uniting Our Divisions. Composing Our Differences,
and Healing Our Breaches.

In Two Parts.

Discipulus prioris posterior Dies. Hor.

By Robert Hearne, Gent.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Milbourn; And are to be Sold by Randal Tailor, near
Stationers' Hall, 1681.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND MY MOST NOBLE LORD, John Lord Frescheville, Baron
of Stayeley, etc.
My Lord,
WHEN I consider upon what Treacherous Ground Our present State does stand,
through needless Fears, unnecessary Jealousies, and hot-brained Reflections, I
think it my Duty, and every Good Christian's to call out vigorously for a
helping Hand: And, To whom should we call, but to those Men, who have shown
Themselves serviceable on the like Occasion? To those Men, who have ventured
their Lives and Fortunes, to stem the Tide of Insulting Danger, which Our
Enemies drove forwards; whereof Your Lordship is undeniably One of the most
Eminent? Upon this Score it is, that I dare Affix so noble a Frontispiece to my
VVeak Endeavors: Upon this Score it is, I challenge so Honorable a Patron as
Your Lordship, who is a Known Example, and an Admired Encourager of Those, who
are truly Loyal to their King, and Sincere Lovers of their Country: Of which
Number, I profess my Self One; and therefore, am the Bolder to enter into Your
Honor's Presence, to implore Your Favorable Protection.

It was the Saying of a Learned Politician, and a much Esteemed Author; That to
write of Modern Times (or Men,) is a troublesome Business: All Men (says he)
commit Errors; few, having committed Them, will hear of it. Present Actions are
not with Safety related, nor are they listened unto without Danger. Well may
they be Reverenced, never Censured. Who puts them in Print, seeks after an
uncertain Glory, and exposes Himself to a certain Danger. Who leaves it to be
done by Posterity, reaps no other Fruit of his Present Labors, than the mear
Contemplation of a future, imaginary, fruitless Glory, etc.

BUT with his Leave; If every Private Man, is a Member of the whole Body
Politic, and consequently must bear a Share in the Public Good or Ill, as
every Part in the Indisposition of the Body Natural is sensibly touched; I say,
It is the Indispensible Duty of every Private Person, to endeavor the Healing
Public Breaches, the Composing Differences, and Removing all
Mis-understandings, which might disturb the Peace of the Government, and
obstruct the Common Welfare: Though with this Restriction, That he shall not
pretend either to Instruct his Prince; or, by prying into His Council, betray
the Failures, or derogate from His Authority-Poyal.

My Lord,

I HAVE Compiled this Short Essay, as a small Echantillon of my Love and Zeal
for my Country's Good and Peace; and have compared Times past with the Times
present, the several Revolutions of Our Present Affairs, with the sad
Catastrophe's Forty Years since; and, as near as may be, taken an Impartial
View of the various Methods, which led us to our Then Ruin; and, Similibus
juxta se positis, Surveyed our Own: And, I think, we may say with the
Heathen-Poet, Etas parenturn pejor Avis.

This little Piece I have thrown amongst many Others into the Public Treasury,
under Your Noble Protection, as a small Acknowledgment likewise of Your
Lordship's former Favors, which You were pleased to Confer upon me: Begging
Your Lordship's Pardon for This Presumption of Him, who is ever obliged to
Style Himself,

My Lord, Your Lordship's Most Obedient and Devoted Servant, ROBERT HEARNE.

Loyalties severe Summons TO THE Bar of Conscience: OR, A Seasonable and Timely
Call TO THE People of England, UPON THE Present Juncture of Affairs.
The First Part.
HAVING Acted a long and tedious Part in this World; seen, and been engaged in
Various, and Bloody Scenes; and being even grown Gray upon the Stage, I thought
I might be Excuseable, and that it would not be improper for me, if I undertook
to Acquaint the World with the several Transactions I have had Prospects of in
my time; a Map of which, I suppose will not be altogether Unseasonable in this
juncture; seeing the same Methods and Measures are taken and followed, that
brought upon Us the late Troubles; and in all Appearance the same or worse
Tragedies are going to be Played over again. Wherefore I think it is the Duty
of every True and Loyal Englishman, to warn, and put his Fellow Subjects in
mind of the Desolations, and Calamities the Nation Groaned under, in the late
Civil Wars; that We may so Regulate all our Actions and Resolutions, as that
they may only tend to Union amongst Our selves, and Obedience and Loyalty to
Our PRINCE.

THE Devastations and Ruins, the Effusion of Humane Blood, and all the other
sad Consequences of Domestic Broiles, are, alas! so well, and sensibly known
by this Nation, that it is altogether unnecessary to descant upon them; and
therefore, I shall Content my self with Tracing along the Pretexts, and Steps
that engaged, and led Us to Our Ruin and Desolation. This perhaps is but too
Seasonable at this time, when all seems ready for a general Combustion; and
that the Storm is seen coming on with that Rage and Fury, that whosoever shall
be any ways Instrumental toward his Countries avoiding ^^ will have highly
Obliged the whole Kingdom. And I am apt to believe the World will easily pardon
a Relation of this Nature, if it may in any wise Contribute toward the
Preventing of Future Evils: For if a Man, who has been in the most terrible
Tempest that even was known, wherein the most part of his Dearest Friends, and
Nearest Relations have lost both their Estates and Lives, and all have been in
the extremest Danger; nay, wherein the Captain himself Suffered, the utmost
Rigours of Fate, was brought to an unparalelled Tragical End, and the rest of
the Ship only Saved, as it were by a Miracle, and by the greatest Providence of
GOD: I say, if such a Man, who shall have escaped all these extremities, shall
come and tell me, That he sees the Storm gathering in the same Corner or Point,
Blown by the same Winds, and Hurried on with the same Fury; and that I shall be
inevitably Lost if I continue to Steer on my Course: I shall be so far from
being displeased with him, that on the contrary, I shall Value at that Rate the
Obligations I have to him, as to think my self never capable of equalling them
with Acknowledgements. I must Confess it would be a Vanity in me to Imagine,
that this Essay or Compendium can have so great, and good an Effect; yet I
promise my self it may be of some use, and perhaps a Means toward the
Reconciling Our Differences, and the making up Our Breaches, which, who ever
brings to pass, raises to himself immortal Monuments of Honor; and renders Us
as Necessary, and Helpful to Our Friends, and as Dreadful, and Formidable to
Our Enemies, as We have been of late Neglected, and Despised by both the One
and the Other.

I SHALL begin first with the Introduction to the late King's Miseries and
Necessities, which was the War the Parliament had engaged His Father in, with
the House of Austria, for the R^ry of the Palatinate; and which was left Him as
a Heavy Encumbrance and Mortgage upon an Estate; and finding His Exthequer
Empty, and His Revenues spent and drained, He was forced to take such Courses,
and Stoop to such Things, as He would not have done in another Occasion. His
Necessities were still increased by the War, He was not long after Engaged in,
for the Defense, and in the Behalf of the Huguenots of France; wherein having
failed of those timely and seasonable Succors from His Parliament, as He might
Reasonably have promised Himself, in a juncture when so great a Part, and
Branch of the Protestant Communion, as was that of France, lay at Stake: He
failed of that good Success, that a more ready and willing Relief might perhaps
have procured. The Factions now begin, and the public Ministers Censured.
This Furnished the Malcontents, and the Promoters of Sedition, with Pretexts
of Censoring, and Blaming the Conduct of those at the Helm, of Demanding the
Heads of some of the Ministers in Favor, and the Removeal of Others from all
Charges and Places of Trust.

THIS Bustle was Attended with loud Cries, The Bishops for introducing Popery.
and Detestations of Popery; and several were Accused of being Promoters, and
Abettors of it. The Bishops, and others of the Clergy of the Church of England,
were not free from this Aspersion; but were said to be of the Party, and joined
their Endeavors with those, who had a mind, and designed to set up the Roman
Catholic Religion in this Kingdom. This helped to nourish, and spread abroad
Jealousies and Distrusts, occasioned Distractions and Consternations, and gave
deep Root to Dissension and Rebellion. But these Promoters of Mischief did not
content themselves with Stigmatizing the Clergy, and the Chief Ministers of
State; for they endeavored to insinuate into the People underhand, that the
Crown it self was Popishly Affected; The Crown it self Popishly Affected.
and that it did favor, and encourage the Growth of that Religion; That it
Aimed at Arbitrary Government; Arbitrary Government, etc.
and that the Subjects were to be Deprived of their Privileges. The House of
Commons Daily found out New Grievances, drew up Remonstrances, Privileges of
Parliament Cried out for.
and Cried out against most of the Actions of the King and his Ministers, as
contrary to the privileges of Parliament. But notwithstanding all these
Artifices, and Contrivances to set the Nation on a Pare, they would never have
Gained their point, had they not found the Scots Aiming the same way; being
willing to be Instruments for the putting in Execution their Execrable Designs:
Whereupon they Invited them underhand into England. The Scots Rebel.
The Scots (a Hungry, and Poor Nation, ever ready to be upon the Wing on such
Occasions;) Accepted the Offer, came in Swarms, full of Hopes, and with fair
prospects of Riches and Booty: The King Raises an Army to Oppose them.
They Seized upon the best Towns of the more Northern Parts of England. But the
King having drawn a Considerable Army together, Marched to York to Oppose them;
and his Forces being much more Considerable than the Scots, would certainly
have Routed them, had they not Tampered, and Insinuated into the English, that
their Ruin would be certainly attended, or followed by the Oppression of them
themselves; and they once Subdued, the King would be enabled to use His English
Subjects as he thought fit; by which Intelligence and Correspondence it was
Evident, that the English had no mind to Fight, though their Army was much
Stronger than the Scots; A Treaty held.
whereupon by the Mediation of some Persons, a Treaty of Peace was begun, and
soon Finished; Wherein it was agreed, that His Majesty should Publish a
Declaration; whereby all should be confirmed that His Commissioners had
promised in His Name, that a General Assembly and Parliament be Held at
Edinburgh in a short time. And Lastly, that upon Disbanding their Forces,
Dissolving their Counsels, and Restoring the King to His Forts and Castles,
etc. The King was to Recall His Fleet and Forces, and make Restitution of their
Goods, since the Breach.

NOW, that which made the Scots so ready to undertake this Expedition, was not
only a prospect of Gain and Plunder; but the Fears they were in, of losing
their Darling, Presbitery, made them take Arms, and Spirited them into this
Rebellion: The King endeavors to introduce the Liturgy into the Kirk of
Scotland.
For the King in Pursuance of His Father's Design of Establishing the
Common Prayer in Scotland, as it was in England, did Endeavor to introduce the
Liturgy into practice in that Kingdom. But the Nobility and Gentry, having
since the first Reformation of Scotland from Popery, thrown out the Bishops,
and shared their Estates among them, by the Instigation of John Knox the great
Presbyterian, John Knox a great Presbyterian.
were afraid that if they were again Re-established, and Recovered their former
Power and Reverence; they would likewise quickly find the means of procuring
again their Ancient Estates and Revenues. For the preventing of which, they
thereupon spread abroad Discontents and Fears, foment Jealousies and
Distractions, and Engage the Clergy on their side; who were generally inclined
to Knox's Discipline, and the Sovereignty which they had for some time enjoyed
under the Government of Presbitery; The Lyturgy, and Episcopal Government
Termed Popery.
the Clergy Influence the People, and Terrify them with the Danger of Popery
(for so they Termed the Liturgy, and the Government by Bishops.) By these means
and pretexts, they allured the People into a Rebellion, notwithstanding all the
Care that was taken by those at the Helm, to prevent it; and the Confederates
entered into a Solemn League and Covenant, The Solemn League and Covenant.
and obliged themselves to a Mutual Defense against all persons whatsoever, not
excepting the King himself; and then they begun an Actual War; An Actual War
follows.
Raised Men and Money, Seized His Majesty's Arms, Magazines, Castles, Forts,
and Walled Towns; and all this was done for Conscience Sake. But to avoid
becoming Horrible, and Abominable in the Eyes of all the World, by being called
Traitors and Rebels, Tho Varnished with a pretended Design for Petitioning, etc
they Varnished, and Termed all these Preparations and Paces toward a
Rebellion, a Design of Petitioning their Sovereign. But the King not able to
bear His being Affronted at this Rate, does likewise Arm to Defend His Crown,
The King Raises an Army to go against the Scots.
and the Lives, and Estates of His Subjects here; and Recover the Rights and
Prerogatives they had Usurped in that Kingdom. But notwithstanding the Justice
of His Cause, and the Gallantry, and Vigor of His Army; when He came in Sight
of the Enemy, He was moved out of a Compassion, and a Desire to Save so many
Lives, both of His Loyal, and Rebellious Subjects, A Treaty is held a Second
time.
to Condescend to a Treaty; which He was likewise persuaded to, by some of the
English Nobility, that were Secret Friends to the Scots.

DURING this Treaty, the Factious Spirits of the Two Nations, had by Feeling
one another Pulses, found their Tempers to be so alike, and their Inclinations
so suitable, that they easily, and quickly agreed of the Measures for a future
Correspondence; and of the means of putting in Execution their Designs: Which
however would have been impossible for them to have Effected, had they had the
least Sense of Religion, Loyalty, Honor, and Honesty. But the Scots had no
sooner seen the English Army Disbanded, and the People Dissatisfied with the
Ill Success of that Expedition, than that (having Broken almost as soon as
Signed, The Pacification broken, and the Scots Raise another Army.
every Article of that Pacification) they Raised a New Army to Petition withal;
which they were Invited to, by their Brethren or Presbyterian Party here; who
Encouraged them to this Invasion, by assuring them, That the King was not in a
Capacity to make Head against them, nor could be without Calling a Parliament,
wherein they would be sure to find so many Friends in Both Houses, that nothing
should be done there, to their Disadvantage: Which proved but too True; for the
King having Summoned a Parliament, and proposed to them the Raising of Money,
for the suppressing the Insolence of the Scots; some of the Members began to
Question the Grounds, and Justice of the War, which they were Resolved to be
Satisfied in, before Moneys should be Raised. In short, the Scottish Party had
that Influence in this Parliament, as to put it to Question, Whether the
Grievances of the People, or the King's Supply should first be Considered? And
tho the King told that Parliament; That if they would Supply Him so, as to
Suppress the Insolence of the Scots, He would Acquit His Claim to Ship Money,
and give Satisfaction to their Just Demands: They growing still more sensible
by these Proposals of the Necessities the King was in, instead of making such
Returns as so Gracious an Offer merited: Voted, 1. The Clearing the property of
the Subject. 2. The Establishing the True Religion. And 3. The Privileges of
Parliament: and then fell into such Extravagances, that the Privy Council
Advised their Dissolving; The Parliament's Dissolved.
being assured the Heats of the House of Commons were so great, that they
intended that very Day to have Voted against the War with Scotland; whereby the
King would have been in a worse Condition, than before their Sitting. Yet
though the City of London refused to lend Money to the King; the Gentry
contributed indifferently freely, so that with their Assistance He raised a
Second Army; A Second Army raised by the King.
and having with much Difficulty, and the great Murmuring of the Presbyterian
Party, drawn them together as far as York; He designed to have Marched in
person to the Borders of Scotland: But the ill success My Lord Conoway had,
broke all His Measures, for Lesley had no sooner forced His passage over the
River Tine, and faced New Castle, where the King had reposited His Magazine of
Arms, and Ammunition, and His Stores of Provision for His Army; but that the
Gates were opened to them, they having more Friends than Enemies in the Town.
The Scots Declaration.
Hereupon the Scots declare the Intention of the Army to be, Not to lay down
Arms, till the Reformed Religion was settled in both Nations upon sure Grounds;
and the Causes, and Abettors of their present Troubles (that is Archbishop
Laud, and the Earl of Strafford) were brought to public Justice in Parliament.
Whereupon Twelve English Peers Petitioned the King for the Sitting of the
Parliament; Some Lords, and the City, etc. do Petition for the sitting of the
Parliament.
and the City of London, and several other parts of the Kingdom did the like;
all centring in this, that Nothing else could relieve the pressures of the
Nation. And now the King condescends to their Desires, and Summoned a
Parliament, A Parliament's called.
which instead of redressing Grievances, defending Liberty, Property, and Laws,
Trampled all things both Civil and Sacred under their Feet, and the People
found at length, that instead of the Arbitrary Government, they had been so
much afraid of, they had brought upon themselves the Rankest Tyranny.

THIS Parliament was no sooner met, than that they fell to Impeaching the Earl
of Strafford, Archbishop Laud, The Earl of Strafford, and Archbishop Laud
impeach't with several others.
several of the Judges, and other Ministers of State. But tho the Earl had been
forewarned of their Designs against Him; yet relying upon His Great Innocence,
and His Courage rendering Him incapable of Fear, He could not be persuaded to
withdraw till the Storm was over, least His Flight might be interpreted as
Guilt, and should blast His Sovereign's, as well as His own Reputation. Upon
this Impeachment He is Sequestered from the House of Lords; and likewise, His
Friend Sir George Ratcliffe is sent for out of Ireland, by a Sergeant at Arms:
In the mean time the Bishop of Lincoln, who was Prisoner in the Tower, is
Released, who had been Committed there for some dishonorable Speeches that He
had spoken of the King; and having endeavored by some indirect means to Appear
Innocent; He had been therefore Sentenced Ten Thousand Pounds Fine to the King,
Imprisonment in the Tower during Pleasure, to be suspended Ab Officiis and
Beneficiis, from His Bishopric, and the Profits thereof, and to be referred to
the High Commission Court, as to what concerned them. And likewise, Mr. Pryn,
Mr. Burton, and Dr. Bastnick, who had received a very just Censure for Writing
against the Bishops, and their Government (they being all Three Sentenced to
pay Five Thousand Pounds apiece Fine to the King, to lose their Ears in the
Pillory, and to be Imprisoned; which they accordingly Suffered) were now
brought in great Triumph to London; and December the Third, they presented
their Petition against their Prosecutors.

THEN the Commons fell to Voting Ship Money, with the Opinion of the Judges
thereupon, to be Illegal, who with Noy (then esteemed the Oracle of the Law)
had assured the King of the Legality of it; and a Charge of High Treason was
ordered to be drawn up against Eight of them; and they resolved to begin with
the Lord Keeper Finch. Petitions from the City against Church Discipline and
Ceremonies, etc.
About that time an Alderman, and some Hundreds of Citizens presented a
Petition, Subscribed by Fifteen Thousand Hands, against Church Discipline, and
Ceremonies; and a while after the House of Commons Voted, That the Clergy in a
Synod or Convocation, The Commons Vote thereupon
have no Power to make Canons or Laws without Parliaments; and that the Canons
are against the Fundamental Laws of this Realm, the King's Prerogative, the
Property of the Subject, the Right of Parliaments, and tend to Faction and
Sedition.

And hereupon a Charge was ordered to be drawn up against Archbishop Laud, as
the Principal framer of those Canons, and other Delinquencies; which
Impeachment was seconded by another from the Scotch Commissioners; Archbishop
Land impeach't, and sent to the Black-Rod.
upon which, He was Committed to the Black-Rod; and Ten Weeks after, Voted
Guilty of High Treason, and sent to the Tower: The Scots likewise, prefer a
Charge against the Earl of Strafford then in Custody, demanding Justice against
them both, Five Articles against Sir George Ratcliffe.
as the great Incendiaries, and Disturbers, both of Church and State; and Sir
George Ratcliffe (the Earl's Bosom Friend) had Articles also drawn against Him
to this purpose:

THAT He had Conspired with the Earl, 1.
to bring Ireland under an Arbitrary Government, and to Subvert the Fundamental
Laws, and to bring an Army from Ireland to subdue the Subjects of England. That
He persuaded the Earl to use Regal Power, and to deprive the Subjects of their
Liberties and Properties. 2.
That He countenanced Papists, 3.
and built Monasteries, to alienate the Affections of the Irish from the
English. That He withdrew the Subjects of Scotland from their King: And Lastly,
That to preserve Himself, and the Earl of Strafford, 4.
He labored to Subvert the Liberties, 5.
and Privileges of Parliament in Ireland.

THE Lord Keeper Finch was the next Person designed to be Censured; Lord Keeper
Finch Voted a Traitor.
and notwithstanding a Speech He made in His own Vindication, He was Voted a
Traitor upon several accounts; but foreseeing the Storm, to avoid the Danger,
He withdrew Beyond Sea.

THE House of Commons, having by these means removed their Enemies, were
preparing a Bill for a Triennial Parliament; Petitions procured for a
Triennial-Parliament.
to promote which, they procured Petitions to come from several Places, One
whereof was Subscribed with Eight Hundred Hands, aiming principally to destroy
Episcopacy; which the King took Notice of: One with 800. Hands.
and calling Both Houses together, tells them, Of their Slowness, and the
Charge of Two Armies in the Kingdom; and that he would Have them avoid Two
Rocks, the One about the Hierarchy of the Bishops, which He was willing to
Reform, but not alter; the Other concerning Frequent Parliaments, which He
liked well, but not to give His Power to Sheriffs and Constables; and upon
their Remonstrances against the Toleration of Papists; the King assured them,
The King protests an Aversion to Popery.
that the increase of Popery and Papists was extremely against His Mind; and
that He would use all possible means for the Restraining of it.

DURING the Five Months the Scots had Quartered in England, a Cessation having
been Concluded at Rippon; yet the full Pacification was reserved for London,
and the Commissioners of both Parties, fat there to hear the Demands of the
Scots, and to make Answer thereunto. The Scotch Armies great Charge 514128. l
9. s
Whereupon the Scots presented the great account of their Charges, which was
Five Hundred Fourteen Thousand, One Hundred Twenty Eight Pounds Nine Shillings,
besides the Loss of their Nation, which was Four Hundred and Forty Thousand
Pounds. This Reckoning startled the English Commissioners, The Loss of
Scotlands Charges 440000.
till the Scots told them, they did not give in that Account as expecting a
Total Reparation of their Charges and Losses; but were content to bear a part
of it, hoping for the rest from the Justice, and Kindness of England. These
Demands met with some Oppositions: However, Moneys were raised at the present,
from the City of London, for the supply of both the Northern Armies, as the
Parliament had done once before.

MUCH about this time, Four Members of the House of Commons delivered a Message
to the Lords, of a Popish Design of levying an Army of Fifteen Thousand Men in
Lancashire, and Eight Thousand in Ireland; and that the main Promoters thereof,
were the Earls of Strafford and Worcester.

THEN they fell to Accuse Sir Robert Berkly (One of the Judges about
Ship Money) of High Treason; Sir Robert Berkley accused of HighTreason.

The Act passed for a Triennial-Parliament.


and Committed him Prisoner to the Black-Rod. About the same time the King
passed that Act for a Triennial Parliament; and that they might know how much
He valued this great Favor, He told the Two Houses, That hitherto they had
gone on in those things which concerned themselves, and now He expected they
should proceed upon what concerned Him.

THE King likewise signed then the Bill of Subsidies; The Bill of Subsidies
likewise passed.
which so generally pleased them, that Sir Edward Littleton Lord Keeper, was
ordered to return the Humble Thanks of both Houses, to His Majesty at
White Hall. Archbishop Land Committed to the Tower for High Treason.
Presently after, the Archbishop of Canterbury having been Accused of
High Treason by the Commons, was Committed to the Tower: and now Episcopacy it
self was called in Question, and notwithstanding several learned and weighty
Speeches were made in the Defense of it; The Bishops outed from
Parliament-Power, Judicial or Temporal.
the Commons Voted, that No Bishop should have any Vote in Parliament, nor any
judicial Power in the Star Chamber, nor be concerned in any Temporal Matters.

THEN began the Trial of the Earl of Strafford, which after it had lasted some
Weeks; The Earl of Straffords Trial.
and all the Evidence against Him not amounting to so much as to be Legally
capable to take away His Life (had they gone the ancient Legal way to work of
Trying Peers) His Enemies be-thought themselves of a New Expedient to take off
His Head, despairing of ever effecting their Designs as long as He assisted at
the Helm; they had therefore procured the Parliament of Ireland, to Prosecute
Him there also, as Guilty of HighTreason. Whereupon a Bill was brought into the
House of Commons, to attaint Him of Accumulative High Treason; and tho it
passed that House with a kind of surprise, yet it so opened the Eyes of
several, who before had been His violent Enemies, that they became His
Advocates, tho this made them lose that Kindness, Esteem and Favor, which that
House, and the People before had had for them. And the Lords considering how
much it concerned them, and their Posterity; and that it might come to be their
Own Case, were not generally so Zealous and eager for a President, that might
be of such dangerous Consequence: But the Factious Spirits (knowing that as
long as His Head was upon His Shoulders, it would be impossible for them to
Compass their Designs) procured, and stirred up the Rabble in a most insolent
and tumultuary manner, The Rabbles Tumult, and Madness against the Earl, etc.
to come down to the Parliament Houses, and Cry for Justice. It was in vain for
the Lords to Complain of the Force that was offered, and the violation of the
Freedom of Parliament: The Commons took no Notice of it; insomuch, that the
Mobile being hereby encouraged, proceeded to that point of Insolence, as to
post up such Members of the House of Commons, as had Voted against the Bill of
Attainder; and Stigmatizing them with the Name of Straffordians, as they did
likewise to the Lords, who had done the same, threatening, that these, and All
other Enemies of the Commonwealth should Perish with Him; bawling out, Justice
and Execution; nay, One of the Rabble was heard to say, If we have not the
Lieutenant's Life, we will have the King's. The Lords being thus Terrified,
absented themselves from the House, insomuch, that there was not half the
Number when the Bill passed; and of those then present, but Seven more for it,
than those that were against it. The King used His utmost endeavors to
overcome the Difficulties of signing the Bill: But at length (through the
importunities of those who were continually telling him, how requisite it was
for Him to please the People, and perpetually Alarmed Him with the
Apprehensions of an eminent Rebellion; but most especially by the generous
Request of the Earl Himself, who thus concluded in a Letter to the King; (Sir,
The Earl of Strafford's Letter to the King.
To set Your Majesty's Conscience at Liberty, I do most humbly beseech You, for
the preventing of such Mischiefs, as may happen by Your Refusal to pass the
Bill; by this means to remove (Praised be God, I cannot say this Accursed, but)
this Unfortunate thing, forth of the way, toward that blessed Agreement which
God I trust shall for ever Establish between You and Your Subjects. My Consent
herein shall more acquit You to God, than all the World can do besides; to a
willing Man there is no Injury done. I say, The Bill passed by Commission.
principally by this Generous Request, His Majesty was prevailed upon to pass
it by Commission; and therein to do an Action contrary to the Sentiments of His
own Conscience; and which, as Himself tells Us, Lay heavy upon Him to His last
Breath.

HE gave likewise at the same time another Commission to several Lords, to pass
another Bill for continuing the Parliament, A Bill passed for the Parliaments
sitting, during their own Pleasure.
during the pleasure of both Houses; which Act of His, was the main Foundation
of our Subsequent Ruin, and the Chief Engine the Malcontents made use of, to
bring upon the Kingdom, those Desolations and Horrous that so long Afflicted
it; tho He designed it, as a Means to Re-instate Himself in the Affections of
His People; and to remove the very Root of all those Fears and Jealousies,
which are so uneasy both to Prince and People. But what were the Returns they
made to all these Unparalelled Acts of Grace, and Condescentions to please His
People: they made Great Vows indeed, and Protestations of their Loyalty, Duty,
and Sincerity of their Intentions, for the Good of the King and Kingdom; and
that their main Aim was to render Him the Most Glorious Prince that ever sat
upon the English Throne; but how different their Designs were from their Words,
the Sequel made but too Apparent.

THE Fall of that Great Man the Earl of Strafford, so startled several other of
the Principal Officers of State, Many principal Officers resign their Places
upon the Earl of Strafford's Death.
that many of them resigned their Places: About the same time, some Discontents
arose between the Parliament, and the English Army in the North, but a while
after, both Armies were Disbanded. The payment of Tonnage and Poundage, had
been much Questioned since 1628. But now the King, at the request of the
Commons; was content to relinguish His Right to it; and afterward passed a
Bill for Pole Money, and two others for putting down the Star Chamber, and
High-Commission-Courts. And Four Days after, the English, and Scoth Armies
were Disbanded, the King went toward Scotland, notwithstanding all the
endeavors, and allegations of the Presbyterian Faction in England to hinder
that Journey: But seeing the King resolute to keep His Word with the Scots,
being unwilling to disoblige them, who seemed Zealous for His Majesty's
Presence among them; they used their utmost Efforts to obtain a Viceroy (a
Creature of their own) who in the King's absence, might give the Royal-Assent
to such Acts as they had then in Hand: But upon His Majesty's Assurances that
His stay there should be very short; this hopeful Project was strangled in the
Birth.

THE King was received in Scotland with great Testimonies of Affection by that
Nation, His Majesty goes for Scotland.
and Conferred several Places of Honor and Power upon diverse of them;
confirming likewise, the Treaty between the two Nations by Act of Parliament,
assenting to whatever they offered; and indeed, passed so many Acts of
unparalelled Bounty, Grace, and Condescension, as extorted from them the
Revival, and Confirmation of an Act of their Parliament, which they caused to
be solemnly published throughout the Realm, The Scots Parliament publish a
Loyal Act.
That it should be damnable, and detestable Treason in the highest Degree, for
any of the Scots Nation conjunctly or singly to levy Arms, or any Military
Forces, upon any Pretext whatsoever without the King's Royal Commission. But
the Presbyterians, as if their Tenets, and Consciences were fuller of
Abominations, than the Romanists and Jesuits, did with as little Tenderness of
Conscience, not long after violate this promise, as if no such thing had ever
been made; and have made it appear to all the World, that No Laws, not even of
their own making, have any Obligation or Power over them, to restrain them from
a tempting opportunity to Rebel.

DURING His Majesty's abode in Scotland, The Rebellion in Ireland.
there broke out in Ireland, a most horrible and notorious Rebellion; and which
was managed with such Secresy, that it was not discovered till the Night before
it was to have been put in Execution; The great Massacre of 200000.
which was in diverse Places carried on with such Fury, that Two Hundred
Thousand English Men, Women, and Children, were in a short time barbarously
Murdered by all manner of most Cruel Torments that their Devilish Minds could
invent. Many were the Conjectures about the Occasion of this Conspiracy; but
tho the Parliament endeavored all they could to asperse the Reputation, and
blast the Honor of His Sacred Majesty, and to that intent charged Him with
that Rebellion; whereas indeed, they themselves had principally occasioned that
Rebellion, by opposing, and refusing to Consent to the Transportation of those
Forces, which His Majesty had Granted to the King of Spain. For at the
Disbanding of the Irish Army, He had engaged the Word and Honor of a King to
the Three Spanish Ambassadors, here then at this Court, that they should have
the Liberty to Transport such Troops of the Irish Nation, as were willing to
take Service under their Master; and accordingly they Contracted not only with
the Officers and Soldiers; but had advanced Money, and hired Ships for their
Transportation. But this being represented to the Parliament, tho the Lords
seemed inc^mable to comply with it; yet the Commons, who industriously opposed
whatever His Majesty pretended to do without their Advice, absolutely refused
to give their Consent; and framed I know not what Chimaera's of danger; and in
Fine, positively prohibited The passing of any English or Irish into the
Service of any Foreign Prince.

FROM hence it came to pass, that many of those People being of Desperate
Fortunes, fell into Desperate Designs; and being Animated and Spirited, both by
their Religion, and the Traditional Animosity against the English, and more
especially the Scots, whom they consider as Invaders, Robbers, and Incroachers
of their Ancient, and Native Right; they were easily persuaded, and drawn into
a Conspiracy, rather than starve. Whereas had the Parliament given them leave
to have spent their ill humors, and lives in Foreign Wars, they might
probably have prevented whole Rivers of Blood, that was inhumanely spilt, and
have saved all that Treasure that was expended in reducing that Kingdom from
one Rebellion to another.

BUT by this means the Malcontents here at Home got this advantage by that
Rebellion, which they had been long Aiming at, as to Arm all their Factions,
The Factions seize on the Guards, etc. during the King's Absence in Scotland.
and in His Majesty's absence to do all the Acts of Sovereign Authority. And
now they took actually the Guards into their Service, which they had Voted for
before, and appointed Officers to Command them; and to Exercise, and Discipline
the Raw and unexpert Militia of the Countries about London, without so much as
giving the least Notice of all this to His Majesty, or expecting His
Royal-Assent.

THE King being in Scotland, when He first received an account of all that had
happened in Ireland, Sir James Stuart sent for Ireland.
dispatched Sir James Stuart with Instructions to the Lords of the
Privy-Councel there; and sent them by Him all the Money His present Stores
would supply. He likewise moved the Parliament of Scotland, as being the
nearest for their Assistance; but they Excused it, because Ireland was a
Dependant of the Crown of England: but if the State of England would use any of
their Men for that Service, they would make propositions in order to it.

THE King finding His stay to be longer than He thought, left the whole
business of Ireland to the Parliament, which without staying for His leave,
they had took to Themselves; and had indeed declared a speedy and vigorous
Assistance, and Voted Fifty Thousand Pounds for a present supply. About which
time, the King returned out of Scotland; The King Returns to London from
Scotland.
and was Entertained and Feasted at London, and from thence Conducted to
White Hall: After which, the King Treated several of the Brincipal Citizens at
Hampton Court, where diverse of the Aldermen had the Honor of Knighthood.

THEN the King Summons both Houses together, and tells them, A Parliament is
called.
That He had staid in Scotland longer than He expected; yet not Fruitlesly, for
He had given full Satisfaction to that Nation; but cannot choose but take
notice of, and wonder at the unexpected Distractions He finds at Home; and then
recommends to them the State of Ireland: Next He publishes a Proclamition for
Obedience to the Laws; and first, concerning Religion, and the performance of
Divine Service, without innovation or abolishing of Rites and Ceremonies. About
Two Months after which, His Majesty makes another Speech to them, and Conjures
them by all that is Dear to Him or Them, to hasten the Business of Ireland. But
notwithstanding this, and all the Noise and Out cry that was made of the
Cruelties of the Irish Rebellion, they prepared their Succors but very slowly;
and tho His Majesty pressed them with repeated instances to assist vigorously
the Protestant Party against the Popish Rebels; The Irish Rebellion laid upon
the King.
yet they used their endeavors to place the Odium of that Conspiracy to the
King's account; insomuch, that one of their Members said in a Formal Speech at
a Conference with the Lords, That several who had passed into Ireland by His
Majesty's immediate warrant, were at the Head of the Rebellion; which Speech,
the House of Commons ordered to be Printed; and tho His Majesty cleared Himself
of the Scandal, yet instead of obtaining a Reparation, they publicly justified
the Member (who was Pym) for what He had spoken. Besides, instead of taking
into Consideration the bleeding Condition of Ireland, notwithstanding all the
indefatigable Zeal and Pains His Majesty had taken to preserve the Protestant
Religion, and the Peace of the Kingdom; they welcomed Him presently after His
Return from Scotland with a large Remonstrance, The Parliaments Remonstrance.
wherein they endeavored to make appear, that there was a Design on Foot, to
introduce to this Kingdom, Popery and Arbitrary Government; and laid all the
Misfortunes of the Reign, to the Crowns Account, notwithstanding they
themselves had occasioned them; and His Majesty having made a Gracious Answer
to their Petition, that was as a Prologue to their Remonstrance, He issued out
a Declaration to His Subjects by way of Answer to the Remonstrance; The King's
Answer.
the Sum of which was, That He thought He had given sufficient Satisfaction to
His Peoples Fears and Jealousies, concerning Religion, Liberty, and Civil
Interests, by the Bills which He had passed this Parliament; desiring that
Misunderstandings might be removed on either side; and that the bleeding
Condition of Ireland might persuade them to Unity, for the Relief of that
Unhappy Kingdom.

BUT instead of Complying with His Majesty, who offered to raise Ten Thousand
Volunteers for Ireland, if the Commons would undertake to Pay them; and issued
out a Proclamation against the Irish, declaring, Those that were in Arms, with
all their Adherents, and Abettors, The Apprentices Rife, and go to White Hall
and Westminster.
to be Rebels and Traitors: They Caused the Apprentices of London to go in an
Insolent, Tumultuous, Riotous manner to White Hall and Westminster; and the
King being informed, That One of the Lords, and Five of the House of Commons
had Correspondence with the Scots, and Countenanced the late City Tumults; He
thereupon ordered, The King's Order.
their Trunks, Studies, and Chambers to be Sealed up, and their Persons Seized;
the former of which was done, but they kept too good Intelligence about His
Majesty to be Surprised; and having timely Notice, they absented themselves
from the House; The Commons Vote against the putting it in Execution.
whereupon the Commons Voted the same day, That if any Persons shall attempt to
Seize the Persons, or Papers of any Parliament Men, such Members shall require
the Aid of the Constable to Secure such Persons, till further order of the
House; and that it is Lawful for any Person to Assist the said Members; and
that the said Members may stand upon their Guard, and make Resistance according
to the Protestation for Defense of Privileges of Parliament.

HEREUPON the King charges the Lord Kimbolton, and the Five Members with
several Articles; and acquaints Both Houses, The Lord Kimbolton, and five
Members Impeached of High Treason by the King.
That He did intend to prosecute them for High Treason; and required, That
their Persons might be Secured. The Day after, the King went to the House of
Commons; and sitting in the Speaker's- Chair, He viewed the House round, and
perceived the Birds He aimed at were flown; for having Warning, they had
withdrawn into London: Whereupon He tells them, That He came to look for those
Five Members, whom He had Accused of High Treason, and was resolved to have
them wherever He found them; and expected to have them sent to Him, as soon
as they should come to the House: But would not have them think, that this Act
of His was any Violation of Parliament.

THOUGH the King took only the Palsgrave with Him, The King's coming in person
to the House of Commons, is Voted a Breach of their Privilege, and Scandals
raised, etc.
and the Gentlemen of His Ordinary Retinue; Yet this Act of the King's, was so
highly resented by the House, that the next Day the Commons voted it a Breach
of Privilege; and Scandals were raised in the City, that He intended Violence
against the House of Commons, and came thither with Force to Murder several
Members; and used Threatening Speeches against the Parliament: With which the
City was so possessed, that unusual Guards and Watches were set, as if some
desperate Assault were to be made upon the City. And then the Houses publish a
Declaration; that whosoever shall Arrest any Member of Parliament by Warrant
from the King only, is guilty of the Breach of Privileges of Parliament: And
likewise, That all those who attended the King when He came to demand the Five
Members, were guilty of a Traitorous Design against the King and Parliament;
That the Proclamation for Apprehending and Imprisoning the said Members, was
False, Scandalous, and Illegal; and not of Validity enough to hinder them from
Attending the House: And that the Publishing of the several Articles of
High Treason, was a Breach of Privilege; wherefore they entreat His Majesty to
discover the Names of those Informers, and Evil Counselors; declaring all such
Persons, to be Public Enemies to the State.

AND now, what they had been so long aiming at, came to pass; for Petitions
came crowding from all Parts, to put the Kingdom in a Posture of Defense, (as
they termed the Arming of Their Party, and Dis-arming all Those whose Loyalty
obliged them to adhere to the King.) And though His Majesty, before this
unlucky Accident happened, out of a Transcendant Goodness, The Earl of Warwick
made Vice Admiral in the Room of Sir John Pennington.

Sir Thomas Glemham Removed, and Sir John Hotham made Governor of Hull.


upon their Desires, dis-placed Two Lieutenants of the Tower, committed the
Fleet to the Earl of Warwick, as Vice Admiral, removing Sir John Pennington;
and put out Sir Thomas Glemham from the Government of Hull, and put it into the
Hands of Sir John Hotham; who both unfortunately to himself, and the whole
Kingdom, made His Majesty an ill Requital for His Trust: But still this was not
Satisfactory; and though He had granted them all they could have defired, they
would hardly have been contented.

AND now, such Tumults and Numbers of the Rabble, daily flocked to Westminster
and Whitehal; and being Countenanced by the Impeached Members, and their
Adherents, grew so Insolent, that the King doubting of their Intentions, The
Tumults, and Illegal Proceedings of the Commons, make the King retire to
Hampton Court.
thought fit to withdraw to Hampton Court, taking with Him the Queen, Prince,
and Duke of York; where His Retinue and Guards was soon considerably Augmented
by the Accession of the Gentry from all Parts.

THE next Day, the Five Members were Conducted in Triumph to Westminster, The
5. Members brought to the Parliament in Great Triumph, etc.
by great Numbers of the Citizens and Seamen, with Hundreds of Boats and
Barges, with Guns in them; shouting, hollowing, and Insulting, as they passed
by White Hall; and at Westminster, welcomed them with an Harangue, as if they
came from performing some Glorious Action, in the Service of the Nation.

AND now the Commons move the Lords to join with them to Petition the King to
leave the Militia at their Disposal; The Commons petition for the Militia, and
Tower, to be put into then Hands, etc.
as likewise, the Command of the Tower: But they not Complying, the House of
Commons, singly of themselves, request the King, To put Them into the Hands of
the Parliament; but the King not thinking fit to part with the Main Support of
His Throne, did however make them such Gracious Replies, as would have
satisfied all reasonable Men.

THERE was a Rumor, that the Parliament designed to Impeach the Queen of
High Treason; The Queen goes for Holland upon a designed Impeachment.
whereupon She provides against the Danger, and prevails with the King, That
She might accompany Her Eldest Daughter, the Princess of Orange into Holland;
and the King, seeing Things grow worse and worse, consented to it, and Attended
them to the Seaside, and saw them go on Board for Holland; and having ordered
the Prince to wait His Returns at Greenwich, did thereby prevent His Surprise,
which, had the King staid a Quarter of an Hour longer, had been effected; they
having designed Him for an Hostage and Security, against all Cross Events.

THE Parliament having again Petitioned for the Militia, The King's Answer to
the Common's Petition.
the King sends them an Answer; That He is willing to condescend to all the
Proposals concerning the Militia of the Counties, and the Persons mentioned;
but not of London, and other Corporations; whose Government, in that
Particular, He thought it neither Justice, nor Policy, to alter; but would not
consent to Divest Himself of the Power of the County-Militia, for an Indefinite
Time, but for some Limited Space.

THIS Answer not being Satisfactory, and the Breach growing daily wider, He
Removes from London to Theobalds, Royston, etc.
the King thought it not safe to stay in These Parts; but Removed to Theobalds,
Royston, and so to York. But on His Way, He received a Petition, demanding the
Militia more resolutely than before; affirming, That in Case of Denial, the
Imminent Dangers would constrain them to dispose of it by Authority of
Parliament; desiring also, That He would make His Abode near London, and the
Parliament, The King's absolute Refusal to their Second Petition for the
Militia.

The Parliament's Public Declaration hereupon.


and continue the Prince at some of His Houses near the City, for the better
carrying on of Affairs, and preventing the People's Jealousies and Fears: All
which not being then fit to be granted, and therefore refused, they presently
order, That the Kingdom be put into a Posture of Defense, in such a Way as was
agreed upon by the Parliament, and a Committee to prepare a public Declaration
from these Two Heads: 1.
1. The Just Causes of the Fears and Jealousies given to the Parliament. 2.
2. To consider of all Matters arising from His Majesty's Message, and what was
fit to be done.

IN the mean time, the Bishops were so threatened and terrifyed by the Tumults
and Rabble, that Twelve of Them absented themselves from the House; Protesting
against all Laws, Orders, Votes, The Bishop's Protestation.
Resolutions, and Determinations, as in Themselves, Null, and of Non-effect;
which had Passed, or should Pass, during their forced Absence: desiring their
Protestation might be Registered by the Clerk of the House of Lords. But
immediately after, at a Conference between Both Houses, it was agreed, That
this Protestation of the Twelve Bishops, did extend to the deep intrenching
upon the Fundamental Privileges, and Being of Parliaments; and presently after,
They are Accused of HighTreason, seized, and Ten of them Committed.
they were Accused of High Treason, seized, and brought on their Knees at the
Bar of the House of Peers: Ten of them were Committed to the Tower; and the
Other Two, in regard of their Age, to the Black-Rod.

NOW the Parliament proceed to make Great Preparations both by Sea and Land;
and ordered the Admiral of England, The Parliament now makes great Preparations
both by Sea and Land.

Pamphlets dispersed.


to Rigg the King's Ships, and fit them to Sea; and likewise, all Masters, and
Owners of Ships, were persuaded to do the like. The Beacons were repaired;
Sea-Marks set up; and extraordinary Posting up and down with Pacquets;
Pamphlets flew abroad; and all the Other sad Prognostics of a Civil War, did
appear.

THUS did Our late Execrable Troubles begin, That were attended with all the
Calamities of Domestic Broyls; the Parliament every Day pretending to
entertain New Jealousies, and Suspicions of the King's Actions, that so they
might have a Pretext to Arm their Party: which having done, and provided Moneys
for the Defraying the Expenses of the War, they unmasked Themselves; and the
King, and all the Good People of the Nation began to discover, That all their
Assurances of making His Majesty the Most Glorious Prince, that ever swayed the
English Scepter, was no otherwise to be understood, than that they designed to
Crown Him with the Crown of Martyrdom; and that all the Outcry they had made,
and the Fears and Jealousies they had spread abroad of the Loss of their
Privileges, and the danger that Religion, Liberty, and Property were in, was
like Pick-pockets; who bawl out, and accuse Passers by of Picking their
Pockets, that so they might get a Crowd together, and really deprive Them of
what they had falsely accused Others of; who not discovering the Cheat till it
was too late, and that all was gone, had nothing left them but Regret, for
having been drawn into their Own, and their Friends Ruin and Destruction.

AND now, being come so far, as to have a full, but sad View of all those
Devastations and Horrors, of those Torrents of Blood, and Mountains of
Carcasses, which are the usual Effects, nay, inevitable Consequences of a Civil
War; I must beg Leave to retire from so Deplorable and Dreadful a Prospect, and
give you a short Account of the Crew that occasioned all these Desolations and
Miseries, and from whence they sucked their Poisonous Principles, with which
they infected the whole State.

DURING the Reign of Queen Mary, The Rise of the Presbyterians.
several of the Reformed, flying the Persecutions of Her Government, retired to
Geneva; where sucking in Doctrine and Principles that were no ways conformable
nor consistent with Monarchy, at their return Home under Queen Elizabeth, they
spoke even with Adoration of the Discipline of that Place; assuring and
persuading People, that It, and only It was what was taught and directed by our
Savior, and His Disciples, and practiced in the Primitive Times; accusing all
others of Impurity, Superstition, and Popery.

THE Jesuits quickly took notice of these Weeds in Protestanisme, Taken Notice
of by the Jesuits.
and took great Care to humor and cultivate them; hoping that They One Day
might cause such a Breach in Our Church, as that they might enter through it,
and complete Our Ruin. And indeed, these People what by the Forced Modesty, and
Austerity of their Lives, what by the Novelty of their Doctrine, and their
being opposed by Public Authority, that was no ways consistent with their
Tenets, they came at first to be Pittyed, and then to be Loved and Admired by
the Common People.

THUS growing (at length) to be very numerous, that ever-tobe-admired Princess
Queen Elizabeth, Queen Elizabeth's Care to depress them.
thought fit to hinder this Contagion from spreading; and by the Advice of Her
Parliament, as well as Her Council, enacted very severe Laws against them, and
put several of them to Death, as Disturbers of the Peace both of Church and
State. And though they expected more Favor under the Reign of King James; King
James did the like.
yet that Wise Prince thought fit to curb their Zeal, and bridle their Invading
Humor: Notwithstanding, having once allowed them a Conference, and taking upon
Himself to be the Arbitrator, it rendered them so Insolent and Confident, and
brought their Party into such Repute, that toward the Latter End of His Reign,
they began to have great Influence in the House of Commons; which they daily
augmented, and increased by their seeming Abhorrence of Popery and
Superstition; But with everto-be-lamented Methods.
till at length, by their Arts and Practices, they brought into Ruin and
Destruction that Prince and Government, they all along pretended their whole
Design was to Defend, Support, and Maintain; and under the Cloak of Religion,
let in all Manger of Impiety, Atheism, and Superstition.

THE Great Influences the Doctrines of these Men have had amongst the Factious
Parties of this Kingdom of late Times too, since the Happy Restoration of His
Sacred Majesty, to the great Disturbance of the Public Peace, to the
Dis-uniting the Members of the Church of England, and raising Schism and
Divisions in the Communities of Men in Matters of Religion, to the utter
Subversion of Religion it self; nay, Morality too: I say, of the Truth of This,
we have daily Demonstrations and Experiences of. The Jesuits of Geneva, and
Those of St. Omers, I dare affirm, in their Damnable Tenets, with relation to
Monarchy and Episcopacy, bear alike Proposition; and consequently, Public
Peace must be a Thorn in their Side too. Tho I believe verily, That the
Presbyterian is but an Instrument in the Roman Catholics Hands, to work the
Destruction of this Nation; because, they know, there is no Sect bears a greater
Sway, nor admits of a greater Acceptance amongst the Credulous Vulgars, than
This. How under This Cloak ( Religion) they have walked for these several
Years, and made it their Stalking-Horse, to perpetrate their Designs, we all
know; and therefore, I shall enter upon the Second Part of This Discourse, and
trace along our present Troubles and Distractions; beginning with Religion.

Loyalties severe Summons TO THE Bar of Conscience: OR, A Seasonable and Timely
Call TO THE People of England, UPON THE Present Juncture of Affairs.
The Second Part.
BUT before we enter upon Generals, I shall a little come to Particulars, and
by this Means lay before you more plainly, how exactly Men endeavor in These
Times, to follow the Copy which have been drawn by Men of alike Principles and
Dispositions, in the Late Times.

AND Here we must observe, how like Serpents the Subtle Engineers, and Framers
of the Late Commonwealth wrought themselves in to the Accomplishing their
Damned Designs, and Unparalled Contrivances. They no sooner found the Late
King reduced to urgent Necessities, and pressing Occasions for Supplies to His
Exchecquer and Treasury, which were Drained and Exhausted by a long involved
War abroad; but it is as soon taken Notice of by the Factious Parties at Home,
who promised to themselves now a fit Opportunity to broach their Villainies, and
begin those Accursed Designs against the King and Government; which they
afterward perpetrated, and brought to pass. They begin then to hang Tall, and
stand off from any Propositions the King made for Supplies of Money; and
therefore, without He would be brought to those Concessions, and comply with
such unreasonable Demands, which they would, and did make, no Money was to be
had.

THE King being of a Good, Pacifick, and Generous Nature, and knowing the
Pressures and Necessities, which then encumbered Him for a Supply, was forced to
condescend to such Gracious Unparalled Acts, which helped to pull down that
fair and splendid Structure of the Government, which His Royal Predecessors,
Queen Elizabeth, and His Father King James had built: Of which I have spoken
more at large before.

THESE Acts and Concessions of the King, they managed to that Degree, that at
length the Scots influenced Here by some Leading Parties in England, enter upon
a strange Way of forcing His Concessions, by Raising an Army, under the Notion
of Petitioning their King, etc.

NOW, let us behold, how nearly we endeavor to follow these Ieroboams, and how
close the Shadow follows our Heels. In the Year 1679. The Damnable Popish Plot
Discovered in England.
not long after the Discovery of the Hellish Popish Plot, which had put England
into a Great Combustion and Disorder, and that now the Minds of Men were
possessed with Dread and Horror, and an Universal Jealousy and Fear of what
would be the Event of so strange and Surprising an Alarm, distracted almost
even the most sober Brains: The Scots (who are a People ever ready to lay hold
of any Opportunity to Rebel; and knowing This a fit Time to blow up that Fire
into a Flame, which the Papists and Jesuits had kindled) they presently begin
to enter upon their Old Theme of Protesting against the Church Government,
Episcopacy, The Scots Rebellion.
nay, Monarchy too; and Raise a Considerable Army, to further their Execrable
Designs.

BUT before this, to show their Antipathy, and inveterate Abhorrence against
Bishops, (which is a Natural Disposition they sucked from the Breasts of the
Presbyterian Parents, (as is before taken Notice of) and now 'twas never to be
Eradicated out of the Flesh of their Posterity) they Assassinate, and Kill that
Reverend Prelate, the Arch Bishop of St. Andrews, The Reverend Archbishop of
St. Andrews killed.
one of His Majesty's most honorable Privy-Councel, by Stabbing him in his own
Coach, in the Sight of the Sun, dragging him out upon the Ground, hewing and
butchering him, as the Cruel, Blood-Thirsty Dutch did the De wits in Holland,
leaving his Body as one Wound. Oh crudelis Rabies Populi!

BUT this was but a small Prologue to their designed Black Cragedy; the Death
of one Great Person could not satisfy their Bloody Intents; but now, Fury
drives them on to destroy all that oppose them, and a Body of Men was got
together on the Twenty-Nineth of Mar, 1679. to the Number of Eighty, The Rebels
burn several Acts of Parliament.
well Mounted and Armed, and came as far as Rugland, proclaimed the Covenant,
burnt several Acts of Parliament, viz.

1. 1.
The Act concerning the King's Supremacy. 2. 2.
The Rescissory Act. 3. 3.
The Act for Establishing Episcopacy. And, 4. 4.
The Act appointing the Anniversary of the Twenty-Nineth of May.
-- And that done, affixed a certain Scandalous and Traitorous Paper, or
Declaration, upon the Market-Cross and intended to have done the like at
Glasgow, but were prevented by the King's Forces there.

The Rebel's Declaration designed to be put up at Glasgow, (but was actually
put up at Rugland) was in these Words following:
AS the Lord has been pleased still to keep and preserve His Interest in the
Land, The Scot's Declaration put upon the Market-Cross at Rugland.
by the Testimony of some Faithful Witnesses from the Beginning: So in our
Days, some have not been wanting, who through the greatest Hazards have added
their Testimonies to those who are gone before them, by suffering Death,
Banishment, Torturings, Finings, Imprisonments, Forfeitures, etc. flowing from
cruel, and perfidious Adversaries to the Church, and Kingdom of our Lord Jesus
Christ, in the Land. Therefore, We owning the Interest of Christ, according to
the Word of the Lord, and the National and Solemn League and Covenaut, desire
to add our Testimonies of the Worthies that have gone before, (tho Unworthy,
yet hoping as true Members of the Church of Christ in Scotland) and that
against all Things that have been done prejudicial to His Interest, from the
Beginning of the Work of Reformation in Scotland; especially, from the Year
1648. to the Year 1660. against these following Acts: As,

1. 1.
The Act of Supremacy. 2. 2.
The Declaration whereby the Covenants were condemned. 3. 3.
The Act for Eversion of the Established Government of the Church, and for
Establishing of Prelacy, and for outing of Christ's Ministers, who could not
conform thereto, by an Act Rescissory of all Acts of Parliament, and
Assemblies, for Establishing of the Government of the Church of Scotland,
according to the Word.

As likewise, 4. That Act of Council at Glasgow, 4.
putting that Act Rescissory in Execution; where, at one time, were violently
cast out above Three Hundred Ministers, without all Legal Procedure.

Likewise, 5.
5. The Act appointing a Holy Anniversary-Day to be kept upon the Twenty-Nineth
of May, for giving Thanks for the Upsetting an Usurping Power, destroying the
Interest of the Church in the Land; which is to set up the Creature to be
Worshiped, in the Room of our Great Redeemer, and to consent to the assuming
the Power that is proper to the Lord alone, for the Appointing of Ordinances in
His Church; as particularly, the Government thereof, and the Keeping of
Holy Days, and all other Sinful and Unlawful Acts emitted and executed by
them.
And for Confirmation of This our Testimony, We do hereby this Day, being the
Twenty-Nineth of May, 1679. publicly burn them at the Cross of Glasgow most
justly, as they perfidiously and blasphemously had burnt our Holy Covenants
through several Cities of the Covenanted Kingdoms. We judge, none will take
Exception at our not Subscribing this our Testimony, being so solemnly gone
about: for we are ready always to do it, if judged necessary, with all the
Faithful, Suffering Brethren in the Land.

The Effect the Declaration bad.
THIS gained a great Addition to their Number, and every day Fresh Rabbles
came, and Listed themselves under their Rebellious Banner; so that, within few
Days, their Body became considerable, amounting to Fourteen or Fifteen
Thousand Men. But, as in the thickest Brambles there are to be found some
Roses; so, in this Country, the King found some Loyal Hearts, who endeavored
to quell their Insolence: For, on the Eight of May, ( Five Days after the
Murder of the Archbishop of St. Andrews) Captain Graham of Claver-house,
Capt. Graham's Rencounter with the Rebels.
upon notice he had of a great Number of Men, who were gathered together upon
Lowdon-Hill, marched thither with his Troop, and a Company of Dragoons, and
found there Fourteen or Fifteen Thousand Men well Armed, and in good Order: The
Foot commanded by one Weir, and the Horse by Robert Hamilton, one Patton,
Balfour, and Hackston, (the Two last being the Murderers of the Archbishop of
St. Andrews.) The Revels upon Captain Graham's Approach, sent out Two Parties
to skirmish with him, which he beat into their main Body. Then they advanced
with their whole Force upon him, who after a considerable Slaughter of the
Revels, and the Loss of his Cornet, Two Brigadiers, about Eight Horse, and
Twenty Dragoons, (his own Horse being killed under him, and mounting another)
being so much overpowered in number, he made his Retreat to Glasgow, being in
his way forced to Fight his Passage through the Townsmen of Streven, who were
got together to oppose it, leaving Ten or Twelve of them dead upon the Place.

THE Revels had the Confidence to attack the City of Glasgow, The City of
Glasgow Attacked.
at Two several Times; but all the Streets were so Barricadoed by the Lord
Rosse, and the Soldiers put into so good a Posture, that the Revels were beat
off with a Considerable Loss, besides many Prisoners that were taken.

THE Council, the City of Edinborough, several Noble Men, and Persons of
Quality, use their utmost endeavors to suppress these Rebels; amongst which,
the Son of the Lord Rosse, The Son of the Lord Rosse his Skirmish with the
Rebels.
having only with him Forty Horse, and a Company of Dragoons, totally defeats a
party of Three Hundred Horse and Foot of the Rebels, leaving Sixty Six Dead
upon the Place, taking Ten Prisoners, the rest being scattered. As likewise,
The Lord Murray's Stuward puts to the rout a 100.
the Lord Murray's Deputy-Stuward in Down, assembling the Vassals, and Tenants
of His Lordships Stewardry, upon an Alarm of One Hundred Rebels on Horseback,
coming from Fisse, to join with their main Body, pursues them Sixteen Miles
through the Mountains; and at last, coming up to them, Killed several of them,
took Forty Prisoners (amongst which, was one Henderson, one of the Murderers
of the Archbishop of Saint Andrews) and forced them to scatter, and fly into
the adjacent Woods and Moors. Of which, The Lord Elphingston took 30. Prisoners.
the Lord Elphingston having notice, with some Gentlemen under his Command;
pursued them, killed some, and took above Thirty more Prisoners; and amongst
these, Two of the name of Balfour, and one Hamilton of Kinkel ( Three more of
the Murderers of the said Archbishop.)

THE Gentlemen of Stratherne fell upon another Party coming from Fiffe; of
which, they killed some, and took above Forty, The Gentlemen of Stratherne's
Reencounter with them.
and carried them Prisoners to Pearth.

THUS these Bebels met with great Opposition from all parts; They meet with
extraordinary Supplies, upon extraordinary Opposition.
but still like the Serpent Hydra, they had fresh Supplies, and their Numbers
grew great. This allaruming the King and Parliament here, they presently
resolve to dispatch with all Expedition imaginable, a considerable Force
against them, consisting of a Body of Ten Thousand Men, under the Conduct of
the Illustrious James Duke of Monmouth, The Duke of Monmouth goes for Scotland.
a person of whose Prudence, Courage, and Fidelity, we have had large
Demonstrations and Proofs. The Duke with this Body of Men, all Loyal brave
Spirits, and courageous resolute Lads, sets out for Scotland, And

His Grace arrived at Edinborough, the 18th. of June, 79. by Post; and parting
the 19th. following, joined the King's Forces at Blackburne; Major Oglethorpe
causes a Party or Two of the Rebels to retire.
and that Evening sent out Major Oglethorpe with a Detachment of Horse, and
Dragoons, who Met with a Party or Two of the Rebels, who presently retired. The
next day, June 20th. His Grace decamped with His Army, and advanced within Six
Miles of Hamilton, whither the Rebels were retreated; The Duke advances toward
Hamilton.
having encamped their Foot in the Little Park there, and Posted their Horse
along the River, being 6. or 7000. strong, besides one Robert Stewart, Brother
to the Earl of Galioway, and two or three more came in to them.

JUNE the 22d. the Duke drew up His Majesty's Forces at Bothwell-Bridge, which
the Rebels lying on the other side had barricadoed. Here a Paper is brought to
the Lord General by one of the David Hume. The Message of the Rebels.
Rebels representing, That they would lay down their Arms upon no other Terms,
than those expressed in their Declaration; to which, The Duke's Answer.
His Grace gave Answer, That those were destructive to the King's Authority,
and contrary to the Fundamental Laws, and Constitutions of this Kingdom; and
that they were to expect no other Articles from him, but to lay down their
Arms, and render themselves to the King's Mercy. With this Answer they return,
desiring some time to consider, which His Grace granted them. About half an
hour after, the Rebels sent a Paper by a Drummer, representing, That they were
informed, Their 2d. Message.
That His Grace came from England with Terms to be offered to them, that they
desired to know what He had to propose, that they might advise whether the
Terms were such they could accept of. Upon which, His Grace sent them word,
That their Answer did not satisfy Him; His Graces Answer.
and that since they trifled, he would receive no more Messages from them. In
the mean time, Our Canon, with some Horse and Foot, was brought down from the
Body of the Army, and posted not far from the Bridge.

The particular Account of the Fight being by me, I shall Relate it here as I
have it Word for Word.
THe Duke having put himself in the posture abovesaid, A Relation of the Fight
in Scotland.
commanded the Canon to Fire; which it no sooner begun to do, but the Rebels,
who were drawn up on the other side, upon a rising Ground near the Bridge,
threw themselves upon the Ground to avoid the Shot. Those that were posted upon
the Bridge, Fired at first pretty briskly, but after Five or Six Shot of Canon,
they all ran away, they upon the rising beginning first. Our Men immediately
seized the Bridge, threw into the River their Barricadoes of Stones,
Cart-Wheeles, and the like; took a piece of Canon they had, and followed them
up the Hill; but their Number being very small, the Rebels rallied, and faced
them, but had not the Courage to come down upon them; Our Men came down again
to the Bridge, and one Shot more of Canon made the Rebels fly to their upper
Line, where they stood again. In the mean time my Lord General passed the Army
over the Bridge, and drew up upon the Rising, which took up some time; and
before we were quite in order, the Rebels advanced upon Us, and to appearance,
in very good Order. When they approach't, they espied Our Canon at Our Head,
and thereupon immediately shifted their Order, and opened in the middle,
thinking, it seems We were obliged to Shoot strait forward; but Our Canon being
turned upon them as they then stood, and discharged Three or Four times, they
begun to Run again; their Commander Robert Hamilton, being one of the first,
and our Dragoons, and the Highlanders advancing upon them, it was a perfect
Rout; and they fled all ways, Our Men pursuing them. Of the Rebels there were
Seven or Eight Hundred killed, and Eleven or Twelve Hundred taken, which were
afterward brought prisoners to Edinborough.

THE Lord General behaved himself with extraordinary Conduct and Bravery, and
all the Officers, Gentlemen, and Soldiers, carried themselves with great
Cheerfulness and Resolution: But above all, the Mercy of Almighty God was most
signal in that, tho the Rebels were near Seven Thousand; Yet were they totally
defeated without any loss to His Majesty's Forces, save of Two or Three private
Sentinals Killed, and some few Wounded.

THUS was extinguished that furious Flame of Rebellion, fed by Presbyterian
Doctrines and Zeal, to the destroying of so many poor Souls, who obstinately
refused the Mercy of their Prince, and Dyed Martyrs (as they call them) for the
Doctrine of King-killing. I pray God divert them from such like Practices for
the future, and make them know, That without Honoring the King, we do not Fear
God.

NOW to proceed to a Second Remark, which is, Episcopacy spoken against.
the great Hatred these sort of Men, have had, and now have against Episcopacy,
as well as Monarchy. For as in those late Times, the Bishops were ever an
Eyesore to the Scots, and the Presbyterian Faction here; and therefore, the
Church of England in its Government, Liturgy, Common Prayer, and Ceremonies,
was termed direct Popery, and could not be entertained as any thing else; and
therefore, to throw down this Rome, as they called it, destroy the Members of
this Church, and, at the last, the Head too, was what was suitable to a Good
Conscience, and consistent with the Liberty of the Subject, and the Protestant
(alias Presbyterian) Religion. So now adays Men are so bold to call it the
like, and will not stick to say the King is a Papist; and the Professors of
this our Religion of the Church of England, Romish, or Popishly affected. Nay,
it is publicly asserted, That there is not one Bishop in England, who was
advanced to their Episcopal Dignity by any Protestant, but Popish Hand. And
therefore, say they, They must needs have a great relish of that Leaven. And as
the Parliament in those times, began to throw their Bolts at the Bishops, and
to show their Dislike to that Reverend Apostolical Order, and to that
Authority, and Honor which is due to them, and their Right of Sitting in that
August-Assembly; they Vote, That no Bishop should have any Vote in Parliament,
nor any Judicial-power in the Star Chamber, nor be concerned in any Temporal
Matters, etc. So of late, in the Trial of the Earl of Danby; the Commons in
Parliament Vote the Bishops useless; nay, The Bishops Right of Sitting in
capital Causes Disputed.
disown their Right of Sitting there upon Capital Causes, etc. They Dispute
their Right of Sitting at that time, and at all times of Session; and diverse
Papers flew about, concerning the Right of the Lords Spiritual, to Sit in the
Lords House, or Vote in matters Judicial; and others, e contra, were dispersed
abroad, to the vilifying their Reverence, and beating down their undoubted
pretensions. But the Wisdom, and Prudence of Our Gracious Sovereign, knowing
well enough (by sad Experience) That they were Treading in the same Steps with
their Old Fathers, who began at the Church, in order to the better subverting
the State, put an end to the Session. After which, we have but little News of
them; the Anti-Episcopates or Presbyters, holding their Fingers in their
Mouths, and standing as mute as Metamorphosed Niobes.

SINCE the Mutterers against Episcopacy were thus silenced, the Clergy have
been pretty quiet, tho sometimes we meet with a little Piece or two of
Controversial Points, thrown into their Closets, or sent to them by the New
found way of Dispatch; and that is the most they can do now. They would have
their Old Darling bear sway, and would be dancing to Westminster, to the
Assembly of Grave Divines; of which, some Hugh Peter's or Faringdon may be
President; I should say, Moderator: But here is the Plague, They have no long
Triennial, nor meet with such Concessions (tho indeed, they have had too many
very gracious and great ones of late, which have been too much abused, as we
shall take Notice of hereafter) as their Fore-Fathes did; nor have they a
Durante Voluptate Parliament, else you would find they would do glorious
Things, for the Good People of the Land, and the Lord's Cause. In Truth, had
these great Antagonists of the Bishops, but what they Merit, for either their
scandalous stigmatizing them in private, in their Conversations, as well as in
exposing them to the World, with their spiteful Censures, the Punishment which
their Patrons Pryn, and Burton, and Bastwick Suffered in the late Times, is too
great a Favor, and too mild a Resentment.

AND now I must hasten to Generals, only I cannot choose but take Notice, That
these Times, or the Men of them, as if they were driven by the pure Dictates of
a sincere Conscience; or else that they held it as an Article of their Faith,
should think, That within Forty Years, by a necessary Consequence, the same, or
like Occurrences must needs happen to a Nation; and therefore, if they acted
never so contrary to God's Word, Nature, nay, Common Honesty; still it must be
looked upon, as flowing from the supreme Cause, or those concurrent hidden
Causes, which usually attend the Revolutions of States. However it be, This I
must needs confess, No one Evil comes alone: The late King's time, tho attended
with continual Vicissitudes, and repeated Troubles; yet we find still some
dreadful Additional Circumstance or other, to befall them to hasten their way
to Ruin.

THE Scotch Rebellion, His losing His Privileges daily, His public Ministers
impeached, His legal Proceeding censured, thwarted, His Honor beginning to
dwindle, His Majesty exclipsed, His Subjects here at Home Mutinous, and
Seditious; but to add to these, a cursed, hellish Rebellion in Ireland breaks
forth to the Massacring above Two Hundred Thousand of His Subjects in one
Night. Now, do we but look upon our Times, We have through the unspeakable
Bounty of a Gracious GOD, Para'el.
a hellish, Popish Plot, which terrified, and frightened every poor Soul of this
Our English Nation, Discovered to Us, by those who were to be the Executioners
of Our Ruin; the Grandees, and Pillars of the Government are taken into
Custody, as Accessories to this execrable Design of destroying Prince and
People; several others have been taken and Suffered: The People have been
disquieted, and disturbed at such a Surprise; The Government aspersed by
Incendiaries; Loyalty despised; Laws contemned; Authority neglected; Magistracy
villifyed, etc. And, to augment the Obscurity of those dark Clouds, which hang
over our Heads, and threatened Subversion of Monarchy, Religion, and All; A Plot
in Ireland discoverd.
a Cursed Irish Plot too is Discovered, broached and fomented by the same
Ministers, whom the Pope and the Devil had employed in that profound Mystery of
Iniquity, The English Plot. Upon the Miraculous Discovery of which. His Majesty
was pleased to take all the Care He could, for the through detecting This
Damnable Plot; and Proclamations and Warrants are issued out for the
Apprehending the Conspirators: upon the putting in Execution of which, several
betake themselves to Flight, leave their Country, and get into Foreign Parts:
Some are taken Prisoners; amongst which, was those Two notorious Traitors,
Plunket and Fitz-harris taken.
the Titular Primate of Ireland, Plunket; (One whose Hands were imbrued in the
late Bloody Massacre There: So that, we see, the Old Saying true; Quo semel est
imbuta recens servabit Odorem Testa diu) and one Fitz-barris; both which were
lately Tried, Convicted, and Executed: And Others come in, and take hold of the
Mercy of their Prince; and, as far as they were knowing, give their several
Evidences concerning this Hellish Design; Which was for the Murdering His
Majesty's Person, The Design of the Plot in Ireland.
the Destroying and Subverting the True Protestant Religion, the Deposing His
Majesty from the Crown and Government of that Kingdom, and the Establishing of
the Roman Catholic Religion there, etc. Thus, as the Wiseman says; There
shall no Reward be to the Evil Man; the Candle of the wicked shall be put out.
My Son, Fear thou the Lord, and the King, and meddle not with them that are
given to Change: For their Calamity shall rise suddenly; and, Who knows the
Ruin of them?

AND Lastly, As in those Times the Press was open to receive the Dictates of
every Malcontent, to the Aspersion of the King, and His, Ministers, and the
Censuring and Exposing the Government: So, in these Times, we see the like;
every Day affording us fresh Pacquets: But of This, more here-after. I will
therefore desist the Tracing thus Particulars, and do what I promised before I
entered upon this Digression, viz. Lay down in Impartial, General Terms, The
Present State of this poor Nation, through the needless Fear of Popery,
Arbitrary Government, and the Subversion of our Religion, Laws, and Liverties:
I shall begin then with Religion.

THERE is no Stuff so proper to make a Cloak on, Religion,
as Religion; nothing so Profitable, nor indeed so Fashionable: It is a Livery,
How understood now.
wherein a Wise Man may easily serve Two Masters, God, and the World; and make
a gainful and advantageous Service by Either: For when once a Man has got a
Public Opinion of a Holy and Regular Life, the Goodness and Sincerity of his
Conscience is cried up to that height, that his Trade will lack no Custom, his
wares want no Price, his Words need Credit, or his Actions, (tho never so
Enormous and Immoral) be destitute of Praise and Applause. In Summer this keeps
him cool, in Winter warm; and hides the Nasty Bag of all his beloved Secret
Lusts. Under this Cloak, he walks in Publicly fairly with Applause, and in
Private sin securely without Offense, and officiate Wisely without Discovery,
etc.

AT a Fast, I cry Geneva; at a Feast, I cry Rome. Under this Cloak, I compass
Sea and Land to make a Proselyte; and no sooner made, but He Makes me. I most
frequent Schismatical Lectures, which I find most Profitable; from whence,
learning to Divulge and Maintain New Doctrines, they maintain me in Suppers
Thrice a Week. Charity I hold as an Extraordinary Duty; therefore, not
Ordinarily to be performed, etc. Thus our Great Religiosi understands Religion,
but as a Trick they make use of to advance their Interests, and Improve their
Advantage. In fine, It Is Religion, which has been the sole pretended Directrix
to the Commission of the most Nefarious Conspiracies, and Damnable
Contrivances, which have for several Years distracted the Peace and Order of
the Government of the Kingdom of England, Scotland, and Ireland. The sad
Effects of it in those Late Times of Rebellion here in Forty-One, we have (as
is before said) to our Sorrow felt; and those direful Consequences of Ruin and
Destruction of our King and Kingdom, (brooded and hatched under her Wings now
in these present Times,) [Which would have inevitably followed the Damnable
Designs of the Wicked Conspirators of the Hellish Popish Plots, had it not
pleased the Omnipotent Power to infatuate their Intentions, and disclose their
Diabolical Secrets;] I say, These Two sad and notorious Instances, are
sufficient to convince any Reasonable Man, how far Religion has blind-folded,
and carried Men on through the most uncouth, and execrable Designs to destroy both
Prince and People. 'Twas under her Banner the Boid Regicides flourish't their
Colors over the Murdered Body of His Late Sacred Majesty, whom they durst not
to have approach't when Living: 'Twas under her Banner the Audacious Heroes of
the Romish Party, were now Marching on, armed with Fury, Violence, Rapine,
Murder, and Destruction, ready upon a Minutes Call, to Massacre Prince and
People, without Distinction of Sex or Family. As if the Gospel of Peace, which
was first Planted by the Author of Peace, was to be Propagated by His Ministers
by the Sword.

OH the Blindness, and wilful Obstinacy of Man! Oh the Proclivity of the
depraved Humane Nature, to Errors and Abuses! How is it that Thou, Religion,
art thus mistaken? How is it Thy Dictates, and Sacred Rites are thus
mis-construed, and mis-applyed? Do Thou Teach Men such Horrid and Abominable
Doctrines; (...).
That, to Propagate their Empire, and extend their Dominions, Subjects should
be absolved from Obedience to their Lawful Sovereign Princes, impowering them
to Depose Them, or pull Them down from their Thrones, take the Crown from their
Heads; and at last, their Heads from their Bodies? Do Thou warrant Disorders,
Distractions, and Discords in the Socieries or Communities of Men, to the utter
Subversion of Governments, Laws, and Liberties, and to the total Ruin of
Kingdoms? Do Thou lead Men to Contrive the most Execrable Designs, to hatch
Treasons, and to lay Plots and Conspiracies; to Endeavor (nay, Perpetrate)
Assassinations: Nay, if they fail in These, to kick at Authority, and contemn
the Laws, asperse the Governor, and vilify the Government? Are those Thy
Precepts? -- No, no, not at all; nor in any wise consisting with My Nature, as
I am Professed by the Church of England. Indeed, Rome and Geneva may understand
Me so, and the World has felt they do ever understand Me so. The Religion of
the Church of England.
As I am Professed by the Church of England, I command Her Preachers to
endeavor to implant Virtue in Men's Minds; To let Her Doctrine (as it truly and
purely is) be Undefiled, Orthodox, and Evangelical; Teaching Piety, or our Duty
toward God, Justice or Love toward those in Society with us; and primarily,
toward His Vicegerent, our Lawful King and Governor; and Sobriety, or Love to
our own Persons, in living in the Practice of those Excellent Virtues of
Temperance and Soberness; which tends so much to the Glory of God, and our own
Comfort and Happiness. Have not we then, who have the Church of England for our
Mother, great Cause to bless God, for those daily Influences of Divine Love and
Comfort, which we receive from Her? That nothing but the Pure and Incorrupt
Milk of Sincere Piety, and True Religion may be sucked from Her Immaculate
Breasts! But Alas! What the Reverend, Pious, and Learned Archbishop Laud said
in his Speech upon the Scaffold before his Death, speaking of the Church of
England, may be too aptly (the more is our Shame) applied to Her at this Time.
This poor Church of England, (said that Reverend Prelate) has Flourish't, and
been a Shelter to other Neighboring Churches, when Storms have driven upon
them; but Alas! now it is in a Storm it Self; and God knows, whether, or how it
shall get out: And, which is worse than a Storm from without, it is become like
an Oak cleft to Shivers with Wedges made out of its own Body; and that in every
Cleft, Profaneness and Irreligion is creeping in a-pace; Lib. 2. de Vitae
Contem. cap. 4.
while ( as Prosper says) Men that introduce Profaneness, are cloak't with a
Name of Imaginary Religion. For we have, in a manner, almost lost the
Substance, and dwell much (nay, too much a great deal) in Opinion; and that
Church, which all the Jesuits Machinations in these parts of Christendom could
not Ruin, is now fallen into a great deal of Danger, by Her Own.

BUT, hold! Consider, Is it Religion alone, that has thus distracted Men's
Brains? or is it Mistaken zeal, that drives Men into these Madnesses? Is there
nothing else in the Grass, that lies Latitant, and pricks us, and makes us so
uneasy? Yes, I fear there is a Serpent that stings us, and makes us kick at
Authority, called (as heretofore) Liberty of the Subject: It Is this wounds our
Stomachs, Liberty of the Subject.
and without a little Aqua Tetramagogicon, or an Indubitable Assurance of its
being Preserved, we cannot be at ease. God God! Is there any People or Nation
in Europe, ever Blessed with Greater Freedoms, and more Undisturbed Libertyes,
than this Kingdom of England? Or, Is there found from the One Part of the World
to the Other, one People blessed with such a Land. A Land, whose Constitutions
make the Best of Governments, which Government is strengthened with the Best of
Laws, which Laws are Executed by the Best of Princes; whose Prince, whose Laws,
whose Government, makes Us the Happiest of all Subjects, makes Us the Happiest
of all People. And what a late Learned Writer said, speaking in the Praise of a
Land, and the Admirable Blessings of it, may be said of England; and I shall
apply it, according to his Words:

A Land (says he) of Strength, England described as it now flourishes.
of Plenty, and of Peace; where every Soul may sit beneath his Vine, unfrighted
at the Horrid Language of the Hoarse Trumpet, unstartled at the Warlike Summons
of the Roaring Canons: A Land, whose Beauty has surpised the Ambitious Hearts
of Foreign Princes, and taught them by their Martial Oratory, to make their
vain Attempts. A Land, whose Strength reads Vanity in the deceived Hopes of
Conquerors, and crowns their Enterprises with a Shameful Overthrow. A Land,
whose Native Plenty makes her the World's Exchange; supplying Others, able to
subsist without Supply from Foreign Kingdoms: In it Self, Happy; and Abroad,
Honorable. A Land, that has no Vanity; but, what is the sweetest of all
Blessings, Peace and Plenty; that has no Misery, but is propagated from that
Blindness, which cannot see Her own Felicity. A Land, that flows with Milk and
Honey; and, in brief, wants nothing to deserve the Title of a Paradise. The
Curb of Spain, The Pride of Germany, the Aid of Belgia, the Scourge of France,
the Empress of the World, and Queen of Nations. In fine, England is the Envy of
all Nations, the Ambition of all Princes, the Terror of all Enemies, and the
Security of all Neighboring States. -- Thus far I follow the Steps of my
Learned Author in this Encomium, of the Land whereof we were both Oh Fortundt^s
nimium, sua si bona norint Anglos!
Natives.

BUT Alas! I find at the Bottom of the Role, a Blot or Blur, which (as it were)
oblitterates part of the Account; for all these Blessings and Happinesses are
but as so many Steps toward her Woe, or as so many Gaps to let in Pride,
Ambition, etc. as Foxes and Wild-Boars, to eat up, and tread down these her
Flowers: For Alas! She renders her Self miserable, by Not being Compact within
her Self in Unity, but is apt and prone to Civil and Intestine Broyls! Did Her
Children but cherish Brotherly Love and Charity, Union the best Antidore
against Evils.
and endeavor the maintaining a good and right Understanding one with another,
and not suffer every Private Man's Interest, to disturb Public Peace, Utility,
and Order, the Devil himself, nor the Pope, and all his Instruments, can, or
will ever harm or molest us. But that is the Colliquintida, that always spoils
our Pot: We are apt to carp at every thing that suits not with our crooked
Desires: We cannot endure any thing that touches us near, but we style it
Arbitrary, or that it sinells rank of Popishly-Affectedness; and then Authority
is contemned, and every Non-sensical, and half-witted Upstart, who is but just
got out of Busby's Hands, must appear in Print, in a Seditious Libel, against
the King and Government.

THE Splendour of that Fire which burns our Neighbors, deceives the Eye; It
seems Fair, because it Shines: It seems Good, because it gives Light: The Harm
thereof is not felt, till Loss be occasioned thereby. Who is there that is
unsensible, or have not heard of the late Troubles in England? What Ruin, what
Confusion, what Miseries, what Destruction they brought us into? when the Son
killed the Father, and the Father the Son; when all Order both of Nature and
Government was broken to pieces, when Liberty and Property, their Meums and
Tuums; nay, Religion too, (the Chief Cause of so much Effusion of Innocent
Blood) were totally Subverted, and ( quasi) Annihilated: And all upon Pretense
of Arbitrary Government, and a Needless Fear of Introducing Popery. Have not
our Father's Blood been spilt in this Cause, and cries unto us from the Earth;
My Sons, Give not your selves to Change? Prove. 24.2^.
And yet, Will we be running down the same Precipice to Destruction? And, Will
no Persuasive Arguments, and Amicable Suggestions and Persuasions Impede your
Hot Careere, and turn you (like Balaam) from Disobeying the Commands of the
Great Jehovah? But you will continue your Old Thesis, Id factum juvat, quod
fieri non licet?

IT IS true, there ought a Remedy be had for appearing Dangers; The Danger of
too much Haste.
but I do not commend the Repairing of past Errors, caused by Delay, with New
and Greater, caused by Impatience. Injuries received, tend to the Ruin of Men;
who with the Zeal of Honor, do not accompany wisdom; they run upon Revenge for
past Wrongs, and throw themselves headlong upon New Miseries: They would amend
One Error, and produce a Thousand. Too much Haste is as much before Time, as
too much Delay is out of Time. Errors of Impatience, are worse than Errors of
Delay; for it is better to shun Precipices, than run upon Them: If they be not
hindered, they are Retarded. Wisdom is the Daughter of Cold, Violence of Heat:
Things which have not been done in Times past, may be well effected in Times to
come. Occasions are never wanting to Men, but Men are wanting to Occasions:
They may be expected, they ought not to be prevented. Generous Spirits address
themselves to endure present Injuries, out of hope of Future Revenge: They
reserve their Anger to Vindicate Offenses, not to Evaporate Passion. A Disease
that has been long growing, is not presently eradicated; but deserves the
longer Time, and the greater Industry to Cure it. Difficulties ought not
always to be thrust at in Desperate Cases; it is better to commit them into
the Hands of Fortune, than to seek to Remedy them. Where we cannot help our
selves, to be busy, can work no other Effect, than hinder the Effects of a
Cause Superior to our selves. That (as I said before) which has wrought it
self into us by little and little, must be wrought out by little and little.

SINCE the First Discovery of this Late Hellish Popish Plot, What Prudent
Means, and Well-weighed Methods have been used to prevent the Designs, and Dash
the Hopes of those Damnable Conspitors; there is not any reasonable, sober Man,
but will aver, He is sensible of. Almighty God, as the Prime Agent toward Our
Deliverance, was pleased first to Detect their execrable Treasons and
Machinations, and to strike the Rock, to send forth Streams to save our
drooping, and Fainting Land; or made those who were the Great Saul's, Mr. Oaes,
and Mr. (...), etc.
in threatening the Destruction of Our Church and State, to become the most
Eminent Paul's, in the preserving them. And these He placed as most Exquisite
Instruments, in the Hands of His Sacred Majesty, His Vicegerent, to work out
those Means which might procure Our Peace and Welfare, and remove those
Obstacles which impeded that Good, which His Royal Bounty, and Gracious Love,
ever wished His Subjects should enjoy.

THE Consternation, and affright a thing of so important a Nature, (as a Plot)
put the whole Nation into, was not, nor is easily to be removed, especially
discovered, in a time when England was the Sole Seat of Peace and Tranquillity;
and when at the same time, all Her Neighbors were in the greatest
Conflagration of War and Desolation. The sudden Amazement which such a surprise
put Us in, possessed Us then with a Diffidence, and Distrust of our Best Friends;
neither could we think our selves Secure of the Government we lived under,
either in its Power or Authority. We presently suspect the Incredulity of Our
Prince, in being not easily induced to Believe a Plot, might proceed from some
more than Ordinary Cause; and therefore, we imagined the Court-Air smelt rank;
and thus trusting our Senses, The Duke of York impeach't.
we ran briskly on our Pursuit, and found the Duke in the Quarry! The Duke in
the Plot? The Duke in the Plot? Is presently the wondering Interrogatory of
every Body: What! He that was the Alumna, the Joy of all true English Hearts,
the Heir Apparent to the Crown of the Three Kingdoms? And the Endeared Brother
of Our Sovereign Lord?

HERE the Scene begins to alter, and Revenge and Odium sits Regent on every
Brow; and like Amnon's Hatred to His Sister Tamar, it became greater, and more
inveterate, than the Love they before bare to him. For now every Pen is
employed in beating down His Pretentions to the Crown, and proposing the
Reasonableness, nay, Undeniable Necessity, there is for the Exclusion of Him,
as a Papist from the Succession.

AND here all Our Miseries began, Our Fears and Jealousies of Introducing
Popery, Arbitrary Government, and utter Subversion of Our Religion, Laws, and
Liberties, drives Us to distrust Our Prince and His Council; and nothing will
serve our Turns, but we are ready to Affront Authority, asperse His Ministers,
and Contemn His Sovereignty; and all this (like the Ancient Turnus) for the
Liberty of the Subject, and the Maintaining the Protestant Religion!

GOOD GOD! Was there ever Prince more sincere in His Professions, and more real
and direct in His Promises, than Our Prince has been? Was there ever Prince
showed a more Vigilant Care, and Indefatigable Diligence, in endeavoring the
Finding out those nefarious Contrivers of the Popish Plot? Has He not given
the greatest Encouragement imaginable to the Discoverers of the Plot, and
Promoted their Care in finding out those Hell-bred Conspirators to bring them
to Condign Punishment? Has He not taken the Strictest Care in the World, that
the Laws be duly put in Execution; and that Delinquents escape not unpunisht?
Did He Judges removed, and new Ones Chosen.
Did He not Purge the Courts of public Justice, by removing those Magistrates
and Judges, whom He thought Male-affected; and filled up their Rooms with
others? Did He not charge them to Officiat Wisely, and Discharge their Duties
in their several Stations Honestly, for the Good of their King and Country? And
has not this His Princely Care had this Effect, That the Prisons were filled
with Popish Recusants, Priests and Jesuits; and many of them brought to
Condign Punishment? Nay, Has He not shown how far He desires the Plotters in
the Tower, might be brought to their Trials; and the Law takes its force upon
them, The Lord Stafford Executed.
by the Execution of the Lord Stafford? And lastly, is it not His daily
Protestation, That upon His Kingly Word, the Maintaining the Protestant
Religion, as it is Established by Law, the Rights and Liberties of the Subject
of England, etc. is, and shall ever be His Study, Desire, and Care? What would
Subjects wish for? or, What can Prince promise, or do more?

WHY? All this is Nihil ad rem; a Man cannot be in Three several Companies, but
we shall hear some one (more censorious than the rest) which pretend to avouch
it as the much received Opinion, That notwithstanding all This, Latet Anguis
sub Herba; The King inclines to that Religion He so much Persecutes, or
pretends to do: When on the contrary, We shall see how Causeless our Fears are
in this matter, if we will but look back on that memorable Act of 25. Chapter cap.
2d. For preventing of Dangers which may happen from Popish Recusants. Whereby a
Papist was disenabled holding any Office or Employment; tho but of so small an
advantage or interest as a Noble a Year. And it likewise ran in such general
Terms, that it Reserved no one person, but reached even to some about Him, of
whose fidelity, and sincere Love to His Person and Government, He had
undeniable proofs, and unquestionable Demonstrations: Which methinks should be
sufficient to be-lye those Rascals, who are so bold as to say, That He leaned
(in the least) that Way, since if it be examined by any Man of Sense and
Reason, it cannot but be concluded, that a Prince, in whose Power the refusing
a Law is, would ever pass one, to the utter subverting the Intendments and
Designs of a Party, whose Practices He favored, and meant to forward their
Interests. Nay, it ran not only to Offices and Employments, but to the
Disinheriting those Peers, who professed the Romish Religion, from taking their
Seats in Parliament.

AND further to satisfy Us, let Us but look back on His Gracious Speech to the
Parliament, 1679. March 6.

I HAVE done (says He) many Great Things already, Vide, The late Journals of
the House of Commons.
as the Exclusion of the Popish Lords, from their Seats in Parliament, the
Execution of several Men, both upon the Score of the Plot, and the Murder of
Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey; and it is apparent that I have not been Idle in
Prosecuting the Discovery of Both, as much further, as has been possible for
me in so short a time. And above all, I have commanded My Brother to absent
himself from Me, because I would not leave the most Malicious Men room to say,
I had not removed all Causes, which could be pretended to influence me toward
Popish Councils.

Why? All This does not satisfy, as long as Mordecai sits in the King's Gate.
The Fear of a Popish Successor possesses our Minds; and we shall still be
restless, Vide, That Vnknown-Peer's Speech, Printed January last.
till the Duke is Excluded. Let the King's Treasury fill it self, and let
Tangier take ca5re for it self; We must be assured the King is our own, and
that the Duke shall not succeed Him; and then we shall see Golden Days, and
every ones Purse shall be open. Pamphlet upon Pamphlet, Libel upon Libel, are
dispersed on that Subject; and the Streets are filled with the Horrid Noise of
the Bawling Vender, who makes the Streets Ring with his Foul-Mouth, belching
out, Great News of His Royal-Highness the Duke of York; whose Name's Too
Sacred, and of a Higher Veneration than to be mentioned by every Scoundrel,
Dunghill fellow.

AND to make their Malice appear the more Laudable, a Pamphlet must be
Published, The Character of a Popish Successor is Published.
Entitled, The Character of a Popish Successor, and what England may expect
from such a One, stufft up with all the Arguments and Reasons Malice could
invent or suggest, to Asperse His Person, to Thwart His Pretentions, or render
his Ligitimate Succeeding in the Throne of these Three Kingdoms, to be the only
Thing inconsistent, with the Safety and Liberty of the Subject, the Continuance
of the Protestant Religion, and the Privileges of Parliament. And therefore,
in all have to avoid all these Evils which our Fears and Jealousies of a Popish
Successor do at present affright Us with: The Duke must be Excluded, and then
all will be well.

THIS Pamphlet has been the Work of Two Pens to Answer, which has made our
ingenious Author to annex his Answers to them both, and style it now Complete:
It Is pity his to be admired Wit should be employed to such despicable Ends.
Every Sentence of it being the very Quintessence of Malice, and the Superlative
Degree of Boldness and Impudence. I shall only add these few words, which I
leave to your Consideration.

THAT tho it is true, the Soul of every Man (as well Prince as Subject) is in
the Hand, or at the Dispose of the Supreme Power, God; and both Liable to a
Minutes Summons: yet let me tell you, according to the Natural Conclusions of
Humane Understandings, if we examine how little the Disproportion of Age is
betwixt the King, and the Duke His Brother; and what Hopeful Appearances there
are, in the Air, Health, and Briskness of the King, above that Proclivity to
Indispositions which always attend His Royal-Highness; we must needs conclude,
That our Fears are but Chymaeraes, mere Phantasmes; or at least, that we would
shelter our Sinister Intentions under such a Specious pretense, as the
Possibility of being Subjugated to the proposed imminent Servitude a Popish
Successor would inevitably bring along with Him.

BUT what should I further dispute, or endeavor to heap up Arguments to deter
Men from such hot brained, and Unwarrantable Designs; it is done already, but
Yesterday, to my Hand, and that too by the Best of Men: The King; who has
endeavored to allay the Heat, the Fear of a Popish Successor puts Us in, by
telling Us in His Well weighed Gracious Speech to Our last Parliament; That to
remove all reasonable Fears that may anise from the possibility of a Popish
Successor's coming to the Crown; if means could be found that in such a Case,
the Administration of the Government might remain in Protestant Hands, He
should be ready to hearken to any such Expedient, by which the Religion might
be preserved, and the Monarchy not destroyed. Surely this is a Thrice welcome
News; and what will quell that passion which was so predominant, and spreading
against the Duke of York, and will silence Our Penmen or Pamphletteers, who
upon every turn, were always ready to furnish the World with their Bombast,
under this Notion, No Popery, No Slavery; or by endeavoring to possess the
Mobile, or Vulgars, with a Fear that Servitude would be the genuine Concomitant
of a Popish Successor, or King here; and therefore, they should Arm themselves
against such a Danger, and still keep to their old Maxim, Libertas optima
rerum; The Liberty of the Subject should be their Helmet, tho 'twas (as in the
late Rebellion) to the Warring against their Prince, Deposing Him, nay
Murdering Him too.

ALAS! These bold Proselytes of the Recorded Brutus, I dare believe do not
understand what Liberty means (I mean with relation to Government) but only
have heard how great sway this Thundering Noun car Liberty.
ries amidst the giddy Crowd, who need no other Bait to be thrown among them,
than the name of Liberty. Now if by Liberty be intended, What it is.
a Power of doing what one will, it will turn then to Licentiousness; 1.
and that Government which has most thereof, will be worst. If thereby be
meant, a Power of doing what is convenient, 2.
it needs not be parted from Principality or Monarchy; under which, what is
convenient has no less place, than under a Commonwealth. 3.
And if thereby be understood a Power of Commanding others, it is so much less
for the Common People which obey, by how much their Servitude is extended to a
number of Masters: But it is but a Chimaera, which Men fain unto themselves to
bring their Wits to pass, and oftentimes to Sweeten the Beginnings of a
Bitter-Servitude. For my part, I shall not endeavor further to define what
Liberty is, the undisturbed Fruition, and the sweet Benefit redounding to Us
all from it, are Sufficient to ease me of that task; no Nation in the whole
Universe having the like, as England. How far the Needless Fear of losing this
Liberty, carried Us in the late times of Rebellion, even to the utter Ruin of
Families, Estates, and Lives; nay, at last, of that Liberty too, I have before
showed. And therefore, I shall conclude this Point, with showing what sorts of
Men Our Great Libellers and Pamphletteers are, The Character of a Pamphletteer.
according to the Character a Great Prince gave one of His Grandees, who ran in
the same Seditious Road.

THEY are those (says he) who Term themselves Free, and are so indeed, in as
much as they are not subject to Reason; A People, who see nothing but Faults,
because they seek after nothing else; They blame the Sun, because it offends
their Eyes; and know not that the fault is in their Eyes, not in the Sun. A
Wicked Generation, whose Fame lies only in Defamation, their Praise in Blaming,
their Greatness in Detraction. They speak, and write what ever comes next, so
it be bad enough. Under a False show of Liberty, they would endeavor to
Confound the True One, and then to oppress it must follow: They have no Means
to raise themselves, but by taking from others; and so, that they may appear
Great, like Women, they care not whither it be by Flesh, or a Chopine. This
Kind, are the most pernicious to the whole World, would sow Confusion, make
Princes become Tyrants, raise Discords in Senates, and fill Cities with
Calumnies; and Finally, with Dead Men.

I SHOULD say something too, before I make an end of these Considerations,
Privilege of Parliament.
concerning the Privileges of Parliament, so much talked of, and so little
understood. The Maintaining of the Privileges which belong to that August
Assembly, is of so necessary and weighty a Consequence, that without that, the
Liberty we have been talking of, together with the Religion, and Laws could not
subsist. But however it is to be understood, when they are Kept within their
due Banks, and are Guided by the Law of which they with the King, are the
Fathers; and when they encroach not upon the Dignity and Prerogatives of the
Crown: They are the Great Horologe, by which is seen how Regular the Motions of
the whole Nation go; but if the Master-workman finds any Deficiency, or
Irregular Movements; it is in His Power alone, to Take it to pieces, and Correct
it. Parliaments were ever held extreme Necessary, and of Great Use in this
Land, and rendered Us ever the more Formidable, esteemed, and reverenced Abroad,
by how much they Adhered to their Head, the KING. We have, it is true, of late
within these few Years seen more Change of Parliaments, since especially the
Discovery of the Popish Plot, 77. and 78. than since the Happy Restoration of
His Majesty; the Reasons induced His Majesty to proceed so with them in their
so Frequent Dissolutions, is not for every person to enquire after, neither
shall I for my part pretend to search into, much less discover: I am only like
an Honest Man, and Loyal Subject, to acquiesce in the Pleasure of my Prince;
and not to censure the Authority and Reasonableness of His Proceedings in the
least particular.

THE most admirable, and Princely Speech, which His Majesty was Graciously
pleased to make to the Parliament at Oxford, will satisfy any reasonable or
judicious Person, by what Measures He has still proceeded, and what Resentments
He has been obliged to make of all their Proceedings; which in the Second Word
of His said Speech, He styles Unwarrantable; tho He professes notwithstanding
all, He is not out of Love with Parliaments, and never will, as long as they
take their Measures by the Law, To let that be the Rule, by which they Act, as
it is His; and that then whatever they should offer, should meet with His
Gracious Acceptance.

IF a Rider put a rough Bit into a Horses Mouth, which will not be Governed, no
Man blames Him for severity, they blame the Horse rather, because he will not
be Ruled; and yet Men are apt to call the Prince Cruel, who would curb the
Senate; and call not the Senate Headstrong, who will not obey the Prince. A
Senate, or Parliament may Vote Redresses for Grievances, suffered by the
People, whose Representatives they are, but it is in the Prince alone to make
those Votes Valid, or of Force; and therefore, without His Stamp or Royal
Assent, no Vote or Resolve can pass current made by them. It Is their Privilege
to offer Expedients, but it is the King's Prerogative to assent to, or except
against them.

TO proceed according to the Fundamental Laws of the Land, in redressing, or at
least, endeavoring to redress those Grievances which render the Subject
Malcontent, and uneasy; and by this means to Accomodate, and Silence any
Misunder standings or Murmurs, may be conceived against the Government; and
thus procure public Peace, Trahquility, and Order: I say, for this end
likewise, were Parliaments constituted, and thought necessary for the State.
But all This they were Priviliedged to do, with a Restriction, so long as the
Honor, Dignity, and Safety of the Crown was their first, and immediate Regard
and Care, as I said before. A Parliament is the Magnum Anglie Concilium, The
Great Council of the Land, called together by the King, as the proper, and most
genuine Means for the Consulting or advising of, and providing against public
Evils (wherein every private Man is concerned) and in order to the Administering
necessary Remedies. And therefore, to pretend that their Privileges enable
them to Act contrary to what their Head the King shall propose to them, toward
the Regulating Misunderstandings, Composing Differences; and the Securing Peace
and Order, is (if it may be so said) a Casting off that Supreme Power, which
gave them those Privileges; and a Breach of the King's Prerogative. And if
once Regal Prerdgative is invaded, the Regal Power will be in great Danger.
(This we have lately had notorious Testimonies of, and I hope, and pray we may
never see the like again.)

THE last Dissolution of the Parliament met at Oxford, perhaps does, and may
Amuse the World exceedingly, and drive them into a profound Admiration: Unde
hoc? Whence proceeded His Majesty's Displeasure? But the Papers called
Intelligences, pretended to satisfy Us with a great deal, and every
Coffes-House Whispered out Reasons, or at least Suspicions, and Surmises upon
it. For my part, I do, and shall ever continue my Resolution in this
particular, which I mentioned but a little before, That I think it mine, and
every Honest Man, and Loyal Subject's Duty to Acquiesce in the Pleasure of my
Prince, and not to Censure the Authority or Reasonableness of His Proceedings
in the least (I mean, so far as my Conscience shall give me leave.) I shall not
therefore any further dilate on this point, but Conclude with the saying of a
Wife Statesman, viz. Many things (says He) in the world resemble Smoke; their
Beginning is but small, their End great: And many things resemble the Wind,
whose Reginning is Boisterous, and End Weak. He saves himself from the former,
who suffers them not to Increase: from the latter, He who suffers them to Blow
over. Progress of Time, may be expected in the One, where the Other ought to be
Smothered in the Cradle.

HAVING thus far run through Our proposed Parallel under those Three Heads of
Religion, Liberty, and Privileges of Parliament; and therein shown how
dangerous they are to a Commonwealth, when mis-understood, and mis-applyed.
(As GOD knows they have been too much of late here in England; the more is the
pity, and Our shame) I shall therefore in this place look back on the large
Concessions, and bountiful Condescentions of the late King, which was so much
abused, and made as so many Helps toward the subsequent Evils, and Ruin to
this poor Kingdom of England; and see how Our Times have met with the like,
and what unsuitable Returns have been made to the Royal Grace and Favor.

THE pressing Necessities for Supplies of Money to the empty drained Coffers of
the Royal Treasury, through a long War (which I have spoken of before) coming in a
Time, when the Subject's Purse was full; and that now the Parliament, City, and
the Disaffected Parties, knew well enough was a fit time to perpetrate their
Designs, to bring the KING to their Beck, to make Him condescend to what Terms
they pleased; Which to avoid Repetition of, I desire the Impartial Reader to
consider in the Beginning of this Discourse. Where you see after that they had
brought the KING to do what they demanded, they at last, to complete all,
persuade the People that the KING meant to introduce Popery,
Arbitrary-Government, destroy the Protestant Religion, and the Liberty of the
Subject, The unwarrantable Practices of the Parliament. 1640, 41.
etc. This nettles the Giddy Crowd, and induces them to believe, that
whatsoever the Parliament did, was for their Good, and according to Conscience,
and the like: They forget their King's Gracious Concessions and Graunts; they
stop their Ears to His crying Wants, turn their Backs to His friendly and just
Demands, neglect His Authority, despise His Dignity, contemn His Administration
of the Government, thwart His just and lawful Proceedings; and thus Topsy
turvy, per fas nefasque, No King, no Laws, no Religion (I mean of the Church of
England) In exitium rount.

NOW in brief, His now Majesty's Concessions.
Let Us examine Our own Times, and here We shall find Mercy, Bounty, and
Liberality, still swaying the Scepter of these Kingdoms. We see His Sacred
Majesty was no sooner sat Him in His Throne, and had graspt the Scepter in His
Hand; but He as soon begins to display the Influences of His Royal Bounty and
Mercy, by the Act of Oblivion; The Act of Oblivion Granted.
whereby every Individual Person, who had been Actors on that late Bloody Stage
of Rebellion and Treason, (the Cruel and Blood-Thirsty Regicides, or those who
were the Unjust Judges and Murderers of His Father of Blessed Memory only
exempted) from the Beginning of the Civil-War, unto His Happy Restoration, the
New Epoch of our English Nation, that Annus Restauratae Libertatis. Nay, to
dispossess those, who Held their Estates in Capite of the Fears of the just
Demands and Pretentions, so long a time's Killing and Slaying, had given Him
upon their Tenures, and Knight Service; What vast Sums were coming to Him from
the Court of Wards and Liveries, etc. which, unless He remitted, would render
the Act of Oblivion, in effect no Pardon, since it gave not their Estates with
their Lives: His Majesty was Graciously pleased to prevent those Fears by Act
of Parliament, The Act of Parliament, 12 Chapter 2. ca. 24.
12 Chapter 2. cap. 24. depriving Himself of the Richest Jewel of His Crown, a
Prerogative so truly Royal, and so hugely advantageous, That in the Judgment
of the Learned in the Law, The People of England were never truly Free till
then.

WHEN through repeated Affronts, War with Holland.
Calumnies, and Injuries, He was forced to make War with the Hollanders, for
His own Honor: We no sooner find Him informed, That it was prejudicial to His
People, but He shuffles up a Peace upon very hard Terms for Himself; when had
He stood off but a little while (the State of His Enemies being such) He might
have made what Conditions He would. Peace made
Nay further, To show His Love to His Good Subjects, when He entered into a War
for Injuries offered to them, Vide, The Articles of Peace in Aug. 1667. and
those 1674.
no Considerations, neither Plague, nor Fire, (which had then impoverisht the
Land, by the Loss of so much People and Money) would induce Him to a Peace,
till ample Satisfaction made.

WHEN He had upon Advice Granted a Tolleration of Religion, and was satisfied
afterward by the Parliament of the Dangerous Consequences of such a Liberty;
He immediately is induced to Recall it, and did so. The Act for Toleration of
Religion made.
Did He not consent to all such Laws as were offered Him by His Parliament, for
the Securing Us against Popery, Recolled.
and particularly for the Qualifying, and Distingutshing all Persons in Office,
or Place of Trust? An Act against. Popery or Popish Recusants, 25 Chapter 2. cap. 2.
Which was that Great and memorable Act; of which, I have spoken of before, in
another place.

WHEN that Hellish Design of the Papish Party was happily Discovered, How
Wisely and Prudently, did His Majesty be-have Himself, in a Matter of so great
an Importance and Surprise? A Parliament called upon the Discovery of the Plot.
He presently Summons a Parliament; and till they could come together, He uses
all the Means possible for the Searching into, and Discovering further the
Plot, and the Hell-bred Instruments of it; to Seize their Persons and Papers,
and then lays the Whole before them, giving them this Assurance; His Majestes
Speech.
That He would be always ready to Assist them in the Inquiry into the Plot, in
any thing where His Concurrence was necessary, and accordingly as they desired,
by several Proclamations Assisting them; by some, Commanding the Absence of
Papists; by others, Inquiring after Blood, with most bountiful Promises of
Pardon and Recompense; Searching all Counties, Securing all Ports to prevent
any Flight from, and looking into the very Prisons, to bring all Malefactors to
Justice. His Bounty to the Discoverers of the Plot.
For the Encouragement of those who came in upon His Proclamation, He gave them
large Allowances, Guards to there Persons, etc. And this was duly paid, at a
time when He might have been well excused, when His Coffers were empty, and His
own Faithful m^nial Servants went un-paid; which was somewhat hard, especially
when there are some, whose whole Subsistence for themselves and Families,
depends on their In-come from His Majesty's Service. Those who were Imprisoned,
and after a long time expect their Trial; and therefore, Addressed themselves
unto Him, by their humble Petitions; He returned them no other Answer, Than
that They should receive Justice in parliament. Of this I have spoken of
already in another place.

WHEN the parliament had judged it necessary to have a War with the French, All
Trade is forbidden for Three Years; by which, War with the French.
He deprived Himself of a great part; nay a very considerable part of His
Revenue; and which, proved a very Disadvantageous Act to Himself, tho by the
Intent of the Act, it was designed for the French.

THE French having been so Victorious in the Low Countries, That it was much
feared, the Spanish Netherlands would have been quite lost; and that now the
parliament judged it necessary to Raise an Army to go against them: The KING is
ready to Grant it, and a most Incomparable Body of Men are Raised, and Mustered
in the Spring; An Army raised for Flanders.
and e're they could be Ship't for Flanders, they must be Disbanded in July
following; and in this likewise, He complied, Disbanded.
and as far as the Money allowed for that purpose, they were Disbanded: Thus,
will we have an Army? we have one. Will we have none? He Disbands it to gratify
Us. But one Thing I shall here take Notice of, which is the Great Gare His
Majesty took, The King's Care of the Army.
That not one Person from the Officer Chief, to the very meanest Soldier
throughout the whole Army, should be a Roman Catholic; and therefore, every
Individual Person must take the Blessed Sacrament and Test, the Daths of
Megrance and Supremacy, e're they were Listed into His Militia to Fight under
His Banner; by which Method, many Relinquish't, and left the Field (when every
particular Name was to be Book't) and would not take it, as is well known: Nay,
when the time of their Disbanding came, every Man whose Name was found in the
Books, Inter Protestants, his Pay was Deposited to a Farthing, and he
Discharged; none else.

AND because the best Security of a Nation are good and wholesome Laws, Never
resused an Useful Bill at any time.
There has not One Useful Bill been offered to Him, but what He has readily
accepted and past.

AND yet what unsuitable Returns has He had for all these, and many more (which
I could not com-premise within this narrow Compass) His Princely Gracious
Concessions, Vide, The Journals of the House of Commons.
and most Affectionate Condescentions. His Gracious Speeches at the Openings of
Our late Short-Liv'd-Parliaments, show His Resentments of their Proceedings;
and how just He is in them; therefore I omit particulars. His last Speech to
the Parliament at Oxford, sufficiently Evidences how great Reason He had to
Act, as He did in their so frequent Dissolutions. Nay, since that likewise, as
another great Instance of His Love to His Loyal, and Good Subjects, He has
published His Reasons that led Him to it, The King published a Declaration.
which has infinitely satisfied the Subject; the several Addresses from every
of the respective Counties, Shires, Buroughs, etc. giving some ground to
believe. Which I hope are as real in Fact, as they are in Words; and if so,
England will still be happy, notwithstanding all the Machinations and Plots of
Pope or Jesuit, Phanatick or French, being United within our selves, with the
Bonds of Peace, with a Fear of God, Honor of His Vicegerent Our Sovereign
Charles Out King, a Reverence for His Councels, especially His Great Council
the Parliament: and an Awe, and Obedience to His Ministers, and a Brotherly
Love and Charity one toward another. Praying, That God would bless His Majesty
with Peace, and Length of Days, and the Royal-Family; and That God would ever
so Direct all the Consultations of His Great Councils, the future Parliaments;
that they may tend to the Glory of His Name, the Good of His Church, and the
Safety, Honor, and Welfare of their King and Country. To which, Let every
true Son of the Church of England, say always,

Amen.
THE CONCLUSION.
THUS ( Dear Countrymen) I have endeavored to lay before you, a plain and
impartial Relation of the present Condition and State of Affairs, as they now
stand in this Juncture of Time; and what Measures, and Steps we take, to hasten
that Ruin which hangs over Our Heads; and which will inevitably fall upon Us,
if we do not endeavor with the utmost Diligence and Industry, Christian
Prudence, and our Happiness, and Peace oblige Us to. I have showed you in the
Opening of this Discourse, what Measures our Fathers took in the late
Rebellion, toward that Ruin and Destruction, which they brought upon
themselves, and their Posterity. How furiously Blind Zeal hurried them upon,
and and Mistaken Liberty plunged them in Blood and Misery! How great a sway
Parliaments bore (under the Notion of Privilege) amongst the unruly Multitude,
even to the disowning the Regal Power; nay, Deposing Our Prince; and at last,
to bring Him to the Block! I have also showed you how little the Dissimilitude
is, betwixt our, and their Proceedings, and how near we Tread in their
Footsteps: I pray God divert Us from such like Practices.

WE Read of Romulus (that Famous Founder of Rome) when the Sabins had Waged War
against Him, and had got by Stratagem into the City, and had possessed themselves
of the Capitol; and joining Battle, had Slain a great Leader and Captain of the
Romans, named Hostilius; and by this means had caused them to Retreat, and give
Back: Romulus Born along by them that Fled, made a stand at last upon the
Palatine-Hill, and seeing the great Success the Sabines had, and that now the
Honor of the Romans was dwindling; He Vows a Temple to Jupiter, and there
prays to him for Victory: But to show, that Man's Industry was to go along in
Concurrence with the Divine Power; Romulus is not wanting in his own
Endeavors, by his personal Courage and prudent Conduct, like a Valiant
Captain, and brave Leader; and thus at last obtained Victory. An Example of a
Heathen: Alas! for Us Christians! It Is this alone which can save Us, I mean a
Recourse to the Divine Power, to implore its omnipotent Goodness, to Dispel
those dark Gloomy Clouds, which hover over our Heads, and threaten Ruin and
Misery. To do which, I am confident, nay assured, our Church has no way been
backwards, both by Her daily Summons and Calls, and by the Preaching of Her
Learned, Pious Ministry: The Church Doors are always open, and as it were by
their Dumb Signs invite Us to enter there, and Commune with our God by Prayer,
to entreat His Removal of His Judgments from Us. But Alas! In vain do Men call
to Heaven; many do Invoke it, and yet do Hinder it; they require help from
Heaven, and do Abandon themselves; and by their Deeds contrarying their Words,
they show not to Desire what they have entreated, and to have Entreated, that
they might not be heard. This is a Truth too palpable, God knows, and too
notorious among Us now a-dayes! We have a great many pretended Israelites, but
few Israelites indeed.

AY, but say the People, if we are like to have bad Times; and if Evils are
like to come upon Us, and Desolation and Ruin threaten Us, The Fault lies not
at our Doors, nor are our Miscarriges the occasion; but it is the
Maladministration of those at the Helm, from whose Influences alone we
receive or Good, or Detriment, which brings upon Us, those Mischiefs that press
the Nation. And thus like the Milesian Philosopher [ Thales] who gazing up to
behold the Stars, and consider their Aspects, and neglecting the Way wherein he
walked (through his Intention, or serious Contemplation) fell into a Pit or Lake;
and there ended his Life, and Speculation together. Would Men but look into
themselves, and examine the Private Closets of their own Hearts; they will
there find Work enough, and sufficient Reason for wondering Contemplation, when
their Consciences stand ready to Salute them with Nathan's Parable, Thou art
the Man, Or it is for thy Sins that the Land Mourns, that the Angel of God
stands with his Sword drawn in his Hand, ready to Cut it off in the midst it
'its Sins, and leave no place for Reconciliation.

BUT Alas! Men now adays are grown to that Degree of Impiety, that they are
ready to Murder a Man for telling them the Truth. To be sure if the Blasting a
Man's Credit be a means to Ruin him, they will not stick to do that; and tho a
near and intimate Friend with all the Mildness, and Complacency in the World,
endeavor to insinuate a Sense of their miserable, and deplorable Estate, by
all the methods Christian Piety and Charity can suggest; yet if he touch them
too hard upon the Wounded Part, they are apt presently to throw back his
Admonitions in his Face; and with the ungodly Man the Psalmist speaks of, Tush
say they, what? Tellest thou me of Conscience, or a Pious Life. They are good
Trades for a Leaden Spirit that can stand bent to every Frown, and wants the
Brains to make a higher Fortune, or Courage to atcheive that Honor which might
Write their Names in the Chronicles of Fame. Pish, says he, Civil Honesty is
but a fair pretense for him that has no Wit to play the Knave, and makes a Man
capable of a little higher Style than Fool. Come, come, if my Conscience check
me, I Will correct my saucy Conscience, till she stand as mute as Metamorphosed
Niobe, I Will fear neither the Frowns of Princes, nor the Mighty Hand of various
Fortune: I Will pass my slow-paced Time in Melancholy-Charming Mirth, and take
the Advantage of my Youthful Days; I Will Banish Care to The Dead Sea of
Phlegmatic Old Age. A Deep Sigh shall be High Treason, and a Solemn Look
adjudged a Crime too great for Pardon. And thus they go on in Sinning, having
as the Apostle says, Seared their Consciences with a Hot-Iron.

IF a Pious Minister Preaching in the Church, touch them to the quick, by
laying open the ugliness of Sin, and the dismal Consequences of it, and the
Judgments which will inevitably fall upon Sinners, Reprobate and Obstinate; and
perhaps occasionally Harangues against particular Sins; of which, they are too
much inclined, and prone to; They hear Him whilst they are in the Church
seemingly with great Attention, tho they are impatient to be Dismissed, that they
might be at their venting their opprobrious Censures of his Person and
Doctrine; and no sooner have they reached their Houses, but as soon as sat,
presently have at the Parson, or as they usually style him Mr. Doctor, says
One, His words conduce not at all to Edification, nor are the Motions of his
Heart Sanctified. He Adores Great Ones for Preferment, and speaks too partially
of Authority. A sober Language in his mouth, but the poison of Aspes is under
his Tongue. Ah, cries a Second, He fears God for his own ends. He can hear an
Oath from his Superior, without reproving him, and sad Cursings without
Rebuke. He paints Devotion upon his Face, whilst Pride is stamped upon his
Heart. It Is indeed true, says the Third, He is quick-sighted to the
Infirmities of the Saints, and in his heart rejoices at our failings. His
studied Prayers show him to be a high Malignant, and his Jesu-worship concludes
him Popishly affected. He cries up Learning, and the Book of Common Prayer, but
says nothing of Reformation. He cringes, and makes an Idol of the Name of
Jesus, and leans wholly to a Church Government, not honoring a Preaching
Ministry. He places Sanctity in the Walls of a Steeple-house, and adores the
Sacrament with a Popish-Knee. Ah! sighs a Fourth, Have we not a great deal of
reason to separate from these Men, and turn, and absent our selves from their
Congregations; Ah! it is a great Mercy, and Unspeakable Goodness of the Lord,
That he has called us unto Him, to know the Church of God in Truth, and has
given us a Sin-killing, Heart-healing, Soul-convincing, laborious Ministry, to
teach us the Ways of Righteousness, and has separated us from these
Idolatrous Worshippers, these Sons of Belial, and Children of Darkness, etc.

Thus they asperse the Ministry, and endeavor to draw an Odium upon the
Clergy, which is the readiest means to induce men to have a low regard of
Religion it self; for (as a wise Writer of late times said) when once the
Dispensers of Religion fall into Contempt, it must be a strong Arm, and more
than that of Flesh, that can bear up Religion it self, and keep that from
falling too. [I hope, and pray with a Reverend Prelate in a late learned Sermon
upon this Subject, That God will not remove our Candlestick from among us, as
he threatened the Church of Ephesus; tho it is too much to be feared, our
Impenitency, and the disregard we have of Gods Ministers, and the Diversity of
Sects and Opinions amongst us, may be sufficient enough to occasion it. What
Judgments the Angel denounced against those Four Churches in the Revelations,
Chap. 2. I desire every Son and Daughter of our Church to consider; Read the
Severals, and I doubt not but you will soon find, how little a Disproportion
there is betwixt Us and Them: Tho I fear the last ( viz. Thyatira) may be too
much our lively Image.]

The several Schisms, Sects, and Divisions, which have been broached,
fomented, and continued about Religion in this Kingdom of England, have been
(as I said before) the immediate Reasons, that brought men to have a low regard
of Religion it self, and the Causes of the great Decay of Christian Piety in
the Land. We may attribute what we will to the State, and say what we please of
the Government; when it is the Immorality and Vice of the Cymes, which makes
the Almighty angry with us, and threaten to cut us off.

And now Impiety and Irreligion rides Tryumphant, and Immorality sways its
Scepter in the Hearts of men; and therefore, let the Charmer charm never so
wisely, men lend but Adders Cares, and will not regard. And therefore,
Admonitions are but vain, and Advice but Bubbles, Correption and Rebuke pisht
at, and reckoned but as Childish Flattery, or painted Mask; Nothing can be then
expected but such like Reparties; which I will take from the to-be-admired
Vide, Quale's Boanerges, and Barnabas.
Boanerges, and so conclude.

Tell not me of Hell, Devils, or damned Souls, to enforce me from those
Pleasures which they nickname Sin. It Is true, I have not led my life according
to the Pharisaical Square of the Opinions of God's Ministers, neither have I
found Judgments according to their Prophecies; whereby I must conclude, that
God is wonderfully merciful, or they wonderfully mistaken: How often have they
thundered Torment against my Voluptuous life? and yet I feel no pain. How
bitterly have they threatened shame against the Vaunts of the Vainglorious? Yet
find they honor. How fiercely have they preached destruction against my
Cruelty! And yet I live. What Plagues against my Swearing? Yet not infected.
What Diseases against my Drunkenness? And yet sound. What danger against
Procrastination? Yet how often has God been found upon the Death-bead. What
Damnation to Hypocrites? Yet who more safe? What Stripes to the Ignorant? Yet
who more Scot-free? What Poverty to the Sloathful? Yet they prosper. What Falls
to the Proud? Yet stand they surest. What Curses to the Covetous? Yet who
richer. What Judgment to the Lascivious? Yet who more pleasure? What Vengeance
to the Profane, the Censorious, the Revengeful? Yet none live more unscourged.
Who deeper Branded than the Liar? Yet who more Favored? Who more threatened
than the Presumptuous? Yet who less punished?

Thus they run through a Catalogue of the several Kinds of Enormous Sins, which
are most predominant in our depraved Natures, and believe not what the Church
does pronounce on each of them, but as Bugbeares; and therefore, say they, thus
we are fooled, and kept in awe by the strict fancies of these Pulpit-men, whose
Opinions have no Ground, but what they gain from Popularity. But let these bold
blustering Sinners but read the fifth Chapter of Isaiahs Prophecy, and there
they will find the miserable Woes entailed on the Wicked; as likewise, Jer. 4.
Deuteronomy. 29.2 Chron. 34.

Perhaps, I have played the Divine too long, and have tired you with these sad
Reflections; I shall therefore enlarge no further, but only add one word by way
of Admonition, and conclude. Let not, O England, an improvident Carelessness
cast out all Fear of approaching Danger. Have thou not for these many years
nuzzled in the Bosom of Habitual Peace, when thy Neighbors were in the Flames
of War. Be not deceived, a long Peace makes a Bloody War, and the Abuse of
continued Mercies makes a sharp Judgment. The stalled Ox that wallows in his
plenty, and waxes wanton in his Ease, is not far from slaughter. Did thou not
laugh Invasion to scorn, and was not affrighted at Conspiracies. Did thou
want good Laws, or did those Laws want Execution? Did thou not stand the
Glory of the World, and the Envy of all Nations? Did not thy Prophets give
lawful warning, and like true Baptists preach Repentance? How have thou lived,
that now these Prophecies are fulfilled, and that now thou beholdest the Vialls
of thy angry God ready to be powered forth? Did thou think that Pride could
not demolish the Towers that defend thee? Nor drunkenness dry up the Sea that
Walls thee? Nor the Flames of Lust dissolve the Ord'nance that protects thee. O
England, Since mercies could not allure thee, let these threatening Judgments
now at length enforce thee to a true Repentance. Quench the Firebrand which
thou have kindled. Turn thy Mirth to true Mourning, and thy Feasts of Joy to
Humiliation; and pray with thy Church, That from all Sedition, privy
Conspiracy, and Rebellion, from all false Doctrine, Heresy, and Schism, from
Hardness of Heart, and Contempt of His Word and Commandments; God would deliver
us.

Amen.

FINIS.
THE POSTSCRIPT.
SINCE the Composing the foregoing Discourse, the Parliament of Scotland was
Convogued; where the Duke of York sat Commissioner, impoured to touch those
Acts with the Royal Scepter, which passed there, Voted by men of unbyast
Principles, and Loyal Intentions. No sooner do we find them placed in their
Seats, but satissyed with the Royal Pleasure in the Commissioner, and
undisturbed with the daily Murmurings about Exclusion, Exclusion; the
English-man's Character of a Popish Successor, no way sympathizing with Their
Loyal Minds. They presently Vote the publication of those Memorable Acts for
the Lineal Legal Succession in That (and consequently This) Kingdom.

Oh Brave Scots! Now you have quitted your selves like Men, and have showed
this to be the Year of Regeneration, and (consequently) Salvation. Now you
shame our Pretended Loyallists, who make the world believe that their Zeal and
Devotion for the Royal Family deserves Admiration, and merits the name of
Unparalle^'d, when (the Curtain drawn) it is Squint-eyed and byast. Now it is
that you have played the true ancient Scot, not filled with Anti-monarchy and
Rebellion, or influenced by the Factious Spirits of Disaffected English, nor
moved with the malicious Thunderbolt of Seditious and Rebellious Meroz; but a
Legal Succession, according to the Proximity of Blood, the Liberty and Freedom
of The true Kirk of God, as now established, is and shall be your Uninterrupted
Resolve. What does, or will this do, but eternize your Names, and make you
memorable in the Chronicles of Fame. Now you have quitted your selves like true
Israelites, and the God of Israel prosper all your Consultations.

AH! But Brother, and Fellow-Subject (says the Scot to the Englishman) Ye
make Mickle to dee with yee'r Evidences, etc. we Hang them Here, as fast as
they come in. The Dee'l is in ye for Plotting and Swearing. In Troth, a Man
cannot Live with ye for Evidencing, wee'se not come among ye. Ye speak
Treason, and yee'll not be Tried, but when, and whare, and by what Jury ye
please. But yee'r Protestant-Joyner, College, has found, That the Law will
have its Force; and that tho London could afford him an Ignoramus-Jury, Oxford
would not. Veritas est magna, and praevalebit. Truth will prevail, Peace must
be maintained, and Offenders punished, Incendiaries must be suppressed, and
Murmurers silenced. Whatever the Reverend Evidence could deposite in Verbo
sacerdotis, to invalidate the King's Evidence, and to wash off the Ethiopian
Blackness of Treason and Villainy; he still found, That Verbum Justiciae and
Veritatis, foiled him; and that he ought not, as he had set His Hand to the
Plough, to look back. Methinks, the Consideration of His Life and Being (as one
told him) should have Taught Him, That to say his Prayers Hebrew-fashion, was
unbecoming His Coat. In Troth, Ye are all Mad; and what shall I say; Yee'll
never leave Plotting, till yee're all Potted. But look upon the foregoing
Discourse, and yee'le find necessary Cures to Heal this Plotting-Itch.


