The Heads of A CHARGE Delivered in the name of the Army, under the Command of
Sr. THOMAS FAIRFAX, Unto the Commissioners of PARLIAMENT, now with the Army at
St. Albans, June the 14. 1647.

To be by them sent up to the Parliament against Denzel Hollis Esquire, Sr.
Philip Stapleton, Sr. Will. Lewis, Sr. John Clotworthy, Sr. William Waller, Sr.
John Maynard Knights. Major General Massy, Mr. Glynn Recorder of London,
Colonel Walter Long, Colonel Edward Harley, and Anthony Nichols Esquire,
Members of the House of Commons, jointly or severally.

Together with A Paper prefixed, delivered to the Right Honorable
Commissioners of Parliament now with the Army, June the 15. 1647.

From his Excellency Sr. THOMAS FAIRFAX, and the Army under his Command.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by Roger Daniel, Printer to the Universitie. 1647.

St. Albanes, June 14. 1647.
By the appointment of his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, with the Officers and
Soldiery under his Command.

J. Rushworth, Secretary.

A Paper delivered to the Right Honorable Commissioners of Parliament now with
the Army, June 15. 1647.
From his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Army under his command:
Showing,
1. THat in pursuance of the Representations delivered in, we have prepared a
charge against diverse persons, Members of the House of Commons (to whom many
passages in the said Representation do relate) which we have delivered in, to
be speeded to the Parliament, and shall when the Parliament shall have admitted
thereof, appoint fit persons on our and the Kingdoms behalfs to prosecute, and
make good the same.

2. That if the Parliament shall please to admit these things into debate and
consideration, at the desire of the Army in behalf of themselves, and the
Kingdom, and to proceed thereupon, for a general satisfaction therein, we
shall then desire; I. That the persons impeached in the said charge may be
forthwith suspended from sitting in the House, without which we cannot
reasonably expect such proceeding upon any the things we have proposed, as may
probably bring the same to an happy or timely issue to the Kingdom or our
selves, or as may prevent the present designs and practices so eminently
indangering the peace of this Nation, if those same persons (who have
notoriously appeared most active in all the late proceedings; to the prejudice
and provocation of the Army, and hazzarding thus far the peace of the Kingdom)
shall continue in the same power, Judges of those things relating to the Armies
satisfaction, and peace of the Kingdom. II. That there may be a Months pay at
least, immediately sent down to the Army for a present supply, out of which the
Army shall pay 14. days quarter for time to come, and the other 14 days pay
shall be accounted as part of Arrears: And to this we must desire a present
Resolution to be with us on Thursday next, by noon at farthest. III. That if
the Officers and Soldiers of the Army who have engaged for Ireland, or those
who have deserted the Army and come to London, have since then received more
then a Months pay, there may be so much more money sent down to the Army,
above the months pay before mentioned, as may make up that months pay to the
Army equal to what such Officers and Soldiers have so received at London or
elsewhere. IV. That no Officers or Soldiers who have so deserted the Army
shall have any more paid then as for Arrears, until the rest of the Army shall
first be satisfied in point of their Arrears. V. Whereas there have been
several Designs and endeavors without Authority from the Parliament, to
raise and list new forces in this Kingdom, to draw together the forces engaged
for Ireland, and march them toward London, and other secret practices, to
engage the Kingdom in a second war: We further desire, that during the
debates and transaction of this business betwixt the Parliament and the Army;
the Parliament would not suffer any new forces to be raised within this
Kingdom, or any forces to be invited, or admitted out of any other Kingdom
into this, or any thing else to be done that may carry the face of a new war,
or of preparations thereunto, which may endanger or interrupt the present
proceeding to the settlement of the liberties and peace of this Kingdom. VI.
That the Parliament would be pleased without delay to put the things contained
in our several Representations and Papers already given in, into a speedy way
of resolution and dispatch, the present posture and condition of the Kingdom
and Army, as also of his Majesty himself, not admitting delays.


FINIS.
The heads of a Charge delivered in the name of the Army, under the command of
Sr THOMAS FAIRFAX, Unto the Commissioners of PARLIAMENT, now with the Army at
St. Albans, etc.
1. THat contrary to the trust reposed in them, the persons above named Members
of the House of Commons, have jointly or severally invaded, infringed, or
endeavored to overthrow the Rights and Liberties of the Subjects of this
Nation, in Arbitrary, violent, or oppressive ways; (and in this case where no
pretense was or could be of the Exigence of War, or other necessity, which
might justify, or excuse the same.) And they have likewise endeavored by
indirect and corrupt practices, to delay and obstruct Justice to the great
damage and prejudice of diverse of the poor Commoners of England, petitioning
for the same.

2. That this Army being until the middle of March last in a quiet and orderly
condition, and posture, free from any color or appearance of distemper or
disorder, or from offense to any; and ready (upon reasonable satisfaction in
their necessary dues for service past;) either quietly to have disbanded, or
else to have engaged in the service of Ireland; The persons above named have
jointly or severally endeavored by false Informations, misrepresentations, or
scandalous suggestions against the Army, to beget mis-understandings,
prejudices, or jealousies in the Parliament against the Army, and by deluding,
surprising, or otherwise abusing the Parliament, to engage the Authority of
Parliament to such proceedings, as to put insufferable injuries, abuses, and
provocations upon the Army, whereby to provoke and put the Army into a
distemper, and to disoblige and discourage the same from any further engagement
in the Parliaments service: by all which and other the like particulars and
proceedings of theirs, the Peace of the Kingdom has been eminently
endangered, and the relief of Ireland retarded.

3. That whereas the Parliament might otherwise have had out of this Army an
entire force, and answerable to their proportion, designed to have engaged for
Ireland, as aforesaid, under their old Officers and conduct; the persons above
named for advancement of their own ends, faction, and design, to the prejudice
of the public, have jointly or severally under pretense of the service of
Ireland, endeavored by such evil practices as before, to break and pull this
Army in pieces, to the weakening of the Power, and endangering the safety of
the Parliament and Kingdom; and have likewise endeavored to put the
Parliament and Kingdom to the trouble of hazard, delay, and vast expense of
raising a new Force, as for that service.

4. That with the breaking of this Army as aforesaid, they have in the like
manner endeavored under the pretense of the service of Ireland, to raise a new
force as before, to advance and carry on desperate designs of their own in
England, to the prejudice of the Parliament and public, and in pursuance of
the same, have endeavored to divert the Forces engaged, as for Ireland, and
unto such their purpose as aforesaid here in England; and have in like manner
endeavored to have gained a Power from the Parliament for themselves, or some
of them of diverting or misimploying those Forces aforesaid, and to raise new
Forces under pretense to guard the Parliament: And (not having obtained that)
have in like manner endeavored privately to List and engage Officers and
Soldiers, or procure them to be Listed and engaged without authority of
Parliament; for the raising of and imbroiling this Kingdom in a new and bloody
war, and to interrupt and hinder the settling and securing the Rights,
Liberties, and Peace of the Kingdom; and for the settling, upholding, and
protecting of themselves and their accomplices in their unjust, oppressive, and
factious designs and proceedings.

5. That they jointly or severally invited, encouraged, abetted, or
countenanced diverse Reformadoes, and other Officers and Soldiers, tumultuously
and violently to gather together at Westminster, to affright and assault the
Members of Parliament in passage to and from the House; to offer violence to
the House it self, and by such violence, outrages and threats, to awe and
enforce the Parliament.

The several heads of charge, the Army will by such solicitours as they shall
appoint (when the House of Commons shall admit thereof) make good in
particulars, each head against some of the persons, and some one head or more
against each of the persons, and shall shortly give in the several particulars
against each person respectively, which shall be made good by proofs: the Army
desiring to save and ^eserve to themselves the liberties of exhibiting any
further charge against all or any of the said persons.

FINIS.

