A True and Perfect RELATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS AT Manchester, From Sunday the
25. of September, to Sunday the second of October, MDCXLIJ.

Wherein is Related six several Battles fought by the Inhabitants of
Manchester, with two thousand men against the Lord Strange, now Earl of Derby,
and the Lord Rivers with 3000. horse and foot. Describing the number that was
slain on both sides, in each battle.

Declared in a Letter sent from Mr. Thomas Hawkins to Mr. Erbie a Member of the
House of Commons, and openly read in the said House, October the 4. 1642.

October 6. Printed for H. Blake, 1642.

True and Happy NEVES FROM MANCHESTER* Read in the House of Commons, October 4,
1642.
Sunday the 25 of September.
THis day in the Evening the Lord Strange, Lord Rivers Sir Gilbert Gerrat, and
about 3000 soldiers, under their command came before our town, and placed
themselves in battle array against the same, but that night attempted no assault
against the Town only preparing themselves in readiness and ordering their
Army against the next morning.

On Monday morning about six of the clock, they made an assault against the
Town, (...) and bullets fly with great eagerness, and (...) courage, the L.
Strange animating his soldiers with many plausible speeches, and great (...)
courage in himself, upon which we in the (...) addressed our selves, to defend
our selves and offend our enemies, and sending out of the town on that side
where none of their Army were some of our men to give notice to the Inhabitants
of the County, desiring their speedy aid, who with (...) cheerfulness well
provided of Arms came (...) and by 7. of the clock at night, we was in number
equal to our Adversaries, in the mean time before they came in we discharged
our parts as well as we were able against the said Lord and his forces, with
such courage as they gained not possession of any part of our Town, nor slew
any of our men, neither are we certain of the slaughter of any of them toward
Evening the L. Strange divided his Army, but no cessation of shot in the mean
time on either side.

Then the Lord Rivers with about eight hundred men assaulted SALFORD on the
other side of the Water, and before the morning possessed himself of that
Village being accounted the Suburbs of our Town, and rifled the Houses of all
the Inhabitants who were forced to fly from their cruelty.

We had the disadvantage of other Towns, having no Vales nor convenient place
to plant any Ordnance if we had any, but we having none did defend our selves
only with Muskets, playing each to other all night without ceasing and yet
thanks be to God without any damage on our part.

On Tuesday morning the Lord Strange sent a Message to the Town, desiring a
parley, at which he desired Cessation of Arms for 7. hours, which was granted,
pretending he would come to Honorable conditions of Peace.

But most persidiously in the time of Cessation, suffered his soldiers to
plunder and pillage the Countries, and 2. or three Gentlemen's Houses of good
worth and credit, and very godly men, and seized upon a great house near the
Town, upon which he caused to be planted two pieces of Ordnance to shoot to the
Town, and about three of the clock in the afternoon the said Lord sent his
Propositions of Peace to the town, to wit.

I.

That they in the town should be disarmed, and delivered into the custody of
the said Lord Strange.

2. That he with his Army might have free passage through the Town which if
they would grant, no prejudice or injury by him nor any of his Soldiers should
be offered either to the persons or goods of any of the Townsmen; But we
refusing the same, he would then continue his seige and daiely assault with all
the force he could; upon which Answer was returned we would in no wise grant
his demands, nor any other Propositions he should make, for he had violated his
promise inti^^ of their cessation, contrary to the law of Arms upon which he
commanded again to renew the fight discharging his Ordnance as fast as might
be, in the fight were slain Sir Gilbert Gerrat and about (...) his men, and 18.
taken prisoners and brought it to our town; still the exchange of shot
continuing all or most part of the night* not one of our Soldiers slain, only
one man unarmed.

On Wednesday morning the fight began again a fresh, and about twelve of the
clock, about fourscore of our men issued out of the Town to the Adversary,
with whom we had a sharp battle continuing for the space of 3. hours, but in
the end the Enemy ga^e back, and began to retreat in this skirmish, we slew of
the Malignants 30 persons, and took 25. prisoners, or there abouts, then both
sides in the main Body of the Armies caased fight, most part of the night, of
them that were slain in this skirmish was one Captain Stowell, but no other of
Note.

On Thursday the fight began again our men keeping the town, and shooting from
the same, till about ten of the clock, then we sallyed out about 1500. in
complete order, and gave the enemy full battle, which with good courage they
continued about 4 hours at length, their soldiers began to run away, and grow
weary of the fight, then they founded a retreat for that time till the next
day, this day was slain of the malignant Party about 30. persons more, and
about 15. taken prisoners.

On Friday the fight again began, and then the Lord Strange commanded their
Ordnance to be charged with small bullets, to the end to scatter amongst us,
but praised be God, none of our side were yet slain, we issued not out of the
town this day till about two of the clock, and then marched out 1000. of us,
with good hopes to have ended the siege, and routed our enemies, but it fell
out contrary, after about 2. or 3. hours fight with much courage on our side,
the Soldiers of the enemy still running away in great numbers, being almost
wearied, we sounded a retreat, for that night which the Lord Strange and his
soldiers were right glad of not offering the least assault that night, this
day were slain of their side not above 10. persons as we can know for certain,
and about (...) then prisoners, none yet through the providence and great mercy
of God is slain on our part, only in our retreat, by (...) fortune 3. of our
men were slain by our own soldiers, shooting from the Town.

On Satterday morning the Lord Strange again sent a Message to the Town for a
cessation for two days, and in the mean time to have a Treaty for Peace. But
we conceive that this was but to delay (...), thereby thinking to have new
supplies, and (...) some (...) against our town, we refused this request, and
again sallyed out of the Town with about 2000. of our men, which they
perceiving began to discharge, still their soldiers declining, but yet there
main body standing stoutly to it, and after being weary, and powder being
scarce, a retreat was on both sides sounded, and a Cessation agreed, upon till
Monday morning.

This day were slain of the Malignants about 10. or 12. and 1^. taken
prisoners, after we were again in the Town, we refreshed our selves as well as
might be, and afterward sell into examination of the prisoners we had taken,
being in all about 80. and the number that were slain about 100. some report
200. some more* but I (...) you Sir, (...) is the Truth, as (...) as I (...) on
examination of our prisoners, they said they fought against us with small
courage, and did not well understand the cause for which they fought.

^ with the Malignants, I would entreat you (...) you have read these Lines to
present them to (...) other Members of the House of Commons, (...) the whole
House sitting, that you would (...) stand the cause why our Town and County
(...) much aimed at by the Malignant Party as (...) more then all other
Counties of the King (...) are out of their protection, but put to defend
^^^selves the weakest of any.

Yours ever to be comm(...) THO: HAWKIN^
Manchester October 2.
FINIS.
(...) CERTAIN Special and Remarkable Passages of the proceedings of both
Houses of Parliament, and from diverse places of this Kingdom, from Saturday
the first of October to the sixth, containing these particulars following.
A debate in the House of Commons concerning Irish affairs, and sending
forthwith the Earl of Leicester Lord Deputy with a new Commission; and also
relief for the poor Protestants with Money and Clothes. Information that the
Earl of Warwick has taken diverse Ships laden with Money and Ammunition which
were for the Kings use. A motion made in the House of Commons upon a complaint
made of diverse soldiers against one Captain Brown living in Southwarke. A
motion made in the House of Commons on the behalf of the Keeper of the Park at
Farneham, against such as has spoiled his Majesty's Dear. Letters of
intelligence from Yorkshire of the proceedings of the Lord Fairefax, and sir
John Hotham against the Malignants in that County. Letters of intelligence from
Lincoln, of the apprehending of sir William Scr^^pe, sir John Dallison and
others. Information from Mynhead of Marquess Hartford, and the Lord Paulets
going into Wales, together with the names of all those which went along with
him. Information from Shrewsbury that his Majesty has gathered together his
Army, and there intends to tarry for the coming of his Excellency the Lord
General with his Petition, and order from both Houses of Parliament.
Information from Gloucester that the M^ have suppressed that Town, and keep
the same for the use of his Majesty. Information from Worcester that his
Excellency has fortified that Town, and spent some time in searching out the
Malignants in the same, now intending to march to Shrewsbury to meet his
Majesty. A Commitee by both Houses chosen to consider of the Landing of
Merchant strangers in this Kingdom.
Printed at London for T. B. 1642.

Certain Special and remarkable Passages of the proceedings of both Houses of
Parliament, and from diverse places of this Kingdom, from Saturday the first of
October to the sixth, containing these particulars following, etc.
BOth Houses being met they fell into a, great debate concerning the Earl of
Leicester and his Majesty's ^^aying of him from going into Ireland, being so
much desired in that Kingdom, and endeavored by the Parliament here, and
having received information by Letters from the said Earl that his Majesty
has given him some instructions to be observed by him in Ireland, which
neither of both Houses have bin acquainted with or consented to the same, not
knowing to what purpose they tend, having bin greatly debated in both Houses at
a conference between them. It was resolved upon the Question, the said Earl
should be sent for (...) answer some Objections that may be made against him,
and to deliver his instructions to be debated and considered by both Houses for
their consents and approbation thereof, and what shall be by them conceived to
be inconvenient or dangerous by them to be altered and amended, which was
ordered accordingly; Wednesday following being the last day appointed for their
full debate and d(...)tion thereupon.

THen the Committee for the Irish affairs made Repeat (...) the House of
Commons what provision of Money, Ammunition and other things of necessity must
be with all speed (...)nient sent for the relief of the Protestant Army at
Dublin (...)land; That is to say, ten tun of Match, six hundred (...) of
Powder, two great pieces of Ordnance, three hundred (...) of Clothes, and ten
thousand pounds in Money; upon which the House of Commons after some debate
thereupon (...) Message to the Lords desiring a conference, at which the said
report was read, and by both Houses agreed unto, and the said (...) thousand
pounds, with the Powder and Match aforesaid was ordered to be sent with all
speed that might be to Dublin (...)ding to the said Report.

LIkewise information was brought to the House, that the Earl of Warwick with
ten of his ships has lately fought with about eighteen sail of Spanish
ships coming (...)West Indies, and that he has sunk two of them and (...)
two, laden with Bullion and other rich Marchandice (...) has seized for the
use of King and Parliament; and that (...) taken three other ships coming from
Holland laden (...) ^^ney and Ammunition, intended for the service of the King
in his Wars against the Parliament, which he has also seized (...) is
sending them with the two Spanish ships to London, to (...)posed of by the
Parliament.

THen was a motion made in the House of Commons to the behalf of diverse
Soldiers, upon a complaint by them made against one Captain Brown living in
Southwarke, and (...) other Officers, they having bin in pay under his command
about a weeks their Company consisting of above 60. but have received none of
their pay in all this time, nor once exercised or T(...) being able and lusty
men and fit for service and willing to (...) their Lives in service of the
Parliament and State. That for want of their pay they have been much
necessitated and had bin constrained to have departed from their Col^^^^, into
their Country of Sussex out of which they came, if Lieutenant Barnes with his
good and courteous encouragement of them and releeving their necessities out of
his own estate had not kept them together, be having spent 60. pound in
sustaining of them with meat, drink, and lodging. Therefore they desire the
said Lieutenant Barnes may be made their Captain, under whom they will
willingly serve, conceaving him to be an able Soldier, fit to be a Commander,
and well affected in the Protestant Religion, and to the proceedings of both
Houses of Parliament. But if he may not be their Captain, they shall not so
cheerfully serve under any other, upon which the Commons after debate thereof,
had voted the said Captain Brown a Delinquent and ordered he should be sent
for to the House to answer the complaints made against him, and as for the
choosing of a new Captain it was referrd to the consideration of a Committee.

LIkewise a motion was made in the House of Commons on the behalf of the
keeper of Farneham park, that such persons as he has complained on in his
Petition (...) killing his Majesty's Deer, might be sent for to answer the
same, and proceeded against according to Law and Justice, which likewise was
referred to the consideration of a Committee.

THen was read in the House of Commons letters from Yorkshire, intimating that
the Lord Fairfax, Sir William Fairefax, Mr. Hotham and diverse other Gentlemen
of that County have had a skirmish with the Malignants under the command of Sir
William Savile, which continued but a little while, for the said Sir William
Savile with his company ran away, leaving most of their arms behind them, and
that they are fled quite out of that Country into Northumberland, where they
are informed they will again renew their forces, many of that County favou^ing
the Kings cause, and come again for Yorkshire, against whose coming, they
will provide what force they can to entertain them.

THis day was in the House of Commons letters from ^^^colne, informing that Sir
Christopher Wray and (...) other of the Deputy Lieutenants of that County have
(...) skirmish on Thursday last near Lincoln with Mount(...) Willoughby, Sir
William Scroop, Sir John Dallison, Sir (...) Sadler. Sir John Steron and diverse
other Malignants (...) County, in which skirmish were taken prisoners Sir (...)
Scroop and Sir John Dallison, and about 8. or 9. of their (...) slain, and the
rest fled, which prisoners they retain in (...) custody till they have further
order from the Parliament.

THen was read in the House of Commons letters (...) Minhead, intimating that
Marquess Hartford and the (...) Paulet in a disguised habit in a little boat
are escaped into Wales, That the Earl of Bedford having notice thereof,
^^saulted the Town very fiercely, for preventing the like (...)of others his
accomplices that were therein, upon which the Townsmen opened the gates and gave
his Lordship (...) with his Soldiers, who has possessed himself thereof, (...)
apprehended about 50. of the Malignants, and is now (...)ing the ^^wne for the
use of the King and Parliament.

THere was also letters read in the House of Commons (...) Shrewsbury, setting
forth that his Majesty has there gathered together his Army and intends there
to stay (...) coming of his Excellancy the Lord General to give (...) a
treaty concerning the present affairs of the Kingdom (...) though he is
persuaded there from by his Counselors (...) him, That it is hoped that when
his Excellency comes ^^^ther, a happy union and peace will yet be concluded
bet^^^^ the King and his Parliament.

LIkewis^ there were Letters read from Gloucester (...) the malignant party
have suppressed that Town, (...) fortifying the same for his Majesty against
the Parliament ^^siring Present aid may be sent into that County to supp^^^^
the Malignants before they have made themselves any (...)ger, the House
promising to take the same into speedy consideration.

THen was also read in the House of Commons a letter from Worcester, declaring
that his Excellency (...) fortified that Town, and given order to stop and
secure all bridges and passages between that Town and Ludlow for the preventing
of Prince Robert and his Army to return again into that County for to pillage
and rob the Inhabitants thereof* as they do in all other places where ever
they come, and when the passages shall be so secured, his Excellency is
resolved to march with his Army to Shrewsbury, fortifying and placing of
Garrisons in every considerable Town as he marches, to secure the same from
further attempts of the Malignant Party.

THen the House of Commons fell into debate touching the landing of Merchant
^^^^^gers in this Kingdom, and appointed a Committee to sit in the afternoon
to consider of the same, and to make enquiry after such Spanish and French
Merchants as are lately landed at Southampton, Dever, and other ports, and make
report thereof to the House the next morninng, the Committee sitting
accordingly in the Exchequer Chamber.

The names of the prinicpall of those that went for Wales the 23. of September
with the Marquess of Hartford, viz.
Marquess Hartford and his two sons. Lord Seymor and two other of the Seymors.
Lord Paulet. Sir John Paulet and his brother. Sir John Stowell. Mr. John
Stowell, Mr. Edward Stowell, Sir Ralfe Hopton. Sir Ralph Sidneham. Sir Francis
Dedington. Sir Henry Bartley high Sheriff of Summerset, Sir Charles Bartley,
The high Sheriste of Doucetshire. Sir Richard Land. Sir Francis Hauly. Colonel
A^^^^^^ham. Colonel Lunsford. Colonel Lawday. Captain Digby. Master Smith
Lord (...) in Law. Master Killogrew. Mr Edward Windham Master George Windham
Master Hugh Windham Master Anthony H(...) with many others.
FINIS.

