THE Christians DAILY SOLACE IN Experimental Oservations; OR, Cordials for
crosses in these sad and calamitous times of Affliction.

Unless thy Law had been my delight, I should then have perished in mine
affliction; Psalm. 119.92.

By R. Head

LONDON: Printed for Richard Skeleton, at the Hand and Bible in Duck-Lane; Isaac
Pridmore at the Golden Falcon, near the New Exchange; and Henry Marsh at the
Princes Arms in Chancery Lane, 1659.

To the most noble truly virtuous and honorable, the Lady Alice Phillips.
MADAM,
IN stead of imploring alone, your protection of this little Book; I come
likewise my self, humbly beseeching you to shelter us under the secure wings of
your favor, from those killing frowns and great displeasure, I see sitting on
my Mothers angry brows, occasioned by my fault; if I may call it one. Madam, if
you will know what it is, here read it in my hand; it is the publication of
this little Book, which I felloniously laid hands on, knowing very well my
Mothers humility, that will not suffer publicly her pen to speak her praise,
till she changes this life for a better. As soon as I had possessed my self of
this rare Jewel, (as I take it) I came running with it to your Ladyship, as
being only worthy of the first sight thereof, and with all knowing, that the
great influence you have over my dear Mother, will smooth her brow when she
looks on me, if you but give the word, fiat. As for the Book, your very name
prefixed to it, carries with it such virtue and efficacy, that it has equal
power with the Sun to dissipate all vaprous exhalations, that obloquie can
raise against it. Pardon, Madam, I beseech you my ambition and folly in this
dedication, since I have done, as one that would invite Great Jove, to be a
Patron to a little Gnat. But I hope your usual clemency will stand my
Mediator, I shall for bear to speak of encomiums proper to your self, since
we all know, the very naming you, is a sufficient Trumpet to sound your worth.
May your Lady-ship please; to accept of this small gift from a hand, that would
erect statues of Piramids to the honor of your everlasting name, and I shall
haste, as being eagerly proud to subscribe my self.

Madam Your humbly devoted Servant Richard Head

The Epistle to the Reader.
Reader,
HAD not my endeavor forcibly prevailed on the Authors contrary intent, thou
would never have had oh! the opportunity which now thou have by this small
Treatise, to strengthen thee in those afflictions, which calumny shall cast in
the way that thou art travailing in toward eternity. I have often read it, and
perhaps with more delight then others have done, because it so well suited with
my former condition; others likewise have perused it, no meaner Persons then
Ministers, which so well pleased them, as that they heartily descend to read it
in more legible characters, I mean printed. Wherefore that the seeming hopes
and desires of our friends might not miscarry, I resolved my self to
obstetrical bringing it to light for public benefit, that which at first was
only designed, for private use. As for the Author, it would be accounted
partiality in me, to echo out one diminitive word in her due praise, as being
my self the unworthy Son of so learnedly pious, and zealous a Mother. Let this
little Book therefore speak in part, her due encomiums, which is but the
forerunner of sever all more that are already attired to enter on the stage of
the World, if this first meet not with that hard faith which usually attends
most Books; should censure be so mild and propitious, as thereby to make this
as the Inlet to the rest, I then dare say, that experience will verify the
opinion of Pullas her self, represented in the Person of Anna Maria Schurman,
proving that it is possible for a Woman to be equally as well accomplished as a
Man, in all those things that appertain to the mind. Thus beseeching, you to
use this small treatise, and not abuse it, I shall conclude with my hearty
prayers to God that you and I so live for the future, as that we may deserve as
little as may be, the calumny or reproach of any; and so I rest,

Ducklane, June 25, 1659. Yours to serve you Richard Head.

2 Samuel 16.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. to the 14. And when King David came to Bahurim,
behold, thence came out a man of the Family of the House of Saul, whose name
was Shimei the Son of Gera: he came forth and cursed still as he came, etc.


WE have here the true portraiture of one of the most self-denyings Saints,
that either time or experience can demonstrate, that King and Princely Prophet
David, one who was eminent in four things.

1 He was eminent in the choice which God made of him (before his Brethren, or
any of the Isralites) to be King in the room of Saul. 1 Samuel 16.12.

2 He was preferred by the Daughters of Israel (before the King himself) in
their triumphall song Saul has slain his thousands, but David his ten
thousands, 1 Samuel 18.7.

3 But he was most eminent in the savor of God; never was there such an
Epethite given to any before him, that he was a man according to Gods own heart.

4 And lastly, though not least of all; he was super-eminent in his sufferings,
and sorrows, which befell him as soon as he was called from his Fathers
Sheepfold, to be the great Shepherd and King of Israel.

Many of the Saints have been remarkable for some sufferings, and some for
others; but scarce ever shall we find any one but King David, which had a taste
of all? Nay, he drank a deep draught of every afflictions bitter Cup. Take but
a scantling of his life, from his anointing to his death; and there is none but
must needs confess, he was an unparalleled sufferer.

So soon as he had promising hopes that he should be a King, they were as
quickly in part in the bud, and so withered, that he said in his have all men
were liars. Psalm. 116.11. Yea, even the Prophet Samuel, which brought him the
tideings from God, and anointed him, and that he should one day perish by the
hand of him he should succeed. 1 Samuel 27.1.

How was he wearyed by the cruel Tyrant Saul, and hunted up and down from
Mountain to Valley, from the Valley to the Wilderness, from the Wilderness to
the Caves, and at last no place was safe for him, he was fain to depart the
Land.

And as if his own sorrows were not enough, but he must see the sorrow which
befell his Fathers house, for it is like they could not abide safely in
Bethlehem; for they went to the Cave of Adullam to him; no doubt the sight of
them did but add to his misery, he would never have desired such a favor of
the King of Moah else, that his Father and his Mother, might live with him,
till he saw what God would do with him. 1 Samuel 22.1, 3.

What a sorrow was it to him (no doubt) to hear of the slaughter of 85. of the
Lords Priests, occasioned by his coming to Nob: and all the City put to the
edge of the sword. 1 Sum. 22.17, 18.

Again into what distress, was he and his company driven to, when he was forced
to become an eloquent beggar, and that to such a Churl as Nabal, that in stead
of an Alms, or a good answer, he termed him no better then a Runnagate. 1 Samuel
25.10.

How many times was he in jeopardy of his life: what hard shifts was he driven
too? he fained himself mad before Achish King of Gath. 1 Samuel 21.13. being in
great fear there.

But never was he more near it, then when his own people and companions spoke
of stoning him; his grief was so great for the burning of his City Ziklag,
and the carrying away his Wives and Friends, that he wept so much, he could
weep no more, and yet in stead of comforting him, they cause him to be deeply
distressed, when they spoke of stoning him. 1 Samuel 30.6.

Now these were his sufferings before he was crowned King, all which were but
as a Praeludium to his after sorrows; his first may be termed (as it were)
foreign, the latter domestical. The first, more on the body, the latter, more
on the Spirit, and both again had a sufficient share.

What saddest disasters befell himself and family? into what a notion of
sorrows had he plunged himself into, by his committing adultery, and hiding it
with murder; what a heavy doom did he bring upon his house, what perplexity
upon his Spirit? and though God had pardoned him upon his true repentance: yet
the Sword did never depart from his house.

What a cutting Corasive was it to him, when his beloved wife Michal shall
scornfully jeere him, and that in the service of God; what griping griefs did
even tare his tender heart in sunder, to hear that his Daughter Tamar shall be
abused, and that by her own Brother. 2 Samuel 13.14. and that afterward this
incestious Son shall be slain by his Brother Absalom, and at that time too,
when he was in his Cups, that Absalom shall requite his Fathers pardon and
indulgence, with the worst ingratitude; the greatest rebellion was ever heard
off, which we may read at large in 2 Samuel 15.16, 17, 18. That another of his
darlings, Adonijah will be so bold to step into his Fathers Throne, and say,
he will be King, before his Father has surrendered it up to nature. And
doubtless all those sorrows were not to be compared to the sadness of his
soul for sin, which we may abundantly read in many of his mournful Psalms,
there he casts up the accounts of his sorrows, when, and where, and how they
were inflicted, his being slighted, and forsaken by his friends, abused and
scorned by his enemies, was not the least of his miseries, yet for as much as
sin became so heavy a burden to him, he bore all the better; for where sin is
felt heavy, there sorrows will seem light, he was conscious he had deserved
that, and worse; and this made him in a sweet submission to kiss the rod which
this Shimei whipped him withal: suffer him, God has bidden him.

David being a man after Gods own heart, knew the order of Gods proceedings so
well, that he must smart soundly for his sins of adultery and murder, that God
would be just in making good what he had threatened, and not a syllable of it
fall to the ground, and therefore he meekneth his spirit to a quiet and humble
submission, to bear the anger of the Lord, because he had finned against him,
and therefore he professes, Psalm. 39.9. that he was dumb, and opened not his
mouth, because the Lord had done it.

In the 2 Samuel 12.10. Nathan from the Lord, fearfully threatens a heavy
judgment upon David for his sins, Thus says the Lord, because thou have
despised me, and done thus and thus, the sword shall never depart from thy
house: but I will raise up evil against thee, out of thine own house, and I
will take thy Wives, and give them to thy neighbor, and he shall lie with
them: for thou did it secretly, but I will do this thing before all Israel
and this Sun.

Now God goes roundly to work with David himself: now every word must be
fulfilled, David had dealt treacherously with Vriah: David shall be dealt
withal in as treacherous a manner by his subject, his bosom friend: yea, by
his beloved Son. He abused his neighbors wife; he shall have the same measure
redoubled into his own bosom. He had caused the enemies of God to blaspheame
his name: he shall have his own name so spit upon, that he shall become a scorn
and a byword to his enemies, a stranger to his friends, and a song to the very
drunkards.

In these nine verses, we may observe these four particulars.

1 David's coming to Bahurim.

2 Shimei's meeting, and abusing David: aggravated by four remarkable
circumstancies.

1 By his railing at David, saying, come out, come out, thou bloody man, and
thou man of Beliall: charging him with all the blood of the house of Saul.
verse. 7.

2 His cursing him all along as he went. v. 5. and 13.

3 By his throwing stones, and casting dust at him.

4 He pretends a sufficient warrant for what he did, and would make him believe
God had now found him out, and would reckon with him, verse. 8. The Lord has
returned upon thee all the blood of the house of Saul, in whose stead thou have
reigned, and the Lord has delivered thy Kingdom into the hand of Absalom thy
Son, and behold thou art taken to thy mischief, because thou art a bloody man.

3 Here is Abishai's persuading David to avenge himself, verse. 9. Why should
this dead Dog curse my Lord the King: let me go I pray thee and take off his
head.

4 We have David's humility, under Shimei's inhumanity, expressed in five
circumstances.

1 His indignation at the thoughts of revenge, verse. 10. what have I to do with
you, ye Sons of Zeruiah, as if he should have said, I will have nothing to do
with those that cannot bear an injury.

2 His looking off the stone, to God that threw it, verse. 10, 11. The Lord has
bidden him.

3 His patient submitting under the hand of God, verse. 10. So let him curse,
because the Lord has said, curse David: who shall then say, wherefore have
thou done so.

4 His justifying of God, in his way of proceeding, verse. 11. Behold my Son
which came forth of my bowels, seeks my life: how much more may this
Benjamite do it, as if he should have said, if it be good enough for me, that
my sin has procured my Son to become a Rebel, and Traitor to me his Father,
and lay my life in the d^st: it is no wonder if a stranger take this advantage,
and trample upon me too, seeing me so low.

5 His comforting himself with hopes of being benefited by this affliction,
verse. 12. It may be that the Lord will look on my affliction, and that the Lord
will requite good for his cursing this day.

1 David came to Bahurim in his flight from Absalom, we may seriously observe,
to what afflictions and streights the Saints of God may be brought, they may be
brought to flee for their lives: this was David's case, and this is the lot and
portion of all the faithful, to endure affliction in one kind or other.
Abraham the Father of the faithful, had his peculiar afflictions, his great
fears, and his unparalleled trials, Genesis 20.11. and 22. Isaac had his continual
grief of mind, in the marriage of one of his Sons; and of his being deprived
of the other for 20. years together. Genesis 26.35.36.27. See what afflictions
Jacob had, persecuted by his own Brother, and driven from his Fathers house
into a strange Land: there he suffered many an injury and indignity from his
Uncle, with sorrows he sustained from, and in his children; Surely if we would
seriously read the whole story of his life, we shall find his troubles come
tumbling one on the others back: Like the waves of the Sea; commonly the ending
of one, was but the beginning of another.

Moses, whom God so dearly loved, and entertained into the necrest familiarity,
talking with him face to face: was notwithstanding exercised with grievous
afflictions; not to speak of his hardships and streights which he sustained
before, he could understand it: being in danger of death every hour, for 3.
months space. To omit many things, what an affliction had he in carrying such
an untoward people 40. years together in the wilderness? and what wordly
comfort had he to cheer him in suffering all these afflictions, but the
remembrance of the Land of promise: the fruition whereof he long expected. But
at last he is cut off from this hope, and hears Gods definitive sentence
pass upon him, that he must ascend Mount Nebo, and dye there, Deuteronomy. 32.50.

And thus Job, though he were the justest man that lived upon the Earth, (by
the Lords own testimony) yet did he endure manifold, and grievous afflictions,
as we may read in the History of his life; the spoiling of his goods, the
slaughter of his servants, the untimely death of ten children, all at once; the
outward torment of botches and boyles; and the inward terrors of an afflicted
mind, the scorns of the wicked, the strange behavior of his Wife, the
unkind usage and hard censures of his friends, that in these respects he was
thought to be the fittest man to be propounded by the holy Ghost as a pattern
of patience. James 5.11.

And thus did all the Apostles suffer afflictions, yea, and cruel deaths,
(except St. John) Here with a Catalogue St. Paul makes of his sufferings, 2
Cor. 11.44. unto which outward vexation of body, and inward cares and
distractions of mind, we may add his spiritual afflictions, as the fight
between the flesh and spirit, and the buffitings of Satan, which were
incomparably greater then all the rest: for whereas out of the strength of his
faith and patience he rejoiced, yea even boasted himself in his other
afflictions; by these he is much humbled, and cast down in the fight of his
corruptions, and forced to cry out, in perplexity of spirit, oh wretched man
that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death.

Now the causes which does move the Lord to lay upon his children those great
afflictions, is because of sin; Sin then is the meritorious cause why the Lord
punishes a place, or Person: Judgments never come down from God, till
provocations first go up from man, and this the Church plainly affi^meth, Lam.
3.39. man suffers for his sin; and this the Lord tells Israel, Jer. 30.14, 15.
I have stricken thee with the wound of an enemy, and with a sharp chastisement,
for the multitude of thine iniquities, because thy Sons were increased, why
cryest thou for thine affliction, thy sorrow is incurable, for the multitude of
thine iniquities, I have done those things unto thee.

Object. But does God always correct for sin? are there not other ends which
move the Lord to lay crosses, upon his own children?

Ans. Its very true; God does by afflictions, as well make trial of his graces
in us, as chastize us for our sins, and that besides our transgressions there
are in Gods secret counsels, other causes of our crosses and calamities, but
seeing the Lord has in his word denounced these miseries and afflictions
against us, as punishments and chastisements, for our iniquities, and does not
reveal unto us when he tries us, and when he corrects us: Therefore leaving
Gods secrets unto himself, we are not to look unto his hidden counsels, but to
his revealed will, and according thereunto we are always to make this use of
our afflictions, that when we are judged we are chastned of the Lord, and
justly corrected and punished for our sins, and thus the Saints in all ages
have done, still have they insisted on their sins, which have primarily been
the cause of their sorrows; So David complained, Psalm. 38.3. there is no
soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger: neither is there rest in my
bones, by reason of my sins.

And thus the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 64.5. cries out in his prayer for the
people; behold thou art angry, for we have sinned.

Yea Job himself, who was chiefly afflicted for the try all of his graces,
though he desires to defend his innocence against his three friends, to
maintain the integrity of his heart from their false aspertions; yet having to
deal with God, he acknowledges, and says, I have finned, what shall I do unto
thee, oh thou preserver of men, and why do thou not parden, and take away
mine iniquity. Job. 7.20. Again, it is good to make a holy use of every
affliction; Is there an insufficiency, and impotency in creatures that they
cannot help us: or infidelity and treachery whereby they will not afford unto
us that help which we expect from them? we may very well conclude, we rested
too much on those earthen propts, and when contempt and scorn wait upon our
heels, pride and loftiness was our Gentleman Usher before, and so of the
rest. God is one that will do nothing, wherein his word shall not justify his
deed: what befalls us from him must needs be just, though we conceive not our
desert, because he smothers our offenses, his justice is in no way detected;
and surely if we would seriously take notice of it, we may often times read our
fin in our punishment: for God usually retaliates, and deals with men
according to the manner and way of their wickedness: the sin and suffering,
often meet in some remarkable circumstance.

Now as afflictions are punishments for sins past, so are they preventions
against sin in time to come.

Phisit^ans when they purge their Patients, aim most at the cause of the
disease: for when that is taken away, the effects will follow, thus does God
with his own dearest children, he purges them so sore, and brings them so low,
that they are almost pined with want, before a spring of better blood can be
procured. If we have ventured on noisome meats, and hurtful poisons, If we
will feed on gross sins, and drink in the very pudle of iniquity, what shall
our Father do with us? but give us such Physic, as will thoroughly work.

If David will lie, and commit adultery, and fall to murder Innocents: what can
God do less for David, unless he would have him lost: but lash him soundly?
make the rod cling to his skin, yea to his conscience: make his very bones to
ache, and shake too; and when he will be walking so near Hells mouth; it is just
for God to take him by the heels and make him believe he will throw him in;
what if he be crossed of his will, and cry, its better he should cry here
then in Hell? and receive his payment here, then his judgment there; and truly,
many times the whip prevents the halter; and thus if we will venture after
David in those dangerous paths, we shall be sure to pass under the red as he
did, if we be Gods children as he was.

Oh how should David's practice and case affright us? alas, how did he gather
mud, when he did but stand still a while? and how would his corruptions again
have grown to some head, had not Absalom been raised up, to breath him, and to
disperse them: If David were so foggie, after so many breathings: a man of so
good a diet: how resty should we be if never walked? how grounded on our lees
with Moab, if never turned forth from Vessel to Vessel? It stands the Lord
therefore upon, if he will provide for his harvest, and our good: to take some
pains with us, least otherwise he fail of his vintage, while we want dressing.

Now God is graciously pleased to give us a reason for what he does: I will
turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy dross, and take away all thy
time. Isai. 1.25. and again, by this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be
purged, and this is all the fruit, to take away his sin, Isai, 27.9. So
likewise Dan. 11.35. Zach. 13.9.1 Pet. 1.6, 7. Job 33.16, 17. Hos. 2.6, 7.

And this was it that made St. Augustine to comfort himself in the midst of
his tribulation: for says he, it is but my purge, to free me from the dross
of sin.

We seldom know strong diseases cured with gentle means, for it is a rule in
Physic, the medicine must exceed the malady; and therefore we can take
nothing that commonly works so kindly as afflictions; when we are in
prosperity, how apt are we to fall into a dropsy? pride makes us to magnify
our selves, and to have a great opinion of our own worth, and being joined with
the applause of others, we are so pust up, we hardly see our selves; but when
our purge works to purpose, we grow as little in our own conceit, as in the
opinion of others; what are all earthly endowments, severed from grace: alas,
they are but the deceiving shadow of a lying complexion: there is nothing that
will last: nothing but will change? and when we come to look in the glass of
the Law: those outward helps will flee and fail us: and we shall be left in
our own foulness and deformity: Hear what Job says, when thoroughly humbled, I
abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. Job. 42.6.

Again, afflictions purge out the love of the World, now this Worldly love is
such a dangerous disease, that if we are not cured of it, it would bring us at
last to a desperate consumption in all grace and goodness; and to everlasting
death both of body and soul; for faith in God, and confidence in earthly
things, will not stand together, we cannot serve God and mammon: we cannot love
the Lord, and love the World; and this the Apostle St. John says, 2 Epistle,
chap. 2.15. If any man love the World, the love of the Father is not in him.

And therefore God in mercy weanes us from those breasts we have so long lain
at, he is feign to put bitterness on it, that we may loath it; and yet such as
it is, we exceedingly affect it: ah what would we do if it were sweet? If we
defire to dwell in earthen, tottering, ruinous habitations: how loath would we
be to leave them if they were strong? Stately, and permanent? If we take
content in our pilgrimage, and make no have unto our Heavenly Country, when as
our way is so foul, and full of thorns: our journey so painful, and
dangerous: and our entertainment among those worldly Cannibals so bad and
barbarous: what a Paradise would we esteem it, and what little account would we
make of our everlasting Mansions, if we had a pleasant passage, an easy
journey, and kind usage in this strange Country; ah how full is this World of
troubles, wars, contentions, secret Traitors, open enemies, and false friends,
and yet we greeve when we think of leaving it? how would we even surfeit of
sorrow, if enjoying perfect peace, sweet concord, and faithful friendship, we
should be forced to foregoe it; most graciously therefore does our good God
deal with us, when seeing us so besotted with this pernicious love, he cause
the World to deal roughly with us, and even to thrust us away from her; and
when we hardly will let go our hold: God will make our riches to take unto
them as it were the wings of an Eagle, and flee away: our credit shall be
crakt, and our honor laid in the dust: yea our nearest and dearest friends
shall deceive us as a brook: and many times God is fain to make all helps and
hopes to fail us, and we to be left destitute and desolate, stark naked, and
bestript of all: then this will make us (if any thing) to deny all other
things, by faith to catch hold on God: hovering and covering our selves under
his wing only.

Now as God does this in much love and mercy, to beat us for, and from our
fins, and to weane us from the World: so does he it in measure and moderation;
and this he professes. Jer. 46.28. Fear not oh Jacob my Servant, for I am
with thee, I will make a full end of all Nations whither I have driven thee,
but I will not make a full end of thee: but correct thee in measure, yet will I
not leave thee wholly unpunished.

1 For the measure of our afflictions and there moderation, we may plainly see,
both in respect of their quantity, which is but small, and in their time which
is but short, for either they are light, or they are long: and if they be great
in quantity, they are but momentany in their continuance, or if they be tedious
in time, they are easy in weight: It is but a little Cup in comparison, of
what the Lord Jesus drank for us, so that our afflictions and griefs are but
shadows and resemblances, rather then substanciall evils; Hear what the
Apostle Paul says: 2 Cor. 6.9. As dying, and behold we live; as chastned, and
yet not killed; as sorrowing, and yet always rejoyceing. Whence one observes,
that our sorrow has a quasi, as though: but so has not our rejoyceing, our
afflictions are seeming, but our joys are certain.

2 And as they are light, so they are not long lasting; this God has promised
his Church. Isai. 57.16. I will not contend for ever, nor be always wroth, for
the spirits would fail before me, and the souls which I have made. Alas, were
they as long as our whole Life, yet what is that to Eternity? David compares
the length of his life but to a span; and the Lord, the time of affliction only
to a moment. Isai. 54.8. Nay to a small moment, for a small moment have I
forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather thee, in a little wrath I
hid my face from thee, for a moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have
mercy on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer.

Indeed it may seem long to us when we are in trouble, sad hours we say are
long hours, but we mistake the day. God has promised to deliver us, but we
antedate the promises, as we post-date duties; but says Habakkuk 2.3. though
it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come; It is as well Gods desire
to come in with mercy, as we to expect it; Isai. 30.18. The Lord waits that he
may be gracious, we wait when God will, and God waits when he may, when mercy
may be most welcome, and deliverance most glorious.

3 Again, God does not afflict us above our strength, and this the Apostle
verifies, 1 Cor. 10.13. he will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are
able: but will give the issue with the temptation, that we may be able to bear
it.

In the greatest pressures of the Saints, as God tempers the rod, and sweetens
it with his presence, so perpetually does he make it easy to them by his
assistance, he metes out afflictions to the strength of our poor souls, and
supplies strength to the measure of our affliction; the best earthly Physicians
may be deceived in the disease and constitution of his Patient; he may mistake
in the quality or strength of his Physic, and so miss of his intended cure;
but the Physicians of our souls, does so exactly know our temper and disease,
does so entirely affect our health, and so accurately mingle the malign and
poysonfull ingredients in our Physic with corrections and allayes, that the
confection shall be good, and altogether shall and must work for the best.

And therefore we need not to fear, either to be oppressed with an over heavy
weight of troubles and afflictions: or that we shall be tempted above our
power, in regard of our frailty and infirmity, seeing he who makes the wounds,
has also power to cure them, and he that mixeth our Cup, can also give us
strength to drink it, according to the saying of Eliphaz unto Job. chap. 5.18,
19. He makes the wound and binds it up, he smites, and his hands make
whole. The Lord Jesus has bound himself by his most gracious promise, Math.
12.20. That he will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax,
till he bring forth judgment unto victory.

Indeed we have no strength in our own selves to encounter the least
affliction; much less to endure the fiery trial; or be able to wrestle with
Principalities and Powers; but we are supported with the mighty power of God in
our greatest weakness: and held so fast by the hand of Christ: that the
strongest afflictions enforced with all the violence of man or Devil, are not
able to pull us from him.

It is the blessed spirit of God, dwelling in us, does assist us in all our
sufferings, and according to the greatness of our crosses, are the greatness
of our comforts; and this the Apostle Paul says, 2 Cor. 1.5. That as the
sufferings of Christ abound, in us; so our consolation abounds through
Christ. It is this blessed Inmate which does apply unto us the mercies of God,
and merits of Christ: and so assuring us that we have our part, and interest in
all the gracious promises of the Gospel, our consciences are so replenished
with such peace which passes all understanding, and with such unspeakable joy
and gladness, as none can conceive, but they who feel it; ah! this is that
living Fountain, which springs up to eternal life: and like a clear river,
flows with heavenly streams of sweetest consolation, wherein being bathed,
in the scortching heat of afflictions we are cooled and refreshed, and filled
with joy and delight; the thoughts of this made David to sing: Psalm. 46.4. We
have a river whose streams makes glad the City of our God, the holy place of
the Tabernacles of the most High; this is that spiritual anointing which
preserves us from being consumed in the fiery Furnace of our affliction, which
so supples our sores, and extracts the Fiery heat of the burning, that we
receive no hurt thereby; Look upon the three Children in the Furnace, at
Babylon, there was not so much as a hair of their heads singed, neither did
their clothes but smell of the fire. Dan. 3.27. We say its a comfort to have a
companion in misery, to have one that will simpathize, and condole us: what
greater friend can we have then he, which by the Lord Jesus his own mouth, is
called, the Comforter. John 14.26. How then can we be dismayed, when we have
within us such a Fountain of refreshments? Oh let us check our fainting hearts,
when they begin to droop, with the words of Eliphaz. Job 15.12. Does the
consolations of God seem small unto us? what if we want an earthly shadow, we
are sure we have a Heavenly substance.

Oh let us still meditate upon the gracious promises of God; and let them be
our certain stay in our uncertain condition; Hear what the Prophet Isaiah
says, chap. 40.29. Have thou not heard, or known, that the everlasting God,
the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the Earth, faints not, neither is weary,
there is no searching of his understanding, he gives power to the faint, and
to them that have no might, he increases strength, even the youths shall
faint, and be weary, and the young men shall utterly fall: but they that wait
upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall mount up with wings as
Eagles, they shall run and not be weary; and they shall walk and not faint.
Again, Isaiah. 41.10. Fear thou not (says God) for I am with thee, be not
afraid, for I am thy God, I will strengthen and help thee, I will sustain thee
with the right hand of my righteousness. And this was it which made David so
bold and confident, that if he should pass through the valley of the shadow
of death, he would fear no evil, because God was with him, his rod, and his
staff, they did comfort him, Psalm. 23.4.

4 God lays upon us no more then is necssary. Physicians will not minister a
strong potion, where a lenitive is enough, nor put one dram too much in his
prescription: much less will the Lord; nay we our selves, if one medicine do
not cure us, we seek another. Thus deals God; when afflictions are grown
ordinary, and usual, they move the less, because they be familiar: therefore
God is pleased to alter and change his medicines, that they might work the more
kindly. He proportions out the measure of afflictions, according to the
scantest measure of our necessity, for the magnifying of his own glory, by our
sanctification in this life, and our salvation in the life to come.

Alas, the Lord does not take any delight in our smart! or makes any have to
inflict his chastisements: but with patience, and long-suffering, he expects
our repentance, that he may have mercy upon us; and does not take his rod of
correction into his hand, till he be pressed with the weight of our sins. He
does not punish us willingly, as one that takes delight in our smart and
torment: but performs it as an action, which is rather fit for us to suffer,
than for him to do.

Let us conclude therefore, That if we have great or tedious afflictions lying
upon us; either we have great faults, or great stomachs; we many times deal
with God as children do with their parents; while they are under the rod,
promise amendment: but no sooner released, but presently we are as bad as
ever. And therefore though God may ease us, to try us sometimes; yet when he
lengthens our afflictions he will take our word no more, but will make a
through work; and till he see us thoroughly humbled and amended, and know that
our conversion and repentance be constant, and without danger of fleeting, he
will not burn the rod. But as the Goldsmiths lets his Gold melt in the Furnace,
till it be thoroughly purified and purged from its dross: which when he
perceives it according to his mind, will by no means suffer it to stay there
any longer, because it would but wast and loose of his weight. So does the Lord
suffer us to remain in the Furnace of affliction, till we be purged from our
dross of sin, by renewing our faith and repentance: but no sooner are we
according to his purpose purified, but he pulls us out, and will not suffer
us to wast and consume our selves with sorrow and heaviness; and therefore let
us patiently endure the trial, seeing God who puts us into the Furnace,
knows the best time when to take us out.

And by this we may conclude, that our afflictions are limited, both in regard
of their weight and measure. God has said to our sorrows, as to the proud
waves of the Sea, hither shall you come and no farther; all the Angels in
Heaven shall not be able to abate them: nor all the men on earth, or devils in
hell, to add one scruple to them. And whiles God unto his children measures
judgment according to their strength: he renders judgment to the wicked,
according to the measure of their sins.

5 Another consideration is, that our afflictions are not the punishments of a
Righteous Judge, but the chastisements of a Gracious Father. And this the
Apostle persuades, Heb. 12.6, 7, 8. My Son despise not thou the chastning of
the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of him; for whom the Lord loves he
chastneth, and scourges every Son whom he receives, etc. God indeed is
displeased, not with the person, for his hatred to the sin: but with the sin,
for the love of the person; he is not angry in justice, because we have sinned
so much; as in mercy that we may sin no more, and therefore we may sometimes
lie under anger, but never under wrath; it was the Lord Jesus Christ that
suffered the wrath of God, and satisfied divine justice; he bore the
punishments which were due unto sins; and discharged our debt, by offering up
himself unto his Father, as a sufficient sacrifice, and paying a price of
infinite value and merit for our redemption.

6 God has preordained those to be like Christ in his sufferings, who shall be
like him in glory, we must be content to drink with Christ in his bitter Cup,
before we shall be exalted to sit with him in his Kingdom; and this the
Apostle Peter affirms, 1 Pet. 2.21. for Christ also suffered for us, leaving
us an example that we should follow his steps; If we will feast with Christ in
Heaven, we must be content to fast with him on earth? If there we would keep an
everlasting Sabbath with him in his Kingdom: we must labor and travel whilst
those working days last.

That was a sweet speech of Bernard: thou oh Lord Jesus (says he) art to me
both an example, and reward of suffering, and both do strongly provoke, and
vehemently, inflame me: thou teach my hands to fight by the example of thy
fortitude: and after victory, thou Crownest my head with the presence of thy
Majesty. Oh! if thou be so good to those that seek, and run after thee:
what will thou be to those who find and possess thee.

If the Prince of our salvation was consecrated by afflictions, why should we
expect a privilege above him? It is not suitable and fit that an afflicted
head, should have a pampered body, and members? It becomes not the servant to
live in idleness, and pleasure; when as the master wearieth himself with
pains and labors, how can we be called his disciples, if we are not content
to walk in his steps? for as the Apostle says, Phil. 3.10, 11. If we will
know him and the virtue of his resurrection, we must first have fellowship with
him in his afflictions, and be made conformable unto his death, if by any means
we may attain unto the resurrection of the dead.

Ah! if we would often meditate of those afflictions the Lord Jesus Christ did
suffer, and that to bring us to heaven? we would not pore upon our own so much
as we do? would we but think when we suffer poverty, and are pinched with
worldly wants, what the Lord of heaven and earth sustained? he was destitute of
earthly comforts, and had not a house to lay his head. When we are injuriously
traduced, and injustly slandered, and abused: let us call to mind the Lamb of
God, who was without spot or blemish, most innocent, and full of all goodness:
even he was called a wine-Bibber, a friend to publicans and sinners, an
imposter, and one that did all his miracles by the help of the devil. When we
are ill requited by those of whom we have better deserved: forsaken by our
friends in the time of our need, and betrayed by those who stand obliged unto
us by many benefits: and to whom we have committed the very secrets of our
souls? Oh let us think, our dear Lord was worse used before us: for those he
came to save, sought his destruction, his disciples forsake him and flee away
in his greatest extremity, and one of them betrayed him to death, what if we
were haled to the judgment seat, and condemned to death: it cannot be so bad
as his was, in whose mouth was found no guile.

Surely there cannot be a more effectual motive to persuade us to drink of
Christ's bitter cup, then when we consider, that he himself, has not only begun
to us, but has drunk a far greater measure, and the very dreggs thereof, even
to the bottom, and this the Apostle persuades us with patience to run the
race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the Author and finisher of our
faith, Heb. 12.1, 2, 3.

Oh! let us be content to drink of his cup of affliction so long, till the
bitterness of this world passing away, that happy time shall come, that we
shall drink new wine with him in his eternal kingdom. The consideration of
these things will enable us, not only to bear all our crosses with patience
and comfort, but also with the Apostle Paul, Col. 1.24. To rejoice in our
sufferings, in that we do fulfill the rest of the afflictions of Christ in
our flesh for his bodies sake, which is the Church. And the Apostle Peter
exhorts us, 1 Pet. 4.13. To rejoice in as much as we are partakers of Christ's
sufferings, that when his glory shall appear, we may be glad with exceeding
joy. For if we suffer with him, we shall reign with him, 2 Timothy 2.12.

7 Here we see then, that the patient suffering of afflictions, is a Title to
an excellent inheritance; for if God chasten every Son whom he receives, then
if we are not chastised we are bastards, and not Sons; Of this let us be
confident; that although God often send pardons without corrections, yet he
never sends corrections without a pardon, unless it be our sault. And
therefore let us take every, or any affliction, as an earnest penny of our
pardon: And upon condition there may be peace with God, let any thing be
welcome that he can send as its instrument. Ah! let us suffer God to choose his
own circumstancies of adopting us; and be content to be under discipline, when
the reward of that is, to become the sons of God. Now since this is the design
of Gods love to us; let it be an occasion of our love unto him; and let us
remember, that the truth of love is hardly known, but by somewhat that puts us
to pain. Now suppose we were in as great pain and sadness, as ever did load
our spirits; would we not bear it cheerfully and nobly, if we were sure that
within a certain space, some strange excellent providence would relieve us,
enrich and recompense us so, as to overflow all our hopes, desires, and
capacities? Oh! then let us remember that we are Christians, designed to the
inheritance of Jesus, our lot and portion eternity, how great is that joy, how
infinite is that change, how unspeakable is that glory, how excellent is the
recompense of all the sufferings in the world, if they were all laden upon our
spirits? So that let our condition be what it will: If we consider our own
present condition, and compare it to our future possibility: we cannot feel the
present smart of a cross accedent to any great degree?

8 Afflictions as they purge sin, so do they purify grace, in the time of
prosperity we gather so much rust that we need scouring? We can hardly tell
what is true, and what is counterfeit, till it has been in the furnace? And
first for our faith, now is the trial whether our faith be firm or fained? in
the time of prosperity, when we have all things according to our hearts defire,
as health, wealth, credit, friends, etc. We place our confidence on them: But
when God takes these from under us, then shall we be able to discern the truth
of faith, from the trust in these. Now or never are we constrained by faith to
flee to God, and depend upon his providence, Deuteronomy. 8.2. Therefore he humbled
thee, and made thee hungry, that thou may learn, that man lives not by
bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.

When we are in prosperity, there is little exercise for faith; but when we are
in adversity and affliction; vexed with sickness, pinched with poverty,
forsaken of friends, blemished and defamed by our enemies, and subject to
innumerable dangers: then our faith, having enemies to resist, and adversaries
to strive and wrestle with; does stir up its own vigor, gather its strength
and powers together, and finding it self too weak to make resistance, does
earnestly seek to have its strength renewed and increased. That was the maine
end, why God brought forth Abraham to the combat of that sharp temptation, for
the offering up of his Son; He had believed Gods promises before, that Sarah
should bring him a Son; though very unlikely; But now to believe that God would
make good his promise, though Isaac must die; This was faith indeed. This was it
which God thought worthy to be registered to all generations: And to be imputed
to him for righteousness.

And thus likewise God brought forth Job, as a Champion to encounter with Satan
hand to hand, (as we say) and to return the lie upon his own head; that he did
not serve God for naught? That if God take away all he gave him, yea, and his
life to boot: Satan, and the whole world shall know Job will trust in God.

And this the Apostle Paul makes as a trial of faith: we had the sentence of
death in our selves, that we should not trust in our selves, but in God which
raises the dead, 2 Cor. 1.9.

This is the faith that is likely to hold out: That when we see nothing, but
rather all contrary to what we do expect; when there is a curtain drawn
between us and all creature helps: When faiths eyes are turned up to Gods
all sufficiency? Then God is most clearly seen. When we are rich, and enjoy a
full table, and want nothing; Then we think our faith is very strong: But when
poverty sets upon us like an armed man, then we shall see whether faith or
diffidence will get the upper hand. Solomon could say, that if we faint in the
day of adversity, our strength is small; And surely, if we do not trust God
upon his bare word, without a pawn, we trust him not at all; If we do not
believe him for the the small matters of this life, and depend upon him for
likelihoods? How shall we believe him in that which is impossible to us, the
raising of our bodies from their dust? etc.

Let us then examine our faith, in the time of our afflictions: For what we are
then, we are, and we are no more.

9 And thus afflictions confirms hope: And now is our hope in the full tide,
When our worldly hopes are at their greatest ebb: Then do we wait upon God
for the accomplishment of his promises, when we are frustrated of all earthly
expectations: And then we fix this sure anchor upon Gods never decaying truth,
now hope looks for comfort in him alone, when all things appears false and
deceivable. And now when God shall answer hopes expectation in help and
deliverance; then does this experience cause hope, not to be ashamed.

Ah! the sweet refreshments and comforts of hope: She supports us, and makes us
merry in all estates and conditions: It Is the best companion that ever bore a
distressed soul company. It will never leave us, till it has brought us to
heaven gates.

When afflictions, like the lead in the net would finke us down, and that sin
and sorrows labor to drown us, hope like the Cork upholds us, and sustaines
us. So that according to the Proverb. Were it not for hope, the heart would
break. And this the Apostle faith, 1 Cor. 15. If in this life only, we have
hope, we are of all men most miserable. And thus hope makes us to do, to
suffer, and to die.

Oh! therefore, let not those deliverances which are delaied, be the fainting
of our hearts, but let hope bear then up cheerfully, in a constant expectation
of that mercy, which in due time, shall be made good unto us. Let us take what
he gives, and wait for what he promises, as well knowing, that he cannot
slack, as the world accounts slacknesse, but will surely keep his own time,
though not ours.

10 Afflictions manifest the truth of our love. Alas: Many in the time of
prosperity love God, for his left handed blessings. (as Satan objected to Job)
And if God deny them but a fond desire: they are ready to overlooke all the
mercyes they enjoy: and fling them (as it were) in the face of God. But now to
love God when he takes away all: To read love in an angry look; This is love
in deed.

Love, is that lovely motive, which makes our obedience full. It Is that virtue,
which comprehends all other virtues; for if we do and suffer out of love, we
are at the highest pitch possible attainable. Love, says the Apostle,
fullfills the Law; nor can any virtue hold out so long, faith and hope, bring
us to Heaven Gates, but love enters with us, and abides for ever. Here what the
Maiden Martyr said at the Stake, Farewell Faith, and welcome Love.

See what a sweet interpretation love puts on all Gods dealings; when the flesh
objects and says, like Jobs wife, What, bless God and dye? serve him, and be
thus rewarded? but love answers, What, and shall we not receive evil at the
hand of God as well as good? do they not both proceed from the same fountain?
yea, from that Ocean of Love from whence Christ came.

Again, in streights and want^, flesh will object, Can the servants and the
dogs be served, and shall a Child of God want necessaries? want bread? but
says Love, The Love of God, as God, and the Love of a Father in Christ do much
differ; as God, he is good to all, makes his Sun to shine, and his Rain to
fall on the just, and unjust; as a Father, he is especially good to his
Children; to whom, if he gives not much in this world, yet gives he so much as
he sees best for them, with a comfortable use thereof, this however, to be his
Child, is more then if he gave us all the World to enjoy.

When we are at any time scorned, reproached, reviled, scandalized; Love goes
away silently, with this heavy burden, reasoning with her self, behold the
love of my God! do they fling borrowed dirt in my face? what a mercy is it,
that God does not discover to them the filth of my heart, my secret sins? how
would they blaze them?

And so for losses of friends, husband, children, goods; Love looks upon
nothing as lost, but restored or laid up, thinking always upon what she does
enjoy; that in her greatest wants, she enjoyes innumerable blessings from God,
whereas our sins have deserved that all should be taken from us, and his
judgments and punishments inflicted as a fit wages for all our sinful
services; Love makes us rest sweetly contented with what we have, and not
repining for wanting something; but rejoicing that the Lord affords us any
thing: Ah! says Love, if I am not so happy as others for what I do enjoy, yet
in this I am happy, for the evils I might have had, and have escaped; surely if
we have a little, and cannot be contented, we have even too much.

And this is the nature of Love, the more the world magligneth and persecuteth
us, the more our love is weaned from the world, and the less we love the
world, the more is our affections inflamed toward God: Ah! we shall in our
outward crosses feel the inward comforts of Gods Spirit so pleasant and
delightful, that they are sufficient to sweeten a world of miseries; and this
made David to sing, Psalm. 116.1. Oh how I love the Lord! And surely many of the
Saints of God do never love him so solidly, as when they have been soundly
whipped.

And as by afflictions we come to love God more, so are we made to compassinate
and pity our brethren; we can never give comforts rightly, till we have gotten
experience of what we say; there cannot be any place in our hearts for
compassion of others griefs, till passion and suffering of the same evils have
been there before; no Phifitian is more able to cure a another man, than he who
has first cured himself of the same disease; because unto his art is enjoined
experience, whereby it is made perfect; and therefore when we go to comfort
others, we can from our own knowledge say, I have been thus afflicted, and thus
and thus did I receive consolation, and was strengthened in patience to bear my
crosses; here God did support me with his might, when being feeble in my self,
I was ready to faint and fall; thus was I refreshed with spiritual
consolations, and the inward feelings of Gods love and mercy, thus did he
powerfully deliver me, when in respect of all outward means my case was
desperate: And thus does David take upon him to comfort others upon his own
experience, Psalm. 34. O taste and see that the Lord is good, blessed is the man
that trusts in him, I was brought low and he helped me, I sought the Lord and
he heard me, and delivered me out of all my fears.

And this as a Caveat by the by; when ever you are afflicted, either in body,
spirit, goods, or good name; do not vent your griefs to them that have never
been afflicted; for as they cannot give you any experimental comfort, so your
griefs cannot make any great impression in their hearts, they can be no more
affected with your complaints, than if you discoursed of the causes, symptoms,
and malignity of that disease they never felt? they may sigh, and say its very
sad, but it cannot long sink into their minds, its commonly but tedious
discourse at the best; some can speak it by woeful experience, that the
disclosing of their wounds, have been an occasion that their plasters have
been flung in their face, and that which should have been an argument of pity
and compassion, have procured slighting and contempt; but no more of this.

11 By afflictions we are brought to be more humble, to have a sight and sense
of our own vileness and unworthiness, to an acknowledgement of our
infirmities, weakness, and great insufficiency, and to a voluntary submission
of our wills in all things to the will of God: Alas in the time of prosperity,
we are so blinded with natural pride, and self-love, that we never come to a
clear knowledge of our selves, nor to a true valuation of our abilities, but
are puffed up with self-conceit, having a greater opinion of our own excellencies
than they deserve, imagining that though God should leave us to our selves, we
could stand in our own might, resist any temptation, and encounter and overcome
any enemy, but when God brings us into afflictions, and exercises us with
sickness, poverty, disgrace, or loss of our nearest and dearest friends; then
are we by them brought to a sight of our own frailty and infirmity, and by this
experience find how unable we are by our own strength to endure the least
trial, and to get the upper hand of the weakest temptation; alas a proud heart
is never broken and brought down but by afflictions? This was it which made
David to say, 2. Sam. 15.26. Let the Lord do to me as seems good in his own
eyes.

This was it that brought down the proud heart of Manasses King of Juda, when
he had raged against God and his Saints with wonderful insolency, but when he
was in captivty, fast in chains, then this Wild Colt is ^amed, his proud heart
is down; he humbled himself greatly before the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 33.12.

And thus we see in the Apostle Peter, how bold and confident he was in his
own strength, and opinion, till he fell foulely; but after we hear of no more
such braggs: but of this, more hereafter.

12 Afflictions make us more diligent in prayer; for though we may be slack and
loose in this holy exercise when we are at ease and rest, yet when the weight
of affliction lies heavy upon us, it presses out of us strong cries, and
bitter sighs and tears, this made David to cry out of the depth of his misery,
to roar for grief of heart, to water his couch with his tears, and making his
bed to swim, these his perbolical speeches express the abundance of his sorrow.

And this was it which made Jacob to be so earnest with God; his affliction and
distress, made him to be so solicitous with God, with weeping and
supplications, a whole night together, and would not give over without a
blessing, Hos. 12.3, 4. And this the Prophet says, Israel did, Isay. 26.17.
They poured out their prayers when the Lords chastning was upon them.

Prayer is the best remedy for sorrow? griefs are eased by groans and
utterance, the but opening of a vein cools the blood: And such Evaporations
disburdeneth and cools the heart? It Is some ease to pour out our complaints
into a friends bosom; but no such refreshment as to disburden our hearts into
the ears of God; prayer is the exercise of our graces: And graces exercised
will yield comfort, prayer solicites God for patience, that if we have a great
burden, we may have a strong back; prayer will beg hope and trust, to wait
upon God for his fatherly care and love. It will ask a gracious improvement:
The benefit of the rod, is a fruit of the divine grace, as well as the benefit
of the word, and then she begs deliverance, with a submission to Gods will,
that in the mean time, they may be moderated, sweetened, and sanctified, in the
issue to us.

And surely there is no cross so great, but prayer will lighten it; as there
is none so easy, but plodding and unthankfullnesse will make it heavy. Oh let
us then in all our sorrows and sufferings, make our complaints to our gracious
God, and let that time which is spent in aggravating crosses and unkindnesses,
be spent in re-counting mercies and deliverances; and then crosses will be as
small in our account, as they be in truth.

And when our prayers begin to flagg and faint, as being most unworthy
acceptance, let us strengthen our desires by the remembrance of Christ's praying
and interceding for us; if Christ did not pray for us in our troubles and
temptations, no afflictions but would be too big for our little hearts.

13 And as afflictions beget prayer, so they beget and increase patience, which
is our passive obedience, whereby we are content that Gods will may be done in
us, suffering with meekness and patience, whatsoever crosses and afflictions
it shall please him to inflict upon us. In prosperity our minds are made weak
and effeminate, by reason that our too much having our wills, do make us
wanton, and wantonness does make us way-ward and peevish; which causes us to
show great impatience in our smallest crosses, and to murmur and complain,
when but the sight or shadow of any affliction does appear, oh how techy we
are! if but a little touched in our reputation? we storm, fret, and fume, if we
are scandalized, reproached, slighted, contemned; we think they are such
indignities as are insufferable, and insupportable weights and burdens; the
faulsehood and unkindnesse of a friend, Oh that is not to be born; it God cross
us but a little in our estates; we think our loss irreparable; if he take away
a child from many, why then we overlooke all the rest, and keep whineing for
that; whereas it had been mercy if God had taken all, and left us but one; but
if he add to take away a wife or husband, alas then there is no such grief as
ours; now we will go mourning to our graves, with Rachell, we will not be
comforted because they are not; but when God lays on affliction to purpose, and
whips us soundly for crying, now we are as quiet as lambs, now we can kiss the
rod, and do any thing; and say, Oh 't was good that I was afflicted; thy Rod
and thy Staff they comfort me: now that burden that made us sink under, we
carry away with ease; now the Scorns and reproaches of our enemies, which made
us formerly weep, we either wink, and will not see them, or if we cannot choose
but hear and see too, yet regard no more than a Lion the bark of a Dog.

Now the unkindnesse of a friend, which would cut sharper than a razor: (time
was) make us to think upon those friends that are perfect, and have left all
their infirmities in the dust; now we are made to seek friendship with him,
that when once he loves, he loves to the end; with whom there is no
variableness or shadow of turning: and to be sweetly contented with him
alone, though all the friends in the world have left us; and certainly he is
unworthy to lay amy claim to God, that cannot find parents, kindred, friends,
in him alone.

And thus when we have sweetly been brought to do the will of God, we shall
silently and contentedly suffer it; passive obedience springs from active: when
we truly know it is Gods will, we endure it with a quiet patience; considering
that what ever befalls us, comes from his good pleasure; and therefore those
that have not inured themselves to the yoke of obedience, will never endure the
yoke of suffering.

1 Another thing we may observe in David's flight; he was persecuted by his own
Son, to whom he had been but too kind a Father; and truly those children seldom
prove happy to us, that have too much of our heart.

Absalom had deserved death in causing his own brother to be slain: David
pardons the fact; in him is verified the Proverb: Save a Malefactor from the
Gallows, and he will hang thee if he can. If Absalom had had his desert
before, David might have freed himself from much trouble and sorrow; hanged he
must be, if none will do it his pride shall; and besides, hang on record for
the most disloyallest traitor and rebel, and the most disobedientest Son that
ever the Sun beheld.

Thus we see, that if parents can be content that their children shall cross
God, God will be content that their children shall be crosses to them; if David
will not correct him, God will.

Again if Rulers will give life when God calls for death, they shall help
themselves to sorrow, and their friends to shame; God has here a time to pay
David, and punish Absalom, thus you see in Elies indulgence to his ungodly
sons; rebuke them he did, but restrain them he did not, they shall be executed
by the Sword of an enemy, though not of justice, and himself shall die a
fearful death, 1. Sam. 4.18.

And truly it is worth our observation, that when we make too much of the
Creature, God makes nothing of them. And thus many times we nourish such Vipers
as in the end eats out our bowels; many a one does by us, as Joab served Abner,
2. Sam. 3.27. Take us aside to speak with us quietly, and then stab us; Alas,
the true hearted lie most open to credulity; and therefore it is very easy to
beguile their harmless intentions: And indeed no enemy so bad as a bosom
friend? and no enmity burns so furiously, as that which arises from the
quenched coals of love: And this is it that makes us take more grievous the
injury of a friend far greater, than the malicious hatred of an enemy; for open
hostility calls us to our guards; but we have had no fence against a trusted
treachery.

Of all enemies it is a misery to have one very powerful, or very malicious; if
they cannot wound us upon proofs, they will upon likelihood.

And of all enemies he will be the worst that has done us an irreparable
injury; for when he sees he can make us no satisfaction, he will proceed to
hatred, and then to malice, and then he will seek our ruin.

And he is the worst enemy that turns traitor, and turn traitor he cannot,
unless he has been a friend formerly; now a traitor is much more dangerous
than a professed enemy; and a fugitive Soldier more pernicious in time of war,
than he that assaulteth with open violence: Ambrose could say, That an enemy
may be shunned, but a friend cannot, if he means to be treacherous; we may
easily take heed of him to whom we have not committed our counsels; but it is
scarce possible to prevent his mischiefs to whom we have entrusted them.

And truly David never met with such enmity from all his professed enemies as
he had from those which were once his familiar friends; Hear what a pitiful
complaint he makes, Psalm. 55.12. 13, 14. If it had been an enemy, I could have
born it; but it was thou, mine equal, my familiar friend, in whom I delighted,
which did eat of my bread and went to the house of God in company with me, this
is he that has lifted up his heel against me.

But let all Traitors lay to heart, how frequent have been examples of Gods
vengeance on such: who ever saw a bloody Traitor come to a good end? few or
none ever escape the hand of God, or the sword of the Magistrate, or their own
balter; how died Zimri, Achithophel, Absalom, Zebah, Judas, their own hands
made passage for their souls into hellish torments, (as the devil once
complained) before their time.

2 But are these all that David has to encounter with? these were dumb dogs
that would have snapt at his heels, nay at his head ere he had seen them; no,
there is another fierce mastiffe, which flies at him with open mouth; Shimei
will take advantage of this time to vent the old grudge and malice that lay
lurking in his heart, till a fit opportunity: he was of the house of Saul, that
was enough to make him an enemy; so that we may conclude, that malicious
wretches watch an advantage when they may do a mischief: It is the common
course of a cursed disposition to trample upon those which are already fallen.

This has been the practice of Satan's instruments in all ages, to insult over
misery; and I would it were confined to them only. Job was bitterly spoken
against in his greatest extremity by his own friends, and they no doubt Godly
too, and censured for an hipocrite; and yet he gives it out for a maxim, that
to him that is in misery, pity should be shown; and of all objects of sorrow,
a distressed King is the most pitiful, because it presents most the frailty
of humanity: the sorrows of a deposed King, are like the distorquements of a
departed conscience: which none can know, but he that has lost a Crown,
toward those that have been always poor, piety is not so passionate: For
they had no elevation to make their depression seem the greater wonder. Surely
a tender heart would have pitied Bajazet, and Valerian, (as they were men) the
one in his Cage: the other when he lay prostrate as a footstool to his proud
foe, who would not have wept with King Edward the second, when his princely
tears were all the warm water, his butchers would allow him to shave him
with? When the hedge was his cloth of state, and his throne the ground; and who
would not have poured out unrestrained tears, to have seen King David go up
Mount Olivet barefoot, and weeping as he went, to see all his Nobles and mighty
men in mourning; and to hear all the country cry with a loud voice, 2 Samuel 15
23.30. And yet this miscreant Shimei in stead of pity, proudly insults.

Ah! With what spirits are they endued, that can greive, the greived; and add
sorrow to the over-burdened: What to put more weight to an overcharged b^ame,
to lash with an iron rod that back which is already flaied with whipping?
Surely this property is not only inhumane, but diabolical. To persecute a poor
distresseed soul, it is the very extremity that malice can do, or affliction
suffer.

It Is a hellish disposition, how to watch to give a blow to the man that is
already reeling.

Again, Shimei charges David peremptorily with the blood of the house of Saul,
why should we conclude that which neither our eyes did see by proof, or our
ears hear by report; but Calumny and conjecture will injure innocence it self.

In matter of censure, nothing but a certain knowledge, should make us give a
certain judgment; fame, and air, are both too weak foundations for
unspotted truth to build on; only deeds are liable to the downright tax? In
things uncertain, a bad construction, must needs flow from a bad mind; and
therefore Malice and baseness, ever dwell with Calumny. And the desire to
disgrace another, springs from the same fountain.

Censures will not hold out weight, that have life only from the spungy cells of
the common brain; why should any pass a definitive sentence against any one
whom we know but superficially? As if I were a God to see the inward soul.
Nature, art, report, may all fail: Yea, sometimes probabilityes. There is no
certainty to discover a man by, but time and conversation.

Besides Shimei rips up David's faults, and lays them to open view: David had
polluted his hands in the blood of Vriah, though not of Saul: But God had washed
them clean: Who then durst call David a bloody man? Its bad raking into those
sores, which the blood of Christ has healed.

He is justly to be condemned for a traitor to reputation, and society: That
tells the private faults of his friend, to the public, and depraving world;
certainly they have no work or business at home, in their own consciences.
That have so much leisure in sinful curiosity, and unnecessary meddling, and
enquiring into other men's carriages? Oh! What Malice, Spite, and pride, do
show it self many times in those Pharisaicall false-hearts, and finde-faults,
to mistake, and missinterpret an innocent neighbor; yea, and often times to
proclaim with great noise, and self applause, their own idle Malignant,
forgeries, and fancies; for faults, of those, who are more righteous then they.
It Is an usual custom, for malevolent Detractors, to disparage others upon
slight grounds, and little instances; and in a matter of a discourtesy to dive
into a man's mind, beyond his own comment: Stirring up a doutbfull indignity,
without proofs, that carry weight, or conviction. And many times for want of
matter, they will snatch a report from the invenomed tongue of a talebearer.
And so with his wicked wit, and wide conscience, work a World of revengfull
villainy.

Ah! there are too many, which think it best to raise their reputations, with
the ruins of another; and to hold every insolent detraction from other men's
sufficiencies, an addition to their own.

Let all censorious busi-bodyes, take heed, how they speak of the infirmities
of Gods people: Thou may speak the truth, and yet be a slanderer; and whilst
thou make thy tongue, the whipper of thy neighbor: thou oftentimes provest a
murderer. By mangling and martering his reputation, which if it live to recover
its wound, yet seldom or never its scarre; and therefore there can never be a
sufficient recompense for an unjust slander.

Let these motives prevail with us; what if he be a Saint thou so defamests?
if he be a Saint, he is one for whom Jesus Christ has dyed, between whom there
is a nearer relation and union, then between a man and his wife; will a loving
husband endure to see his wife abused before his face; seriously think the
Lord stands by and sees all. He hears all those contumelious reproaches, and
will weigh from what mind they do proceed; whether from weakness, or,
willfulness. And accordingly he will repay, consider that place, Number. 12.8.
What says God, (to Aaron and Miriam, Saints) were you not af^raid to speak
against my servant Moses? and then reason; shall I upon the malicious
instigation of a viperine brood, deride, disgrace, discredit any one that is
so near to the Lord Jesus; shall I cast a malicious glance, coy, or
contemptuous look against one of the bridegroomes friends shall I admit any
false and forged calumniation, against their spotless innocence. Shall I
invent intangling snares to inveigle their charitable and credulous simplicity?
shall I have the least sinister conceips against their upright conversations?
What if they are black in regard of sufferings and afflictions outwardly? And
in regard of their often frailtyes and infirmityes inwardly: Why yet let me
think they are amiable, and lovely, in respect of their practice of piety,
inward sincerity, and Christ's righteousness, and sanctification begun and
kindled, which will never go out. What if they are deformed in their own
eyes, and esteemed vile in the eyes of others: Nay, hardly gracious in the eyes
of a very few: yet are they honorable in the esteem of God.

Ah! How dare we to speak ill of a Child of God: Or greive one that is so
indeared to such a fathers affections? God loves his own so tenderly; that
whosoever offers a disgrace to them, shall be sure to pay for it: Either by
tears or torment.

Let us therefore study and practice a right religious ordering of our tongues,
and let them be always the touchstone of our hearts, whereby we may easily
discern, whether they be heavenly metal, or of earthly dross. And let us
never speak evil of any man, though truly: But with a design of charity, to
reclaim him from that evil; and never use more words against any man's sins in
public: Then we would make prayers for their souls in private.

Let us take heed how we handle the reputation of another: It is like a white
ball, which sullys by being tossed from hand to hand,

There be few which do not sometimes such actions as they would not have
discretion scan, unadvised words may sometimes fly from the tongue, that the
heart did neither hatch, nor harbor; integrity it self, would not be awed by
a blabbing spy. And therefore in all our commerce, let us make frequent
appeals to our consciences: would I have this measure meted out into mine own
soul; Oh! Let us abhor to speak that of another which we would not have
another speak of us, or ever condemn that in any one, which we would not have
but pard oned in our selves; and what ever we do or speak, to think first,
what will become of it, when its done. And though we cannot make a man worse to
himself; yet we may render him vile to others.

How too many are there which pretend to meet for better ends; do under
Christ's livery, carry a pack of false and slanderous tales: which they have
raked, and scraped together, from their own dunghill surmises: insinuating
listenings, malicious whisperings, pragmaticall inquisitivenesse into other
men's businesses; and hear out of an inching humor of tattling, they lay abroad
their rotten wares, defame their innocent harmless neighbors, which if any
accidentally come in the while; they quickly pack up and are gone.

Here their malice draws consequencies, a great way off from the premises; and
conclude sins from inevident fignes; and what reproach is here hatched under a
hearsay; they greedily take up, and vent it at the next meeting for an
undeniable truth.

Ah! Would they lay that place to their hearts, Psalm. 15.3. Those that shall
inherit Gods hill, are such, as does not back-bite with his tongue: Nor does
evil to his neighbor, nor takes up a reproach against him. Note that he does
not only, not speak evil; but he does not hear evil, with approbation; he
takes not up a reproach against his neighbor. But these backbiters shall
find it by certain demonstration to their own consciences, that they are as
yet, the children of the devil, the father of lies and slanders, and have of
him already learned the very language of hell Job. 8.44.

3 Abishai cannot bear this indignity, though David will: And therefore
desires leave to take away his head. Take notice, that, ungodly wretches that
cannot bridle their tongues against the children of God: are in the ready way
to ruin.

And surely, it cannot be safe to insult over any. Into all sensitive
creatures, nature has put a kind of vindictive justice, that in some measure
they are able to return an injury; if they do not always, it is only because
they are not able.

But man has a more able, and more impatient soul: And though reason and
religion teaches him not to be furious: Yet with all, it teaches him not to be
dull.

Extremities of injuries, often awake extremities of revenge; especially if we
meet with contempt from others, or find despair in our selves.

Nor stands it but with reason: That a strong patience, urged beyond it self:
Should turn into the strongest rage; disdain will banish patience, and bring
in fury.

And truly ingenuity can bear any thing more easily, then the griese of a
contumelious reproach.

It argues a kind of nobleness in that man's nature, that will plead in the
defense of his neighbors innocence, and they that will not vindicate the name
of a Christian from calumination; these in their silence, consent to the
slander, that it is true.

But yet here must be great discretion: in the apprehension of a quarrel; let
nothing sink beyond its weight; sudden apprehensions usually mistake; the
ultimate judgment of reason is best.

Alas, when the judgment makes too great a report of outward things to the
affections: the affections makes too great ado about them.

And therefore many men may do good things: and not do well in doing it,
because he fails in the end, and manner of doing.

Abisha^'s zeal to David's welfare persuaded him to have taken off the head of
Saul his undeserved enemy; upon an advantage: But David's Maxim took place
first in his own breast. Who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords
anointed and be guiltless, 1 Samuel 26.9. And therefore that man which will do
more then is fit; will in time do more then is lawful. He that now exceeds
the measure; will ere long, exceed the manner.

4 And now you may hear David's answer, with a kind of indignation at the
thoughts of revenge. What have I to do with you ye sons of Zeruiah, let him
curse, etc.

Where we have the greatest humility, lie under the most grievous insulting can
be expressed; and truly it argued a brave Princely spirit in him.

When Ambassadors have used any indecencies to Kings: They do not chide, but
deny them Audience; as if silence were the Royal way to reject a wrong. Ah! he
injoyes a most noble composedness, that seats himself above the flight of
the injurious claw, nor does he by this show his weakness but his wisdom,
because the wise rage least.

1 Again, David answers Shimei, not a word. See a pattern of patience, in a
heart fraught full of holy Magnanimity, and heavenly greatness; which walked so
high, that scorners, and tauntes could not reach him: much less troubles and
afflictions press him down; he goes on his way, regarding it no more then
children that cannot judge.

Indeed to revenge an injury, is both easy, and usual: And as the world
thinks, savours of some Nobleness; but religion says the contrary, and tells
us, it is better to neglect it, then requite it. And therefore if any one shall
offer us an injury: Let him know, we can see it, and scorn to take notice of
it; unless it be such, as the bearing is an offense.

In an apparent wrong, its better sometimes to dissemble it, then play the
waspe, strive to return a sting; it was Solomon's Philosophy, that a wise man's
glory was, in passing by an offense.

It stands not with the discretion of a generous spirit, to return a punishment
for every abuse; some are such, as require nothing but contempt to kill them;
men do not ordinarily strike dogs when they do but bark.

And surely he has but a poor spirit, that is not planted above petty wrongs;
small injuries we should either not hear, or not mind. Nay though we were
told them, we should not know the Author; for by this we may mend our selves,
and never Malice the person.

And truly it argues a man of a Gunpowder spirit, that a little spark of fire
can so quickly blow him up.

A Very light matter will refresh, and then again discourage, a mind that
rests too much upon the liking of others, and indeed it is a sure evidence that
a man lives more to opinion and reputation of others, then to conscience; when
his grief is more for being disappointed of that approbation which he expects
from man. Then for this miscarriage toward God; to feel an injury to lie
heavier, then sin; the weight of sin.

And surely our afflictions discover much our choice and affections: When
outward crosses, are our greatest evil, it is a sign God is not our greatest
good.

It is much to be lamented, that many good people are with too much effeminate
facility, so quickly moved, and touched with every trifle. A spot, or wrinkle
upon their garment, a dish misplaced on the table, or some lesser toy, will
turn many quite out of tune, and put them out of their humor into pelting
chafe; and all this argues such men to be but of poor spirits: For surely
great minds are not moved but with great matters: It is a point of Christian
wisdom, to pass by many petty provocations to anger, without notice or
acknowledgement, without wound or passion, and to digest many times the
brawlings and indiscretions of hasty men, with the same patience that surgeons
do the injuries and blows of mad men when they let them blood.

Ah! What a sweet harmony is there in our souls, when we judge of things as
they are, and affect as we judge, and execute as we affect. Remembering that
those troubles that come of necessity, we should learn to bear with
boldness and Christian courage.

And therefore as one says, let us still maintain a garrison of holy reasons,
against the assaults of strong passions: We may hope for the best, but fear
the worst, and prepare to bear whatsoever God shall please to lay on us. In
this world of changes, we cannot resolve upon alteration, the mind is out of
frame: we cannot say, this or that trouble shall not befall: Yet we may in the
strength of God say, nothing that does befall, shall make me do that which is
unbeseeming a Christian.

Where the spirit of God has taken up his firm abode in the soul, it will
little set by any outward change; he will little est^eme to be accounted little
in the eyes of others, when he is so little in his own.

Let us therefore walk in such a heavenly disdain, amidst the scorns of an
insulting generation: That the world may know we can live above every
condition; and that all our afflictions, are far beneath our hopes.

And let it be our joy, to bear contentedly the unjust aspersions of malicious
censure: Who was there ever among the Saints, that was not slandered? though
our accusers may be believed a while: Yet let our actions outweigh their
words: and the disgrace at last will rest with the intender of the ill; that
stone that injury casts, ever in the end, lights on its own head.

2 David looks off from Shimei, to God that set him a work: Suffer him, God
has bidden him. Let him curse, because the Lord has said; curse David.

Let this teach us, that Gods hand has a special stroke in all our
afflictions, is there any evil in the City, (says God,) and I have not done
it, Amos. 3.6.

Hear what Joseph says to his brethren, I am Joseph your brother whom ye
sold: But God sent me hither, Genesis 45.5. And thus did Joh from the Sab^eans,
and Cald^eans, which had robbed him, and slain his Servants, to God: The Lord
has given and the Lord has taken, and blessed be his name, Joh. 1.21.

And indeed, the President and pattern of all humility: looked neither at
Hered, nor the Jews, or Pilate, but to his father; shall I not drink of the
cup that my father has given me? And this was it which made David so sweetly
silent, Psalm. 39 9. I was dumb, and opened not my mouth because the Lord did
it. To fly upon instruments as the maine cause of our crosses; is to declare
our selves void of reason: So the dog bites the stone; which would never have
hit him, if it had not been thrown.

It was a sweet meditation, a holy man of God, has set down for his own
support and ours. He strikes me that made me, that moderates the world: Why
struggle I with him? why with my self? am I a fool, or a rebel? A fool if I
am ignorant whence my afflictions come: a rebel, if I know, and be impatient.

And therefore, when ought falls out contrary to our expectation, let us not
run to second causes, but say, God has purposed it, as it is fallen out. He
will make use of what instrument he pleases: It is enough, and his will be
done, though ours be crossed.

So promiscuous, and inconstant is the administration of things here below,
that they seem to run upon wheels, so does Ezechiel phrase it, Chap. 1. But
these wheels have eyes. From which Metaphorical, and Metonymicall expression
we may see, that there is something in their events, showing the reason of
their turnings, which we see not. Yea, and those wheels move, as the beasts
stir them: To teach us, that there is nothing done on earth, but by the Lord in
his instruments; the wheels move, as they are guided by those Angels, move as
they are guided by the spirit: And thus all is from the Lord. And least the
says of any be overthrown from the change of things: The Lord tells us, that
the wheels are one within another, and so are the wings of the Angels. There
is an agreeableness between them, and thus is it in the changes of a thousand
years. Now to look upon Gods providence in some particular only, as upon a
wheel or two, and not upon all as once, as they are one within another, this
deceives us.

When we look upon honest Joseph in his disgraceful imprisonment only? On
innocent David, in his scorn and contempt in the Court; and under the reproach
of cursing Shemei; on just Naboth, condemned to death by false witnesses, and
accordingly stoned; who say we shall rise again to show his innocence? on
Paul held the worst man of his time; on the Church, as in the days of Queen
Hester, but if we look upon all these passages, all at once, we shall see that
they have eics; that they have Angels, and these a spirit to guide them.

On these wheels is Joseph brought by the sale of his brethren to Phara^'s
Steward; by the false accusation of his Mistress, he is cast into prison: By the
interpretation of the prisoners dreams he is brought to Pharaoh's knowledge,
and so to greatness in his Court.

Thus whilst David sits still: Does the Lord vex Saul by the Philistines, and
ends his days. And first setleth David in the Kingdom of Juda; then Ish
bosbeth falling out with Abner about a word forsakes him; Ish-hosheth shall be
slain by two wicked men. And thus is David fairly brought to the Crown, even
by those wheels.

Thus in the days of Queen Hester, when the Church was upon the point of
destruction; that the King could not sleep that night. That he should call for
the book of the Chronicles before another: And that in this book, that place
which contained Mordeccyes revealing the treason against the King; should
revoke his decree, and so the Church enjoy deliverance: this plainly proves,
that in all those various, and strange administrations of accidents that do
befall us: that God not only made, but wisely disposes of all. Surely these
wheels have eyes, and a spirit to guide them.

And therefore in all our wrongs and injuries, let us look up to the first
mover, and discharge the means. It Is true, the instruments may be unjust, nay,
cruel in their wrongs, but the cause is just from him that did inflict them;
wicked men are rods in the hand of God, and at them must look never, but as
they are in the hand of an Almighty power; wherewith when he has sufficiently
corrected us, he will cast them into the fire.

Genesis 28.12. Jacob wondering at the descent, and ascent of Angels on the ladder
in the vision; looks up to the top, and there sees God sending them with
their errands: so one Angel smites us, and another delivers us: but if we look
up, we should see God in both.

3 As David acknowledges God to be the principle cause of his afflictions: so
he quietly, and patiently submits himself to bear them.

A patient submission unto Gods will, and a faithful exercise under his
visiting hand, is an unfallible demonstration, that we are children and not
bastards.

Says David, the Lord has said curse David, who then shall say wherefore have
thou done so?

And thus elsewhere he patiently submits himself to be afflicted at his
good pleasure, 2 Scm. 15.26. But if (says he) he thus say, I have no delight
in thee, behold here am I, let him do to me as seems good in his eyes.

So good old Elie, when he heard from Samuel what a fearful work God would
do to his house: quietly he humbles himselfs: saying, it is the Lord, let him
do what seems him best, 1 Samuel 3.18.

Thus likewise Job, once have I spoken, yea twice, but I will proceed no
further: I will lay my hand upon my mouth, and abhor my self, repenting in
dust and ashes.

Lo Hezechiah sweetly submits: when he looks up to God: what shall I say? For
he has said it to me, and he has done it, Isa. 38.13.

It is the safest way, when Gods hand is on our back, to lay our hand on our
mouths, and do as Aaron did at the fearful death of his sons: when he hears
Moses to tell him, that God would be sanctified in those that did draw near
unto him? He held his peace, Lev. 10.3.

Thus those Saints in the 21. Acts. 14, Conclude their arguments with words of
submission, concerning Paul's journey to Jerusalem; the will of the Lord be
done.

Now as all events whatsoever, are by, and according to the will of God: so to
this will of God, must we sweetly submit in all cross accidents whatsoever we
either feel or fear.

This have the Saints in all ages done, when they saw once the the mind of God,
they quietly yeil ded.

So Mauritius the Roman Emperor; when after the butchering of his loving wife,
and tender children, before his face, at the command of the Tirant Phocas: he
was to act his own part in that mournful tragedy, in his flesh at first, like
a grudging Israelite, began to repine and draw back: but after some passionate
panges, he humbly submits, with these words: just art thou O Lord, and just are
thy judgments.

And this is patience indeed; when we are content, without murmuring or
repining, to resign our selves into Gods hands, to be dealt withal, even as
it shall seem good to him, both for the time and measure of our affliction. We
must, not only, not sink under them: but not shrink from them. Stay in them,
till he that laid them on, shall please to take them off.

1 If we would seriously consider, who this is that afflicts us? Why, it is the
Lord, who is infinite in glory, power and Majesty: who having created us of
nothing, may dispose also of us according to his pleasure, for why should the
clay murmur against the potter; dust and ashes against the glorious King of
heaven and earth. Who measures the earth with his span, and poyseth it as in a
balance; who upholdeth all things by his word: and rules them at his good
pleasure. In him we live, move and have our being, so that if he sustain us,
we continue: but if he blow upon us, we are presently gone, and return again
unto our dust.

2 As God is infinite in majesty and power: so is he just in his judgments,
his ways are past finding out. Has he corrected us sharply, surely 'twas no
more then we deserved, has he taken away our dearest friends by death; why he
took away nothing but what he gave? he never gave any thing absolutely, and for
ever: but only to use for a time, till he again did call for it; and therefore
seeing the Lord has taken nothing but his own: let us not say we have lost
it, but only restored it to the right owner.

3 Let us bear patiently whatsover comes from God, because he is goodness it
self: from whom there can come no evil. It is he that rules the world, and
orders all things for the best: taking care of every particular person:
neither does, nor has any evil in him.

God is the fountain from whence all goodnesle flows: if he be good to all:
he is abundantly good to his own; if he be so sweet to those that seek him:
how beyond expression will he be to those that find him.

Now who may better chastize us, then he that created us; who more right to
correct and nurture us, then he who feeds and nurseth us.

We see the most savage beasts, which will not endure the look of a stranger
will take stripes from their owner, who feeds and tends them; and shall we
more brutish then they, snarle and repine when the Lord, who not only gives us
food, but also makes it nourishment, does chastize us for our good.

The Lord is our King and Sovereign unto whom we are to yield absolute
obedience: and therefore if earthly Princes do punish their subjects, and
judge them insolent if they repine, and rebellious if they resist: not enduring
expostulation, or to have their actions called to account, nay, though they be
unjust. How then shall we be acquitted, when being corrected by God, we
impatiently murmr: and by using unlawful means to free our selves, as much
as in us lies, resist him in his most righteous judgments: which are all
disposed for our good, if we submit our selves unto them. Seeing by ruling us
thus on earth, he fitteth us to reign with him in heaven.

Ah! Therefore let us not look to the interior causes, by which our crosses
are immediately imposed, but unto the Lord our God, who is the chief and
supreme cause of all our afflictions. Let us not look to instruments, and
aggravate our sorrows by circumstances: as looking upon our afflictions with
an impotent impatience, because our enemies are malicious, proud and insolent
in the carriage of the matter: but to God, which aymeth at nothing but our good.

Thus says Christ to Pilate, thou could have no power, except it were given
the from above.

Thus likewise do we make our burdens in supportable, when we too much look
upon the treachery, neglect, or unkind dealing of some friends; of whom we
have deserved well, and therefore least of all suspected to have received from
them such hard measure; Alas! if our thoughts mount no higher then those broken
reeds, we may sit down, and die of discontent.

And therefore 'twas sweetly said of a holy and experimental Divine lately:
that unless we learn to suffer from the hands of Saints, as well as from
ungodly persons, we must never looks to live a merry day. So say I, unless we
can bear the fallings off; the falsehood, and treachery of a beloved friend,
we shall never come to possess pure patience indeed.

And thus many times when ought befalls us through our own default,
negligence, or want of providence: we add unto it the weight of many
criminations, and oftentimes false accusations against our selves, as though it
were not heavy enough in it self to press us down, unless we added
thereunto the load of bitter invectives against our own negligence, and of
sharp censures for our own faultiness, as being the cause which has brought
upon us those crosses and calamities.

But we must lift up the eyes of our mind above the earth unto heaven, and
consider that the Lord is the chief cause of all our afflictions: and like a
just judge uses wicked enemies, false, and fading friends: Yea, and also our
own improvidence, and negligence, as the executioners of his righteous
judgments: effecting by these means his own purposes for the advancing of
his glory, and also for our eternal good.

And therefore let us patiently look up, eye him which is invisible, who has
power in his own hand, to restrain their fury, bridle their malice, work their
falsehood, and treachery, and make use of our own weakness and failings for
our future advantage.

Waiting patiently for the Lords coming to help us, or bearing patiently what
the Lord imposes on us, are a like right pleasing and acceptable services unto
our God: which he is wont to crown with multiplied, and overflowing refreshings
when he comes. They that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength, they
shall mount up with wings as Eagles: they shall run and not be weary, they
shall walk and not faint; Isa. 40.31.

Ah! We have not patiently waited so many years in the means of grace for
comfort, as God has waited for our conversion.

Let us resolve to do as much as we can; and suffer as much in obedience to
God, as we can suffer for necessity, or passion, fear, or desire: and surely
if we can for one thing, we can for another: and there is nothing wanting but
the mind; and therefore let us not say, we cannot endure this: for God would
never have sent it, if he had not known us strong enough to abide it; only he
that knows us well already, would also take this occasion, to make us know our
selves.

And truly there is an art or skill of bearing troubles, (if we could learn
it) without overmuch troubling of our selves: as in bearing of a burden, there
is a way so to poize it, that it weighs not over-heavy: if it hangs all on
one side, it poizeth the body down. Thus is it when we lay all the weights in
the scales of creatures, and other cross accidents, occasioned by our selves.
We pull the greatest part of our troubles upon our selves, by not imparting our
care so as to take upon us the care of duty, and leave the rest to God.

Ah! Let us not think the day of the Lord too little, and the day of man too
much: but rely on the all-sufficient God; accounting it nothing to be judged
by man, as knowing in whom we have believed: and that it is enough that our
judgment is with the most high: and the uprightness of our hearts are known
to him: and that our praise is with him.

And at least wise shall we be accounted patient sufferers: if finding
impatiencie to arise in our affections, we shall be displeased with our selves
for it. And to check and chide our souls for our impatiency, saying as David,
Psalm. 62. Yet my soul be silent to Jehovah.

Neither must we be patient for a fit; or take patiently one cross, and fume
and (...) for another; but we must with a Christian Magnanimity be able to
bear all. Thus we see did Job, after one affliction, he patiently endured
another, until they were exceedingly multiplied in number, and increased in
weight.

And this was the practice of the Prophet, Isa, Chap. 26.9. In the way of thy
judgments O Lord, have we waited for thee. So likewise the Church, L^m. 3.26.
It is good (says she) both to trust, and to wait for the salvation of the
Lord. And let us not in a blockish stupidity, lie under the correcting hand of
God, as if we had no sense, no, no: god will have his blows felt, and as
Ambrose well observed; they do not deserve the praise of patience, who endure
without complaining, the wounds of adversity, when being benumbed, they have no
sense of pain.

And therefore moderate grief for offending such a gracious father, may very
well stand with true patience; we ought to grieve, (says a holy and
experimental divine, one of a thousand) when God rebukes: yet as children to
their fathers scourge; with shame, with fear, and with submission. and as
children to their fathers love, with hearts enlarged, and love redundant,
weep^, and love. and as children to their sa^ers ^me, with holy change, and
^est reformation. And as children to their fathers bounds, with eye to present
time for present duty. Ah! Le^ u^study what is our present duty, and God will
study what shall be for our future comfort. And then may we safely expect God
in his ways of mercy; when we are in his ways of obedience.

And let us likewise bear our afflictions freely and willingly: sweetly and
silently, putting our necks under the yoke, and willingly kissing the rod. For
if we go^ to the cross as bears to the stake, we suffer not in obedience;
remember what the Lord Jesus has said he that takes not up his cross daily,
cannot be my disciple. Forced suffering against our wills, is not worth the
name of patience; overpowered strength may bear in policy, when it must yield
of necessity: but little thanks for such bearing, in respect of God, to choose
to bear rather then not when God chastises, and his will is so to take up the
cross, when flesh might find the way to shift it; Christ calling thereunto:
this is action, and truth of duty: not dull passion, or patience perforce. And
there is a wide difference between taking up our cross, and having it laid on
us; many a one bears a forced burden, whether they will, or no, grudgingly,
and with repining: no reward for this, but then is our fortitude worthy of
praise, when we can endure to be miserable willingly.

And willingness implies cheerfulness: and so we must be too. But here then
you may object. Is it not required that we should be affected with sorrow in
our sufferings? and moderately mourn in our crosses and afflictions: and how
then can we at the same time rejoice: seeing joy and mourning, are opposite one
to another.

For answer hereunto, we must know that Christian sorrow and rejoicing, may
well stand together: seeing the one makes way for the other: for therefore we
be wail our sins, that we may rejoice in the assurance of the pardon of them,
of our reconciliation with God, and of our interest in all the gracious
promises of the Gospel. So that though we give the first part to be acted by
sorrow, yet let us not always have it continue in a Christian heart: for so it
would grow immoderate: but after this our unfeigned repentance for sin, and our
assurance of pardon with God, let us have spiritual rejoicing: not only when
we have a confluence of those left handed blessings: but in tribulation and
afflictions.

Again, opposites may agree in the same subject, at the same time, in a diverse
respect, for so we mourn because by our sins we have crucified the Lord of
life: but rejoice, in that by his death he has wrought the work of our
redemption: we may at the same time mourn in the fight of our sins because we
have difhonoured by them a gracious father: and yet rejoice, in that our sorrow
assures us, that they are forgiven us, and we received into Gods favor. We
may mourn in the sense of our pain and smart: but rejoice in it, as it is a
figne of our adoption; when God corrects us as his children, that we might
not be condemned with the world. So that we may spend our days in a joyful
mourning, or a mournful joy.

And thus by sense of pain, the Lord makes the flesh to mourn, that it may
be mortified, restrained from sin for fear of punishment, and by this
spiritual joy apprehended by faith, our good God refreshes the spiritual
part, that it may not faint and yield when the flesh tempts it to murmuring
and despair. Ah! I^ is the swe^n^ o^ God's love that allayeth the sow^nesse of
all our afflictions. This made David to say, Psalm. 94.19. In the multitude of
my thoughts which are within me, thy comforts delight my soul.

Labor we then for patience under all our pressures, it will lighten all our
crosses, and lesson our pains. Patience in afflictions (as a father says)
will make us Martyrs without either fire or sword. And therefore misery it
self cannot make us miserable: Let us then rejoice and be exceeding glad, for
great will be our reward in heaven. And let the consideration of this, sweeten
the bitterness of our cup, that according to the weight of our afflictions
here; shall be the weight of our glory hereafter. Who would not then be content
to drink of Christ's viniger and gall in this world so he migh drink that new
wine with him in his heavenly kingdom.

Oh. But how shall we obtain this patience, and a Cheerful bearing up the
head under all our pressures?

Answ. We must know that patience is no natural faculty, or inherent quality,
which is borne and bred with us; for naturally we are peevish and impatient, if
we are ^ever so (...) crossed of our wills: murmu^ and repining against Divine
providence, and therefore this flower is not to be found in the barren desert
of corrupted nature, where it never grew? neither is patience attained by the
help of natural reason, and Philosophy, whi^ propounds unto us only shadows
of comforts, that have a seeming show a far off, but vanish away when we seek
to catch them. These props which uphold patience, are gilded over but with
humane Wit, Art and Eloquence, which seem to be of some strength, so long as
our patience is unburthened: but when once patience is pressed with the least
weight of afflictions; then they fail, and break, bewraying their weakness
and insufficiency: together with the folly of those who invented them, and of
us who trusted in them.

Alas! The Philosophers (for the most part) were ignorant of the chief causes
of all afflictions, not ascribing them unto God, and his most wise and just
providence: but unto fate, and destany, chance and fortune: never looking unto
the chief deserving cause which is sin: but imagined that all crosses happened
by the guidance of blind fortune; which put no difference between the good
and bad, just and unjust: and so accordingly did they apply false remedies,
which were as loathsome as the disease which they sought to cure.

Epictetus, was one of the wisest of all the Philosophers, and yet what cold
counsel does he give, as namely that we must bear patiently that which we
cannot avoid: whereas that alone, is enough to make a man break out into all
impatiency, when he shall consider that his miseries which are presently
intolerable, are also inevitable for the time to come; that we do bear those
burdens which are common to many: and that we have innumerable companions in
our griefs, that all mankind are subject to manifold miseries, and
afflictions, and therefore we must not take it ill, if we be not exempted from
the common lot; but in the mean time, they^make no mention of Gods providence
disposing of all our afflictions, and turning them to our good: they do not
show that they are proportioned to the measure of our strength, so as they
shall never overwhelme us: nor that they are the chastisements of a gracious
Father, and the fruits of his love again; they put us in no hope and assurance,
that God is present with us in all our troubles, and in his good time will
deliver us out of all our afflictions; and therefore we are not to trust to
those who are but miserable comforters at the best.

Now if we will be sure to have true patience in our afflictions indeed; we
must seek for it where it is to be found; and that is from the Father of
lights, from whom every good and perfect gift does come; now God has promised
that what ever we ask according to his will (believing) we shall obtain: since
therefore we have a promise, let us go to God by prayer, and in a humble
boldness put him in mind of that word: call upon me in the day of trouble, and
I will hear thee, and thou shall glorify me; and truly we never glorify God
more, then when we seek deliverance from God, and patiently expect it from him
alone.

God does many times, as tender Mothers do with their children that stray away
from them; which cause them to be frightened, that they may return and cast
themselves into their arms for protection, so does our good God cause these
bugbeares of afflictions to meet and terrify us, when we have run away from
him; and suffers us to be deprived of all other helps and comforts, that we
may with fullness of affiance rest wholly on him.

Ah! if we would consider that so ready is the Lord to hearken unto the suites
of those that pray unto him, that when he sees this disposition in them, he
promises that before they call, he will answer, and while they speak, he will
hear, Isai. 65.24. and again Psalm. 91.15. he shall call upon me, and I will
hear him, I will be with him in trouble, I will deliver him and glorify him,
so in Psalm. 145.19. he will fulfill the desire of them that fear him, he also
will hear their cry, and will save them.

And indeed there can never be a stronger prop to uphold our patience, then
fervency in prayer: says the Apostle James, chap. 1.5. if any of you lack
wisdom, (namely that wisdom specially which inableth us to bear the
cross, with comfort and patience) let him ask of God, which gives to all men
liberally, and reproacheth no man, and it shall be given him.

Oh! how it eases us of our griefer, and lighteneth our hearts of the burden
of our afflictions, when as we lay open our grievances before God, and pour out
all our complaints into his bosom; now if it be an ease to our afflicted
mind, if we may communicate our griefesto a dear friend, that at least we may
be pittyed by him, though he have no ability to help, or releeve us: then how
much more ease and comfort shall we find, in laying open the cause of our
griefs before our heavenly Father? who as he infinitely exceeds all the
tenderest Fathers in the World, in pity, in love, and compassion; so he is
able, when as it shall be most for his glory, and our comfort, to free us out
of all our miseries and afflictions.

Now a main strengthener of patience, is providently to foresee crosses
approaching; this the heathen Seneca prescribed as a way to be rid of care and
fear, and to attain unto full security; that whatsoever evil we may fear to
be coming, we should suppose, that it will certainly come, and so exercise our
selves to bear it willingly, before we be constrained to bear it upon
necessity.

Let us then prepare our selves for the time of adversity, and consider that
those things which have happened unto others; may also befall us: and bear those
afflictions which at any time may be laid upon us.

But above all, let us not fix our hearts upon any thing in the World, but use
the benefits of this life, as though we used them not, and enjoy them so, as
those who are presently to foregoe them; for those things which we possess
with immoderate love, we always lose with immoderate grief, and if we look
upon our temporal blessings, as upon perpetuities, we shall subject our
selves, to much sorrow, and find small patience, when their loss proves unto
us, that they were but movables.

Its good to forethink when we are honored in the World, and have every man's
tongue as a Trumpet for our praise; the time may come, we may be as much
disgraced and defamed: for this has befallen to many before us, and will
happen to many after us: and why not then unto us also among the rest? then
seriously let us consider, and examine our hearts how we should be able to
bear it: if we should be cast down out of the high Throne of honor and
reputation; into the lowest bottom of shame and disgrace, and with what
reasons and arguments we might strengthen our patience: and mitigate and
moderate our grief and heaviness.

Thus when we abound with riches, and have such plenty of earthly things,
that we have not only for our selves a sufficiency of all we can desire, but
are also able to give to others, and make them beholden unto us; now then let
us think, how we could patiently bear a change of all these things, our
filks for rags, our full tables for course and scant fare; nay, may be to be
constrained to ask rel^ef even of those which formerly we have supported, and
to receive it grudgingly, or to be shamefully denied.

So likewise when we have friends, and acquaintance who now smile upon us,
making airy covenants of perpetual leagues, pretending such dearnesse of
affection, that our entertainment shall be the very best, and our vvelcome
huggs and imbracements, that in the midst of our delights, we should
consider that they are not only mortal but mutable; they may become our
greatest enemies. Now let us forecast how we could bear it, to have their
sweetest discourse turned into silence at the best, when we shall see such a
change in their countenance, that in stead of smiles, we shall read slighting,
contempt, disdain; when they will not honor us so far, as to give a reason
for their estrangment, or admit of an apology to plead the sincerity of our
hearts toward them: but shall load us with the burden of their unkindnesses,
not only trying, but tyring our patience with their wrongs, which sticks closer
to our hearts, then all the injuries and outrages of a professed enemy.

And thus likewise for our nearest and dearest relations, of Husband, wife,
child, etc. let us cast a serious look on them, and consider, they may quickly
be taken away from us: any of them, all of them, death will not be bribed:
will not hearken to any of our cries, tears, or sighs: oh then let us reason
with our selves, how shall we be able to endure a parting, when we cannot
endure the thought of it? how shall we grapple with the substance, when the
shaddovv does so affright us?

Oh! therefore whatsoever we may lose of that which we most love; let us
think that it is now in losing, or suppose it already lost: this is the way
to prepare our hearts, and arm our patience, to bear the burden?

From the serious consideration of these things, there will arise two special
benefits.

1 That we shall not be puffed up with pride in the confluence of these earthly
blessings, and so become insolent: but use them with all sobriety and a good
conscience, when as our expectation, like a continual Monitor, does put us in
mind of our loss.

2 This daily expectation will make these afflictions, which in themselves are
grisly, and terrible, to be so well known and familiar, that when they appear,
they will not much skar and affright us. And truly the very Heathen in this
matter will shame us. Anaxagoras being certified of the death of his dear, and
worthy Son, heard it with patience, without any disturbance of passion; for
said he, when I begot him, I knew he was mortal, and had brought him up in the
expectation of this mortality.

And this consideration, of preparing to meet afflictions before they fall upon
us, will arm^ our patience, and abate their strength: and when by our
meditations we shall poyze a cross before it be imposed upon us, we shall much
lighten our burdens, which are made so to others by their customable bearing
of them.

Yet must we not run into afflictions, or pull them on our shoulders: but that
we diligently use all good means, either to escape them before they come, or
to be freed from them, when they are inflicted on us; and then if the Trumpet
of holiness sound the alarm to Ba^tell, let us march on valiantly without
delay, contemn our lives, and enter the conflict with cheerfulness, rush into
the main army of our enemies, put Satan to flight, and set up a trophy of
victory: but if godliness sustain no damage, the principles of religion be not
undermined, which concern our salvation, nor any man do enforce us to do any
thing displeasing to our God; let us not be superfluous in our sufferings; and
be sure, we make not a cross of our own, and throw it in our way, and so
stumble in it, and say it is the cross of Christ; herein we deceive our
selves, if we pick private quarrels against our own peace, seeking out and
provoking an enemy, with whom the Lord has not commanded us to fight.

And though we have obtained of the Lord patience to bear our burdens, yet God
does not allow us to lie down under them still, when we may by good and honest
means be freed from them: because this is to tempt the Lord, when as needlessly
we desire to make experience of his power, providence, and promised assistance
either for our delivery, or for strength and patience to endure these wilful
trials.

We see what the practice of the Saints have been to avoid troubles if they
could, and with their prayers they have joined their own lawful endeavors?
Thus Moses fled from Pharaoh, David from Saul and Absalom, Joseph and Mary from
Herod's cruel persecution, Paul from the Jews at Damascus.

And as we may pray that our bitter Cups should be removed from us, so may we
advise with our selves, and take counsel of others, and labor and endeavor
in the use of all lawful means to escape afflictions, or to overcome them, if
we cannot avoid them; and this all with a sweet submission to the good pleasure
of God; desiring that our wills may be even melted into the will of God; not
mine, but thy will be done.

Obj. But here our souls may object, and say that we have known many who have
trusted in God, and have waited for his help, and have fervently called upon
him for deliverance, have notwithstanding at last died in their afflictions?
yea, and we our selves still remain under great and grievous miseries and
crosses, though we have often earnestly sought the face of God: and with strong
cries and tears, have poured out our complaints, and depended upon no other,
for succor and freedom, and yet we are not delivered, no nor can see no
outgate, or means when we shall escape?

Ans. For answer to our own hearts, it is certain that all Gods children have
deliverance out of their afflictions in due time, whether it be by life or
death, that matters not; one way or other we shall be delivered: now seeing our
longest lives are short and momentany, being compared to eternity, and that
happiness which we shall then enjoy with God: the time of our afflictions
cannot be long, nor our deliverance far off, although it should be deferred
to the day of our dissolution; Ah! the comforts of God are well worth the
waiting for all our days.

2 Gods promises of deliverance from remporall afflictions are not absolute,
but always to be understood with this condition; if it stand with his own
glory, and our spiritual good: for otherwise our freedom from afflictions
would be no benefit, but the greatest hurt; now Gods glory and our salvation
often times are more advanced by the continuance, then by the removal of our
crosses: as when God tries by them his graces in us, that he may afterward
crown them: and causes our fight to be so much the more long and dangerous,
that accordingly our ensuing victory may be the more glorious: or when God does
use afflictions, either for an hedge to keep us from leaping into the forbidden
pastures of carnal pleasures: or for a fiery Furnace to purge and purify us
from the dross of corruptions; now in these cases, it is the greatest freedom
not to be freed: and Gods greatest mercy toward us, when as he continues us
in our temporal misery.

3 Let us comfort our selves when God deferreth his promises, and continues
our conflict of afflictions, after we have long vvaited for help and
deliverance, by considering, that in his good time they shall most certainly be
accomplished: Gods promises are certain performances: his truth is of his
essence, and it is no more possible that he should fail of his word, then that
he should deny himself, and therefore since he has promised that we shall
overcome the World, that we shall have strength to endure temptations, and have
a happy issue out of them: that if we suffer with Christ, we shall reign with
him: we may be assured though our way be long and foul, yet at last we shall
safely come to our journeys end: that after our painful sufferings, shall come
our glorious reigning: and that after our dangerous fight, we shall obtain a
happy victory, and be crowned with eternal glory.

Says Bernard, we may be secure in fighting, seeing we are sure of over
coming: by flying we may love the victory, but by dying we cannot; ah! blessed
shall we be if we dye fighting, because we shall be crowned dying.

Let the consideration of this comfort us, that God no less waits upon us to
do us good, then we to receive it: expecting a convenient time, when as ^e may
most fitly and seasonable extend his mercy in our deliverance, and therefore
^aith the Prophet, Isaiab 30.18. therefore will the Lord wait, that he may have
mercy upon us, and therefore he will be exalted that he may have compassion
upon us; we wait when God will, and God waits when he may: when mercy may be
most welcome, and deliverance most glorious.

The fourth circumstance is David's justifying of God in his way of proceeding;
behold my Son which came forth out of my bowels se^keth my life, how much more
this Benjamite? etc. here see that God will never leave correcting that soul
whom he means to save, till he has brought it down on its knees, and to
acknowledge he is justly dealt withal, and this David confesses, Psalm. 119.75.
I know oh Lord that thy judgments are just, and that thou in very faithfulness
have caused me to be afflicted; See the change in his dispo^ion, when Nabal
would not answer his expectation, (when he so excellently acted the part of an
eloquent beggar:) he presently was all on a fire, vowing revenge, not only to
him, but to all his Family: now the case is altered; he can endure to be railed
on by one that was his subject: yea, and cursed too, and stones and dirt flung
at him, and not so much as a rising thought of revenge: and thus we see how
fierce David was with the Ammonitish Prisoners, he put them to death in cold
blood: nay, he used great cruelty in their deaths, by putting them under Saws,
and Harrows, and Axes of Iron, and burnt them alive in fiery brickkils: but
afflictions at last made him so tame, that not only the right^ous might reprove
him, but the wicked might reproach him, and he is silent: or if he speak, they
be words of patience and submission: So let him curse, because the Lord has
said curse David: he that could not before endure Hanuns affront, can now
quietly, and meekly without defire of revenge, endure many opprobrious
indignities: and be contented that Shimei shall bemire him with the dirt of his
filthy tongue, without the least show of passion.

So Ephraim by this means is made to confess his own untamednesse with
tears, Jer. 31.18. and Lam. 3. makes a man to put his mouth in the dust, and
to be of an humble and lowly carriage toward all men; doing nothing that may
savor of pride, contempt, or disdain; but rather abasing our selves to our
inferiors, and even to give our cheeks to the smiters.

The Lord bears, and forbeareth a long time, expecting our amendment; and
when there is no other remedy, then he takes the rod in hand; when gentle
means would not serve, rougher means shall: if the shaking of the rod will not
humble us, we shall surely feel the smart: God will first or last, take us in
hand, and master our proudest hearts, and stoutest stomachs; and if fewer and
lighter stripes will not serve the turn, he will inflict more and harder, till
he has brought us as he would have us.

And therefore it is better to be taken down in youth, than to be broken in
pieces by great crosses in age; we shall be sure of a time of reckoning, the
best of us; God will punish sin where ever be find i^, and in this world most
severely to his own; they that have most of Gods heart, do oftentimes feel his
hand most heavy.

When the ^ins of Saints shall become a scandal to Religion, no wonder if God
will vindicate his honor, and be severest against those that wear his livery;
yet inwardly side with Satan and their own lofts; other offenses God may
punish, this he must, least the enemies of the truth triumph against him: David
had such a whip for this as never man had greater, because he had by his fin
caused the enemies of God to blaspheme, his child must dye; when he that had
sung the pureness of the God of Israel, and proclaimed the noble acts he did
of old, and seemed as one indeared to the Almighties love, how would the
Philistims rejoice, when he should thus become Apostate, and with a mild
licentiousness, mix his lust with murder and ingratitude; surely his sin and
punishment God will have to stand upon record to the worlds end to be a warning
to all, that if God was so severe against one who lay so near his heart; then
let us with fear and trembling look to our ways, making straight steps to our
feet, least that which is lame be turned out of the way; ever remembering, that
after the remission of a ^in, the very chastisements of the Almighty may be
deadly.

And this was it which made David so meek without murmuring, seeing God as his
justice required, did justly execute his righteous judgments upon him for his
sin, and according to his revealed truth inflicted those afflictions which he
had formerly threatened.

God is immutable: as his course has been toward his children in times past,
so will he deal with us, and our posterity in time to come, he will ever
proceed by the same rules of justice and mercy, punishing like finnes with like
judgments.

And therefore let us justify Gods wifedome in all his proceedings of
providence, concerning our selves and others: his justice in punishing, as well
as his love in correcting, his grace in giving, and his mercy in taking away,
and in all things from the heart, bless the name of the Lord.

Bless his name, and exalt his free grace, that our punishment is no more, nor
no wor^e.

What if we have many crosses heavily lying upon us? truly if we had our due
desert, we should have more and greater; the terrors of conscience here, and
torments of hell hereafter; what if death have deprived us for a time of our
children, dearest and necrest relations, alas our fins have deserved to be
deprived of the presence of God, and all his holy and glorious Saints and
Angels, and that to all eternity; what if we have lo^t our honor, riches,
reputation, and estimation with the world, perhaps they were our Gods, no
wonder they were da^ht to pieces, and we made to drink of their dust, what if
our friends have lest us, and have forgotten all their promises, and purposes
of friendly intimacy, and have taken away all their love, and have in stead
repaid us with scorn and disdain; what then? they could not take away our God,
nor our Christ, nor his spirit, nor our interest in the promises, nor our hope
of Heaven; why what have we lost then? truly matters of no great moment, the
presence of our God without any of these is perfect peace, but all these
without God is but a little more cheerful hell.

And therefore none could justify God in his way of proceeding better then
David: so he says, nay sings it too: Psalm.103. he has not dealt with us after
our fins, nor rewarded us after our iniquities, and this he intimates, Psalm.
51.4. by that ingeminating confession of his; against thee, thee only have I
sinned, and done this evil in thy fight, that thou might be justified when
thou speak, and clear when thou art judged.

5 David comforting himself with hopes of being benefited by this affliction:
it may be that the Lord will look on my affliction, and that the Lord will
requ^ good for his cursing this day.

And this should comfort us in our deepeft diftresse, because Gods round
reprehensions, are ever gracious forerunners of his mercy.

Faith will teach us to say, God has chastised me according as he has
threatened: therefore he will comfort me according as he has promised: now has
not God promised, and assured us to uphold us in our afflictions, and bring us
through it, and comfort us by it, and glori^ie us after it? let us therefore
with Abraham, hope against hope, and apprehend the certain accomplishment of
these promises by faith, whence fence and carnal reason see nothing but the
contrary.

Ah! if we would seriously consider, that as God is the supreme cause of all
our afflictions, so does he govern and overruled all secondary, and inseriour
causes and means, by his most wise and powerful providence: that when they
seem most to oppose against him: they do but effect that which he wills, and
has purposed to be done? they serve to the furthering of his ends, his glory,
and our salvation; how opposite and contrary they are one to the other.

Now if God has joined his glory and our happiness together; it is ^it that
we should refer our selves to his good pleasure, that has joined his glory to
our best good, which is our salvation.

This was it which upheld the head of David, the good which would follow: he
was sure that this wet seed-time, would bring forth a plentiful harvest: this
he ^ings. Psalm. 126.6. He that goes forth weeping, bearing precious seed:
shall doub^lesse come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him; And
again, Psalm. 126.5. They that sow in tears shall reap in joy. And thus many
times, God in mercy puts us to a lesser trouble, for our greater good.

Thus did the Lord with the Israelites when he brought them into the
wilderness, where they endured much affliction: he did humble them, and prove
them that he might do them good at their latter end. Deuteronomy. 8.16.

Now God does not only advance by afflictions the spiritual and everlasting
good of his own children, but many times turns them to their greater benefit
in the things of this life, as we may see in the example of Joseph: he was
sold as a slave, that he might be a great Commander; he lost his patrimony at
home, that he might receive a much more large inheritance in a strange
Country, and therefore he professes, that when his brethren intended evil
against him, God disposed it to the good, not only of himself, but of many
others.

And thus was Johs afflictions turned to his advantage here in this life; what
a name has he gotten to be a pattern of patience: which shall never die so
long as the world lasts, for all his temporal things which he lost, he shall
have it doubled; and those that charged him for an Hipocrite, shall be the
first shall contribute to his relief and comfort; and this was it which
comforted him, when he looked to the end: God (faith he) knows my way, and
tri^th me, and I shall come forth like gold. Joh. 23.10.

Ah! if we would consider Gods manner of dealing many times: he is feign to
pull us down to the ground before he build us up anew, empty us quite of all
Creature comforts, before he fills us with himself: so never should our names
have had so sweet a savor with God, if they had not been by man, pounded in
the mortar of afflictions, so that many may say, they had been undone, if they
had not been undone.

Thus I have heard of ^godly man^hat was going for France, and he was going a
Shipboard, he broak his leg, and it pleased God so to order it, that the Ship
in which he should have gone in, at that time was cast away, and not a man
saved: so that by breaking a bone, he saved his life.

The like did that blessed Martyr in Queen Mary's days, who would always
conclude of all Gods dealings to be very good: and so he said when word was
brought him, that the next day he must be burned: but as he was going to the
stake, he fell and brake his leg, which when some asked him whether this were
good too; he replied, oh yes! very good: and so it fell out indeed, for before
his lame leg would bring him to the stake: a post from Queen Elizabeth came to
save him, and to tell Queen Mary was dead.

Oh! how does afflictions occasion more comfort and further experience of
grace: God seldom afflicts in vain, such solemn providence and dispansations,
leave men better or worse: but the children of God gain profit still by them,
for 'cis Gods course to recompense outward losses, with inward enjoyments, for
as the sufferings of Christ abound in us: so also consolations abound by
Christ; that is, inward comfort and experiences, according to the rate of
outward s^fferings: Ah! a wilderness that gives us more of God, is to be
preferred above all the pleasures and treasures of Egypt.

Now as afflictions occasion comfort, so it tries it, whether it be sound, and
solid: for in the time of prosperity, that comfort which v^e have, is so mixed
according to the mixed causes of it, that we can very hardly di^cern what of it
is carnal, and what is spiritual: but when all other comforts and hopes are
gone: then that which is left, is most likely to be spiritual: and the spirit
never works more sensibly and sweetly, then when it works alone.

So likewise, how can we tell whether we be able to encounter with an
adversary, when there appears (...) to contend against us? How can we tell
with what patience we can bear poverty, when we always abound in riches?
how can we discern what heart and co^rage we ^ave to ind^re sha^e,
disg^ace, reproaches: when we shall grow old in popular applause, and the
s^reame of their favors, shall flow unto our graves: how shall we know
with what constancy, and contentedness, we can sustain the l^ss of
children, friends of the nearest and dearest relations, when we never heard of
the death of any of them: truly we may comfort others, but then it comes more
kindly, when we have first comforted our selves, and have commanded our griefs
to avoid our presence?

And this is she goodness and sweetness of our afflictions, when being cast
into this fiery Furnace, we are purified from our dross, we may be approved in
the touch, and be esteemed and prized, as well befitteth our worth and value;
according to that of Solomon, Prove. 17.3. as the fining-pot for silver, and the
Furnace for gold; so h Lord tries the heart.

Object. But some may say, my afflictions are great, and my strength small: so
that in my trials, I show so many infi^mities and corruptions, I fear I shall
never be approved: how then shall I grow better by them.

Ans. Alas poor soul, do thou think that the Goldsm^th has skill enough so
to proportion the heat of the fire to the metal, that it may be purified and
not consumed: and can thou imagine that the Lord knows not how to fit his
trials to thy st^ength: or if he have knowledge and wisdom enough, can thou
doubt of his will, seeing he has bound himself by a most gracious promise,
that he will not suffer us to be tempted or tried above our strength, but will
give a good issue with the temptations yea, but in the mean time, thou art
pressed with such an heavy weight, that thou bewraiest thine infirmities and
corruptions.

And truly, it may be necessary and profitable for thee so to do: that by
this trial thou might come to the sight and sense of these imperfections,
which before were in thee, though hidden and unknown: to the end, that now
beholding them, thou may be truly humbled, brought to unfeigned repentance
and to an hearty endeavor in using all good means to be cleansed and freed
from them.

God many times in wonderful mercy and love, causes us to bewray, our smaller
infirmities, that he might free us from grosser sins: and taking away all self
confidence in our one strength, he causeeth us with full affiance to rest upon
him who never fails those that trust in him.

Ah! We shall have treble honor for all our sufferings: we are honored by the
Lord, when he inricheth us with his graces: and then by trying of them; whereby
their worth and excellency is manifested unto all that behold us. And at last
he will honor us by crowning his own graces in us, when as by trial they are
approved.

Did we but serio^fly confider that promise, Romans 8.28. All things shall work
together, not on y for good, but for the best, to them that love God: we would
think our present condition to be best, what ever it be, because of the wise
providence of God.

Not to speak how prosperity works for our good, because though we are like a
ship under sail, with afore-winde, carried sweetly, and swiftly toward
heaven, being fully laden with the blessings of Gods left hand: yet for as
much, as we sail in a tumultuous sea, we are in great danger always to be
over set: and many a one have been driven to that extremity to cut down their
maine Mast; and ^achling: thr^w overboard all their goods before they could
se^ure their lives.

My army, (said a Roman Captain) never stood in worse terms, then when it had
peace. And 'cis noted of Solomon that of all the Kings of Juda, he fell
foulest, because he was most prosperous.

And therefore an afflicted estate is most safest, yea and often most sweetest.
There is a fruit in the least cross: we should therefore look more at the
fruit, then deliverance from the cross: the longer it continues, the more we
may get by it.

1 If we consider the good which comes to us through the Malice of man: we re^d
of Jacob when he sent Joseph to Dothan to visit his brethren, they cast him
into a pit: Reuben, more pitiful then the rest, relieves him; but sells him
to the Midianites: they sell him again to Potiphar: his Mistress accuses
him; his Master condemns him, imprisons him: the Baker after long
forgetfullnesse, commends him to Pharaob, on the occasion of his dream: and
thus is he exalted. How many instruments were here, not one looking to God, or
to one another. Only the Lord of Ezechiels wheels, turns all about for the
good of his children.

So David goes on in Battle against Israel with Achish King of Gath, with
whom for a while he sojourned in the time of his banishment. The Princes of the
Philistimes command him to go back, and this they did only to disgrace him,
because they did distrust him. But 'twas for his good: for had he gone on, he
had been guilty of the blood of Israel, especially of Saul, who was slain in
that Battle: whereas now he is free, both from the blood of Israel, and from
the censure of the Philistimes, they cannot blame him for going back, because
it 'twas in obedience to their command.

Thus we see the Church in Q^eene Hester's time: what was plotted for their
ruin, turned for their farther deliverance, and Hamans malice to Mordecay,
shall be the first step to his preferment.

Many a Saint whose names do now breath forth a fresh perfume in the Church of
God, would have lived and died obscurely: had not the malice of others pounded
them in the mortar of afflictions.

The wicked (says one) are as it were Gods Physicians, by the poison of their
malice they purge out the poison of sin, from out of the souls of his
servants. They are the Lords scullions and their office is, to make clean the
vessels of honor. They serve as an antidote, to keep us from the contagious
infection of sin; and truly, this may be one reason, why the Lord thinks it
fitter to serve his own providence of wicked men: that he may bring good out
of evil, then not permit any evil at all.

Thus were all the ends of the King of Affiria, and the outrages of his army,
directed by God to that maine end, inchastifeing his people: I hough (as the
Lordplainly affirms) he never so much as thought so, or ever aimed at this
end. Isa 10.7.

And this many times the cruelty and oppression of proud insolency, that can
not look but with disdain, conttempt, make the Lord to pity the distressed
the sooner; and to arise, and set hi^ own in safety from them that poff^ah at
them, Psalm. 12.

Another out of malice to our persons, and a desire to revenge misconceived
wrongs, and supposed injuries; seeks our utter ruin, endeavoring to make our
names odio^s, to countenance their own cause: thinking they have laid a sound
foundation of their own glory, upon the ruins of our reputation, and estates.
But this often turns to our greater advantage, when God shall at length m^nifest
our inn^c^ncy, mauger all their plo^s and projects; so that whosoever blows
out the candle of our reputation with too strong a breath, does but make a
stink to blow it in again; and it were well thought o^, it is their malicious
breath that makes so i^a savor, not our snuff.

O hers cannot love us, because they cannot: or they will not, because they
will not: and so force themselves to an Antipathy, looking upon all our actions
with the green spectacles of prejudice; c^nstraing, or rather misconstruing
all actions, or intensions according to their own opinion, put^ing false
glosses on all plain tex^s; these are very ready to fide with a depraving
multitude whereby they become accessory of injury; if the injury be great, they
will proceed to hate those whom they have m^l gned, hatred in time will turn
to implacable malice, so that their houses are too hot for our neighborhood,
nay, may be a whole Town will in time ^steeme us as Nauseous to their quaesy
st^macks, and therefore we must out, as the frith of the stree^s. These are
like the m^n of Ephesus, who cried and made a lord noise, some for one thing,
and some for another, but the most part knew not wherefore they were come
together, Acts. 19.32. So these, cry out that such are people want not any
fault, though they cannot make manifest any one: thus may times one barking
dog, sets all the curs in a Town a bauling, at nothing sometimes, or at the
moon.

But this likewise works for the best, to a more circumspect walking, among so
many Critical enemies, and truly we never walk so warily, as when we have many
enemies to watch us. But if their cruelty will not endure our company any
longer, but that we must be constrained to secke a new habitation; (which many
of Gods dear children are forced in those saddest times, having lost their
old.) but this may by the blessing of God, turn to a great advantage. Their
malice does but transplant us into a better soil, where we may thrive more, and
bear our fruit with more safty, and comfort: without such fear of being nipt in
the bud. O^ else they drive us to a more narrow search, and greater longings
for that City above; whose foundations are so stable, and sure; that no enemy
can deprive us off, where is no plundering or oppressions: when all the malice
of man or devil, shall never be able to drive us thence.

Another sort there are, which sometimes were very hot, and eager in the
pursuit of their love; professing their love shall hold out, when others tire;
their's shall live, and flow, when all others are dead and dry: like Peter's
boasting, which will sight valliantly for a spurt: and do it may be more then
is required: but when they see their friends over powered by insolent
authority; then they will deny their acquaintance, and neither own them, nor
their cause. This have been the case of many, and therefore the less to be
wondered at.

David complains pitifully, thou have put my lovers and friends far from me,
and my acquaintance into darkness, and this may comfort us the more, when we
consider God has a hand in their estrangement, and therefore cannot choose but
be for good: we shall ever after be more wise, then rest and lean upon such
slender props, that at the best will bend, if not break, and look upon the
choicest friends to be subject to mutability, as mortality, and to be wary of
that love, which is ripe so suddenly: those rath-ripes (as we may call them)
will soon rot; all violent things in nature cannot last long: that love is
never lasting, which flames before it burns; and very rarely is that friendship
found with the durability of affection, which is so suddenly kindled;
enduring love is ever built on virtue: which no person can see in another at
once: and therefore by a soft ascension, does degree it self in the soul.

If we should tell those our sometimes great friends, that their hottest love
was never but fained, I believe they would not take it well: but they must know
that love was never sincere, that will not hold out length with life, and
therefore if God have snapt our fingers from such false friends, we have the
greater cause to be thankful. There will a great deal of sweetness flow
from this sower; better to be debarred of their society altogether, then be any
more greeved with their falsehood and unkindnesse.

And thus the malice of enemies, and the false, fained, and sickle love of
supposed friends, shall all turn for our eternal advantage, and therefore
though we have poured out many tears over their living Sepulchers, yet we may
comfort our selves in their loss, then enjoy their love with a continual
fear of loosing: or incurring their displeasure by a Captious exception, many
times for a mere oversight, or unwilling miscarriage, and unpurposed enour:
though generally we did ever observe them with obsequious love.

Let us not then be so greevously troubled, when we are any ways wronged,
belyed, railed upon, spurned at, or trampled upon by the feet of honored
insolency, or dunghill Malice; slighted, contemned, and utterly cast off, by
our bosom friends: but in a meek, and patient behavior, let us sweetly,
seriously, and feelingly in our own hearts say; this is from God, for my good:
or with Eli, it is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. There is a
supreme providence, wisdom, and power, which sees, and over-ruleth all
their actions and ends: that when they are most eager in pursuing their
designs, does make them when they think least of it, to serve him for the
effecting of all his counsels and purposes, and the furthering and advancing
of those his maine ends, even his own glory, and our greatest good, both here,
and hereafter.

2 not only the Malice of man, but the malice of Satan himself that sets them
awork, shall turn to our good.

He goes about like a roaring Lion seeking what soul he may devour, 1 Pet.
5.8. He thrusts fore at us, and so worrieth us with unwearied temptations,
seeking nothing more, then to dishonor God in our overthrow: but this like a
storm at sea, drives us to our port: even to the throne of grace, by prayers
and tears, for help against hell, 2 Chronicles. 20.13. When Satan has fetched us
over to a sin, by spells and Charms of mercy, he at length finding us bleeding
and dying, would make us believe, there is no mercy for us: when having made us
sin against the Law, he would make us sin against the Gospel also; that so
mercy her self might condemn us: but after sin committed, he steps in
between us and God, and begs out of our fathers hand, therod, to beat us for
those sins we had never done but through his inticement. Now say we, we see the
devils business added to his false-hood: surely peace once made with our God,
we will never be thus cheated again; Ah! how wary shall we be ever after, of
Satan's wiles; surely the best of sin is shame and sorrow, the forbidden tree
will never yield better fruit.

3 Our fins work our good, while we carry this mortal body about us, we do,
and must carry sin within us. Many unavoydable infirmities, invincible
necessities; God in mercy and wisdom, will have it to be thus.

1 To subdue our pride, and presumpion, which else would advance it self
against God. It Is said, Deuteronomy. 7.22. That God did not drive out the Canaanites
from among his people all at once; least the wild beasts should grow in upon
them. And says David, Psalm. 59.11. Lord slay not all the enemies of thy Church
at once, least thy people forget it. So God that could at first have taken away
all the corruption of our nature, and the lusts of our hearts would not: least
the wild beasts of pride, and security growing in upon us, we forget mercy.
Thus the Lord would not take away the thorn in the flesh of the Apostle Peul;
those buffettings of Satan: but tells him, his grace is sufficient for him, 2
Cor. 12.8. Alas, had we not these infirmities in us: how soon like our first
parents, would we think our selves to be Gods.

Look upon the Aposile Peter, how consident of his own strength, how forward
was he, in his profession: he would be first and singular, if all should deny
him, yet would not he, no, he would dye first; but God let loose but a small
temptation, the words of a poor filly maid, shall so affright him, with the
sear of death, that he will presently deny his Lord and Master: nay forswear
him too; but this fall did him much good; O^! How warily did he walk, ever
after, how cautious of his words, And when Christ did ask him, whether he loved
him more then these; he had done boasting now; only he pleades the sincerity
of his heart: Lord thou know all things, and know that I love thee, Job.
21.17.

Thus did Jobs impatiency, bring him, to the more humility, to the more abasing
of himself: Yea, to abhorring of himself in dust and ashes, Job. 42.6. So
David after his falls, he was the more Circumspect over himself; the more
eager against his sins; and the more earnest with God by praver against them.

2 As these infirmities serve us as to subdue pride and security; so to a waken
us from our spiritual sluggishnesse, to careful and constant prayer; yea, to
watchfulness unto prayer, with all perseverance.

Our infirmities are as it were the coals which Satan blows to consume us;
now when feeling the fire, we labor to keep it out, and by the contrary blasts
of Gods Spirit to quench the flame, we enter the combat which nothing else but
death can put an end unto.

When there is no fear of the enemy, our weapons rust, and we remain
unexperienced; and what then shall we do in the day of trial.

3 By our falls we are made more pitifully tender toward our brethen,
whenever overcome by a temptation; because we our selves, have been overcome,
and we cannot tell how soon again.

Thus when news was brought to a learned, and experienced Divine, that a
professor was soully fallen; Alas! faith he, he fell to day, and I may fall to
morrow.

And this the Apostle Paul ex^orteth, Gal. 6.1. It a brother be overtaken, yea,
which are spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness,
considering thy self, least thou also be^empted.

Now many times we do not know how frail we are, till we fall: neither know
what is our weakness: nor what our strength is, we see neither how poor we
our selves are, nor how strong our God is, and therefore will the Lord suffer
us to fall, that seeing how filthy we have made our selves by our own
pollutions, we may be the more wary and circumspect for the time to come. The
burnt child dreads the fire; and those that have layen once at hell gates,
will for ever be careful how they come there again.

Thus are Gods children by the renewing of their sins, made to renew their
sorrows, and more strictly to examine their repentance, past and present; and
if there be any dust or dirt of pride, or impatiency in us, this shaking of us,
will make it appear, and discover it self: so that sometimes one sin shall be
made as a means to purge out another: not by any virtue it has in it self,
but as God makes use of it as an instrument to drive us home to him, as
Mariners in storm to their port.

4 Our wants, they work for our good likewise. Alas! such is our nature, we
love no longer to wait in humility then we have hope of benefit, the young
prodigal no sooner receives his portion, but he departs to rassle it in
another Country; willingly we would attend no longer then God is giving: having
received, we would be out of his fight to spend, and this makes the Lord so
scant in his blessings, God will have us many times to know the worth, but of
his left handed blessings in their want, that we might know what value to put
on the next we shall receive, and how to be thankful for them. Now we come to
relish every mercy indeed, now a bit of brown bread is sweet, which in our
fulness would not down.

And now are we kept by this our meandness, in a continual dependence on Gods
al-sufficiency for mercies and blessings, till we have them: that on our
spiritual trassique for his glory, he may furnish us with greater store.

O how does this make us pity poor hunger-starved souls: now our bowels
which before were hardened, are melted toward them in pity and compassion: our
hearts are made more tender, which may be would have never been, if we had not
wanted our selves.

Let us not therefore measure things by the present sweetness, but by the
future profit. Wants will work for good in the end; and truly those mercies
that come to us out of great difficulties, and seem to be raised out of
contraries, are the sweetest mercies indeed. Let us never say at any time, we
are in a hard condition, unless we have a hard heart, and cannot pray.

What though we are at a very low ebb in regard of outward comfort; yet the
high springs of our joy and consolations, are not lost, but swallowed up in the
Ocean of Gods love, where they are reserved for us, to an appointed time. And
though we be not the subject of comfort; yet our comfort is always sure in the
object of faith: and it is hid for us even then when it is hid from us.

Indeed they are the best natures, whom mercies and blessings winn; but they
are more which this rod of wants sends home.

Sometimes a Physician lets blood, not that the man is sick, but that he may
not be; so God takes from us sometimes our wealth, least we should grow proud,
sometimes our dearest relations and children, least we should idolize them.
Sometimes our good name, least we should grow insolent: sometimes our health,
liberty, etc. Least we turn the grace of our God into wantonness, so that what
ever befalls us, is from our God, and for our good.

There is nothing so high, that is above Gods providence, nothing so low, that
is beneath it: nothing so large, but is bounded by it: nothing so confused, but
God can order it: nothing so bad, but he can draw good out of it: nothing so
wisely plotted, but God can disappoint it. Nothing so simple and unpolitiquely
carried, but he can give a prevailing issue unto it: and make it necessary in
regard of the event. And therefore this cannot but bring strong security to our
poor distressed souls, to know that in all variety of changes, and cross
providence; God, and our God has such a disposing hand, whatsoever befalls
us; all shall serve to bring Gods electing love, and our glorification
together, let us check our drooping souls, in the words of David, Psalm. 42.
why art thou so sad O my soul, and why art thou so disquieted within me, trust
in God, for I shall yet praise him, he is the health of my countenance and my
God.

And then let us sweetly conclude that God will very shortly, turn our depths
of sorrow, into seas of comfort; our bitter ^eares into spiritual triumphs,
our former heaviness, into heavenly joy, our oppression and wrongs, into a
Crown of glory, our innocence which now is obscured by the rotten rags of
prejudice: which fame, that common liar, cast upon her: shall then appear
beautiful, and shine as clear as the light. Our sadned hearts shall be filled
with those unmixed pleasures, which no man shall take from us. our troubled
consciences shall have that perfect peace which passes all understanding, and
which our utmost conceit cannot possibly comprehend.

We have seen how David comforted himself with hopes of being benefitted by
this his affliction: and we have seen the end of the Lord, it is true, he was
now in one of the greatest afflictions that ever befell a man, a father, or a
King: persecuted by his own bosom friends, by his beloved son; more then
20000 of his own subjects up in arms against him; outward troubles, inward
conflicts, encompassed him on every side; so that there was but a step between
him and death, yet by theey of faith and strength of God, looks beyond all and
eyed him which is invisible. It was a thick cloud, God had wrapped himself in at
that time, none but a Saint could have concluded a fair end, from such a lou'e
beginning, yet David's hope shall not shame him, his confidence will not leave
him, till the full accomplishment of his faith, the scaene shall be changed,
his rebellious Son shall have his desert, his trustless counselor Achitophel,
shall pay himself for his treachery, and shall save the hangman a labor; he will
supply the place of an executioner, his guilty conscience shall be his
witness, and God will be his judge.

Now shall David be brought home again with greater honor then ever all the
tribes of Israel shall sharply contend who shall be the first, that shall come
and conduct him. Shimei, that a little before had so abused him, shall be as
forward as any, nay to be foremost of many, to welcome the King back again.
He needs no accusers, or judge: his own mouth shall condemn him: and his
heart shall bid his tongue beg pardon for his desperate presumption.

Take notice of his humble carriage now, 2 Samuel 19.16, 17, etc. first he hasted
to come down with the men of Juda, to meet the King: and he brings a thousand
men with him of his own tribe to honor him, and after he had ushered him over
Jordan, in the presence of all he fell down before him; and said unto the
King, verse. 19. Let not my Lord impute iniquity unto me, neither do thou
remember that which thy servant did perversely, the day that my Lord the King
went out of Jerusalem, that the King should take it to his heart; for thy
servant does know that I have sinned: therefore I am come the first this day of
all the house of Joseph, to go down to meet my Lord the King, etc.

Now were there not here a parcel of fine words? co (...) Tavil, or any
expect, or require more then con^ition, confession, begging of pardon, in the
greatest humility; this (...) pass with David, (and ought so with us) but it
will not so with God; he knew the person, and what were his pretenses, that the
next occasion might make him do the like again. And indeed there is no trial
of an enemy in prosperity; but when we are in an exigence, in distress; then
you shall see he commonly shows himself, and tells what a one he is, 'Twas
unlikely Shimei would ever have proved a worthy friend; he was so base a for.
For as one says, he that can be a worthy enemy; will, reconciled, be a worth
yer friend. But to give a blow to a man that is already reeling; to insult over
adversity, to whip a flai'd back is the greatest cruelty.

Besides, take notice, that when Shimei came, Ziba comes with him, this
according to the proverb: birds of a fether, flock together. Traitorous
backbiters; and slanderers go together, and truly we may joyn^ the
tale-hearer, with the talebearer, they are so near of kin: there is but this
difference between them: that whereas the one has the devil in his tongue,
the other has him in his ear.

David puts them together, Psalm. 15.3. Those that shall inherit Gods holy hill;
does not backbite with his tongue, nor does evil to his neighbor, not takes
up a reproach against him.

Ob. But may it stand with Gods justice to punish the afflictors of his
children, when they but execute his will, did not Nathan foretell the troubles
would befall David from out of his own house? and did not Shimei serve him but
right? had not he caused the enemies of God to blaspheme his name; was it not
just his own name should be rent for such dishonor?

Answ. Very just indeed, in regard of God, but not so in respect of man; this
will not serve for their excuse, nor any way at all extenuate their
faultiness, for how ever they did do the secret will of God, which no
creature in heaven or earth, is able to withstand: yet this makes nothing for
them: seeing his hidden will was never propounded as a rule unto which they
should conform their actions; Gods revealed will was to be their guide: where
they could find no warrant, or command for what they did.

As one says There is a vast difference betwixt the instrument of Gods
providence, and the ministers of his ordinance, the one fulfils his purposes,
the other his commands. When Jehu destroyed the posterity of Abab; he sinned
not in the fact: for besides the prediction of the Prophet, he had his special
commission from God: for which he had his reward, 2 Kings. 10.30. But when
Zimri slew Elah: there was indeed the like prediction, but no commissions
therefore has he a fearful punishment, 1 Kings. 16.18.

Thus we see, if we do what God prescribes, we are accepted with him, though
perhaps in the issue, we cross his secret determinations. But if we violate
his precepts, though we fulfill his secret appointment; we are obnoxious to the
wrath of God.

Well then from all, which have been said, let Shimei's example be a Caveat for
ever, how any one abuses a Saint of God. Shimei pays dearly for it; though
David's piety can pardon him upon his humiliation; God will not let him escape
so, he will avenge David's quarrel, and Solomon shall reckon with him for his
former dealings, he shall fall into a new fin of disobedience against the King,
and now he is paid for all, himself is made the judge, that the sentence of
death is most just.

Thus we see, it is bad meddling with any of Gods children; especially when they
are under the correcting hand of God; a father will not take it well, that
another shall come and lash that child he is correcting; no more will God;
hear what he says, Isay. 47.6. I was wroth with my people, I have polluted
mine inheritance, and given them into thine hand: thou did show them no
mercy: upon the ancient have thou heavily laid the yoke, verse. 11. therefore
shall evil come upon thee, thou shall not know from whence it rises: and
mischief shall fall upon thee, thou shall not be able to put it off: and
desolation shall come upon thee suddenly, which thou shall not know. So
Zachariah 1.15. Says the Lord, I am very sore displeased with the heathen,
that are at ease: for I was but a little displeased, and they helped forward
the affliction, every soul that misuses a child of God, must be sure to pay
for it, either by tears, or torment.

Oh! Tremble all you which make so little account of injuring, or persecuting a
Saint: that have caused them to shed, either red, or white tears: surely their
tears are as well bottled up as their blood, and both are precious with God,
and both do cry, though not with an equal voice, yet loud enough to be heard.

Can you fear to soil, or demollish the palace of a Prince, or Peer: and can
you presume once to endeavor to ruinate, or contaminate the lords own temple;
founded and built upon Jesus Christ; can you be afraid to harm or hurt the
sheep, servants, children, brethren, consorts, or members of mortal Princes:
whose breath is in their nostrels, and must return to their dust: and dare you
adventure to defame, and perplex the sheep, servants, children, brethren,
spouse and members of the Lord Jesus; can you do any thing out of the
all-seing eye of God; or Gods deputy, conscience: and though that may not
always speak: yet it ever writes; it is a shroud remembrancer, and will tell
all, yea, the very least aggravateing circumstance.

If Ishmael will be mocking the son of the promise, he shall be rejected for a
persecutor, Gal. 4.29. And shall be turned out of his fathers house for ever.

Remember seriously, and sadly, the little children of Bethel, that did perhaps
but as they were taught, when they called the Prophet Elisha bold head: Alas!
their years might something have excused them: and yet behold a fearful
example of Gods severest judgments for the smallest abuse of a Prophet: two
she bears shall have a command to tear in pieces two and forty of them, 2
Kings. 2 24.

Take heed therefore how your tongue smite a child of God, or traduce their
innocence; how you move it in the least motion against them: do not invent
intangling snares ^o inveagle their charitable, and too credulous simplicity:
do not surmise, hatch, or harbor the least finister conceit against their
upright conversations: do not so much as cast a malicious glance, or coy, or
contemptuous look upon their persons: remember, their maker, is their husband,
and will not suffer the least indignity to be offered them, without a
punishment? What if they are black in regard of their sufferings, and
afflictions outwardly: or in regard of their often frailties and infirmities,
inwardly? vet are they amiable and lovely in respect of their practice of
piety, and obedience to Gods Laws outwardly; and of Christ's righteousness,
and sanctification begun, inwardly: What if they are deformed in their own
eyes, and vile in the eyes of man? yet are they lovely in the eyes of the
bridegroom Christ, Cant. 1.7. And the bridegroomes friends, Cant. 5.9, 17.
What if they cannot be gracious with all? yet they are with some, and though
they may be cast out of fellowship in the world: yet have they fellowship with
the father, and with his son Jesus Christ, 1 Job. 1.3.

Oh! Therefore let it be the brand of a most profane wretch, and one of Satan's
brood, to be belching out reproaches against their innocent neighbors: who
rather then they will want matter, they will most basely, and unworthily snatch
it from the invenomed tongue of a talebearer: nay, rather then fail; forge it
out of a suspicious selfe-guiltinesse in their own profane fancies; and suck
it as they say, out of their own fingers.

And indeed, wicked men's censures of Gods children, are many times not only
groundless, causles, and false: but also predigiously absurd, and utterly
impossible, without any show, or shadow at all of likelihood. So the Jews,
confidently censured the Lord Jesus, that he had a Devil, in whom dwelt the
fullness of the Godhead bodily, Col. 2 9. Tertullus judged the Apostle Paul a
pestilent follow; that was the most precious man upon the earth, Act. 24.5.
Eliab was accounted by Ahab, to be a troubler of Israel: who was in truth, the
very Chariots, and horsemen of the same, 2 Kings. 13.14. The Princes of Israel
suggested to King Zedechiah, that Jeremy was a traitor to the state: from which
he was so far, that he desired his head to be turned into waters, and his eyes
into springs of tears, that he might weep day and night, for the desolations
of it, Jer. 38.4.

And let it ever be the property of vain glorious Pharisees, to raise their
reputations, upon the imaginary ruins of good men's innocencies, and by
fathering upon them such enforced sinister senses; and wrested crooked
constructions, which an ingenious, impartial expositor could never possible
extract. It is the easiest thing of a thousand, for a Malicious mind, to soil
the glory, of the bravest, and most beautiful actions, with ill, and wrong
interpretations.

Beware of fastening a false crime upon an innocent, the very Casuists and
school men, do deservedly vilify it with a brand of hainousness, far above
thest; as they may very well, both for a greater breach of love, preciousness
of object, uncomprehensibleness of loss, difficulty of restitution, concurrence
of many sins, and consequence of much ill; take heed of adding to the truth, or
detracting from it, or intermixing false adulterate glosses, or some
impertinent parenthesis of your own, and so in very malice will give good
people in their absence, their due and deserved attributions, with many outward
plausible speeches: but ever after at the close, premising some formal
counterfeit, protestation, and Pharisaicall preface, as, I am very sorry to
hear it; I would it were otherwise; indeed the man, (or woman) is of very good
parts, extraordinary gifts; but he is proud of them; I believe him to be a
Godly person, but he has one or two foul faults, which I would not willingly
name, thereby implying more then is expressed. Oh! This is not to speak out of
any love to the party, but out of an envious, perverse, dunghill humor, they
do desire to brand those whom they will not love: or whom they have injured,
and cannot make satisfaction: with one notorious brand or another.

Oh! do not, for sear of a curse; charge upon a Saint with so much credulity
and confidence, those things they never did, never knew, never thought upon; do
not report true things maliciously, and upon purpose to bring them into hatred,
and dil-estimation: so Doeg dealt with David, and it cost the lives of 85 of
the Lords Priests. And you, which take upon you the name of professors, and
would be accounted of more then ordinary; because perhaps you are in society
with such a Church: or in credit with such a Minister: and eminent in prayer,
in repetition of Sermons, excellent in knowledge, and discourse: Alas! you may
do all this, and yet go to hell. Take not liberty to your selves to insult
unmercifull, either over the damnable estate of those who are without: oh dive
not, or once be prying into Gods book of predestination; it is too high for
mortals, being Gods prerogative Royal; or uncharitably blaze abroad the
infirmities, and failings of the Saints, which you ought to conceal. Do not
be fierce, and fiery against your fellow Christians, if you differ from them in
some indifferent things, if God have given you more knowledge then others;
bless God, and walk the more humbly: and give that allowance to others, which
you would they should give to you.

Remember that undeniable truth, James. 1.26. If any man among you seem to be
religious, and bridleth not his tongue, he deceives his own heart, his
religion is in vain, certainly, those professors who give their tongues so
much liberty, prove too often, either utterly unsound, or not so thoroughly
humbled; those that are so quick to spy a more in their brothers eye, have
commonly a a beam in their own; and those who are prying into other men's
carriages, perusing other men's lives; have hardly any leisure to look into
their own rotten hearts, and mere carnal courses. How often may we hear an
imperious Pharisee mangle and marter a Saints good name, for some lesser,
bewailed infirmity; who never yet learned to mourn for, or mortify any one of
those many gross corruptions, and secret villainies, which reign too manifestly
in themselves.

O! all you therefore that are not only professors, but practisers; not in
show only, but in substance: Saints of God, elect and precious: do not, Oh!
do not you learn, or become accessory to this hellish vice of censuring: be
very careful and tender what conceits you entertain and what censure you
pass upon others. You are bound by the laws of divine love, to conceive and
speak the best of every one: until his words, ordinary carriage, and open
profaneness, clearly convince the contrary, you are to interpret all things in
the better part, so far as they may stand with a good conscience, without
prejudice to the truth, or impeachment of Gods glory; you ought to be so far
from apprehension of imaginary matter, or violent wresting of men's words,
actions, and be haviour to the worst sense: that if matters be but probable,
poized with equal circumstances, and with even weight of reasons interpretable
both ways: you are ever to suffer your conceits, and censures, to be carried
the more charitable way, and be so far from censuring others without ground,
truth, or proof, (which is the ordinary practice now) that you should never
speak the ill you too certainly know by your brethren, but with fearefullness,
as it were, and with some kind of inforcement.

Would we not say he were mad, that did wound and tear his own members; much
more is he that will give a lash at a member of Christ.

Let cursed Chams, uncover, and sport themselves in the nakedness of a fallen
Saint: let railing Rabshakehs be ever belching, and breathing out reproaches
against Gods precious ones. Let dogged Doegs thirsting after, and delighting in
the overthrow of innocence, discover the errors of Gods anointed ones with
Satanical aggravations. Let covetous Zibaes by presents, and false suggestions,
dispoil the honest, and harmless of reputation, and favor. Let base and
unworthy Shimei's insult over misery, casting dirt and stones on them whom God
is whipping. But do not you, which are mystical members of Christ's body,
wound one another, for fear you wound the sides of Christ.

And indeed, the Sword of a brother cuts deeper then an enemies; and proves
many times the most deadly blow.

But above all, take heed of wounding, or grieving the father less and
widows: who lie most open to injuries and wrong, who have few, or none on
earth to plead their cause: yet they have a God, who has styled himself to
be, a father of the fatherless, and a judge of widows causes, and this sings
David, is God in his holy habitation, Psalm. 68.5.

In how many places in sacred scripture, has God commanded to plead so them,
to relieve them, much less to abuse them; read and tremble at that fearful
place, Exodus, 22.22, 23, 24. Ye shall not afflict any widow, or fatherless
child. If thou afflict them in any wise, (mark that) and they cry at all unto
me: I will surely hear their cry. And my wrath shall wax hot, and I will kill
you with the sword: and your wives shall be widows, and your children
fatherless. Do not say this is old Testament, for it is a moral Law inacted
in the high court of heaven, never to be repealed, till time shall be no more.

Oh! That Saints would walk more warily now in this frozen age; they are too
many of them tainted with this sin: and it is to be lamented, even with tears
of blood: what, shall Saints fill up the measure of iniquity Mat. 24.12.
because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold. How miserably
are we divided; not more in judgment, then affection; if God have given one a
more cleerer light then another, let him not despise him; but rather bless
God, and help him that sincerely seeks the right way to heaven.

That once glorious Church of the Jews, walked through many types and shadows;
at the best it was but by moon light, or star light; but when the Son of
righteousness arose, all those stars of lesser light did vanish and give
place. Now though our Sun be up, yet is he not exalted to his Meridian; till
that glorious City of God, new Jerusalem come down from heaven; when all mists
and foggs of er^our and heresy shall be scattered, when all dark places shall
be made light and clear, and prophesies shall be accomplished. But if we live
not to see this beautiful Church, let us content our selves in being members
of Christ's mystical body, and we may find the way to our home without
stumbling if we please. And may go to heaven without treading upon one the
others heels.

Study not new lights, and opinions, to be singular; or follow any man (how
eminent so ever) no longer then they follow Christ: lamentable it is to see,
how men drive on a faction; and indeed, religion is become little else, truth
is even lost, in questions about her.

It Is wisdom to prove all things, but hold fast that which is good, be like
the honorable men of Berea, search the scriptures whether those things be so or
no; stand in the way, and ask for the good old way. Examine how the Saints
formerly lived: let the sacred word of God be our rule, and the practice of the
most eminent Saints, our example.

Oh! Let us not content our selves with a bare outside show of holiness: or
delude our selves, (as one very excellently says) Alas! our religion does not
consist in outward shows, profession, much talking, in holding strickt points,
defending new opinions, in external forms of religious exercises, set-tasks
of hearing, reading, conference, and the like: in some solemn, outward
extraordinary abstinences, and forbearances, censuring others, etc. But in
righteousness, peace and joy in the holy Ghost: in meekness, tender
heartedness, love, patience, humility, contentedness; mortification of sin,
moderation of passion, holy guidance of the tongue; in works of mercy,
justice, and truth: in fidelity, and painfulnesse in our callings, conscionable
conversing with men, well knowing how we stand related; reverencing superiors,
loving our equals, courteous to our inferiors, sweerly forgiving our enemies:
an open-hearted, real, fruitful affectionatenesse, and bounty to all Gods
children: in heavenly-mindednesse, self-denial, the life of faith, in
disesteem of earthly things, contempt of the world, resolute hatred of sin: in
approving our hearts in Gods presence, a sweet communion with him, and longing
for the coming of the Lord Jesus.

It is not sufficient that we be talkers, unless we be walkers; if any man be
in Christ he is a new creature, nor new in one part only, but in all;
otherwise we are monsters. If there be a new heart, certainly there will be a
new habit. Lightness in attire, ever show a vain mind, and will never suit
with a grave heart; so a loose, unadvised, frivolous, talkativenesse: argue at
best, but a frothy brain.

Let us not therefore ingrosse all the talk, in unmannerly interruptions, as
too many do, and is sometimes incident to new converts, or counterfeits;
neither in the other extreme, to be so reserved and curious, as to say no
more, then may breed an applause and admiration of that worth which may be is
not so much in us. This is as fearful a fault, though not altogether as filthy
as the other. A sober, humble, well advised speech, (as one says) is a token
of grace.

And let us be very circumspect of our company, and companions. It Is a thing to
be much lamented to see how many precious hours, and opportunities are lost,
with idle, frivolous discourse, which benefits none; how do many range about
in their discourse from field to Town, from Town, to houses, from houses, to
particular things, meddling with others businesses which does not belong to them
of their diet, clothes, fashions of them, their family, children, servants,
estates, whence they had it, and how long twill last; then next they will be
raking into the dunghill puddles of the true, or seeming miscariages of their
neighbors good, or ill. Tossing, and tumbling them from tongue to tongue, as
sharp as swords; renting and tearing the good names of those that are better
then themselves: fathering upon them that which they never thought of, turning
by their cunning art, a hearsay, may be their supposition, into a peremptory
proposition, that it was so: and then to mount it upon the wings of flying, and
lying fame, to pass swiftly, and securely without stop, or controlement.

When this perhaps is done, then they ramble in their serious communications
into their fields, and houses; telling many large and deep discourses of the
longitude, and latitude of their lands, the number of their sheep, and the
several conditions of their horses: what great business they have finished,
or intended. And then for want of better matter, they will tell of the pretty
lispings of their children, what they did, and what they said, and all to no
purpose, but to maintain a great deal of prittle prattle: with much such
tedious stuff, enough to tire a judicious, and Solid Saint^ who departs the
company, either grieved, or corrupted, or both: but if some should pen the
discourse that is at some meetings many times; and after they are in a serious
mood, to read it to them, with all their Antic gestures, and behaviors: I
believe some would be ashamed, and not to have so much patience as to hear,
what sometime they spoke, therefore it is wisdom to premeditate, and not be too
hasty in our speech: and after, to use reviewes, what we said, or did, one
unadvised word, may ruin us; either in our estates, or lives.

Oh! Consider seriously; such communications do not yield the least glance, or
glimmering of sound delight, or comfort, when we are going to our bed, or fall
into any affliction, or temptation, or come to lie down in our beds of death;
and though formerly we have been overtaken, so as to talk, or hear such
fruitless, and frivolous matters: yet let us hence forth resolve in the
strength of God, never to stay long in that company, wherein we can neither
teach, or learn. Never meddling with others marters, but such as concern our
selves, or those with whom we do confer.

Let us principally aim at Gods glory, our own souls benefit; and the good
of others, by communicating sweetest experiences of Gods dear, and precious
dealings to our poor souls in their extremities; which may be a support and
stay, for their present, and our future comfort, in whatsoever condition.

FINIS.

