Hay any work for Cooper: OR, A BRIEF PISTLE DIRECTED BY WAY OF an
Hublication to the Reverend Bishops, counselling them if they will needs be
Barrelled up, for fear of smelling in the nostrills of his Majesty, and the
state, that they would use the advice of Reverend Martin, for the providing of
their Cooper, because the Reverend T. C. (by which mystical Letters is
understood, either the bounsing Parson of Eastmeane, or Tom Coakes his
Chaplain) to be an unskilful and a Beceitfull Tub-trimmer. WHEREIN WORTHY
MARTIN QVITS Himself like a Man I warrant you, in the modest defense of his
self and his learned Pistles, and makes the Coopers hoopes to fly off, and
the Bishops Tubs to leake out of all cry.

Penned and Compiled by MARTIN the METROPOLITAN.

Printed in Europe, not far from some of the Bounsing Priests,

A man of worship, to the men of worship, that is Marti^ Mar-prelate gentleman,
Primate, and Metropolitan of all the Ma^tins wheresoever, To the John of all
the Sir John's, and to the rest of the terrible Priests says, have among you
once again, my clergy masters.
For,

O Brethren, there is such a deal of love grown of late I perceive, between
you and me, tha^ although I would be negligent in sending my Pistles unto you:
yet I see you cannot forget me, I thought you to be very kind when you sent
your Pursivaunts about the Country to seek for me. But now that you your
selves have taken the pains to write, this is out of all cry. Why it passes to
think what loving and careful Brethren I have, who although I cannot be
gotten, to tell them where I am, because I love not the air of the Clinke or
Gatehouse in this cold time of Winter, and by reason of my business in
Pistle-making, will not. withstanding make it known unto the world, that they
have a months mind toward me, now truly brethren. I find you kind, why ye do
not know what a pleasure you have done me. My worships books were unknown to
many, before you allowed T. C. to admonish the people of England to take heed,
that if they loved you, they would make much of their Prelates, and the chief
of the Clergy. Now many seek after my books, more then ever they did.
Again, some knew not that our brother John of Fulham, was so good unto the
porter of his gate, as to make the poor blind honest soul, to be a dum
Minister. Many did not know, either that Amen, is as much as by my faith, and
so that our Savior Christ ever swear by his faith, or that bowling and eating
of the Sabbath, are of the same nature: that Bishops may as lawfully make blind
guydes, as David might cate of the Show bread, or that father Thomas
Tub-trimmer of Winchester, good old student, is a master of Ar^s of 45. years
standing. Many I say, were ignorant of these things, and many other pretty
toys, until you wrote this pretty book, besides whatsoever you overpasse in
my writings, and did not gainsay, that I hope will be judged to be true, and so
John a Bridges his treason out of the 448 page of his book, you grant to be
true. Your selves you deny not to be petty Popes, the Bishop of fir David's in
Wales, you deny not to have two wives, with an hundred other things which you
do not gain say, so that the reader may judge that I am true of my word, and
use not to lie like Bishops, and thi^ has greatly commended my worships good
dealing. But in your confutation of my book, you have showed reverend Martin to
be truepeny indeed, for you have confirmed, rather then confuted him. So that
brethren, the pleasure which you have done unto me, is out of all scotche and
notche. And should not I again be as ready to pleasure you? Nay, then I should
be as ungrateful toward my good brethren (as John of Ca^t. is to Thomas
Cartwright. The which John, although he has been greatly favored by the
said Thomas, in that Thomas has now these many years let him alone and said
nothing unto him, for not answering his books, yet is not ashamed to make a
secret comparison, between himself and Thomas Cartwright- As who say, John of
Lambehith, were as learned as Thomas Cartwright. What say you old deane John a
Bridges, have not you showed your self thankful unto his Majesty, in
overthrowing his supremacy in the 448 page of your book. I will lay on load on
your skincoat for this gear anon:

And I will have my penyworths of all of your brethren ere I have done with
you, for thi^ pains which your T. C. has taken with me. This is the Puritans
craft, in procuring me to be confuted I know: I Will be even with them, to a
crafty whoresons brethren Bishop, did you think, because the puritans T. C.
did set John of Cant. at a nonplus, and gave him the overthrow, that therefore
your T. C. alias Thomas Cooper Bishop of Winchester, or Thomas Cook his
Chaplain, could set me at a nonplus, simple fellows, me thinks he should not.

J guess your T, C. to b^ Thomas Cooper (but I do^ not peremptorily affirm it)
because the modest old student of 52* years standing, set^eth Winchester after
Lincoln and Rochester in the cont^ts of his book, which blasphemy, would not
have been toller^ted by them that saw and allowed the book, unless Mistress
Coopers husband had been the author of it.

Secondly, hecuase this T. C, the author of this book is a Bishop, and
therefore Thomas Cooper he is a Bishop, because he reckon^th himself charged
amongst others, with those crimes whereof none are accused but Bishops alone,
page 101. lin. 26. Ha old Martin, yet I see ^hou have it in thee, thou will
enter into the bowels of the cause in hand I perceive. Nay if you will commend
me, I will give you more reasons yet. The style and the phra^e is very like her
husbands, that was sometimes wont to write unto Doctor Day of Wells. You see I
can do it indeed. Again, none would be so groshead as to gather* because my
reverence tells Deane John, that he shall have twenty fists about his ^ares
more then his own (whereby J meant indeed, that many would write against him,
by reason of his bomination learning, which otherwise never meant to take pen
in hand) that J threatened him with blows, and to deal by stafford law;
whereas that was far from my meaning, and could by no means be gathered out
of my words, but only by him that pronon^ced Enlogeni for E^login in the
pulpit, and by him whom a Papist made to believe, that the Greek word Eulogein,
that is to give thanks, signifie^h to make a cross in the forhead: py hy hy
hy, I cannot but laugh, py hy hy hy. I cannot but laugh, to think that an old
soaking student in this learned ag^, is not ashamed to be so impud^ as to
pre^me to deal with a Papist, when he has no grue in his pocket. But I
promise you Sir, it is no shame to be a L. Bishop if a man could, though he
were as unlearned as John of Gloucester, or William of L^echfeld, And I tell you
true, our brother Westchester, had as live play twenty nobles in a night, at
Priemeero on the cards, as trouble himself with any Pulpit labor, and yet he
thinks himself to be a sufficient Bishop. What a Bishop such a cardplaier? A
Bishop play 20 nobles in a night? Why a round threpence serves the turn to
make good sport 3 or four nights amongst honest neighbors, and take heed of
it brother Westchester* it is an unlawful game if you will believe me. For in
Winter it is no matter to take a little sport for an odd cast braces of twenty
nobles when the weather is foul, that men cannot go abroad to bowls, or to
shoot? What would you have men take no recreation: Yea but it is an old said
s^w, enough is as good as a feast, and recreations must not be made a trade and
an occupation, ka master Martin Mar-prelate, I tell you true brother min^,
though J have as good a gift in pistle making, as you have at Prieme^ro, and
f^re more delight then you can have at your card^, for the love I bear to my
brethren, yet I dare not use this sport, and cards I tell you though they be
without horns, yet they are parlous beasts, be they lawful or unlawful take
^eed of them for all that. For you cannot use them but you must needs say your
brother T. C. his ^men, that is, swear^ by your faith, many a time in the
night, well I will never stand ^rgling the matter any more with you, if you
will leave your card-playing so it is, if you will not, trust to it, it will
be the wo^se for you.

I must go simply and plainly to work with my brethren, that have published
T. C. Whosoever have published that book, they have so hooped the Bishops
tubs, that they have made them to s^ell far more odious then ever they did,
even in the nostrels of all men. The book is of 252 pages; the drift thereof
is to (...) certain printed and published libels, you bestow not full 50 pages
in the answer of any thing that ever was published in print, the rest are
bestowed to maintain the belly, and to c^ute: what think you? Even the (...)
inventions of your ow^ brains for the most part. As that it is not lawful for
his Majesty to allot any lands unto the maintenance of the Minister, or the
Minister to live upon lands for this purpose allot^ed unto him, but is to
content himself with a small pension, and so small, as he have nothing to
leave for his wife and children after him (for who^ he is not to be car^full,
but to rest on Gods providence) and is to require no more but food and
raiment, that in poverty he might b^ answerable unto our Savior Christ and his
Apostles, in the confutation of these points, and the Scriptures corruptly
applied to prove them* there is bestowed above 100 pages of this Book, that
is, from the 149 unto the end. Well T. C. whosoever thou art, and whatsoever
Martin is, neither thou, nor any man or woman in England shall know while you
live, suspect and trouble as ^any as you will, and therefore save you^ money in
seeking for him, for it may be he is nearer you then you are ware of. But
whosoever thou a^ I say, thou show thy self to be a most notorious wicked
s^anderer, in fa^hering these things upon those whom they call Puritans, which
^ever any enjoying common sense would affirm* And bring me him, or set down
his name and his reasons that holds any of the former points confuted in thy
book, and I will prove him to be utterly bereaved of his wits, and his
confuter to be either stark mad, or a stark enemy to all religion, yea to his
Majesty and the state, of this Kingdom. No no, T. C. Puritans hold no such
points, it were well for Bishops, that their adversaries were thus sotti^. They
might then justly incense his Majesty and the state against them, if they were
of this mind. These objections, in the confutation whereof, thou have bestowed
so much time, are so far from having any Puritan to be their author, as
whosoever reads the book, were he as blockheaded as Thomas of Winchester
himself, he may easily know them to be objections only invented by the author
of the book himself. For although he be an impudent wretch, yet dares he
not set them down, as writings of any other, for then he would have described
the author and the book by some audient.

The Puritans indeed hold it unlawful for a Minister to have such temporal
revenewes, as whereby 10 ministers might be well maintained, unless the said
revenews come unto him by inheritance.

They hold it also unlawful, for any state to bestow the livings of many
ministers upon one alone, especially when there is such want of Ministers
livings.

They hold it unlawful for any minister to be Lord over his brethren, and they
hold it unlawful for any state to tolerate such under their government,
because it is unlawful for states, to tolerate men in those places whereinto
the word has forbidden them to enter.

They affirm that our Savior Christ has forbidden all ministers to be Lords,
Luke 22. 25. And the Apostle Peter, shows them to be none of Gods Ministers,
which are Lords over Gods heritage, as you Bishops are, and would be accounted.
These things T. C. you should have confuted, and not troubled your self, to
execute the fruits of your own brains, as an enemy to the state, And in
these points, I do challenge you T. C. and you Deane John, and you John
Whitgift, and you Doctor Coosins, and you Doctor Capcase (Copcoat I think your
name be) and as many else, as have or dare write in the defense of the
established church government, if you cannot confute my former assertions, you
do but in vain think to maintain your selves by slanders, in fathering upon
the Puritans the offsprings of your own blockheads. And assure your selves, I
will so be scoop, if you cannot defend your selves in these points, as all the
world shall cry shame upon you, you think prettely to escape the point of your
Antichristian callings, by giving out that Puritans hold it unlawful for his
Majesty to leave any lands for the use of the ministers maintenance, J cannot
but commend you. for I promise you, you can shift of an heinous accusation very
prettily,

A true man brings unanswerable witnesses against a robber by the high way
side, and desires the Judge, that the law may proceed against him, Oh no my
Lord says the thief, in any case let not me be dealt with. For these mine
accusers have given out* that you are a drunkard or they have committed Treason
against the state, therefore I pray you believe my slander against them, that
they may be executed, so when I come to my trial, I shall be sure to have no
accusers. A very pretty way to escape, if a man could tell how to bring the
matter about. Now brethren Bishops, your manner of dealing is even the very
same. The puritans say truly, that all Lord Bishops are petty Antichrists, and
therefore that the Magistrates ought to thrust you out of the commonwealth.
Now of all loves say the Bishops, let not our places be called in question,
but rather credit our slanders against the Puritans, whereby, if men would
believe us when we lie, we would bear the world in hand, that these our
accusers are Malcontents and sottish men, holding it unlawful for the
Magistrate to allot any lands for the Ministers portion, and unlawful for the
Minister to provide for his family. And therefore you must not give ear to the
accusations of any such men against us. And so we shall be sure to be
acquitted. But brethren do you think to be thus cleared? Why the Puritans
hold no such points as you lay to their charge. Though they did, as they do
not, yet that were no sufficient reason, why you being petty Popes, should be
maintained in a Christian commonwealth. Answer the reasons that I brought
against you otherwise. Come off you Bishops, leave your thousands, and content
your selves with your hundreds, says John of London. So that you do plainly
see, that your Cooper T. C. is but a deceitful workman, and if you commit the
hooping of your Bishoprics unto him, they will so le^ke in a short space as
they shall be able to keep never a Lord Bishop in them. And this may serve for
an answer unto the latter part of your book, by way of an Interim, until
more work for Cooper be published.

Hay any work for Cooper.
ANd now reverend T. G. I am come to your Epistle to the reader, but first you
and I must go out alone into the plain fields, and the^e we will try it out,
even by plain Syllogismes, and that I know Bishops cannot abide to hear of.

The reverend T. G. to the Reader. Page 1.
I draw great danger upon my self, in defending our Bishops and others the
chief of the clergy of the church of England. Their adversaries are very
eger: the Saints in heaven have felt of their tongues, for when they speak of
Paul, Peter, Mary, etc. whom others justly call saints: they in derision call
them sir Peter, sir Paul, sir Mary.

Reverend Martin.
Alas poor reverend T. G. Be not afraid. Here be none but friends man. I hope
thou art a good fellow, and a true subject, yea but I defend the Bishops of the
church of England says he* then indeed I marvel not though thy conscience
accuse thee, and thou art sure to be as wellfavouredly, thwacked for thy
labor, as ever thou wast in thy life. Thy conscience J say, must needs make
thee fear in defending them. For they are petty Popes, and petty Antichrists
as I have proved; because they are Pastor of pastors, etc. thou have not
answered my reasons, and therefore swadled thou shall be for thy pains, and
yet if thou will yield I will spare thee. Thou can not be a good and sound
subject and defend the hierarchy of Lord Bishops to be lawful, as I will show
anon. Concerning Sir Paul, I have him not all in my writings. And therefore
the reader must know, that there is a Canterbury trick once to patch up an
accusation with a lie or two.

Sir Peter was the oversight of the Printer, who omitted this Marginall note,
viz. He was not Saint Peter which had a lawful superior authority over the
universal body of the Church. And therefore the Priest whereof Deane Iohu
speaks was sir Peter,

And good reverend T. C. I pray thee tell me, what kin was Saint Mary Oueries,
to Mary the Virgin. In my book learning, the one was some Popish Trull, and
the other the blessed Virgin. But will you have all those, who are Saints
indeed, called Saints? Why then why do you not call saint Abraham, saint Sara,
saint Jeremy. If John of Canterbury should marry, tell me good T. C. do thou
not think that he would not make choice of a godly woman. I hope a would, and
T. C. though you are learned, yet you go beyond your books if you said the
contrary, being a godly woman, then she were a Saint, and so by your rule, her
name being Mary, you would have her called Saint Mary Canterbury. But I promise
thee; did his grace what he could, I would call her sir Mary Canterbury as long
as he professed himself to be a Priest, and this I might do lawfully. For he
being sir John, why should not his wife be sir Mary, and why not sir Mary
Overies, as well as sir Mary Canterbury? I hope John of Canterbury whom I know,
(though I know no great good in him) to be as honest a man as M. Overies was,
whom I did not know. Neither is there any reason why you T. C. should hold M.
Overies and his Mary, because they are within the Diocese of Winchester to be
more honest then M. Canterbury and his wife. Nay there is more reasons, why M.
Canterbury and his wife dwelling at Lambehith, should be thought the honester
of the two, then Overies and his wife, because they dwell O the banks side.
But good Tom tubtrimmer, tell me what you mean by the chief of the Clergy in
the Church of England? John Canterbury I am sure Why good T. C. this speech is
either blasphemous, or traitorous, or by your own confession an evident
proof, that John of Canterbury is Lord over his brethren. He that is chief
of the clergy, is chief of Gods heritage, and that is Jesus Christ only, and
so to make the Pope of Canterbury chief of Gods heritage, in this sense is
blasphemons, if you mean by clergy, as Deane John does page 443 of his book,
both the people and Ministers of the Church of England, in this sense his
Majesty is chief of the clergy in the Church of England, and so your speech
is trait^rous. Lastly, if by clergy you mean the ministers of the Church of
England; none in this sense can be chief of the Clergy, but a petty Pope. For
our Savior Christ flatly forbids any to be chief of the clergy in this
sense, Luke 22. 26. And none ever claimed this unto himself but a petty Pope.
Therefore T. C. you are either by your own speech a blasphemer or a traitor, or
else John of Cant. is a petty Pope. Here is good spooneme^t for a Cooper. Take
heed of writing against Martin, if you love your ease.

Reverend T. C. page 2. Epistle.
But I fear them not, while I go about to maintain the dignity of Priests.

Reverend Martin.
Well fare a good heart yet, stand to thy tackling, and get the high commission
to send abroad the Pursivants, and I warrant thee thou wile do something; Alas
good Priests, that their dignity is like to fall to the ground, it is pity
they should be so, they are such notable Pulpit men. There is a neighbor of
ours, an honest Priest, who was sometimes (simple as he now stands) a vice in a
play for want of a better, his name is Gliberie of Hawstead in Essex, he goes
much to the Pulpit. On a time I think it was the last May, he went up with a
full resolution, to do his business with great commendations. But see the
fortune of it; A boy in the Church, hearing either the Summer Lord with his May
game, or Robin Hood with his Morice dance going by the Church, out goees the
boy. Good Glibery, though he were in the pulpit, yet had a mind to his old
companions abroad (a company of merry grigs you must think them to be, as
merry as a vice on a stage) seeing the boy going out, finished his matter
presently with John of Londons Amen, saying ha, ye faith boy, are they there,
then ha with thee, and so came down and among them he goes. Were it not then
pity, that the dignity of such a Priest should decay. And I would gentle T. C.
that you would take the pains to write a treatise against the boy with the red
cap, which put this Glibery out of his matter at another time. For Glibery
being in the pulpit so fastened his eyes upon a boy with a red ^ap, that he was
clean dashed out of countenance, in so much that no note could be hard from him
at that, time, but this: Take away red cap there, take away red cap there: it
had been better that he had never been borne, he has marred such a Sermon
this day, as it is wonderful to think^ The King and the Counsel might well
have heard it for a good Sermon, and so came down. An admonition to the people
of England, to take heed of boys with red caps, which make them set light by
the dignity of there Priests, would do good in this time, brother T. C. you
know well.

Reverend T. C,
The cause why we are so spighted, is because we do ^ may hereby ceiveth
(...). is a Bishop.
endeavor to maintain the laws which his Majesty and the whole state of the
Realm have allowed, and do not admit a new platform of government, devised I
know not by whom.

Reverend Martin.
Why T. C. say Eulojin for Eulogein as often as you will, and I will never
spite you, or the Bishop of Winchoster either for the matter. But do you
think our Church government, to be good and lawful, because his Majesty and
the (...), who maintain the reformed religion allows the (...)? Why the Lord
does not allow it, therefore it cannot be lawful. And it is the Fault of such
wretches as you Bishops are, that his Majesty and the state allows the same.
For you should have otherwise instructed them, they know you not yet so
thoroughly as I do. So that if I can prove, that that the Lord disliketh our
Church government, your endeavors to maintain the same, show that thereby you
cannot choose, but be traitors to God and his word, whatsoever you are to his
Majesty and the State. Now T, C. look to your self for I will presently make
all the hoopes of your Bishoprics fly assunder

Therefore

Our Church government, is an unlawful Church government, and not allowed in
the sight of God. Because

That Church government is an unlawful Church government, the Offices and
Officers whereof, the civil magistrate may lawfully abolish out of the Church,
mark my craft in reasoning brother T. C. I say the Offices and Officers; for I
grant that the Magistrate may thrust the Officers of a lawful Church
government out of the Church if they be Diotrepheses, Mar^elmes, Whitgifts,
Simon Magustes, Coopers, Pernes, Renoldes, or auy such like Iudases, (though
the most of these must be packing Offices and all) but their Offices must
stand, that the same may be supplied by honester men. But the Offices of
Archbishops and Bishops, and therefore the Officers much more, may be lawfully
abolished out of the Church by his Majesty and our state. And truly this were
brave weather to turn them out: it is pity to keep them in any longer. And
that would do me good at the heart, to see John of London, and the rest of his
brethren so discharged of his business, as he might freely run in his
cassocke and hose after his bowl, or flourish with his two hand sword, O it is a
sweet trunch f^ddle.

But the Offices of Archbishops and Bishops, may be lawfully abolished out of
the Church by his Majesty, and the state, as I hope one day they shall be;
Therefore (mark now T. C. and carry me this conclusion to John of Lambehith for
his breakefast) our Church government. by Arohb. and Bishop^, is an unlawful
church government* You see brother Cooper, that I am very courteous in my
minor, for J desire therein no more Offices to be thrust out of the Church at
one time, but Archbs. and Bishops, as for Deanes Archdeacons, and Chancellors,
I hope they will be so kind unto my Lords grace, as not to stay, if his worship
and the rest of the noble clergy Lords were turned out to grass; I will
presently prove both mayor and minor of this syllogism. And hold my cloak
there some body, that I may go roundly to work, for i will so bu^eg the Cooper
as it had been better to have hooped half the tubs in Winchester, then write
against my worships pistles.

No civil Magistrate may lawfully either maime or deforme the body of Christ,
which is the Church, but whosoever does abolish any lawful Church Officer, out
of the church government, he does either maime or deforme the Church: Therefore
T. C. no civil Magistrate, no Prince, no state, may without sin abolish any
lawsull Officer, together. with his office, out of the government of the
Church, and p^ consequens, the Offices of Archbishops and Lordbishops, which
his Majesty may without sin lawfully abolish out of the Church, are no
lawful Church Officers, and therefore also, the Church government practiced by
John Whitgift, John Mar-^lme, Richard Peterborow, William of Lincoln, Edmond
of Worcester, yea and by that old stealecounter mass priest, John of
Gloucester with the rest of his brethren, is to be presently thrust out of the
Church* And me thinks this gear cottons indeed my masters. And I told you T.
C. that you should be thumped for defending Bishops. Take heed of me while you
live. The minor of my last syllogism, that whosoever does abolish the Office
of any lawful Church Officer out of the church, he either maimeth or deformeth
the church, I can prove with a wet finger. Because every lawful Church
Officer, even by reason of his Office, is a member of the body of Christ Jesus,
which is the church, and being a member of the body, if the Magistrate does
displace him by abolishing his Office, and leaves the place thereof void,
then the Magistrate maimeth the body, if he put another Office unto an Officer
in stead thereof, he deformeth the same. Because the Magistrate has neither
the skill nor the commission, to make the members of the body of Christ.
Because he cannot tell to what use, the members of his making may serve in the
Church. Do you think T. C. that the Magistrate may make an eye for the
visible body of the Church? (For you must understand, that we all this while
speak of the visisible body) can he make a foot or a hand for that body? I
pray you in what place of the body would you have them placed? If our Savior
Christ has left behind him a perfect body: surely he has left therein no
place, or no use for members of the Magistrates making and invention: if an
imperfect and maimed body. I am well assured that the magistrate is not able to
perfect that which he left unfinished. But I hope T. C. that thou will not be
so mad, and wicked, as to say, that our Savior Christ, left behind him here
on earth an imperfect and maimed body. If not, then where shall these offices,
namely these members invented by the Magistrate be placed therein.?

Would you have the natural eyes put out (as your brethren the bishops have
done in the church of England, ever since John of Canterbury urged his wretched
subscription) and unnatural squint gogled eyes put in their stead: when the
body cannot see with any eyes, but with the natural eyes thereof, displace
them howsoever you may seem to help the matter, by putting others in their
stead, yet the body shall be still blind and maimed. What say you T. C. may the
Magistrate cut off the true and natural legs, and hands of the body of
Christ, under a pretense to put wooden in their stead? I hope you will not say
that he may. How then comes it to pass T. C. that you hold John of
Canterbury his office, and John Mar^elmes to be true and natural members of
the body, that is true officers of the Church, and yet hold it lawful for his
Majesty to displace them out of the church. J cannot tell brother what you hold
in this point. Me think J have disturbed your senses. Do you think that the
magistrate may displace the true members of the body of Christ, and place
wooden in their stead. Why this is to hold it lawful for the Magistrate to
massacre the body. Do you think he may not? Then may not his Majesty displace
John of Canterburies office out of our church: if he may not displace his
office, then either he by virtue of his office, is a lawful Pope above all
civil magistrates, or else the Church government is so prescribed in the word,
as it is not lawful for the magistrate to alter the same. But John of
Canterbury, as the Puritans themselves confess, is no Pope. Then either the
church government is so prescribed in the word as it may not be altered, or else
the maiestrate may abolish a lawful church government, and place another in
stead thereof. If the Church government be so prescribed in the word, as it
cannot be altered then either our government is the same. which was therein
prescribed, or our Church government is a false Church government. If ours be
the same which is mentioned in the word: Then Paul and Peter were either no
true Church governors, or else Paul and Peter, and the rest of Church
governors in their time were Lords, for all our Church governors are Lords.
But Paul and Peter, etc. were no Lords, and yet true church governors.
Therefore our church government is not that which is prescribed in the word,
and therefore a false and unlawful church government. If you think that the
Magistrate may displace the lawful Offices of the body, then as I said before,
you hold it lawful for the Magistrate to maime or deforme the body. Because
what soever he puts in the room of the true and right members, must needs
be a deformity, and what place soever he leaves unfurnished of a member, must
needs be a maime. And this is the only and sole office of Christ only, to
place and displace the members of his body: to wit, the Officers of his Church,
he may lawfully do it, so cannot man. And therefore the sots (of which number
you T. C. and you John Whitgift, and you Deane John, and you D, Coosins, and
you D. Copcot with the rest of the ignorant and wretched defenders of our
corrupt Church government are to be accounted) which think that the Offices of
Pastors, Doctors, Elders and Deacons, or the most of them, may be as well now
wanting in the Church, as the Offices of Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists:
do notably bewray their vile ignorance, but the cause they do not hurt. For
the beasts do not consider that the Offices of Apostles, Evangelists and
Prophets, were removed out of the church, not by man, but by the Lord, because
he in his wisdom did not see any use of The Apostles chose men in stead of
James being beheaded as they did in stead of Judas, Act. 1. which they would
have done if the Apo stolicall calling had been permanent.
such members in his body, after the time of the first planting of the Church.
I say they were removed by the Lord himself and not by man: because, partly
the gifts wherewith they were endued, partly the largeness of their
commission, with certain other essential properties to them belonging, were
by him abrogated and taken away, which no man could do, again, the
Apostolical, Evangelicall and Prophetical callings, were either lawfully or
unlawfully abolished out of the Church, if lawfully, then they were abolished
by the Lord: and therefore they are neither to be called back until he shows
it to be his pleasure that it should be so, neither can the church be truly
said to be maimed for want of them: because he which could best tell, what
members were fit for his Church did abolish them. If unlawfully, then those
callings may be lawfully called back again into the Church, and the Church
without them is maimed, that is, wants some members. For if their callings
were injuriously abrogated, they are as injuriously kept out of the Church, and
being members of the church, the church is maimed without the^, unless the
Lord has showed, that the time of their service in the body is expired. But
they are not injuriously kept out (for so his Majesty should be said to injury
the Church, unless he would see Apostles, prophets and Evangelists planted
therein) neither can the church be said to be maimed for want of them, because
the Lord by taking them away has declared, that now there can be no use of
them in the body; therefore the Lord abrogated them. Therefore also they may be
wanting, and the Church neither maimed nor deformed thereby. Whereas the
keeping out of either of the former offices of Pastors, Doctors, elders and
Deacons, is a maiming of the Church, the placing of others in their stead, a
deforming. Now reverend T. C. I beseech you entreat mistress Cooper, to write
to M, D. Day, sometimes of Magdalins, that he may procure D. Cooper, to know of
him that was the last Thomas of Lincoln, whether the now B* of Winchester be
not persuaded, that Reverend Martin has sufficiently proved it to be
unlawful, for the civil Magistrate, to abolish any lawful church Officer out
of the church. Because it is unlawful for him to maime or deforme the body of
Christ, by displacing the members thereof. But it may be, your Coopers noddle,
profane T. C. doubts, (for I know you to be as ignorant in these points, as
John Whitgift, or De^ne John their selves.)

Whether a lawful Church officer in regard of his office, be a member of the
body of Christ, which is the church.

Therefore look Romans 12. Uerse 4, 5. etc. and there you shall see, that
whosoever has an office in the body, is a member of the body. There also you
shall see, that he that teaches, which is the Do and or, he y^ exhorts,
which is the Pastor, he that rules which is the Elder, he that distributeth,
which is the Deacon (as for him that shows mercy that is there spoken off,
he is but a church servant, and no church officer) There I say, you shall also
see, that these 4 Offices, of Pa^tours, Doctors, Elders, and Deacons are
members of the body: and 1 Cor. 12, 8, and 28, you shall see that God has
ordained them: Out of all which hitherto I have spoken T. C. I come upon you,
and your Bishoprics with 4 or 5 (yea half a dozen and need be) such dry
soopes, as John of London with his two hand sword never gave the like. For they
answer your whole profane book. First, that the platform of government, by
Pastors, Doctors, Elders, and Deacons, which you say was devised you know not
by whom, is the invention of our Savior Christ. For God ordained them says
the Ap^stle, 1 Cor. 12, 8, 28, And therefore unless yo^ will show yourselfe,
either to ^e a blaspemer, by terming Jesus Christ to be you cannot tell whom,
or else to be ignorant who is Jesus Christ: you must needs acknowledge the
platform of government, which you say, was invented by you know not whom, to
have Christ Jesus for the author thereof,

Secondly, that the word of God teaches, that of necessity, This T. Cooper
gain^aieth page 2. of his Epistle.
the government by Pastors, Doctors, Elders, etc. ought to be in every Church,
which is neither maimed ^or deformed. Because that church must needs be maimed
which wants those members, which the Lord has appointed to be therein;
unless the Lord himself has, by taking those members away, showed that now
his body is to have no use of them; But as has been said, God has ordained
Pastors, Doctors, Elders and Deacons to be in his Church, proved out of Romans
12, 6, 7, 8. 1 Cor. 12. 8, 28. Ephe. 4, 12. And he has not taken these
officers away out of his church, because the church has continual need of
them: As of Pastors to feed with the word of Wisdom: Of the Doctors to feed
with the Word of knowledge, and both to build up his body in the unity of
faith, of Elders, to watch and oversee men's manners, of Deacons, to look unto
the poor and church treasury. Therefore, where these 4. Officers are wanting,
there the Church is imperfect in his Regiment.

Thirdly, that this government cannot be inconvenient Cooper says his page se^
and Epistle.
for any State or Kingdom; For is it inconvenient for a State or Kingdom, to
have the body of Christ perfect therein?

Fourthly, that every Christian Magistrate is bound to receive this government,
by Pastors, Doctors, Elders, and Deacons in the Church, within his dominions,
whatsoever inconvenience may be likely to follow the receiving of it. Because
no likelihood of inconvenience ought to induce the Magistrate willingly to
permit the church under his government, to be maimed or deformed?

Fifthly, that the government of the church by Lord Archbishops and Bishops, is
a government of deformed and unshapen members, serving for no good use in the
church of God. Because it is not the government by Pastors, Doctors, Elders and
Deacons, which as I have showed are now the only true members, that is, the
only true Officers of the visible body.

Sixthly and lastly. That they who defend this false and bastardly government of
Archbishops and Bishops, and withstand this true and natural government of the
church, by Pastors, Doctors, Elders and Deacons are likely in a while to become
Mar-prince, Mar-state, Mar-law, Mar-Magistrate, Mar-common wealth. As for
Mar-church, and Mar-religion, they have long since proved themselves to be.

These six points do necessarily follow; of that which before I have set
down, namely that it is not lawful for any to abolish or alter the true and
lawful government of the church. Because it is not lawful for them to maime
or deforme the body of the church.

And I challenge you T. C. and you Deane John, and you John Whitgift, and you D.
Coosins, and you D. Cop^ot, and all the rest that will or dare defend our
established Church government, to be tried with me in a Judgment of life and
death, at any bar in England in this point. Namely,

That you must needs be, not only traitors to God and his word, but also
enemies unto his Majesty and the land, in defending the established church
government to be lawful. You see the accusation which I lay to your charge,
and here follows the proof of it. They who defend that the Prince and state,
may bid God to battle against them, they are not only traitors against God
and his word, but also enemies to the Prince and state. I think John of
Gloucester himself, will not be so senceles^e as to deny this.

But our Archbishops and Bishops, which hold it lawful for his Majesty and
the state, to retain this established for me of government, and to keep out
the government by Pastors, Doctors, Elders and Deacons, which was appointed by
Christ, whom you profane T. C. call you know not whom, hold it lawful for his
Majesty and the state to bid God to battle against them. Because they bid the
Lord to battle against them which maime and deforme the body of Christ, viz.
the church. And they as was declared, maime and deforme the body of the church,
which keep out the lawful offices, appointed by the Lord to be members thereof,
and in their steed, place other wooden members of the invetnion of man.
Therefore you T. C. and you Deane John, and you John Whitgift, and you the rest
of the beastly defendors of the corrupt church government are not only
trayters to God and his word, but enemies to her Majesty and the state. Like
you any of these Nu^ John Canterbury? I am not disposed to jest in this serious
ma^ter. I am called Martin Mar-prelat. There be many that greatly dislike of my
doings, I may have my wants I know: For I am a man: Bot my course I know to be
ordinary and lawful. I saw the cause of Christ's government, and of the Bishops
Antichristian to be hidden. The most part of men could not be gotten to read
any thing, written in the defense of the one, and against the other, I
bethought me therefore of a way whereby men might be drawn to do both,
perceiving the humors of men in these times (especially of those that are in
any place) to be given to mirth, I took that course, I might lawfully do it,
I, For jesting is lawful by circumstances, even in the greatest matters. The
circumstances of time, place and persons urged me thereunto, I never profaned
the word in any jest. Other mirth I used as a covert, wherein I would bring the
truth into light, the Lord being the Author both of mirth and gravity. Is it
not lawful in it self, for the truth to use either of these ways, when the
circumstances do make it lawful?

My purpose was and is to do good, I know I have done no harm, howsoever some
may judge Martin to mar all. They are very weak ones that so think. In that
which I have written J know vudoubtedly that I have done the Lord and the state
of this Kingdom great service. Because I have in some sort, discovered the
greatest enemies thereof. And by so much the most pestil^nt enemies, because
they wound Gods religion, and currupt the State with Atheism and looseness,
and so call for Gods vengance upon us all, even under the color of Religion. I
affirm them to be the greatest enemies that now our state has, for if it were
not for them, the truth should have more free passage herein, then now it has.
All states thereby would be amended, and so we should not be subject unto Gods
displeasure, as now we are by reason of them.

Now let me deal with these are in authority, I do make it known unto them,
that our Bishops are the greatest enemies which we have. For they do not only
go about, but they have long since, fully persuaded our state, that they may
lawfully procure the Lord, to take the Sword in hand against the state: if this
be true, have J not said truly, that they are the greatest enemies which our
state has. The Papists work no such effect, for they are not trusted. The
Atheifts have not infected our whole state, these have. The attempts of our
foreign enemies may be pernicious. But they are men as we are, But that God,
which when our Bishops have, and do make our Prince, and our governors to
wadge war, who is able to stand against him?

Well to the point, many have put his Majesty, the Parliament and counsel in
mind, that the church officers now among us, are not such as the Lord allows
off, because they are not of his own ordaining. They have showed that this
fault is to be amended, or the Lords hand to be looked for. The Bishops on the
other side, have cried out upon them, that have thus dutifully moved the state.
They with a loud voice gave out, that the magistrate may lawfully maintain
that church government, which best fitteth our estate, as living in the time of
peace, What do they else herein, but say that the magistrate in time of peace,
may maime and defor^e the body of Christ his church. That Christ has left the
government of his own house imperfect, and left the same to the discretion of
the Magistrate, whereas Moses before whom in this point of government, the Lord
Crhist is justly preferred, Hob. 3, 6. made the government of the legal policy
so perfect, as he left not any part thereof to the discretion of the
Magistrate. Can they deny church Officers, to be members of the church, they
are refused by the express text, 1 Cor. 12. will they affirm Christ to have
left behind him an imperfect body of his Church, wanting members at y^ least
wise, having such members as were only permanent at the Magistrates pleasure.
Why Moses the servant, otherwise governed the house in his time. And the son
is commended in this point for Wisdom, and faithfulness before him, Heb. 3.
6. Either then, that commendation of the son before the servant, is a false
testimony, or the son ordained a permanent government in his Church, If
permanent not to be changed. What then, do they that hold it may be changed at
the Magistrates pleasure, but advise the Magistrate by his positive laws, to
proclaim that it is his will, that if there shall be a Church within his
dominions, he will maime and deforme the same, he will ordain therein, what
members he thinks good. He will make it known that Christ under his
government, shall be made less faithful then Moses was: That he has left the
placing of members in his body unto the Magistrate. Oh cursed beasts, that
bring this guilt upon our estate: Repent Caitifes while you have time, you
shall not have it I fear when you will, And look you that are in authority
unto the equity of the controversy, between our wicked Bishops, and those vho
would have the disorders of our Church amended. Take heed you ^e not carried
away with slanders. Christ's government is neither Mar-prince, Mar-state,
Mar-law, nor Mar-magistrate. The living God whose cause is pleaded for, will be
revenged of you, if you give ear unto this slander, contrary to so many
testimonies as are brought out of his word, to prove the contrary. He
denounces his wrath against all you, that think it lawful for you, to maime
or deform his church, he accounts his Church maimed, when those Offices are
therein placed, which he has not appointed to be members thereof: he also
testifies that there be no members of this appointment in the Church, but such
as he himself has named in his word, and those that he has named, man must
not displace, for so he should put the body out of joint. Now our Bishops
holding the contrary, and bearing you in hand, that you may practice the
contrary, do they not drive you to provoke the Lord to anger against your own
souls? And are they not your enemies, they hold the contrary J say, for they
say that his Majesty may alter this government now established, and thereby
they show either this government to be unlawful, or that the magistrate may
presume to place those members in Gods Church, which the Lord never mentioned
in his word. And I (...) you mark how the case stands between these
wretches, and those whom they call puritans.

1 The puritans (falsely so called) show it to be unlaw full for the
Magistrate, to go about to make any members for the body of Christ. 2 They
hold all officers of the Church, to be members of the body, Romans 12, 6. 1. Cor.
12. 8. 28. 3 And therefore they hold the altering, or the abolishing of the
offices of church government, to be the altering (...) abolishing of the
members of the Church. 4 The altering and abolishing of which members, they
hold to be unlawful, because it must needs be a maime unto the body. 5 They
hold Christ Jesus to have set down as exact, and as unchangeable a Church
government, as eve^ Moses did Heb. 3. 6.
These and such like are the points they hold, let their cause be tried, and if
they hold any other points in effect but these, let them be hanged every man of
them.

Now I demand, whether they that hold the contrary in these points, and cause
the State to practice the contrary, be not outrageous wicked men, and dangerous
enemies of the state, it cannot be denied but they are. Because the contrary
practice of any the former points, is a way to work the ruin of the state.

Now our Bishops hold the contrary unto them all, save the 3. and 2. points,
whereunto it may be they will yield, and cause our estate to practice the
contrary, whence at the length, our destruction is like to proceed* For

1 They deny Christ Jesus to have set down as exact, and as unchangeable a
form of Church government as Moses did. For they say, that the Magistrate may
change the church government established by Christ, so could he not do that,
prescribed by Moses. 2 In holding all offices of the church to be members of
the body, (for if they be not members, what should they do in the body) they
hold it lawful for y^ Magistrate to attempt the making of new members for that
body. 3 The altering or abolishing of these members by the Magistrates they
hold to be lawful, And therefore the maiming or deforming.
Now you wretches (Archb. and L. Bishops I mean) you Mar-state, Mar-law,
Mar-Prince, Mar-magistrate, Mar-commonwealth, Mar-church, and Mar-religion, Are
you able for your lives, to answer any part of the former Syllogism, whereby
you are concluded, to be the greatest enemies unto his Majesty and the State?
You dare not attempt it I know. For you cannot deny, but they who hold it and
defend it lawful (yea enforce the Magistrate) to maime or deforme the body of
Christ, are utter enemies unto that Magistrate, and that state, wherein this
order is practiced. You cannot deny your selves to do this, unto our
Magistrate and State: because you bear them in hand, that a lawful Church
government may consist of those offices, which the magistrate may abolish out
of the Church without sin, and so, that the Magistrate may lawfully cut off
the members of Christ from his body, and so may lawfully massacre the body. You
are then the men by whom our estate is most likely to be overthrown, you are
those that shall answer for our blood which the Spaniard, or any other enemies
are like to spill, without the Lords great mercy: you are the persecutors of
your brethren, (if you may be accounted brethren) you and your hirelings are
not only the wound, but the very Plague and pestilence of our Church. You are
those who maime, deforme, vex, persecute, grieve, and wound the Church. Which
keep the same in captivity and darkness, defend the blind leaders of the
blind, ^lander, revile and deforme Christ's holy government, that such broken
and wooden members as you are, may be still maintained, to have the rooms of
the true and natural members of the body. Tell me I pray, whether the true and
natural members of the body may be lawfully cut off by the Magistrate. If you
should say they may, I know no man would abide the speech. What? May the
Magistrate cut off the true and natural members, of the body of Christ? Oh
impudency not to be tolerated. But our magistrate, that is his Majesty and our
state, may lawfully by your own confession cut you off, that is, displace you
and your Offices out of our church, Deny this if you dare. Then indeed it shall
appear, that John of Canterbury means to be a Pope indeed, and to have the
sovereignty over the civil Magistrate. Then will you show your self indeed,
to be Mar-prince, Mar-law, and Mar-state: Now if the Magistrate may displace
you as he may, then you are not the true members. Then you are (as indeed you
ought) to be thrust out, unless the Magistrate would incur the wrath of GOD,
for maiming and deforming the body of the Church, by joining unnatural members
thereunto.

Answer but this reason of mine, and then hang those that seek reformation, if
ever again they speak of it, if you do not, I will give you little quiet. I
fear you not. If the Magistrate will be so overseene as to believe, that
because you which are the maime of the church are spoken against, therefore
they, namely our Prince and state, which are Gods Lieutenants, shall be in like
sort dealt with, this credulity will be the Magistrates sin. But I know their
wisdom to be such as they will not. For what reason is this, which you
profane T. C. have used. page 103.

The sinful, the unlawful, the broken, unnatural, false and bastardly
governors of the church, to wit, Archb. and Bishops, which abuse even their
false Offices, are spoken against, Therefore the true, natural and lawful,
and just governors of the Common wealth, shall be likewise shortly misliked.
Ah senseless and undutifull beasts, that dare compare your selves with our true
Magistrates, which are the ordinances of God, with your selves, that is, with
Archbishops and Bishops, which as you your selves confess ( I will by and by
prove this) are the ordinances of the Devil.

J know I am disliked of many which are your enemies, that is of many which you
call Puritans. It is their weakness, J am threatened to be hanged by you. What
though I were hanged, do you think the cause shall be the better. For the day
that you hang Martin, assure your selves, there will 20 Martins spring in my
place. I mean not now you gross Beasts, of any commotion as profane T. C.
like a senseless wretch, not able to understand an English phrase, has given
out upon that which he calls the threatening of fistes. Assure your selves, I
will prove Marprelat ere I have done with you. I am alone. No man under Heaven
is privy, or has bin privy unto my writings against you, J used the advice of
none therein. You have and do suspect diverse, as Master Pagget, Master
Wiggington, Master Vdall, and Master Penri, etc. to make Martin. If they cannot
clear their selves their silliness is pitiful, and they are worthy to bear
Martins punishment. Well once again answer my reasons, both of your
Antichristian places in my first Epistle unto you, and these now used against
you. Otherwise the wisdom of the Magistrate must needs smell what you are:
And call you to a reckoning, for deceiving them so long, making them to suffer
the Church of Christ under their government to be maimed and deformed.

Your reasons for the defense of your Hierarchy, and the keeping out of
Christ's government, used by this profane T. C, are already answered. They show
what profane Beasts you are. I will here repeat them. But here first the
Reader is to know what answer this T. C. makes unto the syllogismes, whereby
I prove all L. Bishops to be petty Popes and petty Antichrists. I assure you
no other then this, he flatly denies the conclusion, whereas he might (^f he
had any learning in him, or had read any thing) know that every Dunsticall
Logician, gives this for an inviolable precept, that the conclusion is not to
be denied. For that must needs be true, if the Major and minor be true, he in
omitting the Major and minor, because he was not able to answer thereby,
grants the conclusion to be true: His answer unto the conclusion is, that all
Lord B. were not petty Popes* Because page 74 Cranmer, Ridley, Hooper, were not
petty Popes: They were not petty Popes, because they were not Reprobates. As
though you block you, every petty Pope and petty Antichrist were a reprobate.
Why no man can deny Gregory the great, to be a petty Pope, and a petty
Antichrist, For he was the next immediate Pope before Boniface the first, that
known Antichrist: and yet this Gregory left behind him undoubted testimonies
of a chosen child of God, so might they, and yet be petty Popes in respect of
their Office: Profane T. C. his first and second reason, for the lawfulness of
our church government: And what though good men gave their consent unto our
Church government, or writing unto Bishops, gave them their Lordly titles? Are
their offices therefore lawful? Then so is the Popes office: For Erasmu^ was a
good man you cannot deny, and yet he both allowed of the Popes office since his
calling, and writing unto him gave him his titles: So did Luther since his
calling also, for he dedicated his book of Christian liberty unto Pope Leo
the tenth. The book and his Epistle unto tbe Pope are both in English. Here I
would wish the Magistrate to mark what good reasons you are able to afford for
your Hierarchy.

Thirdly, says profane T. C, page 75. All Churches have not the governmene of
Pastors and Doctors: but Saxony and Denmarck, have L. Bishops. You are a great
State man undoubtedly T. C. that understand the State of other Churches so
well* But herein the impudency of a proud fool appears egregiously. As
though the testimony of a silly Schoolmaster, being also as unlearned as a man
of that trade and profession can be, with any honesty, would be believed
against known experience. Yea, but Saxony and Denmarc^ have Superintendents,
what then? ergo L. Archb. and Bishops. I deny it. Though other Churches had L.
Archb. and Bb^ this proves nothing else, but that other Churches are maimed
and have their imperfectious, Your reason is this, other good Churches are
deformed, therefore ours must needs be so too. The Kings son is lame,
therefore the children of no subjects must go upright. And these be all the
good reasons which you can bring for the government of Archb. and Bishops,
against the government of Christ. You reason thus. It must not be admitted into
this Kingdom, because then Civilians shall not be able to live in that
estimatron and wealth, wherein they now do, Carnal and senseless Beasts, who
are not ashamed to prefer the outward estate of men before the glory of
Christ's Kingdom. Here again, let the Magistrate and other Readers consider,
whether it be not time, that such brutish men should be looked unto. Which
reason thus: The body of Christ which is the Church, must needs be maimed and
deformed in this Commonwealth, because otherwise Civilians should not be able
to live. Why you enemies to the state, you Traitors to GOD and his Word, you
Mar-prince, Mar-law, Mar-magistrate, Mar-Church, and Mar-common wealth: do you
not know that the World should rather go a begging, then that the glory of God
by mayming his Church should be defaced? Who can abide this indignity. The
Prince and state must procure God to wrath against them, by continuing the
deformity of his church, and it may not be otherwise, because the Civilians
else must fall to decay. I will tell you what, you monstrous and ungodly
Bishops, though I had no fear of God before mine eyes, and had no hope of a
better life, yet the love that I owe as a Natural man unto his Majesty, and
the state would enforce me to write against you: his Majesty and this Kingdom
(whom the Lord bless with his mighty hand, I unfamedly beseech) must endanger
them selves under the peril of Gods heav^e wrath, rather then the maime of our
Church government must be healed for we had rather it should be so, say our
Bishops, then we should be thrust out, for if we should be thrust out, the
study of the civil Law, must needs go to wrack Well, if I have lived
sometimes a Citizen, in that old and ancient (though Heathenish) Rome, and had
heard King Dojotarus, Caesar, yea or Pompey himself give out this speech,
namely, that the City and Empire of Rome must needs be brought subject unto
some danger, because otherwise, Catolin, Lentulus, Cethegus, with other of the
Nobility could not tell how to live, but must needs go a begging, I would
surely, in the love I ought to the safety of that, state, have called him that
had used such a speech, in judicium capitis, whosoever he had been: and I
would not have doubted to have given him the overthrow. And shall I being a
christian English Subject, abide to hear a wicked crew of ungodly Bishops,
with their hangones and parasites, affirm that our King and our state must
needs be subject unto the greatest danger that may be viz. the wrath of God for
deforming his Church, and that Gods Church must needs be maimed and deformed
among us, because otherwise, a few Civilians shall not be able to live. Shall I
hear and see these things professed and published; and in the love I owe unto
Gods religion and his Majesty, say nothing? I cannot, I will not, I may not be
silent at this speech: come what will come of it. The love of a Christian
Church, Prince and State, shall I trust, work more in me, then the love of a
Heathen Empire and State should do. Now judge good Reader, who is more
tolerable in a Commonwealth, Martin that would have the enemies of his Majesty
removed thence, or our Bishops which would have his life, and the whole
Kingdoms prosperity hazarded, rather then a few Civilians should want
maintenance. But I pray thee tell me T. C; why should the government of Christ
impoverish Civilians? Because (says he) page 77. the Canon law by which they
live, must be altered, if that were admitted. Yea but Civilians live by the
Court of Amralty, and other courts as well as by the Arches, viz. Also the
Probats of Testaments, the controversies of Tithes, Matrimony, and many other
causes, which you Bishops Mar-state, do usurpingly take from the Civil
Magistrate, would be a means of Civilians maintenance. But are not you ashamed
to profess your whole government, to be a government ruled by the Popes Canon
Laws, which are banished by statute out of this Kingdom? This notably shows
that pou are Mar-prince and Mar-state. For how dare you retain these Laws,
unless by virtue of them, you mean either to enforce the supremacy of the
Prince to go again to Rome, or to come to Lambeth. It is treason by statute,
fot any subject in this Land to proceed Doctor of the Canon law, and dare you
profess your Church government to be ruled by that law. As though one statute
might not refer all matters of the Canon law, unto the temporal and common
law of this Realm: and is this all you can say T. C.

2 Yes says he, the government of Christ would bring in the judicial law of
Moses. As much as is moral of that law, or of the equity of it would be
brought in. And do you again say it. But you sodden headed Ass you, the most
part of that law is abrogated. Some part thereof is in force among us, as the
punishment of a Murderer by death, and presumptuous obstinate Theft by death,
etc.

3. His Majesty's prerogative in Ecclesiastical causes, should not be a whit
diminished; but rather greatly strengthened by Christ's government. And no law
should be altered, but such as were contrary to the Law of God, and against the
profit of the Common wealth: and therefore there can be no danger in altering
these.

4 The Ministers maintenance by Tithe, no Puritan denies to be unlawful. For
Martin (good Mr. Parson you must understand) does account no Brownist to be a
Puritan, nor yet a sottish Cooperist.

5. The inconvenience which you show of the government which is, that men would
not be ruled by it, is answered before. And I pray you, why should not they be
better obedient unto Gods Law, if the same also were established by the law of
the Land, then to the Popes Law and his Canons. You think that all men are
like your selves: that is like Bishops, such as cannot choose but break the
Laws and good orders of God and his Majesty.

7 The laws of England have been made, when there was never a Bishop in the
Parliament, as in the first year of Qeen Eliz. And this reason as all thu
rest, may serve to maintain Popery, as well as the hierarchy of Bishops.

8 The government of the Church of Christ, is no popular government, but it is
Monarchical, in regard of our head Christ, Aristocraticall in the Eldership,
and Democraticall in the people. Such is the civil government of our Kingdom:
Monarchical in his Majesty's person: Aristocraticall in the higher house of
Parliament, or rather at the Counsel Table: Democraticall in the body of the
Commons of the Lower house of Parliament. Therefore profane T. C. this
government seeks no popularity to be brought into the Church, much less
intends the alteration of the Civil state, that is but your slander, of
which you make an occupation, And I will surely pay you for it. I must be
brief now, but more work for Cooper shall examine your standers. They are
nothing else but proofs, that as, by your own Confessions, you are Bishops of
the Devil, so you are enemies unto the state. For by these slanders, you go
about to blind our State, that they may never see a perfect Regiment of the
Church in our days. I say that by your own Confession, you are Bishops of the
Devil. I will prove it thus: You confess that your Lordly government, were
not lawful and tolerable in this Common wealth, if his Majesty and the state
of the Land did disclaim the same. Tell me, do you not confess this, deny it
if you dare. For will you say, that you ought lawfully to be here in our Common
wealth, whither his Majesty and the Counsel will or no. Is this the thanks
that his Majesty shall have, for tolerating you in his Kingdom all this while,
that now you will say, that you and your places stand not in this Kingdom by
his courtesy, but you have as good right unto your places, as he has unto his
Kingdom. And by this means your Offices stand not by his good liking, and the
good liking of the state* as do the Offices of our Lord high Chancellor, high
Treasurer, and high Steward of England. But your Offices ought to stand and to
be in force in spite of his Majesty, the Parliament, Counsel, and every man
else, unless they would do you injury. So that I know, J, you dare not deny
but that your Offices were unlawful in our Commonwealth, if his Majesty, the
Parliament, and the Counsel would have them abolished. If you grant this, then
you do not hold your Offices as from God, but as from man. His Majesty he
holds his Office, and his Kingdom, as from GOD, and is beholding for the
same* unto no Prince not State under Heaven. Your case is otherwise, for you
hold your Offices as from his Majesty, and not from God. For otherwise* you
needed not to be any more beholding unto his Majesty for the same in regard of
right, then he is bound to be beholding unto other states in regard of his
right: and so you in regard of your Lordly superiority, are not the Bishops of
God, but as Ierom says, the Bishops of man. And this the most of you confess
to be true, and you see how dangerous it would be for you, to affirm the
contrary, namely, that you hold your Offices as from God. Well Sir, if you say
that you are the Bishops of man. Then tell me whether you like of Deane John
his Book.

O yes, says T. C. For his grace did peruse that book, and T. C. 38*
we know the sufficiency of it to be such, as the Puritans are not able to
answer it. Well then, whatsoever is in this book is anthenticall. It is so,
says T. C. otherwise his grace would not have allowed it. What say you then to
the 140 page of that book, where he says ( answering the ^rertise of the
Bishop of God, the By. of Man, and the Bishop of the Devil) that there is no
Bishop of man at all, but every Bishop must be either the Bishop of GOD, or
the Bishop of the Devil. He also affirms none to be the Bishop of God, but
he which has war^ant, both inclusively and also expressly in Gods Word. Now you
Bishops of the Deane John, (...) 1* pag^ 40 line 7*
Devil, what say you now, are you spighted of the Puritans, because you like
good subjects defend the Laws of his Majesty, or else because like incarnate
Devils you are Bishops of the Devils, as you your selves confess.

Here again, let the Magistrate once more consider, what pestilent and
dangerous Beasts these wretches are unto the civil state. For either by their
own confession they are the Bishops of the Devil (and so by that means will
be the undoing of the state, if they be continued therein) or else their
places ought to be in this Commonwealth whether his Majesty and our state will
or no^: because they are not (as they say) the Bishops of man, that is, they
have not their superiority, and their Lordly callings over their brethren by
humane constitution, as my Lord Chancellor, Treasurer, and other honorable
personages have, but by divine ordinance, Yea, and their callings they hold (as
you have heard) not only to be inclusively, but also expressly in the word.
What shift will they use to avoid this point? Are they the Bishops of men, that
is, hold they their jurisdiction as from men. No says Deane Bridges, no says
John of Canterbury and the rest of them (for all of them allow this Book of
John Bridges) for then we are the Bishops of the Devil, we cannot avoid it.
Are ^hey then the Bishops of God, that is, have they such a calling as the
Apostles, Evangelists, etc. had; that is, such a calling as ought lawfully to
be in a christian Commonwealth (unless the Magistrate would injury the Church,
yea maime, deforme, and make a Monster of the Church) whither the Magistrate
will or no. We have, say they, For our calling* are not only inclusively, but
also expressly in the word* So that by Deane Bridges his confession, and the
approbation of John Canterbury, either our Bishops are Bishops of the Devil,
or their callings cannot be defended lawful, without flat and plain Treason,
in overthrowing his Majesty's supremacy. And so Deane Bridges has written, and
John Whitgift has approved and allowed flat Treason to be published.

Is Martin to be blamed for finding out and discovering Traitors? Is he to be
blamed for crying out against the Bishops of the Devil? If he be, then indeed
have J* offended in-writing against Bishops. If not, whether is the better
Subject Martin or our Bishops: whether I be favored or no* J will not cease,
in the love I owe to his Majesty, to write against Traitors, to write against
the Devils Bishops. Our Bishops are such by their own confession.

For they protest themselves to be the Bishops of the Devil If they should hold
the pr^heminency to be from man, If they hold it otherwise then from man, they
are Traitors. And until this Beast Doctor Bridges wrote this Book, they never
as yet durst presume to claim their Lordships any otherwise lawful then from
his Majesty, yea and D. Bridges about the 60. page says thosame* But they care
not what contrariety they have in their writings, what Treason they hold, as
long as they are persuaded that no man shall be tolerated to write against
them. I have once already showed Treason to be in this Book of the Deane of
Sarum, page 448. I show the like now to be page 340. Because Deane Bridges
durst not answer me. They have turned unto me in his stead, a Beast whom by
the length of his Ears, I guess to be his Brother, that is, an Ass of the
same kind. But I will be answered of the Deane himself in this and the former
point of Treason, or else his Cloister shall smoke for it. And thus profane T.
C. you perceive what a good subject you are, in defending the established
government. Thus also I have answered all your Books in the matters of the
lawfulness of the government by Pastors, Doctors, Elders, and Deacons, and
the unlawfulness of our bastardly Church government, by Archbishops and
Bishops* where also the Reader may see, that if ever there was a Church rightly
governed, that is a Church without maime or deformity, the same was governed by
Pastors, Doctors, Elders and Deacons.

Whau, whau, but where have I been all this while? Ten to one among some of
these Puritans. Why Martin? Why Martin, I say have tow forgotten thy self?
Where have ti been, why man, cha bin a seeking for a Samons nest, and cha
vound a whole crew* either of Ecclesiastical Traitors, or of the Bishops of
the Devil, of broken and maimed members of the Church: never wink on me good
fellow, for I will speak the truth, let the Puritans do what they can. I say
then that they are broken members, and I say John of Canterbury, if he be a
member of the Church, I say he is a broken member, and that Thomas of
Winchester is a Choleri^ke member. Yea, and cha vound that profane T. C is
afraid lest his Majesty should give Bishops livings away from om. And therefore
shuts his book with this position, viz. That it is not lawful to bestow
such livings upon Lay men, as are appointed by Gods law upon Ministers. But
hereof more warke for Cooper shall learnedly dispute.

Reverend T. C. Admonition page 1, 2, 3.
We use the Ministers most vil^ly now a days. God will punish us for it, as
he did those which abused his Prophets.

Reverend Martin.
Look to it T. C. then. For out of thine own mouth shall thou b^ judged, thou
unrighteous servant. Our Bishops are they which abuse the Ministers. Our
Bishops were never good Ministers as yet, and therefore they are not to be
compared with the Prophets.

Reverend T. C. page 4.
Some men will say, that I do great injury to the Prophets and Apostles, in
comparing our Bishops unto them. But we may be happy if we may have tolerable
Ministers in this pe^ilous age.

Reverend Martin.
I hope T. C. that thou do not mean to serve the Church with worse then we
have: what worse then John of Canterbury? worse then Tom Tubtrimmer of
Winchester? worse then the Vick^rs of Hell, Sir Ieff^ry Jones, the parson of
Micklain, etc. I pray thee rather then we should have a change from evil to
worse, let us have the evil still But I care not if I abide the venture of the
change. Therefore get John with his Canterburinesse removed, etc. whom thou
acknowledgest to be evil, and J do not doubt, if worse come in their stead,
but the Devil will soon fetch them away, and so we shall be quickly rid,
both of evil and worse. But good T. C. is it possible to find worse then we
have? I do not marvel though thou call me libeller, when thou dare abuse
the Prophets far worse, then in calling them libellers: for I tell thee true,
thou could not have any way so stained their good names, as thou have done in
comparing them to our Bishops. Call me Libeller as often as thou will, I do
not greatly care, but and thou love me, never liken me to our Bishops of the
Devil. For J cannot abide to be compared unto those, for by thine own
comparison in the 9. page, they are just Balaams up and down.

Reverend T. C. page 8, 9, 10.
Though our Bishops be as evil as Judas the false Apostles, and Balaam, yet
because they have sometimes brought unto ^s Gods message, we must think no
othetwise of them, then of Gods Messengers. For GOD will not suffer divellish
and Antichristian persons to be the chief restorers of his Gospel.

Reverend Martin.
First T. C. I have truly gathered thine argument, though thou namest neither
Judas nor the false Apostles. Prove it otherwise. Then have thou reverend
Martin proved thy self a liar. Now secondly then seeing it is so, I pray thee
good honest T. C. desire our Judasses (who was also one of the first Apostles)
not to sell their Master for money, desire our false Apostles (who preached no
false doctrine for the most part) not to insult over poor Paul) and desire our
good Balaams, not to follow the wages of unrighteousness. The counsel is
good. For Judas, though one of the first publishers of the Gospel (so were not
our Bishops in our time) yet hung himself. The false Apostles had their
reward, I doubt not. And Balaam as soon as ever the Israelites took him, was
justly executed for his wickedness. The forced blessing wherewith he blessed
them saved him not.

Reverend T. C. page 10, 11, 12, 13.
May conjecturall speeches fly abroad of Bishops, as that they are covetous,
give not to the poor, hinder reformation, Simoniacks, etc. but the chief
Governors ought to take heed, that they give no credit to any such things. I
trust never any of them committed Idolatry, as Aaron did.

Reverend Martin.
Yea, I beseech you that are in authority in any case, not to believe any truth
against our Bishops. For these Puritans (although the Bishops grant themselves
to be as evil as Balaam) could never yet prove the good fathers, to have
committed Idolatry as Aaron did. And as long as they be no worse then Balaam
was, there is no reason why they should be disliked. You know this is a
troublesome world, men cannot come unto any mere living without friendss And
it is no reason why a man should trouble his friend and give him nothing, a
hundred pounds and a gelding, is yet better then nothing. To bowl but seven
days in a week, is a very tolerable, recreation. You must know that John of
London, has sometimes preached ( as this profane T. C. has given out to his
no small commendations) th^ise in a year at Paules-crosse. A sore labor, it
is reason that he should bestow the rest of the year, in maintaining his
health by recreation, and providing for his family: give him leave but to keep
out the government of the Church, to swear like a swag, to persecute, and to
take some small ten in the hundred, and truly he will be loath ever to commit
idolatry as Aharon did. I hope though Judas sold his Master, yet that it cannot
be proved since his calling, that ever he committed Idolatry.

Reverend T. C. page 16, 17.
Though Bishops should offend as Noah did in drunkenness, yet good children
should cover their fathers falts. For natural children, though they suffer
injuries at their fathers hands, yet they take their griefs very mildly.

Reverend Martin.
Bishop West phaling. But what then? Parson Gravat, parson of sir John Pulchres
in London (one of dumb John's bousing Mates) will be drunk but once a week,
But what then? good Children should take linkes in a cold morning, and light
them at his nose, to see if by that means some part of the fire that has so
flashed his sweet face, might be taken away: this were their duty, says T. C.
and not to cry read nose, read nose. But T. C. what if a man should find him
lying in the kenill, whether should he take him up (all to be mired like a
Swine) in the sight of the people, and carry him home on his back, or fling a
coverled on him, and let him there take his rest, until his legs would be
advised by him to carry him home. But me thinks brother T. C. you defend the
Bishops but evil favouredly in these points. For you do, as though a Thief
should say to a true man, I must needs have thy purse, thou must bear with
me, it is my nature, J must needs play the Thief. But yet thou dealest
uncharitably with me, if thou blasest it abroad: for though I make an
occupation of Theft, ye^ charity would cover it. So say you, though our Bishops
make a Trade of persecuting and depriving Gods Ministers, though they make a
Trade of continuing in Antichristian callings, yet charity would have their
faltes covered, and have them mildly dealt with. As though T. C. there were no
difference, betwixt those that fall by infirmity into some one sin, not
making it their Trade, and not defending the same to be lawful, and our
Bishops which continue in an Antichristian calling, and occupation, and defend
they may do so. But will they leave think you, if they be mildly and gently
dealt with. Then good John of Canterbury, J pray thee leave thy persecuting,
good John of Canterbury leave thy Popedom: good Father, John of London, be no
more a Bishop of the Devil: be no more a Traitor to God and his Word. And good
sweet Boys, all of you become honest men: maime and deforme the Church no
longer: sweet fathers now make not a Trade of persecuting; gentle fathers keep
the people in ignorance no longer: good fathers now maintain the dumb
Ministry no longer. Be the destruction of the Church no longer, good sweet
Babes now leave your Nonresidency, and your other sins, sweet Popes now: and
suffer the truth to have free passage. Lo T. C. now I have mildly dealt with
the good Fathers. I will now expect a while, to see whether they will amend by
fair means, if not let them not say, but they have bin warned.

Reverend T. C. from the 20 to the 30.
Though the Bishops be falty, yet they are not to be excused that find fault
with them for sinister ends. And the Prince and Magistrates, is to take heed
that by their suggestions, they be not brought to put down L. Bishops, to take
away their livings, and put them to their pensions. For the putting of them to
their pensions, would discourage young students from the study of Divinity.

Reverend Martin.
I thought you were afraid to lose your livings, by the Cour^er Martins means.
But brethren fear it not. I would not have any true Minister in the Land, want
a sufficient living. But good souls. I commend you yet, that are not so
b^shfull, but you will show your griefs. Is it the treading under foot of the
glory of God, that you fear good men. No no say they, we could reasonably well
bear that loss. But we dye if you diminish the allowance of our Kitchen. Let
us be assured of that, and our Lordly callings, and we do not greatly care,
how other matters go. I will when more work is published, help those good
young students unto a means to live, though they have none of your
Bishopdomes, if they will be ruled by me.

Reverend T. C. page 5. 36.
They have been within these few weeks 3 or 4 pamphlets bublished in Print,
against Bishops. The Author of them calls himself Martin, etc.

R. Martin.
But good Tom Tubtrimmer, if there have been 3 or 4 published, why does Bishop
Cooper name one only, why does he not confute all* why does he invent
objections of his own, seeing he had 3. books more to confute, or 2 at least
then he has touched, nay, why does he confute one of them thoroughly, seeing
therein his Bishopdome was reasonably caperclawed. I have only published a
Pistle, and a Pitomy; wherein also I grant that I did reasonably Pistle them.
Therefore T. C. you begin with a lie, in that you say that I have published
either 3. or 4. books.

Reverend T. C. page 38.
His grace never felt blow as yet, etc. What is he past feeling, will thou tell
me that T. C. he sleeps belike in the top of the roust. I would not be so
well thwacked for the Popedom of Ca^ter. as he has borne poor man. He was
never able to make good syllogism since I am sure: He allowed D. Bridges his
book quoth T. C. I pray thee what got he by that, but a Testimony against
himself, that either he has allowed Treason, or confessed himself to be the
Bishop of the Devil*

T. C. page 38. He that reads his grace his answer, and M. Cartwrights reply,
shall see which is the better learned of the two. So he shall indeed T. C. and
he were very simple which could not discern that; And there is so much
answered already as thou say, that his grace dare answer no more for shame.
And T. C. you your selves grant Thomas Cartwright to be learned, so did I
never think John Whitgift to be, what comparison can you make between them?
But Thomas Cartwright, shall I say that thou made this book against me,
because T. C. is set to it, well take heed of it, if J find it to be thy doing*
J will so besoop thee, as thon never bangedst John Whitgift better in thy life.
I see here that they have quarrelled with thee Water Traverse, John Penri,
Thomas Spark, Giles Wiggington, Master Davison, etc. Nay it is no matter, you
are even well served, this will teach you I trow to become my Chaplains, For if
you were my Chaplains once, I trow John Whitgift, nor any of his, durst not
once say black to your eyes, And if I had thy learning Thomas Cartwright, I
would m^ke them all to smoke. But though I were as very a^ A^ehead as John
Cat^rcap is, yet I could deal well enough with Clergy men: yea with old
Wink^n de word, D. Prime himself: And i will bepistle you D. Prime, when I am at
more le^sure, though indeed J tell you true, that as yet J do^ disdame to deal
with a contemptible trencher Chaplain, such as you D. Banckcroft, and Chaplain
D^port are. But i will be with you all three to bring one day, you shall never
escape my fingers, if I take you but once in hand. You see how I have dealt with
Deane John, your entertainment shall be alike. But Thomas Cartwright, thou art
T. C. so is Tom Cooper too. The distinction then between you both, shall be
this; he shall be profane T. C. because he calls Christ Jesus, by whom the
government by Pastors, Doctors, Elders, and Deacons was commanded to be he
knows not whom: and thou shall be simple T. C.

Concerning Mistress Lawson profane T. C. is it not lawful for her to go to
Lambeth by water, to accompany Qui pergit quod vult dicere quae non vult audiet.
a Preachers wife, going also (as commonly godly matrons in London do) with
her man: No says T. C. I do not like this in women: Tush man, Thomas Lawson
is not Thomas Cooper, he has no such cause to doubt of Dame Lawsons going
without her husband, as the Bishop of Winchester has had of Dame Coopers
gadding. But more work for Cooper, will say more for Mistress Lawson.

From whomsoever Charde had his protection, his Face is glad of it, for
otherwise he knows not how to get a Printer, for the established government,
because the books will not sell.

Touching the Praemunire, let the Libeller and his, do T. C. page 40.
what he dare. Why brethren, what wisdom is this in you to dare your betters?
do you not know that I can send you my mind by a Pistle, and then prove you to
be petty Popes, and Enemies to the State: And how can you mend your selves? It
is certain you are in a praemunire: If his Majesty will give me leave to have
the Law, J will be bound to bring 10 000 pounds into his Coffers upon that
bargain. And therefore soolish men, dare your better^ no more. And hear I
pray thee mark how I have made the Bishops to pull in their Horns. For
whereas in this place they had printed the word dare, they bethought
themselves, that they had to deal with my worship, which am favored at the
Court, and being afraid of me, they pasted the word can upon the word dare, and
so where before they bad me and mine do what we durst. now they bid us do
what we can. hoping thereby to have a friend in a corner, who would not suffer
us to do what we ought and durst: and so our ability should not be according
unto their demerit. Mark now the Bishops of the Devil, whither you be not
afraid of me: I will see you jolled with the praemunire one day.

The like thing you shall find in the 135 page. For there having said, that
they will not deny the discipline to have been in the Apostles time, they have
now pasted there upon that, That is not yet proved. So that although their
Consciences do tell them, that the discipline was then, yet they will bear the
world in hand, that that is not yet proved. Here you see that if this patch T.
C. had not used two patches to cover his patchery, the Bishops would have
accounted him to be as very a patch as Deane John.

A, but these knave Puritans are more unmannerly before his grace, then the
Recusants are, and therefore the Recusants have more favor. I cannot blame
them* for we ought to have no Popes. The Papists like the Archiepisc^pall
Pall, and therefore reverenceth a petty Pope thsrein. And though the Recusant
come not to hence the sermons, yet he is an informer very often, upon other
men's information.

His grace denies that ever he heard of any such matter, as that the Jesuit
should say, he wouid become a brave Cardinal, if Popery should come again. I
know T. C. that long since he is past shame, and a notorious Liar, otherwise
how durst he deny this, seeing Cliffe an honest and a godly Cobbler, dwelling at
Battle bridge, did justify this before his grace his teeth, yea and will
justify the page 41.
same again if he be called. So will Atkinson too: Send for them if he dare;
Ministers of the Gospel ought to be page 46.
called Priests, says his grace, what say you oy that? Then page 44.
good sir John O Cant. when will thou say Mas^e at our house? His grace is also
persuaded, that there ought to be a Lordly spueriority among Ministers. So was
Judas persuaded to sell his Master; if you would have these things proved,
profane T. C. refers you to his grace his answer unto simple T. C. and to
Doctor Bridges* That is, if you would learn any honesty, you must go to the
stews, or if you would have a good favor, you must go to the sincke for it.
Why thou vnsavourly snu^fe, do tow think that men know not D. Bridges and
John Whitgift. Yea but his grace also firmly believes, that Christ in soul
descended into Hell. This is the third point of his Catholic pe^swasion: but
tell him from me, that he shall never be saved by this belief, and my finger
in his mouth. Let him tell what our Savior Christ should do, if he did not
harrow Hell. Where thou say Mr. ^oung had only the dealing with Thakwel the
Popish Printer, without his graces privity, thou lie in thy throat: M. Young
himself brought him to his grace, who ordered the matter as it is set down in
my Pistle. But did not I say truly of thee, that thou can cog, face and lie,
as fast as a dog can trot, and that thou have a right seasoned wainscoate face
of ti nowne, chwarnt tee, ti vorehead zaze hard as horn.

Concerning Waldegrave, its no matter how you deal with him, heez a foolish
fellow, to suffer you to spoil his press and letters, an a had bin my
worships Printer, i would a kept him from your clouches. And yet it is pity to
belie the Devil: and therefore you shall not belie him and go sco^free. As
for the press that Waldegrave sold, he did is by order, viz. He sold it to an
allowed Printer, I. C. one his own company, with the knowledge of his Warden,
Henry Denham, etc. And call you this favor, in releasing him after long
imprisonment? But I will give you a president of great favor indeed, wherein
you may see what an ungrateful fellow Waldegrave is to his grace, who has bin
so good unto him from time to time. There being a controve^e between another
Printer and Waldegrave (all matters of Printing being committed by the Lords of
the Counsel to his grace) Waldegrave made one of his Company his friend (who
could do much with his grace) to deal for him, who brake the matter to his
worship, being at Croydon in his Orchard; so soon as the party named
Waldegrave, he sweetly answered him, saying: if i^ had bin any of the company
save him, he would have granted the suite, but in no case to Waldegrave. Well
Waldegrave, obtained the K. H, Lord Treasurers Letter in his behalf to his
grace, who when he had read it, said, J will answer my Lord Treasurer, with
that Waldegrave entreated for his favorable Letter to the Wardens of his
Company, which in the end through D. Coosins he obtained (though late) yet
went home at night, thinking to deliver it in the Morning: but before he was
ready, the Wardens were with him, and rested him with a Pursivant upon his
graces Commandment, Waldegrave telling them there was a letter from his grace,
which he received late the last night at Croydon: who answered, they knew it
well enough, but this is his pleasure now, so they carried Waldegrave to
prison, and in this his Grace was so good unto him, as to help him with an
hundred marks over the shoulders. If this be your favor, God keep me from
you, ka. M. Marprelate. Bishops have justly received according to their
deserts, having found greater favor at my Worships hands then ever they
deserved, being notorious, disobedient and godless persons, unthrifty spenders
and consumers of the fruits, not of their own labors, (as you say Waldegrave
was) but of the possessions of the Church, persons that have violated their
faith to God, his Church, his Majesty, and this whole Kingdom, and wittingly
bring us all without the great mercy of God to our undoing, so that ou^ wives,
children and servants have cause to curse all L. Bp. Lo T. C. you see that I
have a good gift in imitation, and me thinks I have brought your words into a
marvailous good sense, where as before in the cause of Waldegrve, they were
illfavouredly wrested: and as for his wife and children, they have just cause
to curse John of London and John of Canterbury, for their tyrannizing over him:
by imprisoning and spoiling his goods, and vexing his poor wife and children,
with continual rifeling his house with their Pursivants, who in November last,
violently rusht into his house, breaking through the maine wall thereof after
midnight, taking away his goods, for some of the Pursivants sold his books up
and down the streets, to Watchmen and others. Ah you Antichristian Prelates,
when will you make an end of defending your tyranny, by the blood and rapine of
her Majesty's subjects? You have bin the consumers of the fruits of Waldegraves
labors: for have you not sent him so often to prison, that it seemed you made
a common occupation thereof? For as soon as any book is printed in the defense
of Christ's holy Discipline, or for the detecting of your Antichristian
dealings, but your ravening pursivants fly city and country to seek for
Waldegrave, as though he were bound by statute unto you, either to make known
who printed seditious books against my L. Face, or to go to prison himself,
and threatened with the rack. And are you not ashamed to say, that he ever
violated his Faith? you know well enough, that he is neither Archb. nor L. B.
The case thus stood, after he had remained a long time in Prison, not that time
when Hartwell his graces secretary wished that his grace might never eat bit of
bread after he released him, Nor at that time when you profane T. C. told him,
that all Puricans had traiterous hearts. Nor at that time Waldegrave told her
grace, that he was worse then Bo^er in regard of the time. Nor that time when
he was strangely released by one of the Lord of good Londons Swans. Neither
was it at that time, when his grace (good conscionable Noble man) violated his
promise, in that he told the Wardens of the Stationers, that if Waldegrave
would come quietly to him, and cease printing of seditious books, he would
pardon what was past, and the Wardens promised his wife, that if he were
committed, they would lie at his graces gate till he were released, and for all
this yet he was committed to the white Lion, where he lay 6 weeks, Nor it was
not at that time, when his grace allowed Watson the Pursivant, to take of
Waldegrave, 13^. 4 pen^c, f^r carrying of him to the white Lion, But it was
that time when his grace kept him 20 weeks together in the white Lion, for
printing the complaint of the Comminalty, the practice of Prelates* a learned
man's judgment etc. Means being used for his liberty, his friend who was bound
for him told him, his liberty was obtained in manner following. You must be
bound faith he, in a 100 pounds, to print no more books hereafter, but such as
shall be authorized by her Majesty or his grace or such as were before lawfully
authorized: whereunto he answered that it was not possible for him to contain
himself within Where (...) it may appear ^e swore not to his friend.
the compass of that bond, neither should his consent ever go to the same
(the same will D, Coosins witness (that maidenly Doctor, who sits cheek by
joll with you) if he will speak a truth, which words Waldegrave uttered to
him, going in the old Pallas at Westminster with his Keeper before hoe was
released) yet he would gladly have his liberty if he might lawfully. For said
he I being a poor workman to my company, cannot possibly observe it* For many
books heretofore printed, had cum privilegio, and yet were never authorized:
and again, that it were but a ^olly for him to sue to her Majesty, the Office
were very base and unsit for her. And he might be well assured that Caiphas of
Cant. would never authorize any thing for his behoof, and so it fell out. And
thus Martin has proved you in this, as in all other things, to be liars. And
what is it that you Bp. and your hangones will not say by Waldegrave, whom you
would hang if you could I will be brief in the r^st, but so, as the Reader may
perceive that T. C. was hired to lie by commission.

I will stand to it, that his grace accounts the preaching of the Word, being
the only ordinary means of Salvation page 46.
to be an heresy, and does moreally persecute the same: his appellation to the
obedient Clergy shall stand him in no page 47.
steed, when more work for Cooper is published. And there I will pay thee for
abusing Master Wiggington, and Mr. Davison, whose good names can take no stain
from a Bishops chops. If his grace rejected Master Evans for page 47.
want of conformity, why is the quare impedit gotten against the Bishop of
Worcester, by the noble Earl of Warwick his patron. J hope he will see both
the quare impedit, and the praemunire too, brought upon the bones of father
Edmond of Worcester. It is a common brag with page 48, 49.
his grace, his parasites, and with himself, that he is the second person in
the land. More work shall pay his grace for commending the Apocrypha, a
profane and a lying 2 Esdras, 14. 21. 37, etc.
story in many places, to be unseparably joined with the holy Word of God. You
grant D. Spark to have set his grace and your self T. C. at a nonplus for the
septuaginta page 50.
is contrary to the Hebrew, and therefore you maintain contrary translations,
and require men to approve both. Martin has marred Richard patriks Market, for
otherwife he was in good hope to have a benefice at his grace his hand, and to
be made a Minstrell. Shameless and impudent wretches that dare deny John of
Canterbury to have bin at any time under D. ^erne, but as a fellow of the
house, where he was master, whereas all the world knows him to have bin a
poor scholar in that house, yea and his grace has often confessed, that he
being there a poor scholar, was so poor as he had not a napkin to wipe his
mouth, but when he had gotten some fat meat of O the fellows table, would go
to the Skrine, and first wipe his mouth on the one side and then O the other,
because he wanted a napkin, judge you whither this be not a meane^ state, then
to carry a clo^kbag, which is not spoken to upbraid any man's poverty, but to
pull the pride of Gods enemy an ase lower. Although we cannot believe D. Perne
in the Pulpit, yet in this point we will not refuse his testimony. I am glad
John of London you will not deny, but you have the Dyars cloth, make
restitution then: thou made the page 51, 52* 53, 54.
Porter of thy Gate a Minister John, and thou might do^ it lawfully. Why so
J pray thee, why man, because he was almost blind, and at Paddington being a
small people* he could not starve as many souls, as his master does, which
has a great charge, I hope Mr. Madox will think scorn, to ask John of London
forgiveness. The substance of the page 55, 56
Tale is true. I told you that I had it at the second hand.

Are you not ashamed to deny the elmes to be cut down at Fulham? Why her
Majesty's taker took them from John of London. And simple fellows, are you
not able to discern between a pleasant frump given you by a counselor, and
a speech used in good earnest. Alas poor John O London, do thou think,
that Mr. Vice-chamberlaine spoke as he thought. Then it is time to beg thee
for a swagge. And so it is if thou think we will believe the ^urncoate O.
Perne speaking unto us in his own name, who like an Apostatae, has out of the
pulpit, told so many untruthes. And as it is lawful to boule* O the Sabbath,
as it is to cat, and for you to make dumb Ministers, as it was page 57, 58
for DAVID to eat of the show bread page 110. or for the Machabees to fight on
the Sabbath, or for Moses to grant a bill of divorcement? J perceive these men
will have the page 62.
good Divinity, if it be to be gotten for money. Yea and our Savior Christ,
swear by his Faith very often. How so good John, I never heard that before, why
says T. ^. he said Amen Amen very often, and Amen, is as much as by my faith,
page 62. horrible and blasphemous Beasts, whither will your madness grow in a
while, if you be not restrained* M. Allen the Grocer is paid all save 10
pound: for the use of that, the Executors have John O Londons blessing. And J
think they are reasonably well served. If page 58.
the tale of Benison be not true, why was John of London alorted by the
counsel, to pay him (I think) 40 pounds, page 59.
for his false imprisonment. John of London is not dumb, because he preaches
sometimes thrice a year at Paul's Cross. Then we shall never make our money of
it I see. But I pray thee T. G, how can thou excuse his blasphemy page 6. 61
62
of Eli, Eli, lamasaback^hani, there have been two outrageous facts amongst
others committed in the world, by those that profess true Religion, the one
was the betraying of our Savior by Judas an Apostle, the other was the
horrible mocking of his agony and bitter passion, by John Elmar a Bishop in
this speech* If he had bin in some reformed Churches, the Blasphemer would have
hardly escaped with his life. And is it true sweet Boy indeed Has
Liecestershire so embraced the Gospel without contention, and that by dumb
John's means? Little do thou know what thou have done now, how if Martin be
a Liecestershire man, have not thou then set out the praise of thine own bane?

For Martin I am sure, has wrought your Caiphas Chair more wrack and misery,
then all the whole Land beside. And therefore thou see, a man may be so mad
sometimes, that he may praise he cannot tell what. The Bishop of Rochester in
presenting himself to a parsonage, did no more then Law allowed him. And do
so again good John of Rochester, and it will be for thy oredit, Fo, page 63,
these Puritans would find fault I think with John of Cant, ( if he believing
that Christ in soul went to Hell) should hold it unlawful for a man to pray
unto Christ being in Hell. And sweet John of Cant, if ever thou prayedst in thy
life for any bodies soul, now pray for thy brother D, Squire and Tarletons
souls. They were honest fellows, though I think Deane John's ears be longer.
For why good sweet John may not your worship do this, as well as William of
Lancolne might pray, that our souls page 63, 64
should be with the souls of professed traitorous Papists.

The good B. of Winchester did not protest, that at Sir M. Overies which was
laid to his charge, but he spoke some things that way. Well brother
Winchester, you confess page 14, 65, 66, etc.
the most part, and we will believe the rest for your sake without witness.
The B. of Winchester never said that it was an her esie, to hold that the
preaching of the Word was page 71.
the only ordinary means to salvation, but inasmuch as P^nri held that the
effect of salvation could not be wrought by the word read, he said that was
not far from heresy: why Brother Cooper, what is this else but open
confession. For John Penri as appears in his writings holds the word read,
to be no ordinary means of salvation at all, This I know you will account an
heresy, otherwise your case is damnable, that cause the people to content
themselves with reading, and hold that they may ordin^rily be saved thereby.
Yea but T. of Winchester disputed page 7^, 75.
a M of Art, 45 years ^goe in Divinity. Here is an old Lad once: I hope that
disputation was very cholerickly performed. And he did once as pretty a thing
as that came to. For once preaching a^ Canter. he was disposed to note out T.
C. I mean simple T. C. in his Sermon, his part he played after this sort. He
noted 4 great Hidraes of the Gospel in his sermon, 1 Carnal Security, 2
Heathenish Gentility, 3 obstinat Papistry, 4. Says he (when I look in his
forehead, ^ find T. C. written therein, which I cannot otherwise interpret,
then thanklesse Curiosity* thanklesse for the benefits already received, and
more curious then needs, in vain and needless questions: the old student did
not know himself to be T. C. when he thus spoke: and this is the thanklesse
curiosity, that has answered Martin: yea he saw Martins picture drawn, when
he was a young man. I perceive then he was not so blind, as the old Porter of
Paddington, whom John of London bedeaconed and beministred: Lucian of
Winchester was himself the Painter, Mydas of Cant. the Judge: the one of the 2
women called Ignorance was the goodwife of Bath. Dr. Culpable Warden of New
College: the other called jealous suspicion, was the Fox; John of Exceter,
then Camwinkadeward, alias Dr. Prime Calumniator: this Winken and his Lord of
Winchester drew innocence, to wit, Martin Marprelat Gent: by the heir of the
head then followed: Dolus, ^aus, insidiae, to wit: Dr. Perne, ^. Renold, and
Dr. Cosins: the Treader was cankered Mallis, his Eyes was fiery, his face
thin, wrink^led, pined away with melancholy: and this was Dr. Copcot, then
followed doleful Repentance, that is, Deane John repenting that ever he had
written in the Bishops behalf, because his grace is not as good as his word,
T. C. consider this picture until we meet again. Now my business calls me
away, I am going toward Banbery? for I hear say, there has bin old ado; for
Bakers daughters would have Knights whither they would or no. I will learn the
truth thereof, and so I will post to shohill: and visiting some parts of
Stratford, Warwick, and Northampton shires. I may well make a journey back
again to Norfolk and Suffolk: J have a Regester at Bury, and by that time my
visitors will come out of Cornwall, Devon and Hamshire: and now farewell good
profane T. C. I cannot now meddle with a long period, which thou have in the
33. 34. page of thy Book, it is but 38 lines, thou art longer winded then
Deane John is I see, though he has longer periods then that I set down,
whereas thou do complain that the Livings of our Bishops are so small that
some of their Children are like to go a begging, there is present Remedy for
that, for to what end else is John of Cant, unmarried, but to provide for the
Bishops Children, who shall be poorly left, though indeed I never said in my
life, that there was any great familiarity between Mistress Toye and John
Whitgift, and i will befie em, i will befie em that will say so of me; and wherefore
is Rich. of Peterborough unmarryed but to provide for other men's Children; O
now I remember me, he has also a charge to provide for, for his Hosts and
cosen of Sibson, the Peticote which he bestowed upon her, within this six
months was not the best in England, the Token was not unmeere for her state,
farewell, farewell, farewell, old Martin keep thee out of their hands for all
that, for thou art a short fellow, thou will one day overthrow them Amen, and
then thou swearest by thy Faith, quoth John of London.

Martin the Metropolitan to John the Metropolitan, says Nemo considat nimium
secundis.

Martin to his troubled Son, says Nemo desperet Meliora Lapsus.

Anglia Martinis Disce favere tuis.

Faults Escaped.
Title line 10, Read, Chapleine has showed himself in his late admonition to
the people of England to b. etc.

Epist. page 3 read Eulegein for Euldgeni, bear with the rest of the Faults.

FINIS.

