THE SKIRMISHER CONFOUNDED: Being a Collection of several Passages taken forth
of some Books of John Cheyney's, who styles himself, The Author of the Skirmish
upon Quakerism;

In which is the Baseness, Wickedness, Contradictions, Lies, Hypocrisy,
Unbelief, Confusion and Blasphemy of that Skirmishing Priest discovered, and he
laid open to the View of every one who shall read with a single Eye,

Collected by a Friend to the Truth, and a Well-wisher to the Souls of all
People, Roger Haydocke.

Isa. 55.17. No Weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper, and every
Tongue that shall rise up in judgment against thee thou shall condemn; this is
the Heritage of the Servants of the Lord, and their Righteousness is of me,
says the Lord.

Psalm 7.15. He made a Pit, and dug it, and is fallen into the Ditch which he
made.

Printed in the Year, 1676.

THE Skirmisher CONFOUNDED.
John Cheyney's Book entitled, A Call to Prayer, etc in the Preface to the
Reader, says thus, I would be loath to fasten any Error upon any Person, which
I can perceive him not to hold, and I would heartily interpret all words so far
as I can with Conscience and Justice to the Truth.

The next page of the same Preface to the Reader, thus. I do not know but by
their Opinion of the Light within, Devils and damned Souls may be saved.

In his Book entitled, The Skirmish, etc. p. 4. Penn's Position does just fi^
the Irish Rebellion, the French Massacree, the Marian Persecution, the Ten
Persecutions of the Primitive Churches, the Gunpowder Treason.

Page 13. of the same Book, I would be glad to make the best I can of your
Position.

Animadversion, Ca^ there be greater Baseness, then under Pretense of Candor to
be thus Absurd? Is it not great wickedness in this Skirmisher, to make such
Ungodly Consequences of so Harmles^ a Position, and yet afterward say, He
would be glad to make the best he can of it.

Here follows the Priest's Contradictions.
John Cheyney The Skirmisher against OR fighting John Cheyney, Himself.

Assertion. Contradiction. 1. CAll to Prayer, pa. 117. I dare say, let the
Light within alone, and say nothing to it, and it shall never move any Quaker
or ungodly Soul to pray till Death, or the Flames of Hell shall awake them. 1.
CAll to Prayer, page 119. For though the Light may move, yet it will be but a
weak Motion, and the Motion of the Darkness or Fleshly Part will overcome. 2.
p. 119. A Qua. or any other may live a secure flesh pleasing life all his
days, and never have one effectual motion to prayer if he be ruled by the
Light within. 2. Page 119. That which should Move them to Prayer, the Light
within, is over powered by the Darkness. 3. Page 119. The Quakers could hardly
devise a more sin-pleasing Doctrine, then never to pray without a Motion from
the Light within. 3. Page 118. I Will tell thee what keeps me from Prayer, when
my Conscience and the Light within moves me to Prayer, my Sloth and Laziness,
my Deadness, want of Life and Hunger, and Spirit in my Soul. 4. Pa. 109. Their
grand Principle of the Light within is not consistent with right Prayer. 4.
Page 3, 4. Right Prayer is not mere words, nor a mere work of Nature, nor bare
humane industry and striving without the special Grace and Concurrance of God.
5. P. 76. The Spirit of God is a Spirit of Supplication, he commands and moves
to prayer. p. 20. The Spirit does intercede in us -- we could do nothing
without the special help of God's spirit -- without the special help of God's
spirit we can do no special Work. 5. Page 115. Their great Assertion, that
Prayer is not to be done without the Motion of the Light within -- some have
confessed, they never pray without a Motion from the Spirit of God. Page 98.
You need no Motion of the Spirit to tell you when to feed and clothe your
Bodies; but you need a motion from the Spirit to put you upon to dress and feed
your Souls. 6. Quakerism subverted, p. 18. The Light within tells me, there is
a God. 6. Page 101. Trust not that blind deceitful Guide within you, the Light
within you, lest it lead you into everlasting darkness. 7. Skirmish. p. 13. The
Light within, which should be man's Guide, takes part with the flesh and Satan
against God. 7. Page 61. When God and Conscience have called to this Duty, a
lazy, carnal, self-willed Mind has kept us away. 8. Call to Pray. p. 111. They
are no people of prayer and make no use of prayer: p. 101. A prayerless people
of a prayerless Religion -- Prayerless Pretenders to Holiness. 8. Page 114. If
Report be true when they do pray; for I have heard and believe, that sometimes
they pray. 9. Skirmish. p. 13 If the Scriptures go, farewell God and Christ, and
Heaven, and all Law and Rule. 9. Page 62. Must a hungry man need a Scripture to
tell him how often he must eat? no more does a hungry Soul need a Scripture to
tell him how often he must pray.

Besides these Contradictions out of his Books, I shall add one more out of two
Manuscripts written with his own Hand, which I think he will not deny (and I am
certain in this be has no Cause to Blame the Printer, as some time he did, but
if he deny it, I can both produce and prove it.

10. O Lord, thou know that I am what I profess my self to be, thy Servant,
sincere and upright, 10. Given forth by a weak believing Christian, and
disobedient Servant of Christ. John Cheyney. John Cheyney.

I shall here set down some of his Confessions to the Light, Grace and Spirit
of God, and then discover his Lies, etc.
Page 120. THe Light then prevails Habitually, and there is a kind of continual
Exercise of the Soul by internal Prayer. Page 122. The Soul and Heart of Prayer
is within seen to God. Page 4. There is a great deal of Praying outwardly which
is not right and sincere praying, outward Balling and Canting. Page 90. He that
turns away his Ear from hearing the Law, even his Prayer shall be
Abomination. R. H. queries, Is not the Law Light? and where is this Law and the
Ear also that should be turned to it, without man or within man?

Page 7. All right Prayer must be in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ -- The
bare naming of Christ is not enough. Page 12. Whilst there is Grace in the
Soul, there will be a Root of Prayer. Page 28. What is God to me, if I have no
Life or Spirit in me, wherewith to seek him, and apply my self to him. R. H.
queries, Whether all men have not need of Life or Spirit in them (as well as
priest Cheyney) wherewith to seek God, and apply themselves to God? and if so,
why does this priest tell the people, The Quakers mangle God and Christ, and
cut them in pieces, because they say, God has given people a Measure of Life,
Light and Spirit, wherewith they may seek after and apply themselves to God?

Page 20. The spirit does intercede in us by a kind of continual restless
Motion and importunity toward God. Page 57. Wicked people, were it not to
still their Consciences, they would not pray that little which they do. R. H.
queries, Does not the Light in the Conscience move them to pray? is it as a
drunken negligent Coachman? or rather, does it not do its Office truly, and is
clear of the Priest's wicked Charge? Hear him further.

Page 84. This is the Language and Practice of Wordliness, stand by God, stand
by Christ and Eternal Life, cease Conscience, away Spirit, let my Soul sink. R.
H. Sure God and Christ, the Light and Spirit are not to be blamed, since they
are bidden stand by, and are turned from before the Soul can sink; but what a
Strait does this bring the Skirmisher into? who in his Book entitled Quakerism
subverted, p. 31. tells us, If the Light be blameless, or in Effect he says,
(for his Words admit of the Consequence) If there be any thing in man, though
of God and not of man, that is Innocent and Blameless before God, then the
Quakers are in the Right, and all that he has writ, as also his Skirmish must
fall to the Ground, and he must acknowledge himself to be utterly defeated, and
to have lost the Day.

Now, that there is something of God in man, he also grants p. 28. of the same
Book, in these Words, There is something of God, something of Satan, Flesh and
Spirit, Light and Darkness.

Now to the Conscience of the Reader in the ^ight of God do I leave it, that
Judgment may be given betwixt the Skirmisher and the Quakers, whether the
Skirmisher be not utterly routted. Hear him further.

Call to Prayer, p. 103. So dangerous it is to resist the Spirit of the Lord,
and to imprison the Truth in Unrighteousness, and to go about to salve an
Vlcerous Conscience by false ^ures, they may serve for a while, but the Day is
at Hand when God w^ll search us all. R. H. The Priest grants the Spirit of the
Lord may be resisted, and the Truth in Unrighteousness imprisoned: Now I query
whether this Resisting the Spirit, and Imprisoning the Truth be within man, or
without him?

Page 41. A Gracious Man (says the Priest) may silently worship God, and speak
to God, and so as none may hear but himself, and yet he most fervent in Prayer,
and yet this Priest scoffingly says, p. 101, 102. How many dumb and silent
Meetings have you? without either prayer or preaching. P. 19. Men may give us
Words and Forms to use, but they cannot give us the spirit of Grace and
Supplication, p. 17. Who knows how to pray to God, further then God shall teach
and enable him?

R. H. querieth, whether it be not safe for all then, to feel God's Spirit with
them to teach them in Prayer? Hear what the Priest himself says.

Page 21. When the spirit of the Lord is from man he can do nothing, Prayer
sticks in his Mouth like choak-Cheese. Thus much by the Priest in Honor of the
Light, Grace and Spirit of God in Prayer. I shall here add some of the Priest's
Lies and so proceed.

Page 122. The Quakers declare themselves to be Hypocrites. Page 50. Christ
answers, get you gone, away with you (to wit, the five Foolish Virgins) ye are
Workers of Iniquity, I never knew you. Page 140. I am passed through the
Red Sea, Egypt is behind me; I am escaped out of Sodom; I am from under the
Bondage of spiritual Pharaoh, the Devil, who once was my Father and Master.
Skirmish, p. 2. The QUAKERS PROFESS to build their Religion and Hopes upon the
Scriptures. Call to Prayer, p. 15. God hears wicked men in their Distress, and
grants them many Good things in Answer to their Prayers. Answ. This
contradicts the Scripture, If I (says David) regard Iniquity in my Heart,
the Lord will not hear me, Psalm. 66.18.

Besides these there are many other forged Lies in his Books, which for Brevity
Sake I pass by at this time, he tells the World, p. 115. That he has
discoursed with some Quakers, who have confessed to him that they never pray
without a Motion from God's spirit.

R. H. querieth, Why should they pray without God's Spirit? J. C. himself
confesses elsewhere (as I have hinted before) that nothing can be done in
Prayer without the especial Help of God's Spirit, yet he blames the Quakers for
refusing to pray without the Spirit move them; but had they not better do so,
then to go before or without the Spirit, and have their Prayer stick in their
Mouths like Choak-Cheese, and said John Cheyney before: But in this I have
Reason to suspect Forgery, that those Quakers should confess to him, they in
many Years have not had a Motion to Prayer. Now if his tale be true let him
give us the Names of such, if it be false, let his Iniquity stop his Mouth, and
let Shame come over him. But to proceed.

Call to Prayer, p. 42. God is a spirit, and be requires the spirit in every
Performance, and nothing but the Life and Spirit, and Zeal and Fervency in all
our Duties and Services will please him. Mal. 1. and last, Cursed be the
Deceiver which has a Male in his Flock, and voweth and sacrifices unto God a
corrupt thing. R. H. Well, enough for the Downfall of this Skirmisher: The
Priest confesses, he has a Male, asserts, God requires nothing else, neither
will be pleased with any thing else, but Spirit, Life, Zeal and Fervency; he
grants, that the Deceiver who has a Male, may sacrifice to God a corrupt
thing, to wit, A Cold, Distracted, Life-less, Dead Prayer; and such Prayers,
Offerings and Sacrifices are Abomination to God, no more pleasing to him, then
was the cutting off of a Dogs Neck, or offering Swines Blood, and unto such
Deceivers the Curse is due.

Now how near this Priest Cheyney's Prayers are thereunto read in his own Words
published to the World, which need little Animadversion, because they speak
fully of themselves; he ought not to be angry with me for repeating them, since
he has caused them to be printed, if he be ashamed of them let him call them
in and recant, and what I have in my Custody, he shall have freely; but to the
Matter, in order to signify his Hypocrisy.

Call to Prayer, p. 45, 46. We all come under reproof for our coldness and
deadness in Prayer, there is much detestable hypocrisy and coldness committed
by us in our solemn Prayers to God, both in secret, in private and in public.
Does not this speak forth it self? But hear him further. What is this but to
mock the Almighty God, and to sport with consuming Fire, and dally and play
with Everlasting Torment, and be in jest and complement with Heaven and Hell,
and make a light matter of sin and eternity; What is this but a profanation of
God's Name, and going to Hell upon our Knees, and a provoking God to deny us
those Mercies which we so faintly beg? -- Why do we pray like canting Beggars,
like Dreamers and Sleepers? Page 135. O my God forgive me all my Omission of
prayer, all my Coldness, Deadness, Lukewarmness and Distractions in Prayer.
Page 139. I am distracted in Prayer, I am soon weary, I come poorly off, my
Foes are too hard for me -- Why go I mourning all the Day long, when the
Comforter which should relieve my Soul is gone from me? Page 145. It is a great
Misery as well as Sin to be lukewarm in Prayer -- Tremble to have my lukewarm
Prayers abhorred by God, and spued out of his Mouth, and cast in my Face as
Dung. -- If I get to Heaven it must be by this Trade of begging. Page 143. This
Priest Cheyney tells us, If he be idle in prayer he shall have but a ragged
tattered Soul, Mark, he says, I shall not be able to cover or conceal my
Wickedness from the World. R. H. querieth, whether this be not a Hypocrite
indeed, who by distracted prayers thinks to hide his Wickedness from the World?
Hear him further.

Page 47. O loytering Souls, unprofitable and unfruitful Servants all of us to
our heavenly Master! Let us be asham^d of our Doings, and mend our Prayers,
lest God sp^e them out of his Mouth. Page 131. Had thou, O my Soul, but a
right Sense of Gods thou could not but be fervent in Prayer; thou prayest,
but how? Exceeding coldly. R. H. The Priest grants he has not a right Sense of
God, and that he prays exceeding coldly, yet in page 141 he says, But the
Lord is with me, and shall preserve me unto his heavenly Kingdom; but mark
Reader, what follows in the same page, But yet my Soul is much sadded and cast
down when I consider what Strivings and Fightings there is in my Prayer against
it self, one part in me would be more holy, and another part contradicts it,
and would be as I am, and have leave to be unholy; one side is for God and for
Heaven, and the other side savoureth Earth, and is all for the Flesh, and
grudgeth every painful sigh for Heaven; O how is my Soul tossed between these
two Contenders! and I am compelled to pray Hypocritically, and Dissemble with
God, and utter Untruths to him that searches the Hearts, and delights not
but in Upright Lips.

But this is not all, (though enough to confound this Skirmisher) Yet he shuts
up himself in Unbelief, hear him, But either it must be so in part, or there
will be no praying in this World.

R. H. querieth, Must there either be Hypocritical Praying, Dissembling with
God, and uttering Untruths to him that searches the Hearts, or no praying in
this World? God forbid: Let this Lying, Dissembling, Hypocrite's Mouth be
stopped, the Spirit of God inditeth better Matter, it teaches all the Sons of
God, who are led by it, to pray with it, and with Understanding (not rude or
distracted, like Priest Cheyney) but to offer to God what God has prepared;
for he prepares the Morning and the Evening Sacrifice, which as sweet Incense
is accepted of him; he hears his own Spirit, and another Spirit he will not
hear. Hear what he says of their Congregations.

Call to Prayer, p. 30. O how little of Prayer is there in our Congregations?
indeed there is praying in many Congregations, but it is rather a Mocking of
God, most vile Hypocrisy; so often as the public Prayers are read and
repeated by the Minister and People, so often the Name of God is taken in vain
exceedingly by many Hypocritical Ministers and people: and yet the Priest says
of himself, p. 142 I am the most Rude and Unskillful of all thy Ministers. I
shall now touch his Confusion, and so discover his Blasphemy.

Call to Prayer, p. 16. Prayer is a Holy and Reverend Communion of sinful Dust
and Ashes, with the great and glorious God. Page 108. He tells of a Quaker,
that had so much of Christ's Spirit and Religion Outwardly in Him, as to pray.
Page 52. I think there are but few Hypocrites that keep up a constant Course of
Prayer, and yet I cannot say, but there may be some and Many. Page 145. Though
Christ be not present upon Earth Corporally and Carnally, he is truly present
by his Spirit, and he dwells in his Saints; This latter is for the Quakers;
Page 66. The Priest says, Behold we are lean, exceeding lean, like blasted
Corn, there is Husk, but no Corn. Page 72. Thence it is that we are like raw
Flesh, unsodden Christians, Milk-sops. Quakerism Subverted, Page 27, 28. The
Priest says, In every man, since the Fall, there is something of God and
something of Satan, Flesh and Spirit, Light and Darkness. Page 34. he says,
(This Light which is something of God, by him placed in Opposition to Satan,
Spirit in Opposition to Flesh) is guilty of all sins of Omission and
Commission, which the Soul is charged with, and guilty of; it has a Hand in
all Thought sins, Hears sins, Tongue sins, Life sins; This is the Language of
this Blasphemer. Hear him further. Page 21. The worst of men has a Light
within him, and so we say, that Jesus Christ is the true Light, which
enlightneth every man that comes into the World, John 1.9. Page 23. He calls
this Light within, the Quakers Diana. Call to Prayer, p. 112. The Quakers
Dagon. In Blasphemy of the true God and Christ, once more hear him, Quakerism
subverted, page 33. The Light goes down with the Soul into Hell, p. 34 The
Light within, in Hell, is turned into a Self-tormenting Light. What is this but
to say, The Light of Christ tormenteth it self in Hell; Confusion and
Blasphemy. But for all this, this skirmishing Priest would not be called a
Deceiver, Liar, Hypocrite, no more would his Generation the Scribes and
Pharisees of old, yet he tells us himself, Call to Prayer, p. 113. I could
bring many that could not endure such Ministers as I. No marvail, Skirmisher;
many see thee to be a Cloud without Water; but if this Priest mean his own
Generation, it is no Wonder; for though it be not very long since he turned
Parson, and crept in among the Chimmerims, or men of the Black Robe (for
formerly he was a Justice's Clark, and thirsted eagerly after the Quakers
Money, but as yet I hear not that he returned them their Money again) yet in
this short time he has defiled his own Nest, charged his Brethren with vile
Hypocrisy, stilled them Hypocritical Ministers, yet of himself says, I am the
most rude and unskilful of all thy Ministers; has he not marked his own Nose?
What constrained him to pray Hypocritically, dissemble with God, and lie to the
Almighty? Not the Truth; for there is no Lie of it; not the Spirit of Truth;
for that leads into all Truth: He has been acted by another Spirit. Well he
is seen by many to be what he is, an Hypocrite.

And whereas he says, many will not endure such Preachers as he, I add, no
Doubt; but from henceforth some that have heard him, and approved of him, being
simply betrayed by him, now seeing him, will hear him no more, but quite turn
their Backs of that Rude, Distracted, Hypocritical, Dissembling, Lying
Minister, all which his own Confession proves him to be; also a Base, Wicked,
Confused, Blaspheming Priest, all which his own Works prove him to be.

Now if any moderate Inquirer shall ask a Reason why I heap these things upon
him? I answer, I am only an Instrument in the Lord's Hand, and the God of
Heaven is pouring Contempt upon him; he has lift up himself, and not by the
Lord, and therefore the Lord is casting him down. For the Truth's Sake, and for
the Sake of the simple hearted where this may come, have I collected these
passages out of his Works, giving the Title of the Book and Page, in which
whosoever desires may in his Books read them more at large, many Gross things I
have past by in his Books, especially Quakerism subverted, as also in his
Skirmish, the latter being fully answered already: It is for Truth's Sake, and
the Sake of Peoples Souls which are misguided, that thus far I have run through
his dirty Channel; what I have written I commend to every Man's Conscience in
the Sight of God, who am Truth's Friend, and the Soul's Friend, but an Enemy to
that which misguideth it.

Roger Haydock.

THE END.

