A CHRONICLE OF THE Late Intestine War IN THE THREE KINGDOMS OF ENGLAND,
SCOTLAND and IRELAND.

WITH The Intervening Affairs of TREATIES, And other Occurrences relating
thereunto.

As also the several Usurpations, Foreign Wars, Differences and Interests
depending upon it, to the happy Restitution of our Sacred Sovereign K. CHARLES
II.

In Four Parts, Viz. The COMMONS WAR, The DEMOCRACIE, The PROTECTORATE, The
RESTITUTION.


By JAMES HEATH, Gent.

The Second Edition.

To which is added A Continuation to this present year 1675.

Being a brief Account of the most Memorable Transactions In England, Scotland
and Ireland, and Foreign Parts.

By I. P.

LONDON: Printed by I. C. for THOMAS BASSET, at the George near Cliffords-Inne
in Fleetstreet. MDCLXXVI.

To the most Illustrious and Magnanimous, GEORGE, Duke of Albemarle, Earl of
Torrington, Baron Monck of Potherige, Beauchamp, and Teys: Captain General of
all his Majesty's Landforces, Garrisons, Forts, and Castles within any of His
Majesty's Kingdoms or Dominions; Master of the Horse, Knight of the most Noble
Order of the Garter, and one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
May it please your Highness,
I Presume to offer your victorious hands this Fragment and minute Portion of
Time, from the encouragement of that Axiom, That by Moments Approaches are
made to Eternity, to which the Duration of your Glory is most adaequate and
Commensurate.

I am most humbly conscious that this Historiola, this piece of a Chronicle, is
a most incompetent and incongruous Present to Your Highness; and of all the
meanest and vilest that ever obtruded or excused themselves to Princes, the
most unpardonable. But such is the Fate of this way of writing, and upon this
Subject, that whosoever shall dare to increase our Annals, must either injure
your Greatness by intitling you to his Endeavor, or else disoblige his Nation,
who owe and own their Laws, which is more than their History, to your Prudence
and Puissance.

Besides (Great Sir) the Genius that walked and wandered in the contexture and
account of this War, like the Ghost of murdered persons, never left importuning
and urging me to address its groans to you, the Vindex and Avenger of that
blood, which has been so barbarously and unnaturally spilt. Your Highnesses
blessed Conduct traced and overtook the guilt of the late Sanguinary times, and
Expiated those dire Effusions. You have reconciled our Review to those
abhorrences, and with innocence given us the Representation of the Impiety of
the late Age: You have given Form and Beauty to the Chaos of our Confusions,
made the lineaments thereof in its derivation to Posterity lovely and amiable:
from a ghastly and mangled Spectacle, not to be owned or known by our selves,
you have perfected and concinnated it to its proportions; and from a Medly of
our Distractions, brought forth a Beautiful Rationale We doubt not to evince to
your Majesty, that his Excellency and the Army under his Command, etc. have
complied with the Obligations for which they were raised; The Preservation of
the Protestant Religion, the honor and happiness of the King, the Privileges
of Parliament, the Liberty and Propriety of the Subject, and the Fundamental
Laws of the Land. Vide Declaration of the Army, May 1660.
. And now under that your Highnesses Signature, this little Chronicle is
ambitious to pass, and to commend it self to the world.

I would not be guilty of so much vanity, as to pretend in this Address any
respect or regard to your Renown and Fame, raised beyond the reach of our most
exalted praises, as being the same with the Miracles your Highness has
instrumented: the highest Transcendencies of Language do with advantage
disappear into silent Ecstasies, and our Raptures convert into the Forms of
Blessing, and lose themselves in Adoration. Besides, the Oracle, the Wisdom of
the Kingdom in Parliament, has engrossed all the utterance of Gratitude, in
their public Acknowledgments, transcribed into the sacred Records and Rolls of
that supreme Court.

So Heaven was pleased not only to sum up the virtues and felicities of all
the Generals in our Civil Wars, integrating and accomplishing the Loyalty,
Conduct, Courage, Success, Renown and Triumphs, contra-opposed and divided
among them, in your Heroical person, making you the Complete Compendium, as
well as the absolute Conclusion of the menage thereof (which to your Honor and
Memory shall be eternally celebrated,) but also to center the general hope and
confidence in your single Virtue, to unite, or at least cement and amuse
different Parties and Persuasions to an acquiescence in your Resolutions and
Design, and then at last to Crown them with universal Satisfaction, Content,
and Delight; the three Nations being inspired with One voice, and gratulatory
Shout, at your Redemption of us from Slavery.

But while I please my self and the Reader with the memory of that ravishing
Kindness, I forget I do displease your Highness with this rude and tedious
Boldness, which I would religiously avoid. May you graciously be pleased to
vouchsafe a Reception of this Essay to the honor of the Times you have made,
wherein Truth has recovered her Reputation, and dare maintain it, (and it is
the only justifiable part of the ensuing Work, as far as Humane Frailty may be
indulged;) while I doubt not but mine (and the General) Prayers to Heaven shall
be accepted for Your and your Posterities long Temporal, and endless Eternal
Felicities.

Your Highness's Devoted and most Obedient Servant, JAMES HEATH.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THe custom and obligation which lies upon all public Writings to bespeak the
benevolent and favorable judgment of those who shall vouchsafe them their
perusal, does with great advantage, like the auspicious invocation of a Deity,
assist those humble, and submiss acknowledgments I am bound to render of the
ensuing Collections.

It is most certain, that Books of this nature bring an Imputation of their
own, like original guilt, with them into the World, and that it is an
impossible labor to wipe it off, though the felicity of former times, and
debonarity of their manners, have transmitted a few more innocent, and less
obnoxious Histories to a most piacular and guilty Posterity; but the crimes
with which the Current of our Annals are imbittered, and the effects thereof,
-- Odium, Timor, Ira, Voluptas,
-- Nostri est Farrago Libelli.
those many animosities and irreconciled Feuds, besides the depravity of the
late age, leave such a dreadful prejudice upon this attempt, that like the
atcheivement of the Augaean labor, nothing but Rivers of Oil can assuage or
mitigate and purge the distemper.

And that course I may presume to have steered, saving in that parricidial
Fact, the abhorrence of the world, an impiety of such a magnitude, that it
cannot be heightened by any aggravation, no more than lessened by any excuse, as
Sir Heneage Finch excellently observed; indeed, such an unmeasurable
wickedness, save that it filled up the measure of its iniquity, as infinity of
time can never parallel, unless such unexampled and unfortunate Virtue and
Innocence dare appear again: and therefore to clear and free the Nation, and
expiate the infamy of that treason, the individual persons of that Conspiracy
are marked and branded with their Character.

As to other persons, I have used the severest cautions I could, that I
trespassed not upon their name, by any wrong, sinister, single, or injurious
report; nor willingly at all, but where such account was of great evidence,
light, and satisfaction to the subject discoursed of. I must confess, as Sir
Walter Raleigh said, Truth may be followed too near, both to persons, time, and
place; like Diana, she must not be seen naked, and profaned by a full view;
and many are yet living, who are very unwilling to hear their story: I have
therefore piously abstained (without most just and notorious reasons) from
thrusting my Pen wilfully into such matter, to the wounding of any man's
Reputation, considering what the same Satyrist wisely adventured, -- Experiar
quid concedatur in illis,
Quorum Flaminia tegitur cinis atque Latina.


As to Actions, I have not indiligently traced and examined all relations of
them; but such is the variety thereof, that I flatter not my self with the
hopes of giving general satisfaction: nor would my design allow me to be
copious or particular in every man's merit; if I should have discharged that
Debt of Glory, I should have undone the Credit of this modest and plain-meaning
History. I have used for my better direction herein, whatsoever Authentic
accounts I could procure; and particularly I am obliged to the Honorable Sir
Lewis Dyve, for his exact and elegant Narrative of the Irish War in 1649, under
the conduct of the most noble the Duke of Ormond; as also to several other
Noble hands for diverse small Pieces relating to this Work, on whose difficult
and perplexed Contexture I could otherwise neither safely nor fairly have
adventured.

That is part of my defense for this undertaking: for I suppose the honor of
such Personages placed beyond the reach of Calumny* and as to the rest, which
shows its Birth and Production by a distinct and discernible style, I can
justly allege the most known and approved Authorities; and for the publication
of it in this manner, and at this time, the fortune of a former Impression, and
importunity for this, as the first Essay of this kind in English, that can lay
claim to the prosperous veracity of the times.

The great wonder of our Revolutions is not yet over, and the Underlings of the
last Age, who were born during the Rebellion, as yet in a Maze, and astonished
at the Event and Issue of our Troubles; nor can be settled in that Allegiance
which was a stranger to their Nativity. That therefore such, and future
Posterity, might be fully informed of the state and nature of the Quarrel, and
be more satisfied with their voluntary obedience (to be improved now by this
seasonable account of the dispute thereof through the last twenty years) I have
endeavored a perfect Relation in this Series of the War, and succeeding
Affairs.

And I will here only mention, for the advice of future times, and as a
necessary Memento to the present, what evils and mischiefs (even to the brink
of destruction) the popular Cheats of Religion and Liberty have most terribly
effected. I will not instance the successful Artifices of the Usurpers, which
wanted not any the smallest plausible ingredients, till their Conspiracy came
to a powerful consistency, and was able to vindicate and entitle its Treason to
the authority of the Law. If this could have been foreseen or prevented, there
had scarce been twenty guilty persons in the Nation, whereas a considerable
number are now obnoxious to the Government, upon the score of those prevailing
and thriving Grandees, who offered the World to their Adherers, and gave them
the unjust possession of their impious Conquest.

The whole Work is divided into four parts, as well for the more distinct and
clear perceivance of each form and shape of the Anarchy, its interests and
peculiar relative Affairs, as for a rest and pause to the Reader, who would
otherwise be wearied with a hudled continuance of such Confusions. I will add
no more: for I think it unnecessary to engage further in the matter, or
anticipate the Contents of this Chronicle (which name it only pretends to, as
a Iournal or Day-book of Time) but having once more requested the most
favorable acceptance and censure thereof, and that the Reader will please to
measure the Failures and Errors of it by its abstruse, obscure, and intricate
Conveyances, which admitted of no certain, full, and infallible knowledge (as
agreed on by all hands) the particulars claiming to the grand success and sum
of every Action for their belief, to bid him happily

VALE.
Reader,
HAving promised a short Abstract of those vast sums of Money the Long
Parliament and their continued Usurpation drained out of the Purses and Blood,
I may say, of the English people; I found in the Progress of the Account, that
it would exceed all Arithmetic, and belief to the Reputation and Credit of
History: yet because I would not totally disappoint Posterity, I will give them
the Items, and let their leisure and computation reckon the Sums, if they can
find numbers for it; but I fear I shall not count half of them.

Imprimis, The Corban of the Cause, Public Faith-money, supplied with
Composition-Money for Delinquents Estates: which was finis principalis, one of
the first ends of the Work.

The Fees of the two Speakers (and their Clerks) of the Lords and Commons House
of Parliament, for Pardons of Delinquents, is 35 l. for every man whose Estate
is 100 l. per annum, and upward.

Ten thousand men so compounding and paying, amounts to 2000000; and is Twenty
hundred thousand pounds; being 200 Wagons loading of silver, every Wagon
loading being 10000 l. of silver.

Divide 10000 men in ten parts; as thus:

One thousand men, Delinquents, whose Estates are betwixt one and 200 l. a
year, every man paying but 200 l. two years Revenue, amounted to 200000 l. a
year.

The second thousand men, whose Estates are betwixt two and 300 l. a year,
paying two years Revenue, comes to 400000 l.

The third thousand of Compounders, whose Estates are betwixt three and 400 l.
a year, and so paying, amounts to 600000 l.

The fourth thousand Compounders, whose Estates are betwixt four and 500 l. a
year, pays 800000 l.

The fifth thousand Compounders, whose Estates are betwixt five and 600 l. a
year, pays 1000000 l. which is 300 Wagons loading of silver, every Wagon
loading being 10000 l. in silver.

The other five thousand Delinquents paying as the beforementioned five
thousand Compounders, amounts to 8000000 l. that is, 800 Wagons of silver,
10000 l. being a Wagons loading.

All which is a Mass of Money, yet but a small sum to the moneys brought in as
follows.

First, Head-money: Secondly, Plate lent upon the Propositions. Thirdly, Money
raised for the Rebels Lands, and Adventurers account. Fourthly, Money for the
Weekly Meals, for a Meal for one day in the week. Fifthly, Money lent upon
Ordinances of Parliament. Sixthly, Fifty Subsidies. Seventhly, The Twenty, and
Twenty and Fifth part of Lands and Goods. Eighthly, Excise, a Monster, whose
Receipt was like the Abyss. Ninthly, Customs. Tenthly, Sequestration of all
the Delinquents Lands, since the War began. Eleventh, the Kings Revenue, and
Committee-money. Twelfth, Money for Newcastle-coals. Thirteen, Money raised for
his Excellency of Housekeepers, and some other Commanders in the like nature,
besides Plundrings, and what has been taken going out of the Land, and to the
King. Lastly, Monthly Taxes upon all the Lands in the associated Counties, and
the Cities of London and Westminster, besides what they took for Contribution
in their Garrisons, etc. which came to 60000 l. a month, and so given in, if
not more, and by the year amounts to 720000 l. and in five years comes to
3600000 l. and is 360 Wagons loading of silver, at 10000 l. a Wagons loading.
(And this higher afterward)
This in five years time amounted (besides the Customs and the Kings Revenues,
and Ecclesiastical Profits sequestered in their hands) to near 20000000. But he
that is able to reckon what the Sales of the same lands of King, Queen, and
Prince, Bishops, Deans and Chapters, the Nobility and Gentry, as Delinquents,
together with the Monthly assessment at the same time of 100000, and 120000 per
mensem, come to, Erit mihi magnus Apollo. I mention not Decimation, nor the
Piedmont-Sacriledge, nor other slier Artifices of Cromwell, nor the Prize-money,
etc. But if an estimate be taken of their gettings by their spending, let that
almost insuperable debt left upon the Kingdom, and discharged by the King upon
his Return, be the unenvied testimony thereof. Vale.

A CHRONICLE OF THE CIVIL WARS OF ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND. THE FIRST
PART: BEING The Commons War.
NO higher or greater cause can be assigned for this War (setting aside the
sins of all Times and Nations, to which the Justice of Heaven is seldom long a
Debtor) but the fate and catastrophe of Kingdoms and Monarchies, which do at
certain periods of time taste of that vicissitude and mutability, to which all
other sublunary things are more frequently subjected.

The secondary causes of it, are so many and so uncertain, so variously
reported and believed, that it would spend much of the paper allotted to this
History in ascertaining them. Therefore to contain and keep within the limits
of this designment; something only shall be said of them, that was obvious to
every eye, not savouring of partiality or affection.

Many disorders and Irregularities no doubt there were in the State, contracted
through a long and lazy peace, bolstred up with an Universal trade, which
procured a general wealth, the Parents of Wantonnesses; the excess of National
riches being but as the burden which the Ass carries, and mistakes for
provender; people being only the better able to sustain their future misery,
with their present plenty.

These conceived abuses in the manage of the State (like ill humors, where
they find an equal resistance, or overpower of nature,) sunk and descended
upon the Ecclesiastical Regiment, too impotent to sustain those general
assaults which were given it.

No storms or tempests can be raised or maintained below, without the Celestial
influences, or disturbances in the upper Region; nor often are there any
Commotions or Wars among or in Nations, where Religion, which ought to be the
peaceablest and most innocent persuasion, is not the Primum Mobile, the great
mover of the Machine of Destruction.

Quantum Religio potuit suadere malorum?
Nothing from abroad could any way break off that continued series of peace we
had so long enjoyed; we had made the Nations round about us to wonder at, and
to dread the putting forth of that strength which had been matured and ripened
by the sunshine of so great a prosperity, so many years together, while the
world about us was hurled into the confusions of Ruin and War, ready to become
a prey to the next potent Invasion.

Distractions and Confusions about Church-Ceremonies.
Strange moreover it is, That the miserable Distractions and Confusions which
ensued, should be derived from no greater beginnings then a few Ceremonies in
the Church; that War, which stands upon none, should be founded and fixed upon
them: and yet nothing more certain can be charged with the guilt of so much
misery as these Kingdoms so long suffered under; but the Cavils, Discontents
and disputes about them.

A grudging there was for many years before, in the Raigns of Queen Elizabeth
and King James, in whose days, and at his first assumption to this Crown, a
Conference was before him managed by the Reformists about them, In a Conference
about them, justified by K. James.
where that learned King so justified the use of them, that for a while all
ob^oqu^es against them were silenced, and the Church and State enjoyed its
greatest blessings of Peace and Uniformity.

Nor was there much noise about them in the beginning of the Reign of King
Charles; but toward the middle it began to threaten a storm, in the year 1635.
toward the conclusion whereof, some Uproars and Commotions were raised, Fresh
Commotions about them, raised by Pryn, Bastwick, Burton, and Lilburn.
decrying those Ceremonial Rites used and practiced in the Church; such being
the ushering in by a general murmur, what was plainly and distinctly declared
in the beginning of the year 1637. (from whence this Chronicle takes its rise,)
by Mr. Pryn, Dr. Bastwick, and Mr Burton; seconded and asserted by that
famously known person, John Lilburn.

These men, though questionless from different grounds and respects (as this
age has lived to see by Mr. Pryn, who proved a great and happy instrument in
the Kings Restitution, and consequently, the resettlement of the Church)
printed several Books against the aforesaid Ceremonies; for these Books they
were apprehended (which were charged also to be full of Invectives against the
Bishops and Episcopal Government) and were severely censured in the
Star Chamber, to the exasperation of a great part of the Kingdom.

All Pillori'd and Crop'd.
They were all three sentenced to be set in the Pillory, and to have their ears
cut off, Mr. Pryn to be stigmatized on both cheeks, each of them fined five
thousand pounds apiece to the King, Pryn stigmatized: they are fined and
imprisoned.
and to be imprisoned during the Kings pleasure; which was accordingly executed
in every point of the sentence, and as valiantly and stoutly undergone by these
sufferers, who after they had stood in the Pillory (three thereof being set up
in the Palace-yard at Westminster) were sent to remote Castles in the adjacent
Isles of Guernsey and Iersey; from whence, as we shall see hereafter, they were
brought back to London.

I may not dis-joyn the story of John Lilburn from theirs, though divided by
time, Lilburn whipped at Carts tail.
he suffering the year after, being whipped at a carts tail for imprinting and
vending several Books of the same purport and contents against the Bishops.
This man proved a great trouble-world in all the variety of Governments
afterward, being chief of a faction called Levellers: he was a great
proposal-maker and modeller of State, which by his means was always restless in
the Usurpation. He died a Quaker; and such as his life was, such was his death.

This year also Dr. Williams then Bishop of Lincoln, and Dean of Westminster,
formerly Lord Keeper, relapsed again into the Kings disfavour, for some
dishonorable words uttered against the King, which were taken hold of, and
prosecuted in the Star Chamber, Bishop Williams fined 10000 l.
where he was fined ten thousand pounds; though his enemies would rather have
had him resigned his Bishopric and Deanery: but he was of too great a spirit
to relinquish either of them, as being places conferred on him by Patent from
his bountiful Master King James; and so chose to pay the aforesaid fine, which
upon a new score was soon after doubled. These harsh proceedings against him so
exasperated his mind, that in the troubles ensuing he openly sided with the
Parliament. In effect, this whole years revolution, as to matters of
importance, was concerned in Episcopacy.

But this smoke and smother in England concerning Ceremonies, Troubles break
out in Scotland.
broke out into fire in Scotland; these petty and particular discontents here,
being blown up there into a National dislike and abhorrence of them; so that
this here, was but the forerunner of that conflagration there, which afterward
laid waste Three Kingdoms. And because of the remarkable and strange eruption
and effects of it, I think fit to give those Scottish Troubles their particular
Narrative, connext and entire together: Which here follows.

The Troubles and Tumult in Scotland, about the Service Book, Book of Canons,
High Commission, and Episcopacy.
THe great and long designed Union of the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland
had taken its desired effect, England and Scotland United.
by the assumption of King James the Sixth to this Crown; and the National feud
between the two people thereof well allayed, if not wholly extinguished; being
both as one body under one supreme Head and Governor.

That King, Scotland well settled.
at his departing from that his Native Kingdom, had left it in a very
flourishing condition, as ever it boasted of; the State well provided for by
wholesome Laws, and the management thereof committed to the prudentest and most
honorable of the Nobility, the Church-Regiment under a godly and a learned
Orthodox Episcopacy, reverenced and well accepted by the people.

All things both in Church and State being well ordered, supported and
maintained by that accession of power and greatness to their Sovereign in this
Kingdom, that Nation continued in a firm and unvariable quiet till about the
middle of the Reign of King Charles the first of blessed memory, by whom, as
also by his Royal Father, Endeavors for conformity in Discipline.
several endeavors were used for the better strengthening and perpetuating the
Union a^oresaid, by conforming the Discipline of that Church to the pattern of
this. Religion being the most sure and indissolvable tie and mutual security.

In the time of King James, those memorable Five-Articles were made by the
Assembly at Perth, Articles of Perth.
whereby the High Commission, the Book of Canons, and other Rites and
Ceremonies were introduced and established. By King Charles the First, the Book
of Service or Common Prayer was endeavored likewise to be brought in,
Common Prayer endeavored to be introduced in Scotland.
it having constantly been used for twenty years before in his Majesty's own
Royal Chapel in that Kingdom, before his Majesty's Ministers of State, and the
Nobility and Gentry attending them.

And now all things appeared Retro sublapsa referri, to precipitate into
Confusion and Disorder; the period of that peace was come, which had so long
blessed that Kingdom. Not that really and singularly that Book was the cause of
those Commotions, but accidentally ministering the malcontents of that Kingdom
an occasion of revolt and disloyalty: For the seeds of that Sedition were sown
by the Plotters of the Covenant, which was afterward so magnified under the
pretense of Religion, long before any of the grievances or pretended
innovations in Religion complained of by them were ever heard amongst them.

The Kings Revocation cause of Tumults.
The true Original of these Tumults, was a Revocation made by King Charles the
first, of such things as had passed away in prejudice of the Crown, especially
by some of the late Princes in their minorites; by this course some of the
principal Contrivers of this Covenant, found their Estates within the danger of
the Laws: And though the King, to rectify that proceeding of his, had made
appear his clemency, in waving all the advantages which the Laws afforded him,
not one of his Subjects being damnified by the said Revocation; yet for all
this, the principal persons labored a disaffection to the Government, laying
the envy of procuring that Revocation upon the Prelates, Laid upon the Bishop.
who in this were as innocent as the thing it self; only because they hoped,
that the very name of Churchmen or Religious persons, should in the point of
Faction have that operation with their followers, which they conceived the
Church or Religion it self might have had, if they could have seen how to have
persuaded them, that by this Revocation either of them had been endangered.
Other things there were relating to the Ministers themselves, the Gentry, and
their Farmers, who paid the Tithes to the Nobility; being the burden of
Impropriations: This the King thought to remedy by granting out a Commission to
a great number of the prime of all estates and degrees, to relieve, if they
should see cause, both the Ministers and others who suffered by that grievance:
This Commission was called, Commission of Superiority and Tithes.
The Commission of Superiority and Tithes; which effected, as to the agrieved,
its intended effect, and for which all possible thanks were rendered to his
Majesty

Nor were the most of the Nobility unsensible of the advantage by this means to
matter of profit, but they fretted privately for being robbed of that
Lordliness over the Clergy and Laity, which by right of Tithe they enjoyed; and
therefore had recourse to the former fetch of making the Bishops (when indeed
it was obtained by the importunity of Clergy and Laity) the Procurers also of
this Commission.

Honors and Titles add to the Troubles.
The last ingredient to this bitter Cup, which was prepared in Scotland for the
three Nations, was matter of Honor and Title: For the King going to his
Coronation there in 1631. a Parliament being called to honor the same (wherein
an Act passed, that gave his Majesty power to appoint such Vestures for
Churchmen which he should hold most decent; and another for ratifying all Acts
heretofore made concerning the established Religion, and the liberties and
privileges of the Church) his Majesty finding some principal men who were
suitors at the same time for the Dignities aforesaid, dissenters to the
confirmation and allowance of the said Acts, did not confer such expected
Honors, but passed those by, and justly advanced more Loyal persons; at which
they then muttered, but mutined not till his Majesty's departure.

Libels tax the Parliament.
Then they with Seditious private Libels, taxed this Parliament with
prevarication and obliquity in their proceedings, as if it had been packed; and
also, that the voices were not truly numbered, but that some Acts were past
without plurality of Votes. This being sifted by the Kings Privy Council there,
the Author was known, who fled; but the principal engager, the Lord Balmerino,
Libeller fled. Balmerino apprehended.
was apprehended. His Father had been raised by King James to his Barony and
Fortune, but for the most ungrateful of Treasons, was condemned by his Peers:
His Son at his time fell into the same crime and condemnation; but both, by
their Majesty's favor and clemency, restored to Life, Honor, Liberty and
Estate.

But all these devices could not serve their turn, without Religion, and such
specious pretenses were pleaded, to the subversion of the Government; therefore
the Service Book opportunely offering it self (though in 1616. at Aberdeen, a
piece very like it had passed by the General Assembly (only altered in some
places, lest in totidem verbis, some factious spirits might have misconstrued
it as a badge of dependence of that Church upon England, to the prejudice of
the Laws and Liberties) and by their own Bishops afterward, and revised by the
King, who observed many of that Nation reverently here to use it; and also that
it had been read in the Koyal Chapel in Scotland, as aforesaid) being enjoined
to be read on Easter Day, 1637. in Edinburgh, but deferred for some reasons,
though no opposition appeared then, till the twenty third of July; on that day
such a Tumult and Riot happened, Strange Tumult ab^ut reading Common Prayer.
the heads of the vulgar being secretly prepossest (as deep waters run
smoothest till they come to some breach) as for everlasting notice and memorial
of so paltry an introduction to the grandest and miraculous change, and
subversions which followed, it is here briefly, though satisfactorily
transcribed.

ON the Twenty third of July, being Sunday, according to public warning given
the Sunday before, the Service Book was begun to be read in Edinburgh, in St.
Giles Church, called the Great Church; where were present (as usual) many of
the Privy Council, both the Archbishops and other Bishops, the Justices, and
the Magistrates of Edinburgh. No sooner was the Book opened by the Dean of
Edinburgh, but a number of the vulgar, most of them women, with clapping of
their bands, cursing and outcries, raised such a barbarous hubbub in the place,
that none could bear or be heard. The Bishop of Edinburg, who was to Preach,
stepped into the Pulpit, which is immediately above the place where the Dean was
to read; intending to appease the Tumult, by putting them in mind of the
sacredness of the place, and of the horrible profanation thereof: But then the
rabble grew so enraged and mad, that if a stool aimed to be thrown at him, had
not been providentially diverted by the hand of one present, the life of that
Prelate had been endangered, if not lost. The Archbishop of St. Andrews, the
Lord Chancellor, with diverse others, offering to appease the multitude, were
entertained with such bitter curses and imprecations, that not being able to
prevail with the people, the Provost, Bailiffs, and diverse others of the
Council of the City, were forced to come down from the Gallery on which they
usually sit, and with much ado, in a very great Tumult and confusion thrust out
these disorderly people, making fast the Church-doors. After all which, the
Dean proceeded to read Service, which was devoutly performed, being assisted by
the Lords and the Bishops then present: Yet the clamor, rapping at
Church-doors, and throwing of stones in at the Church-windows by the rabble
without was so great, that the Magistrates were constrained to go out and use
their endeavors for to appease the multitude. After a little pause and
cessation, the Bishop of Edinburgh Preached; and after Sermon done, in his
going from Church, was so environed with a multitude of the meaner sort of
people cursing and crowding him, that he was near being trod to death, if he
had not recovered the stayrs of his Lodging, where he was again assaulted, and
was like to have been pulled backwards, if the Earl of Weems from his next
Lodging, seeing the Bishops life in danger, had not sent his servants to rescue
him; who got the Bishop almost breathless into his Chamber. In other Churches
the Minister was forced to give over reading: And so that Morning passed.

Between the two Sermons, consultation was held how to suppress those
outrages; and 'was so ordered, that the Service was quietly read in St. Giles
and other Churches in the afternoon: But yet the rabble intermitted nothing of
their madness; The Rabble continued their madness.
for staying in the streets, at the coming home of the Earl of Roxborough, the
Lord Privy Seal, with the aforesaid Bishop in his Coach, they so fiercely
assaulted him with stones, that he had like to have suffered the death of the
Martyr St. Stephen; so that if his footmen had not kept the multitude off with
their drawn Swords, their lives had been very much endangered.

Thus the Reformation began there with such terrible profanations of the Lords
day, and of the Lords House; an ill omen, what in future would be the
conclusion; and this done by the same many-headed Monster, that in like manner
began the troubles in England; nor ever was the Union more perfect and
straight, then in such mischiefs.

To prevent and redress these ills, Proclamation against them.
the Privy Council set forth a Proclamation, thereby discharging all concourses
of people and tumultuous meetings in Edinburgh under pain of death; at which
time the Magistrates of the said City, before the Council Table, professed
their detestation thereof, and proffered their utmost power in the discovery of
the principals in that uproar; Magistrates profess a detestation, but soon
joined with them.
though they afterward shamefully failed in their promise, and appeared among
the chief of the Covenanters, even while they were glozing with the King and
the Archbishop of Canterbury in England, by letters full of duty and affection
to his Majesty, and his Churches service.

All businesses of note for a time seemed to be hushed and calmed, by reason of
the long Vacation, (which in that Kingdom begins always on Lammasday) and
the Harvest, which drew all sorts of people from Edinburgh, except the
Citizens, so that all was quiet till the ensuing October, and then the conflux
of all sorts soon enlivened the tumults again; the Ministers who undertook the
reading of the second Service Book, Ministers recant reading Service: Petition
against it, and thereby endanger insurrection: Proclamation to depart the City,
removing Term, and seizing a Libel.
publicly relenting their forwardness, and recanting, and reneging it, and to
that purpose presented a Petition, desiring it might not be imposed on them:
this being backed with such an Universal rendezvous of all sorts, gave the
Council the fear of an Insurrection; for prevention whereof, a Proclamation
again was published, which under pain or Rebellion commanded all persons,
except they should show cause of their further stay about their particular
affairs, to depart the City, and return to their Houses; Seconded also with
another, whereby his Majesty's Council, and Session (which is the Term) were
declared to be removed from Edinburgh to Dundee; and a third for seizing and
discovering of a certain seditious Book against the English Ceremonies, which
second book was ordered to be publicly burnt upon the seizure.

Another Insurrection.

Bishop of Galloway in danger.


These Proclamations were next day overtaken with another Insurrection: For on
the 19 of October, 1667. the Bishop of Galloway, and Sir William Elphinston
Lord chief Justice of that Kingdom, being appointed by the Lords of the Council
to examine witnesses in a Cause depending before them, passing through the
streets to the Council-House, were suddenly encountered and surrounded with an
enraged multitude; the Bishop hardly by the means of one of the parties in that
Suit getting safe to the Council, where, through the like irreverence to that
Tribunal, he could find no Sanctuary, being threatened instantly with death.
Upon report of this outrage, Traquair and Wigton came to his relief with no
less danger.
the Earls of Traquair and Wigton came with their followers to his relief,
where with much ado they got entrance, but found themselves in no better case
than the Bishop, the peoples rage being thereby the more increased.

The Lords and the Bishop being thus beset, sent privately to the Lord Provost
and Bailiffs of Edinburgh, They send to the Provost and Bailiffs of Edinburgh
for relief, who were as bad or worse used.
for relief; who sent them word that they themselves were in the same
condition, if not worse, if the Lords attempted not to appease the people, who
had forced them in their Council-House, for fear of their lives, to subscribe a
Paper then instantly presented them, which contained three particulars. First,
that they should join with them in opposition to the Service Book, and in
petitioning to the King. Secondly, that by their Authority they should restore
Mr. Ramsey, and Mr. Rolloch, two lately silenced Ministers. Thirdly, that they
should restore one Mr. Henderson a silenced Reader; which three persons were
notable Ringleaders of the faction; three most important grounds for so fearful
a Commotion.

A Conference, but in vain.
Thereupon the Lords resolved to go and confer with the Magistrates, and either
by their authority or persuasion to reduce the people to obedience and reason;
but all in vain: for at their return re infecta to the Council Table again,
they were set upon, the Earl of Traquair being trodden down, Traquair trodden
down.
losing his white Staff, the Ensign of his Office of Treasurer, with his Hat
and Cloak, and so with much ado got back again to the Council; who seeing the
impendent danger from the fury of the people, were forced to apply themselves
to some Noblemen who were of the faction, by whose influence upon and respects
from the people, they with the aforesaid Bishops were conveyed to their
respective dwellings; but the Provost was pursued with threats, railing and
danger, unto the yard of his own house.

This Mornings storm being blown over, another Proclamation was made against
further unlawful Assemblies, and meeting in the streets of that City, under the
most severe pains the Laws in those Cases had provided; Another Proclamation
against unlawful Assemblies: but not regarded.

The Rabble petition.


but so little regard was thereunto given, that the next day they demanded of
the Lords what they had demanded of their Magistrates; and to that purpose two
Petitions, as well from the Rabble, as also now from greater hands, the chief
Citizens, Gentry, and Nobility, were presently tendered to the Lord Chancellor
of that Kingdom, which imported the whole substance of the present Commotion;
the English Service Book still bearing the burden: Withal in this last
petition, making their greivances swell, adding their dislike of the book of
Canons, to their former distaste of the Service Book; so one demand ushered in
another, till they had nothing to ask, but what they resolved to take: the
parallel of our troubles. These petitions were afterward sent up to the King,
Their petition sent to the King, who by Proclamation resents the affronts of
his chief Ministers.
who by a Proclamation resented the injuries and affronts done his Royal
Authority, by those attemps upon his chief Ministers, and also declared his
firm intentions to maintain the Protestant Religion, commanding also all
persons to forbear further meetings and petitions of this nature, upon pain of
treason. But this Proclamation was encountered with a Protestation made by the
Earls of Hume and Lindsey, Hume and Lindsey justify the matter.
two great Covenanters, who avowed therein the whole action, with a resolution
added to adhere to them to the last, requiring also some of the Bishops to be
removed from his Majesty's Council, and such other more unreasonable
expostulations, which yet came short still of those that they made afterward,
their number and power still increasing their peremptory and haughty designs
upon the Government.

Soon after, this sedition began to arm it self, and assume another name; they
of the faction took the authority of the Kingdom to themselves; Four Tables.
erected four Tables, as they called them, of the four ranks of Noblemen,
Gentry, Burgesses and Ministers, out of all which was formed one general Table,
that was supreme. This Table, after some consultation and reports from the
other, resolved upon a Covenant to be taken throughout the Kingdom, A Covenant
resolved on.
which for substance was the same with that Solemn League, afterward taken in
England; only Bishops in express terms were not therein then abjured, but
implicitly no doubt included, and more plainly, their sitting in civil
Judicatories.

The King was most highly incensed against this Usurpation of his Royal
Authority, The King highly incensed thereat.
especially at the obtruding this Covenant, wherewith the greatest part of the
Nation were already infected, and others through compulsion and force scared
into a compliance with it, though with a great deal of stir and reluctance:
Wherefore to obviate the imminent danger it threatened, the King dispatched away
the Marquess of Hamilton as his Commissioner to that Kingdom, Hamilton sent
unto Scotland.
to apply some present remedy to the distemper; he being a person of great
honor and influence on that Nation.

Before his arrival, of which the Covenanters had timely notice, they made the
more have to engage the people against any accommodation: Nor did they with the
usual respect entertain the Commissioner; but after some few days stay, after
some overtures by him made on the Kings part toward them, They slight him,
and his demands of them, particularly their deserting and relinquishing their
Covenant, he received a slighting answer, that they would descend to no
particulars of their part, till a general Assembly should be called: But as for
the Covenant, they would sooner part with their lives, than abate a syllable of
it; and resolved never to hear more against it: and strengthen themselves.
And thereupon new guards were by them clapped upon Edinburgh Castle, the Watches
of the City multiplied, and the Ministers began to convert all their Sermons
into Libels, warning the people to take heed of Crafty Compositions, when they
were resolved against any.

These difficulties caused the Commissioner to repair to London, having first
received order to publish the Kings Declaration against the supposed Popery;
and removed also the Term, for the further satisfying of the City of Edinburgh,
back thither again; Term returned to Edinburgh.
which indeed was for a while magnified by the Citizens as an Act of favor,
but presently was undervalued as a trick to cajole them; so instructed by those
who grudged the King any esteem or love in the minds of his people.

By Declaration, Service and Canons dispensed with.
The Kings Declaration, bearing Date June 20. 1638. was soon after published;
which contained his dispensation of the Service Book and Canons, with a promise
of calling a general Assembly and Parliament with all convenient Expedition;
requiring his subjects to contain themselves in their duty, and not further to
hearken to any Rebellious suggestions.

The Covenanters protest against it.
As soon as the Herald had proclaimed it, the Covenanters were ready. upon a
Scaffold there erected, with a Protestation against it; (having before possessed
the People, that if this Declaration were hearkened unto, it would bring
undoubted ruin to their Religion, Laws and Liberties) which they publicly
read, importing some new additions to their former demands, and cavils at the
uncertainty of the Kings intentions in the matters declared.

Hamilton having given the King an account of affairs, is sent again^ and
enters a Treaty.
The Marquess Hamilton being arrived at London, gave the King an account of the
whole business; and according to his new instructions, returned back again by
their appointed time, the 15 th of August, 1638. and entered presently into a
Treaty with them about the manner of calling the General Assembly; which they
would not hear of, but that a General Assembly should be immediately called;
and of the due Elections thereto, when they were met, themselves should be the
judge: For otherwise there would of necessity be some prelimitations, which the
freedom thereof might not suffer.

Upon this Emergency all things growing worse and worse, the Marquess was
forced upon another journey to consult the King (the Covenanters concluding, He
returns to England, has power given him to satisfy the Scots if possible.
that if he returned not before the 21 of September, they would of themselves
Indict this Convention) who concluded of giving that Kingdom the utmost
satisfaction; and with a Commission to summon this Assembly returned: But the
day after, the Covenanters, contrary to promise, made an Election in one of the
Presbyteries Adjacent, of themselves; whereas throughout the Kingdom, according
to the directions of the Tables, Lay Elders and Ministers were chosen together;
a thing never seen before in that Kingdom.

The Assembly at Glasgow.
This Assembly, the Source of those calamities which afterward embroiled and
enslaved that Nation, was held at the City and University of Glasgow, in
November 1638. in which they so carried and packt the Elections, that there was
scarce one Dissenter from those Resolutions they had professed in their Covenant.
The Bishops were Totally excluded from sitting or voting therein, Bishops
excluded: They protest against it.
but were cited to compeer as offenders, and answer their charge. Against these
proceedings, and the illegality of the constitution of this Assembly, they
first protested, and tendered their reasons, but they would not be admitted for
such; so that the Lord Commissioner seeing no hope of Justice, Law, or Reason,
or Loyalty taking place there, at seven days end dissolved them by a
Proclamation; They continue fitting, notwithstanding a Proclamation to dissolve
them.
which they took no further notice of, then only by opposing another
Protestation, wherein they declared, that the Assembly ought not to be, nor was
as dissolved, until such time as those ends so often before expressed were
fully attained; and so proceeded in their Session.

Strange and desperate was the Pride of this Assembly, far beyond the Popes
infallible Councils, taking upon them to be the Supreme Judicatory on earth,
above all Laws and Parliaments, and King himself, as Christ's Council; and that
if the Judges and other Ministers of State should not obey their Commandment,
they might proceed to sentence of Excommunication against them: Which was
effectually put in practice afterward against the Bishops, and their
adherents, before they armed themselves otherwise against their Sovereign.

Yet notwithstanding, they did pretend that the King, should he be satisfied of
the equity and lenity of their proceedings, would no doubt comply with them in
the matters they Petitioned for; which more exasperated his Majesty than all
the Violations and Usurpations of his Authority.

Arguile owns the Covenanters.
The Earl of Arguile, who had hitherto kept fair with the King, and was one of
his Privy Council there, now owned the Covenanters, and professed his adherence
to their cause. It is believed he was one of the first that stirred in this
unfortunate business, and that therefore the better to satisfy him, the King
after the first Pacification, made him a Marquess. More certain it is, he was
the last that suffered in it, as in the conclusion of this Chronicle will
appear.

I have insisted the longer on this story, because the general Commotions that
followed it, ran almost the same parallel in their respective commencements in
the three Kingdoms; and to show, that neither prudence nor arms, both which
were seasonably applied, could stop or prevent those judgments of Confusion
and Ruin, which soon after ensued this Tragical Prologue in a miserable
catastrophe.

For the Scots presently began to arm, The Scots arm.
having first sent to the French King* craving his aid and assistance; which
was readily proffered them by Cardinal Richlieu his chief Minister of State,
who was supposed to have fomented the quarrel from the very beginning, to quit
scores with the King of England for siding with the Rochellers in the beginning
of his Reign.

But before any blood was drawn, came over the Queen Mother, Queen Mother
arrives.
whom the generality of the people took for a Prognostic or ill Omen of a War,
or some Rupture approaching. Many scandals were raised against the King for her
admission hither; but all things were gone too far beyond the contribution of
her advice, to make her guilty of our troubles: However, she seemed the Comet
that did portend and foretell them, the like Commotions having happened for some
years past in the places of her residence.

The Scots toward the end of the year 1638, The Scots have a competent Army.
had gotten together a competent Army, raised by the Authority and Ordinance of
the aforesaid Assembly, for the pretended defense of the Kingdom, its Religion
and Laws. Nor did the King neglect the affairs of that Kingdom, but was arming
here in England, with all the speed his Purse would afford; which was then in a
low ebb: Yet by the Loans of the Nobility, Gentry and Clergy, he had raised a
gallant Army, The King raists an Army.
with which he marched toward the borders.

Over this Army the Earl of Arundel was made General, Arundel General-Hamilton
commands the Fleet.
the Earl of Essex Lieutenant General of the Foot, and the Earl of Holland
Lieutenant General of the horse. A Fleet also was rigged and well manned, and
set to Sea under the command of the aforesaid Marquess Hamilton, which soon
after came to an Anchor in the Frith near Edinburgh. A Declaration by the King.
The King being thus in readiness, Emitted another Declaration, wherein he
taxed the Scots with several rebellious Libels, for their Protestations against
his commands, for usurping his Authority, and for refusing the Oath of
Allegiance and Supremacy upon account of their having taken the Covenant;
reiterates his resolutions of maintaining Episcopacy in that Kingdom, and lays
the blood (if any were spilt in that quarrel) upon themselves as Rebels, whom
he ought not longer to suffer to proceed in those undutiful and destructive
courses, but hoped to reduce to their former and due Obedience. The Assembly
answers.
To which the 22 of March the said Assembly reply by an Ordinance, wherein,
after expostulating the Kings Declaration, they curse themselves if they intend
any harm to England; concluding their War to be merely defensive, and grounded
upon the natural and Civil Law.

Anno Dom. 1639.
THe King set forward with his Army, and in April came to York, and in May to
Barwick, where both Armies came in view one of another. When the King was at
York, the Earls of Roxborough and Traquair, The Earls of Roxborough and
Traquair Commissioners from the Covenanters.
two formerly of his Council, and Officers of State, came to him as
Commissioners from the Covenanters, under pretense of Treating with the King;
who wanting their due Commission, and being suspected to have been sent on an
errand purposely to tamper with the English Lords; and to persuade them of the
honest intentions of the Scotch Nation, were therefore for a while committed,
Committed and released.
but soon after set at liberty; having in part effected their errand, and
insinuated a good opinion of their proceedings, withal begot an intelligence
and correspondence with some of the Peers, who before were well inclined to
their cause. This appeared soon after in the English Councils of War, where the
first Gallantry and Resolutions of the Principal Commanders were seen to flag
and abate, and dissolve into more soft and pliable dispositions to peace.

The English Army being far superior in Arms, men, and bravery, was encamped
near Barwick, and the Scots at Dunslo; when by mediation of the persons
aforesaid, A Treaty began, and soon ended.
a Treaty was begun (which ended presently in a short-lived Peace,) upon
several Articles, which being not performed on the Scots part, are needless
here to repeat. In the mean time, the Parliament of Scotland, according to the
Kings Proclamation when he also summoned their Assembly, met on the appointed
15th of May, and was prorogued till the last of August; The Parliament of
Scotland proregued.
at which time they sat four days, and therein formed four demands for the
King. The Assembly also sat a little before, and abolisht Episcopacie, the
Liturgy, and the Book of Canons, The Assembly abolish Episc^pacie.
with the High Commission, etc.

These things coming to the Kings knowledge, together with a Pamphlet
prevaricating the conditions of the late Treaty, their Letters to the King of
France for aid, their new Provisions for Arms, their levying of Taxes of ten
marks per Centum, and continuing their Officers and Fortifications, induced him
by his new Commissioner the Earl of Traquair to command the Adjournment of the
Parliament until the second of June next ensuing, Their Parlialiament adjourned.
upon pain of Treason. Against which Command the Covenanters declare, and send
a Remonstrance to the King by the Earl of Dumfermling and the Lord Loudon, They
send the Earl of Dumfermling and Lord Loudon with a Remonstrance.
the Chancellor of that Kingdom afterward; who coming without Warrant from
the Kings Commissioner Traquair, were sent back again. Whereupon Traquair, a
person suspected to have abused his trust, comes himself, and advising with
Hamilton, they both propound to the Council, the affairs of Scotland being so
desperate, whether it were not more expedient the King should go himself in
person into Scotland, than to reduce them by Arms: which after many politic
considerations, was Resolved in the Affirmative, That nothing could reclaim
them to their duty, but force of Arms. This again brought the Earl of
Dumfermling and the Lord Loudon to London, with two other Commissioners; where
before the King again, they insisted upon the justification of their innocence,
and withal desired that the King would ratify and confirm their proceedings,
and that their Parliament might proceed to determine of all Articles or Bills
brought to them, to the establishing of Religion and Peace: But instead of an
Answer to their requests, the King charged them with the aforementioned Libel,
and their Letters and Intelligence held with the French King, which then came
to English light, and were known by the Characters to be the writing of the
Lord Loudon, Loudon committed, and released.
who was thereupon committed for a short time, but released upon the mediation
of the Marquess Hamilton. After his release, he and Dumfermling presented their
Assemblies and Parliaments Remonstrance to the King; and the Commissioner
returned also, and gave a full account of the state of that Kingdom. All three
of them being admitted unto the Council together, the matter was there managed
with so much anger and sharpness, that the King and the Scots were more
exasperated against one another than before.

The P. Elector Palatine came into England.
The Prince Elector Palatine, the Kings Nephew by the Queen of Bohemia, about
this time came into England, having utterly lost his interest in the
Palatinate, by the late defeat given him there, by Count Hatsfield the
Emperors General, where Prince Rupert, so famous afterward in our Wars, and
the Lord Craven, were taken: he staid not long here, but departed again, and
was taken at Lions by the French, Departed, and taken by the French.

Released; and returning unto England, was allowed 8000 l. per annum.


having past so far undiscovered: he was soon after released, and returned into
England, where by the Parliament he had 8000 l. a year assigned him out of his
Uncles the Kings Revenue; till after His Murder, he departed home upon the
Articles of Munster-Treaty, by which he was restored to his Dignities and
Sovereignty, being conveyed hence in 1649. in a man of War to the Brill in
Holland.

This year was signalized also by a famous Sea Fight between the Flemings and
the Spaniards in the Downs. A Sea Fight between the Flemings and the Spaniards.
Don Antonio Ocquendo was Admiral of the Spanish Fleet, which consisted of
seventy Sail of great Ships and Gallions, on which were put aboard, as the
report went, twenty five thousand men designed for the service of the Spaniard
against the Dutch of the one side, and the French on the other, and were
ordered to be landed at Dunkirk with money for the paying of his Armies then
afoot. On the 17th of September, they were met by the Vice Admiral of the
Holland-Fleet, The Hollanders worsted.
who engaging them in the Chanel, was worsted; but getting to windward, kept
near them, continuing firing to give Van Trump, then before Dunkirk, notice of
their approach. Betwixt Dover and Calice the two Dutch Fleets join, and attaque
the Spaniard (the English Fleet under the Command of Sir John Pennington
looking on the while) who being sore bruised, But in conclusion become Victors.
was forced to the English Coast, where the Spanish Ambassador desired they
might be protected for two Tides by the Kings Ships; but that could not be
allowed, for the Kings Neutrality between both. Whereupon, in the night, some
part, with the most of the Treasure, and fourteen Ships, got safe to Dunkirk;
the rest, Van Trump being recruited with an hundred Ships in an instant almost
of time, set upon and dispersed, sinking and taking, and stranding very many,
so that few escaped home. This was the second luckless Armado of the Spaniard,
on which the malcontents of this and the Kingdom of Scotland, grounded many
false and scandalous surmises against the King.

To return again to Scotland, An ill Omen.
where I may not omit one fatal passage. On the 19th day of November, being the
Anniversary of his Majesty's Birth, part of the Walls of the strong Castle of
Edinburgh fell down; which was likewise interpreted for an ill Omen: such
another, though more unhappily, and nearly significant, Lord Estrich, Col.
Ruthen and others sent to repair Edinburgh- Castle, they were resisted by the
Covenanters.
was that of the fall of the head of his staff at his Trial, before the
pretended High Court of Justice. For the repairing of these ruins, the King
sent the Lord Estrich, Col. Ruthen and others, who were resisted by the
Covenanters, as men not qualified for the service.

No hopes for these and other reasons being conceivable of treating, and
persuading the Scots to obedience, a Resolution was taken vigorously to
prosecute the War commenced the year before; to which purpose it was debated at
a Cabinet-Council, where none were present but the Archbishop of Canterbury,
the Earl of Strafford, and Hamilton; and there agreed that a Parliament must be
called in England and Ireland; and that in the mean time, for the speedy
raising of money, the Nobility, Gentry, and Clergy should subscribe what sums
of money they would advance to this service for the present occasion, till the
King could be otherwise helped by Subsidies. The Nobility, Gentry, and Clergy
assist the King with money for the carrying on of the War.
To this purpose the Earl of Strafford first subscribed twenty thousand pounds,
the like did the Duke of Richmond, and the Nobility according to the several
values of their Estates. The Clergy granted four shillings in the pound in
their Convocation, which presently followed, to be paid for six years together;
only the City of London were refractory, and could not be induced to lend one
farthing to the carrying on of that War.

By these Loans (however) of the Kings Loyally affected Subjects, he was again
in a formidable posture; and the Earl of Strafford, besides his own personal
disbursments, Supplies from Ireland.
had procured four Subsidies, to maintain ten thousand foot and fifteen hundred
Horse, from the Parliament of Ireland he had newly called; for which he was
honorably brought into the House of Peers in the Parliament of England;
whither by his Majesty's call from his Lieutenantship of Ireland he was then
arrived, to assist the King with his prudent Counsels.

Sir Thomas Coventry, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, Lord Keeper Coventry dies.
dies the tenth of January, after he had for fifteen years behaved himself in
that place like a wise and honest man. Sir John Finch, Succeeded by Sir John
Finch.
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, succeeds him; of whom more anon.

Anno. Dom. 1640.
A Parliament summoned.
THe 13th of April, this year, being the 16th of the Kings Reign, a Parliament
was summoned at Westminster; at the opening whereof, the King acquainted them
with the affronts and indignities he had received from his Scotch Subjects,
They favor the Scots.
whom he spared not to call Rebels; which was somewhat resented by the Members
of the House of Commons, who out of dislike of Episcopacie here, did not much
favor that War against them, which by a nickname was then called Bellum
Episcopale.

Therefore upon the Kings desires to them for a supply of money, by which he
might be enabled to reduce the Scots, they presently started their old
grievances; which caused a debate, whether the King or the Subjects should be
relieved first; for so they made the Scotch War the Kings personal and distinct
business.

Are backward in assisting the King with money.
This alteration, and the apparent unwillingness of the House of Commons to
advance any money except their previous desires ( viz. of clearing the
properties of the Subject, and the establishing of the true Religion, and
Privileges of Parliament) were confirmed and granted by the King, reduced his
Majesty to a present necessity and dilemma, either of complying with the Scots,
or to take money as he could raise it, by his own credit and Authority, to
subdue them: for there was no hopes in the Parliaments delays. And this was the
true Reason of the dissolving that Parliament, Are dissolved.
which happened May the 5th, to the great grief of all good people, who were
sensible of the Kings difficulties, and the approaching evils.

The Convocation of the Clergy sat at the same time, and were continued beyond
the Parliaments dissolution, though contrary to practice and custom; where, The
Convocation of the Clergy sit, and assist the King with money.
as before is said, they contributed and confirmed the Grant of the fifth part
of their Ecclesiastical Livings for six years, toward the carrying on of the
War against the Scots. I may not omit the concession of the King in this affair
to the Parliament, wherein he offered upon the granting of him some Subsidies,
to remit and acquit his claim of Ship-mony, and other advantages of his
Prerogative.

They make new Canons in opposition to Popery and the the Scotch Covenant.
At this Convocation some new Canons were made, with Salvoes and dispensations
for some which had been strictly heretofore enjoined, but especially and mainly
for Episcopacie; and the Doctrine of the Church of England in opposition to
Popery, was hereby established by the Oath of etc. As likewise in opposition to
the Scotch Covenant. This Convocation ended May 29. none dissenting but Dr.
Goodman Bishop of Gloucester, Bishop Goodman dissents,
who since died a Roman Catholic, and owned that faith. As a testimony of the
sincerity of the Archbishop of Canterbury in the Protestant Religion, I shall
here insert therefore a passage relating to these Canons: And is admonished by
A. B. Laud.
Upon the Bishop of Glocester's refusal thereof, the Archbishop would have
proceeded to the Censures of the Church immediately, and therefore gave him,
according to the Canons, three admonitions one upon the neck of another, that
he should forthwith subscribe: and if he had not been whispered, that so
weighty a matter required deliberation and distance of time, he would there
have suspended him from his Dignities and Office.

This Noble Prelate, for these and the like vigorous actings both in Church and
State, fell into the obloquy of the male contents, the Chief of whom were the
Nonconformists, then called Puritans, who abounded in London; the most whereof,
upon a distaste taken from the censure of Mr. Pryn, Dr. Bastwick, and Mr.
Burton, did mightily malign him; so that on the ninth of May, a Paper was
posted upon the Exchange, Tot said A. B. Libelled, and his house assaulted.
animating Apprentices to rise and sack his house at Lambeth next Monday; which
they were the more forward to do, because it was rumoured, that he was the
first instigator of the King to dissolve the last Parliament: But he had
intelligence of their designs, and provided to receive them. According to
their appointed time, in the dead of the night they came, to the number of five
hundred, and beset his house, and endeavored to enter; but were quickly beaten
off, and glad to retreat, having in some measure vented their anger against him
in railing and scandalous language (such as the streets were full of before in
scattered Libels) and breaking his glass-windows. The day following, Some of
the faction imprisoned, and rescued. Bensted a Seaman hanged.


many of them upon enquiry were apprehended and imprisoned, but three days
after forcibly rescued from thence by their Companions, who broke open the
Prison-doors; for which one Bensted a Seaman was apprehended, and hanged
afterward in St. Georges-fields, and his head and quarters set upon the
several Gates of the City.

The Scotch Parliament now sat again, and were more violent in their
proceedings than before: The Scotch Army advance toward England. Henry Duke of
Gloucester b^^n.

The Earl of Northumberland General of the Kings Army.

Earl of Strafford Lieut. General.

The King comes to Northallerton.


for having notice of the discontents in England, they presently advanced with
their Army thitherwards, about the same time that the Queen was delivered of a
Son, Henry Duke of Gloucester (of whose decease we shall speak in its place.)
The King, to be in a readiness to receive them, had also appointed an Army, of
which he made the Earl of Northumberland General, and the Earl of Strafford
Lieutenant General; but the Earl of Northumberland falling sick, he himself
sent away part of the Army under the Command of the Lord Conway, and advanced
out of London with the remainder, and came in person to Northallerton. During
his March, the Lord Conway had but ill success. He had drawn about 1200 Horse
and 3000 Foot to secure the Passes upon Tine near Newborn; So far was the
Scotch Army advanced under the Command of General Lesly, (Earl of Leven, an old
Soldier in the Swedish Wars) better armed, intelligenced, and provided than
the last year: on the 27th of August, Lesly desired leave of my Lord Conway for
his whole Army to pass to the King with their Petition; which he, as before,
avowed to be the hones^est, loyallest, and innocent thing in the World;
Newborn- sight, Aug. 29. Genesis Lesley, Earl of Leven engages with the Lord
Conway, and ^^^eats him.
but was refused and stopped. Thereupon three hundred Scotch Horse attempted to
cross the River, and were therein repelled by the shot of the English
Musketeers, who were placed under the shelter of a Breast-work. This was no
sooner done, but the Scots with nine pieces of Ordinance, which they had placed
on the side of the River, and blinded them with bushes, played upon those
breast-works; which so affrighted the English Infantry, being raw Soldiers,
and not used to the noise and execution of Canon, that they presently forsook
their Posts, cast down their Arms and fled. Instantly the Scotch Horse with
their General himself advanced, but were handsomely welcomed by
Commissary-General Wilmot, who with the Cavalry, which consisted mostly of
Gentlemen, very stoutly stood to it, till they were overborn by number, and
galled with great Bullets, and so forced into a disorderly retreat. Here were
slain two or three Gentlemen of Quality, among which was Cornet Porter, Son to
Endymeon Porter of the Bedchamber, with some fourscore and odd of common
Soldiers.

The Lord Conway, Sir Jacob Ashley deserts Newcastle; that and Durham render
themselves to Genesis Lesley.
after this defeat, carried himself the first news of it to the King, that it
might not be told by others to his prejudice; and Sir Jacob Ashley Governor of
Newcastle, knowing the place not tenable, deserted it, sinking the Ordnance in
the River; so that upon Lesleys approach, both that Town and Durham rendered
themselves into his hands.

These losses accelerated the Earl of Strafford into those parts, who having
the supreme Command of the Army therefore conferred upon him, and knowing his
Honor and Reputation to be embarked in this business, resolved to put it to
the decision of the Sword, which he was as well able to manage as his Pen:
Challenges the Lord Conway for the disaster at Newborn, The Earl of Stafford
complains of the Lord Conway.
before the King, as if his ill conduct had occasioned it; who as stoutly
denied it, laying the fault, as indeed it ought, upon the rawness of his
Soldiers.

In Scotland the Earl of Haddington, who commanded as Major General the Forces
raised, and to be raised in Lothian, having recovered from the Soldiers of
Berwick Garrison the pieces of Ordnance which Lesley had left behind him at
Dunslo, The Earl of Haddington the Scots M. G. with 20 Knights and Gentlemen
slain at Dunglass.
and brought them to Dunglass, was the next day slain, with twenty more Knights
and Gentlemen, in the midst of his Court, by the stones that flew from the
Vault near adjoining, which was then blown up with the Magazine that lay in it.

Though the Earl of Strafford was so eagerly and intensly bent on fighting with
the Scots, yet with the King (who was loath to run that hazard, not knowing how
to recruit himself, if he were worsted, unless he should condescend as much or
more to his English Subjects in Parliament) those Martial resolutions soon
abated, to the regret of that Noble Earl, whose safety as well as glory
consisted in driving the Scots out of this Kingdom. So that though the King had
declared them to be Rebels and Traitors by Proclamation, The Scots proclaimed
Traitors, and the Kings Royal Standard set up at York. The Scots petition the
King, and are answered by the Earl of Lanerick.
and commanded that public Prayers should be put up against them in all
Churches, and had set up his Royal Standard at York; yet now he was contented
to treat with them, and to that end received from them a Petition stuffed with
their grievances; to which he returned answer, by his Secretary of Scotland,
the Earl of Lanerick, That he expected their particular demands; which were
tendered to him within three days after, and imported his Majesty's calling a
Parliament in England, without which there could be no satisfying redress for
them. They had likewise published sometime before their marching into England,
a Declaration entitled, The intentions of the Army; which signified that they
would not lay down their Arms, till the reformed Religion were settled in both
Nations upon sure grounds, and the causers and abetters of their present
grievances and troubles were brought to public Justice, and that in
Parliament.

In order to the speedy accommodation therefore of this quarrel, Twelve of the
Nobility who were there with the King, by name, Hertford, Essex, Bedford,
Warwick, Mulgrave, Bristol, Bullingbrook, Say, Mandevil, Howard, Paget, and
Brook, drew up a Petition to the King, and had it delivered: after which,
others of the same contents were brought from London and other places of the
Kingdom, which unanimously agreed in this, That nothing could satisfy the
people, nor relieve their grievances and pressures, but a Parliament.

The Lords of England summoned to appear at York. They agree to call a
Parliament.
This the King willingly assented to, and in part condescended to other of the
Scots demands; and for the present summoned the Lords of England to appear at
York, where accordingly they met; and on the first day of their sitting in
Council, it was agreed that a Parliament should be called, to convene the third
of November next. And in reference to the Scotch business, and the poor
oppressed Northern Counties, where both the Armies that Summer had quartered,
(the Bishopric of Durham being then taxed by the Scots at three hundred and
fifty pound, the Country of Northumberland at three hundred pound a day) it was
also resolved that a Treaty should be had; and thereupon sixteen English Lords,
whereof eight were Earls, the other Barons, should meet with so many of the
Scotch Nobility; and the place was assigned at York; which was refused, as not
safe enough for the Scotch Commissioners, by reason of the presence of the Lord
Deputy Strafford, who had proclaimed them Traitors in Ireland, and against whom
they had matters of high Complaint: A Treaty of peace at Rippon.
And so it was resolved it should begin at Rippon.

The English insist on a Cessation: The Scots refuse, and propound 4
Praeliminaries.
The first thing the English insisted on, was a present Cessation; but the Scots
objected against that, and said that other things were more expedient to be
first considered: For as they would obey the Kings command in advancing no
further, so would they not go back again till they had accomplished the business
they came for; and therefore propounded four Praeliminaries to be resolved on,
which were concluded on and agreed to.

The Earl of Strafford advises the King to fight them,
At the first of these, That the Scotch Army should be paid and maintained out
of the English purse, the Earl of Strafford was highly incensed and enraged,
being so dishonorable a thing to the Nation; and therefore would have
persuaded the King to give him leave to fight them, no way doubting but that he
should be able to drive them presently into Scotland again, though accounted
then far superior in Discipline and Soldiery to the English Army.

But the affair of the Treaty was so far advanced, for the reasons aforesaid,
that there was no fair way of receding, if the King had been powerful enough to
have combated them, But in conclusion,
as some made no scruple; so that on the 16 th of October, the English
Commanders, some through fear, others out of compliance with the major part,
agreed to the ensuing Articles, which for an envious remark I have transcribed.

First, These Articles were agreed on.
That there be a Cessation of Arms both by Sea and Land from this present.

Secondly, That all Acts of Hostility do thenceforth cease.

Thirdly, That both parties shall peaceably return during the Treaty, whatever
they possess at the time of the Cessation.

Fourthly, That all such persons who lived in any of his Majesty's Forts beyond
the River of Tweed, shall not exempt their Lands which lie within the Counties
of Northumberland, and the Bishopric, from such Contributions as shall be laid
upon them for the payment of eight hundred pound per diem.

Fifthly, That none of the Kings Forces upon the other side of. Tweed, shall
give any impediment to such contributions as are already allowed for the
competency of the Scotch Army, and shall fetch no victuals nor forage out of
their bounds, except that which the inhabitants and owners thereof shall bring
voluntarily to them; and that any restraints or detention of Victual, Cattle or
Forage, which shall be made by the Scots within those bounds for their
maintenance, shall be no breach.

Sixthly, That no recruit shall be brought into either Armies, from the time of
the Cessation, and during the Treaty.

Seventhly, That the contribution of eight hundred and fifty pounds per diem
shall be only raised out of the Counties of Northumberland, Westmerland, and
the Bishopric, and the Town of Newcastle; and that the not payment thereof
shall be no breach of the Treaty, but the Counties and Towns shall be left to
the Scots power to raise the same, but not to exceed the sum agreed upon,
unless it be for charges of driving, to be set by a Prizer of the forage.

Eighthly, That the River Tweed shall be the bounds of both Armies, (excepting
always the Town and Castle of Storkton, and the Village of Egyshiff;) and the
Counties of Northumberland and the Bishopric, be the limits within which the
Scottish Army is to reside, having liberty from them to send such Convoys as
shall be necessary only for the gathering up of the Contribution which shall
be unpaid by the Counties of Northumberland and Cumberland.

Ninth and Tenth Articles of private injuries.

Eleventhly, No new Fortifications to be made during the Treaty against either
Party.

Twelfthly, That the Subjects of both Kingdoms may in their trade of Commerce
freely pass to and fro without any stay at all* but it is particularly
provided, that no member of either Army pass without a formal Pass under the
hands of the General, or of him that commands in chief.

This was the sum of that unlucky Cessation, which was afterward at London
concluded in a Treaty soon after the sitting of the Parliament, who in February
next paid the Scots off, giving them the style of their dear brethren: which
much pleased them, but the money which accrewed by an arrear of 124000 l. was a
great deal more acceptable. And thus with their pay and dismission out of this
Kingdom, I dismiss them for this time from any further Narrative, and look home
to our own affairs in England.

The Parliament sat down on the third of November, The Parliament set, they
question several Bishops and Judges, and vote down Monopolies.
and immediately fell to questioning several chief Ministers of State, Bishops
and Judges; pretending thereby both to satisfy this Nation and the Scots:
Monopolies also were voted down, and much more good was promised and expected
from the Parliament.

The principal of those Grandees that were accused, was the Earl of Strafford,
against whom Mr. Pym is sent from the Commons to the Lords, with an Impeachment
of High Treason; Mr. pym sent from the Commons to the Lords with an Impeachment
of high treason against the Earl of* Strafford, he is committed and Sir George
Ratcliff sent for out of Ireland.

Dr. Williams Bishop of Lincoln released, Mr. Pryn, Dr. Bastwick and Mr. Burton
received by the Londoners in pomp.

Sir John Finch Lord Keeper, and Francis Windebanck Secretary of State charged
with high treason, they with^rew.

John James a Romish Catholic stabs Justice. Howard in Westminster Hall


whereupon he was sequestered from sitting as a Peer, and his Privado Sir George
Ratcliff was sent for out of Ireland, by a Sergeant at Arms. Soon after, the
aforesaid Earl was committed to the Usher of the Black Rod, and so to the
Tower, in order to his ensuing Trial; yet he obtained the assignation of
Council, and a Solicitor for the better managing his defense.

The Bishop of Lincoln contrariwise was released out of the Tower; and Mr.
Pryn, Dr. Bastwick, and Mr. Burton returned from their kind of banishment in
great pomp and bravery, (attended by many hundreds on Horseback, with boughs in
their hands, to London) for the Tide was turned, and ran strong the other way.

In the interim, the Lord Keeper Finch, and Sir Francis Windebank Secretary of
State, both charged with no less than High Treason, wisely withdrew themselves
into Foreign parts, and weathered the storm that would have sunk them.

One John James, the Son of Sir Henry James of Feversham in Kent, and of the
Romish Religion, audaciously adventured to stab Mr. Howard a Justice of Peace,
in Westminster Hall; the said Mr. Howard being about to deliver to the
Committee for Religion a Catalogue of such Recusants as were within his liberty.

The House of Commons now Voted the Assesment of Ship-mony (about which there
had been so much ado, and so many contests) together with the Opinions of the
Judges, and the Writs for it, and the judgment of the Exchequer against Mr.
Hambden, to be all illegal: and the Arguments of the two Justices, Crook and
Hutton, showing the illegality thereof, to be Printed; and also ordered a
Charge of High Treason to be drawn up against eight others of the Judges. Which
business of Ship Money being made so accessory to our ensuing Troubles, I have
thought fit to insert these Records concerning the same.

The Case, as it was stated by the King to the Judges: CHARLES REX,

The Case of Shipmoney stated.
WHen the good and safety of the Kingdom in general is concerned, and the whole
Kingdom in danger, Whether may not the King by Writ under the Great Seal of
England, command all the Subjects in this Kingdom at their charge to provide
and furnish such number of Ships, with Men, Victual, and Munition, and for such
a time as he shall think sit, for the defense and safeguard of the Kingdom from
such danger and peril, and by Law compel the doing thereof, in case of refusal
and refractoriness? And whether in such cases the King is not sole Judge both
of the danger, and when and how the same is to be prevented and avoided?




Their Opinions.

The Judges opinions thereupon.
MAy it please your most excellent Majesty, we have according to your Majesty's
command severally and every man by himself, and all of us together, taken into
serious consideration the Case and Questions, signed by your Majesty, and
enclosed in your Letter; And we are of opinion, that when the good and safety
of the Kingdom in general is concerned, and the whole Kingdom in danger, your
Majesty may by Writ under the great Seal of England command all the Subjects of
this your Kingdom at their charge to provide and furnish such a number of
Ships, with men, victual, and munition, and for such time as your Majesty shall
think fit, for the defense and safeguard from such a danger and peril, and that
by law your Majesty may compel the doing thereof in case of refusal or
refractoriness. And we are also of opinion, that in such case your Majesty is
sole Judge both of the danger, and when and how the same is to be prevented and
avoided.

This was signed by all the Judges but Justice Hutton and Justice Crook, whose
Arguments were against it for Mr. Hambden, who was sued for not paying the
Twenty Shillings Taxed upon him for Shipmoney.
DEcember 27th, 1640.
Resolved by the Commons, Shipmoney v^t^d illegal.
that the Charge imposed upon the subjects for the providing and furnishing of
Ships, and the A^^esments for that purpose, commonly called Shipmoney, are
against the Laws of the Realm, the Subjects right of property, and contrary to
former resolutions in Parliament, and to the Petition of Right.

Resolved, That the Extrajudicial opinions of the Judges published in the
Star Chamber, and enrolled in the Courts of Westminster, are in whole and in
every part of them against the Laws of the Realm, the Liberty of the Subject
etc.

This was also so resolved by the Lords, and by the Parliament ordered, That a
Vacat be brought into the Parliament House of all those Records concerning
Ship Money. Which was accordingly done, February 27. the same Year, the 16 of
the King.


Die Veneris 26 die Februarii, 1640.
UPon the report of the right honorable the Lords Committees appointed to
consider of the way of vacating of the Judgment in the Exchequer concerning
Shipmoney; It was ordered by the Lords spiritual and temporal in the High Court
of Parliament assembled, that the Lord Keeper, or the Master of the Rolls, the
two Lord chief Justices, and the Lord chief Baron, and likewise the chief Clerk
of the Star Chamber, shall bring into the Upper House of Parliament the Record
in the Exchequer of the Judgment in Mr. Hambdens case concerning Shipmoney, The
Judgment of the Excheq^^r against Mr. Hambden vacated.
and also the several Rolls in each several Court of the King's Bench,
Common Pleas, Exchequer, Star Chamber, and Chancery, wherein the Judges
extrajudicial Opinions in the Cases made touching Shipmoney be entered* and that
a Vacat shall be made in the Upper House of Parliament of the said several
Records. And likewise the Judgment of Parliament touching the illegality of the
said Judgments in the Exchequer, and the proceedings thereupon, and touching
the illegality of the extrajudicial Opinions of the Judges in the said several
Courts concerning Shipmoney, be annexed and apostiled unto the same: And that a
Copy of the Judgment of Parliament concerning the illegality of the said
Judgment in the Exchequer, and the said extrajudicial Opinions of the said
Judges concerning Shipmoney, be delivered to the several Judges of the Assize:
And that they be required to publish the same at the Assizes in each several
County within their Circuits, and to take care that the same be Entered and
Enrolled by the several Clerks of Assizes. And if any entry be made by any
Custos Rotulorum, or Clerk of Assize, of the said Judgment in the Exchequer, or
of the said Extrajudicial Opinions of the Judges, That several Vacats be made
thereof per judicium in Paliamento, by judgment in Parliament. And that an Act
of Parliament be prepared against the said Judgment and extrajudicial Opinions
in the proceedings touching Shipmoney.

Vacatur istud Recordum and Judicium inde habitum per considerationem and
judicium Dominor. spiritual. and temporal. in Parliam. and irrotulamentum eorum
Cancellatur.

The two Justices Arguments also against it were likewise Printed and published.


They likewise ordered a Committee to draw up a Charge against the Archbishop
of Canterbury; Mr. Hollis delivers a Charge against the A.B. Cant. the Scots do
the like: he is voted guilty of high treason, and committed.
which was done, and delivered to the Lords by Mr. Hollis; which was seconded
with another from the Scots Commissioners: upon which he was committed to the
black Rod, and ten weeks after voted guilty of High treason, and sent to the
Tower.

The Parliament having thus removed these men, and growing every day more and
more upon the affections of the people, they began to hammer upon the Bill for
Triennial Paliaments, The King signs the Bill for Triennial Parliaments.
which soon after passed both Houses; and to the universal content of the
Kingdom, was signed by his Majesty; for which the Parliament, by the Lord
Littleton Keeper of the great Seal, gave him their most humble and hearty
thanks.

Some former Overtures and Propositions had been made by the Dutch Ambassadors
of a Marriage between the Princess Mary the Kings eldest Daughter, and William
Prince of Aurange; which upon the arrival of the said Prince, was afterward
accomplished, The Houses oppose Bishops temporal jurisdiction.
being well approved of by both Houses; by the lower whereof, a Vote passed
against Bishops temporal jurisdiction; which was afterward framed into an Act,
passed the Lords, and was confirmed by the King, who in all things (saving his
Honor and Conscience) complied with the desires of this Parliament.

The Earl of Straffords Trial.
Now came the Earl of Straffords Trial, which after various debates about the
Place, was appointed in Westminster Hall: the King, Queen, and Prince, had a
place built for them; the Nobility had seats at the upper end of the Court; the
Commons in a Committee sat below; several of whom, as Mr. Pym, Mr. St. John,
and others, managed his Accusation: the Earl of Arundel was Lord High Steward,
and the Earl of Lindsey Lord High Constable. The Charge or Impeachment
consisted of Twenty eight Articles; all which he so learnedly and warily
answered, defending himself with such sinewy Eloquence, and warded the points
of his accusation so dexterously, that the Lords could not find the guilt which
the Commons so highly exclaimed against, as the greatest treason imaginable.
Sir David Fowls and Sir William Pennyman witnesses against the Earl; the last
of whom wept.


Among other witnesses, Sir David Fowls, and Sir William Pennyman appeared
against the Earl; the first of whom the Earl declared was his enemy, and the
latter, a Member of the House; of whom it was observed, that having testified
against the Earl, he could not abstain from weeping.

Anno Dom. 1641.
THe Commons seeing they could not condemn him by this proceeding, they betook
themselves to another, by Bill of Attainder; which conceding the matter of Fact
sufficiently proved against him at his Trial, and by the Testimony also of the
Parliament of Ireland, who had prosecuted him there for the said offenses, He
is condemned as guilty of high treason.
condemned him as guilty of high treason. This Bill stuck for a while with the
Lords, till the Tumults coming down and stopping their Coaches, and menacing to
post up the names of those who favored him under the name of Straffordians,
The faction make a hideous cry of Justice. The King with much re^uctancy signs
the Bill of Attainder.
with an impetuous cry of Justice, frighted many of the Peers to assent to the
Bill, which yet passed but by the plurality of seven voices against him. No
sooner was it past there, but the Commons presented it to the King for him to
sign; who very much declined it* but being over-perswaded by the dangers that
were represented as inevitable consequents of his refusal, and being also
desired by the said Noble Earl himself to give the Parliament content, though
through the mediation of his own blood; His Majesty after advice with the
Bishops, did pass that fatal Bill, which proved the Ax against his own life.

I cannot pass the Tragedy of this excellent Statesman* without a very notable
remarque, A notable remarque concerning Sir Alexander Carew.
which has received credit from the mouths of many honorable persons; it was
this: At the time of the passing the Bill of Attainder in the House of Commons,
Sir Bevil-Greenvile, and Sir Alexander Carew, sitting together, they both
serving for the same County of Cornwall, Sir ^evil bespoke Sir Alexander in
suchlike words: Pray Sir let it not be said, than any member of our County
should have a hand in this ^minous business, and therefore pray give your Vote
against this Bill. To whom the other instantly replied: If I were siere to be
the next man that should suffer upon the same Scaffold, with the same Ax, I
would give my consent to the passing of it. And we have seen how exactly and in
every circumstance this presagious saying of his was afterward verified and
accomplished.

It is observable, Those Bishops that consented to the Earls death escaped not
the fury of the times.
moreover, that none of all the Bishops that were advised with by the King, in
reference to his satisfaction concerning the Earls death, escaped the fury of
that Parliament and the times; he only excepted, as the King himself notes in
his Book, who counseled him by no means, not for any considerations or reason
of State or Time whatsoever, to act against his conscience; but that obeying
the Dictates thereof, he should refer the Issue to God: which Counsel had it
been followed, doubtless those miseries which ensued presently after had, never
befallen him nor his Kingdoms; the Earl being indeed one of the chief Pillars
and Basis of his Authority and Government, without whose ruin the Grandees of
the Faction knew they could not effect or accomplish any thing; such an
absolute, rare, honest, and loyal masterpiece of Reason and Prudence, (so much
strength of spirit to quicken his undertakings joined therewith) the age
present saw not, and well will it be for the next if it may compare and
parallel him. Thus far to the memory of his most useful life; we must also
parentate something to his lamented and most causeless death, from which, as we
shall see in the conclusion of this History, he had a most honorable
Resurrection here.

On Sunday May 2. was solemnized at Court the marriage between the young Prince
of Orange and the Princess Mary. Prince of Orange warries the Princess Mary.
Sir Dudley Carleton the Earls Secretary brings him word of his Majesty's having
passed the Bill of Attainder.


Before we attend the Earl to the Stage, it will not be unworthy the Readers
patience, to observe Sir Dudley Carleton, the Earls Secretary, bringing him the
news of the Kings passing the Bill of Attainder: the Earl believing the King
would not have done it, arose from his chair, and lifting up his eyes to
Heaven, clapped his hand upon his heart, and said, Put not your trust in Princes,
nor in the sons of men, for in them there is no salvation.

A design was laid for his escape, if we may believe Sir William Balfore
Lieutenant of the Tower at that time, whose report upon examination was, that
the Earl sent for him four days before his suffering, and endeavored to
persuade him to connive at his escape, promising to reward him with twenty
thousand pounds, and his Daughter in marriage to Balfores Son. The said Balfore
saying further, that he was commanded to admit Captain Billingsley to march
into the Tower with an hundred men, for the better securing of the place; but
the said Billingsley coming he was denied entrance by Balfore: whereupon the
Earl expostulates with the Lieutenant, of the danger of opposing the Kings
command; Balfore answering, that a design of his escape was discovered by three
good-wives of Tower-street, that peeping in at the keyhole of his door, they
saw him walking with Billingsley, and heard them advising thereon, and of a
Ship to be in readiness for him below the River.

On the 8th of May, 1641. the said Earl was brought to the Scaffold on
Tower Hill, where were present some of the Nobility, Sir George Wentworth his
Brother, and the Archbishop of Armagh, to whom principally he directed his
Speech (which being so public, Life in Mr. Lloyds Memoires.
and transmitted by so many pens, cannot certainly fail posterity) and with
much Christian resolution, was offered there as a Sacrifice to popular fury,
heightened and enraged by the artifices and designs of some innovating principal
Leaders to the following breaches and Rebellion. To sum up all our misery in
the total of this noble person, the same day the King signed the Bill for his
Execution, he signed also another for the continuing of this Parliament till
they should dissolve themselves; the only lasting monument of all our troubles.

The Scots having thus obtained their aims against this honorable person, The
English Army disband, the Scotch receive a vast sum of money, and return home.

The King visits his Parliament of Edinburgh.

The Earl of Leicester made Lord Lieutenant of Ireland.


whom they termed the enemy of their Country, and having received a vast sum of
money (blood, and the price of blood together) were now pleased upon the
disbanding of the English Army, to march home and disband also, as was before
intimated; having first obtained of his Majesty a grant to be present at the
next sitting of their Parliament at Edinburgh; which his Majesty condescended
to, and in August came thither, having before his departure constituted the
Earl of Leicester Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, in the place of the Earl of
Strafford; but through the Rebellion, and other contingencies and reasons of
State falling out, he never went over in that quality, though preparations were
made both here and there in order to his Government.

On the seventeenth of May, diverse of the Kings chiefest Officers of State,
fearing they might likewise be subject to the same destructive change with the
Earl of Strafford, resign their places; viz. The Lord Cottington Master of the
Wards, to the Lord Say.

Doctor Iuxon then Bishop of London, resignes his office of Treasurer of
England, to five Commissioners.

Marquess Hertford was also sworn governor to the Prince, in the stead of the
Earl of Newcastle.

The Earl of Pembroke displaced from being Lord Chamberlain of the Kings
Household, and the Earl of Essex ordered to succeed him.

Upon the Kings going for Scotland, the Parliament was Adjourned till the 20 of
October; The Parliament adjourned.

The faction increases and grows strong.


during which recess, and his Majesty's absence, the ill humors of discontents
gathered amain. The Faction was strengthened at home, by open and avowed
correspondencies, which became public in menaces and threatenings against the
remaining disorders and abuses in the Government. The Ax had but tasted of that
blood, of which it soon after glutted it self; all persons of all Ranks and
Conditions, King, Archbishop, Duke, Marquess, Earls, Lords, Knights, Gentlemen,
Ministers, Mechanics, suffering under its edge. A remarkable thing, the
parallel of it being no where in our English Chronicles: But so the Noble Earl
of Straffords blood was expiated, and his innocence attended with the like
victimes.

The Parliament now met together after their adjournment, the King being still
in Scotland, The King settles the affairs of Scotland.
where he so ordered affairs by his indulgence and bounty, that it was verily
thought upon his departure, he had not left a malecontent in that Kingdom: to
the confirmation of which opinion, the Scots were not wanting themselves; it
being their complement, grown to a public expression, that his Majesty
departed a contented King, from a contented people.

The Parliament at Westminster had scarce yet sat in a full House from their
Adjournment, curiously prying into the Errors and Maladministration of the
Government here, but the fearful news came of a horrid Rebellion broke forth in
Ireland. A Rebellion in Ireland.
It seems no sooner that careful diligent eye of the Earl of Strafford was
first distorted by the Scotch affairs, and after put out and extinguished by
the English envy, but the Irish resumed their wonted desires after liberty,
which they never yet attempted upon a less foundation than a total Massacre,
and utter extirpation of the English in that Kingdom; so that in effect,
however the Parliament threw the odium of that Rebellion there upon the King,
Questionless it can be no where imputable ab extra, from without, but from
their unwarrantable proceeding against the said Earl, whose name and presence
alone would have been sufficient to have prevented it, or his wisdom and power
able to have suppressed it.

This affrighting news when the Kingdom was already in a trepidation, laboring
with its own fears and pretended dangers, soon brought the King from Scotland,
The King returns from Scotland, and is magnificently received at London.
with all possible haste to London; where, notwithstanding those troubles, he
was most welcomly, and as magnificently entertained; the Citizens on Horseback
with Gold-chains, and in their several Liveries, in Rayles placed along the
streets, cheerfully receiving him; the sober part of the Nation not valuing the
Irish troubles, if the King and his Parliament should but happily agree: if the
breaches could be but closed here, there was no doubt of stanching the wound
there. But it was otherwise meant by the faction, who added that conflagration
as fuel to this; suggesting to the multitude, that what was acted against the
Protestants there, was likewise intended to be put in Execution here; the
Authors of one, being also so of the other; sinisterly traducing the King as
inclining to Popery, The faction s^anderously charge the King and Arch-B. Cant.
with inclining to Popery.

Walker an Iron-monger th^ows a Libel into the Kings (...); he is impri^oned.
Sir Richard Gurney Lord Mayor of London.


which they point blank charged upon the Archbishop of Canterbury; which
imputation diffused it self afterward upon the whole Order.

This torrent of the multitude was swelled so high, even at this reception of
the King, that one Walker an Iron-monger, as his Majesty passed from Guild Hall
(where he was most sumptuously feasted at the City-charge, Sir Richard Gurney
being then Mayor) threw into his Coach a scandalous Libel, Entitled, To your
Tents, O Israel: which indignity the King complained of, and thereupon Walker
was put in Prison; yet afterward he Libelled a great deal worse, both in Press
and Pulpit. But since the settlement of the Church, he procured a lawful
Ordination. I mention this man, as the shame of that zealotry which so
furiously commenced this unnatural War.

The first business transacted with the King by the two Houses, was an account
of the Irish Rebellion; the King having acquainted them in a short Speech of
his composure of the Scotch troubles, and soon after conjuring them to join
with him in the speedy suppressing of the Irish, Most of the Irish Nobility
revolted: Sir Phelim Oneal their chief command^r.
whose dangers grew every day greater, Jobs Messengers perpetually bringing
over worser and worser news from that Kingdom, where most of the Nobility were
confederated in that horrid revolt, having made Sir Phelim Oneal (the chief of
the family of Tyrone, the late famous Rebel there in the latter part of the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and bred in Lincoln's Inn, and then a Protestant, but
turned a bloody Papist, though a most sneaking and silly Coward) the supreme
Commander of their Forces, which then were raised in great numbers throughout
all the Provinces.

Deep waters run stillest, A full account of the Irish Rebellion, and
proceedings of the War there.
and with the least noise; so was it with this Plot. It was very strange that a
design of such vastness, of so great mischief and horror, should be concealed
among a multitude that were concerned in it: But this devilish secrecy was
imputable only to the ancient irreconciliable malice of the Irish against the
English, whose yoke sundry times they had attempted to shake off; not for any
oppression they were under, but out of a natural desire of being Lords and
Masters of their own liberty. But nevertheless it pleased God that it came in
the very nick of the execution of their Plot to be revealed by one of that
Nation, or otherwise that Kingdom had been in danger to be lost, as Sicily was
from the French, by a sudden massacre.

The chief Instrument in carrying on this horrible Plot, Roger Moor the chief
instrument in the plot.
was one Roger Moor, descended of an ancient Irish family, but allied to most
of the Gentlemen of the English Pale: He made several journeys into all the
four Provinces of this Kingdom, communicating his intelligences from foreign
Popish Courts, and the transactions of their Priests and Friars there, to the
encouragement of this Revolt.

Another of the greatest confidents and accomplices in this design, was the Lord
Viscount Gormanston, The Lord Viscount Gormanston one of their accomplices.
of the English Pale, which generally sided with the Rebels, (as being
inoculated into Irish stocks, and were Papists generally) though against all
opinion of the Council, for that they had been such enemies to the Earl of
Tyrone, in his grand Rebellion. But the menacing speeches, and denunciations of
the English Parliament against Papists in both Kingdoms, especially in this,
where they threatened a total extirpation, cannot be denied to be one, if not
the principal cause why they made this defection from their Country and
Allegiance.

The 23 of October was the day pitched upon for the general rising; and the Lord
Macguire, Col. Mac Mahon, Col. Plunket, and Capt. Fox, Hugh Birn and Roger
Moor, were appointed for the seizure of Dublin-Castle; which would at once have
done their work: those persons (with a competent number of men to their
assistance) came one day before to Town, and had conference together at the
Lyon-Tavern near Copper-Ally, where one Owen O Conally an Irish Gentleman, but
a retainer to Sir John Clotworthy, was admitted, and by Mac Mahon informed of
the conspiracy. After a large drinking to their next mornings success, Owen O
Conally discovers the Plot. Iu^^ice Parsons and Sir Jo. Borlace double their
Watches.
O Conally privily repaired to the Lord Justice Parsons, (to whom, and Sir John
Borlace the other Justice, the Government was committed after my Lord
Straffords death: The Lord Dillon was likewise named and constituted; but to
avoid the jealousy, and grudgings thereat, the King had disauthorized him) and
very disturbedly and confusedly, by reason of the drink, and his horror at the
story, revealed the chiefest part of it. It was thereupon advised by the said
Lord Justice, for a fuller and certainer account, to send him back again to the
said Mac Mahon, commanding him to return that night again to him; which he did
from the said Tavern and company (who would have kept him there all night) by
pretending to ease himself; and thence leaping over a wall and a set of pales
into the streets.

In the mean time the Lord Justice Parsons went to the Lord Borlaces house, and
there assembled a Council, by the coming of Sir Thomas Rotheram, and Sir Robert
Meredith; who resolved first to attend the return of O Conally, who in his way
to them had been seized by the Watches, which by the order of Justice Parsons
had been doubled and reinforced, and the Castle of Dublin manned and guarded
very stoutly. But by the diligence of one of the Lord Parsons servants, who was
set expressly to walk the streets, and attend the motion of Conally, he was
found in the Constables hands, and brought before them, where being recovered
from his distemper, he gave a perfect narrative of the Treason intended; and
that when the Conspitators had gotten the Cas^le and the Ammunition and Stores,
etc. they would batter the Chimneys, and then the Houses of the Town, till it
yielded, and then kill all the Protestant Inhabitants; and that the like would
be executed the same time in all parts of the Kingdom.

Mac Mahon and Mac-Guire, their Lodgings watched. Mac Mahon and his men after
some resistance are s^cured, and confess the Plot. The Lord Mac-guire seized.
Upon this discovery, the Lords ordered the Lodgings of Mac Mahon and Mac Guire
to be set and watched; but upon further advice, they sent before day and seized
Mac Mahon. He and his man at first made some resistance with drawn swords; but
seeing he was overpowred, yielded, and being brought before the Council,
confessed the whole Plot, adding, that it was impossible for them to prevent
it; and that it was true, they had him in their power, and might use him as
they pleased, but he was sure he should be revenged. He was the Grandson of the
Rebel Tyrone. The Lord Macguire was next seized; but the other four got away in
the dark, by the aid of some of the Townsmen: and of all those that came up in
numbers to the City, and left their horses in the Suburbs, of which the Council
had notice betimes, and seized some of them, and got notice thereby of the
owners, there were not (by the slack pursuit of the Inhabitants) above thirty,
(and those servants, and inconsiderable persons) that were taken. Mac Guire and
Mac Mahon were committed to the custody of the Constable of the Castle.

The Council warn the people of the Rebellion by Proclamation.
The same day, October 23. the Council emitted a Proclamation, giving notice of
the Rebellion, raised by some evil affected Irish Papists: which character, at
the instance of the Lords of the English Pale, and to give them content, in
whose Loyalty at present rested the hope of the Kingdom, was changed into this
discrimination, The evil affected of the old Irish in the Province of Ulster.
But notwithstanding, soon after they absolutely declared themselves for the
Rebels; having by their temporizing in this manner, gained a great quantity of
Arms from Dublin, and then refused to appear there at the summons of the
Council; giving themselves the name of the Confederate Catholic Army.

The Lord Blaweys House, Wife and Children surprised. The Newry surprised, with
several other places of strength.
The same night, the 23 of October, the Lord Blawey arrived at Dublin with the
news of the surprizal of his House, Wife and Children by the Rebels of the
County of Monaghan; and the day after, Sir Arthur Tyrringham brought news of
the suprizal of the Newry; which was seconded with notice of the like seizure
of Fort Montjoy, Carlemont, To^rages, Carick, Mac-Ross, Cloughouter, and Castle
of Monaghan, being all of them places of considerable strength, besides a
multitude of other Houses of strength, Castles and Towns filled with British
Inhabitants, who by immuring themselves, and not joining in a Body, were ruined
easily one after another, whereas otherwise they might have been able to have
defeated this barbarous Enemy. The Rebels take Dundalk, and besiege Tredagh.
They commit horrid Massacres in sundry places.
These successes were obtained under the ensigns and Conduct o^ Sir Phelim O
Neal, Turlough O Neal his brother, Rory Mac Guire Brother to the Lord Mac
Guire, Philip O Rely, Mulmore O Rely, Sir Conne Gennys, Col. Mac Brian, and Mac
Mahon; who with their torces advancing Southwards, took in Dundalk, and
besieged Tredagh; the Lords of the Pale publicly joining with them, Viscount
Gormanstone being made Lord General thereof; Hugh Birn Lieutenant General, and
the Earl of Fingale General of the Horse. Every day and hour came Tidings of
the most horrid massacres committed in the Counties of Down, Fermanagh,
Monaghan, Antrim, and Armagh: those that escaped to the Sea-Towns, the Inland
being all lost, perishing there by their hard and starving march, both hungry
and naked, and pestring the few Garrisons of Colrain, Carick-fergus and London
Derry; and of the multitude of those that got to Dublin, not one in five
survived the want and tire of their journey; insomuch that some being
over-driven by the Rebels, have been forced to leave their Infants and young
Children in the Highways, which were knocked on the head by them. Nor was this
calamity all; such as got shipping for England were most of them drowned, and
others three months at Sea, the winter and that season of the year was so rude
and tempestuous; while the Rebels gloried in their successes and cruelties, and
this extraordinary displeasure of the Almighty toward these their causless
Adversaries.

That I may not pass this doleful subject without some particular testimony of
their barbarousness, I will instance that inhumane murder at Portnedown Bridge,
where in the very beginning of the Rebellion at several times they forced 1800
men, 1800 Persons drowned.
women and children with pikes and halberts off that Bridge into the River, and
drowned them all: soon after which, there were such ghastly apparitions seen,
and such screeches of revenge heard, that the Irish inhabitants were forced to
remove their Creats or Hovels out of the dreadful noise and clamor thereof. In
sum, there was never such a Diabolical Fury, Treachery and Perfidiousness in
the world, which consumed in five months time no less then 150000 persons;
150000 Persons destroyed in the Province of Ulster only in five mo^ths time.

Sir Phelim Oneal defeat^d at Du^dalk. Dublin in great streights.


nay, some good Authors have reckoned more in that one Province of Vlster. Sir
Phelim O Neal and his party cruelly upon their defeat at Dundalk and other
places, wreaking their revenge upon such innocent persons, as from the
beginning of the Rebellion they had kept in miserable durance and captivity.
Dublin was now in great streights and frights; which the miseries of those poor
Wretches that made it their refuge, rendered more dismal. The whole Irish Army
consisted but of 2000 Foot and 1000 Horse, and so dis-joyned, that there was as
much danger of embodying them, as staying there where they were, (for seven
Companies of Foot had been lost, with their Garrisons, already, to the Rebels,
most of the Soldiers being Irish. Nor was there any money in the Treasury;
only 3000 l. destined to pay a public debt in England, was stopped for present
use; by which means a Regiment was raised for Sir Henry Titchburn, A Regiment
raised for Sir H. Titchburn, another for Sir Charles Coot. Expresses sent to
the King, the Lord Lieutenant, and the Parliament.
to reinforce the Garrison of Tredagh, into which the Lord Moor now Earl
thereof had opportunely put himself with his Troop of Horse; for the Townsmen
were false and wavering: Sir Henry arrived safe thither in two days march from
Dublin, November the 4th. Another Regiment was raised for Sir Charles Coot, who
was to be Governor of the City, now in great fear and despair; for the Rebels
were near it on every side: this Regiment was made up mostly of those men who
came stripped and despoiled out of the North, and who lived to see themselves
revenged of the Irish. Applications were likewise made, and Expresses sent to
the King, then in Scotland; to the Lord Lieutenant the Earl of Leicester, and
both Houses of Parliament at Westminster, who readily voted a potent relief;
but by their debates and quarrels with the King, on purpose retarded it, till
all was near lost in that Kingdom; the envy whereof they loaded upon his
Majesty, than whom no Prince could ever be more affected with the sadness of
such a calamity, I may not omit that Owen O Conally, who was sent with the
express to the Parliament, was rewarded by them according to the desire of the
Council of Ireland with 200 l. in money, Owen O Conally rewarded with 200 l. in
money, and a pension of 200 l. per anum. The Earl of Ormond Lieu. Genesis marched
to Dublin with diverse other Captains.
and 200 l. a year pension, till lands of inheritance could be settled on him.

The Earl of Ormond was now marched to Dublin, with the title of
Lieutenant General; and a Troop of 100 Cur^asiers completely armed; Sir Thomas
Lucas, and Captain Armstrong, old Soldiers, and Captain Yarner, arrived out of
England, as did Col. Crawford, for whom a Regiment was raised, as Troops for
the other; 600 Foot had been also provided under the conduct of Major Roper, to
march as Recruits to Tredagh, at the instance of the Governor; and accordingly
on the 27th of November they begun this short Expedition, accompanied with 50
Horse of the Earl of Ormonds under Sir Patrick Weems; but by ill conduct, and
loytering in the way, and the unexpertness of those raw foot-Souldiers, they
were of a sudden in a mist attaqued by a body of the Rebels near Julian
Town-bridg, and there being deserted by the horse, most shamefully routed;
three of the Captains with all the English, except 100 that escaped with Major
Roper to Drogheda, Major Roper with 600 Foot to Tredagh. With 50 Horse under
Sir Pat. Weems, surprised by the Rebels and routed.
being cut off: The news whereof arrived to the Governor, just as he was
returned from the place of his disappointed meeting with them the day before,
by reason of their delayed advance.

Proud with this success, as with the taking of Mellefont-house, the Mansion of
the Lord Moor, which had been stoutly defended, they made sure of Tredagh, and
drew their ^orces about it; whereas had they marched for Dublin, where they had
too many friends, and whence Sir Charles Coot was marched into the County of
Wicklow to repress the insolences of the Birns and Tools toward the poor
English, from whom they had taken Carews fort, and possessed themselves of the
chief Gentlemen's houses; they might have carried both places. At Wicklow Sir
Charles executed some murderous Irish; Some Rebels executed at Wicklo. Luke
Tool encounters Sir Charles Coote, and is pu^ to flight. The Lords and Gentry of
the English Pale declare for the Roman Catholic Religion.
but being ca^^ed to Dublin, he was encountered by Luke Tool, and 1000 Irish,
whom he quickly made run into a Bog, with some loss, and came safe home.

Now the Lords and Gentry of the English Pale plainly discovered themselves,
and, as is touched before, assisted in the siege of Tredagh; and thereby
Lemster and Vlster became United in this Rebellion, in which Munster was not
engaged till December. (At this time also they emitted their Declaration,
wherein they dec^ared for the exercise of the Roman Catholic Religion, their
Rights and Privileges, and the Kings Prerogative; and justified their taking
arms to those purposes, by the example of the Scots, who had obtained their
demands thereby: And next, they presume to face Dublin, theatning to encamp at
Clantarfe very near the Harbor thereof, which they intended to stop from
receiving any succors, but at the approach of Sir Charles Coot they fled
thence, and the Town was pillaged, and some part burnt, for that they had
robbed a Barge, and some of the goods were found in Mr. Kings house, who with
Luke Nettervil, and others had now encamped themselves again at Swords within
six miles of Dublin with 20000 men, and had possessed the Castle of Artain and
other places within two miles thereof: At Castle-Lyons and Rath there lay 2000
more, who came out of Caterlagh, Kings County and Kildare, under Roger Moor.
This was on the East Side: on the South Side lay the Birnes and the Tools, who
had lodged themselves in Castles near the Seaside, and some Villages at the
foot of the Mountains, The Rebels in Lemster 20000 strong.
so that their Forces now in Lemster amounted to 20000 men. About this time the
Naas and Kildare were taken, as were Trim and Ashbey in the County of Mead, by
the Rebels; and no better news was to be hoped for or expected: besides, now
the market of Dublin could not be supplied, the enemy every where so
encompassed it.

Sir Simon Harcourt arrives with a Regiment at Tredagh.
Tredagh nevertheless held out gallantly, till the arrival of Sir Simon
Harcourt with his Regiment out of England, and some supplies of money; and more
men and arms were daily expected; which deceiving the opinion of the Rebels, so
disheartened them, after many fruitless attemps made upon that Town, that they
broke up their siege, and marched Northwards; but in their way Sir Henry
Titchburn sallied out and overtook them, and gave them a defeat; and pursuing
his success, The Rebels are disheartened, and defeated by Sir Henry Titchburn,
who recovered Dundalk. Sir Phelim O Neal escapes to Ulster: Sir George Monro
recovers Newry, and does the Rebels much damage.
recovered Dundalk again by storm; while Sir Phelim O Neal hardly escaped over
the River, and fled back to Vlster, where Major General Sir George Monro, who
commanded the Scotch forces (whose Plantations fared no better than the
English, when the Irish had once mastered ours) lent the Parliament by
agreement at Edinburgh, in revenge of those spoils and massacres committed,
made the same bloody havoc and waste, and in the beginning of the next year
took in and recovered sundry Towns and Castles, particularly the Newry; which,
with the like successes of Sir Simon Harcourt and Sir Charles Coot in Lemster,
had almost flag'd the hearts of the Irish, and made them willing to a Cessation.

Leave we that Kingdom in a forlorn, miserable, bleeding condition, and cast an
eye homeward. The King soon after his return, to rest and vacate himself a
little from the toil and burden of business, retired to Hampton Court, whence
notwithstanding, the importunity of his affairs straight recalled him to his
Court at White Hall, where he was sundry times tumulted by a numerous rabble
out of London, Tumults from London affront the King and Court.
crying out No Bishops, with other affronting language to the King himself, as
they passed by the Court-Gates to Westminster, where Col. Lunsford (then
nominated to be Lieutenant of the Tower, but not confided in by the Citizens no
more than others appointed to that charge, till Sir William Balfour had
possession thereof) and some other Gentlemen, drew upon them, and wounded some
of them; which so exasperated them, that the next time they came down armed,
and in greater numbers, to the terror and affrightment of the parts adjacent to
the Court: an ill omen or presage of those dire revolutions which followed.

The beginning of these uproars were like themselves, at first tumultuary, and
consisted of the rabble only; but the kind reception they found from some
Parliament-Members, who tacitly encouraged their rude clamours, and smiled
upon their numbers, moved Citizens of the best quality to join with those
Clubmen; and now they began to marshal their multitudes into rank and File; the
eminent zealots, some of them Aldermens fellows, being right-hand-men, or else
placing themselves in the intervals like Officers; and upon their return by
night, which was the usual course, carried Links in their hands, like right
boutefeus, to light their Accomplices and Partakers in this monstrous Riot: So
that the danger appearing in a method and form, the dire prognostic of
Battalia, and flighting the opposition of a Corpse du Guard erected over against
Scotland-yard, Sir William Mason heads the Gentlemen of Grays-Inne to
White Hall, prostering them and himself to his Majesty as a guard for his
person.
which was maintained by the Trained Bands of St. Clements and St. Martins; the
Gentlemen of the honorable Society of Grayes-Inne, under the leading of Sir
William Mason, in good order ranked two and two, marched from their randezvouz
at Covent Garden to White Hall, and proffered their Loyal Service to the King,
as a Guard to his person, against those formidable tumults. They were received
by the King with all respect and acknowledgements of this seasonable tender;
which manifested that Law, Reason, and Civility were disengaged from the
Rebellion: but the Kings sudden remove dispensed with their Duty. The King
receives them with respect. The Tumultuous rabble countenanced by some Grandees
of the faction. Whereat the King is much troubled.


The King, sensible from what quiver this Arrow came, and not longer able to
endure these indignities, which he had so often moved the two Houses, though in
vain, to prevent or punish, resolved to seize on those Grandees who principally
abetted those tumults, and also had had a deep hand in the Scotch troubles,
(having intercepted Letters of correspondence between them and the Covenanters)
the untoward Issue and Event whereof (as whereby his English Subjects had
presumed to obtain by tumults the same demands) lay yet heavy on his heart, and
boded the fame conclusions.

Taking therefore with him a Guard of his own domestic Servants, and some
Gentlemen casually then in the Court, late in one of the Christmas-nights, He
demands five Members of the House of Commons and the Lord Kimbolton.
he came to the door of the House of Commons, and entered, and demanded five
members thereof, (as also one of the House of Peers, the Lord Kimbolton) viz.
Mr. Pyns, Mr. Hambden, Mr. Holles, Mr. Stro^d, and Sir Arthur Haslerig; but
they having notice of the Kings coming to this purpose, by one Langrish a
Servant of the Queens, had time, and but just enough, to withdraw themselves
into Westminster Hall, where they lay hid in the Kings-bench-Court, until the
business of that night was over, and then betook themselves into London to the
Guild Hall, whereto the House not long after adjourned it self in a grand
Committee, for their safeguard and security.

The House vote it a breach of privilege.
This attempt of the King, the House presently voted a breach of privilege; and
ran so high as to complain of evil Councillors about the King, demanding the
persons of those who gave that advice to the King: Nay, so highly did they
insist upon and urge this violation of their freedom, that all the King could
do, gave them no satisfaction, though he endeavored to excuse it; so that it
continued their plea throughout the War: But how it was retaliated upon them
both by themselves and Oliver, in the several Exclusions and Forces afterward
put upon that House, needs no particular indigitation.

They accuse several Bishops as guilty of high Treason. They are Committed.
Having therefore got this claw against the King, they resolve to revenge
themselves on the Bishops; some of whom they suspected to be the chief
instruments in that business: Particularly, to gratify the City, (whom they
had wholly devoted at their service) who might see the Parliaments readiness to
comply with their clamours against that Venerable Order, Twelve of these the
Commons accused to the Lords as guilty of High Treason, whereof ten were
committed to the Tower, The Irish are proclaimed Rebels.
and two to the Black Rod. At the same time also the Irish were proclaimed
Rebels; thirty Proclamations hereof being only Printed, for some reasons of
State the King reserved to himself then, though afterward when the Parliament
among other things taxed him with this, he gave them a full and satisfactory
answer, as not willing to make the Irish desperate, and utterly undo his
Protestant Subjects, who were (as then) far too weak to withstand so potent a
Rebellion, which the King was willing so far to comply with the Parliament as
to declare it so. For the number of them, he said it was the request of the
said Lords Justices of Ireland there should be but twenty, as many of
themselves well knew.

The King declares his charge against the five members.
Like wise to satisfy the Parliament about that business of the five members,
he now declared his charge against them, which consisted of several things
relating to intelligence held with the Scots, while declared Traitors.

That they traitorously endeavored by many foul Aspersions upon his Majesty
and Government, to alienate the affections of the people, and to make his
Majesty odious to them.

That they traitorously endeavored to subvert the fundamental Laws and
Government of this Kingdom, and to deprive the King of his Regal, and to place
on Subjects an arbitrary and illegal power.

That they endeavored to draw his Majesty's late Army (in the North) to
disobedience to his Majesty's command.

That they invited the Scots to invade England.

That they traitorously endeavored the subversion of the rights and very being
of Parliament.

That for the completing of their traiterous designs, they have endeavored
as far as in them lay, by force and terror to compel the Parliament to join
with them in their traiterous designs, and to that end countenanced and raised
the tumults against the King and Parliament.

That they had traitorously conspired to levy, and had actually levied war
against the King.

The Parliament imprisons Sir Edw. Herbert.
This was (as I said before) declared by the King; but in hopes and order to
accommodation (this course being thought a good expedient thereto) was laid
aside, and not prosecuted: But the Parliament left it not so, imprisoning for a
while the Kings Attorney, Sir Edward Herbert, demanding those evil Councillors
that gave this advice against the five Members to punishment.

The Tumults increase, and the King retires to Hampton Court.
Herewith the Tumults so increased about White Hall and Westminster, that the
King, Queen, Prince, and Duke of York, were forced for security of their
persons, to retire to Hampton Court; being necessitated to take sufficient
forces of his Courtiers for his guard.

About this time there was a false rumor raised, A rumor concerning the Lord
Digby. Col. Lunsford committed. The Scots interpose themselves, the Parliament
demands the Tower and the Militia.
by the Lord Digbies passing through Kingston near London, of a plot to raise
Horse against the Parliament; whereupon Col. Lunsford then with him, was
committed to Prison, and this story improved into a calumny against the King.

The Scots now interposed themselves betwixt the King and Parliament, though
siding clearly with the Parliament, having by Treaty agreed with them to send
over 2500 men into the North of Ireland, upon the English pay. Through their
thus taking of their parts, the Parliament flew high now in their demands,
requiring the disposal of the Command of the Tower, and the management of the
Militia; which being refused, they desisted not, but on the 26 of January
Petitioned the King for them both; to which the King by several reasons
answered in the nagative. Now again they insisted upon it, as also upon the
business of the five Members, still to exasperate the people (who cried out
against Popish Lords and Bishops sitting in Parliament) to which the King
answered as before, and declared his readiness to pass an Act of general
Pardon, to take away all suspicion from the five Members.

Several Petitions were presented to the Parliament from the Countries about
the foresaid matters, Buckinghamshire- men petition in behalf of Mr. Hambden.
and one from the Buckinghamshire-men to the King himself, in vindication of
their Countryman Mr. Hambden. To this Petition the King demur'd, intent only
on the Irish business, whose miseries pierced him to the quick, being neither
able effectually to relieve them, the Rebels being Masters of the chiefest
places there; nor to put any thing here in a way o^ forwardness thereto, The
King leaves Hampton Court, the Queen and Princess of Aurange take ship for
Holland.

The Parliament vote the Queen a Traitor.


through the cross proceedings and difficulties of his affairs here.

The King was departed from Hampton Court, in company with the Queen and his
Daughter the Princess of Aurange to Dover, to see them shipped for Holland.
Whither the Queen conveyed away most of the Crown-Jewels, which she pledged for
money and Arms for the King her Husband, and for which she was afterward voted
a Traitor, the Parliament being doing it at her departure. Now he returned
straight to Greenwich from thence, having the Prince in his company, to
Theobalds. Still the difference widened more and more according as he removed
from London, to which he was importunately desired to return by both Houses, by
the Members thereof who continued sitting; though the Grandees of the Faction
were well contented with what distance he kept from them, as rendering their
pretended Jealousies and Fears more and more credible to the deluded people.
From Theobalds, the misunderstanding still increasing betwixt the King and two
Houses, he removed Northward, first to Royston, thence to Newmarket, and in
conclusion to York; having received and answered several Messages from the
Parliament by the way.

The principal difference between the King and them was the Militia; The
Militia, the principal difference between King and Parliament.
this was disputed betwixt them; the King claiming it as an unseparable right
of the Crown, and the Houses urging the management of it for present
satisfaction and safety, and had thereupon nominated Officers; which
designation the King disallowed. And now the rupture was visible.

I have thought fit therefore to insert both the Commission of Array, and the
Ordinance of the Militia, they seeming to be as the Challenge to the War
ensuing, though they both are here inserted out of order of time.

CHarles by the grace of God, The Commission of Arry.
King of England, Scotland, etc. to our most dear Cozens Henry Earl of
Huntingdon, and William Earl of Devonshire; and also to our beloved and trusty,
Henry Hastings Esquire, Son of the said Earl of Huntingdon; Henry Barkley,
George Villiers, Thomas Burton, Baronets; Henry Shipwith, etc. Knights; Henry
Hasting of Humberton, etc. Esquires; and the Sheriff of our County of L. for
the time being, greeting. Know ye, that we willing to take care and provide for
the safety and defense of Our Self and Kingdom, and our Lieges thereof,
according as our duty is, and by Gods good favor resolving to resist the
malice of our enemies, if they s^all presume to invade this our Realm of
England: Have appointed you, or any three or more of you, to array and trayn
all and every person and persons in arms, bowmen, etc. dwelling within your
said County, within liberties and with out; and that you cause to be Armed all
such as are able of body, and sit to bear them, who have of their own wherewith
to arm themselves, viz. every one according to his estate or condition, to rate
and proportion according to your advice and discretion, or of any three of you;
and to distrain all those who have Lands and Possessions, and through debility
of body are unable for service, causing them to find according to the quality
of their Lands and Goods, what Arms conveniently and reasonably (saving their
condition) they can bear; and to provide men at Arms, armed but with Bows and
Arrows, so that they who shall stay and continue at their own home in their
County for the defense of this our Kingdom against our enemies, shall receive
no wages nor expenses for this their stay at home aforesaid: and that you
likewise dispose and cause to be disposed the said men so Armed and Arrayed,
into Regiments, Troops, and Companies, or other Division as you shall see
convenient. And we have assigned you, or any three or more of you, whereof you
the said Earl of Huntingdon, and in your absence you the said Earl of
Devonshire, or you Henry Hastings, son of the said Earl of Huntingdon, to be
one of the said men at Arms, and Bowmen, so arrayed and trained, as well to the
Seacoasts as to any other places, where, and as often, and as need shall
r^quire, to expel, overcome and destroy our said enemies, from time to time, in
any eminent peril, to command and lead. And we have likewise Commissionated you
or any three or more of you, to cause Muster or Musters of the said men so
armed and arrayed to be made, and to supervise them, as often as occasion shall
require.

And also to proclaim, ordain, and diligently examine, and see that all, and
every such men at Arms, armed men, and Bowmen in such Musters, be armed with
their own, and not others weapons, upon penalty of loosing them; those only
excepted who are to be armed at the charge of others. And to arrest, take, and
in our Prisons to put all, and every of those who in this behalf you shall find
enemies or Rebels, and to continue them in such Prisons until they shall be
thence delivered by Law. And therefore, as straightly as we can, upon your
Faith and Allegiance which you owe us, we enjoin and command you, that
forthwith upon the sight of these presents, that in the best and safest manner
you can, you* arm and array your selves; and that before you at certain days
and places which you shall judge most convenient and expedient, and of least
hindrance to our people, you cause all men dwelling in your County by whom the
Array and Arming may be best effected and completed, to be called and come
together, there and then to be arrayed and armed; and them so arrayed and
armed, to keep in the same array. And furthermore, that you cause Beacons to be
set up in the usual places, by which the several Counties may in fit time be
fore-armed against the coming of our Enemies. And the same men so arrayed and
armed in imminent danger, in the defense of the Kingdom and Country aforesaid,
from time to time, as well to the Seaside, or to other places where need shall
require, you cause to be led and conducted, or some of you, of whom you the
aforesaid Henry Earl of Huntingdon, or in your absence, you the aforesaid
William Earl of Devonshire, or you the aforesaid Henry Hastings, Son of the
said Earl of Huntingdon, we will to be one, do cause to be conducted as
aforesaid; so that through default of defense, array or conduct of the
aforesaid Soldiers, or through your negligence, no hurt or damage be done to
the aforesaid Country, as far as to your power it can be let. And we
straightly command all and every our Earls, Barons, Knights, Mayors, Bailiffs,
Constables, Ministers, and others our faithful Liege-people of our County
aforesaid, as well within Liberties as without, by virtue of these presents, to
be counselling, aiding, and assisting to you, and every one of you, in all and
singular the Premises. And we likewise Command you the said Sheriff, that at
certain times and places which you or any three or more of you as aforesaid
shall appoint, shall cause to convene before you all such men in the County
aforesaid, by whom the Array, Assesment and Appointment, can best be effected
and completed; and to detain those in Prison, who for their Rebellion shall
happen thither to be committed. In witness whereof, we have caused these our
Letters to be made Patents. Witness our self the 11th day of June, in the 18
Year of our Reign.

Per Ipsum Regem.

The Reader must know, that this Ordinance of the Militia was framed in
February, and declared to be a Law, whether the King should give his Royal
assent or no, in March ensuing; and several things done at that time in the
several Counties, in pursuance of it: So that it long precedes the Kings
Commission of Array, though for dignity sake I have here Postposed it.

The Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament, for Ordering the Militia of the
Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales.
WHereas there has been of late a most dangerous and desperate design upon the
House of Commons, An Ordinance of Parliament for ordering the Militia.
which we have just cause to believe to be an effect of the bloody Councels of
Papists, and other ill-affected persons, who have already raised a rebellion in
the Kingdom of Ireland; And by reason of many discoveries, we cannot but fear
they will proceed not only to stir up the like rebellions and insurrections in
this Kingdom of England, but also to back them with forces from abroad:

It is ordained by the Lords and Commons, now in Parliament assembled, that
shall have power to assemble and call together all and singular his Majesty's
Subjects within the County of as well within Liberties as without, that are
meet and fit fothe Wars, and them to train, exercise and put in readiness, and
them after their abilities and faculties well and sufficiently, from time to
time, to cause to be arrayed and weaponed, and to take the Muster of them in
places most fit for that purpose. And shall have power within the said County
to nominate and appoint such persons of quality as to him shall seem meet to be
his Deputie-Lieutenants, to be approved of by both Houses of Parliament. And
that any one or more of the said Deputies so assigned and approved of, shall in
the absence or by command of the same have power and Authority to do and
execute within the County all such Power and Authority before in this pr^sent
Ordinance contained. And so shall have power to make Colonels and Captains, and
other Officers, and to remove out of their places, and to make others from time
to time, as he shall think fit for that purpose. And his Deputies, Colonels,
Captains and other Officers, shall have further Power and Authority to lead,
conduct and employ the persons aforesaid, Arrayed and Weaponed, as well within
the County of as within any other part of this Realm of England, or Dominion of
Wales, for the suppression of all Rebellions, insurrections and invasions that
may happen, according as they from time to time shall receive directions by His
Majesty's Authority, signified unto them by the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament.

And it is further ordained, that such persons as shall not obey in any of the
Premises, shall answer their neglect and contempt to the Lords and Commons in ^
Parliamentary Way, and not otherwise, nor elsewhere; and that every the powers
granted as aforesaid, shall continue until it shall be otherwise ordered or
declared by both Houses of Parliament, and no longer.

John Brown, Clerk Parl.


How contrary to any Law, Practice or Precedent of any Parliament, this
Ordinance was, I refer the Reader to examine in his Majesty's Answer to it.

The Parliament send several Papers to the King.
Many Messages and Answers, and Papers past betwixt the King and the Parliament,
which though out of their order, we shall present at one view entire in this
Place; this History not allowing every one a particular room. Those of the
Kings were less strained, yet more elegant then the Parliament's: the great
ingredients and most substantial part of their Addresses were Jealousies and
Fears; with which the King was constantly baited, for want of more solid
Arguments, and which no reason could rectify or dispel, being irrefutable,
because inexistible; it being like fighting with a shadow, which cannot be
driven away. They protested all along, that if his Majesty should persist in
the denial of the Militia, the Dangers were such as would endure no longer
delay, but that they should be forced to dispose of it by Authority of
Parliament, and must resolve so to do, as it was by them propounded: Desiring,
that for the safety of his person and people, in much jealousy and Fear, he
will be pleased to reside in or near London, and to continue the Prince at St.
James's, or any other Houses near London, to prevent the Jealousies and Fears
of the people. Affirming, That by the Laws of the Realm the power of the
Militia, of raising, ordering, and disposing thereof in any place, cannot be
granted to any Corporation by Charter, or otherwise, without consent of
Parliament; and that those par^s of the Kingdom that have put themselves in a
posture of defense, have done it by direction and Declaration of Parliament.

The King much troubled with those unreasonable Papers, replied, that he was so
much amazed at this Message, The King is much troubled thereat, and answers.
that he knew not what to answer. You speak of jealousies and fears, said he;
lay your hands to your hearts, and ask your selves whether I may not in earnest
be disturbed with jealousies and fears; and if so, I assure you this Message
has nothing lessned them. For the Militia, I thought as much before. My last
answer being agreeable to what in Justice or reason you can ask, or I in honor
grant, I shall not alter in any point. I wish my residence near you might be
safe and honorable, that I had no cause to absent my self from Whitehal; Ask
your selves, whether I have not? I shall take that care of my Son, which shall
justify me to God as a father, and to my Dominions as a King. I assure you
upon mine honor, I have no thoughts but of peace and Justice to my people,
which I shall by all means possible seek to preserve, relying upon the goodness
of God for the preservation of my self and my rights.

This quickened in the Parliament a resolution that the Kingdom be put presently
into a posture of defense, The Parliament declare their resolution of putting
the Kingdom into a posture of defense.

The Earl of Warwick made Admiral of England.

The King answers the Parliaments Declation with another.


and a public Declaration thereupon to be made. They talked of advertisements
and extraordinary preparations of foreign Princes by land and Sea. In order to
this, the Beacons were made up, new Sea-marks set up, much riding, posting with
packquets, whispering and tales telling. The Earl of Northumberland, Admiral of
England, is commanded with all speed to rigg the Kings ships, and equip them
forthwith for the Sea: And because of his indisposition, that charge is
conferred on the Earl of Warwick, against whom the King took great exception;
one very affectionate to the Cause which then first began to be in every man's
mouth.

The Declaration aforesaid was carried to Royston, whither the King was removed
from Theobalds, by the Earls of Pembrook and Holland, who delivered him the
substance of it: to which he returned in a most polite Declaration also, and
verbally told the Lords, that for the Militia, he would not trust his wife and
children with it for an hour; that it was never asked of any King: That to
their Fears and jealousies he would take time to satisfy all the world, hoping
that God would in his good time discover the bottoms and secrets of all plots
and treasons, and set him upright with his people. The substance of his
Declaration was this.

That he had little encouragement to Replies of this nature, when he is told of
how little value his words are with them, though accompanied with Love and
Justice: That his honor ought not to be wounded under the common style and
imputation of evil Councillors: That he had formerly declared his faithful
affection to the Protestant Profession, his whole life answerable in practice;
which should rather be acknowledged by them, than any design of his framed and
declared to alter it in this Kingdom; calling God to be witness, and wishing
that the judgment of Heaven may be manifested on those that have or had any
such design. Concerning his sense of his good Subjects in Ireland, what had he
not done in his Messages to both Houses, offering his own person ready to
venture for their preservation and redemption, being to give God an account of
his interest in them? Denies any design of forcing the Parliament by his Army;
and other particulars of the Petition, of passes granted Col. Leg, my Lord
Jermins Pass, as likewise the Lord Digbies. And as for advertisements from
Rome, Venice, Paris, the Popes Nuncio, the Kings of France and Spain, He is
confident ^o sober man in the Kingdom will believe that he is so desperate or
senceless to entertain such designs, to bring the Kingdom to destruction, and
bury his name and posterity in perpetual infamy. He adds in conclusion, could
there yet want evidence on his part to join with his Parliament? Look back upon
their own Remonstrance in November last of the State of the Kingdom, which
valued his Acts of Grace and Justice at so high a rate, that it declared the
Kingdom a gainer, though it should charge it self by Subsidies and Pole Money
six millions of pounds, besides the Contracting the Sents demands of two
hundred and twenty thousand pounds. Nay more, he has passed those Bills for
the triennial Parliament, for relinquishing his Title to impose upon Merchants
goods, and his power of pressing of Soldiers; for suppressing the Court of
Star, Chamber, High Commission, regulating the Council Table. He offers a free
Pardon to his people, and propounds a r^^^^ciliation.
Are these but words? The Bills for the Forests, the Stannery Courts, the
Clerk of the Markets, the taking away the Vote of the Bishops, nothing but
words? what greater earnest can be given, than the Bill for the continuance of
the Parliament? The length of which he wishes may never alter the nature of
Parliaments. And for a perfect reconciliation with his people, he offers a free
pardon. Nor does he repent of his favors done them, but will meet them in an
honorable way, to add more, with the greatest readiness and kindness, for the
peace, Honor and Prosperity of the Nation.

This seemed satisfactory to the unprejudiced and sober; but prevailed not at
all with the factious and giddy multitude, and less with their Chiefs and
Abetters, who now emit the Ordinance for the defense of the Kingdom, which is
resolved to be no whit prejudicial to the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy; and
next, that the Kings Commissioners of Lieutenancy over the respective Counties
are illegal and void: That their Ordinance for the Militia is to be obeyed as
the fundamental law of this Kingdom* The faction set forth another Declaration
concerning the Militia.
and prepare another Declaration to that purpose.

As the King removed Northward, his mind went Southward, though the Showers
gathered there, which soon after came down in a storm. But it is a question
whether if the King had returned, his influence had not dispelled and
dissipated them* which thickened presently together, and resisted that light
which Majesty dispensed in many after-gratious offers and condescentions, till
the setting of it, after a big and fatal revolution.

The King sends a Message to the Parliament concerning Ireland.
Therefore he sends another Message to them from thence, that he means to take
up his residence at York; conjures them to dispatch the business of Ireland;
and if calamities increase upon his Protestant Subjects there, he shall wash
his hands before all the World from any imputation upon him.

He says, that as he has been forward to retract any thing intrenching upon
them, so he expects an equal tenderness in them toward him, in any
unquestionable and fundamental privilege. That his Subjects be not obliged to
obey any Act, Order or Injunction, to which his Majesty has not given his
consent. And therefore requires that they presume not, upon pretense of any
Order or Ordinance (to which his Majesty is not a party) of the Militia, or any
other thing, to do or execute against the laws: he being to keep the laws
himself, and his Subjects to obey them.

They plead the privilege of Parliament.
To this all the reply they made was, That to have their Vote questioned or
contradicted, is a high breath of privilege of Parliament: and a Committee was
by them appointed to examine where and by whom this Message was counseled: and
as the total of all this absurdity, they justify their last Declaration in
every particular.

The King knowing what the Parliament drove at chiefly, to render him suspect
of favoring Papists, The King proclaims against Papists.
being at Stamford, published a Proclamation for putting the Laws in due
execution against Papists: this somewhat abated the charge which his enemies
labored to fix on him for this particular, though they wrested this also,
giving out that it was a time-serving policy, and that nothing less was
intended.

The Yorkshire Gentry desire a right understanding between King and Parliament.
What the two Houses did ambiguously supplicate, the Yorkshire Gentry did
cordially beg of the King, desiring by such expedients as his Majesty's own
judgment should dictate, a right understanding betwixt him and his Parliament,
to whom they would likewise address themselves. The King returned a gracious
answer, with thanks; tells them that he is not mistaken in the confidence of
their affections, The King returns a gracious answer.
nor will he ever deceive their expectations from him: But as to the prayer of
the Petition, the alone way of a good understanding, was for the Parliament to
consider of his Message of the 20th of January, that the Militia be settled by
Act of Parliament, explained in his Answer to their Petition for it; and wishes
them in the sense of those, to apply themselves to the Parliament for the good
of All.

He resolving to go for Ireland, sends a Message to the Parliament.
The King was now resolved, since he saw how slowly the Irish business
proceeded, for the dispatch of that Rebellion to pass over thither; and to that
purpose sent a Message to the Parliament from York: From which expedition they
dissuade the King, and in lieu of using the Magazine of Hull for that service,
desire it may be sent to the Tower of London, to supply that, almost exhausted;
guessing indeed that the King intended to possess himself of it: Sir John
Hotham admitted into Hull.
but they prevented him, by Sir John Hothams admittance into the Town, standing
affected to their Cause, before the coming of my Lord Newcastle to the same
purpose.

Thereupon they again petition the King in the matter of the Militia, The
Parliament Petition the King for the Militia: they insist upon the dangers of
Popery.
as to his Forts and Magazins, inserting the old standing matter of Popery, in
relation to some Jesuits whom the King had reprieved. To this Petition the
Kings Answer was, that he wondered why a Garrison was put into Hull without his
consent, and Soldiers billeted without Law, contrary to the Petition of right,
and that they could mention to him the transferring of his Magazine without
reason or judgment: Hull is Garrisoned, and the King is troubled that they
should Petition him, and at the instant carve at their one pleasures.
he would know why he might not be thought sufficient to empower and entrust
any person of unquestionable honor and worth with the custody of a Fort, Town,
or Magazine of his own; when they were so confident as to commit it without his
knowledge or consent to Sir John Hotham, though he doubts not but it will be
rendered to him when he shall demand it. Hopes that they will not do in this
case, as they have done in the Militia; petition him, and make themselves the
Carvers: and tells them, that if they attempt any thing herein without his
consent, he will hold it as an act of violence against him, and so declare it
to all the world.

For the Priests, He excuses his repriving of some I^suites.
he refers them to the Law and their Sentence, the time of his Reprieve granted
them being expired. But in that answer to his expedition into Ireland, they
court him there with a Compliment of their fear of the danger of his person,
The Parliament refuse to be governed by Commissioners in his Majesty's absence.
besides the interruption of the proceedings of Parliament. Though to the
first, they were more afraid of that force he should raise to accompany and
attend his person; and as to the second, the distance lay only in their
averseness to an Accommodation: until they were nearer in duty and affection,
the proximity of his person availed not: but they would in no wise endure to
hear of being governed by Commissioners in his Majesty's absence, because it
was presumed there were more then enough of themselves already, that looked
like such things in his presence, if not more Sovereign and imperious than such
could be.

To this Reply the King rejoyns, that he looks upon them as his great Council
with great respect, but also upon himself as not d^prived of his understanding,
or divested of any right he had before the Parliament assembled: he called them
by his Writ and authority, to give him counsel; but did not resign his interest
and freedom, nor will subject himself to their determinations; nor has he
dissented at any time without his reasons given with candor and conscience;
and though a Major part may bind them in their consultations and opinions, yet
he holds himself free to dissent from them.

Anno Dom. 1642.
NOw this great controversy of the Militia came to be decided; and what had
been bandyed with so many words, to be summed up and stated in the case of
Hull, and the Magazine there, which the King as before had refused to be
translated any otherwhere than for his own accommodation in the service of
Ireland: The King resolves to possess himself of Hull.
besides, the County of York added their instances to the Kings resolution,
requesting him, as well for his own as the public safety, it might be
continued where it was. Therefore to end the dispute, and ascertain the matter
without any further contest, the King resolved to go and possess himself
thereof, taking with him a Guard only for his person, which consisted of his
menial servants, and the Gentry adjacent thereabout.

On the 23 of April his Majesty came before the Town, But is denied entrance by
Sir John Hotham, who stood on the Walls, and ^eard himself proclaimed a Traitor.
when, contrary to all expectation, especially of the King, the entrance was
denied him, the gates being shut against him, as Sir John Hotham then upon the
Walls of the said Town peremptorily told him, by Authority of Parliament, by
whose trust he kept it; nor by any means, after a long Parley and persuasion,
would admit the King into the Town, unless under certain disloyal and undutiful
limitations, which the King so abhorred, that moved with just indignation, he
caused Hotham instantly and before his face to be proclaimed Traitor; a name
that stuck to him or all sides, and was his Sentence long before his Execution;
and which, (in such very heinous matters not usual) reached the life of his
eldest Son also. But because his late Majesty's own Sacred Pen has so
compassionately delivered his story, it will be rudeness to that blessed
Prince, and barbarity to Sir John Hotham, to rake further in his ashes than
what we shall have occasion for in the depositing them after Execution.

The Duke of York and Prince ^lector bring in the Town, are suffered to depart.
The Duke of York and the Prince Elector Palatine were gone into the Town the
day before, and were now after some deliberation suffered to go out again; who
came to the King, then in a very great discontent retreated to Beverly, whence
he sent Letters to the Mayor of Hull, which signified to him his Majesty's
displeasure and resentment of the affront done him; thereby also warning him
and the Garrison (which consist^d of a thousand men) not to partake with
Hotham, The King retreat^d to Beverly, writes to the Mayor and Garrison of Hull.
but to lay down their arms and receive the King, who would rather enlarge than
lessen and diminish their Charter and Privileges.

After this Message, he likewise dispatched another to the Parliament,
requiring the Town and Magazine to be delivered to him, and that his honor be
repaired by some signal and remarkable Justice upon Hotham; And to the
Parliament for I^^tice against Hotham.
that injury so closely ^ying at his breast, that till satisfaction be given
him therein, he can intend no other business whatsoever, as portending those
undutiful actions which afterward succeeded: This is, says he, to make me
worse in condition than the meanest Subject, since I cannot enjoy my own; it is
time therefore to examine how he lost them, and to try all possible ways by the
help of God, the Laws, and his good Subjects, to recover them, and vindicate
himself; concluding, that if he fail in the reducing of the place, he is the
first Prince in Christendom that has done so; and prays God to bless him in
these resolutions.

The Parliament order the Lord Li^^tenant of Lincoln to ^uppress all Forc^s
rai^ed against Hull.
This was answered no otherways, but by a Command to their Lord Lieutenant of
the County of Lincoln to suppress all Forces that should be gathered and raised
against the said Town of Hull, and presently expedite the Ordinances of the
Militia framed by themselves, having rejected that of the Kings own
appointment, and drawn by his Council, though not a word in answer against it
to satisfy him; excluding all persons named by the King in his draught, and
committed the trust and power thereof for two years, Sir Richard Gurney Lo^d
Mayor (...) London, sent to the Tower.
to such in whom they confided. Soon after they seized upon Sir Richard Gurney
Lord Mayor of London* whom for an example to other Loyal Magistrates they sent
to the Tower of London; not long after which usage he deceased.

The Parliament Authorize Sir John Hotham to raise the Trained Bands.
Sir John Hotham is also empowered by the Parliament to Summon the Trained Bands
of the County to his assistance; which through the factiousness of others, and
his own menaces, he compass^d; and having them within his reach, to prevent the
King of any supply of Arms thereabout, he disarms the Countrymen, and
dismisseth them.

The King s^mmons the G^ntry of York, for the security of his Person.
Her^upon the King Summoned the Gentry and Freeholders of the County of York,
to whom he complains of all those lawless proceedings of the Parliament and
Hotham, to the danger of his person, which he thinks fit to secure by a guard
from among them; reiterates his Protestation to the Lords then that were with
him, some of whom were sent from the Parliament, and continued there, that he
intended not to raise a War, or embroyl the Kingdom; but since he had so lately
received such an indignity so near his residence, it could not be interpreted
other than an Act of Prudence, to provide this way for his safety; that being
the only end in this design: Which public Declaration was attested by all
the Lords to be his Majesty's intention.

The Parliament Conclude the K. intends War.
Now had the Parliament the occasion they waited for; no Salvo's or
Protestations on the Kings part would serve turn, but it was taken for granted
that the King intended War, and therefore they proceeded presently to put the
peo-into a posture of War, by virtue of their late Ordinance of the Militia, to
rescue the King from his evil Counsel, They take up Arms under pre^ence of
r^scuing the King from his evil Counsel, and prohibit all resort to the King.
who had engaged him in a War against his Parliament. I will not wade further
in this Question, Who began it? because his Majesty on his dying Royal word,
has asserted it by this undeniable proof, Who gave the first Commissions?

In order to this open Hostility intended, they prohibit all resort to the
King, save of those in his special service; and Command the respective Sheriffs
to seize all other than such, as the disturbers of the peace, and to raise the
County-power against them; who were so divided in themselves by contrary
commands, that no difficulty remained to the near ensuing rupture; sides being
taken and avowed, every man on his guard, waiting for the first blow, and
prepared to return it as his judgment or fancy led him. To b^ow up this
animosity into fire and fury, They publish a R^monstrance.
next comes out another Remonstrance from the Parliament, the Daughter of that
which was presented to the King at Hampton Court; that taxed the
maladministration of the Government till the calling of the Parliament, this
recited all their complaints from the very first day of their sitting to the
date thereof; their dispute of the Militia, the business of the five Members,
etc. and so brought the state of their quarrel into one entire body, that their
Partisans, by such a heap of grievances, i^ not by the weight of them, might
without more scrutiny own them, and stand by their Caus^.

This missed not of a plenary and satisfactory Answer from the King; Which is
answ^red by the King.
but Hands had no Ears; the Faction was busy and employed in arming
themselves, like Caesar's, The^ ^avi^e the Scots to their (...).
write and fight together; soliciting also in the mean time their dear
Brethren the Scots to their party, whom though the King so lately had obliged,
and vouchsafed them a particular account of his intentions throughout all these
unhappy transactions, summed up in a Letter to his Privy Counsel in that
Kingdom, The Sco^s pretend a z^al for his Majesty, b^t de^^a^^ for the
Parliament, and have their thanks.
which after communication begot a Protestation from that Kingdom of all the
Loyalty and affection imaginable, with many serious expressions of their
thanks, and gratitude to his Majesty, whose Royal word in the concerns both of
Church and State, they deemed a grievous sin to doubt or question: Yet
nevertheless presently after they declared themselves in favor of the
Parliament, in a large manifestation of their most cordial affection to them,
with as many more good words as they had received Pounds; and in conclusion,
order the said Privy Council not to meddle with any verbal or real engagement
for the King against the Parliament of England, but to keep close to their
Covenant and their English brethren. For all which kindness the Parliament claw
them again, and returned them thanks by their Commissioners resident in London.

But this Remonstrance did not reach all the matter; The Parliament set forth
another Remonstrance, which the King answers.
therefore out comes a third, comprehensive enough; which the King likewise
answered. It will be tedious to recite them, because little new matter in them,
only more passionately written, as bordering betwixt the Gown and the Sword,
which was as good as half drawn already.

As the last essay for an Accommodation, They send him 19 Propositions to York.
that the people might see the Parliament would leave no way untryed, Nineteen
Propositions are sent to the King at York, which in strict terms comprised the
licentiousness of all their former Papers. To these if the King assented, as
they withal Petition him to do, they promise to make him a glorious Prince.

For the Answer to these by the King, The King returns an answer to them.
I refer the Reader to the Kings book, where the vncivility and
unreasonableness thereof is justly censured; though the reply he made to them
presently after their tender, was so argumentative and honest, that it stumbled
many of their friends, and confirmed the Kings good Subjects in their Loyal
integrity.

All hopes being now lost of this Paper-scuffle, The King is assisted by the
Yorkshire Gentry.
the King addresses himself to the Gentry and Commonalty of the County of York
(the populacy being those on whom the Parliamentary pretenses so greatly
operated) and declares to them the same resolutions he had formerly made,
desiring to undeceive them of those opinions the Parliament had instilled every
where; and chooses out of them a guard of Horse, and a Regiment of the Trained
Bands, as a guard to his person; which they cheerfully undertook, and did Duty
in that quality: Here he also found an addition of many worthy Gentlemen and
Nobles ready for his service.

The L^^do^^rs affect the Parliament.
The City of London was likewise as affectionate for the Parliament, having
proffered their service, which was accepted, to secure the two Houses. This
caused the King to send a Letter to the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, The
King writes to the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen: they p^rsist: the King
sends out his Commissions of Array.
forbidding them either to levy Arms, or raise money upon that account. But
seeing them to persist in the same courses, he first sends out his Commissions
of Array to the respective Lord-Lieutenants and their assistants, according to
the Statute of 5 H. 4. and other subsequent Records, which by the Parliament
(on the question) were resolved to be against Law, and the liberty of the
Subject, etc. And then summons his Lords and Privy Council attending him at
York, and declares that he will not require any obedience from them, but by the
Laws of the Land; charging them not to yield obedience to any commands
illegally imposed by others, and that he will defend them and all others from
the Votes of Parliament. Lastly, that he will not engage them in any War
against the Parliament, except for necessary defense against such as invade him
or them.

And publishes a General Declaration, inviting all his loving Subjects to
assist him.
Then came out his general Declaration, where after he had fully unmasqued the
pretenses of the Parliament in their project of Liberty and Religion, he
excites all his loving subjects, according to their Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, to contribute their aid and assistance for the opposing and
suppressing those Traiterous attempts of such persons as would destroy his
Person, Honor, and Estate, Promises 8 l. per cent. and his Lands, Parks, and
Houses, for security.
and engage the Kingdom in a Civil War: D^claring, that whoever shall bring
unto him Money or Ammunition, Horse and Arms, for his or the public defense,
shall receive 8 l. per centum interest, to be assured out of his Forrest-Lands,
Parks, and Houses. And then issues out a Proclamation showing the Legality of
his Commissions of Array. Proclaims the Legality of his Commissions of Array.


To all these the Parliament respectively answer; justify their proceedings,
and promise to use the money advanced for the Irish service, according to the
first designation of it, though herein they failed abundantly, converting the
most part of it to their own use and necessities. The Parliament justify their
proceedings.


Though the Parliament was intent on the business of levying Arms, yet several
Patriots of both Houses did what they could to persuade to an accommodation;
amongst whom Sir Benjamin Rudyard was one of the chief, Sir Ben. Rudyard and
other Members of Parliament earnest for an accommodation.
who all along warned them of the miseries of a Civil War; and what a shame it
would be to them in aftertimes, and so consequently to all Parliaments, if
when the King had condescended so far, they should proceed to the effusion of
blood upon so unnecessary a quarrel. He dyed soon after the first blood was
drawn; and that speech of his on his deathbed is very remarkable: Mr. Pym, and
Mr. Hambden (the Grandees of the then Faction) told me, Mr. Hambden,
(says he) That they thought the King so ill beloved by his Subjects, that he
could never be able to raise an Army to oppose them. Which mistake of theirs,
cost many thousand lives.

On the contrary also, many elaborate vehement Speeches were made by Mr. Pym
and other Grandees, to encourage the Citizens to stand fast to the interest of
the Parliament; and the City was not wayward to such councels. Isaac Penington
was Mayor; Mr. Pym, and Isaac Penington Lord M. of London, as violent for a war.
a busy stickler of the Faction; and many of the Court of Aldermen were little
better affected: the Common Council were generally of the same temper; and
indeed the greatest number of the people inhabiting the said City were alike
disposed.

Now the Militia was on foot: every where the Parliaments Cause had the
precedence of affection, The Militia set on foot.
their Ordinances being obeyed like Acts; wherefore the King prohibited by
Proclamation any Levi^s or Musters of his Subjects any where in England without
his command, and sets on foot his Commission of Array; which the Parliament
likewise inhibit to be obeyed any where: but neither of them signified any
thing to those that were bent and inclined to each Cause; so that the
preparations for War, both of Men, Horse, Money and Arms, went on very fast,
especially on the Parliaments side at London, where all persons of all ages and
Sexes contribute so excessively to the furtherance of the War, The ^^^^iament
bor^^w money o^ ^he public Faith.
that the sum which it amounted unto is almost incredible. This money was
borrowed upon the credit of the PVBLIQVE FAITH, by an Ordinance of Parliament;
a name much adored then, and as much contemned and hated afterward.

The King finding how the pulse of these distracted Kingdoms did beat, The King
(...) for (...) peace.
giving symptoms of some violent disease and distemper approaching, redoubled
his instances to the Houses for peace, adjuring them to prevent that blood-sh^d
now so threatening and imminen^; and they reg^st the like entreaties and
^^^^^stations upon him (but not bating an ace, or receding a tittle from the^r
(...) Demands) so that there was no hopes or likelihood of a Pacification.

Nor wanted there Artifices to uphold and maintain this Credit and Autho^ (...)
which the Parliament had gained over the City, Several f^^tious rumors raised
against the Kings friends.
their Purses and Affections: they were told, and that in solemn Assemblies,
that the evil Counselors about the King intended the abrogation of their
Cities Charter; and if they prevailed, would expose their Wives and Children to
Rapine, Violence, and Villainy, and the wealth and riches of the City; a prey to
desperate and necessitous persons: All which while they continued in the
Parliaments protection, they should have no cause to fear.

With these preparatory discourses and incentives, The London- Mini^ters and
Citizens too violent for the Faction.
the War was presently ushered in; nay, the Citizens were ready to court it, as
the certainest way of safety. Add we also the encouragements of the Ministers
of London, to the other incitations, who were so violent in their crying up the
Cause, that even mere Children became Volunteers, forsook their Parents, and
followed the Camp.

Thither also are we now come: For from the Kings leaving his Court at York,
with an intent to encourage his party in the Commission of Array, and stitle
the Ordinance of the Militia, we cannot call his removes a Progress, but
Expedition; and indeed it was a perfect War levied, though at such distances,
that the twilight of peace was preserved only by his hovering near the Solstice
of his Kingdom, the midland, without engaging the confines of their
Association; which if he had done speedily, it is probable we had not seen that
night of confusion that followed in his setting and declination.

His Majesty therefore having again called the Gentry of York together at
rendezvous, protested his unwillingless, as well as unprovidedness for a War;
desiring (if he should be thereunto compelled) their assistance in the
maintaining his most just Cause; and then departed for Lincolnshire to Newark,
The King at Newark, he sends to the Lord Willoughby of Parham to defill from
aiding the Rebellion, and returns to York.
whither he had sent before his Letters Mandatory to my Lord Willoughby of
Parham, charging him to desist from raising, levying, or exercising any forces
within that County, by virtue of his Commission from the Parliament; wherein
nevertheless he had proceeded. Here the King convened the Gentlemen of this
County, and made to them the like Protestations; and having received some small
supplies, returned back again to York. At the same time the Parliament were
listing men apace, and appointing their General, and the Superior Officers of
the Army.

His Majesty about this time meeting with some oppositions from the Earl of
Stamford, The King causes the Earl of Stamford to be proclaimed Traitor.
Lord Lieutenant of Leicestershire for the Parliament, was pleased to proclaim
the said Earl and his adherents Traitors; to the great dissatisfaction of the
Parliament.

On the other side, Sir John Lucas proclaimed Traitor by the Parliament, and
committed.
Insurrections happening in Essex, the Parliament send down Sir Thomas
Barrington and Mr. Grymstone to quell their Tumults, where they seize Sir John
Lucas and his Lady at Colchester, commit them to the Goal; send his eight
Coach-horses to General Essex; and in order to Sir John's Trial, he is
proclaimed Traitor, sent to London, and committed prisoner to the Gate House.

James Lord Strange, James Lord Strange Impea^hed of High Treason by the
Parliament.
Son and Heir of William Earl of Derby, was likewise by the Parliament
impeached of High Treason, for that he upon the 15th of July last, did at
Manchester in the County of Lancaster summon and raise Forces for the service
of the King: They further charging him with being the death of Richard
Percival, a Linnen-webster; and cause their said Charges to be published in the
Churches of Lancaster and Chester.

Sir John Byron worsted by the Parliament-Forces, and declared Rebel.
Sir John Byron raises some Troops in the County of Oxford for the King, and
being suddenly surprised by the Parliamentarians, sustaineth some loss; and by
them he and his Associates are declared Rebels. He then marches to Worcester,
which Town he seizes for the King. He marches to Worcester, and tak^s it for
the King.


At York the King made the Marquess of Hertford Leiutenant-General of the
Western Counties, intending forthwith himself to set upon Hull (whose stores he
had designed once to have made a Magazine for Ireland, to reduce those Rebels;
which he had often declared to the two Houses; The Marquess of Hertford, L. G.
of the West for the King.
but they would by no means consent to it) but upon deliberate advice he past
by it, only making one attempt near it, to show his just indignation, and to
satisfy his Honor, where he lost unhappily some twenty men, and marched
directly into Nottinghamshire.

The King attempts Hull with (...) and s^ts (...) Standard at Nottingham.
About the beginning of August, he came to Nottingham-Town, and on the tenth of
the same month published his Royal Proclamation, commanding and enjoining all
his Subjects to the Northward of Trent, and twenty miles Southward, to
Rendezvous at Nottingham the 23 of that instant; where he, according to the
purport of his Proclamation, set up his Standard, and where appeared five or
six thousand men. The Earl of Lindsey General for the King.


After a view and Muster of these Royal Volunteers, the King proceeded to the
nomination of a General, who was the Right honorable the Earl of Lindsey,
General formerly for the Rochel-Expedition; and the Parliament made Robert Earl
of Essex their Captain General, The Earl of Essex Captain-G. for the Parliament.
the Earl of Bedford General of the Horse.

Essex about this time departed from London in great state and magnificence.

The King leaves Nottinghamshire, and marched into Staffordshire, thence into
Leicestershire, The Earl of Bedford G. of their H^r^e.
car^ssing the Gentry all the way he went; so into the Confines of Wales, and
sat down at last in Shrewsbury, where after he had a while rested, the Gentry,
Essex departs from London in state.
Freeholders, and Inhabitants of that County, with other additions out of
Wales, being assemb^ed, he made this Oration, which for its excellency, and
because it contains the truth of the quarrel, The King in Staffordshire and
Leicestershire.
is here inserted.

GENTLEMEN,
His Oration to the Gentry, Freeholders and Inhabitants.
IT is some benefit to me from the insolency and misfortunes which have driven
me about, that they have brought me to so good a part of my Kingdom, and to so
faithful a part of my people. I hope neither you nor I shall repent in coming
hither; I will do my part that you may not, and of you I was confident before I
came. The residence of an Array is not usually pleasant to any place, and mine
may carry more fear with it, Wherein he promises to have a tender respect to
his Subjects.
since it may be thought (being robbed and spoiled of all mine own, and such
terror used to fright and keep all men from supplying of me) I must only live
upon the aid and relief of my people; but be not afraid: I would to God my poor
Subjects suffered no more by the insolence and violence of that Army raised
against me (though they have made themselves wanton even with plenty) than you
shall do by mine; and yet I fear I cannot prevent all disorders; I will do my
best. And this I promise you, no man shall be a looser by me, Choosing rather
to melt down his own plate, Sell or Morgage his Land, than to oppress them.
if I can help it.

I have sent hither for a Mint; I will melt down all my own plate, and expose
all my Land to sale or morgage, that if it be possible, I may not bring the
least pressure upon you: in the mean time, I have summoned you hither to do
that for me and your selves, for the maintenance of your Religion, and the Law
of the Land (by which you enjoy all that you have) which other men do against
us. Do not suffer so good a Cause to be lost, for want of supplying me with
that which will be taken from you by those who pursue me with this violence.
And whilst these ill men Sacrifice their Money, Plate, and utmost industry to
destroy the Commonwealth, be you no less liberal to preserve it. Assure your
selves, if it please God to bless me with success, I shall remember the
assistance that every particular man here gives me, to his advantage. However,
it will hereafter, (how furiously soever the minds of men are now possessed) be
honor and comfort to you, that with some charge and trouble to your selves,
you did your part to support the King, and preserve the Kingdom.

With those expressions, to which his actions agreed, he so won the affections
of that County, The King at Shrewsbury with 6000 f^ot, 3000 ho^^, and ^^ar 2000
Dragooners.
and the adjacent, that before the middle of October* which was about three
weeks after his first coming to Shrewsbury, with a small party, rather than any
force or Army, he was grown to a complete strength, consisting of about 6000
foot, 3000 brave horse, and almost 2000 Dragooners.

From thence, having issued out Warrants for Horses and Ca^ts, in order to his
removal, he marched along within view of Coventry, He marches (...) o^
Coventry.
but made no essay or attempt upon it; not intending to lose any time in
sitting down before it, unless the Town had been freely surrendered to him. From
thence he came to Southam, not many miles distant from their Lord General.

This March of his struck some terror into the City of London it self, The
Londoners (...).
though all their Army was then in a readiness, and attending the King;
therefore the Trained Bands were speedily raised for a guard of the City, and
fortifications, such as the time would allow, were ordered to be forthwith made
round it; ac^ording to which Order, many hundreds of men were set on work, who
were soon alter seconded by the several Companies and Parishes in London and
the Suburbs, as also by the Wives and Maids, who followed a Drum in rank and
file, with a Rampier-basket between two of them, until a regular Line and
Circumva^lation, taking up twelve miles in circuit, was quite finished.

Windsor-Castle was at this time garrisoned by the Parliament, C^l. Ven governs
Windsor- Castle for the Parliament, where Barksted commands (...).
Col. Ven being sent down with twelve Companies of foot, in one whereof
Barkstead the Regicide commanded, it being his first military employment as
Governor. Diverse Citizens suspected for their affection and loyalty to the
King, were also at this time secured. And the association of the several
Counties first projected and begun, and money and plate raised for the
Parliament: in so great danger did the Cock-sure Grandees of the Faction then
see and find themselves. The Parliament (...) of the Counties.


Indeed the Kings design was London, which at the approach of such an Army
would put his friends in a capacity to appear for him, and facilitate and end
the War in its beginning, which the King passionately desired. But considering
that it was dangerous venturing to be enclosed between the Army and the City,
with their entire forces, he resolved to face about, and fight the Earl of
Essex first, who having garrisoned several places, and lessened his numerous
Army, was advancing after him.

Portsmouth was now taken by Sir John Merrick, Fortsmouth and Southsea Castle
taken for the Parliament by Sir John Merrick.
having first surprised Southsea Castle, and held it for the Parliament:
Colonel Goring being forced to yield it, the Town being commanded by that
Castle, before the Marquess of Hertford could come to the relief of it, being
then besieged in Sherburn by the Earl of Bedford; Goring, Goring goes to France.
according to agreement, passing for the present over into France.

The Earl of Essex advances into Worcestershire, while the Kings Army staid
still at Shrewsbury, expecting forces out of South Wales; to prevent the
conjunction of whom, Essex sent a party of Horse under the command of Colonel
Sands and Colonel Feinnes, betwixt whom and Prince Rupert and the Lord Byron,
happened a smart encounter in the lanes near Worcester City, A smart skirmi^h
near Worcester. Major Douglass killed. Worcester Garriso^'d for the Parliament
by the Earl of Essex.
where at first the Parliament-Army had the better; but Prince Rupert falling
in the Rear, forced them to leave their design. Colon^l Sands was mortally
wounded, his Major Douglass was killed, with the loss of threescore men;
nevertheless Essex hastily advancing, the Royallists quitted Worcester, which
thereupon was Garrisoned for the Parliament.

While the Earl of Essex staid here about settling the Militia, the King passed
directly away from Shrewsbury, (where he had coined money out of the Plate
freely brought him by the Gentry) toward London, The King coins his plate into
money.
having got the start of Essex, who thereupon doubled his haste after him. The
King therefore resolved to fight him, and staid at Keynton, whither next
morning came the Essexians.

Edgehill fight Prince Rupert commands the right W^^g of the Horse.

The Lord Wilmot Commands the left ^ing.

The Earl of Lindsey General for the King.

The Earl of Essex General for the Parliament.

Their chief Commanders were Colonel Ramsey, Sir William Balfour, Sir Philip
Stapleton, and the Lord Field^ng.


On Sunday, October. 23. the King in Battalia descended from Edgehill; whence
with a Prospective-glass he viewed the Parliaments Army; and being asked what
his Majesty thought of them, he answered: I never saw the Rebels before in a
body; I am resolved to fight them: God and good men assist my righteous cause.
The King had the advantage both of the ground and Wind, his Army drawn up in
very good order; his main Battle of Foot winged on both sides with a number of
brave Horse; but those on the right, where Prince Rupert commanded, were the
most choice and courageous. The other Wing was led by the Lord Wilmot,
Lieutenant General of the Horse; the Battle by the Earl of Lindsey General of
the field, on foot in the head of them, with a half-Pike in his hand. In the
whole Army, were very many expert and valiant Commanders: all the distrust was
in the Welsh Infantry, who at first beginning were somewhat skittish. In this
posture the King marched into the Vale adjoining, called The Vale of Red-Horse,
a name suitable to the color that was that day bestowed on it: which Essex
having notice of, he presently drew his Army out of Keynton Town, where he
quartered that night, and put it into this order. He himself, as the other
General, on foot at the head of his Infantry, which made up one entire body,
opposed himself to the Kings; on the left Wing stood Col. Ramsey a Scotch man,
with five Regiments of Horse; on the other Sir William Balfour, and Sir Philip
Stapleton, who commanded the Generals Lifeguard of Horse, that fought stoutly;
and behind them, as a Reserve, was placed the Lord Fielding with his Regiment
of Horse.

Prince Rupert ov^rthrows Col. Ramsey.

Col. Essex killed.


Both Armies thus facing one another, the fight began with the exchange of
Artillery; which doing no great execution on either side, Prince Rupert fell
with fury upon Col. Ramsey, and utterly overthrew him, so that that whole Wing
fled with speed toward Keynton. The Foot placed near to that Wing seeing the
rout and slaughter, threw down their Arms, and fled also; of which Colonel
Essex's Brigade was the greatest part. The Colonel being thus forsaken, put
himself into the battle, and was of great service afterward that day, till he
was shot in the Thigh with a Bullet, of which he soon after dyed. Prince Rupert
following the chase to Keynton-Town, Prince Rupert's mistake.
fell there on the Wagons Essex had left behind him, and returned not to the
Field, (which else had been totally the Kings) until Colonel Hambdens Regiment,
Col. Hambden comes to assist Essex.
and some other Forces which were coming to join with Essex, forced him with
their Canon out of the Lanes wherein he continued his pursuit. (The Earl of
Carnarvan seconding the same mistake, through heat of Courage.) On the other
Wing, Lord Wilmot worsted by Sir Will. Balfour. E. of Lindsey mortally wounded;
his Son the Lord Willoughby taken prisoner.
Sir William Balfour had put my Lord Wilmot to it, and had beat him from his
ground; so that the Kings Foot on that side were left naked, and both Front and
Flank attaqued by Foot and Horse. The main Battle was here joined: Balfour
breaking in pieces two Regiments of the Kings, had opened the way to the
Standard. Here the Earl of Lindsey was mortally wounded, performing the part of
2 valiant man, as well as an expert General; and his Son the Lord Willoughby
coming in to his rescue, taken prisoner. Sir Edmond Verney slain.
Sir Edmond Varney the Standard Bearer was slain under it: But another brisk
charge being made upon Balfour, and fresh supplies coming into that part so
distressed; The Kings Standard taken, and rescued, by Sir John Smith, whom the
King therefore Knighted.
the Standard taken by Essex, and in the hands of one Chambers his Secretary,
was rescued by Sir John Smith, whom the King after the battle Knighted, and
made him a Banneret for his noble service; and the Parliamentarians were
repelled again.

It was near evening, and both Armies stood at a gaze; Horse being drawn, as in
the beginning of the fight, on both sides of the Foot, neither of them
attempting any more on either part: Both Armies divide.

The King retreats.

Earl of Essex marches to Warwick.

The Victory doubtful on either part.

Banbury Garrisoned by the King.

Solemn thanks given on both sides.

The Parliament reward the Earl of Essex with 5000 l.

Slain on both sides near 6000. On the Kings side, the Lord Aubigney, Col.
Munro, etc.

On the Parliaments, the Lord St. John, Lieu. Col. Ramsey. Earl of Essex
marches toward Coventry, the King by Ayno to Banbury, to Oxford, and toward
London.

Commissioners from the Parliament tender Propositions, only to prevent the
Kings intentions, and to gain time for Essex to recruit: a notable Skirmish at
Branford, where the King met with the Regiments of Col. Hollis, Col. Hambden,
and the Lord Brooks, 300 Parliamentarians slain, among whom Lieu. Col. Quarles,
as many taken prisoners.


the Royalists knew that Essex had received an addition as aforesaid under
Hambden, and so were stronger in Foot; the Essexians likewise knew that Prince
Ruperts Horse, which were the best, were as good as fresh and untouched, and
they had tasted of their Gallantry. In this consultation they stood till night,
when the King retreated to the place from whence he descended, the side of
Edgehill, where with the Prince in his Coach he passed that night, his Army
keeping great Fires; and in the morning marched his Foot away, while the Horse
stood in Battalia toward Ayno. The Earl of Essex lodged that night on the
place where the fight was, and then (not without fear and discouragement)
marched to Warwick, leaving the King to pursue his way for London, which was
the thing by this fight he attempted to hinder.

The Victory is questioned by either part: the King was denied it, because he
left the field, and the dead to the disposal of the enemy, and marched away.
That was answered, that it was agreeable to the Kings design, which was no
more than to make his way free for London aforesaid; and expedition was
requisite. It is denied also to the Parliament, for that they lost somewhat
more men, and more Standards, and received a confessed defeat in one part of
the Army: But the main was, that they durst not offer to set upon or impede the
King in his March the next morning, but go away far enough from him to
Coventry, and thereby lost Banbury (wherein was a well-appointed Garrison) to
the King; which was a remarkable Trophee of his Conquest.

However, both parties gave God solemn thanks (on days set apart) for their
success and victory; the Parliament adding other to their General for his
valor and good conduct in that business, and presented him with 5000 l. for a
reward of his service.

On both sides were slain here near 6000 men, as by the Country it was judged,
who had the burial of the dead. On the Kings party were slain of note, the
right Noble and valiant the Lord Aubigney, who died of his wounds at Abingdon,
and was buried in Christ-Church Oxford, (Father to the most illustrious Charles
Duke of Richmond); the Earl of Lindsey, Sir Edmond Varney, as before, and
Colonel Monro a Scotch-man. On the Parliaments side, the Lord St. John of
Bletso, who dyed also of his wounds; Colonel Essex, and Lieutenant Colonel
Ramsey; all men of singular courage and resolution.

The Earl of Essex next day marched toward Coventry, and the King by Ayno,
(where his Army refreshed themselves) to Banbury, which was presently delivered
to him; and so to Oxford.

The King marching from Oxford, was by the way to London met by Commissioners
from the Parliament, tendering Propositions, and desiring that during the Treaty
the Kings Army should march no nearer this way; to spin time, while Essex could
recruit his Army: Wherefore the King advancing from Colebrook, came to
Brainford, where part of the Parliaments Army, (being the Regiments of Colonel
Hollis, Hambden, and the Lord Brooks) for a while maintained their ground
stoutly; but being over-powred, some were driven into the River, and there
drowned, and three hundred slain, among whom was Lieutenant Colonel Quarles,
and as many taken prisoners. This brought a general consternation upon the City
of London; all shops were shut up, and all the Regiments, both Trained Bands
and Auxiliaries, were drawn out: So that the Earl of Essex had a most complete
and numerous Army of a sudden. Hereupon the King presently marched away,
fearing to be encompassed by the Parliamentarians, over Kingston-bridge (which
he broke down, to stop the pursuit Essex made after him) to Reading, and so to
Oxford, The King at Oxford.
where he took up his Winter Quarters.

Sir William Waller takes Winchester. Chichester delivered to the Parliament,
Marlborough to the King.

Lord Hopton Arms against the Earl of Stamford, his Regiment put to the Sword
by Prince Rupert at Cyrencester. Gloucester summoned.


The Cities of Winchester and Chichester delivered to the Parliament,
Marlborough to the King, and the Lord Hopton armed against the Earl of
Stamford; several Towns taken for the King in the West, others for the
Parliament in the North.

Cyrencester had been Garrisoned by the Parliament-Forces of Gloucester, being
the mid way betwixt that City and Oxford. Upon this place Prince Rupert had a
design, though his march that way was given out for the regaining of Shudly
Castle, (out of which Colonel Massey had smothered the Royallists with wet
hay:) for afte^ he had passed some ten miles beyond Cyrencester, he suddenly
returned back, and surprised the Guards, within two hours time became Master of
the place, putting the Earl of Stamfords Regiment to the Sword, who made a
stout opposition, taking 1100 prisoners, and 8000 arms, and other provisions
for War; it being newly made a Magazine. From thence the Prince came before
Gloucester, summoned the Town, and departed.

Litchfield-Close Garrisoned by the K. Besieged by the Lord Brook. He is
killed by a Musket Shot: The Close delivered to the Parliament.

The Regiments of the Lord Wilmot, Lord Grandison, Lord Digby, Sir William
Penniman, Col. Blague, Col. Usher, and Col. Gray, take Marlborough, with the
Governor Col. Ramsey.


The Lord Brook and the Earl of Northampton were in Arms against each other in
the Counties of Warwick and Stafford, where several small skirmishes had been
between them: At last, in March, the Lord Brook came and besieged Litchfield
Close, Garrisoned by the King; and as he was viewing the approaches to it out
of a Window in the Tower, a single Bullet from the Close shot him in the head
through the eye; of which he fell down dead: nevertheless the siege was
continued, and the Close delivered to the Parliamentarians.

His death happened by the shot aforesaid on St. Chads day, in whose memory the
Minster from whence he was killed is called by the name of St. Chad, he being
the first Bishop of that See.

The Kings Forces under the command of Lieutenant General the Lord Wilmot,
assisted with his own Regiment of Horse, that of the Lords Grandisons and
Digbies, with Sir William Pennimans and Colonel Blagues Regiment, of Foot, and
Colonel Vshers and Colonel Greys of Dragons, took the Town of Marlborough,
defended by Colonel Ramsey a Scot, and about five hundred Foot; the said
Ramsey, and diverse of the chief Rebels brought prisoners to Oxford; all their
Arms taken, and four Colors, and the Town Garisoned for the King.

This day paid success to the King also in the North, where the Earl of
New Castle besieged Tadcaster, Tadcaster besieged by the Earl of New Castle,
taken and Garrisoned by the King.

Lord Fairfax stormeth Leeds. The Royalists defeated.


a place well fortified, and better manned; the strength of the
Parliament-Forces being summed up in this Town and Hull. Several Assaults were
made most part of that day and evening, wherein several were killed, among whom
was Captain Lifter. This resolution so discouraged the defendants, that they
Slipped away in the night to Cawood and Selby, leaving the Town in a very tenable
condition for his Majesty's service.

Leeds stormed by the Lord Fairfax, and a defeat given to the Royalists
thereabouts, and Belvoir-Castle, belonging to the Earl of Rutland, surprised
for the King; Belvoir-castle surprised for the King.

Col. Massey active in Gloucestershire. Salisbury plundered by the Faction.

Yarum fight.


while near the same time, Colonel Massey played feats in Gloucestershire, and
Salisbury plundered by another party of the Parliaments. Yarum-fight also
betwixt Colonel Goring and General King, against some Forces of the Parliament,
as Colonel Goring was conveying the Arms and Ammunition he brought over with
him from Holland, who had the Victory.

About this time happened a Skirmish betwixt Colonel Hambden and Sir Gilbert
Gerrard at the Brill, of which Sir Gilbert was Governor: wherein about a
hundred were killed and wounded of the Parliaments side; the rest fled. Sir
Gilb. Gerrard puts Hambden to flight.


The Queen having taken Shipping at Scheveling near the Hague in Holland, on
the 22 being met by the Earl of Newcastle, the Marquess of Montros^, and the
Lord Ogilby, she landed at Burlington-Bay, Queen landing at Burlington-Key, is
in imminent danger; But escaping, is conducted to York, and from thence to the
King at Edgehill.
where on the 24 came four Ships of the Parliaments, who making several shots
of cross-Bars against the house, she was forced to rise out of her Bed, and to
get under a Hill to save her life; and then was honorably conducted through
Maltou and Norburton to York, and from thence not long after (to his Majesty's
great content, who most entirely loved her, as she him) met the King at
Edgehill.

After General Essex had recruited his Army with new supplies, the first thing
he attempted was the siege of Reading; Reading besieged by the Earl of Essex.

The Governor Sir Arthur Aston wounded

Col. Fielding yields the Town to the Parliament

Marq. of Newcastle defeated at Wakefield by Sir Thomas Fairfax Monmouth and
Hereford taken by Sir Will. Waller for the Parliament.


which being manfully defended by Sir Arthur Aston, till he received a wound on
his head by the falling of a Brickbat; and the relief brought by the King
himself from Oxford being worsted at Caversham-bridge, after ten days siege was
yielded by Colonel Fielding (then substituted Governor) to the Parliament.

In the North, things went something equaller then before on the Parliaments
side: Sir Thomas Fairfax had defeated the Kings Forces under the Marquess of
Newcastle at Wakefield, and buoyed up the sinking interest of that Cause.
Monmouth likewise was taken by the Parliaments Forces under the command of Sir
William Waller; who also took Hereford and other places.

This in sum: more particularly now. Of the West, where the Kings interest bore
the greatest sway, we have hitherto said little: It will be now time to turn
that way, and see from what beginnings the War arose in that quarter, where for
the most part, its principal events and concerns were placed.

Two Proclamations were about this time published; one from the Earl of
Cumberland, the other from the Earl of Newcastle; whereby Ferdinando Lord
Fairfax* Sir Thomas Fairfax, Sir Matthew Bointon, Sir Edward Loftus, Sir Henry
Forbes, Sir Thomas Malleverer, Sir Richard Darby, Sir Christopher Wray, Sir
Henry Anderson, Ferdinando Lord Fairfax and his son Tho. Fairfax, with others
proclaimed Traitors, by the Earl of Cumberland, and the Earl of Newcastle. The
two aforesaid Earl^ proclaimed Traitors by the Parliam^nt.

The King m^re prosperous in the West.


Sir John Savil, Sir Edward Rodes, Sir Hugh Cholmley, Sir Thomas Rennington,
Sir Thomas Norcliffe, and others, were declared Traitors; which the Parliament
retaliate upon the Earls in like manner.

The menage of the Military matters there, were on the Kings part, as to the
remote Counties of Cornwall and Devon shire, (after the Retreat of the Marquess
of Hertford, Lieutenant General of the Western Association, with Sir Lewis
Dives out of Sherburn (where they were besieged by the Earl of Bedford, but in
vain) in Dorcester-shire) was committed to four eminent persons, viz. the Lord
Mohun, Sir Ralph Hopton, Colonel Ashburnham, and Sir John Barkley; by whose
joint Counsels and Forces, levied by their respective Friends and Interests, an
Army was framed to oppose the Earl of Stamford, then coming down from
Gloucester, where he first was made Governor, as Lord Lieutenant jointly with
the Lord Roberts of the same County, to settle the Militia for the Parliament;
having a Commission therefore, according to that Ordinance; which service was
well advanced.

At the approach of this enemy, near Liskard, Liskard fight January 19. Sir
Ralph Hopton chief Commander for the King at Liskard.
it was taken into consideration to whom the alone charge and ordering of the
Battle should be entrusted, for four would breed distraction: whereupon the
business of the day was deservedly devolved upon Sir Ralph Hopton, who had been
an old Soldier in the Low Countries; and yet before the War, had been taken
for a Puritan, and a Commonwealths-man, against the Prerogative: he was desired
by them all, as hitherto they had prevented any such division, by an equal
moderation, to take it upon him.

After therefore he had commanded public prayers in the head of every
Squadron, He orders public Prayers at the head of each Squadron.
(which was performed) he drew up the Foot in the best Order he could, placing
a Forlorn of Musketeers in the little enclosures, and then winged them with
the Horse and Dragoons he had.

This done, The Royalists get the day, and come to Liskard.
two Minion small Drakes being fetched from the Lord Mohuns house, were planted
within random-shot of the enemy, concealed by the Horse from them; which were
discharged with such success, that the enemy quickly quitted their ground, and
in a rout fled; on which the Royalists did sparing execution. There were taken
1250 prisoners, most of their Colors, all their Canon, Arms and Ammunition;
and so the Victor-Army came that night to Liskard.

Salt-Ash was assaulted and forced by Sir Ralph Hopton, Salt Ash assaulted by
Hopton.
where he took ten pieces of Ordnance, 700 more Prisoners, 400 Arms, and a Ship
with 16 pieces of Ordnance.

Litchfield besieged and ^ummon^d i^ the Ea^l of Northampton, March 19. The
(...) by Brereton and Gell; Hopton-Heath Fight. The Earl of Northampton state.
Litchfield was no sooner delivered to the Parliamentarians, but Spencer the
valiant Earl of Northampton comes and besieges it again for the King, and
summons the Governor Lieutenant Colonel Russel to deliver it to him: he
refuses; and in the interim Sir Wiliam Brereton and Sir John Gell advance to
his relief, with 3000 men and upwards: against these the Earl draws off a Party
from the Leaguer, and at Hopton-Heath, on a ground full of Conyboroughs, (which
afforded ill footing for Horse, of which the Earls Forces chiefly consisted)
Charges the Parliamentarians, where at last he obtained a Victory with the
price of his life; a dear bargain for the King and his Cause, of which he was a
most magnanimous Assertor; he was first unhors'd, whether by the disadvantage
of the Ground, or born down by the Enemies, is uncertain: he refused quarter,
and was killed by a private unlucky hand. His Forces returned afresh to the
Siege, where soon after they were seconded by Prince Rupert, who having coasted
the Country from his summons of Gloucester into Wales, ^itchfield (...) to
Prince Rupert.
returned back by Litchfield, where he so powerfully carried on the Siege, that
the stout Governor was compelled to hearken to his Terms, and surrender that
place, which continued for the King throughout the War, the price it cost being
well worth, and requiring the safe keeping of the Jewel. The rendition was the
16 day of April: I would not disjoyn the story, for the years sake.

Grantham taken for the K. by Colonel Cavendish.
Colonel Charles Cavendish reduced Grantham to the Kings obedience, taking 350
Prisoners, with Officers and Colors, and then demolished the Fortifications;
the like fortune had the Parliamentarians in recovering Marlborough from the
King, Marlborough for the Parliament.
which was regained by them; but soon after, as not tenable, was slighted by
all parties.

Anno Dom. 1643.
THis year began with the smart actions, Prince ^upert at Brimingham.

A slight skirmish.


as before, of Prince Rupert, who on the third of April entered and Mastered
Brimingham Town, the residence of a famed Lecturer. Some Welchmen were here got
together for the Parliament, where they made some little defense; but were soon
beaten up to their Barricadoes, which they forsook likewise and fled; betwixt
150 killed and taken, The Earl of Denbigh slain.
some good Ammunition, but all not worth the life of that stout old Earl of
Denbigh, who was here killed in the Service of his Sovereign.

Scarborough delivered by Capt. Brown Bushel. for which he was beheaded.
Next ensued a revolt of a notable place in the North to the King, as the year
before began with a notable revolt of Hull to the Parliament: such another
parallax was throughout the War in the Western and Northern Battles; if one had
the better in the West, at the same time the other had it in the North. Now
Scarborough was delivered to the King by the means of one Captain Brown Bushel,
who long afterward paid for it with his head at Tower Hill.

Fairfax d^feated at Bramham-Moor. The Parliaments Cause endangered; the Scots
invited to their assistance.
The Lord Fairfax, who commanded in chief for the Parliament in the North, after
several Velitations and Skirmishes betwixt him and the Earls of Newcastle and
Cumberland, Generals for the King, who had declared this Lord and his Adherents
Traitors, was overthrown at Bramham-Moor; and the Parliaments Cause, through
this and other losses in those parts, greatly endangered; whereupon the Scots
were hastily solicited to come into the aid of their English brethren, as we
shall see at large hereafter.

Queen proclaimed Trayto^.
Now the Parliament flew high in their consultations at home; the Grandees
working upon the sober part of the Parliament, that the action of the Queen, in
bringing over Arms, Money, and other provisions for the assistance of the King,
was a dangerous destructive business, wound up the anger of the two Houses to
such a pitch, that she was proclaimed Traitor: and at the same time, down went
all the Crosses throughout England; Cheapside-Cross and other Crosses
demolished. The Regalia seized at Westminster by Mr. H. Martin.
particularly, the third of this month, Cheapside-Cross was demolished.

And for the better carrying on of the work of Reformation, Mr. Henry Martin a
Member of Parliament enters violently into the Abby-Church at Westminster,
defaces the Ornaments of the Church, and breaking open two doors makes his way
to a private place where the Crowns, Scepters, and other Utensils of State used
by Kings on their day of Coronation were: but Mr. Wheeler persuaded him to be
more moderate, he only secured them by sealing up the Doors.

After this beginning of Reformation, Cov^nant taken by the Parliament, the
Londoners, and all within the Parliaments command.
the Parliament took the Solemn League and Covenant at Westminster. It was
first framed in Scotland, and was generally taken by them in the Year 1639. The
main drift of it was against the Episcopal Dignity, and was now, for the mutual
indearment of the two Nations (assurance being promised the Parliament from
Scotland) pressed upon all in England, where the Parliaments power was
Paramount, being taken throughout London the fifth of this month.

The Earl of Essex advances from Reading to Tame, Essex advances from Reading
to Tame* Prince Rupert falls upon their quarters.
where a general sickness seized upon the Army: during their quartering there
about, Prince Rupert fell into part of their quarters; but the Essexians taking
the Alarm, and drawing out, the business came to a Fight in Chalgrave field,
where Colonel Hambden that great stickler against Shipmoney was mortally
wounded. Chalgrave fight, Hambden mortally wounded.
It was observable, that in this place the said Colonel Hambden first Listed
and Trained his men in the beginning of the War.

The Lord Keeper Littleton having departed with the Great Seal to Oxford, Id.
Littleton ^lies with the Great Seal to Oxford, a new one voted.
according to the Kings Command, the Parliament voted a new Great Seal to be
made.

To cast an eye to the affairs of the West, Sir Ralph Hopton, after his little
victory at Liskard, having made sure of the County of Cornwall, and established
all things to the advantage of the Kings affairs there* Sir. R. Hopton marches
into Devon-shire against the E. o^ Samford. and Ma. G^^. Chudleigh, Stratton
fight.
marched into Devonshire, to oppose the Earl of Stamford and Major General
Chudleigh for the Parliament; with whom on Tuesday, May 16 a Battle happened at
Stratton in that County. The Kings Forces had the disadvantage, both in want of
Ammunition, and being necessitated to March up a ste^p Hill; open to all
oppositions, to come to fight; being in number not above 3000, the sixth part
whereof was Horse and Dragoons. The Enemy were above 5000, with the same
quantity of Horse, but supplied that defect with the strength of the Hill, on
which they were fortified.

The Royalists attempted their ascent four several ways, The Kings party
worsted. Ma. G. Chudleigh taken by Sir John Berkley, and the fortune of the day
restored.
and were as resolutely beaten down; the fight continuing from five in the
morning, till three in the afternoon, without any certainty of event or
success on either party. Major General Chudleigh charged stoutly against a
stand of Pikes commanded by Sir Bevil Greenvile, to the disordering of his
Party, and the overthrowing of his Person; but in time came Sir John Berkley,
and restored the fortune of the day, by taking Major General Chudleigh Prisoner.

Toward the end of the day, the several parties met at the top of the Hill,
with great shouts of joy; which the routed Enemy confusedly forsook and fled.
There were taken seventeen hundred Prisoners, all their Cannon and Ammunition,
being thirteen brass Pieces of Ordnance, seventy barrels of Powder, with a
Magazine of Biscuit, and other provisions proportionable. By this opportune
Victory, all that Nook of the West was reduced to the Kings entire obedience,
Hopton then created Baron Hopton of Stratton.
except Plymouth; and for which important service, the King presently honored
Sir Ralph with the Title of Baron Hopton of Stratton, from the place where he
achieved his honor.

The Parliament had appointed first Colonel Thomas Essex, Col. Thomas Essex and
Col. Not. Fiennes Governors of Bristol.
then Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes, to be Governor of Bristol, of which in the
beginning of the troubles they had possessed themselves: and having discovered a
Plot of delivering the City to Prince Rupert, (who accordingly was drawn down
near the place expecting the Signal, Yeomans and Bourcher executed.
which was ringing of a Bell, and opening a gate) surprised and secured the
intelligencers, viz. Mr. Robert Yeomans, and Mr. George Bourcher, Earl of
Northampton defeats Colo^^l John Fiennes.
two of the Citizens; and soon after, notwithstanding the King and his Generals
mandates, and threats of retaliation, disloyally executed them in that City.

Wardour- Castle taken for the Parliament, and a wh^le after retaken by Sir
Francis Dorrington.
James Earl of Northampton defeats a body of Parliamentarians in Middleton
Cheiny Town-field, under Colonel John Fiennes, killed 200, took 300 more, with
their Arms (while the rest fled to Northampton) and brought them into Banbury
his Garrison. At this time also Wardour-Castle in Wilt-shire was taken by the
Parliaments Forces, and not long after retaken by Sir Francis Dorrington. But
enough to be said of such petty places.

Sir William Waller Garrisons Taunton and Bridg-Water for the Parliament.
Sir William Waller was now advanced into the West with a well-furnished Army,
to prevent those dangers which the growing Fortunes of the Lord Hopton
threatened to the Cause, and the well-affected in those Counties. By force
partly, and partly by persuasion, he had screwed himself into a great many
Towns, chiefly Taunton and Bridge-water, which he Garisoned: whereupon the Lord
H^mpton joining with Prince Maurice and the Marquess of Hartford, Hopton joins
with Prince Maurice and Marq. of Hartford.
advanced Eastward, and at a place called Landsdown met with Sir William drawn
up in a place of great advantage with Forlorns. Sir Bevil Greenvil and Sir
Nicolas Slanning advanced first upon them, and some Horse; but Sir William had
so lined the Hedges, Landsdown fight.
and the Horse were so galled with Musket Shot, that they were forced to
retreat disorderly toward the Rear of their Foot: Sir Bevil Greenvil and Sir
Nicholas Slanning advance toward Sir William Waller.
when the Cornish-men came on with resolution, and beat them out of their
Hedges; and pursued them up an ascent, where they had almost regularly
fortified themselves by Hedges, and laid Stone-walls. From hence Waller charged
with a body of Horse, and again disordered them; yet they rallied, and received
another Repulse* in one of which Major Lowre (that commanded part of the Horse)
was slain in the Head of them, They are disordered, Ma^or Lowre and Sir Bevil
Greenvil slain.
as also that noble person Sir Bevil Greenvil in the Head of his stand of
Pikes, with which he had done signal Service so often; diverse Gentlemen of less
note falling with him, until in conclusion night drawing on, nay quite spent,
for it was one of the clock in the morning, and past, before they gave over,
the Battle might be said (or a continued Skirmish it was) to be drawn betwixt
them, the Royalists continuing in the Field all ^ight, having possession of the
Field, dead, and of 300 Arms, and nine barrels of Powder le^t by the Enemy,
which by some accident or treachery was fired, Lord Hopton hurt.
and the Lord Hopton thereby hurt and endangered. Here were slain besides on
the Kings part Mr. Leak, son to my Lord Deincourt, now Earl of Scars-dale,
Diverse others slain.
Mr. Barker, Lieutenant Colonel Wall, Capt. James, Capt. Cholwel, and Mr.
Bostard.

Lord Hopton surrounded by Waller.
That which on the other side seems to say that Sir William Waller had the
better of it, is, that within two days after he had cooped up my Lord Hopton in
the Devises; this again is imputed to the want of Ammunition, the Royalists
being forced, Round-way Down fight.
as they were taught by their expert General, to boil and beat their Bed-cords
to make Match of it. Lord Hopton re^^^ed by Pr. Maurice, Earl of Carnarvan,
Lord Wilmot, and Lord Biron:
But long they were not surrounded in that untenable place, before Prince
Maurice, the Earl of Carnarvan, the Lord Wilmot, and Lord Biron, with 1500
choice Horse, came to their rescue, and presented themselves on the 13 of the
same Month by break of day, to the Enemies Leaguer; and having given a sign to
their Friends within, fell with much valor on their Enemies, and routed them
on Round-way-down: Which Onset being seconded from the Foot within, proved a
total rout to the Enemy, whose Curassiers under Sir Arthur Hazlerig made some
resistance; They ro^t Waller and Hazlerig; who fled to Bristol, thence to
Farnham, and so to London.
but being once broken, became the ruin of the Infantry, who presently
submitted, and had quarter given them. Here were slain 800, besides what fell
in the pursuit, which was continued ten miles an end with great Fury; but then
their tired Horses began to lag: And so Sir William and Sir Arthur came first
to Bristol, thence to Farnham, and from thence with expedition to London.

There were taken two Thousand Prisoners, four Brass Guns, with their
Ammunition and Baggage, eight and twenty Colors, and nine Corners.

Upon this fortunate day, The King and Queen at Oxford.
the Queen with the King from Edgehill made her joyful Entry into Oxford; and
not long after, the Earl of Lindsey, who was taken Prisoner when his Father was
killed at Edgehill, was welcomed to the Court there from his restraint. The
young E. of Lindsey at Oxford.


This loss soon reduced Bristol into the Kings hands, being delivered by
Colonel Fiennes after three days siege to Prince Rupert; Bristol delivered to
Prince Rupert.
for which surrender he had like to have lost his head.

These successes drew the King into the West, Dorchester, Portland, Weymouth,
and Melcomb submit.

Bidiford, Appleford, and Barnstable surrendered.

Exeter delivered to Prince Maurice, Sir John Berkly Governor thereof.


where Dorchester, Portland, Weymouth, and Melcomb, submitted themselves:
Bidiford, Appleford and Barnstable, surrendered, and after a little dispute
before Exeter, and some Grenades thrown in, and firing part of the Suburbs,
the great Sconce being taken in storm, that City was delivered to Prince
Maurice, and Sir John Berkly made Governor.

We must retrospect a little, lest the hurrying of the War carry us from other
remarkables. The Marquess of New Castle a little before, Friday June 30,
obtained a victory over the Lord Fairfax at Adderton-Heath, where he routed the
Parliamentarians, gained their five pieces of Cannon, and so amazed them, that
they fled to Leeds, which way was precluded and obstructed; then to Bradford,
in their flight whither, he took and killed two thousand, while Fairfax hardly
escaped to Leeds with the Convoy of one Troop of Horse. The next day the said
Earl came before Bradford, Adderton-Heath fight.

Fairfax routed. Bradford taken.

Hallifax quitted.

Sir. H. Cholmley takes Beverley.


which after the Battering of forty great Shot, he took, with two thousand more
of the same party the next morning, with all their Arms and Ammunition.
Hereupon Hallifax was quitted by the Parliamentarians; and Sir Hugh Cholmley
took Beverley.

The Lady Aubigney, Wife to that Noble Lord who dyed of his wounds at
Edgehill, had brought to London (according to the intelligence and desires of
some Citizens of London) from the King a Commission of Array; the design
whereof was, that they should seize into their custody the Kings Children, some
Members of Parliament, Lady Aubigney brings a Commission of Array to London.
the Lord Mayor, and Committee of the Militia, all the City Outworks and Forts,
the Tower of London, and all the Magazines. Then to let in the Kings Army, to
surprise the City, to destroy all opposers; and this grounded upon refusal of
paying of Taxes imposed without Authority.

The Plot however came to be discovered, The design discovered.
and great noise was made about it. The principal men were Mr. Edward Waller a
Parliament Man, who with much ado and great friends, Mr. Edward Waller fined
10000 pounds. Some Lords and others suspected.
came off with the fine of ten thousand pounds. (Some Lords were suspected to
favor the business also.) Mr. Tompkins Clerk of the Queens Council, Mr.
Chaloner a Linen-Draper, Mr. Hasel, Mr. Blinkborn, Mr. White, and others.

These were all Arraigned before a Council of War at Guild Hall, Tompkins and
Chaloner executed.
where four of the last were sentenced to be hanged; and two of them suffered
accordingly, leaving sad and mournful Widows behind them, for their Loyalty and
affection to their Sovereign.

The Parliament now set a Fine of twenty thousand pounds upon Judge Berkley,
Judge Berkley fined, voted incapable of any public trust, and a Prisoner
during pleasure. The King resolves to gain Gloucester.
who had been a long time Prisoner for encouraging the design of Ship Money;
he is likewise voted incapable of any Office or Dignity in the Commonwealth,
and to remain in Prison during pleasure.

By the King it was concluded to set upon Gloucester, being the only
considerable place that held out for the Parliament in the West, and lay very
inconvenient, hindering the intercourse betwixt Wales and the West-Countries.
In order whereunto, his Majesty on the tenth of August came from Oxford in
Person before it with a Royal Army, (while it was hardly imaginable where the
Parliament could raise another Army) and that done, to march for London: which
proved a Fatal mistake to the King; for if he had gone directly for London,
there was no opposition in readiness against him, nor any place to stay him.

The King being resolved to gain Gloucester, after Prince Rupert had summoned it
at a distance, having close begirt it, and being displeased that such a forlorn
City should stand out against him, yet desirous to gain it without blood and
loss of time, which seemed then precious in his Career of victory, sent in this
honorable Summons by two Heralds.

CHARLES REX.

The Kings Gracious Summons to the said City.
OVt of Our tender compassion to Our City of Gloucester, and that it may not
receive any prejudice by Our Army, which We cannot prevent if We be compelled
to assault it; We are therefore personally come before it, to require the same;
and are graciously pleased to let all the Inhabitants of, and all other persons
within that City, as well Soldiers as others, know, that if they shall
immediately submit themselves, and deliver this City to Us, We are contented
freely and absolutely to pardon every one of them without exception; and do
assure them on the Word of a King, that they, nor any of them, shall receive
the least damage or prejudice by Our Army in their persons and estates, but
that We will appoint such a Governor, and a moderate Garrison to reside there,
as shall be both for the ease and security of that City, and the whole Country.
But if they shall neglect this offer of Grace and Favor, and compel Us by the
power of Our Army to reduce that place (which by the help of God We shall
easily and shortly be able to do) they must thank themselves for all the
calamities and miseries which shall befall them. To this Message We expect a
clear and positive answer, within two hours after the publishing hereof; and by
these presents do give leave to any persons safely to repair to, and return
from Us, whom that City shall desire to employ unto Us in that business. And We
do require all the Officers and Soldiers of Our Army quietly to suffer them to
pass accordingly.


To this Summons an Answer was returned in Writing, delivered by Major Pudsey,
and a Citizen, in these Words.

WE the Inhabitants, Magistrates, Officers, and Soldiers, within this Garrison
of Gloucester, Their equivocal Answer.
unto his Majesty's gracious Message return this humble Answer: That we do keep
this City according to our Oath and Allegiance, to and for the use of his
Majesty, and his Royal Posterity; and do accordingly conceive our selves wholly
bound to obey the Commands of his Majesty signified by both Houses of
Parliament; and are resolved by Gods help to keep this City accordingly.


This equivocal strange answer the King received without any passion; only
wondered at their confidence, saying before the Messengers that brought the
Answer, Waller is extinct, and Essex cannot come. Upon the return of the
Messengers, Col. Massey the Governor fired the Suburbs, and forces Prince
Rupert to retreat.
Colonel Massey the Governor set fire on the Suburbs, whither Prince Rupert
was advanced, but was driven out by the flame. The same night the Kings Army
intrencht on two sides of the City, within Musquet-^hot of the Wall, under
shelter of some Houses which the Fire had not catched; which caused the
Besieged to sally out upon them, in commanded parties of an hundred and fifty
Musketeers at a time, then greater parties of five hundred; which came off
with safety, and did some execution, save the two last, where they received
some loss by misguidance; which made them afterward cautious how they ventured
out, having but a few men in the Town; the vanquishing of any one of those
parties, being like to run the City into extreme hazard, whose whole strength
remained upon the Works day and night, except the reserve of a hundred and
twenty men at the Main Guard.

The King was loath to spill blood, The King undermines Gloucester.
and throw away the lives of so many men as the Storming would cost, if he
should prevail; and therefore fell to Undermining, and shooting out of Morters
and Grenades into the City; which the City answering, would speedily consume
their Magazine, which was at last reduced to three Barrels of powder, by
continual shooting of their Cannon into the Leaguer, which did much mischief.
And to the Mining, the Governor used Countermines; both parties working with
great industry, while the King thought it not honorable to vouchsafe to send
them another Summons: And they held out in hopes of a sudden and potent relief;
which came soon after, as we now shall relate.

The Parliament was in great perplexity to recruit an Army so much wasted, The
Parliament raise the Trained Bands.
and therefore since they could not raise a strength abroad; were resolved to
make use of the Trained Bands: Those that were well-affected to the Parliament
encouraged each other to the work; though by wise men the enterprise was
despaired on. For the General, Essex, was eighty miles off, and his march lay
through those Countries which were already harrased by the Enemy.

Sir William Waller, Waller constituted Major-Gen. of Kent, Essex, Surrey and
Hamp-shire.
who first had received his Commission about the time of Edge-bill ^ight, and
had been defeated as we mentioned before, in regard of his vigilance and
experience, though he failed therein, was intended for a Reserve to Essex in
this Expedition; but that Ordinance of Parliament for him took no sudden
effect, farther than the constituting of him Major General of Kent, Surrey,
Essex, and Hampshire.

On the twenty fourth of August, Essex Ren^^vouzed on Hounsloe-heath, lodged at
Colebrook. P. Rupert with a party of Horse i^deavours to impede his march.
General Essex Rendevouzed on Hounsloe-heath, whither he was accompanied with
most of the Members of the Parliament, and from thence marched on his way,
lodging that night at Colebrook. Upon intelligence of this Armies advance,
Prince Rupert with the greatest part of the Kings Horse drew off from
Gloucester to oppose their march, that so the Siege might not be interrupted.
Several incounters were made by parties before, who mis-judged the whole by the
most resolute Troops in the Van, who were spirited with Money, and the Cause,
and so reported it; so that the King fearing a powerful enemy from without, and
an obstinate enemy within, drew off in the very nick, when he might probably
have been possessed of it by delaying his remove.

We will not mention other encounters, The fight in Stow of the Would.
than that which happened on the fourth of September, so commonly known by the
name of the fight at Stow in the Would. The General sent Colonel Harvey with
his Regiment of Horse, and two Regiments of Foot, to advance a little before
toward the right hand, and the City-Regiments upon the left, under the conduct
of Lieutenant General Boyly, Adjutant of the Foot. Prince Rupert having notice
thereof, appeared with about three thousand Horse drawn up on the Hills, facing
the Parliaments Forces; and a strong party (which speedily executed their
Errand) to enclose those Forces: which being perceived, three Regiments
advanced to Colonel Herveys rescue, and thereupon the Kings Forces retreated to
their main Body.

Better order was afterward taken for that small distance from Gloucester by
Essex; Genesis Essex at Presbury-hills, the siege of Gloucester deserted.
so that on the fifth of September the General advanced and came to
Presbury-hills, where he drew up his whole Army in view of the City of
Gloucester, and discharged four pieces of great Ordnance, to give them notice
of his approach. Soon after which, he saw the Kings quarters on fire; for
immediately he deserted the siege, and marched away all night, hoping to take
better advantages than the surrender of the Town would have offorded him; for
Essex was concluded to be tired.

The Relief being come, as before is said, the Town was freed, with much
rejoicing both of the Garrison and Army; the City extolling and praising the
General for his timely and valorous advance, and he extolling their courage and
constancy, and highly applauding the Governor for his skilful defense of the
City. The Generals Reer-guard stayed on the top of Presbury-hill, by reason of
the steepness thereof, darkness of the night, and tempestuousness of the
weather; Genesis Essex at Cheltenham.
but the General quartered at Cheltenham: though during his March, the Kings
Forces skirmished with part of his Army, and diverse times beat up his quarters
while he staid at Cheltenham, which was two days.

It was hardly thought indeed that ever he could have been able to have
effected the business; but providence pleasing to continue our troubles, which
either by the taking or letting alone that City would have been at a near
Period, suffered the King to fail in the height of his hopes and expectations.

Solemn thanks for the d^livery of Gloucester, b^th there and at London.
At Gloucester solemn thanks were rendered to God for this great deliverance,
with all expressions of Joy and Triumph; and notice being sent to London, the
like was done there, especially by the Women, whose Husbands were many of them
Engaged in that service.

The King near Wilt-shire.
The King continued-in his Quarters upon the borders of Wilt-shire, with a
resolution to fight Essex in his return; which he must necessarily do, for
recruits and refreshments, Essex re^^^ves Tewskbury and Gloucester.
having suffered many discommodities in the Expedition. He departed with this
resolution from Tewksbury, which Garrison and that of Gloucester he had provided
with necessaries, (...) Sir N. Crisp, and Col. Spencer. and takes Cyre^cester.
to Cheltenham, where he had notice that a party of the Kings Forces were
quartered at Cyrencester, being the Regiments of Sir Nicholas Crisp, and
Colonel Spencer; which at midnight he surprised, and took the Town, where he
found forty ^oad of Victuals, which mightily heartned his Army, who had almost
been famished.

From Cyrencester in leisurable short Marches, of five Miles a day, he came to
Cricklade, and so to Swinden, intending to pass to Hungerford. But when the Van
and Body of his Army had marched almost over Auborn-Chase, a Gallant Body of
the Kings Horse, Auborn-chase f^^t.
consisting of about five thousand, tell upon the Rear of his Army; which being
soon disordered, endeavored to make a Retreat to their Body; but they were
pursued too hastily both on Rear and Flank, so that it was done with great loss
and confusion. Being come to their Body, they faced the same Horse, who again
put them into the like disorder, until some of the Van coming to their
assistance, the Kings Horse were repelled; but fresh reserves coming on, The
Parliamentarians wors^ed.
stopped the fury of the Parliaments Foot. Two gallant and brave Charges were
made, presently one after another, and the Parliamentarians driven again to
their main Body; at which time Sir Philip Stapleton, who had the Van for that
day (as they changed it for reservation every day) came purposely back and drew
up his Regiment to succor them, which caused the Royallists to retire; and so
the night parted them. On the Kings party, in those smart charges and
encounters, were slain a French Marquess, De Vieu ville, with other Officers of
good quality, Marq. De Vieu ville slain.
whose worth appeared highly; on the Parliament side were slain two Captains,
Middleton and Hacket: The worst fell upon Colonel Sheffields Regiment of Horse,
which was utterly broke, and two Standards taken, and very many men killed.

Essex marches from Hungerford to Newberry.
On Thursday the 19 of September, from his quarters at Hungerford, the Earl of
Essex marched to Newbery, and upon approach to the Twon, saw the Kings Forces
upon an hill, just in opposition to their March; which the General perceiving,
himself first advanced to a place near the Enemy, and thence commanded Colonel
Barcleys and Colonel Holborns Brigades to charge them: Newberry fight.
That was done very fiercely, Col. Barcley and Col. Holborn charge P. Rupert.
but was as resolutely recharged by Prince Rupert, who never wanted the first
and most furious brunts. This place of advantage was contested for hotly by
both parties, till both Armies being ready to grapple, the difference of ground
was not reckoned on; and the Kings Forces departed to their several Posts.

The Battle being then begun, Sir Philip Stapleton advanced with his Regiment
of Horse, and the Generals Lifeguard; who being received by the Earl of
Carnarvan, E. of Carnarvan slain.
he briskly Charged them, and pursuing them to their Foot, was unhappily shot
in the head of his Troops.

(A Nobleman certainly of as great spirit and affection for the Kings service
as any, and as much deservedly lamented by them; and to whose memory more
public Honors are due, than a private Interment in Jesus College Oxford.)

The Royallists thus desperately Charging, were soon fallen upon the
Parliaments Body of Horse; who giving close Fire upon them, put them to the
^out, and made Prince Rupert hastily return to his whole Body of Horse. This
gave opportunity for all the Parliaments Horse of the right Wing, Prince Rupert
worsted.
in which were the Regiments of the aforesaid Sir Phil. Stapleton, Dolbeir,
Ramsey, Harvey, and Goodwin, with the General's, to draw up together; whom the
Prince most resolutely again Charged, and that so thoroughly, that some
Regiments were so mixed together, that they knew not how to disengage
themselves. In this confusion many were slain on both sides, and the
Parliamentarians at last forced to the Lanes end, where in the morning they
entered, and where their Foot stood, in very great disorder. Some of the
Royalists Troops pursued them into the Lane, but being roundly saluted by the
Foot, came back with some loss and danger. In those Charges were wounded
Colonel Dalbeir, Commissiary Copley, Captain Hammond, Captain Pym, and Captain
Fleetwood. The left Wing of the Parliament and the right of the King could not
be Engaged but in small parties, by reason of Hedges.

As to the Fight made by the Infantry, 'twas so divided, dispersed and
discontinued, that a stable fixed account cannot be given of it further than in
parcels. The Kings Infantry led by Lord Ruthen, Earl of Brentford.
The Lord Ruthen a Scotchman, lately made Earl of Brentford, an expert
Soldier, was here the Kings General, who warily managed the Battle: on the
other side, under the Earl of Essex, Major General Skippon commanded
principally in the Foot-service, Major General Skippon principal Commander of
the Foot under Essex.
which he prudently and courageously performed; preventing the King, which was
Ruthens design, either to seize his Artillery, or to fall on the Rear of his
men that fought on the Hill, or gayning that Hill behind him, or their last
nights quarter. Very many men were lost in this dispute; the Royalists having
seized on some of the Artillery, but were forced to desert it, leaving some of
the most daring of their Soldiers behind them. About four a clock in the
Afternoon, all the whole Army of Foot was engaged in the Fight; which had
proved a great deal more bloody, if night had not drawn on; when the Kings
Army, both Horse and Foot, stood in good order on the further side of the
Green, Both Armies divided by the night.
intending in the morning to fall on the Parliaments Army afresh. But other
Counsels prevailing, as supposing better advantages ought to be made in their
March home, they suffered them the next morning to March on; which was very
acceptable to men who had endured much hardship, both for want of rest and diet.

In pursuance therefore of a resolution to fall upon them in the Lanes, next
day Colonel Hurry, one of both sides, newly revolted to the King, with a
commanded Party of 800 Musketeers, and a body of Horse, was sent after them;
who charging furiously in those narrow passages, put the Rear into an absolute
Rout, who were compelled to stop the pursuit, to overthrow their Carriages
across the way. Being thus fled to their main body, who were drawn up in
Battalia in a Heath, whither they were still hotly followed, they faced about,
and gave the Royalists such a welcome, that they stood not to abide it, but
made all the haste possibly back again. In this after-Skirmish were slain on
both sides near 500 men; and in the main Battle the day before, and in
Auburn-chase, betwixt five and six thousand; the greatest loss whereof, if any
material difference, fell on the Parliaments side, of which the most
considerable were Colonel Tucker, Col. Tucker on the Parl. side slain.
and two Captains, Massey and Hunt: on the King's, the aforesaid Earl of
Carnarvan, the Earl of Sunderland, and Lord Viscount Falkland; On the K. side,
the E. of Sunderland, and Lord Viscount Faulkland.
both which were killed near the Kings person; (which was here very much
endangered by shot) and other Colonels and Officers; both Armies with great
valor and obstinacy maintaining their ground, especially the London Trained
Bands and Auxiliaries, against whom the Royalists had the greatest spleen, and
therefore tasted of their resolution.

This Battle was fought Wednesday the 20 of September, and on Thursday in the
evening. Essex at ^eading, (...).
The General Essex after that encounter in the Lanes, drew up the Army of
Theal, and taking some refreshment there, Marched the next morning, being
Friday, with the whole Army to Reading, where he stayed till the Sabbath was
past, and caused public Thanks to be given for his victory.

About this time Sir Nicholas Crispe, Farmer of the Kings Customs, and a
Commander for the King by Land, and afterward by Sea, commanding a Regiment of
Horse, had the Convoy of the Train of Artillery from Oxford to the S^ege of
Gloucester; which he brought safely thither, and quartered at a Knights house in
Rouslidge near Gloucester, where he finds the best part of the house taken up
by Sir James Enyon and other Gentlemen of no Command in the Army. These
Gentlemen chanced to miss some of their Horses out of their Pastures, and
suspecting the Colonels Soldiers, very rashly demand satisfaction of the
Colonel; who refusing to draw forth his Soldiers upon Sir James his pleasure,
the said Knight departs, and sends a Gentleman to him with a Challenge, A d^^l
between Sir Nicholas Crispe and Sir James Enyon.
the contents of which was, That he should meet him in a certain adjoining
Field with his Sword; which if he did refuse to do, he would Pistol him against
the Wall. Sir Nicholas accompanied with only one Friend, within an hour goes to
the appointed place, where he finds Sir James and the Gentleman that brought
the Challenge, and desired to understand of Sir James the ground of his quarrel
with him; adding, that his Command in the Army might excuse him from fighting;
however, he was come with a Christian resolution to give him all reasonable
satisfaction for what injury he had done, of which he pro^essed to be ignorant.
Sir James replied, he expected justice from his Sword; and thereupon drew, Sir
Nicholas doing the like: the encounter followed, Sir James Enyon killed.
wherein Sir James received an unfortunate thrust about the rim of his belly,
and was straightway conveyed to the aforesaid house, and within two days died.

On Monday the 2 of October following, a Council of War sat upon Sir Nicholas:
but considering the provocations that were given him in his own quarters, Sir
Nicholas Crispe ^rye^ by a Council of War, and acquitted.
they thought it justice to acquit him from any punishment in that Court, and
referred him to the King, who being informed of the occasion of their
difference, Sir Nicholas was admitted to kiss his Majesty's hand, He kisseth
the Kingshand, and is pardoned.
and received his Gracious Pardon under the Great Seal.

Pity it were so worthy and learned a Divine as Doctor Featly should be buried
in Oblivion, Doctor Featley committed to prison for opposing the Covenant.
though by the Parliament he was for some years in the Lord Peter's House in
Aldersgate Street London, for opposing the strict Rules of the Covenant: he was
formerly Minister at Lambeth, but his Livings were given away, and his Books
bestowed on Mr. White of Dorchester.

From Reading the General was received at London with great Triumph; the Army
Marching into the City, He is received at London in Triumph.
and were welcomed, especially the Trained Bands, by their Friends, and met by
the Lord Mayor and Aldermen at Temple Bar; The King at Oxford.
and the King departed to take up his Winter Quarters about Oxford.

This Expedition, though not so successful as the Parliament voyced it, yet
buoyed them up in their reputation, which was before very low; so that soon
after they came to balance the Kings fortune, which went less, through the
Confederation of the Scots, who were then in preparation, according to the
agreement and Covenant entered into here, to enter this Kingdom in assistance of
the Parliament.

The King sensible of this, and for practicing whereof, or at least
intelligence with the main Agitators therein, The K. commits Ma. Hamilton to
Pendennis- Castle.
he in January sent the Marquess Hamilton Prisoner to Pendennis-Castle, who had
all along assured him to the contrary. And being daily solicited by the
pressing miseries of his Irish Subjects, who were not able to subsist longer
under them, to procure them some rest and respit from the violence of that
Rebellion, as also the better to withdraw his Protestant Army out of that
Kingdom to his own assistance here against the Invasion of the Scots, by the
Marquess of Ormond, his Lieutenant there, concluded a Cessation for a year with
those Rebels, A Cessation for a year in Ireland.
and then gave order that 3000 of his English Army should be Embarked; which
soon after, in November, landed in Wales, under the Command of Sir Michael
Earnely, a Wilt-shire Gentleman, slain in the second Newbery Battle, and
Colonel Monk (after, the most renowned General, Duke of Albemarl) which being
afterward divided to make up several broken Regiments, by Prince Rupert, were
rendered not so serviceable, by reason of the change of Officers, and parting
with their old Comrades, as they might have been, had they continued in a Body
together, being most of them veterane and well-experienced Soldiers.

The greatest part of those Forces besieging Nantwich in Cheshire, Col. Monk
surprised at Nantwich, and imprisoned in the Tower of London.
were surprised, after a sudden and stout resistance made, by Sir Thomas
Fairfax, who was sent thither with all speed to keep them from taking head in
those Counties. Among the Prisoners was this Colonel Monk, who was sent up to
the Tower of London, where he continued a Prisoner in very hard durance, till
the War was near expired; and then took a Commission for Ireland; from which
auspicious employment have sprung all his Heroic most glorious Actions toward
the King and Kingdom.

But to give a more particular account of the War, which was parcelled out into
all the Corners of the Kingdom, we must insert here other actions of the noble
Marquess of Newcastle, Mar. of Newcastle sends Forces to the Queen: diverse
places submit to them.
and those Forces which he sent the Queen upon her advance Southward to Newark.
The hot news whereof alarmed the Members at Westminster, most of the Northern
parts being already reduced for the King, and these considerable places since
the Battle at Adderton-Heath (gained chiefly by the valor of Sir Henry Howard,
and Sir Savile, who both lost their lives there, and were interred together in
York-Minster:) Howly House, Tamworth Castle, Burton upon Trent, and Bradford
yielded to the Marquesses Forces. Hallifax was likewise quitted by the Lord
Fairfax, Hallifax quitted by Fairfax.
himself with much ado shifting up and down with his broken Party, and
suffering Beverly near Hull to fall into the same hands; until the Parliament
sent down the Earl of Manchester to oppose this torrent of the Royal success;
Manchester sent against the Royalists, Lyn yields to him. He Marches to assist
the L. Willoughby of Parham.
who rising with his Associated Forces from Lyn, which was yielded to him
September 16 (part of which had toward the end of July, under the Command of
Cromwell and Ireton surprised Burleigh House and Stamford, and seized several
eminent Gentlemen of those parts, who were sent Prisoners to a new Goal in
Maiden-street, London,) Marched to the assistance of the Lord Willoughby of
Parham, then hardly put to it, and who had lately yielded Gainsborough upon
Articles to the said Marquess of Newcastle.

And here I must not omit the death of a most eminent honorable person, upon
account of this unfortunate Garrison, while in my Lord Willoug^bies possession.
Some of his Forces had surprised the Earl of Kingston, L. Willohgby surprizeth
the Earl of Kingston. Col. Cavendish slain.
Father to the present Marquess of Dorchester, and brought him hither; whence
for better security of his person, which was of great concernment to the Kings
affairs thereabout, they resolved to send him to Hull. In the way thither,
Colonel Cavendish, brother to the Earl of Devon-shire, with a party pursued the
Pinnace to a shallow, which she could not pass; and demanded her, and the Earls
surrender: which being refused, a Drake was discharged, which unhappily killed
the said Earl, and one of his servants, being placed on purpose on the Deck to
deter the Royalists from shooting: whereupon they presently struck Sail and
yielded; but with a just revenge, were all sacrificed to the Ghost of that most
Loyal and Noble Peer.

Notice of this party and their design being given to the Garrison, a
sufficient number under Colonel White a Lincolnshire Gentleman were hastened to
relieve the Boat, or recover it if taken, who accordingly encountered with the
Royalists, and being too many for them, this right valiant Personage was forced
to take the Trent with his Horse, which swam him safe to the other side, but
there stuck in the owze and mud; and as soon as the Colonel had got ashore off
his Horseback, the Enemy was come round by Ford, and seeing him desperately
wounded, offered him quarter; which he magnanimously refusing, and throwing his
Blood he wiped off his Face among them, was killed outright upon the place.

To return: the Earl of Manchester with his Horse approaching these parts, and
this particular place, most part of the Earl of Newcastles Army, then
quartering thereabouts, advanced to meet him; but the Associate Horse were so
well disciplined, and such chosen able men, that after a very sharp and sore
conflict near Horn-Castle in Lincolnshire, Horn-castle fight.
the Royalists were forced to fly, having sustained a great loss, viz. 30
Colors (the Parliamentarians said 35) taken, 400 slain, the chief of whom were
Sir Ingram Hopton, The E. of Newcastle ^orsted. Sir Ingram Hopton, and Sir
George Bowls slain. Manchester besieges Lincoln.
Sir George Bowls, and Lieutenant Colonel Markham, with other inferior
Officers; 1000 Horse taken, and as many Arms, and 800 Prisoners. After this
Victory the Earl of Manchester marched to Lincoln, and beleaguered it round,
and summoned it; which the Townsmen slighted: hereupon a storm was resolved
on, after a weeks patience, and expectation of a surrender; and on the 20th of
October put in execution just at daybreak all round the City, which was
speedily entered by Manchester's Regiment of Foot, Lincoln City and Minster
stormed and taken.
who slew all they found in Arms, and most cruelly plundered the Town, leaving
it not worth a farthing. The Minster and Close were surrendered after a little
resistance upon quarter only, and 2500 Arms taken therein; Sir John Meldrum
possesses Gainsborough.
and presently Gainsborough was quitted and deserted by the Royalists, and Sir
John Meldrum possessed it ^or the Parliament, as not long after my Lord
Willoughby of Parham took in Bullingbrook-Castle.

Ld. Willoughby possesses Bullingbrook- Castle.
These successes in those parts, the Parliamentarians making opposition afresh
in Yorkshire, assisted by the Mancashire-Forces, under Colonel Rigby and
Suttleworth, and who had fortified Lanchester and other places in the County
(which was generally for the Parliament, as to the vulgar, in hatred of the
Roman Catholic Gentry, with which it abounded) caused the King to send away
Sir Lewis Dives and Colonel Hurrey with a party of two or three thousand Horse
into Bedford-shire, The King sends Sir Lewis Dives into the Associated Counties.
and so to make an eruption into the Associated Counties, thereby to divert
Manchesters further Progress, who was now with Cromwell and Sir John Meldrum set
down before Newark, but upon this invasion was presenty recalled; for the
danger was judged very great at London, which instantly took an Alarm; and by
Essex's order the Hartford-shire-Trained Bands were presently raised to oppose
this unexpected enemy. Sir Lewis came first to Ampthill, thence to Bedford;
where he entered, and took Sir John Norris and some other Officers, He takes Sir
John Norris: Affrights Hartford-shire and Bedfordshire, and returns.
who would have encouraged the Townsmen to a resistance, but they fared the
better for their compliance, whether out of their Loyalty or discretion, I will
not say. Thence this flying party came to Sir Samuel Lukes house, and served
that as Sir Lewis was served before in the same County by the Sequestrators;
Sir Lewis Dives, Sir Rob. Heath, Justice Forster, Sir John Banks, and Sergeant
Glanvile, voted Traitors.
and so proceeded as far as to face Hitching in Hartford-shire; and having
soundly frighted those parts, informed of Manchesters return, they speeded back
again to Oxford. The Members at Westminster were so vexed with this incursion,
that they voted Sir Lewis Dives a Traitor, for levying War against the
Parliament; as they had voted the Judges Sir Robert Heath, Justice Forster, Sir
John Banks, and Sergeant Glanvile, who declared and affirmed at Salisbury, in
the Circuit, the several Treasons of Essex, Manchester, and other superior
Officers of their Army, to be guilty of the same Crime charged upon them; which
was the recriminative temper of those times: And those persons that were
threatened with the Curse of the Law, were animated in their Disloyal service by
the thanks of the House.

The Kentish Insurrection in behalf of the K.
There had been a dangerous Insurrection in July this year in Kent, about the
heart of that County toward Sevenoke, but quasht by the early prevention of
Major General Brown (just as they were seizing most of the Parliement-affected
Gentry having already Sir Thomas Walsingham a member of the House in custody)
who was sent with two London-R^giments to suppress them: A small skirmish or
two happened, but not worth notice: for he had no Commission to fight; it
sufficed him to keep them from joining with more of that Malecon^ent party, and
driving them further toward Canterbury, whence by the care and diligence of
the Committees, a party of their own Countrymen came and reduced them at
Feversham, with some little Execution. Several persons either fled or suffered
for this R^sing; but the greatest damage fell upon Sir Edward Hales, who was
accused of promoting it; as the like Loyal principle had in the beginning of
the War endangered the Estate of Sir Edward Dering, a person formerly very
eminent in the House for his defense and assertion of Episcopacy.

These tendencies and offers of these Kentish-men toward their duty, invited
the King at some of their own instances also to send my Lord Hopton
thitherward, Lord Hopton marches into Kent.
as he had done Sir Lewis Dives into Bedford-shire, to make a new diversion;
and the Parliament to obviate such proceedings, though in the depth of Winter,
Essex and Waller recruited.
dispatched away both Essex and Waller with recruited Armies to their several
charges. Wallers Forces consisted chiefly of Volunteers which lifted themselves
in the new Artillery-ground London, where he was greatly beloved and favored,
presently after his defeat at Roundway. Essex marched by the way of St. Albans
(where Colonel Fiennes the late Governor of Bristol was Condemned and
Sentenced by a Council of War for cowardice in delivering it in January) and so
to Newport-Pagnel, Col. Fiennes condemned for Cowardice. Essex possesses it.
which had first been Garrisoned by Prince Rupert, and was of great convenience
and accommodation to the intelligence and commerce (besides hindrance,
Newport-pagnal abandoned.
dividing and distracting of the enemy) between London and Oxford, the chief
Garrison for the King, but now presen^ly abandoned upon his approach; Walter
apprinted to attend Hopton.
and so to Tositer and Northampton; Waller to Farnham and those parts, to
attend the motion of the Lord H^pton, who had faced Petworth, and entered
Midhurst, and at last was clapped down before Aundel-castle, the extremest parts
of Sussex; whose shore before we leave, Isle of Jersey delivered to Sir John
Pennington.
we must conjoyn a short account of the Isle of Iersey, which by Sir Peter
Osburn was now delivered to Sir John Pennington, still Vice Admiral for the
King in the narrow Seas; in exchange of which good fortune, the Garrison of
Pool had received a very great success, in an Expedition into the Country, and
the Earl of Warwick had joined at Warcham with Col. Earl upon a design against
C^rf-castle, but that succeeded not.

Monsieur le Prince de Harcourt came hither a while before, The French
Ambassador splendidly received at Oxford.
as Ambassador Extraordinary, to offer the French Kings interposition and
arbitrament of the differences between King and Parliament; and was convoyed
and splendidly received at Oxford; but his Coach and Packet searched as he
passed the London-Fortifications; which he highly complained of to the
Parliament, who to evade his Peacemaking errand, would not own him as an
Ambassador Extraordinary. He was followed upon the same account to Oxford,
whence he went and came twice, with a Duch Ambassador; but all to no purpose:
For the Parliament had now two fresh Armies asoot raised by the City, and a
third (the Scots) now upon their march, though a little before they earnestly
be^ought an Accommodation.

It is time here to remember other memorable things which happened a little
before; Sir John Hothams revolt and seizure.
the first was that of the two Hothams, Sir John and his Son; these persons
eminent (more especially the Father) for adherence to the Parliament, having
first of all men denied the King admittance into his Towns and Magazines, by
putting themselves into Hull, and keeping it by virtue of a power from the
Lords and Commons, now either touched in conscience for the unlawfulness and
the undutifulness of that action, or else not so highly regarded and
considered, as that important and leading piece of service might justly
challenge from the Parliament, the Queen being also newly arrived in those
parts, who probably might have dealt with Sir John in the matter, he began to
falter from that firmness he had professed for the Parliament, which being
guessed at by some strict observers of him, he not being reserved enough in a
thing of that consequence, a party was made against him in his own Garrison;
and he too late endeavoring to have secured Hull for the King, was in the
bustle knocked down in the streets, secured with his Son, He and his Son sent
Prisoners to the Tower.
and both sent up prisoners to the Tower, whence not long after they were
brought to trial and execution. At the same time also returned Sir Hugh
Cholmly, a Member likewise of the House of Commons, and who had secured
Scarborough for them, which (as before) was afterward put into the Kings hands
by Brown Bushel.

The other thing remarkable was the death of Mr. John Pym, the great stickler
against the King and his Prerogative, Mr. Pym dies.
the Speech-maker of the House of Commons, that could wiredraw money with every
word he uttered to the City. He died when the Kingdom was in a flame, which he
had chiefly blown up, not likely to be extinguished. Nothing is reported of his
end certainly; and though there was a fable of his body being full of Lice,
sure we may be, it was full of worms afterward; and let judgment be left to
God, whether he engaged in the Times and Quarrel, out of a misguided or a
reclaiming Conscience.

A new great Seal, The King declares it treason, sends a Messenger to adjourn
the Term:
Insert we here also, as matters of State, not War, that upon the carrying the
Great Seal to Oxford by the Lord Keeper Littleton, a new great Seal was made by
the Parliament, which the King declared to be treasonable; and soon after sent
a Messenger to London, one Daniel Kniveton, to forbid the holding of the Term
by any color of the said Seal; and did therewith adjourn the said Term: but
the Parliament were so far from giving heed to that Message of the Kings, which
was according to his duty delivered to the Judges in Westminster hall by the
said Kniveton, He is condemned for a spy, and hanged.
that by a Council of War held at Essex-House they sentenced him to be hanged
for a Spy; which was accordingly executed upon him at the old Exchange, London,
on 27 November. Add we also, that in February the King convened the Members of
both Houses who had deserted them at Westminster, as a Parliament in Oxford.
The Parliament at Oxford.
They met in the Schools accordingly, and proceeded to several Consultations;
but within a year totally disappeared.

To conclude this year with Military affairs; in January the Scotch Forces
according to compact entered England with a well-accomplisht Army, The Scots
enter England.

Diverse places surrendered on both sides.


and in February crossed Tine. And to sum up the rendition of places on both
sides, take this account: Scarborough, Brimingham, Litchfield, Howley-house,
Burton upon Trent, Bradford, Hallifax, Bristol, Gainsborough, Dorchester,
Portland, Weymouth, Melcomb, Beverly, Bidiford, Appleford, Barnstable, Exeter,
Dartmouth, Howarden-Castle, Arundel-Castle, taken by the Lord Hopton;
Beeston-Castle, Lapley-House, Crew-House, Hopton-Castle, Warder-Castle,
regained; Sturton-Castle, and Newark relieved for the King, Prince Rupert
relieves Newark, and overcomes Sir John Meldrum.
where Prince Rupert gained a complete victory against Sir John Meldrum, who
commanded there with 7000 men against the Town; The Parliamentarians were
beaten from their entrenchments, into a House called the Spittle, or
Exeter-House, where they came to a surrender upon capitulation, leaving their
Arms, and Bag and Bagage behind them, and a thousand men slain on their side;
Reading, Wardour-Castle, Monmouth, Taunton, and Bridge-Water, Tamworth-Castle,
Burley-House, Gloucester relieved, Lyn yielded to the Earl of Manchester,
Grafton-House, and Arundel-House taken by Sir William Waller again, being again
recruited with a fresh Army, and a new Commission given him to be a
Major General of the four Counties of Kent, Surry, Sussex, and Hamp-shire;
which leads this Chronicle next to some remarkable actions of his (which were
much in expectation) in the ensuing year.

Anno Dom. 1644.
SIr William Waller, after his reducement of Arundel-Castle, Marched to find
out the Lord Hopton, Brandon or Cheriton-down fight, between Sir Will. Waller
and the Lord Hopton, March 29.
to cry quits with him for his defeat at Roundway-Down. Both Armies were near
one another a good space: for his Lordship hovered about Winchester, and those
parts; and at Brandon-Heath near Alsford, was drawn up (having a little before
in his intended March to the relief of Arundel beaten Colonel Norton into
Chichester, who endeavored to impede him) and stood ready to receive Sir
William, who had taken the advantage of a Hill, from which the Royalists with
fury beat him, and drove him to another; where under the shelter of some Bushes
and Trees, he so galled the Kings Horse, The Kings party worsted.
that they were forced in some disorder to retreat to their Foot. There was a
hollow betwixt both bodies, which each endeavoring to gain, many men found it
for their Graves on both sides. The Lord Hopton therefore seeing the slaughter
that was made, Lord Hopton draws off to Winchester, from thence to Oxford.
and likely to continue upon his men, timely drew off his Artillery and Cannon
toward Winchester, and then wheeling about, Marched for Basing, and so
presently to Oxford. In this fight was killed on the Kings part, that valiant
person John Lord Stuart second Brother to the Duke of Richmond, John L. Stuart,
Sir John Smith, Col. Sandys, Col. Scot, and Col. Manning slain.
who dyed at Abbington of his wounds; as also Sir John Smith, Colonel Sandys,
Colonel Scot, and Colonel Manning, father to that person who betrayed the King
to Cromwell while he resided at Colen, in the design of Colonel Penruddock; for
which he was shot to death in the Duke of Newburghs Country; with diverse
Persons of Quality wounded, among whom was Sir Edward Stowel, Eldest Son to Sir
John; and Sir Henry, after Lord Bard; besides private Soldiers above 1400. Of
the Parliaments side, few men of note were killed, about 900 common Soldiers;
Colonel Dolbeir wounded, and Colonel Tompsons Leg shot off by a Cannon-bullet.

About this time the Dutch Ambassadors came to Oxford again, The Dutch
Ambassador at Oxford.
endeavoring to mediate between the King and Parliament, but returned re
infecta; from whence the King also was designing to march, being newly come
thither from Reading, which he slighted. Sir Charles Blunt, Sir Charles Blunt
slain.
a courageous Gentleman on the Kings side, was slain about this time. Great and
extraordinary preparations were now made for this Campagnia, which I shall next
relate.

Essex and Waller, Essex and Waller join.
(who had followed the Lord Hopton to Basing, and there showed a mind of
Besieging the house) now joined their Armies together, amounting to a very
great strength, with intention to set upon the King at Oxford; wherefore the
Queen was sent away with a sufficient Convoy to Exeter: Queen goes to Exeter.
In the mean time Essex plunders Abbington, Abbington plundered and Garrisoned.
and makes a Garrison of it soon after.

In this place, (which afterward proved a Thom to the Kings foot, not being
able but in great Parties to stir out of Oxford) Essex left Colonel Brown, Col.
Brown Governor thereof.
and constituted him Governor thereof. This famous Person, as his actions all
along after declared, especially his latter, in his Industrious Loyal
endeavors for the Restitution of his Majesty, was no inconsiderable part of
the War, having been designed by the Parliament to the suppression of the
Kentish-Commotions, and then as an assistant to Sir William Waller at the
taking in of Winchester and Chichester, was afterward, when the War was ended,
and the King brought to Holmby, made one of the Commissioners to attend his
Majesty; where he was so gained upon by his Princely Goodness and Virtues, that
from that time he was wholly changed, The K. marches to Worcester.

The Parl. divide their Forces.

Waller sent a King-catching, and Essex into the West.


and reduced from all false Opinions concerning his Majesty, and afterward
proved a most Cordial and Loyal actor and sufferer for him and his Cause.

To return: the King in the mean while marched with his Army from Oxford to
Worcester; which caused the two Parliament-Generals to divide their forces
again: Waller was to go after the King, as they termed it, A King-catching,
while Essex marched with another gallant Army into the West, which was totally
fallen from the Parliament. The King had but few Forces about him, by reason
that Prince Rupert was sent with the greatest part of the Army to the relief of
York, Prince Rupert sent to York.
then Besieged by the joynt-power of three Armies, the Scots, Manchester's, and
Fairfax's. In his way he Storms Bolton, and takes it: but of that by and by.

The King having Traversed his ground, came back again from Worcester; and Sir
William Waller from out of the Skirts of Gloucestershire, was ready at his
heels: Insomuch that he overtook him near Banbury, Corpredy- fight.
at a place called Cropredy-bridge. Waller drew up in Battalia on a Hill,
expecting the advantage of the Kings passing the Bridge: which the King
adventuring to do, Waller sets upon the K. is gallantry received by the Earls
of Cleaveland and Northampton, and put to flight.
Waller descends from his Post, and falls upon the Kings Rear beyond the
Bridge, where he was so gallantly received by the Earls of Cleaveland and
Northampton, that he was quite Routed, Six hundred killed, and Seven hundred
taken Prisoners, his Train of Artillery, and many of the Officers; so that Sir
William was forced to fly, and have recourse to London for another recruit.

It was therefore resolved, upon this defeat of Waller, that the King should
immediately follow the Earl of Essex, who was advanced so far, that the Queen,
who was delivered of the Princess Henrietta at Exeter the sixteenth of June,
The Princess Henrietta born at Exeter, the Queen goes to France.
in the Month of July was fain to be gone from thence for fear of a Siege
(leaving the young Lady to the tuition of the Countess of Dalkeith) to France,
where she landed on the 25th at Breast in Britany. At the beginning of August,
the King had overtaken the said Earl at Lestithiel; The E. of Essex defeated at
Lestithiel.
his Forces in so ill a condition through their long march, and their want of
necessaries, which the Country People kept from them, that it was concluded an
easy thing to conquer them: The King therefore resolved to coop them up, and
keep all manner of Provision from them. After two or three days leaguer in this
manner, the Parliament-horse broke through the Kings Army by night; the
General, and the Lord Roberts, at whose instance this Expedition was
undertaken, got by boat from Foy to Plymouth; and the Foot being destitute, and
deserted by the Horse, under the command of Major General Skippon, came to a
Capitulation; by which it was agreed, they should render their Arms,
Ammunition, Artillery, and Stores, into the hands of the King, and have liberty
(as many as would) to pass home; they engaging never more to bear Arms against
the King. So that by this defeat the Parliament were quite undone in the West,
as to present appearance.

Marq. of Newcastle Besieged in York by the E. of Manchester, Lord Fairfax, and
Lesly.
The Marquess of Newcastle had been besieged above nine weeks in York, by the
joint Forces of the Earl of Manchester, the Lord Fairfax, and the Scotch Army
under Lesly; for the relief whereof, Prince Rupert was sent; who passed through
Shrop-shire, and thence through Lancashire, increasing his Forces by the way
from the several Garrisons and Parties thereabouts. In his way he raised the
Siege of Latham-house, where the Countess of Derby had stoutly defended her
self for a long time: Prince Rupert raises the Siege of Latham- house, and
takes diverse places.
He moreover took Stopford, Leverpool, and Bolton; the last whereof refusing
his Summons, and being in no condition to withstand his power, he deservedly
(having mastered it by a Storm the third time) pillaged, using the right of
Arms to those who had provoked him by their impotent obstinacy. Besides, it was
noted for a Town of Sectaries, and suchlike people.

On Sunday the last day of June, the Prince came to Knaresborough, fourteen
miles from York; the next morning over Burrough-Bridge, and that night by the
River to York; The Siege of York ra^^d.
upon whose approach the besiegers quit their quarters, and those in York
pursued their Rear, and seized some Provisions: the next morning, July the
second, the Prince advanced after them, resolving to give them Battle: which
resolution was opposed by the Marquess of Newcastle, as one who well knew the
several concerns of the three confederate parties, among whom there had passed
some Jarrings in their Councels for Command.

But the Prince was determined to put an end to the Scotch danger, (which only
retarded the Kings entire success) by a present fight; and though he be much
blamed for it, yet it seems and appears he had the Kings express command to
fight that Army with all convenient speed and advantage. Accordingly it was his
intention to fight them that morning, or at least by noon; marching in view of
them on the plain called Marston-Moor: Marston-Moor fight.
But it proved seven at night before both Armies Engaged. The Parliamentarians
had taken the advantage of a Cornhill, on the South Side of Marston-Moor, four
miles from York; Prince Rupert commands the Main Battle, Marq. of Newcastle one
Wing; General Goring, Sir Charles Lucas and Major General Porter several
parties.
so that the Prince accepted of what fighting ground they had left him. His
Army was divided into Wings, whereof the Marquess of Newcastle commanded one,
the Prince the main Battle; though he charged in the left Wing, where was
General Goring, Sir Charles Lucas, and Major General Porter, Son to Mr.
Endymion Porter of the Bedchamber.

Being thus resolved, and drawn in Battalia, ready to charge and begin the
Encounter, it was resolved upon the signal, that the Princes left Wing should
commence the Battle; whither some new Reserves were brought to enforce and
assist them.

The right Wing of the Parliamentarians Horse, The Parliaments Horse and Scotch
Cavalry routed.
which consisted of the L. Fair-fax's Troops in the Van, and of the Scotch
Cavalry in the Rear, (against which the Prince had a more peculiar indignation)
was at the first Onset of the Kings left Wing of Horse, (commanded as
aforesaid) put to Total rout; the Royalists following them in the pursuit so
far, (as it was their unhappy custom) that thereby they became the overthrow of
their own Army. The Scots some of them ran ten miles an end, and a wey bit,
crying out Quarter, with other lamentable Expressions of Fear.

During this Slaughter and Conquest in that part of the Field, The Victory
dubious in other parts, where the E. of Manchesters Horse engaged.
the Victory stood dubious on the other, where the Earl of Manchester's Horse
were on the Left Wing of their Army. These were Raised out of the Associated
Counties of Bedford, Cambridge, Suffolk, Buckingham, etc. commonly called the
Eastern Associates; and both for Arms, Men, and Horses, the compleatest
Regiments in England: They were more absolutely at the command of Colonel
Cromwell, Cromwell his Lieut. Genesis a most indefatigable Soldier.
then Lieutenant General to Manchester; an indefatigable Soldier, and of great
courage and conduct: of whose ^^^ions we should have spoken before, and have
mentioned how he first secured those Counties for the Parliament, purging, that
is to say, extinguishing the University; suppressing several endeavors for the
King namely, taking Sir Thomas Barker, Sir Tho. Barker, Sir John Pettus, Capt.
Allen, etc. imprisoned.
Sir Io. Pettus, and Capt. (since, Sir Thomas) Allen, Admiral of the Seas, and
other the prime Gentlemen of Suffolk, Prisoners at Lowestoft in Suffolk, as
they were met at a Rendezvous there, to promote the Commission of Array; as he
did Sir Henry Connisby at Saint Albans soon after; having reclaimed himself
from the open vanities of Youth, and taken up the secret Vices of Old men; so
that certainly a stranger change was never wrought in any man; each Vice
skipping over its medium of virtue, (which he touched not at all) becoming the
contrary extreme; his youthful Debaucheries proving in his Old Age all manner
of Atheistical Profaneness, as Perjury, Hypocrisy, Cruelty; in a word, what
not? so that indeed they had no more parallel, than his as strange Fortunes.

He was born April the 25th in Saint John's Parish, An account of Oliver
Cromwels life.
in the Town of Huntingdon, and was Christened in that Church the 29th of the
same month, Anno Dom. 1599. where Sir Oliver Cromwell his Uncle gave him his
name, being received into the Bosom of the Church by her Rites and Ceremonies;
both which he afterward rent and tore, and ungraciously and impiously annulled
and renounced. That I may use my own words in his Life and Death lately
printed, and transcribe a Paragraph or more which are of use here, for the
information and satisfaction of Posterity.

That year 1599, was the last of that wonderful Century, and did just precede
the famous and celebrated Union of the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland
under King James; as if it were congenial to Crowns, as to other lesser
accessions of Felicity in private persons, to have at the same instant a
temperament and allay to their Luster and Greatness; th^^ ^s Fortunes right
hand presented a Scepter, so her left hand was ready with a Scourge to wreak
her Envy and fury upon the glory and Grandeur of that renowned Succession to,
and accrument of Dominion. The subtilties, Arts and Policies of his that
Goddess, under the name of Providence, potently and irresistibly conspiring
with his, as close Treasons and dissembled Treacheries, to the ruin and
overthrow of this Church and Kingdom, singly and insensibly accomplished by the
mean and unobserved hand of this bold and perjurious Politic.

Every thing has its Good and Evil Angel to attend it; and that grand and
happy Revolution was to be afflicted and persecuted by this Fury, to an almost
dissolution of its well-composed and established frame.

Born of an ancient Family at Huntington.
He was descended of a very ancient Knightly Family of his name, in the County
of Huntington, where for many Ages they have had a large and plentiful
Patrimony: it will suffice therefore to deduce him from no further Originals
then Sir Henry Cromwell his Grandfather, a Gentleman highly honored and beloved
both in Court and Country; who had issue Sir Oliver his eldest Son, Henry,
Robert and Richard, and Sir Philip the youngest (whose Son, upon suspicion of
Poisoning his Master, was accused thereupon, convicted and hanged, some thirty
five years ago.) This our Oliver was Son of Mr. Robert Cromwell, the third Son
of Sir Henry, a Gentleman who went no less in esteem and reputation, that any
of his Ancestors, for his personal worth, until his unfortunate production of
this his Son and Heir, Married to Elizabeth the Niece of Sir Rob. Steward, who
settled on him an Estate after he had consumed his Patrimony, and intended for
New England.
whom he had by his wife Elizabeth Steward, the Niece of Sir Robert Steward, a
Gentleman of a competent fortune in this County, but of such a malign effect
on the course of this his Nephews life, that if all the Lands he gave him (as
some were Fenny ground) had been irrecoverably lost, it might have past for a
good providence, and a happy prevention of those Ruins he caused in the three
Kingdoms.

For that estate continued him here, after his debauchery had wasted and
consumed his own Patrimony; and diverted him from a resolution of going into
New England, the Harbor of Nonconformists; which design, upon his sudden and
miraculous conversion, first to a civil and Religious deportment, and thence to
a sour Puritanism, he straightway abandoned: by the former Repentance, he
gained the good will and affection of the Orthodox Clergy, Sir Robert Steward
declares O. C. his Heir.
who by their persuasions, and charitable insinuations, wrought him into Sir
Robert Steward's favor, insomuch that he declared him his Heir to an Estate of
four or five hundred pounds a year: by his second change to Nonconformity, and
Scrupulous Sanctity, he gained the estimation and favor of the Faction;
Cromwell gets into favor with the Faction; they procure him to wife, Elizabeth
the Daughter of Sir James Bowcher, and choose him Burgess for Cambridge.
some of the Heads whereof, viz. Mr. Hambden, and Master Goodwin, procured him
the Match with a Kinswoman of theirs, Mistress Elizabeth Bowcher, the Daughter
of Sir James Bowcher; and afterward got him chosen a Burgess for Cambridge, by
their interest in that Town, which was totally infected with Puritanism and
Zelotry: and this was his first projection and design of ambition, besides that
it privileged him from Arrests, his Estate being sunk again, and not to be
repaired but by the General Ruin.

I have the rather insisted upon him here, because this is the place from
whence he began to appear in that eminence which showed him to the people as a
most able Champion of the Parliaments cause, and from whence it is thought he
first derived those ambitious thoughts which after Ruined three Kingdoms.

To give him his due, the Honor of this Field was mainly, if not solely
ascribable to his courage; for with his Regiment of Curassiers he broke through
all that withstood him, The Marq. of Newcastle defeated.
Defeating all the Northern Horse under the Marquess of Newcastle; at which
time the main bodies joined, animated and encouraged by his success.

Being thus over-powred both in Front and Flank, the Royallists began to fly,
and Cromwell being impatient of any longer demur to his victory, which he had so
fairly bid for, omitted not to prosecute the same. In this unhappy juncture,
the Princes right Wing returned to the field; but all was grown so desperate,
and in such confusion and disorder, that it was impossible to Ralley them; and
the fearful execution that was made among them, had quite taken away the
hearing of any Command, or obedience to Discipline.

There was yet standing two Regiments of the Lord New-castle's, His Lambs
excellent Soldiers.
one called by the name of his Lambs; these being veterane Soldiers, and
accustomed to fight, stood their Ground, and the fury of that impression of
Cromwell, which Routed the whole Army besides; nor did the danger nor the
slaughter round them, make them cast away their Arms or their courage; but
seeing themselves destitute of their friends, and surrounded by their enemies,
they cast themselves into a Ring, where though quarter was offered them, they
gallantly refused it, They are overpowred and destroyed.
and so manfully behaved themselves, that they flew more of the enemy in this
particular fight, than they had killed of them before. At last they were cut
down, not by the Sword, but showers of bullets, after a long and stout
resistance, leaving their enemies a sorrowful victory, both in respect of
themselves whom they would have spared, as in regard of the loss of the bravest
men on their own side, who fell in assaulting them. A very inconsiderable
number of them were preserved, to be the living monuments of that Brigades
Loyalty and valor.

The Prince after this defeat fled to Thursk, P. Rupert fled to Thursk, etc.
and so through Lancashire and Shropshire the way he came: (Night ended the
pursuit: for it was eleven a clock before the fight ceased, The Parl. Generals
march to the Siege at York, from whence they rose to fight.
else more blood had been shed) and the Parliaments Generals to the siege at
York, from whence they rose to give the Prince battle. Here were slain to the
number of 8000 and upwards in the field and flight; which at certain was
divided equally between both Armies: For what slaughter was made by the Prince
upon the Scots and Fairfax, The loss of men so great on both sides, that the
Inhabitants were poisoned with the smell of the Dead bodies.
was requited by Cromwell on the left Wing as aforesaid, and the fight was
furious and bloody there. It must needs be a great carnivage; for a month after
the Battle, though the slain bodies were put into pits and covered, there was
such a stench thereabouts, that it almost poisoned them that passed over the
Moor; and at Kendal, a place near adjacent, the Bell for six weeks together
never ceased tolling for the inhabitants who were poisoned and infected with
the smell.

The Marquess of Newcastle, Marq. Newcastle, L. Widrington, Genesis King, Sir Will.
Vavasor and others pass over to Hamburgh.
and the Lords and Colonels of his party who complied not with the Prince in
the resolution of fighting, (his men having been so long cooped up in York, and
in no present condition for battle) took shipping at Newcastle, and passed over
to Hamburgh; among whom was the Lord Widdrington, General King, Sir William
Vavasor, killed afterward in the Swedes service at Copenhagen, and many
others; which proved the utter loss of the North to the King.

Here were slain of persons of quality a good number, Slain on the K. side, the
L. Carry, and Sir Tho. Metham.
such as Knights and Squires, and the like; particularly on the Kings side, the
Lord Carry Eldest son to the Earl of Monmouth, and Sir Thomas Metham; on the
Parliament-side, the Lord Diddup a Scotch Lord, On the Parl. side, the Lord
Diddup.
remarkable by this, that when it was told the King at Oxford, that such a Lord
was slain on the Parliaments side, he answered, that he had forgot there was
such a Lord in Scotland. To which one replied, That his Majesty might well do
so, for the Lord had forgot he had such a King in England.

The Victor Army being come again before York, York yielded by Sir Thomas
Glenham.
summoned the City again: they had used before their utmost endeavors, by
Mines and Assaults, (in one whereof they lost near one thousand men, and were
beaten off) to have entered; to which the Governor returned answer, that he was
no whit dismayed with their present success; yet nevertheless on equal
Conditions he would come to a Treaty and Surrender; which in nineteen days
after the battle was concluded on. The main Articles were:

That the Garrison should march out according to the honorable custom of War:
That the Garrison the Parliament put in should consist two parts of three of the
County of York: That the Citizens should be indempnified, as well those absent
as present, and have the benefit of those Articles: That the Cathedral and
Churches should receive no prejudice, etc. According to which agreement, the
Governor and Garrison departed the 23 day of July; but the Articles were most
of them basely infringed and violated, by plundering the people that departed
out of York to Skipton, whither by Articles they were to be convoyed.

The Parliament raise new L^vies.
New Levies were at this time ordered to be made by the Parliament, amounting to
twelve thousand Horse and Foot in the Southern parts of England, and as many
more were by their directions to their Commissioners in Scotland intended to be
raised there, for a supply and reinforcement of that Army then in England; and
like sums of money proportioned thereunto; the Scots crying Give, give, while
the Citizens of London paid for all: (upon whom this year an odd kind of Tax
was laid for the setting out of Sir William Wallers Army, as was unpractised
ever in any War, A strange Tax laid upon London.
that every Citizen should pay as much every Tuesday, as his expenses for a
meal for his family usually amounted to.)

Easing^house besieged by Sir Will. Waller,
During the Kings absence in the West, and the Princes in the North, Sir William
Waller had recruited himself, and joined with the forces of Colonel Norton, and
Colonel Morley, who had drawn down before Basing, a house of the Marquess of
Winchesters, garrisoned by him, and kept for the King; which being distressed
for want of Ammunition and provision, was close laid to by the enemy. Many
brave Salleys were made, and a multitude of men they slew; And relieved by Col.
Gage and Col. Sir G. Buncley.
so that it was afterward called Basting-house. Waller was resolved not to
rise, cost what it would: at length relief was put into it, under the conduct
of Colonel Gage, and Colonel Sir George Buncley, who with a party of 800 Horse,
each having a Sack of Meal behind him, resolutely passed through the Leaguer to
the House; and having unladen themselves, as valiantly returned back safe again
to Oxford. The besiegers at Last depart.
Nevertheless they persisted in the enterprise, till after Newbery-fight, the
King marching that way, the Forces left to block it up rose and departed
without it.

The siege of Dennington-Castle.
Dennington-Castle near Newbery was Garrisoned by the King; wherefore Colonel
Middleton Lieutenant General to Sir William Waller, came and sat down before
it with the broken remains of Cropredy, amounting to three thousand Horse and
Foot; he presently made his Approaches, and seized a Barn from the besieged,
and then sent in his Summons; which for the honor of Sir John Boys the
Governor, who did the King Knight Service then and afterward, (as by and by
will appear) in that place, are here inserted.

For the Governor of Dennington-Castle.
The summons by Col. Middleton.
SIR, I demand you to render me Dennington-Castle for the use of the King and
Parliament: if you please to entertain a present Treaty, you shall have
honorable terms. My desire to spare-blood, makes me propose this. I desire
your Answer.

John Middleton.


For Lieutenant General Middleton.
The Answer from Sir John Boys the Governor.
SIR, I am entrusted by his Majesty's express command, and have not learned yet
to obey any other than my Sovereign. To spare blood, do as you please; but my
self, and those that are with me, are fully resolved freely to venture ours in
maintaining what we are here entrusted with; which is the Answer of

John Boys.


The besiegers assault the Castle, come off with loss, and depart.
Middleton perceived words would not do, and therefore advanced with Foot and
Scaling-ladders in three places; the fight lasting six hours, in which he lost
one hundred men, a Colonel, a Major, and other Officers, leaving them to the
disposal of the Governor; and broke up his siege, and departed Westward to
Essex; and by the way was met with by Sir Francis Dorrington, and Sir William
Courtney, They are met by Sir Francis Dorrington and Sir W. Courtney, and
worsted;

They afterward rout a party of the K. Horse near Sherburn.


who had laid an Ambuscado for him in a Lane five miles long, beyond
Bridgewater, where being pelted with their Shot from the Hedges, he faced about
in some disorder, and fell upon the two Knights, who routed his Party, killed
some, and took many Prisoners. Retreating thence as unable now to effect his
business, which was to second Essex in the West, he fell upon a Party of the
Kings Horse near Sherburn in Dorsetshire, which he totally routed, and with
this different strange success speeded for London.

Colonel Horton comes next to Dennington, and Summons it again, as
Adjutant-General to Major General Brown; Dennington-castle again Summoned by
Col. Horton.
and to as little purpose, being answered with scorn: this so incensed him,
that with a furious Battery from the foot of the Hill, on that side next
Newbery, which lasted twelve days, every day spending eighty shot, he at last
beat down their Towers, with a part of the Wall; and being increased with three
Regiments more from the Earl of Manchester, Manchester comes to his assistance.
he in another Summons acquaints the Governor of his strength; but all in
vain: at last came the Earl himself, who removed the Battery on the other side,
and proceeded by Mines also; They batter the Castle, but in vain: they depart.
but the Garrison sallying out, sent them out of their Trenches, killed a
Lieutenant Colonel, and other Officers; which made the Besiegers slacken in
their heat. They continued nevertheless Battering two days after, and then
seeing it bootless to lie there longer, rose from the Siege; the Earl to
Reading, Windsor-Forces to Newbery, and Horton to Abingdon.

About this time, the Reformation of the Church in defacing of its Paintings,
The defacing of Churches in City and Country.
breaking Glass-windows, pulling down Communion-Tables, and the like, was
almost brought to pass in London; the last Church left, was his Majesty's
Chapel at White Hall, which by the order of Sir Robert Harloe, Sir R. Harloe a
forward zealot.
the Parliaments Commissioner in that Irreligious business, was likewise
visited in the same rude manner, and several Sculptures and Paintings, as
guilty of Superstition, indeed of other men's Avarice and The^ving, were
pur^oyn'd and sold.

The King had sent a Message for Peace, The King sends a Message for peace.
soon after his success at Lestithiel, as he had done before from Evesham. This
last Message from Tavestock in Devonshire coming to the notice of Somersetshire
and Wiltshire Inhabitants, they professed their Concurrence with the King, and
that they would petition the Parliament to comply with the King, and end those
differences. From this root sprung afterward that Association of the Club-men
(after the Fatal business at Naseby) in the Western Counties. An Association of
Club-men.


Next to Dennington-Siege, remarkable was that of Banbury, Banbury Siege raised.
where Col. John Fiennes commanded for the Parliament, and where he used
Batterings, Mines, and Stormings against the Castle, wherein Sir William
Compton was Governor for the King; whom he summoned twice, and at last had
answer, that the Governor wondered he would send again. Then Grenades were
used, which made a breach, and gave them encouragement to Storm it again; which
was begun on the 23 of September: But they were Repulsed with great loss, yet
nevertheless they continued their Grenades and Battery, The Earl of
Northampton and Col. Gage the Governor of Oxford, relieve Banbury.
till the Earl of Northampton was come from the Rendezvous near Newbery, and
had joined with the Forces under Colonel Gage, newly made Governor of Oxford.
Upon the approach of the said Earl, the Parliamentarians Retreated to the
West Side of the Town toward Hanwel, while the Foot in some disorder drew out
of the Town, following their Horse; having sent away their Baggage and
Artillery the night before. The Earl followed them, while Sir Henry Gage
relieved Banbury. The Enemy being briskly Charged, made away in haste, and
dispersed themselves several ways, by Cropredy and Compton. The Earl of
Brainford and Colonel Web were here wounded, as also Lieutenant Colonel Smith
and Captain Bo^eler slain. The Enemy lost many men, a field-Piece, eight
Wagons of Ammunition, and six barrels of Powder, four Cornets, and some Horse.
Thus was this Siege Raised, The Siege raised.
which had continued from the nineteenth of July, to the five and twentieth of
October.

While these things were acting hereabouts, when there was little motion in any
parts else of the Kingdom, at least not considerable, another design was laid
upon Gloucester, by the united Forces of Worcestershire and Hereford, while
Massey was abroad on parties; who having notice thereof, having got an addition
of three hundred and fifty men from T^wksbury, to enable him to fight with
Colonel Mine, Col. Mine s^ain i^ Glocestersh^re, and the Royalists worsted by
Mas^ey,
a gallant expert Commander, followed after him to his quarters at Elderfield.
By break of day both parties engaged; Massey beating the Royalists from their
Ambuscadoes, put their Horse to flight, and so fell upon the Van of their Foot,
routed their whole body, killed and wounded several of them, and took many
Prisoners. The Noble Colonel Mine, who commanded a Regiment of English which he
brought with him out of Ireland, was killed here fighting and bringing up his
men, and keeping them from the rout, with near two hundred more slain, and the
like number taken Prisoners. This defeat happened by reason the two
County-forces aforesaid were not joined, who came just in the close of the
fight, and killed some of Masseys men who followed the pursuit; but he himself,
with his ^ooty and Prisoners, got safe to Gloucester, Who bestowed an hono^rable
burial on the sai^ C^lon^l.
where he very honorably interred the body of the aforesaid Colonel Mine.

Some attempts, designs, and skirmishes about passes upon the Severn,
whereabout Prince Rupert was quartered, after his de^eat at Marston moor,
happened every day: Princ^ Rupert at the Severn, where hapn^d daily Skir^^^hes.
such being the fortune of war, that the Prince, who had bid battle but the
other day to thirty thousand men, now pidled and trifled with a Brigade or two,
to seek the advantage of a private and commodious march, being dogged but with
a Squadron or two of Horse at A^t Ferry, where betwixt some of his forces and
Colonel Massey a b^^k^ring fell out, wherein Massey prevailed, He is worsted by
Massey.
but to no great loss or concernment.

While Colonel Massey was thus every day upon parties marching up and down, one
Kirle, who for a while before had intelligence with him about the delivery of
Monmouth, Monmouth b^^^a^^d to Massey, by Lieutenant-Co^. Kirle.
being Lieutenant Colonel to Holtby the Governor, took the advantage of his
approach to effect it: for Massey having showed himself thereabouts, gave out
that the enemy being plundering about Bristol, he was constrained to depart:
whereupon Kirle is sent out with a Troop of Horse to pursue his rear: him and
his party Massey takes, secures his men all but a Coronet, who gave the Allarm
to Monmouth, where Kirle suddenly coming with a hundred Horse of Masseys,
commands the Gates to be opened to let him in speedily (as he said) with his
Prisoners; which after some dispute being done, and the Drawbridge let down,
he entered, and presently declared hin^^^^; Mastering the Guards, and making
good the bridge, till a body of Horse and Foot close behind came on and entered
the Town. The Governor escaped over the dry Graft, leaving this place (the key
of South- Wales) thus in the enemies hands; Col Holtby Gover^our thereof
escapes.
but it was regained from them soon after by as good Conduct, as it was lost by
base Treachery.

Several other encounters and velitations there were in those parts, wherein
Massey's activity and vigilance manifested it self; Massey active and vigilant.
but because they were of no great moment, it will be to as little purpose to
relate them. Come we now to that which is most material and remarkable.

Hitherto the King seemed to have fortune equal, if not favorable and
inclinable to him, saving in that unfortunate business of Marston-Moor. Now the
Cause came to be disputed. The King in his march out of the West, sent part of
his Army on several services; his reduced enemy still marching before him
toward London, as far as Basing, where they had Arms put again into their
hands, and r^c^^i^s from all parts thereabouts sent them. Near that House they
gathered into one body, but attempted not the place. Here joined the Earls of
Essex, Manchester and Sir William Waller, with some trained Regiments of London.

The King came to Kingsclear, Essex to Aldermarston, and thence privately over
the water to Padworth, and so to Bucklebury-Heath, and thence to Newberry,
where the King was. Newberry second fight, October. 27.
On Sunday-morning, about a thousand of the Earl of Manchesters forces, and
London Trained bands, came down the hill very early, and undiscerned passed
over the Kennet, and advanced upon some few of the Kings Foot, Manchester's
forces overpowered the Kings, but are rep^lied by Sir Bernard Astley.
and over-powred them, till they were seconded by Sir Bernard Astley, who drove
the enemy back again over the River, and the Reserves that were passed to
assist them, altogether in the same rout. Essex his design was to surround the
King toward Spr^; to which purpose, about three a clock in the afternoon, four
thousand of their Horse and Dragoons, and a stand of five hundred Pikes, and
some Cannon, appeared on the West Side of Newberry beyond the King; The Duke of
Yorks Regiment led by Sir Will. St Ledger, and Pr. Maurices Brigade repulsed.
where the Cornish Foot and the Duke of Yorks Regiment commanded by Sir William
St. Ledger, with five Fieldpieces, and a Brigade of Prince Maurice's Horse,
charged home, but were repulsed, and so overpowered with number, that they
were forced to forsake their ground and their five Fieldpieces, which the
enemy seized, and maintained. Essex's Horse also were too hard for the Kings,
whom they discomfited, and then with a part of them and some Musketeers fell
upon the Kings Life-guards, Essex his Horse too hard for the Kings, over-powred
Sir Humphry Bennet and Major Leg; but are repulsed by the Lord Bernard Stuart.
Goring and Cleaveland worsted: Earl of Cleaveland taken Prisoner, and the
Kings person in danger.
and Sir Humphry Bennets Brigade; they also overpowered Major Leg, who was
sent with a party of Horse to their reserve; and made Colonel Bennet to bear
off in some disorder: but being seconded by the Lord Bernard Stuart, who fell
upon the enemies Flanks, they routed them, killing in the conflict a Captain
and several private Soldiers. On the Kings side Captain Cathlin was slain, and
Captain Walgrave wounded.

On the East Side of Newberry the Parliaments forces were not less successful;
against whom General Goring and the old Earl of Cleaveland opposed themselves,
with the said Earls brigade, which consisted of the Regiments of Colonel
Thornhill, Colonel Hamilton, Colonel Culpepper, and Colonel Stuart. In this
dispute the Kings forces had the better, killing Major Hurry, Colonel Hurry's
Kinsman; but fresh supplies coming in, the Earl was forced to recede, and was
at last taken Prisoner, and the Kings person very near the same condition.

Let us cast a view now into the bloodiest parts of the field, on the
North-East of Newbery, where Manchester and the London Trained bands ^ought
against the Lord Ashley and Sir George Lisle, who had secured one Mr. Dolmans
house, as a place of some advantage, Earl of Manchester engaged with Lord
Ashley and Sir George Lisle, they are worsted but relieved by Sir John Brown.
having Colonel Thelwel for his Reserve: Manchesters Horse and Foot descending
the Hill with the aforesaid Trained bands, advanced hastily upon those Foot of
Sir Georges, and worsted them; but Sir John Brown, with Prince Charles his
Regiment, coming in time, gave a stop to their fury, diverting some part of
their Horse, to the relief of their Foot; which he fell upon, and so retreated:
when the Reserve under Thelwel made good his beginnings; and Colonel Lisle
animating his own Regiment by his example, by pulling off his doublet, brought
them three several times to the Charge, and maugre all the force and fury of
the enemy, could not be beaten from his ground, which he quitted not before
command. Several times here it came to the butt-end, with very great resolution
on both sides; which ceased not while they had any light to see what they did;
The King marches to Wallingford, and so to Oxford.
In the Covert of night the King drew all his Artillery, Ammunition, and
Wagons, under the walls of Dennington-Castle, and marched away to Wallingford
(though his Rear staid that night in the place till almost morning) and so to
Oxford.

This was a most fierce and bloody Battle, though of short continuance, but of
four hours, from four a clock in the afternoon till eight at night; wherein the
Parliamentarians strove to revenge their disgraceful defeat at Lestithiel* and
the Royalists to redeem their loss at Marston-Moor: but it was observed, that
none fought so eagerly as those Soldiers who took the engagement never to bear
Arms against the King, at their rendition in Cornwall; so that the King was well
rewarded for his lenity* and sparing of blood, which was at this place
plenteously drawn from his own Army: Of which, of men of note, were slain fewer
than in any Battle whatsoever; there being reckoned but three; Colonel Sir
William St. Ledger, Slain of note on the Kings side, Sir William St. Ledger.
Lieutenant Colonel Topping, and Lieutenant Colonel Leak: There were wounded
Sir John Greenvile, the General the Earl of Brainford in the head, and Sir
Richard Campfield, Colonel of the Queens Regiment of Horse; of Common Soldiers
a greater quantity than of the Parliaments, near three thousand: But of their
side not any person of note above a Captain, Essex had the Field.
and some five and twenty hundred killed. The Earl of Essex had indubitably the
honor, as he had the pillage of the Field, on which he lay all that night; and
having buried the Dead, marched to Besiege Demington-castle, where the Kings
Artillery was secured by the care of the aforesaid Colonel Boys, Col. Boys
secured the Kings Artillery.
who intended not to part with them at any Rates, though encompassed with so
great and powerful an Army, which after three several Summons, three several
days together assaulted it.

The King having marched his Army through Oxford on the thirtieth of the same
month, on the sixth of October Rendezvouzed them on Burlington-Green, within a
Mile Eastward of Oxford; and so marched by Dorchester to Wallingford, and
forward for the relief of Dennington-castle, The King relieves
Dennington-castle.
which yet stiffly defended it self: Upon his approach, and some resolute
attempts upon their out-Guards overnight, which passed with sundry Skirmishes,
the Enemy drew off next day, and departed, although they were two for one.

The Parliament suspect the Earl of Essex.
Hereabout, and in this matter, appears the first dissatisfaction of the
Parliament, as to the good management of their Arms; the Earl of Essex being
now suspected as careless or discontent: And therefore they fell to debate
concerning the Army in the House. For Colonel Norton had writ a Letter to them,
that he had received a Warrant from a chief Commander in the Army to withdraw
from Basing; which was a thing to him unexpected, but yet he obeyed: and
besides, the commands of the Committee of both Kingdoms to the Army were lately
much neglected* and complained of. This debate flew so high, as it came to this
question: How chance the Parliament-forces permitted the Enemy to relieve
Dennington-castle, when they were two for one? and why the Town of Newbery was
quitted before the Enemy was marched away? as the pretense of not fighting was,
because they would not quit Newbery.

It seems it was first resolved by the Council of State, that Essex his Forces
should not quit Newbery, or draw out into the Field, lest the King should take
it for Winter Quarters; but when the King should retreat from the relief of
Dennington, to fall upon his Rear: But no such matter was prosecuted; for the
King possessed himself of that Town, as a good covert and quarter for his Army,
while the Parliaments Forces lay in the open Fields, who being by the Kings
approach to them at Hungerford, and one thousand Horse sent under the same
Colonel Gage from thence, hastily dislodged also from the Siege of Basing,
(where Manchester and his whole Army had showed themselves only) departed to
their Winter Quarters in Reading, Henly, Abington, and Farnham; and the King's
to Basing, Odiam, Newbery, Blewbury and Marlborough.

Whilst they thus are lodged in their quarters, there will be respite to look
upon the Counsels and debates of the Parliament, and the consultations of the
King, and the debates likewise in his Court and Parliament at Oxford.

Manchester and Cromwell disser.
And first, the Earl of Manchester made his relation concerning the management
of the business at Dennington-castle of great length in Writing, which was in
the nature of a Charge against his Lieutenant General Cromwell, who had fought
so Fortunately for the Parliament: He thereupon made answer to several
particulars therein mentioned, and pleaded first, point of Privilege, because
of the transmitting of that business from the Lords, before any Charge was
brought into the House of Commons. This private Quarrel was presently quashed,
but the Public disgusts were not so soon laid.

For the Independent Faction began now to appear, and to be powerful in the
House of Commons; so that a suspicion was raised and somented by them, that the
Earl of Essex was more Royal than the Parliament ever intended, when they gave
him his Commission. Upon this pretense, and after several discourses, it came
at last to a debate, The Parliament resolve to new model their Army.
wherein it was resolved to new model their Army, and so by degrees to quit
themselves of their General, and to bethink of a new one, that should not be of
that dangerous greatness and honor, who might not well be disputed with; but
to choose one of a middle Estate betwixt the Peers and the People; and so to be
at last rid of all the Lords: which afterward they brought to pass.

To this end they began with a subtle Order, They Order that no Member shall
bear command in either Military or Civil affairs.
That no Member of either House shall during this War, enjoy and execute any
Office or Command military or civil, which has been granted or conferred on
any Member of either House, or by any Authority derived from either House. The
Reasons published for this Order, were these fine ones. That all Commissions to
Parliament Men being void, the new modeling the Army may be carried on with the
less exception, when all are concerned alike; That Military differences among
the great Commanders being Parliament Men which might retard the work, will
hereby cease; Those that shall be new elected Officers being of lesser quality
and sooner subject to question and punishment, and the Army also maintained at
a lesser charge.

Forty days were limited from this Order, by which all such Commissions and
Commands were in the Army declared void; with a resolution nevertheless
expressed, to pay off their Arrears; which was meanly performed, and at the
same rate that the Earl of Essex had the Ten thousand pounds a year assigned
him (for the good service he had done the State) out of the Lands of the Lord
Capel (whose Heirs now have his Honor) and other Delinquents, punctually paid
him.

This Ordinance for new modelling the Army met notwithstanding with great
opposition; The Ordinance for the new modeling the Army December. 31.
and as much (after it was received into the House) of alteration: The Lords
being instructed to soresee the evil consequences; nor would they plenarily
consent, before the old trick of Petitions from City and Country compelled them
to pass it. The Title whereof was, An Ordinance for the raising and maintaining
of Forces for the defense of the Kingdom, Sir Thomas Fairfax made General.
under the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax.

He thereupon is sent for, and privately comes out of the North; and on the
nineteenth of February, was brought by four Members into the House of Commons,
where a Chair was set, and he desired to sit therein; the Speaker telling him
of the great confidence and trust the Kingdom had put upon him in the Command
of this Army (from a sense of his Valor and Fidelity) for the defense of the
Laws and Religion.

While this Army was a modelling, many disorders happened, which retarded their
settlement: it was to consist of fourteen thousand Foot, and seven thousand
Horse and Dragoons effective; so that the Spring was well advanced, before they
were in any readiness. The stots advance Southward.
Therefore the Scots Army was entreated to advance Southward with all speed,
to assist the Parliament in the mean time.

It is to be noted, The first Address, contrived by Oliver Cromwell.
that the first contrivance of Addresses was from Oliver Cromwell, who having by
this Model (and by a Salvo to him from the injunction of the Ordinance) the
Regiment of Colonel Leg, (which had been in some muttering and discontent
against the Parliament) conferred on him, did, as soon as he had Mustered them,
present a Paper to them, wherein they professed their future adherence to the
Parliament in all duty and affection, as to the utmost hazard of their lives:
which Precedent and leading Case was followed throughout the Army, and since
throughout the Times.

The Scots (we said before) were sent for to march more Southward, The Scots
t^^^ Newcastle.
having left all things secure behind them, save Carlisle, which was then
Besieged; for Newcastle they had taken, of which we must speak a little. They
had layn a long while for many months a close and desperate Siege to it, where
several Sallies and Skirmishes had happened, it proving one of the hardest
resolutest Sieges in the Kingdom; all sorts of policy, of peace and war, by
Treaty, by Mines, by Assaults, having been frequently used, but to little
purpose; the Inhabitants resolving never, if possible, to fall into the Scots
hands.

But on Saturday the nineteenth of October, all the Scotch Army furiously set
upon the Town: and having weakened the defenses thereof, both as to the
Fortifications and the Garrison, having made three breaches by their Battery
and Mines, after a tedious Storm they at last mastered it. Sir John Morley and
Sir Nicolas Cole, and Sir George Baker, got to the Castle, where being forced
by necessity, they came to a Capitulation, which in Articles concluded a
surrender on the twenty seventh of the same month. The town being taken by
assault, was plundered sufficiently over and over again; Plunder it.
and thanks was given solemnly at London, So^^m thanks at London for their
success.
for the giving of Newcastle up to their Brethren of Scotland. And very great
reason they had to do so; for the poorer sort of people had been almost starved
for the last two years, for want of fuel; Coals having risen to the price of
four pound a Chaldron, never heard of before in London, as to the half of it.

Sir John Hotham and his son had been prisoners in the Tower of London since
July 1643. Now upon the new Model, several of the old strains were heard, as
every Change began with Outcryes: the noise was justice now against
Delinquents; the Sword had glutted it self almost with blood, now the Ax was to
taste some of it: but because of order, it is fit to put Sir Alexander Carew in
the forlorn of those men, Sir Alexander Carew behea^ed, f^^ end^avouring to
betray Plymouth-Fort to the King.
who on the three and twentieth of December was beheaded on Tower Hill, being
condemned by a Council of War held at Guild Hall, for endeavoring to betray
Plymouth-Fort, where he was Commander, to the King. This unfortunate person, of
whom something strange as to the business of the Earl of Strafford has been
said before, was brother to the more miserable John Carew, one of the Judges of
his late Majesty.

On the twenty seventh of December Sir John Hotham received sentence in like
manner, for his endeavor to betray Hull to the King, and for holding and
maintaining correspondence and intelligence with the Marquess of Newcastle and
others: the Earl of Manchester, and other great persons, sitting in the
Hustings Court at Guild Hall as Judges. He would have evaded the Charge* but he
could not thoroughly do it, and so mainly insisted on the great service he had
done before at Hull, when he might have expected great honor and preferment.
He also produced some witnesses of quality, on purpose to take off the
testimony of the Examinants against him; but they were not received for
sufficient.

Sir John Hotham and his son executed Jan. 1, 2. for endeavoring to betray
Hull, and holding correspondence with the Marquess of Newcastle.
His Excecution should have been on the thirty first of December upon
Tower Hill, where the multitude was assembled, the Scaffold, his Co^fin and
Executioner was in readiness; but as he was on his way thither, a Reprieve came
from the Lords for four days longer; which the Commons so stomacked, that
conceiving their Privilege hereby invaded, they ordered he should dye on the
second of January; which was accordingly performed, (his son suffered the day
before for the same offense; and both of them) dying with great reluctance, and
reflecting upon the Parliament; being assisted in this sad business with no
better comforter than Hugh Peter's. Hugh Peter's accompanies them at their
deaths.
In their grave we leave them, with that most excellent memorial of them in the
Kings book, than which nothing can be more truly or pathetically said of them;
give me leave, for an example to posterity, to transcribe a Paragraph.

The Kings observations of them in his Me^itations.
Nor did a solitary vengeance serve the turn; the cutting off one head in a
family is not enough to expiate the affront done to the head of the
Commonweal; the eldest son must be involved in the punishment, as he was
infected with the sin of his father, against the father of his Country; Root
and Branch, God cuts off in one day.

That which makes me more pity him, is, that after he began to have some
inclinations toward a repentance for his sin, and reparation of his duty to
me, he should be so unhappie as to fall into the hands of their Justice, and
not my Mercy, who could as willingly have forgiven him, as he could have asked
that favor of me.

Poor Gentleman! he is now become a notable Monument of unprosperous
Disloyalty; teaching the world by so sad and unfortunate a spectacle, that the
rude carriage of a Subject carries always its own Vengeance as an unseparable
shadow with it; and those often prove the most fatal and implacable Executioners
of it, who were the first employers in the service. Less than this could not be
afforded to this most notable passage of the times, whose ill beginning with
this man brought him to this ill and unfortunate end.

The Assembly of Divines Convocated by the Parliament had sat a good while in
consultation of Church Government; The Assembly of Divines consult about
Church Government.
and though they were forward enough to subvert what they sound standing, yet
by the interposition of more moderate and learned Divines, who happened to be
chosen among the rest, such as Dr. Featly, (whom at last the Parliament stifled
in restraint) and Dr. (after Bishop) Gauden, and others, that speed was
retarded: but upon this request of the Parliament to the Scots for their speedy
advance, in exchange of mutual kindness, they demanded the speedy settlement of
the Presbyterian Government, and that the Orders and Ceremonies of the Church
of England might not be used, in the interim, in any of the Churches of the
places where they should happen to quarter. Presently upon the receipt of this
Letter, the Assembly was ordered to bring in their Model of Church Government;
and those Resolves were urged afterward by many hundred Petitions, The
Covenant pressed to be universally tak^^.
and the Covenant pressed to be universally taken. Toward the end of this month,
they had licked up the form of their Directory, but could not agree about the
receiving of the Sacrament; which dispute was then committed.

Hereupon the Parliament proc^eded, and voted the abolishing of the
Common Prayer Book; The Comm^n-Prayer abolished.
which gave some satisfaction to the Scots, yet not fully contended them: they
had in the beginning of our Troubles openly named the Archbishop of Canterbury,
and prosecuted him as an Enemy to their Country, as the great Incendiary of the
broyls between both Nations, and did not desist while they had him safe in the
Tower; now they would have his life also as a gratification of their
assistance: His head must be danced off, like St. John Baptist's, at the Music
of their Bag-pipes. This they publicly demanded; so that an Ordinance (for the
Parliament durst not venture his Trial at the Common Law, as was thought by
some, because of the clause of that Bill of Attainder against the Earl of
Strafford, that his Case should be no precedent; and they knew the Judges
(though they might pack a Jury that should) would never venture to condemn him:
And his trial by Peers they vouchsafed not, as alike dangerous) passed the
House of Commons, whereby he was declared guilty; and that sent up to the Lords
for their concurrence, who bogled at it, Sir David Hawkins a zealous stickler
for the Parliament.
as a very ill precedent; so that it stuck for a while, until Sir David Hawkins
with his veterane Troops of Justice-cryers came, bawled at the Lords House for
speedy Execution of Delinquents: And then a new Expedient was set on foot for
the better dispatch, that the Lords should come and sit in the House of Commons
as to this business, and make one work of it; which some of them unworthily
did: an ill Omen or Presage, what that degenerateness would come to, when after
some of the same persons sat there as Commoners.

By this trick, after several brave Defenses made at the Bar of the Lords
House, where with might and main his Enemies prosecuted his Innocence, he was
condemned; (the main Argument against him being used by Sergeant Wild, That he
was so guilty an offender, that he wondered the people did not pull him in
pieces as he came to and fro to his trial,) and on the tenth of January brought
to Tower Hill, from a most sound and sweet repose that night, till awakened by
Pennington the Lieutenant of the Tower, Archbishop of Canterbury b^head^d.
to go to his Execution, whereat he was no whit dismayed, his color being as
fresh in his Face as ever it was in his life; which continued to his last
minute. At his death he made a Funeral-sermon for himself, which was in lieu of
a Speech, where this is (as he hinted it) to be observed, Vide Speech^s.
that though other Archbishops had lost their lives in this manner, yet not
the same way: He being the first Englishman that ever was condemned by an
Ordinance of Parliament.

His body was decently interred in Alhallows Barkin, London, according to the
Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, Buried at Alhallows Barking,
London.
of which he had been the chief Defender and Assertor; leaving Sir John
Robinson his Nephew, (since Lieutenant of the Tower) to inherit the remains of
his Estate, and the rewards of his great Services and Munificences to this
Church and Kingdom.

Abington had been made a Garrison ever since the Earl of Essex marched into
Cornwall; and became so troublesome a neighbor to Oxford, and the Country
adjacent, by the continual excursions of the Horse, which were never less than
a Regiment, that Colonel Sir Henry Gage (to prevent this perpetual annoyance,
Sir Henry Gage C^l. for the King, shot near Abingdon.
no man daring to travail upon any of the Roads toward Oxford with provisions
or other business, more especially hindering the intercourse betwixt Oxford and
Wallingford) resolved to build a Fort at Culham-bridge, within a mile of
Abington, on the London-road, to repress the boldness of those parties, who
were constantly out thereabouts upon designs. In the attempt thereof, and to
obstruct so dangerous an obstacle to their Eruption, the Abingdon-forces under
Colonel Brown Sally out, Engage, and maintain a short fight with the Royalists,
with little hopes of prevailing, till an Unfortunate shot wounded Colonel Gage
in the head, of which he dyed as soon as he came to Oxford; and so that project
was laid aside.

The King had so closely prosecuted his intentions for Peace, that it being in
the depth of Winter, both Armies in their quarters, and the two Factions of
Presbytery and Independency jealous of one another, the modelling of the Army
requiring also some gain and advantage of time; a Treaty, so often proposed by
the King, was now admitted to be managed at Vxbridge, Uxbridge- Tr^aty, Jan. 3.
by Commissioners on both sides.

The Kings Commissioners were as Follow:
Commissioners for the King at the Treaty at Uxbridge.
Duke of Richmond and Lenox, Marquess of Hertford, Earl of Southampton, Earl of
Kingston, Earl of Chichester, Lord Capel, Lord Seymore, Lord Hatton, Lord
Culpeper, Sir Edward Nicholas, Sir Edward Hide, afterward Lord Chancellor. Sir
Richard Lane, Sir Thomas Gardener, Sir Orlando Bridgeman, Mr. John Ashburnham,
Mr. Ieffery Palmer, Dr. Stuart, and Dr. Hammond, Divines.
The Parliaments Commissioners were,
Earl of Northumberland, Commissioners for the Parliament.
Earl of Pembroke, Earl of Salisbury, Earl of Denbigh, Lord Wenman, Mr. Denzil
Hollis, Mr. William Pierpoint, Sir Henry Vane, Jun. Mr. Crew, Mr. Whitlock, Mr.
Prideaux, Mr. Vines a Minister.
The Scotch Commissioners.
Scotch Commissioners.
Lord London, Sir Charles Erskin, Mr. Dundas, Mr. Brackley, Mr. Alexander
Henderson, Minister.
The main things first to be treated of, The main things to be treated of were,
Religon, Militia, and Ireland.
were, first Religion; second, Militia, third, Ireland. For Religion, the King
would not alter Government by Bishops, but would give way to some amendments in
the Liturgy upon advice. For the Militia, he would consent some Forts and
Garrisons should remain in the Parliaments hands pro tempore, The King refuses
to alter Religion by Bishops, but would admit of some amendments in the
Liturgy.
for security of the agreement; the King having the nomination of half the
Commissioners. For Ireland, the King would not abrogate the Cessation, until he
were sure the Rebellion here were at an end; having, to avoid that popular
demand, and to prevent any insisting upon that point, given Order to the
Marquess of Ormond to conclude a Peace, but however to continue the Cessation
for a year; for which he should promise the Irish, He is willing some Garrisons
should be in the Parliaments hands pro tempore, but will not abrogate the
Cessation in Ireland.
if he could have it no cheaper, to join with them against the Scots and
Inchiqueen: for by that time, the King said he hoped his condition would be
such, as the Irish should be glad to accept of less, or he enabled to grant
more.

The Parliament on the contrary side, insisted, as to Religion, upon the taking
away of the Kings Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, his Donations and Temporalties
of Bishoprics, his First Fruits and Tenths of Bishops, Deans, Deans and
Chapters; not offering to constitute the least dependence of the Clergy upon
the King, to the Presbyterian mode; compensating him with Bishops Lands, in
lieu of all those; which of themselves, if dissov'd, belong unto the Crown. For
Ireland, the King should annul the Cessation, and leave the management of that
Kingdom to the Scots. And for the Militia, that it should be managed
altogether by such Commissioners as they should appoint; so that the King
should not have the least power of his own to assist his Neighbors and Allies,
or defend himself at home.

They had also so obstructed any hopes of a conclusion, by limiting the time of
the Treaty to twenty days, and trying up the Commissioners with such
limitations, that the good effect thereof was despaired at the entrance into
it. Much persuasion was used by the Kings side, to the Parliaments
Commissioners, that they would gain longer time, and that the Treaty might be
revived; but all to no purpose. And to this matter, notable is that of one Mr.
Love, Mr. Love a strange Incendiary.
who by some private means or other was admitted to Preach before the said
Commissioners there; where he said, It was as possible for Heaven and Hell, as
the King and Parliament to agree; strange words to be uttered in such a
juncture, and in such a place, and before such an Assembly! but the end of that
man showed him the folly and wickedness of that expression. So after two and
twenty days Conference, the Treaty ended in vain. The Treaty ended in vain.
The Kings Commissioners complained of this Love; but answer was made, he was
none of their train, but the Parliament should be informed of him, who would do
justice upon him; but the business was hushed.

In the interim, the Lord Macguire, The Lord Macguire and Col. Mac Mahon hanged
drawn and quartered.
and one Colonel Mac Mahon, who were, as was said before, seized in Dublin the
night of the breaking forth of the Rebellion in Ireland, and had been Prisoners
in the Tower ever since, and some while before broke out from thence, and
wading over the Moat escaped away, being found in Drury Lane London, at a
private house, were brought to the Kings-Bench-Bar, (though Macguire pleaded
his Privilege of Peerage, and insisted peremptorily on it, while overruled by
the Court and Parliament together) and there after a Trial, both sentenced for
their Treason, to be hanged, drawn and quartered; which they underwent with a
great deal of stoutness, and their way of Piety; clearing the King from any
privity to that Rebellion.

Shrewsbury, Shrewsbury taken by Major General Mitton for the Parliament.
a most important and strong Garrison for the King, was by some treachery not
yet brought to light, betrayed just at the conclusion of the Treaty aforesaid
to Major General Mitton for the Parliament: It seems the Parliament rather
tampered underhand, than dealt fair above-board, and openly, during the time
thereof. For this good service, the said Major General Mitton, being a Member
of the House of Commons, at his coming thither, had the thanks of the same
given him by Mr. Speaker. He has the thanks of the House.
Abundance of Persons of Quality were surprised in this place, as thinking it
one of the securest Retreats in these parts; the List of whom I find after this
sort: Eight Knights and Baronets, forty Colonels, Majors, and Captains; 200
private Soldiers; some few slain. The Parliament takes Scarborough and
Weymouth, they raise Plymouth Siege. Ponfract- castle relieved by Sir Marmaduke
Langdale: he routs the Parl. Forces under Col. Rossiter.
About this time also Scarborough and Weymouth were taken for the Parliament,
and Plymouth-Siege for a while raised, and a day of Thanksgiving therefore set
apart.

Sir Marmaduke Langdale, an eminent man for the King in the North, was sent
from Oxford to relieve Ponfract-Castle in Yorkshire, Besieged by the Forces of
the Lord Fairfax: This Expedition he so prudently and valiantly underwent, that
in his way thither he routed Colonel Rossiter, who opposed him at
Melton-Mowbray, and passed forward; and with resolution, though twice inferior
in number, so charged the Besiegers, that after a sharp conflict he beat them
from the Siege, and having relieved the Castle, departed back again to the
assistance of the King, then threatened with a fresh and potent Army from London.

For the Earls of Essex, Manchester and Denbigh had resigned their Commissions
in the House of Peers, Essex, Manchester, and Denbigh resign their Commissions.
few of their Officers also continuing in their service; for whom the General
Essex in a Speech, when he laid down his said Commission, desired that the
Parliament would take care of their Debentures: which they abundantly promised,
but performed thinly, leaving them the unsatisfied name of Reformado's. Their
General himself having lost the opportunity of Blessing the Kingdom with a
Peace when it lay in his power, to which he was courted by the King a while
before at Lestithiel, seeing how the Pulse of the times beat, and what Counsels
were likely to prevail, withdrew himself in a Discontent to Eltham-House in
Kent, where not long after he deceased, as in due time shall be declared.

At that same time that Shrewsbury was thus surprised, the Kings Forces had a
Success, A notable success at the Devises, under Sir Jacob Ashley.
for the handsomness, though not for the consequence of it, very Notable. The
Kings Forces had Garrisoned a repaired Castle at the Devises, and Colonel
Devereux had a Garrison at Roudon-House between Malmsbury and that; which
therefore for its inconvenience was Besieged. Colonel Stephens of
Gloucestershire came to its Relief with 200 Horse, and as many Foot from
Malmsbury, and forced his passage with provision into the House. While he
stayed to take further order for the security of the place, the Royalists
surround the House again, cast up a Work where he entered, and keep him in; and
Sir Jacob Ashley comes to second the Siege with 3000 men. Massey understanding
this, did what he could to draw off Sir Jacob, by facing Cyrencester, and
sending a Party of Horse from Gloucester, which were to join with a like number
from Malmsbury again; but all in vain: the besieged were compelled at last to
render themselves upon very hard terms and conditions.

About this time there was a kind of Faction in the Kings Court at Oxford, and
some altercations betwixt the parties concerning the Kings Council; A Faction
at Oxford; the Lords, Savil, Percy, and Andover, confined.
so that some Lords, Savil, Percy, and Andover, were confined; and the
Parliament, that this, the Members of the same Houses at Westminster who
adhered to the King, who by the Kings Order were the year before convened at
Oxford, were for some Reasons and Discontents arisen about the Army, The
Parliament Adjourned.
Adjourned till the 10 of October. But that Parliament signified nothing.

The House of Commons Voted, that in their new Generals Commission, the words,
The Parliament's new Generals Commission.
For preservation of his Majesty's Person, should be left out; and accordingly
they were so. And so ended the year 1644. the last of the Kings Felicity.

Anno Dom. 1645.
WE will begin this year, though we post-date the time, that we may recite all
the exploits in Scotland, The Actions of the Renowned Marquess of Montross.
together with the actions of the renowned and ever-glorious Marquess of
Montross, appointed Governor of that Kingdom. The year before, he came into
Scotland, attended only by two, Mr. William Rollock, and Mr. Sibbalds, in
whose company he came at last to his Cousin Mr. Patrick Graham in the
Sheriffdom of Perth, with whom he staid a while disguised, till he had sent to
discover the State of the Kingdom. He had all along given the King information
of the Scots Rebellions, and siding with the Parliament; but Hamilton was
over-trusted. Much ado he had to pass, the ways being so strictly guarded,
while the Scotch Army was in England. At his arrival in the Highlands, He
arrives in the Highlands of Scotland.
being supplied with 1100 men from the Marquess of Antrim out of Ireland, and
another addition under the Lord Kilpont, and the Earl of Perths Son, he marched
to find out the Army of Covenanters, then gathered under the command of
Tullybarn, He fights the Covenanters, and obtains a great Victory at
Tepper-Moor.
the Lord Elch, and Drummond, consisting of a great Force, into Perth-shire,
where at Tepper-Moor he obtained a great Victory; his Soldiers, for want of
Arms and Ammunition, making use of the Stones lying advantagiously on the
Fighting-ground. Here he killed no less then 2000 men; whereupon Perth-City
opened its Gates to the Conqueror.

To withstand and repress so dangerous an Enemy within the Bowels of the
Kingdom, another Army was raised, and put under more Experienced Captains. In
the mean while, Montross had fallen into Argyles Country, H^ makes great spoils
in Argyles Country, Who with the E. of Seaforth, ma^ch against him with two
several Armies.
where he made miserable havoc, intending utterly to break the Spirits of that
people, who were so surely Engaged to Arguiles side. Here the Earl of Seaforth
followed him with an Army, and the Marquess of Argyle had another of the other
side. Montross therefore resolved to fight with one first; and so fell upon
that party under Argyle; which he totally routed, killed 1500 on the place, the
rest escaped; and so the Marquess of Montross bent his way after the other
Army, which he defeated at Brechin, He routs Argyle, defeats Col. Hurry at
Brechin, afterward at Alderne, and obtains a remarkable Victory at Alesford-
hills.
being newly put under the command of Colonel Hurry; afterward offers Battle
to Bailey, who had another Army ready to fight him; but he waited for
advantages: whereupon he marches after Hurry, who had recruited, and was
pressing upon the Lord Gourdon (having taken Dundee in his way) and at Alderne
discomfits him, killing 1800, and dispersing the rest.

He seeks out Bailey, to whom was joined the Earl of Lindsey; and at
Alesford-hills forced them to fight, utterly routed them, and obtained a
remarkable Victory: But that which lessened the Triumph, was the death of the
Lord Gourdon, Lord Gourdons death.
one that was as the right hand of Montross. A very Loyal Right Noble
Gentleman, Marquess of Montross affrights the Parliament at St. Johnstons.
being Eldest Son to the Marquess of Huntley. After this, he comes to St.
Iohnstons, where he alarmed the Parliament there sitting; and so into the
Lowlands, where the Kirk had another Army in readiness, under the command of
the aforesaid Bailey.

At a place called Kilsith, His famous Victory at Kilsith.
both Armies met; and a cruel Battle it was; but in conclusion, Success and
Victory Crowned Montross's Head, and almost 6000 of his Enemies were slain in
this fight, the pursuit being eagerly followed for a great way; the Covenanters
at first fighting very resolutely; but the fortune of Montross still Prevailed.
David Lesley routed.
The Nobility now every where readily assisted him, and the Towns and Cities
declared for him; The N^bility and Gentry assist him.
so that the Kingdom, which afforded men and assistance for the Invasion of
another Kingdom, was not now able to defend it self; the Governor (so was
Montross dignified) being seized of all places almost of strength, even as far
as Edinburgh, where some Royal prisoners were delivered to him. The Estates of
Scotland therefore sent for David Lesley, while Montross expected Forces from
the King under the Lord Digby; which staid too long, and were afterward
defeated at Sherburn in Yorkshire. Upon the arrival of Lesley, most of the
Forces under Montross, not dreading any Enemy so soon out of England, were
departed home; so that Lesley finding Montross in a very weak condition at
Philips-Haugh, fell upon him before he could retreat, almost before his Scouts
could give him intelligence, and there routs him. He at first resolved to lose
his life with the field; but being persuaded of better hopes, he resolutely
charged through, and brought the flying remains of his Army safe into the
High-lands, where he began new Levies: But the fortune of the King failing
every where, he was the next year ordered by the King, The King orders Montross
to disband.
then in the Scots custody, to disband, and depart the Kingdom. And so we leave
him till a more unhappy revolution of time.

In the beginning of this year Colonel Massey received a defeat at Lidbury, the
manner thus: Prince Rupert, Colonel Massey defeated at Lidbury by Prince Rupert.
who had for some time quartered thereabouts to make new Levies, had
intercepted some Scouts, and by them understood the Col. had taken up his
quarters there, intending to fall upon Sir John Winter, who had been his
restless adversary throughout the War in Gloucester-shire, and who being called
into the Army, had tired his house, which he had maintained as a Garrison
against all opposition: When the Prince was within half a mile of the Town,
Massey took the Alarm, commanded his Horse to mount, and gave order for his
Foot to march, that the Royalists might not get before them, which the Prince
aimed at. A furious Charge the said Horse maintained, consisting principally of
Officers, among whom was Kirl that betrayed Monmouth: at last Massey was forced
to fly, narrowly escaping taking, Major Backhouse his great second being
mortally wounded, He is forced to fly, and narrowly escapes.
with diverse others, and some common Soldiers taken Prisoners, the rest fled
to Gloucester in haste with the Governor.

But that which deservedly ought to begin the year, was the investiture of Sir
Thomas Fairfax in the supreme Command of the Army: Sir Thomas Fairfax takes
command of the Army.
It was the first of April when he received his Commission, and on the twenty
third of April he went from London to Windsor to perfect the new Model; where
he continued in that troublesome affair to the end of the month. In the mean
time Colonel Cromwell (who had been commanded out of the West, by the Ordinance
of the Parliament against Members continuance in any Military command, whose
limitations of forty days was then expired) came thither to salute the General,
and next morning was stopped there with a dispensation from his attendance on
the House for forty days longer (which was extended to the length.) For Prince
Rupert and his brother Maurice had gathered a competent Army of Horse in
Worcestershire, Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice raise Horse in
Worcestershire.
and the confines of Wales, and were ordered by the King to come and fetch him
off with his Infantry and Train of Artillery from Oxford. To which purpose a
Convoy of Horse was presently dispatched, consisting of near 2000, being the
Regiments of the Queen, the Earl of Northampton, the Lord Wilmot, and Colonel
Palmer; while the Princes advanced in a body after them. Upon advertisement
thereof, the Committee of both Kingdoms recommended it to the General, to send
Lieutenant General Cromwell with some Horse to march beyond Oxford, and lie on
the way to Worcester, to intercept the same Convoy. Cromwell sent to intercept
the Kings Forces, routs them.
With a party of Horse and Dragoons therefore then on the field, neither
mustered nor recruited, as of the new Model, Cromwell immediately marched, found
the enemy, and engaged them near Islip-bridge, routed them, took 400 Horse, and
200 Prisoners, and the Qeens Standard. The Queens Standard taken.

He summons Blechington house; the Governor Col. Windebank delivers it.


And to make up this a kind of a victory, presently summoned Blechington-house
within four miles of Oxford, where Colonel Windebank commanded, and whither
some of these routed Troops had fled for shelter. At his approach, he instantly
summoned it in a very threatening Message, if he rendered it not immediately,
(his Horse casting out words for the Foot to fall on, when there was none
there.) The governor overruled by his fair young Bride, and some Ladies that
were come thither to visit, and frighted with the menace, delivered the House,
with all the Arms and Ammunition therein. For which, the hopeful young
Gentleman, for all the prayers and entreaties of his Wife, And was therefore
shot to death.
and the merit of his Father, was shot to death against Merton-Colledge-Wall in
Oxford; to the great regret afterward of the King, when he understood the
business, and for which he was highly displeased with Prince Rupert.

After the taking of this Blechingdon-House, Cromwell sent the Prisoners away to
Alisbury, and slighted that Garrison; and having intelligence of a party of 350
Foot under Sir William Vaughan, who were marching that way toward
Radcot-bridge, Cromwell takes Sir William Vaughan at Radcot- bridge.
he pursued them, and took the said Sir William, Lieutenant Colonel Littleton,
and about 200 more Prisoners.

His next attempt was upon Farringdon, having borrowed 600 Foot from Abingdon,
of Major General Brown; here he lost some 50 men withont any success, and so
gave over the design; but before he could get off, was attaqued by part of
General Gorings Horse, commanded by himself, then newly come out of the West
from Taunton-siege; who by his valor so ordered his business, that he gave
Cromwell the first brush he received, Goring gives Cromwell his first brush.
taking Major Bethel Prisoner, and three Colors; and then retreated to
Letchlade, in order to his return to strengthen and renew the siege against the
aforesaid Town of Taunton.

The new modeled Army on the first of May began to march, The new modeled Army
march to Blandford in Dorset-shire: take Lieutenant-Col. Hacket.
after a debate whether it should march Westward to the relief of Taunton, or
to besiege Oxford. The first designment was followed; and so on the 7 of May,
from Windsor, General Fairfax reached Blandford in Dorset-shire, whither he
marched without any opposition, save a little skirmish betwixt some of his
Troops and one Lieutenant Colonel Hacket, whom they took Prisoner.

The King taking this opportunity of the Armies marching Westward, The King
leaving Oxford, takes the field.
drew his Forces and Artillery out of Oxford into the field: Which the General
foreseeing, had left Cromwell and Major General Brown to attend his motions; but
they being not of strength sufficient to impede his Marches, or Conjuncture
with Prince Rupert, who advanced out of Hereford-shire and Worcestershire,
Fairfax was recalled out of the West, Fairfax recalled from the West, but
leaves part of his Army there.
and ordered by the Committee of both Kingdoms to allot only a portion of his
Army for Taunton; which was a Brigade consisting of four Regiments, the Supreme
Command whereof was given unto the eldest Colonel Welden. Upon approach of
those Forces, the Royalists thinking it had been the whole Army, (for Fairfax
made such semblance, marching as far as Dorchester with the said relief) drew
off, and gave them the liberty of entrance the fourteenth of May, where they
were welcomed by the resolute Governor, afterward General Blake, a man more
famous in the Times succeeding.

General Fairfax on the 14 of May likewise arrived at Newbery, where two days
he rested his wearied Foot, and there again received new Orders to lay Siege to
Oxford; Oxford besieged the second time.
and Cromwell and Brown were recalled from following the King, to join with the
General in that Enterprise: Nevertheless a party of 2500 Horse and Dragoons
under Colonel Vermuden ( Cromwell not being so acceptable to that Nation) were
sent to join with the Scots in their march Southwards. Fifteen days the
Parliaments Army lay before the City, while the King was at liberty, and
irresistible in the Field. Fairfax despairing of reducing the Town, never sent
in a Summons; thereby intending to save the first reputation of the Army, when
it should rise from thence without it. Nothing occurred of any remark, during
this Siege, but that a Bridge was laid over the River for a Communication, and
a resolute Sally made by the Garrison upon a Corpse du Guard near
Heddington-hill, which they surprised, killed twelve, and took the rest, which
made up 100 Prisoners, who were Exchanged for the like number which the
Adjutant-General Fleming took near Newnham, under the command of Captain
Gardener, who had been sent Prisoners to Abingdon, A cruel custom at Abingdon,
where a cruel custom had been practiced of hanging all the Irish without any
manner of Trial; under which notion, very many English also suffered: A
barbarity so common, that it grew into the Proverb of Abingdon-Law. Borstal-
house besieged.

Gaunt- house surrendered.


Borstal-house was likewise besieged by Skippon, whither the General went
himself, but to no purpose. Gaunt-house being battered by Colonel Raynsborough,
and a breach made after a resolute answer, was glad to abate from its
stubbornness, and take Conditions upon quarter from the Enemy.

But while General Fairfax trifled at Oxford, news came that the King having
relieved Chester, Chester distressed; Relieved by the King.
distressed by Sir William Brereton and the Neighboring County-forces, was now
marching toward Leicester, and the Association; the Scots Army, instead of
advancing against the King, being gone more Northward toward Westmerland,
their own affairs at home so requiring: And also that General Goring, Goring,
Hopton, and Greenvile join, and besiege Taunton. Leicester Stormed and taken by
Prince Rupert, May 21.
Sir Ralph Hopton, and Sir Richard Greenvile, had joined all their Forces
against Colonel Weldens Brigade, in a manner besieging them, and the Town of
Taunton together. And that which brought up the Rear of these intelligences was
worst of all, that the King had taken Leicester by Storm, the manner thus.

After Prince Rupert had summoned it, wherein he offered quarter to the Town,
the Committee of that County then resident there, assembled all the Commanders,
and read the Summons unto them; by whom it was resolved to give answer next
morning. The Trumphet was no sooner returned, but a Drum was presently
dispatched for a full answer within an hour; which while they debated beyond
their stint, the Kings Guns played from the Battery, and all Soldiers were
commanded to their respective Posts; the great and small Shot never
intermitting that day and night; when next morning they Stormed at six or seven
places. At Newark-breach they entered first, where Colonel St. George was slain
with a great shot, in a Bravery and Gallantry of Courage, venturing upon the
mouth of the Cannon. The Works being seized, there yet remained a Work of
greater Bloodshed, the Marketplace, where the Defendants had drawn up their
Artillery, and for three hours space maintained the fight at the Cross therein.
They were at last overpowered; the Committee Men, with Sir Robert Pie, He
takes Sir Robert Pie: the Town is plundered.
Colonel Hacker, and Colonel Gray, taken Prisoners, and put into custody; only
Sir Robert had some more respect showed him. The Town was plundered, and some
of the Inhabitants for the present secured; the spoil part of it carried away
to the Kings adjacent Garrison of Newark, Ashby-Delazouch and Belvoyr-Castle:
But the Parliament-forces found very near as good Booty in those sudden spoils
that came from Naseby.

All men upon this Success looked upon the Kings Army as far the more puissant.
The Parliament almost driven to despair.
Great Fears and Distrusts were arisen in the Parliament it self, not much
different from despair; several Members being overheard to say in their
passage to the House out of Westminster Hall, that there was no hopes but in
the Kings mercy, and that the speediest recourse thereto would be the safest
Expedient for them. And the Royal party were as good as Cocksure (as we say)
that the day was their own; which they made appear, even in London, by all
public signs and discourses. The King and Royalists too confident of Success.
The King himself deceived also with this Lightning before his Ruin, which he
construed for the greatest Sunshine of his Felicity, was of the same Opinion;
the result whereof appeared in a Letter written to the Queen, June the 8th,
where he used this Expression. I may without being too sanguine affirm, that
since this Rebellion, my affairs were never in so hopeful away. But behold the
inconstancy and fate of War! This his greatest Exaltation, proved his utter
Crushing and Final overthrow, in the approaching Encounter at Naseby.

For the Parliament being alarmed with this imminent danger, gave speedy
command to Sir Thomas Fairfax to rise from Oxford, Sir Thomas Fairfax ordered
to give the King-Battel.
and march after the King, and put their disperate condition to the decision of
a Battle: For they were now upon a ticklish Point; and Treachery and Division
at Home, with the Kings growing Success, would no doubt improve to a public
desertion of the Grandees of the Faction; than which to them a Conquest could
not be worse, if not advantageous, by linking and involving so many in the
danger, that in the multitude of the offenders they might find shelter.

The King was now in dispute whether he should turn his Arms to raise Oxford or
Pomfret-siege, Yorkshire a long time harrased by the Scots.
march Southward or Northward: The York-shire-men insisted on going homeward to
their own Country, that had so long been harrased by and under the Dominion of
the Scots; of which opinion was Sir Marmaduke Langdale, and that in going
thitherward probably Fairfax would rise and follow, where some notable
advantages might be taken of him, so far distanced from any place or succor of
relief. Others were of opinion that the King should march into the Association,
The unresolved which way to bend his Forces.
and bending a little Westward, join with General Goring, who now again
besieged Taunton with a gallant Army, and had worsted Colonel Welden, sent
thither with succors as aforesaid; and then with his United Forces, which
Fairfax would be in no case to resist, to march directly to London, and put an
end to the War.

While this Consultation was held, The Parliament order Fairfax to put their
differences to the decision of a Battle.
Fairfax was ordered to rise from before Oxford by the Committee of both
Kingdoms, who startled with the loss of Leicester, resolved as before to put
the business to an Issue by the fortune of a Battle, if the King would be
brought to it. From Oxford the Army arose, intending to put themselves between
the King and the Associated Counties, and fight him if he advanced; if not, to
follow him with the same resolution.

The 5th of June the Parliaments Army marched to Marsh-Gibeon, They march to
Marsh-Gibeon. Major General Brown Garrisons Gaunt- house. The King at Daventry,
and Northampton
ten miles from Oxford; and Major General Brown put a substantial Garrison into
Gaunt-house, as a Curb and Bridle to the Oxonians; when news was brought them
that the King was come to Daventry with an intent to raise the Siege. June the
6th, the Army marched to Brickhil, designing Stony-Stratford for the
Head-quarter, but that intelligence came that the King had faced Northampton
with some of his Horse, and it was thought dangerous to come so near him,
before the Horse under Vermuden were returned out of Derby^shire, and joined
with them.

Lieutenant General Cromwell, Cromwell sent for by the Parliament to command
their Horse.
who had been sent with three Troops of Horse a little before to secure the
Isle of Ely in case the King should make an irruption as was supposed, was now
by a Letter from the General to the Parliament desired to return to the Army to
command the Horse; and accordingly by their order he came back with 600 Horse
of the Association: the General writ likewise to Sir John Gell, Colonel
Rossiter, and the respective Governors of Warwick, Coventry, Northampton, and
Nottingham, to send what Forces they could spare; and then came Colonel
Vermuden with 2500 Horse and Dragoons.

After this Conjunction, the Army marched within three miles of Northampton,
where they were informed that the King was still about Daventry, The Kings Foot
and Carriages quartered upon Burrough-hill.
Quartering all his Foot and Carriages upon Burrough-hill, as if he intended to
fight upon that ground if they should advance; but he stayed only till 1200
Horse which he had sent to Oxford, as a Convoy of the Cattle out of Leicester
and Northamptonshire were returned.

The Parliaments Army then came to Gilsborough, The Parliaments Army at
Gilsborough.
within five miles of Borough hill; where, as their General was riding in the
morning (having been stopped in the night, which was rainy and tempestuous, by a
private Soldier for the Word, till the Captain of the Guard being sent for
gave it him) about three a clock he discerned the Royalists to ride fast over
the said hill, making fires in abundance, as if they were firing their Huts;
which gave some cause to believe that they were about to march, as it presently
appeared.

About five in the morning, June 13, certain notice was given, that the
Royalists were drawn off from Burrough-hill, having stood in Arms all night,
being amazed that the Parliaments Army were so near; it having been spread
abroad among them, that they were gone for security into the Association: So
that the Convoy of Horse being come from Oxford, The Kings Army march to
Pomfret.
they speedily resolved to march to Pomfret, thinking that Sir Tho. Fairfax
would not follow them; or if he did, they should fight him with more advantage.

Hereupon the Parliaments Drums and Trumpets began to sound; Ireton with a
strong party of Horse sent to fall upon his Flank.
and a strong party of Horse was sent under Colonel Ireton to fall upon the
flank of the Kings Army if he should see cause; and the main Body came that
night to Gilling; the Kings Headquarters being at Naseby, The Kings
Headquarters at Naseby. Alarmed by Ireton, he goes to Harborough, and
unhappily resolves to fight.
which Ireton Alarmed; so that the King not having notice of it till eleven a
Clock at night, as he had little imagined the nearness of an Army, or that they
durst bear up to him, much amazed, left his own quarters at that unseasonable
time, and for security went to Harborough, where Prince Rupert and the Van of
the Army quartered; and as soon as he came thither, sent to call up his Nephew,
resting himself in a Chair in a low room. In the mean time a Council of War was
also presently summoned, where it was resolved, that seeing there was no
bringing off the Rear if they should march further for Leicester, but that the
whole Army would be put in hazard, they should give the enemy battle, relying
upon the valor of the Infantry, and in a bravery to march back and find him
out. But this was more the Kings unhappy resolution, than his Commanders, who
would have avoided fighting till General Goring were joined with them.

Naseby- fight.
On Saturday, June the 14, a day fatal to the King, the Parliamentarians
advanced by three a clock in the morning to retard the Royalists March with
their Horse. The Parliament forces Rendezvous near Naseby: they discover the
Kings Horse near Harborough.
By five a clock they Rendezvouzed near Naseby; and immediately great bodies of
the Kings Horse were discerned on the top of the hill short of Harborough;
which showed that he intended not to draw away, but that he would come forward
and engage them on the ground where they stood; which they presently took the
best advantage of, possessing the edge of a hill, from which they afterward
retreated 100 paces, that the Kings Army, marching upon plain ground, might not
well discern in what form their Battle was drawn, nor see any confusion therein.

The King misinformed.
The King being falsely informed that the Parliaments Army was drawing off in
haste and flying to Northampton, marched on with the greater precipitancy,
leaving many of his Ordnance behind him. The place of the fight was a large
fallow-field on the Northwest-side of Naseby, flanked on the left with a hedge,
which was lined with Dragoons, to prevent the annoying of the left flank of the
Parliaments Army, that was drawn up in this posture: Leiutenant-General Cromwell
commanded the right Wing of Horse, Cromwell commands the right Wing of the Parl.
horse; Ireton the left: The Genesis and Skippon the main battle of Foot. Whaley
routs Langdale, who commanded part of the Kings left Wing.
wherein were five Regiments, and the addition of Colonel Rossiters Troops, who
was newly come when the fight began, and took his post there:
Commissary-General Ireton commanded the left Wing of Horse and Dragoons; and
the General and Major General Skippon the main Battle of Foot. Both the Wings
of Horse charged together upon the King's, who were drawn in the same Order,
and marched swiftly, but very regularly upon the Enemy. Colonel Whaley, being
in the right Wing, charged first two Divisions of Horse of the Kings left Wing,
commanded by the Lord Langdale, who made a gallant resistance, firing at a very
close charge, and came to the Sword; but were by force Routed and driven back
to Prince Ruperts Regiment, being the Reserve of the Kings Foot. But the whole
Right Wing of the Parliaments advancing (which was with some difficulty, by
reason of a Coney-warren they passed) they were totally routed, after a Rally
made, and put to flight, from which they never returned to their ground again;
so that in this part there was an absolute Conquest.

Prince Rupert routs the Parliaments left Wing.

Ireton taken Prisoner, and (the fortune of the day changing) is released.


The success of the left Wing, which charged the right Wing of the Kings, was
quite contrary: Prince Rupert commanding it, according to his wonted custom,
charged furiously, and broke in upon and routed the three rightmost Divisions
of that left Wing, which was also distressed by a Brigade of the Kings Foot, in
which Ireton himself charged, and therein being run through the Thigh with a
Pike, and into the face with a Halbert, was taken Prisoner, and kept so; till
the battle and fortune of the day changing, he changed his condition, giving
his Keeper that liberty which he timely offered, and came over to Sir Thomas
Fairfax.

The left Wing being thus routed, Prince Rupert pursued his advantage and
success almost to Naseby-Town; in his return summoning the Train, and offering
them Quarter; who instead of accepting it, fired lustily upon him; who
despairing of forcing it, being well guarded by Firelocks, and perceiving the
Success of the right Wing of Horse, retreated in great have to the rescue of
his friends, whom he found in such general distress, that instead of attempting
any thing in their Relief, being close followed in the Rear by the Parliaments
Horse of both Wings, who were joined, he stopped not until he came to the
ground where the King was rallying his broken Forces himself in person.

In the main Battle, the Kings Regiment, Sir Bernard Ashley's and Sir George
Lisle's Tertia's stood manfully to it; their Horse being in the Rear of them,
but could no way assist them, being kept from it by part of the Enemies Horse,
who kept them in action; The Kings Foot overpowered by the Parliaments Horse.
the other part fell in with their own Foot, and jointly poured their whole
strength upon the Kings Infantry, which now, except one Tertia, were all at
mercy, the Reserves being likewise routed. This standing parcel of Foot Cromwell
endeavored to break with his Horse; attempting them in Flank, Front, and Rear,
but in vain, till the Generals own Regiment of Foot came up, and fell in with
the butt-end of their Muskets; the Horse Charging them at the same time, and
so trampled them down.

The King had now nothing in the Field but his Horse, His Cavalry in great
distress.
(where he himself was) which he had put in as good order as the time and the
near pressing of the Enemy would permit: which Fairfax perceiving, he resolved
to stay for his Foot, who were a quarter of a mile behind him, that he might
not put the day in hazard again. As soon as they came up, the Horse opened at
great distance to receive their Foot in the midst of them, and stood again in
the same form of Battalia as before the commencement of the Fight; having not
only the advantage of ground, but the Kings Artillery, who besides had no Foot
to entertain the levelled Volleys against his Cavalry.

During this respite, Okey's Dragoons do notable Execution on the Kings Horse.
the Dragoons of Fairfax under Colonel Okey advanced (a person miserable by
nothing more than his valor, which betrayed him to the Artifices of Cromwell in
the matter of the King) and with notable courage and smartness fired upon the
Kings Troops; his Majesty now discharging the part of a Soldier, animating his
men to a second round Charge upon the Horse opposite to him, not yet secured by
their Infantry; but they soon appearing, the gallantry of that resolution was
lost, and the danger and despair of doing any good by any further resistance
prevailed against the Kings entreaties, and indeed against the reasonableness
of the attempt.

For who can but expostulate the misery of this day! The Calamities of this day.
the Troops of those calamities that broke in upon the Kingdom, sadly
upbraiding the relasch and weakness of that Cavalry, which might by a generous
Bravery have saved themselves, their honor, the King, and the Kingdom, and,
which is more, the innocence of the Nation.

But the Justice and overruling Wisdom of Almighty God vouchsafed not his
assistance and favor to those Arms, reserving the Honor and Reputation of the
Cause they defended to his unquestionable all-puissant Arm; that it might
hereafter be transcribed to posterity from the visible and glorious
manifestations of Digitus Dei.

Read then and peruse with thine eyes, O guiltless Posterity, the Fates of the
flying Royalists, on whom for fourteen miles (the despicable condition of the
Enemy, but that morning, proving the most potent and formidable strength) the
Parliamentarians did Execution, no parties of them making any notable
resistance; The Parliament take many of the Kings Officers, and his Standard ^
with his Cabinet of Letters, which they unworthily publish.
but were freed from the extremity of the pursuit, more by the tire of their
enemies Horse, than by the celerity of their own.

The Prisoners taken at this fight, were 6 Colonels, Commissioned and
Reformadoes, 8 Lieutenant-Colonels, 18 Majors, 70 Captains, 8 Lieutenants, 80
Ensigns, 200 other inferior Officers, besides 4 of the Kings Footmen, 13 of
his household, 12 pieces of Ordnance, 8000 Arms, 40 barrels of Powder, 200
Carriages, all their Bag and Baggage, the Kings Standard, and near 100 Colors
of Horse and Foot, and (the dishonor of the Parliamentarians Triumph) the
Kings Cabinet of Letters, published afterward in a most impudent manner (of
which the King most elegantly complained) by the irreconciliable Enemies of his
and his Kingdoms peace.

The number of the Common Soldiers taken, amounted to 4500, who were
afterward brought to London, and enclosed in the new Churchyard in
Westminster by Tuttle-fields; from whence they were freed by another Captivity,
the service of foreign Princes.

The advantage equal to both parties.
This Battle was fought much upon equal advantage for number both of Horse and
Foot; the ground also as equal: For the fury of the fight dispensed with the
first commodiousness of the Campania, which was uncertainly maintained by the
diversity of Success; being thereunto very fit, by reason of its playnness,
which was a mile broad from the utmost Flank of the Right, to the left Wing of
the Parliaments Army, who first disposed of it; and the neutrality of the Wind
favored both alike.

The Commanders on both sides behaved themselves worthy of their places:
(nothing can be faulted in matter of courage, but the Northern Horse for the
King, who were disgus^ed in the beginning, for that they fought unwillingly, as
resolute upon the enterprise of Pomfret.) To give them their particular dues,
will be too filling for this Volume; The Lord Bard. did excellent service for
the King.
we will only mention my Lord Bard, because this Chronicle has given no
former account of his Honor, to which he rose from a Commoner, by excellent
services done the King; and Colonel John Russel, of whom before in
Marston-Moor; the whitest name in the Roll of Fame.

And since it is by the Victor-party, even by the General himself, thought a
crime, this Relation shall not spread it. He himself became the Command, had it
been lawful; the other his Officers were men, and pity only they were English.
Skippon here received a mark of his Disloyalty.

Fiennes s^nt to London with the Prisoners.
The next day Colonel John Fiennes with his Regiment was sent up to London by
the General with the Prisoners and Colors taken in the fight, who had been all
along eminent in the services of that side.

The Parliaments Forces pursut the Kings.
The Kings Forces being thus vanquished, Fairfax gave orders for the Army and
Train to march after them the next day, being Sunday, without any more
intermission; the pursuit of the Victory being of parallel consequence with the
obtaining of it. These Orders were cheerfully obeyed, though the long march of
the Foot for many days together, and the vehemence of the Battle, might have
made them rest: That night they quartered at Great Glyn, four miles short of
Leicester; but the Horse came nearer; which so much Alarmed the Nobility and
Gentry that had fled thither for security, that they fled thence in great
haste, leaving the Lord Hastings to defend the place.

The King at Ashby de la zouch. He goes into Wales.
The King in the mean time not judging it safe to lodge at Leicester, departed
to Ashby de la zouch, where he reposed himself some few hours; but stayed not
there, making all speed he could from Litchfield in the night, and from thence
into Wales. The other part of the rout, being the Northern Horse under Sir
Marmaduke Langdale, Sir Marmaduke Langdale flies to Newark.
fled incontinently from the Battle to Newark, and narrowly escaped Sir John
Gell, who was advancing with 2000 Horse from Nottingham, to join with the
General.

The General Fairfax was once unresolved whether he should presently march to
relieve Taunton sorely distressed by the Lord Goring, Taunton distressed by the
Lord Goring.
or undertake Leicester. He had received full information of the strength of
that Army, and what a desperate forlorn condition Blake the Governor was in;
yet knowing that now there was no possibility of juncture with the King, of
which before the fight Goring had assured his Majesty within few days,
Leicester retaken.
he resolved to reduce Leicester first.

Lord Hastings Governor thereof.
On Monday the 16 of June, the whole Army came before the Town, when the General
sent a Summons to the Lord Hastings to deliver it to the use of the Parliament;
who very resolutely refused them, and thereupon command was given for a present
Storm.

On the 17, being Tuesday, great store of Ladders were brought in, a Battery
raised, upon which two Demy-Cannons and a whole Culverin taken at Naseby were
planted upon an old Work against the Newark, being the very same Guns which the
King not many days before had used against the same place. Whereupon the Lord
of Loughborough, seeing this resolution of the enemy, sent a Trumpeter out that
day with Letters, desiring a Parley concerning the surrender of the Town; which
began that evening, and concluded in an agreement; and on Wednesday morning,
June the 18, the Garrison marched out, The Kings Soldiers march out with
Staves in their hands.
the Governor to Ashby-de-la-zouch, the Soldiers and other Officers to
Litchfield, with staves only in their hands.

There were taken in the Town 14 pieces of Ordnance, 30 Colors, 2000 Arms, 500
Horse, 50 barrels of Powder, and other Ammunition proportionable thereunto.

Then consultation was held whether any Horse should be sent after the King,
who hastened to Hereford; but the distress of Taunton in the West swayed the
Parliaments Army thither-ward, being newly mustered, and gratified with their
pay sent down from London.

With this intention the Army marched toward Marlborough, The Parliaments Army
march toward Marlborough.
where they should be nevertheless in the midway to Hereford and Taunton, if
the King should appear formidable; but no such account being likely to be given
of him, they advanced further Westward, and by the way took in
Highworth-Garrison, and came to Salisbury, where their General had noti^e that
the Countrymen under the Style of Club-men were generally risen in those
Counties, The Club men rise.
(being distinguished by a white Ribon in their hats) and had been bickering
with part of Major General Massey's forces, which were the only considerable
for the Parliament thereabouts; and that there might be some suspicion of
danger, either in their Quarters or in the field from them: For it was supposed
they were risen in favor of the King, however they pretended a neutrality, and
preservation of themselves. To this purpose they presented the General with two
Petitions; the one to the King, the other to the Parliament; They Petition the
King and Parliament.
desiring a Safe Conduct to go and deliver them. They were reputed near the
number of ten thousand, then ready at an hours warning to be embodyed together;
Armed with Country-weapons, Bills and Pitchtorks, and Clubs, and some
Fire-Armes, under the command of one Mr. Hollis, who transacted with Sir Thomas
Fairfax in the matter aforesaid. Their Demands were high, though reasonable:
but of these men more anon.

Goring hearing of this advance of the Army, Taunton freed, July 7.
made a semblance and show of drawing off from Taunton (where Colonel Welden
and the relief lately sent were besieged:) after he had marched some two miles,
the Garrison sallied out to fall upon his Rear; when on a sudden he faces
about, falls with fury and execution upon the party, kills many, and pursues
the rest into the Town up to the very Gates, And Goring after his defeating the
besieged departed.
and then sets down closer than before: But his Scouts giving him continual
notice of Fairfax's approach, he finally departed, to prevent the enemies
hasty advance, and to get an opportunity of joining with the Forces which he
expected to his assistance from the King.

To this purpose he commodiously quartered his Army at Long Sutton, His Army
quartered at Long-Sutton,
keeping the River betwixt him and his enemies, having the Garrisons of
Bridgewater, Langport, Borough, and Ilchester, and several Passes upon the
River, to friend; the Bridges every where broken down; and it would have been
hazardous to force a passage in view of his Army, who were in good order, ready
to receive any attempt. It was therefore concluded by the Parliamentarians, to
force a passage at a Town called Evil, and there to put up the bridge again,
and so fall upon him. The Royalists understanding that Evil was gained, marched
to Langport, and quitted Ilchester, and a Pass at Load-bridge; and made show as
if (leading the most part of the Army that way) they would surprise Taunton.
they march to Langport.
To prevent that, Major General Massey was ordered to fall on their Rear,
Massey resolutely attempis their Rear, but with loss.
being of that side the water; which he resolutely attempted, but with loss,
for nevertheless the Royalists kept themselves in their station and way.

Langport fight.
The next day, July the 10, General Goring advanced from Langport with his Foot
to the Pass, having lined the hedges thick with Musketeers, and drawn up his
Ordnance, the main Body being placed in good order upon a hill, about a
Musket Shot from the Pass. The fight began with the roaring of the Cannon from
Fairfax's Camp with some execution; then the Foot advanced, and beat the
Royalists from their hedges, General Fairfax routs the Lord Goring.
and made way for their Horse, who charged resolutely under Major Bethel, and
were courageously received by the Royalists Horse, drawn up in a lane; who with
pure valor beat them back in disorder, and made notable execution; especially
the Regiment of Colonel Nevil, formerly that of the Earl of Carnarvan, did with
their wonted, yet extraordinary magnanimity, renew the encounter, till
Desbrough coming in with fresh supplies, of which Goring knew they had store,
he in some handsome order drew off, having given their Cavalry such a smart
entertainment, that they were willing to stay till their Foot came up. By this
time the Royalists had marched two miles in the Lanes, when the whole Army
appearing again, giving another Charge, they drew off in haste and confusion
toward Bridgewater, having fired and deserted Langport. In this fight and
pursuit, of both sides, Langport fired.
were slain about 1000, about 1200 Prisoners taken, some 1000 Horse, two
Pieces, 30 Colors of Horse and Foot; the flight and pursuit continuing till
within two miles of Bridgewater, where that night Fairfax took up his Quarters,
General Fairfax at Bridgewater.
in deliberation whether he should follow the Lord Goring, or besiege that
Town, through which the Royalists in their flight p^^^ed to the North of
Devonshire, Sir Richard Greenvile, and Sir John Berkley join with the Lord
Goring.
where Sir Richard Greenvile and Sir John Berkley joined with him, making 6000
strong; and Prince Charles and the Lord Hopton were raising Forces in Cornwall
for the same purpose.

Fairfax determined therefore not to weary his Foot with a sudden march, but to
attaque Bridgewater; and resolution was made after a little respite to storm
it. It was a natural-well-fortified place, lying level with the adjacent
valley; the Works about it very regular and strong, the Fosse or Ditch deep, and
about 30 foot wide, which was filled up every Tide to the brim; the Line of no
great compass, and well manned with 1800 Soldiers; having a Castle also of a
considerable strength within, and the support and maintenance of all provision,
victual and Ammunition, every way sufficient.

Such was the difficulty of undertaking it; and the disreputation of leaving it
after a siege, was cast likewise into the danger: But trusting to their
uncontrollable Fortune, the Parliamentarians resolved to storm it, as a way
conducing to free the Army to follow their success abroad, and make a final
end. Accordingly, on Munday-morning, July 22. ( Hugh Peter's having encouraged
them the day before) just at break of day the Forlorn was led on by
Lieutenant Colonel Hewson, and seconded by Lieutenant Colonel Ashfield, (men
known, Bridgewater taken, July 23. by the Parliament. The Parliaments forlorn
led by Hewson a daring Soldier.
and infamous afterward) who da^ingly having thrown their Bridges over the
Graft, mounted the Walls; and for all the showers of Bullets, beat the
defendants from their Cannon, and turned them upon the Town, and let down their
Drawbridge, where Captain (afterward Colonel and Comissary) Reynolds entered
with the Forlorn of Horse immediately, and secured that part of the Town called
Eastover, charging as far as the Drawbridge of the other. Hereupon 600 of the
defendants, who were assigned to the defense of that place, and had made manful
resistance, craved Quarter, and had it granted; the whole Storm falling upon
them, while the other on the West Side were but alarmed; but they perceiving
this unhappy stratagem, soon after with Grenades fired that part of the Town
possessed by the enemy, and gave signs of an obstinate resistance. The town
fired.


Both sides continued in quiet till Tuesday-night, at which time another round
alarm only was given, to keep the besieged waking: the General then sent in
another Summons, which was refused; but the Cannon playing, and several
Grenades lighting in the Town; after some Messages past, the General proving
very difficult to any Conditions, Colonel Okey takes Borough- Garrison for the
Parliament.
and prepared for an Assault, the Town was rendered by the Governor upon
Quarter only for life, on the 23 of July; 1000 more Gentlemen, Clergy, and
common Soldiers being made Prisoners. Both Towns were lamentably fired. The
adjacent Garrison of Borough was a little while before rendered to Colonel Okey.

After this surrender, The Clubmen dispersed.
the General before he would march further Westward, resolved to reduce the
Clubmen, who were so peremptory in their demands: Colonel Fleetwood on the
second of August encompassed them in Shaftsbury with 1000 Horse, They were Ten
thousand in a Body.
and took fifty of the principal, who were Mr. Hollis, Dr. Goche, Mr. Carry,
etc. and disarmed and sent them to Prison; but on the fourth of August,
Lieutenant General Cromwell was sent against several parties of 10000 of them,
who threatened much danger; some he persuaded to return to their dwellings; but
on Hambleton-hill near Strawton 4000 of them stood on their guard, in a place
which had been an old Roman-Work, deeply trenched: Thereupon Cromwels Troop
charged up the hill, and were repulsed at the passage into the Fort; but
Desborough coming behind on their Rear, they were presently dispersed, some 40
killed, and 200 wounded, and 400 taken Prisoners, with about 12 Colors taken,
in one whereof was Written, If you offer to plunder, or take our Cattle, The
Motto of one of their Colors.

Be assured we will bid you Battle.


No doubt, as was said before, they had some design for the King, as was
guessed from the general affection of these parts formerly and constantly to
his Cause: but what ever it was, it was now defeated; and the Club-folks had
Club-law.

Sherburn-Castle was now besieged, Sherburn- Castle besieged, and Bath taken.
while Colonel Rich took in the City of Bath, having none but Horse and
Dragoons with him, and the place Tenable: and Prince Rupert was also on his way
to relieve it from Bristol with 1500 Horse and Foot; but Okey's Dragoons
creeping on their bellies over the Bridge to the Gate, which they fired, made
the Governor surrender July the 29. upon Articles.

To return to Sherburn-Castle; Sir Jews Dives the Governor of Sherburn-
Castle maks a nota^^^ defense.
there Sir Jews Dives was Governor, who made a most notable defense; which
for the honor of that noble Knight, who so constantly, and through so many
hazards adhered to the King, and because this was a place of remarque, and the
first that endured a formal siege in the beginning of the War, shall be more
largely spoken of. A Hay-stack ( August the fifth at night) within a stones
throw of the Works was gained; a Storm was then resolved on, but afterward
deferred, and Battery and Approaches pitched upon, together with Mining, for
that the ground wherein the Castle stood was minable. Much hurt was done out of
the Castle by Birding-peices, by very skilful Marks-men; several Officers and
Gunners being killed by such shot.

Both Mines and Galleries were now made; The General Summons the Castle, and
offers the Ladies and women their liberty to depart.
every worker being rewarded with twelve pence a day and twelve pence a night,
so hazardous was the service; and then a second Summons was sent in, with an
offer from the General that the Ladies and Women might depart. Sir Lewis
acknowledged that civility, but contemned the peremptoriness of the demand. The
Miners were got within two yards of the Wall, where the Rock appearing, they
began to doubt of any effect; but it proving but a soft stone, on the 14 of
August the great Guns played, and had made a Breach by the evening in the
middle of the Wall, so that ten a breast might enter; and one of the Towers was
beaten down, when the Parliament-Souldiers were so venturous, as for six pence
a Bullet to fetch off all the Cannon-shot that rebounded from the Castle, of
which there was great scarcity.

A third Summons was now sent in, The Castle again Summoned.

The Governors resolute answer.


to deliver the Castle, or expect extremity; to which Sir Lewis told the Drum,
that he would hang him: That the language was so far different from what he had
formerly received, that he could not believe it came from the same hand: That
whatever happened, he would not lose his honor to save his life, which he
should think well bestowed in the service.

Sherburn- Castle taken August. 15.
The Mine being now ready to spring, a general Assault was resolved on, the
Gallery being advanced so near the Works, that the Soldiers pulled the Wool
out of the Woolsacks from the besieged, who made fires all night to discover
the Mines and Approaches. Two of the Towers were also gained, and with that
encouragement the Assaylants without order improved it, forcing them within
from their Guns, which they had planted to oppose their entrance at the Breach;
so that presently they were forced to quit the great Court within the Castle:
Which so disheartened them, that the Besiegers hastily, and before the time
appointed, leapt over the Works, and so into the Castle; which was followed by
the whole Army, who presently possessed themselves of it, and plundered it
sufficiently, stripping every person within it; but because of the little
opposition they found, Sir Lewis Dives imprisoned in the Tower: he escapes to
Ireland.
giving indifferent good quarter. Sir Lewis was taken Prisoner, and kept so a
long while in the Tower, till after the death of the King, being designed for
the slaughter also, he made an escape from his Keeper at White Hall, whither he
was brought to be examined, and soon after did notable service in Ireland for
his present Majesty. There were taken also 400 Prisoners, Colonel Giles
Strangeways, Sir William Walcot, Colonel Thornhil: and the Clubmen of the parts
adjacent fully quieted by the loss of this place, their Leaders being sent
Prisoners with those of Sherburn.

The next place designed as a further Trophee of the Parliaments victorious
Army, after some dispute (because Plymouth was straightly beset, and in the
same plight now, as Taunton formerly) was Bristol. In the march of the Army
thither, Colonel Rainsborough took in Nunny-Castle the 21 of August, upon
condition of liberty to go to their own houses. Nunny- Castle taken by Colonel
Rainsborough for the Parliament.
Commissary-General Ireton was first sent with 2000 Horse to secure the
Villages and Towns adjacent to Bristol, from being fired by the Royalists in
that City, which because of its importance, being justly reckoned in the first
rank of populous Cities of the Kingdom, and the only considerable part the
King had for Shipping, Trade and Riches, and lay advantageous for supplies from
Ireland, was thought necessary to be reduced; Ireton sent toward Bristol.
and the danger of leaving so considerable a strength of 3000 Horse and Foot,
as Prince Rupert could make in the field, and leave a sufficient Garrison
besides, was no inconsiderable motive to the attempt.

At the setting down of the Army, several Salleys were made, with different
success; Several Salleys with different success. Sir Bernard Ashley mortally
wounded.
Sir Bernard Ashley mortally wounded and taken under the Walls, when on the
fourth of September a Summons was sent in unto Prince Rupert; which for its
extraordinary civility and style, and that seeming reverence it bears, (for
here the game began, this being the first taste of this Model, and drawn by
Ireton) is very delightful to insert.

For his Highness Prince Rupert.
SIR,
Sir Thomas Fairfax's Summons to Prince Rupert.
FOr the service of the Parliament, I have brought their Army before the City of
Bristol, and do Summon you in their Names to render it, with all the Forts
belonging to the same, into my hands for their use.

Having used this plain language, as the business requires, I wish it may be as
effectual unto you, as it is satisfactory to my self, that I do a little
expostulate with you about the Surrender of the same; which I confess is a way
not common, and which I should not have used, but in respect to such a person,
and such a place. I take into consideration your Royal Birth, and Relation to
the Crown of England, your Honor, Courage, the virtues of your person, and the
strength of that place, which you may think your self bound and able to
maintain.

Sir, the Crown of England is and will be where it ought to be; we fight to
maintain it there; but the King misled by evil Counselors, or through a
seduced heart, has left his Parliament, under God the best assurance of his
Crown and Family: the maintaining of this Schism, is the ground of this
unha^pie War on your part; and what sad effects it has produced in the three
Kingdoms, is visible to all men. To maintain the rights of the Crown and
Kingdom jointly, a principal part thereof is, that the King in Supreme Acts is
not to be advised by men of whom the Law takes no notice, but by his
Parliament, the great Council of the Kingdom, in whom ( as much as man is
capable of) he hears all his people as it were at once advising him, and in
which multitude of Counselors lies his safety, and his peoples Interest: And
to see him right in this, has been the constant and faithful endeavors of the
Parliament; and to bring those wicked instruments to justice that have misled
him, is the principal ground of our fighting.

Sir, Observe the strange guise of these words.
if God makes this clear to you, as he has to us, I doubt not but he will give
you a heart to deliver this place, notwithstanding all the other considerations
of Honor, Courage, Fidelity, etc. Because of their constancy and use in the
present business, depends upon the right or wrongfulness of this that has been
said. And if upon such conviction you shall surrender it, and save the loss of
blood, or hazard the spoiling of such a City, it would be an occasion glorious
in it self, and joyful to us, for the restoring of you to the endeared
affections of the Parliament and People of England, the truest friend to your
Family it has in the World.

But if this be hid from your eyes, and through your wilfulness, this so great,
famous and ancient a City be by your putting us to force the same exposed to
the ruin and extremities of War ( which yet we shall in that case as much as
possible endeavor to prevent) then I appeal to the righteous God, to be judge
between you and us, and to require the wrong. And let all England judge whether
the burning of its Towns, ruining its Cities, and destroying its people, be a
good requital from a person of your Family, which has the Prayers, Tears,
Purses, and blood of its Parliament and People. And if you look on either as
now divided, has ever had that same party both in Parliaments and People, most
zealous for their assistance and restitution, which you now oppose and seek to
destroy, and whose constant grief has been, that their desires to serve that
your Family, have been ever hindered or made fruitless by that same party about
his Majesty, whose Counsel you act, and whose Interest you pursue in this
unnatural War.

I expect your speedy Answer to this Summons, with the return of the Bearer
this evening, and remain

Your Highness Humble Servant, THO. FAIRFAX.


The Trumpeter was detained all the night, The Trumpeter detained: a Cessation.
during which there was a voluntary Cessation on both sides; which continued
all the next day, when this Answer was returned.

SIR,
I Received yours by your Trumpeter; Prince Rupert^ Answer.
I desire to know whether you will give me leave to send to the King to know
his pleasure in it.

Your Servant, RVPERT.


To which this was the Reply next day.

SIR,
YOur overture of sending to the King to know his pleasure, I cannot give way
to, because of delay. Sir Thomas Fairfax's reply.
I confess your Answer does intimate your intention not to surrender without
his Majesty's consent; yet because it is but implicit, I send again to know a
more positive Answer from you self, which I desire may be such as may render me
capable of approving my self

Your Highness Humble Servant, THO. FAIRFAX.


In the mean while, additions of Country-forces, by means of Mr. Ash and
others, promoting the Generals Warrant to that purpose, being come to the
Leaguer, a Storm was concluded on, for that intelligence came to the Army, and
was seconded with advice from the Committee of both Kingdoms, that the King,
who was then newly come out of the Associated Counties, of which by and by, was
intended for the relief of Bristol, and to that purpose was to join with
General Goring, who was newly enforced, as was said before, and was now about
Collumpton in Devonshire; whose Letters intercepted, being sent to Secretary
Nicholas, said, that within three Weeks time he should be in a condition to
relieve the Town: So that the Prince did prudently temporize with Fairfax, by
sending out a Draught of very high Articles, while succor might be sent him,
and his Lines finished; though others, and those valiant expert Commanders, of
whom for honors sake Colonel Pretty ought not to be forgotten, declared, that
the Town was tenable by force, and needed not the courtesy or charms or words
to preserve it: but it since appears, that the Prince had Orders from the King,
if it came to extremity, to surrender it upon honorable Articles.

On the 10 of September, the City having been alarmed two nights together,
about two of the Clock in the morning the Storm began, Bristol Stormed Sept. 10.
which was round the City; (for the Seamen also having (by the loss of
Portshed, which was rendered to Colonel Weldens Regiment) free riding in the
River, attempted it of their side; but the Tide failed them) the disposal of
the several posts of the several Regiments was after this manner. The signal
being given, which was by setting on fire a great heap of straw and faggots on
the top of a hill, and the shooting of four great Pieces of Ordnance against
Pryors Fort, from the place where the General was to reside all the time of the
Storm, the General Assault began: Colonel Montague and Colonel Pickerings
Brigade, with their Regiments, at Lawfords gate entered speedily, and recovered
two and twenty great Guns, and took many Prisoners in the Works; them Major
Desborough seconded with his Horse of the Generals Regiment, and part of
Colonel Graves. Sir Hardress Waller's Regiment, and the Generals, between
Lawfords gate and the River Froom. Lieutenant Colonel Pride's Regiment part
against Pryors Fort, and part to alarm the great Fort, who in the mean while
took a Fort wherein were some Welch-men. Colonel Horn, and Colonel Raustings
attempted near Pryors Fort. The Horse that entered here, were led on by Captain
Ireton, seconded by Major Bethel, who received a shot in the thigh, whereof he
after dyed: whose Troops likewise mortally wounded Colonel Tailor of the Kings
party. The Line being thus thrown down by the Pioneers, and mastered both by
the Foot and Horse, the Royalists Horse retreated, and stood in a Body under
the favor of the great Fort, and Coulstons Fort. Priors-hill-Fort held out the
most obstinately, but at length was resolutely mastered, where Prides Soldiers
gave no quarter except to a very few, in regard of the great slaughter they
within made by their gallant defense.

But on the Somersetshire-^ide, the success was not answerable, where Colonel
Weldens, Ingoldsby, and Herberts Regiments were appointed to storm; these, by
reason of the height of the Work, which they had not rightly calculated, the
Ladders proving too short, were repulsed with great loss of above 300 men;
Leiutenant-Colonel Purefoy, and Major Cromwell killed in the general Assault;
and soon after, some part of the Town was set on fire, to make the other more
defensible: and afterward delivered upon Articles.
And then the Prince thought good to treat, and obtained the Conditions he
first propounded, saving that the General would not admi^ of freeing the City
from any Garrison. I may not omit, that Sir Richard Crane, Sir Richard Crane
slain.

The Royalists march to Oxford.


a familiar and Favorite of the Prince, was killed some time before in a Salley.

According to the honorable Articles of the Surrender, on the 14 of September
the Royalists Marched out, and then assigned (as was before agreed) Oxford for
the place they would go to; and because of the danger of the Clubmen, had 1000
Arms lent them at the Princes entreaty for his Foot, to secure them in their
way, which in all amounted to 1500, and the Horse to near half as many; and
were exactly to their Conditions convoyed to the City aforesaid, The Genesis waits
on Prince Rupert two miles out of Bristol.
the General waiting upon the Prince two miles out of Bristol.

After this Rendition, the General thought it not fit to reside at Bristol,
because of the Plague that was rife in the City: It seems that infection has
an antidote against its communicableness in right and Battle, The Plague at
Bristol.
and only kills in peace; To God orders it, that two such devourers should not
at one time be entertained together; nor was it ever known that two contrary
Armies were at the same time, though never so near one another, afflicted with
the same Contagion. The General therefore, to avoid the after-clap, removed to
Bath, Sir Tho. Fairfax removes to Bath.
to intend his health, and repose in that salubrious place, assigning the Army
their refreshments against a March further Westward, where it is now time to
leave them to their surfeiting sweets of Conquest.

We will now therefore travel on with this discourse Northward, where the Town
and Castle of Scarborough, so gallantly defended for a long time against
several Commanders, and lately against Sir John M^ldrum the Scot, (of whom
before at Newark) who laid his bones under the Walls thereof, was now freshly
and more vigorously besieged by Sir Matthew Boynton in his place; to whom,
after a long and tedious leaguering, the Garrison worn out by sickness, many
slain, and no hopes of relief, and the North possessed by the Scots and
Parliament, Sir Hugh Cholmley delivers Scarborough to Sir Matthew Boynton, for
the Parliament, July 25.

Raby, Skipton, Sandal, and Pomfret-Castles delito the Parl. Hereford besieged
by the Scots. They take Canon-Froom.


the valiant Loyal Governor Sir Hugh Cholmly delivered it after a long Treaty,
upon very honorable Conditions. Raby-Castle suffered the like fate, and had
the like Articles; and Skipton and Sandal-Castle did afterward the same; and
the Castle of Pomfret some time before to General Poyntz, the Garrison marching
to Newark.

The Scots, with much entreaty, and more money, were now prevailed with to
march Southward, and in the way took Canon-Froom a strong Garrison by Storm. On
the 15 of August they sat down before Hereford, having made miserable spoil in
their march, which they hoped to complete at this City, against which they
proceeded in all hostile manner, by Mines, Batteries and Assaults; but all to
no purpose, more than the persuasion, Summons, and inducement from the
oppressed* Country, some Gentlemen whereof were wrought upon to request Sir
Barnabas Scudamore to deliver the Town to their burdensome guests the Scots,
and so deliver them from their present charge and oppression. A great number of
men they lost here daily, being rejected with scorn upon all their Summons; Sir
Barnabas Scudamore Governor of Hereford.

The Siege raised.


and at last hearing of the Kings approach, who was come from Oxford that way,
they raised their shameful Siege, and by the way of Gloucester departed to
Warwick, and so Northward again, to the hissing and laughter of the people
through whom they passed. But now to a more sorrowful business, the distracted
unpleasant progress of the King.

The King after his defeat at Naseby had fled toward Wales, with an intention
to recruit; but the necessity of his affairs requiring no long stay thereabout,
he posted back again, his Armies being thus bestowed: The Lord Hopton and the
Prince near Exeter, Sir Richard Greenvile about Southam, Goring at Okington,
and Prince Maurice at Worcester, and the King with a flying Army every where.
The first account of his actions was from Bewdley (whither he advanced from
Litchfield) where he Encountered some of the Scots Horse and Dragoons, The King
in person encounters the Scots at Bewdley, and wors^eth them: defeats Sir John
Gell, and enters the Association, and surpriseth Huntingdon.
and worsted them; then he passed to Sedbury and Ashburn in Derby-shire, and
Skirmishes with Sir John Gell, and defeated his party; and on the 16 of August
came to Welbeck-house, belonging to the Marquess of Newcastle in
Nottingham-shire. Here he stayed not long, but made all the have he could,
(being at liberty to go whither he would, but of no strength to make use of and
enjoy it; like Consumptive bodies, whose Legs do last of all fail them) into
the Association. His Marches were so volatile, uncertain, and swift, that no
preparatory resistance could be made; so that he mastered where e're he came,
Alarming his Enemies every where; who while they consult to join Forces, are
forced to dis-joyn those they have together, to meet with every emergency his
nimble Troops occasioned. In this manner he surprised Huntingdon-Town, which he
entered on Sunday after Noon in Service-time, with some little opposition made
against him at the Bridge, where he slew the Captain and Lieutenant that
maintained it, with most of the Soldiers, and put the Town to ransom, August
24.

and Cambridge.
From thence he marched with the like expedition and celerity, faced the Town
and University of Cambridge; but out of his favorable regard to that place,
departed as suddenly; but yet the fright of his Coming had driven the most
factious out of Colleges and Town; while his Majesty contented himself with
casting a benevolent look upon that Nursery, that had been Planet-strook with
the astonishing seizures of the Rebellion.

His next Stage was Ouburn, having by the way fined St. Ives in 500 pound: and
good reason of State there was for this manner of Tax in such places as the
Association, St. Ives fined 500 pound by toe King.
which had so largely contributed to the Rebellion, and so far assisted and
maintained it, free besides from the burden of the War; and the great Bulwark,
as London was the Castle and Magazine, of the Parliaments Cause. His next
remove was to Doncaster, the way he took for Oxford, whither he came on the 28
of August. The King at Oxford.


The Royalists began to come in upon composition.
At his first arrival he found his Court much altered; some of the Nobility
(besides others) very Right Honorably run away to the Parliament, being
thereto allured by the late Propositions of Peace, which the House after much
importunity vouchsafed his Majesty; which imported in one clause, that all such
as would come in, should be received upon payment of the tenth part of their
Estates: which for the richer sort signified to be clapped in Prison, and
received into custody; but yet this stratagem mainly helped forward the sinking
of the Royal Cause, which having no Arms to protect it self, fell thus into the
treacherous embraces of its enemies: For while they adventured rashly upon the
security of the Propositions, they found themselves mistaken upon the
Preliminary, and stumbled at the threshold, not having obtained Passes for
their access to the Parliaments Quarters; which error being rectified at last,
the two Houses enhanced that commodity; such a quick Trade there was of the
same, that Composition could not be had at the first rate; the Publi^ue Faith
being alike good, and of the same value, in taking from Friends and Enemies:
for now the expiatory money of their Loyalty was come to the Fifth part, and a
time limited for that favor too, if men made not extraordinary have to undo
themselves and their Families, to save a little bread and salt, the remainders
of some fair Estates. Oh unfortunate Allegiance and Duty!

The King marches toward Wales; comes to Ludlow, designing to relieve Chester.
These heavy misfortunes both of public and private concernment, the King not
able, or unwilling to be enured to, by a constant sight of them, departed with
his flying Army toward Wales again, intending for the relief of Chester: with
this purpose, on the 19 of September he came to Ludlow, and there understood
that General Pointz out of the North was dogging him at the heels, being
thereto appointed by the Committee of both Kingdoms, expecting an advantageous
juncture of time and place to fight him; which upon the Kings near advance to
Chester, offered it self. It was forethought that his design was there, and
therefore it was agreed by the besiegers and Poyntz, that as soon as the King
should approach, he should instantly engage, and upon signal accorded on, they
should draw off, leaving a convenient force to make good the Leaguer, and join
with him in the fight.

At Routon-heath, Routon- heathfight, Sept. 24. The Parliaments Forces under
General Poyntz beaten; but reserves coming in, the King is worsted.
within two miles of Chester, the King made a halt, to give notice to the
besieged likewise, when Poyntz desperately fell on, and being far engaged, was
presently worsted and beaten, the Kings Horse, which was all his strength,
fighting courageously; but while he was Rallying again, in the very nick of a
complete Victory to the King (which had disowned and forsook him) in come his
Reserves commanded by Colonel Jones and Louthian, with near 1000 Horse and
Foot; which gave so much encouragement to Poyntz broken Forces, that they
returned to another Charge. While the King was a musing what to do, being beset
in Front and Rear, in fine, he made another brave Charge, where though he had
the worst, yet he made thereby his Retreat good in part, though in some
disorder, and with loss particularly of that thrice-Noble Lord Bernard Stuart,
Earl of Litchfield, the last of the three Illustrious Brothers of the Duke of
Richmond late deceased; and so got into Chester with the remains of his Army,
The King quits Chester, and goes into Wales.
where there was no safety for him to continue, but upon advice it was held
expedient to depart again for Wales, of the fixed affection of which people the
King had had constant experience.

After so many disasters upon the neck of one another, yet did not the King
despair of his Arms, nor with pusillanimity give himself over to the complaints
of his hard Fortune: Though he had lost Armies in the field, and Fortresses and
Cities in every Corner of the Kingdom, yet was he inexpugnable and invincible
in his own mind, and in the Loyal affection and constant sincerity of his
Friends and good Subjects, whose firm adherence (till he totally disarmed them
himself, by his express command) and Gods Sovereign assistance and strengthening
of him within, when there was no help from without, was admirable, and more
admirably improved in his Meditations on this subject.

FRom small beginnings on my part, Eikon Basil.
he let me see that I was not wholly forsaken by my peoples love, or his
protection. My sins sometimes prevailed against the justice of my Cause; and
those that were with me wanted not matter and occasion for his just
chastisement both of them and me. Nor were mine enemies less punished by that
prosperity, which hardened them to contrive that Injustice by open Hostility,
which was begun by most riotous and Vnparliamentary Tumults. I never had any
Victory which was without my sorrow, because it was on mine own Subjects, who
like Absalom died many in their sin. And I never suffered any defeat which made
me despair of Gods mercy and defense.

When Providence gave me or denied me vitory, my desire was neither to boast of
my power, nor charge God foolishly, whom I believed at last would make all
things work together for my good. I wished no greater advantages by the War,
than to bring my Enemies to moderation, and my Friends to peace. I was afraid
of the temptation of an absolute Conquest; and never prayed more for Victory
over others, than over my self. When the first was denied, the second was
granted me; which God saw best for me.

The King assists Montross with Horse.
For notwithstanding these sad losses so thick together, the King by moving up
and down recollecting the scatterings of several parties, had gotten together a
good body of Horse, with which on the 10 of October he marched to Texford,
thence to Welbeck, and quartered part of his Army at Blits the 13 day, and
rendezvoused the 14 at Walsop, where, to answer the instant request of the
Marquess of Montross (who was de^^ated as beforesaid at Philipshaugh) for some
assistance in Horse, he divided his Army, and appointed Sir Marmaduke Langdale
and the Lord Digdy to march Northwards, and with all convenient speed to join
with the said Marquess. This they attempted, while the King went for Newark,
taking such a way, as amazed the Parliaments Forces whither they were designed,
or how they should way-lay them, Sherburn fight Octo. 25. in York- shire.
and intercept their passage. About Sherburn they wheeled off, and beat up a
guard, intending to rendezvous at Bramton-Brierly, the whole number of their
Horse amounting to near 1600. At this Camisade, they surprised at Sherborn and
Mylford 800 Foot, and disabled Colonel Wren's Regiment of Horse. All their Arms
they endeavored to have carried off, laying them in heaps on the street, till
they could get Carriages to convey them away.

The Royalists forced to f^^, by Colonel Copley and Colonel Lilburn.
While they were providing, Colonel Copley, and Colonel Lilburn, who had
attended their Motion, fell upon them with the like number of fresh Horse; and
after a sharp dispute, where Copley's Regiment were first defeated, the
Royalists were forced to give back, and so fled Northwards; the enemy
recovering all their Arms and Prisoners, took 400 of them Prisoners, (among the
slain was Sir Francis Carnaby, and Sir Richard Hutton, with 40 more) the
Countess of Niddisdale, and four or five Colonels, twelve Captains and
Officers; and the best prize of all, was the Lord Digby's Coach, wherein,
besides the rich spoil, were also the Trophies of other men's shame, private
Letters of the King's, which were published with those taken at Naseby, to the
great scandal of all ingenuous and civil people. But as the War began with
Tumults, so it was to be ended with worse indignities, Lord Digby routed at
Carlisle- Sands, he flies into Ireland.
those base and Vulgar Prostitutions. The Lord Digby was met and routed again
at Carlisle-Sands, and from thence with 20 men got to the Isle of Man, and so
to the Marquess of Ormond in Ireland.

The King at Newark, October. Lord Bellasis Governor thereof. Lord Digby charged
with disloyalty by diverse Lords, the King his friend.
The King was at Newark* where a dissension happned concerning this very
misfortune, as if it had not been calamitous enough it self, while the King and
the Lord Bellasis (then Governor of that Town) sided with the reputation of
the Lord Digby, against the imputation with which the two Princes Rupert and
Maurice, the Lord Gerrard, Sir Richard Willis, (formerly Governor of the same)
charged him, as disloyal and treacherous. For upon t^^s difference, which was
grown to a quarrel, the Lord Gerrard, and Sir Richard Willis, with some
hundreds more, withdrew themselves in a discontent, and laid down their
Commissions; and the two Princes, as they were coming to take their leave of
the King in the same mood, were treating with General Poyntz for Passes and
Terms according to their respective qualities. This was first agitated at
Worton-house, some fourteen miles from Newark, and was accordingly entertained
by the Parliament, who gave Colonel Rossiter order to give such Passes and
Conditions; the severest whereof was, That all persons going beyond Seas by
Warrant of either Houses, and after returning, shall have neither pardon nor
quarter given them by the Parliament.

The King returns to Oxford.
The King staid at Newark about ten days; it being reputed the safest Garrison
he had, for that there was no considerable enemy near it; and the Soldiers
within were numerous and resolute, and the place known to be tenable and well
provided, and besides, lay most advantageous for the King to draw together any
Force, having lost and drayned most of his Garrisons in other Counties: But
upon this Feud, and untowardness of his affairs, he in the beginning of
November departed from hence, with a Convoy of 600 Horse to Oxford; so free and
safe was the passage in that part of England from any Armies, while the
Westermost Counties were full of them, and laboring to be delivered.

But though the King escaped any Encounter, Genesis Poyntz routs the Kings C^nvoy.

Belvoyr taken. Sir Gervas Lucas Governor thereof.


the said Convoy returning home, were set upon by General Poyntz, and routed,
the sixth day of November, and so shifted away to their Garrison; while the
Victor sets down before Belvoyr-Castle where Sir Gervas Lucas was Governor for
the King; summoned it, and assaulted it, but both to the like purpose, till
after a siege of four months, the House and Castle was delivered up to him on
the 2 of February, upon honorable Conditions, Sir Gervas and his Officers
being convoyed to Litchfield.

Fairley-Castle in Somersetshire* Several Castles and Houses taken.
the Devises, Lacock-House (to Colonel Pickering) Ch^pstow-Castle delivered to
the Parliament, the last to Colonel Morgan Governor of Gloucester; and
Berkley-Castle, where Sir Charles Lucas commanded, to Colonel Rainsborough,
after a Noble defense; when the Outworks were taken, Berkley Castle Surrendered
by Sir Charles Lucas.
and two Summons refused, Sir Charles saying, he would eat Horseflesh first,
and man's flesh when that was done, before he would yield: But upon the planting
of the Guns upon those Works against the Castle, was glad to Surrender, and
spare those dainties for another extremity, when he made good his Bill of Fare.

The Devises, Devises and Winchester Surrendered by the Lord Ogle.
and Winchester, after a breach made in the Castle thereof by the great Guns,
surrendered by the Lord Ogle to Lieutenant General Cromwell: there marched out
thence to Woodstock 700 men, the chief whereof were the Governor, Sir William
Courtney, Sir John Pawlet, and Doctor Curl Bishop of that Diocese, to whom Hugh
Peter's offered some civilities. A Reverend Prelate, who resided amidst his
Flock, even in these days of danger and trouble; and quitted not his Charge,
while he was suffered no longer to continue in it.

The period of the glory and honor of Basing-house was now approaching,
Basing-house stormed and taken.
for thither next came Cromwell, who after his Batteries were placed, settled the
several posts for the Storm; Colonel Dalbeir on the North-side of the House
next the Grange, Colonel Pickering on his left, and Sir Hardress Waller's and
Colonel Mountague's Regiments next him. The Storm was October the 14* at six in
the morning: Pickering stormed the new house, passed through, and got the gate
of the old house; whereupon the defendants beat a Parley, but it would not be
hearkened, to. In the mean time Mountague and Waller's Regiments assaulted the
strongest Works, where their Court of guard was kept, which they resolutely
recovered, with a whole Culverin; and drawing their Ladders after them, got
over another Work, and the House-Wall, before they could enter. Sir Hardress
Waller was slightly wounded here; many of the defendants were put to the Sword,
being about one hundred, and one Virgin, Doctor Griffith's Daughter, Doctor
Griffiths Daughter slain. Marquess of Winchester and the Governor sent
Prisoners to London.
whom the enemy shamefully left naked: of note, Major Cuffle, slain by the
hands (as supposed) of Major (since Major General) Harrison. There were taken
Prisoners 400, with their Officers, among whom the Noble Marquess of Winchester
himself, and Sir Robert Peak the Governor, who with the Colors also taken,
were sent up together to London.

This Fortress of Loyalty, (the place being called by that name, Love Loyalty
being written in every window of that spacious house) which Mr. Peter's said,
(who gave the relation of its taking to the house of Commons) would become an
Emperor to dwell in, by the spite and fury of a Rebellious crew was turned into
Ashes, Basing-house demolished.
to the incredible loss of the Marquess, who notwithstanding in the very
ruining of it was heard to say, That if the King had no more ground in England
but Basing-house, he would adventure as he did, and so maintain it to the
utmost. It was commonly called Basting-house, and that truly enough; but now
it must needs crumble under the heavy load of the Kings adverse fortune, which
brought three Kingdoms with it to no less a ruin.

The plunder great and rich.
Great and rich was the plunder here; one Common Soldier getting 300 pounds in
silver, and was left in an instant by his Camerades worth but one Half-crown of
it all. And no less was the quantity of provisions, which were enough to
suffice for some years. All which came into the Conquerours hands entire, with
a Bed worth 1400 pounds; who unhandsomly enough seized and disposed of them;
the account whereof will one day be as justly required.

Langford-house Surrend^ed to Cromwell.
These Services being over, and the Western-Road cleared, Cromwell was commanded
to attend on the General, now advanced after the Lord Goring: in his way
thither, he came and besieged Langford-house, belonging to the Lord of
Colerain, near Salisbury, and upon Summons, had it delivered to him upon fair
and equal Conditions, October 18. While the General on the 19 intending to
storm Tiverton, the Chain of the Drawbridge by one unlucky shot broke in two,
and let down the bridge; whereupon the Soldiers ran in, and seized all but the
Church and Castle, which were presently yielded, and quarter upon their asking
for it given; but plundered they were even to their skins. Here was taken one
Major Sadler, an active valorous fellow, who had revolted from the
Parliament-side, and had now held intelligence, and proffered them the like
service he had done the King, for his pardon; notwithstanding he was cond^mned,
and yet made a shift to escape to Exeter, where upon the same score of
Treachery to them, Tiverton taken by Fairfax. Major Sadler executed: Sir
Gilbert Talbot taken Prisoner.
having understood of his practices (by collusion no doubt of both parties) and
for deserting of his post at Tiverton, he was sentenced and executed. Here was
also taken Sir Gilbert Talbot the Governor, and 4 Majors, and 200 Common
Soldiers, who were made Prisoners of War.

There was nothing now left the King in the West, but what lay in the
farthermost parts of Devonshire and Cornwall, Transactions in the West betwixt
the Armies.
and 6000 Horse, of whom the only fear was, left they might break through and
get Eastward: The Country therefore was commanded to keep diligent Watch, and
to be assistant in intelligence, if the Royalists should attempt it: and
because it was Wintertime, and the Army wearied, it was not thought fit to
advance after the Royalists, but to set down before Exeter. The siege of
Exeter, by the Lord Fairfax. Prince Rupert endeavors accommodation with
Fairfax.
During this siege, which was at a good distance, blocking up the City by Forts
round about it, an Accommodation was endeavored by the Prince with the Lord
Fairfax, by a Letter sent to him from the Lord Capel for Passes and such other
previous things to a Treaty, which he desired should take effect betwixt the
King his Father and the Parliament: but Fairfax refused that, saying he was a
Soldier, and but the servant of the Parliament, who alone might so allow, or
consider of such desires. This was seconded by General Goring, General Goring
goes into France.
whose design was like that intended before when the Earl of Essex was at
Lestithiel, to have both Armies join, and make the King and Parliament come to
a conclusion and peace; Lord Wentworth commands his Troops.
but this with no other effect than formerly. Soon after this, General Goring
passed over into France, leaving his Troops to the command of the Lord
Wentworth, resolving to return with supplies by Spring: but providence had
otherwise determined of the Kings affairs.

The King was very industrious, but his Councels so distracted with the
refractoriness of his Fortune, that he could effect nothing; nevertheless, to
show his willingness, A skirmish at Corf- Castle between the Kings Horse and
the Parliaments; the Kings Horse worsted.
and to be doing, he sent a party of Horse Westward, which for a while rambled
up and down about Oxford, fetching in Contribution, to the regret of the
Parliament, who complained of it to their General, who presently sent away a
party of Horse, who fell upon some of those Horse near Corf-Castle, and rescued
the Committee Men of Dorset at War^ham taken by them; and seeing no further
danger of those Horse, returned to their Army, there being some likelihood of
engagement.

For it was now resolved by the Prince, by all means to free Exeter, about
which City some inconsiderable skirmishes had happened, till the taking of
Pouldram-Castle; Captain (afterward Colonel) Deane, Comptrouler of the
Ordnance, appearing therein very active: and it was informed the Lord Hopton,
that the Army was wasted with sickness; which indeed was true, but they never
wanted recruits, nor any other necessary: so that the Prince having come as far
as Okehampton, in his way understanding the force of the Army, drew back again;
whereupon Fairfax presently set down before Dartmouth, Fairfax at Dartmouth.
Plymouth siege d^serted.
being so far advanced, and gave notice of the Princes retreat to Plymouth, to
encourage them in their defense; who having been long besieged, and barred of
all Trade by land, were impatient of the Siege, but had lately made a
successful Salley, and expected a final deliverance from their General, now
something near them; which accordingly happened without the Generals presence,
for the only Rumor of his coming served turn.

The Prince being marched back without any encounter, Lord Wentworth worsted by
Cromwell.
save that Cromwell beat up one of my Lord Wentworth's Brigades quarters at
Bovey-Tracy, and took some 50 Prisoners, and 300 Horse; and a skirmish by Sir
Hardress Waller, where he took some Prisoners also; the General resolved to
attaque Dartmouth, a Port-Town, and where supplies from France or elsewhere
might be landed; and therefore summoned Sir Hugh Pollard the Governor, who
refused to treat; Darmouth stormed and taken, Sir Hugh Pollard Governor.
which put him in a resolution to storm it. He came thither on the 12 of
January, and on the 18 at eleven at night furiously assaulted it, having no
Artillery with him; yet his men went on against 100 Pieces ready mounted, which
being but once discharged against them, they got under them, and quickly turned
them against the Town, which they presently mastered, together with the Castle
which commanded the River. There were two other great Forts, wherein were 34
pieces of Ordnance, that stood a mile from the Town; Sir Henry Carry has
conditions to march, the Governor and the Earl of Newport have quarter given.
who beat a Parley, but in the hurry and noise could not be heard: at last one
of them, in which was Sir Henry Carry, had Conditions to march away, he and his
Officers with Arms; but the Governor, the Earl of Newport, Colonel Seymor, and
Mr. Denham, in the other, could gain no other Conditions but Quarter. Here the
General practiced a civil Stratagem, giving all the Cornish-men their liberty,
and two shillings a man to carry them home; they being the only standing, as
they had been constant, enemy to (...) Parliament. The General went on board
Vice Admiral Batten, who ^^^ked ^he place up by Sea, and was nobly treated.

From thence the Parliament-Army marched to Totnes, and so back again to the
Siege at Exeter; but were from thence diverted again by another action: for
news came that the Prince was fully resolved to attempt something in relief of
that City, and to that purpose had made up his Army near 10000 strong, having
mustered and assembled a great many of the Cornish at Launceston, and were come
as far as Torrington; Torrington- fight.
and Letters were intercepted from the Lord Wentworth to Sir John Berkley the
Governor, encouraging him with expectation of Relief. On the 15 of February,
the Parliaments Army rendezvoused within two miles of Torrington, where the
Lord Hapton continued; and an eye was kept by Colonel Cook, who for that
purpose lay about Barnstable, that they should not break through. On the 16 of
February, the Army marched, and by five in the evening drew up their Van in the
Park, and Forlorns were sent out, betwixt Torrington and Mr. Roll's house, to
line Hedges, to make good the retreat of the Horse. The Lord Hopton likewise
drew out of the Town, four or five Closes off, and lined the Hedges within a
Close of the enemy, and flankt his Foot with Horse; whereupon the Enemy sent
good Reserves, lest by the advantage of the ground they might be encompassed.
Toward night the Lord Hopton drew off from some of the Closes he formerly
possessed; which the enemy entered, and made a halt, intending not to venture
upon the Town, barricadoed, and such a strength within it, in the dark: but
hearing a noise in the Town, as if the Royalists were retreating, and being
loath that they should go off without some taste of their old Fortune and
Success, the Parliamentarians sent a party of Dragoons to fire on the enemy
near the Hedges and Barricadoes, and withal to get some intelligence of the
estate of the Royalists in the Town. This being accordingly attempted, the
Dragoons were answered with a round Volley of Shot; thereupon their Forlorn
Hope of Foot went and engaged themselves to bring off the Dragoons; and the
Reserve fell on to bring off their Forlorn. The Royalists also drew out
Supplies and Seconds, and reinforced the Hedges, standing as before. Both
Armies far engaged, the Parliamentarians manifesting a resolution to go on for
all their disadvantage of the night, it came at last to a plain Fight, the
Regiments successively falling on; which continued a hot service for two hours,
till at last the Royalists were beaten from their aforesaid Hedges, and up to
their Barricadoes, where they again disputed it, manfully maintaining them at
push of Pike, and with the But-end of their Muskets; and then by command drew
off, and gave the Fairfaxians entrance; where the Foot first entered, and then
the Horse, who there jointly charged the enemy drawn up in the Town; the Lord
Hopton commanding the Rear to make their retreat good; in which action he had
his Horse shot dead under him. Here the Parliament-foot were forced back again
to the Barricadoes, where Colonel Hammond opposed himself, and by the
assistance and timely supply of Major Stephens, beat Horse and Foot into the
Town again, it is taken by the Parliament.
from whence the Foot marched away, but the Horse made several stands, and
charged in at several Avenues of the Town, and at the Barricadoes which
themselves had deserted. In fine, all their Horse marched over a Bridge, and at
several other passes of the River, and so Westward; the Parliamentarians not
adventuring to pursue them, but contented themselves with those Prisoners whom
they took in the Town, being disordered and divided from their Body by the
darkness of the night; who being put into the Church, where the Lord Hoptons
Magazine of 80 Barrels of Powder was kept, and there guarded by some of the
Parliaments Forces; 80 ba^rels of Powder fired in a Church, the guard killed,
the Army and Town endangered.
the said Powder either casually or by design was fired, the Church blown into
the Air, those Prisoners and the Guard killed, and the whole Army all over the
Town endangered by the stones, timber, and lead, which with the blast
were-carried up very high, and scattered throughout, and beyond the Town; so
that near as much mischief was done by this Powder, as by the Powder and Bullet
together in the Fight, scarce a stone being left standing of the Church, which
since is raised from its ruins.

The Royalists fought resolutely here, the Cornish not forgetting the
reputation they had formerly got during the War: For here were not taken in all
above 400 Prisoners, the chief whereof were Lieutenant Colonel Wood, eight
Captains, Commissary Boney, six Lieutenants, one Cornet, three Ensigns, one
Chyrurgion, four Sergeants, fifty two Troopers, one hundred twenty seven
Gentlemen, and about 150 common Soldiers, and six Colors. The slain were
Major Threave and Captain Fry, the Lords Hopton and Capel wounded, and the Lord
Hopton's Commission to be General under the Prince, Lord Hopton and Lord Capel
wounded. Lord Hoptons Commission taken.
and 500 pounds in money left in Portmantles, came also to the hands of the
Victors.

The Lord Hopton after this Encounter made back into Cornwall, where he
rendezvouzed his Army again; whither the Princes Regiment of eight hundred
Horse, and some other additional Cavalry of the County, not before joined with
them, came in, and so made up a new entire Body of five thousand Horse, able to
give Battle again to their enemy, on convenient Champion ground, or at least in
such a condition as to make their own terms. And the policy of the Lord Hopton
was as eminent as his valor in the late service, having thereby given a fair
earnest for a Victory; Lord Hopton a valiant and discreet Soldier.
and made them consider of his Forces, if reduced to a necessity of fighting,
as of courageous brave spirits, to whom Fortune could not but be obliged to a
favorable aspect; and her least inconstancy would undo the Fairfaxians.

We will now draw off from those main Bodies, this whole Winter in the field,
Shelford- house stormed and taken,
and return to the Garrisons, who thick and threefold rendered themselves to the
Parliament: We will begin with Shelford-house, where Colonel Stanhop, akin to
the Earl of Chesterfield, was Governor; which after Summons refused, by Maj.
Genesis Poyntz. Col. Stanhop the Governor thereof killed, and the house
demolished.
was stormed by Major General Poyntz, who put all to the Sword they met with:
some Gentlemen getting within a Seiling till the fury was over, found quarter;
the Governor himself was killed in the defense after the House was entered, and
the House demolished.

On the 4 of December, the magnanimous Countess of Derby, who had endured a
Siege off and on for two years last past, rendered Latham-house to the
Parliament upon very fair terms; The Countess of Derby surrenders Larham- house.
the Governor, Officers, and Soldiers to march out either to the Garrison of
Tidbury, or Ashby de la zouch. In this Siege I may not omit one Military neat
Stratagem: The besiegers at dinnertime were jearing the Garrison with
Shoulders of mutton and fresh-meat they showed them: A neat Stratagem.
whereupon a Captain sallied out, took both the guests and the provision, and
two Colors, and brought them into the House; Whereupon the Assaylants took the
Alarm, both great and small Guns playing on both sides. This continuing for a
while, the Captain caused the Colors he had taken to be set on the Works
backward from the Post where he had surprised them; which they of that quarter
seeing, and imagining their men on the other side had entered the House, and
erected their Ensigns, they fell on without fear or wit, Bolton- Castle and
Beeston- Castle delivered.
and were presently cut down in heaps, and beaten to their Trenches,
Bolton-Castle, and Beeston-Castle in Lancashire, were likewise delivered to the
Parliament; and Hereford-City surprised by another Stratagem, the manner thus.

The Garrison was strong and well appointed, Hereford taken by surpris^.
December 18.
the inlet also for the Kings Welsh Forces, and therefore much aimed at; and to
that purpose intelligence had been held by some within, from Colonel Birch and
Colonel Morgan Governor of Gloucester; but their greedy and impatient desire
of the present possession, abrupted all those practices, and put them upon an
honester and safer way: With 2000 Horse and Foot they came from Gloucester in
one day and night, where they had provided six men in Country-habits, with a
seventh like a Constable (in pursuance of Warrants directed the day before to
the adjacent Villages, for some Laborers to be sent in to break the Ice in the
Trenches, and such other work) by morning to present themselves at the Gates;
and as seconds to them, were placed 150 Firelocks, which in the covert of the
night were lodged as near as possible out of discovery; and next them, a Body
of men ready at hand to succeed in the attempt, and enter with them.
Accordingly the stratagem took effect; the Drawbridge was let down to the
Constable and his crew, with their Pickaxes and Spades; which they no sooner
possessed, but the Guard began to suspect, and make some resistance; but the
Reserves pouring in upon them, after three of them were killed, the Town was
entered, first by Colonel Birch and his Firelocks, and then by Morgan: The
Garrison amazed, presently submitted, and yielded themselves Prisoners; the
chief whereof were the Lord Brudenel, Lord Brudenel, fourteen Knights, and
Judge Jenkins taken Prisoners.
fourteen Knights, Judge Ienkins, (of whom more hereafter) four
Lieutenant-Colonels, five Captains, Officers and Gentlemen near a hundred more,
besides eleven Pieces of Ordnance mounted, with Provision suitable to the
strength and quality of the place. This loss was very much regretted by the
Royalists, who now perceived that Fortunes right and left hand, Valor and
Policy, were lifted up against them.

The next place of importance which followed the fate of the Kings declination,
Westchester taken.
was the City of Chester, which had been long besieged, and thrice attempted to
be relieved; Sir William Brereton Commander for the Parliament.
and still rendered worse, by the loss and slaughter of their friends that came
to its rescue, as we have said before. Sir William Brereton now commanded in
chief, as Major General of those Counties; who civilly courted the Lord Byron
the Governor to a Surrender, laying before him the impossibility of any Army
of Forces that could be advanced that way, for that the King was beset in all
his Garrisons, either by close or open Sieges: which at last the Noble Lord
hearkened unto, Lord Byron surrenders Chester.
and upon very honorable Conditions, Surrendered it by Articles, the 3 of
February. And thence Sir William went to besiege Litchfield-close, which not
long after he gained by the same way of Treaty, as will appear in its due
place. Several other places of lesser concernment without much parley
surrendered likewise, suspected of bribery or suchlike practices, which were
finely palliated by the necessity that compelled the greater to their rendition.

The Court of Wards Voted down.
The House now upon discharging the Wardship of the heirs male of Sir
Christopher Wray, a Member of the said House, take an occasion to Vote down the
Court of Wards and Liveries.

The Kings Forces under Sir Jacob Ashley defeated at Stow in the Would, March
12.
All the Kings strength in the field, except that Army that was penned up in
Cornwall, was now collected under the Command of the Lord Ashley, who was
marching to join his Infantry with the Kings remains of his Cavalry about
Farringdon, whereabouts Colonel Rainsborough and Fleetwood kept their Post,
having an eye upon that design of conjunction; and Colonel Morgan and Sir
William Brereton pursued him in the Rear, from Hereford and Worcestershire. At
Stow in the Would, they overtook and set upon him, wearied in his Quarters; but
his men were yet not willing to resign their swords, till after a fair dispute
they were over-powred, 1500 taken Prisoners, with himself, and all his Baggage
and Ammunition. Sir Jacob Ashley taken Prisoner.
This was the last battle that was fought hac vice for the King in England, and
which put a period to any further attempts in the field; the Royalists being
forced to take up in their strong Holds, or submit to the Parliament, and
endeavor a Composition; which was the main work, but too hastily entered upon,
as their own sad experience soon informed them.

Lord Hopton disbands.
And just before this, the 14 of March, the Lord Hopton accepted of Terms for
the disbanding of his Army, which was in this manner. After this worsting at
Torrington, and marching back into Cornwall, General Fairfax followed him within
two days to Launceston, (where Colonel Basset with 500 men at first made
opposition, but was compelled to abandon it, as likewise Saltash was quitted,
and Mount Edgecomb offered a Treaty) and not far from thence Sir James Smith
with a strong party fell upon some of the Van of their Army with good success;
Sir James Smith falls on a party of Parliamentarians, with success. The Prince
and Lord Culpeper set sail for Scilly.
but having notice of Cromwels approach, timely withdrew, and gave them liberty
to possess Bodmin, while the Lord Hopton made his Headquarters at Truro: from
whence the Prince embarked, and set Sail for the Island of Scilly, with the
Lord Culpeper and others: which occasioned General Fairfax to complement the
Lord Hopton to a disbanding, as reckoning them, by the Princes forsaking them,
as good as lost. Among other terms offered him, this to his particular self, as
being honor from the mouth of an enemy, is requisite to be inserted.

Lord Hopton complemented by the Parliament General.
Lastly, for your self, besides what is employed to you in common with others,
you may be assured of such Meditation to the Parliament on your behalf, both
from my self and others, as for one whom for personal worth and many virtues,
but especially for your care of, and moderation toward the Country, we honor
and esteem above any other of your party; whose error (supposing you more
swayed with principles of Honor and Conscience) we most pity, and whose
happiness, so far as is consistant with the public welfare, we should delight
in, more than in your least suffering.

In the mean while the Army advanced, and near St. Columbe beat up the Quarters
of the Princes Regiment, The Parliament Army beat up the Princes quarters, near
St. Columbe. Major General Perr, a gallant-Commander, mortally wounded.
who made a gallant Charge through the enemy, and broke their first divisions;
but fresh supplies coming, they drew off in order, leaving behind them
Major General Pert, a gallant person, mortally wounded, a Prisoner; but so
rebated the edge of the enemies courage, that they halted a while, and part of
the Army drew back to Bodmin, more resolved for Treaty than Conquest: To which
place came the Lord Hopton's answer, wherein he pretended his understanding of
a likelihood of agreement between the King his Master and the Parliament, which
he said without any other Treaty would conclude him, and desired to be referred
thereto: but Fairfax urging this Overture to his advantage, would allow of no
such delays; but his Terms he offered being honorable, was all he could grant;
acquainting his Lordship that there was no such probability of Accommodation
(and indeed his Lordship was greatly mistaken, for there was never any such
intention before nor after) and delays were dangerous, in respect of assistance
both from the French and Irish, which had been promised to be landed for the
Kings service in that County.

Hereupon the Army also advancing, A Treaty concluded on at Tresilian- bridge:
a Cessation agreed on.
a Treaty was concluded on at Tresilian-bridge, and a Cessation agreed to; and
the General thereupon, though with much reluctance of the Lord Hopton, made
Truro his Headquarters; so that now the Kings Forces had but six miles in
breadth, being as it were pounded up, as Essex before. The conclusion of the
Treaty was followed by the rendition of St. Mawes Castle.

The number of the disbanded was nine Brigades; Nine Brigades disbanded.
the French consisting of three Regiments, the Lord Wentworth's of four, Sir
James Smith's of three, the Lord Cleveland's of four, Major General Web's of
three, the Lord Hopton's commanded by Colonel Bevil, the Lord Goring's of five,
and the Princes Regiment consisting of seven hundred, and Sir Richard
Greenvil's Reformadoes.

The Conditions were, The Conditions of their disbanding.
That they should march away with Horse and Arms, in number according to their
respective qualities more or less, as they should choose to go abroad to Foreign
Service, or with Passes to go home: each Colonel with eight or six horses, six
or two pair of Pistols; and so other inferior Officers respectively; the common
Troopers to have twenty shillings a man for their Horses; which, upon ratifying
the Agreement being noised, many of the Royalists sold their horses
beforehand, and got spittle-Jades in their stead, which upon their disbanding
were turned upon their hand. The Lord Hopton was allowed forty Horse and Arms
for himself and twelve men; the Lord Wentworth twenty five Horse and Arms for
himself and eight men.

These were the most material, Th^^ take shipping at Plymouth.
and in six days performed. All the French were presently shipped for their
Country, by provision made by the General at Plymouth, whither he went
accompanied by Lieutenant General Cromwell, being welcomed by the discharge of
300 Pieces of Ordnance, while the Army retreated back into Devon-shire, to make
an end of the Siege of Exceter, where Sir Hardress Waller had continued during
this Cornish Expedition; and the Lords Hopton and Wentworth, not deigning the
Jurisdiction, or indeed any favor from their fellow subjects at Westminster,
Lord Hopton and Wentworth sail into Scilly.
who Lorded it at a brave rate, gallantly waived and declined any advantage
(but what was Military) in the Articles, and Sailed after the Prince into
Scilly.

About this time a resolute Attempt was made upon Abingdon, Abingdon attempted
by Sir Stephen Hawkins.
where Major General Brown was Governor (as before) then absent in London, by
a strong party under the command of Sir Stephen Hawkins from Oxford: The Foot
had gained the Works, and had entered the Town as far as the Marketplace; but
some resistance being there made, and the Horse-guard taking the Alarm by the
appearance of Major Blundel, who desperately charged, they were by Force driven
out again; no Horse, but only three Gentlemen of Christ-Church Oxon,
clambering over to assist them; Ashby de^la-zouch surrendered to the Parliament
by the Lord Loughborough.
the Pioneers and their instruments being so far behind in the Rear, that they
could not timely advance to make a breach for the Cavalry to enter: and so that
noble design, not without suspicion of treachery, was frustrated. Ashby
de-la-zouch, the maiden-Garrison, that was never before Besieged during the
War, was now rendered by the Lord Loughborough, (whose Government it was) upon
honorable terms to the Parliament.

And so we have finished this unfortunate year, which with its period and
revolution may be said to have concluded the Government; Monarchy being beaten
out of the field and out of doors together; the Enemies thereof having nothing
more of hazard to do, but to encounter its Authority at the Bar with Pleas, not
in Battalia with push of pike; and so the main of the Interregnum between that
and the Kings death, was spent in contrivances, designs and new models of I
know not what; whereof (after the reduction of some other places in the
beginning of the year 1646, which languished in a Consumption till May, the
Critical month for that disease) there will be unwelcome occasion for this
Chronicle next to discourse.

Anno Dom. 1646.
Dennington- Castle surrendered (Mar. 25. 1646.) to the Parliament,
DEnnington-Castle leads the dance; and though it had withstood the many Sieges
and attempts made by the enemy, could not now resist its Fate, nor the easy
Summons of a Brigade of the Victor-Army; but despairing of Relief, and so of
honorable Terms, if they should stand to their usual extremity, submitted: But
out of revenge for the slaughter and disappointment the Parliament had suffered
under its walls, by the resolution of the Governor, he upon his return to his
own house according to Articles, was notwithstanding, contrary thereunto, sued
and impleaded for several demolitions by firing of the outhouses, for the
strength and security of the Castle; and by the neighbors for damages. And to
palliate this breach the better, they made an Ordinance, being cock-sure of a
plenary Conquest, That all Articles of Surrenders should insert the damages by
wilful firing; which as it was most unjust, so was it as uncivil and base, and
befitting none but tumultuary, headstrong, and undisciplined enemies. And for
the fuller satisfaction of their spleen and adust choler against this Fortress,
they themselves, not thinking of any reckoning, laid the goodly Fabric in
ashes; and demolished.
made yet more notable by its loyal ruins, than it could have been if standing.

Ruthen- Castle delivered to the Parliament by Sir William Vaughan.
Then followed the Rendition of Ruthen-Castle in Wales to Colonel Mitton,
(whither some of the residue of the divided Forces under Sir William Vaugban
had betaken themselves) upon less equal Conditions than the main Army offered
to any place whatsoever.

April 8. Corf- Castle ta^^^*
Then was Corf-Castle in Dorsetshire taken without any offer of Terms, by
violence and policy mixed together; and to make those Surrenders a Pair-royal,
Exeter was added, whither Fairfax was come, and on the 31 of March drew all his
Army round the City within Musket Shot, having made Bridges over the River,
Exeter- City delivered, Apr. 3. to the Lord Fairfax, by the Governor Sir John
Berkley, by a Treaty between Commissioners on both sides.
and then sent in another Summons, which resolved into a Treaty. Sir John
Berkley the Governor sent out the names of his Commissioners to treat, which
at first were ten; but Fairfax for expedition desiring a less number, eight
were consented to, and six of his: viz. for Exeter; Sir Henry Barkley, Sir
George Carry, Colonel Ashburnham, Colonel Godolphin, Captain Fitzgerald, Mr.
John Wear, Mr. Robert Walker, and Mr. Thomas Knight. For the Parliaments Army;
Colonel Hammond Lieutenant General of the Ordnance, Colonel Sir Hardress
Waller, Colonel Edward Harley (now a Confident, shortly after a Reprobate of
the Army) Colonel Lambert, Commissary-General Stane, and Major Watson
Scoutmaster-General: By whom, after five days debate, it was agreed as
follows: The Conditions.
That the City should be rendered to General Fairfax on Monday the 13th of April,
with all the Stores, etc. The Princess Henrietta to depart any where with her
Governess, in England and Wales, until His Majesty should give order for her
disposal. The Cathedral nor Churches to be defaced. That the Garrison shall
march out according to the most honorable custom of War, and to have free
quarter all the way, and not to be compelled to march above ten miles a day,
and with their Arms, to the places agreed upon for their laying them down. The
Composition of persons of quality shall not exceed two years purchase. That all
persons comprised within these Articles, shall quietly and and peaceably enjoy
all their goods, debts and movables, during the space of four months next
ensuing: And be free-from all Oaths, Covenants and Protestations, and have
liberty within the said time of four months, in case they shall not make their
Composition with the Parliament, and shall be resolved to go beyond Sea (for
which they shall have Passes) to dispose of their said goods, debts, and
movables, allowed by these Articles.



These were the chief Articles, though there were a great many more; very
honorable all of them, as it was the humor or else policy of the Army to
grant them, and served as the original Draught for other places. In these
Articles Sir John Stawel was included, Sir John Stawel included in the Articles.
who for his constant avowance of those Immunities in these Articles from
Oaths, etc. was most dishonourably and savagely used; insomuch that the Faith
of the Army, with their disloyal and perfidious actions toward the King,
appeared at the same time alike villainous and tyrannical.

After the Articles were signed, The General marches to Tiverton,
which was the ninth, the General would not lose so much time as to stay till
Monday the thirteenth, the time of their Rendition; but though the weather was
unseasonable, marched away to Tiverton, and so to form a Siege at Barnstable,
which concluded upon the same Terms with Exeter; and then Dunstar-Castle, who
embraced the same Conditions; of which anon.

The West being cleared, Pendennis-Castle only excepted, General Fairfax on
the 18th of April began his march toward Oxford, and toward Oxford.
it being then rumoured that the King in the perplexity of his affairs would
escape thence; but whither, it could not be so much as conjectured. In his way
thither, says one of their own Anglia Rediviva.
Historians, so many Complaints were made to him of outrages and barbarisms
done in contravention of the Articles both of Cornwall and Exeter, by the
Committee-Troops, (forsooth) that if they were particularly related, would make
such a Volume as would scarce be imagined.

In the interim of this March, Woodstock surrendered (April 26) to Colonel
Rainsborough for the Parliament.
Colonel Rainsborough, who had beleaguered Wood-stock, and attempted it by
storm with very great loss, it being manfully defended, and as well fortified,
had it at last Surrendered to him upon such Articles as manifested the
Governors worth and honor in the acknowledgments thereby given him from his
Enemies.

The King foreseeing that Oxford was the next place which they designed, The
King leaves Oxford, April. 27.
not to make his own Court his Prison, what ever should be done by his Enemies,
if it should please God to reduce him to that distress, resolved to withdraw
himself in time to the Scotch Army, who (as was reported and generally
believed) had given him some assurance, that not only his Majesty, but all
others, that adhered to him, should be safe in their persons, honors and
consciences in their Army; yet not to lay more upon them, having so much
already, I can hardly credit it. The manner of the traverse of the King is thus
related: He went out of Oxford, as Colonel Rainsborough informed the Parliament
(who no doubt were well acquainted with it before, for they had no other means
to be rid of the Kings instances for Peace (of which hereafter together) that
continually sounded in their ears so near hand, than to have him removed from
so near a convenience of personal accommodation) in the disguise of a servant
to Colonel John Ashburn^am, who was accompanied with one Mr. Hudson a Minister,
who for his singular Loyalty and fidelity was entrusted in the menage of that
affair, and for which he deserves a better remarque, than this Chronicle can
contribute or set upon him; losing his life afterward in the same Cause, in
1648, in the Commotions of that unfortunate year. By his Examination upon this
business, it appeared that the King came first to Henly, then to Brainford, and
so near London, removed back to Harrow on the hill, there being a general
Training of the City-Forces in Hide-Park, whither the King was expected to
come, General Essex being them in the field, and his Majesty almost persuaded
to venture himself into their hands; but other Counsels prevailing, he departed
to St. Albans, and thence to Harborough in Leicestershire, where he expected
the French Agent with some Horse to meet him, The King disguised com^s to the
Scotch Army, May 4.
and conduct him to the Scots: but he mssing, the King went (yet uncertain and
irresolute what to do) to Stamford in Lincolnshire, and thence to Downham in
Norfolk, from whence the examinant was sent to the Agent; and upon his return,
they three passed into the Scotch Army, where for the present we shall leave
him with this account of it from the General of that Army to the Parliament at
London, which imported thus much.

That out of a desire to keep a right understanding between the two Kingdoms,
he acquainted them with a strange providence with which his Army was surprised,
together with their carriage and desires thereupon: That the King came the 4 of
May, in so private a manner, that after they had made some search for him* upon
the surmises of persons who pretended to know his face, yet they could not find
him out in sundry houses. Trusting to our integrity, we are so far persuaded
that none will so far misconster us, as to make use of this seeming advantage,
for promoting any other ends than are expressed in the Covenant -- We do
ingenuously declare, that there has been no Treaty nor Capitulation betwixt
his Majesty and us, nor in our names; leaving the ways and means of Peace unto
the Parliament of both Kingdoms. And with such twilight of language concluded.

This was the happiest opportunity that ever offered it self, to do honor to
the Scotch Nation, who had the Peace of three Kingdoms, but their own
particular glory, at their sole Arbitrament; and how miserably they abused this
advantage, and how they debauched their duty to their Prince, and their
reputation to the World, we will not descant upon, since the Parliament of
Scotland, in the year 1661, have so passionately protested against the conduct
of this business, and have exempted from pardon whomsoever shall afterward be
found guilty of this most base and disloyal usage of the King; of which in its
time.

Before this adventure, which the King would have avoided, if the insolence of
the prevailing Houses at Westminster could have been by any means rebated, his
Majesty had courted the Parliament to a Peace by several Letters and Messages
from Oxford; The King reiterated Messages for peace: the first, Dec. 5.
the abstracts whereof it will not be tedious to recite. The first of them was
soon after the aforesaid overture from the Prince by the Lord Fairfax, and was
only to desire a Pass or Safe Conduct for the Duke of Richmond, the Earl of
Southampton, John Ashburnham and Jeffery Palmer Esquires, for their journey and
continuance at Westminster, being furnished with such Propositions as his
Majesty was confident would be the foundation of an happy Peace.

The Parliaments answer.
To this Address, if I may so term it, though the Houses thought lesser of it,
as appears by their Answer, they retort, That had his Majesty's intentions been
the same with his pretenses and expressions, a happy Peace had been settled
long since: That they cannot agree to his desires, as to the coming of those
Lords and Gentlemen into their Quarters, in regard the design (for Peace) may
be of dangerous consequence: That they are in debate of Propositions, which
they will draw up, and send to be signed by way of Bill, by his Majesty. This
was in December 1645. The Reader will excuse this retrospection, because we
will repeat this transaction in its own series.

Message of the 15 of December, 1645.
To this the King ten days after replies with more quickening Language; That his
Majesty cannot but extremely wonder, that after so many expressions on their
part, of a deep and seeming sense of the miseries of this afflicted Kingdom,
and of the dangers incident to his person, during the continuance of these
unnatural Wars; their many, great, and so often-repeated Protestations, that
the raising of these Arms has been only for the defense of Gods true
Religion, his Majesty's honor, safety, and prosperity, the peace, comfort and
security of his people; they should delay a Safe Conduct to the persons
mentioned in his Majesty's Message of the 5 of this instant December, which are
to be sent unto them with Propositions for a well-grounded Peace. A thing so
far from having been denied at any time by his Majesty, whenever they have
desired the same, that he believes it has been seldom practiced among the
most avowed and professed Enemies, much less from Subjects to their King. But
his Majesty is resolved that no discouragements whatsoever shall make him fail
of his part in doing his utmost endeavors to put an end to these Calamities,
etc. And therefore does once again desire a Safe Conduct.

This would not do neither; Message of the 15 of December. for a Personal Treaty.
the King therefore aggresseth them anothe way, and offers a personal Treaty
ten days after. His Majesty laying aside all expostulations, as rather losing
time, than contributing any remedy to the evils, will not complain of their
neglect of him, and delays of Answer, but sends these Propositions this way,
which he intended by the forementioned persons. For conceiving that the former
Treaties hitherto proved ineffectual, chiefly for want of power in those
persons that treated, as likewise because those from whom their power was
derived (not possibly having the particular information of every several
debate) could not give so clear a judgment as was requisite in so important a
business; his Majesty therefore desires that he may have the engagement of the
two Houses at Westminster, the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland, the
Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council and Militia of London, of the chief
Commanders in Sir Thomas Fairfax his Army, for his Majesty's free and safe
coming to, and abode in London or Westminster, with such of his Servants and
Train, not exceeding the number of three hundred, for the space of forty days;
and after the same time, for his free and safe repair to any of his Garrisons,
Oxford, Newark, Worcester, etc. which he shall appoint, there to have a
Personal Treaty with his two Houses, to begin with the three heads which were
Treated on at Oxford. And for the better ingredience and expedition thereto,
will commit the great trust of the Militia for seven years into the hands of a
mixed number of his own and their party; and calls God to witness of his sincere
intentions to Peace, and adjures them likewise to the same.

To this he is instant with them for an answer; Another to the same purpose,
December 29.
and for the facilitating of the way to a Treaty, and their better inducement,
without any expostulation, which he says he purposely forbears, he adds now
more particularly, and to the respective interests, That upon his repair to
Westminster, he doubts not but so to join his endeavors with his two Houses of
Parliament, as to give just satisfaction not only concerning the business of
Ireland, but also for the settling a way for the payment of public debts, as
well to the Scots, as to the City of London and others: and resumes his desire
afresh for a Personal Treaty, and that they would accept of his former offers.

But the House of Commons resolved to keep to their first Answer, Royalists
expeled the Lines of Communication.
not to treat, but to send Propositions; the main whereof was an absolute
avoydance of the Kings concession as to the Militia, which they would have
solely vested in themselves, and no other. And to give color to this
unreasonable stifness, and to obstruct a Personal Treaty, they Vote how great
danger there is already to the Parliament and City, in the resort of so many
Cavaliers to London; and thereupon an Ordinance is made anew, settling the
Militia thereof, and requiring them to provide for the safety of the City, and
to search for Delinquents, and to expel them the Lines of Communication: and
then on the 14 of January returned his Majesty this Answer.

They repeated the innocent blood spilt by his Majesty's Command and
Commission, The Parliaments Answer January 14.
Irish Rebels brought over, and more, with Foreign Forces, on coming; the
Prince of Wales heading an Army in the West, and Garrisons kept against them,
and Forces likewise in Arms for him in Scotland. That for that reason, until
satisfacton and security be given unto both Kingdoms, his coming cannot be
convenient; nor do they conceive it can be any way conducing to Peace, that his
Majesty should come to his Parliament for a few days, with thoughts of leaving
it, especially with intentions of returning to Hostility against it. And do
note likewise, that his Majesty desires not only the engagement of the
Parliament, but of the Lord Mayor, and the Officers of the Army, and the Scotch
Commissioners; which is against the honor and privileges of Parliament, those
being joined with them, who are subject and subordinate to their Authority.

They insist upon their Propositions as the safest and surest way to settle
Peace, as well in England as in Scotland, of which Kingdom in his Letters he
makes no mention.

In proceeding according to these just and necessary grounds for the putting an
end to the bleeding calamities of these Nations, his Majesty shall have the
glory to be the principal instrument in so happy a work, and they (however
misinterpreted) shall approve themselves to God and man. But what?

Before this came to hand, the King sends another Message, to know the reason
of the detention of his Trumpet; The King replies, Jan. 15.
and farther offers the free and public use of the Directory (as commanded by
the Parliament, and then practiced in some parts of the City of London) to such
as shall desire it; and testifies to God and the World, who they are that not
only hinder, but reject this Kingdoms future happiness; it being so much the
stranger, that his Majesty's coming to Westminster, which was the first and
greatest pretense of taking up Arms, should be so much as delayed, much less
not accepted or refused. But his Majesty hopes that God will no longer suffer
the malice of wicked men to hinder the Peace of his too much afflicted Kingdoms.

From Oxford, January 15.

In the mean while, some Papers concerning the Kings Transactions about a Peace
in Ireland were published on purpose by the Parliament, to cast a scruple into
the minds of men, as if while the King Treated, he meant a new War by Ayds from
thence; and so to prejudice him in his peoples minds, who began to murmur at
the averseness and delays of the Parliament: which news coming to the Kings
ears, he sends them a stinging and sharp Message, which was the next day after
he had received their Answer.

The Kings Message and Answer of the 17 of January to that of the 13.
His Majesty thinks not fit to Answer those aspersions which are returned as
Arguments for his not admittance to Westminster to a Personal Treaty, because
it would enforce a style not suitable to his end, being the peace of these
miserable Kingdoms; yet thus much he cannot but say to Those that have sent him
this Answer, That if they had considered what they had done themselves in
occasioning the sheding of so much inocent blood, by withdrawing themselves
from their duty to him, in a time when he had granted so much to his Subjects;
and in violating the known Laws of the Kingdom, to draw an exorbitant power to
themselves over their Fellow Subjects, (to say no more, to do as they have
done) they could not have given such a false Character of his Majesty's Actions.

That his Majesty with impatient expectation requires their Answer to his
desire of a Personal Treaty, as the only expedient. For certainly no rational
man can think their last Paper can be an Answer to his former Demands, the
scope of it being, That because there is a War, therefore there should be no
Treaty for Peace. And is it possible to expect that the Propositions mentioned
should be the ground of a lasting Peace, when the persons that send them will
not endure to hear their own King speak? But what ever his success this way
has hitherto been, or how small his hopes, considering the high strain of
those who deal with his Majesty, yet he will not want Fatherly Bowels to his
Subjects, nor will he forget that God has appointed him for their King with
whom he treats.

At His Court at Oxford, January 17. 1645.

This was well resented by the House of Peers; but the averse Commons would
hear them no more at their Conference than the Kings Messages; wherefore the
King plies them again with a large Message, wherein he shows tha reasonableness
and necessity of his desires for a Treaty.

His Majesty being resolved not to desist (though his discouragements be never
so many and great) from his endeavors after Peace, His Majesty's Message^ of
the 24th of Jan.
till he see it altogether impossible, thinks fit to make this Answer to the
Objections of his two Houses in their Answer of the thirteenth instant, against
his coming to Westminster; expecting still a Reply to his Messages of the
fifteenth and the seventeenth, which he hopes by this time have begotten better
thoughts and resolutions in the Members of both Houses. And first, as to the
innocent blood spilt, he will not dispute who was the Author of it, but rather
presses there should be no more; it being no Argument to say, There shall be
no such Personal Treaty, because there have been Wars; it being a strong
inducement to have such a Treaty, to put an end to them. As to the next
Objection of the assistance he had from some of his Irish Subjects; he says,
they are Protestants, who were formerly s^nt thither by the two Houses, and
impossibilitated to stay there longer, by the neglect of those who sent them
thither* who should have better provided for them. And that for Foreign
Forces, their Armies have swarmed with them, when his Majesty had few or none.
Thirdly, to the Princes heading an Army in the West, that there are diverse
Garrisons yet standing for him, and Forces likewise in Scotland; it must be as
much confessed, that as yet there is no Peace, and therefore is this Treaty
required. But his Majesty desires it may be remembered how long since he has
pressed the disbanding of all Forces; the refusing whereof has been the Cause
of this Objection. As to the time of forty days limited for the Treaty,
whereupon they infer that he would again return to H^stility; his Majesty
protests the sincerity of those resolutions he brings with him for Peace,
which if they meet with the like inclinations from them, will end all these
unhappy bloody differences. To his requiring those engagements of the City,
etc. for his security; whosoever will call to mind the particular occasions
that enforced his Majesty to leave his Cities of London and Westminster, they
will not think his demands unreasonable. But he no way conceives how the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, Common Council, and Militia of London, were either subject or
subordinate to their Authority, there being neither Law nor practice for it,
and so not to be paralleled. That the breach of privilege they mention, is
more likely to be infringed by hindering his Majesty from this Treaty. As for
Scotland, and their Religion, and securing the peace, his Majesty conceives it
was included in his former Messages, particularly that of the fifteenth; but
his sincere meaning and endeavors are after it, as he new expresses himself
for their better satisfaction. Lastly, he says, that there is but two ways of
finally ending these distractions; either by Treaty, or Conquest: The latter of
which his Majesty hopes none will have either the impudence or impiety to wish
for: and for the former, no better Expedient can be in the managing thereof,
than by his Personal assistance in it; before which no Propositions can be
effectual, which will remove all unnecessary delays, and make the greatest
difficulties easy. Wherefore his Majesty, who is most concerned in the good of
his people, does again desire a speedy Answer.


Amidst these importunities, The King commands a general weekly Fast in Oxford.
the King was not less sollicitous and instant at the High Court of Heaven;
having commanded a general Fast in Oxford, upon Friday weekly, according to the
laudable example of the Primitive Christians: in which devotions, The Earl of
Glamorgan (...) by the Lord Digby, and for a while (...).
another unhappy Cavil was raised against him, by the intercepting or
discovering of his Commission to the Earl of Glamorgan, the Marquess of
Worcester's Son, impowering him to treat with the Irish (for which he was
afterward impeached by the Lord Digby, charged on suspicion of high Treason,
and imprisoned for a while; (but soon after set at liberty) as having concluded
a Peace against the Honor and Dignity of his Majesty, and to his great scandal
with his English Subjects) of which said Transactions, to wipe off the
imputation laid on him thereby he gives this account to his two Houses. And the
words of this Prince are of such unqu^stionable credit and veracity, that this
affair needs no other defenc^, which was this, (having intermingled therewith,
and subjoyned his former d^sires for a Personal Treaty.)

(...) Ma^esties (...), Jan. 29.
His Majesty having received inf^rmation from the Lord Lieutenant and Council in
Ireland, that the Earl of Glamorgan has without his or their directions or
privity entered into a Treaty with some Commissioners on the Roman Catholic
party there, and also agreed unto certain Arti^les, highly derogatory to his
Majesty's honor and Royal dignity and prejudicial to the Protestant Religion
there, whereupon the said Earl is arrested, etc. has thought fit to give this
relation thereof, to show how contrary it was to his Majesty's intention and
directions; the Earls Commission being only to raise Forces in that Kingdom,
and to conduct them into this, for his Majesty's service; and not to treat
about any thing else, much less about Religion, or any propriety belonging to
their Church or Laity. That what the Earl did there, came to his knowledge
merely by accident; protesting, that until the news of the said Earls
restraint, he had no notice of any Capitulation with those Rebels, so
destructive to Church and State, and repugnant to his Majesty's public
professions: That therefore he is so far from considering any of those Articles
framed as aforesaid, that he does absolutely disown the said Earl therein;
having given order to his Lieutenant there, the Marquess of O^mond, to proceed
against the said Earl, as one who either out of falseness, presumption, or
folly, has hazarded the blemishing of his Majesty's reputation of his own
head, etc. But true it is, that for the necessary preservation of his Majesty's
Protestant Subjects in Ireland, whose case was daily represented unto him to be
desperate, his Majesty had given a Commission to his Lieutenant to treat and
conclude such a Peace there, as might be for the safety of that Crown, etc. And
yet if the Houses will admit of a personal Treaty with him at London, and will
send him a Pass or Safe Conduct for a Messenger to be sent immediately to
Ireland, he will dispatch one thither to prevent any accident that may hinder
his Majesty's Resolution of leaving the Manage of the business of Ireland
wholly to the two Houses; and will make no Peace but with their consent.

And further, in order to this desired Personal Treaty, he offers the Militia
for seven years, with such limitations as were expressed at Uxbridge the 6 of
February 1644, all Forces disbanded, and Garrisons dismantled, and then all
things to be in Statu quo. That the Houses shall nominate the Admiral, Officers
of State, and Judges, to hold their places during life, or quamdiu se been
gess^rint, which shall be best liked. And likewise liberty to Tender
Consciences behaving themselves peaceably, with a general Act of Oblivion, in
both his Parliaments of both Kingdoms respectievly. These Concessions extending
likewise to his native Realm of Scotland.

And now his Majesty having so fully and clearly expressed his intentions and
desires of making a happy and well-grounded Peace, if any person shall decline
that happiness by opposing of so apparent a way to attain it, he will
sufficiently demonstrate to all the World, his intention and design can be no
other, than the total subversion and change of the ancient and happy Government
of this Kingdom, under which this Nation has so long flourished.


This was followed with two Messages more; the first of the 26 of February,
where he says, that he needs make no excuse, though he sent no more Messages
unto them, for he very will knows he ought not to do it, if he either stood
upon punctilio's of honor, or his own private interest: but nothing being
equally dear unto him as the preservation of his People, he passes by many
scruples, neglects, and delays, and once more desires a speedy Answer; which he
provokes by a second Message of the 3 of March, complaining of their unexpected
silence, and offering upon the faith of both Houses for the preservation of his
honor, person, and estate, and liberty given to all who adhered to him to go
quietly to their houses without any manner of Sequestration, and not to be
compelled to take any Oath save what was warranted by the Laws of the Land, to
disband his Forces, and dismantle his Garrisons, and with no Martial but Royal
attendance return to his two Houses, and there reside with them: And Concludes
with a tender of an Act of General Pardon and Oblivion.

Yet notwithstanding all these forcible and reasonable persuasions, and as many
obliging Caresses and Condescentions, with which never Subjects or Parliaments
of England were so treated, they continue inflexible, and rather the worse and
more arrogant than at his first overture: for they resolved to proceed in their
own method, spending their spare time in wrangling and debating their most
quarrelsome Propositions; and on purpose totally to obviate and preclude the
Kings design (if he should so resolve) of coming to London, they throw these
rubs in the way thither, by this Ordinance, in the first place.

That in case the King shall, contrary to the advice of Parliament already
given him, come or attempt to come within the Lines of Communication, that then
the Committee of the Militia of the City of London shall have Power, The
Parliament publish an Ordinance for the Scizure of the King and his Adherents.
and are hereby enjoined to raise such Forces as they shall think fit, to
prevent any Tumult that may arise by his coming, and to Suppress any that shall
so happen, and to apprehend and secure any such as shall come with him, and to
secure his Person from danger. That all persons whatsoever, that have born Arms
against the Parliament, are to depart the City and Lines of Communication, by
the 6 of April; or to be taken for Spies, and proceeded against according to
the Rules of War in such cases. This Order to continue for a month, and no
longer.

Which showed it was a sudden Legislative by-blow, made temporary, according to
their present apprehension, fear and occasion. And then to bear the people in
hand, and to seem to intend their satisfaction, they promise to dispatch their
Propositions with all speed; and to make this show to appear more real, as if
they were about a Settlement, they resolve to vouchsafe to give the Prince a
like account of it, They pretend to invite the Prince by Commissioners.
That Commissioners shall forthwith be sent, etc. Which Letters and Cajole were
turned afterward into another deeper fetch, or invitation (upon his Majesty's
going to the Scotch Army) of the Prince to the Parliament; whom, it was spread
by the Faction, if the King should by his compliance prevail upon the Scots to
take upon them his Interest, they would set up as a balance to his Majesty's
Authority, having the Scale of indubitable Succession on their side, against
the quarrelled and perplexed possession of the Crown and the Person of the King
on the Scots. But these were but sudden emergent thoughts, pro re nata, and to
be used only if the Rebellion came to such extremity. And here we may wonder,
how through so many patches of policy, and the changes of designs, one single
Usurper attained the complete entire result of so many inconsistent devices and
practices.

The Prince was then departing for France, when this solicitation was
intended; and we shall see how soon their mind changed. The Prince departing
for France.


Exeter being delivered while the General was before Barnstable with the other
part of the Army, Barnstable surrendered April 7 th. Ruthen- Castle, St.
Michaels Mount, and Dunster- Castle Surrendered. Archbishop of York declares
for the Parliament. Dudly- Castle surrendered.
that Town and Fort also rendered it self upon Terms: so that now there was
nothing left the King in the West, and very few places elsewhere; the Garrisons
that were yielded this month, being no less than six, and those considerable,
viz. Ruthen-Castle, Exeter, Barnstable, St. Michaels Mount, Woodstock, and
Dunster-Castle, to Major General Mitton, the General, Colonel Hammond, Colonel
Rainsborough, and Colonel Blake: And this June also the Archbishop of York
declared himself for the Parliament, and maintained his House for them at Purin
in Wales. Dudly-Castle, May the thirteenth, Surrendered by Colonel Levison to
Sir William Brereton.

General Fairfax having done here, marched now Eastward, and on the 19 of
April came to Newbury, and advanced directly to Oxford, from whence the King
(as before) escaped. Sir Thomas Fairfax c^m^s before Oxford: he summons a
Council of War, raises a great Fort near the Town.
Upon his approach, he summoned a Council of War, to advise which way to
proceed: by whom it was agreed, that considering the strength of the place,
they should make a Line and Starve them, for that it would be very hazardous to
attempt it by Storm; to which was added another reason, pretense of their
Civility, lest by Batteries they should demolish the Colleges, and destroy the
Library by their Shot and Grenades preceding the assault. To this purpose a
regular Circumvallation was finished, and a great Fort raised upon Hedington
hill, within half a mile and less of the City (Eastward thereof) and a Battery
likewise; but to little effect. Sir Thomas Glemham was Governor, Sir Thomas
Glemham Gov^r^^^r of Oxford.
who to his everlasting Honor had so well def^nded York, and made very
honorable Conditions; but, to the wonder of Valor and Gallantry, had defended
the City of Carlisle against the Scots, (which was forgot to be mentioned in its
place, Carlisle ^ie^led to the Sc^ts July 1^, 1645, by Sir Thomas Glemham.
other Act^ons c^owding it out) for nine months, and upward, against Sickness,
Famine, and War, having eaten things most reluctant to nature; till the Kings
affairs 1645, being desperate, he accepted of no less honorable (than his
York) Conditions, and was now deservedly, and as the only fit person,
entrusted with this chief Bulwark and Fortress of Loyalty. By him many
additions were made, to render it impregnable; one most dangerous to the enemy
was, that he had ca^s^d the ground before the Trenches to be broke and dug
into pits, wherein he had driven stakes; so that it was neither safe for Horse
nor man, if they should attempt to storm, to approach the Works. But all this
strength availed not against the Fate upon the Kings Cause: besides that there
was some Division among the Nobles at Court, Divisions at Court among the
Nobles at Oxford.
to whom the King had left a power of Treating with the Enemy, insomuch that
after a Summons, the Governor by the advice of the Lords condescended to a
Treaty, which was managed at Marston at Mr. Crooks House, by Commissioners on
both sides; and after a long debate, all Hostility being exercised in the mean
time (especially when it was thought they would agree, the besieged shot their
great Guns continually, by which they did some hurt, killing a
Lieutenant Colonel in the Works; and Prince Rupert received a shot in a Salley
that he made, rather to take the air, than out of any great design) the Treaty
came to a conclusion, upon very noble Terms; which Fairfax was willing to
grant, not knowing but that he might have been forced to continue there till
the depth of Winter, at which time the overflowing of the Rivers, which were
now diverted, might make him rise and leave the Siege; there being plenty of
all provisions in the Town to maintain it beyond that time. The Articles being
tedious, and like those of Exeter, need no repetition.

Oxford delivered June 23.
On Wednesday the 23 of June, according to Agreement, Sir Thomas Glemham marched
out with a Body of 3000 complete Foot, through two Files of the Enemy, which
were placed at the Eastgate, and extended to Shotoverhill, where their Horse
were drawn up in the Rear, in a Solemn Military posture; and having marched to
Tame, The Governor marches to Tame.
900 of them laid down their Arms, and had Passes to their own houses; the
rest, or the most part of them, took service under Colonel Tillier, one of the
Garrison, for the French, and some for the Spaniard. A thousand more marched
out at the North-gate, whose habitations were in Gloucestershire, and the
Counties that way. Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice depart to Oatlands.
Prince Rupert and Maurice departed on the Monday before to Oatlands, upon
special Articles for themselves; and a number of Gentlemen on Tuesday; besides
near 2000 that staid a^^er the Army was entered, for Passes; so that there could
not be less than 7000 men (besides three Auxiliary Regiments of Scholars and
Townsmen, which were disarmed by the General upon his entrance) then in the
Town, being the very flower and the Chivalry of the Kings Army.

There marched out likewise the Duke of York, Duke of York and many persons of
great Quality depart from Oxford. Duke of York conveyed to St. James's; soo^
after into Holland; the Princess Henrietta to France, a while before. Faringdon
included in the Oxford Articles.
the Marquess of Hartford, the Earls of Dorset and Southampton (the Duke of
Richmond, and Earl of Lindsey, being comprised in the said Articles, who
departed Oxford some while before the Siege, and rendered themselves) the Lords
Cottington, Lane, and Dunsmore; Secretary Nicholas, Sir George Lis^e, and
abundance of brave Gentlemen and Officers: so that it was a pleasant martial
fight, and many were the spectators from London, to behold their exit. The Duke
of York was conveyed to St. James's to his Royal Brother and Sister under the
Government of the Earl of Northumberland; from whence, by means of Colonel
Joseph Bamfield, he was conveyed away, (according to the directions of the
Queen his Mother) into Holland, as some while before, the Princess Henrietta,
(after married to the Duke of Orleans) was by the Lady Dalkeith, her Governess,
privately carried into France. In these Articles Faringdon was also included;
the Governor, Sir George Lisle, being then in Oxford, ratifying the same.

Colonel Poyntz and Colonel Rossiter had joined their Forces, (...)
Parliament-Forces under Col. Poyntz and Col. Rossiter besiege Newark.
and with the access of the Scottish Army resolved to besi^ge Newark, upon
which they long had a hankering desire. They began the Siege in December, which
was continued with all obstinacy, the Town defending it self resolutely, and by
often Salleys annoyed the besiegers, doing notable Execution upon them. The
Scots lodged on the North-side with 6000 men, making good Muschams bridge;
Poyntz on the South Side, Colonel Rossiter and Lebunt at Blechington; Claypool,
(the first time he appears in service, now put on by Cromwell) with Leicester
and Ely forces at Bennington; the Nottingham Brigade at Stoak, where the Lord
Bellasis, (the Noble stout Governor) gave them such a Camisade by a sudden
eruption, that he totally routed their Horse, ( Poyntz being there) and had
near surprised the Foot, but that Rossiter came opportunely in, and designing
to get between the Salliers and the Town, made them leave their Victory, and
make home: in their way whither, they defeated the said Colonel Rossiter, and
safely returned in at their Works.

Nevertheless, and though General Leven with his Army was drawn off from
Newark, General Leven with his Scots draws of from Newark: the Town Summoned;
Lord Bellasis the Governor commanded by the King to surrender.
disgusted for want pay, Poyntz would not give over; but having turned the
River Trent quite from the Town on the North-side, and the Scots having taken
Sands Fort before, who paid dear for their Approaches, and the other River
being also turned aside, and several Forts and Batteries new raised within
Musket Shot of the Town, a second Summons was sent in unto the Governor;
which had not prevailed, for all their bravado's of danger, had they not been
reinforced with a command from the King to his Lordship, to make as good Terms
as he could, and deliver the place, for that the Peace of the Kingdom might
the sooner be r^stored. Accordingly, on the 4 of May, May 4 a Treaty entered
into, and Newark yielded.
a Treaty was entered into; the Articles very fair, but not so comprehensive as
those given by Fairfax, but yet such as signified the noble Governors
resolution, and pointed at his great desert; he having approved himself an
eminent Soldier and Servant of his King and Country throughout the War, and
was afterward his Majesty's Governor of his Town of Hull.

While the Army was marching to Oxford, The Parliament-Forces under Col. Whaley
besiege Banbury.
Colonel Whaley with a thousand Foot, and-four Troops of Horse, was sent to
besiege Banbury; who lay before it ten weeks ere the Governor would hearken to
any Terms, as nobly angry with the Fortune of his Cause, as disdainfully vexed
with the disparagement of the Siege; the Castle able to defy their entire
Army, and which had often disappointed and beaten several united strengths that
beleaguered it. But I cannot so regretfully partake with that Loyal Garrison,
as Mr. Sprig Anglia Rediviva.
does zealously with the Town, in a Paragraph of his worthy observation, and
which m^^^ very justly be construed in a better sense than he meant it, being a
full ^ccount of that once-famous place for Zealotry.

Banbury, once a great and fair Market Town, before the late Troubles, but now
having scarce the one half standing to gaze on the Ruins of the other, was
ever till now unfortunate in all means and endeavors used for its recovery,
having lain under the possession and Tyranny of the Enemy from the beginning,
without almost any intermission; which happened to it, partly through the
commodiousness of its Situation for the Enemy, as lying but eighteen miles
North from Oxford, and in such a convenient place as gave it a command into
diverse other Counties, viz. Northhampton-shire, Warwickshire, etc. from out of
which it gathered large Contributions from Oxford: the sweetness that the Enemy
tasted in the fruits and effects thus reaped by this Garrison, made them, that
upon all our attempts to reduce it, they were still ready with great Forces to
relieve it.

But yet I cannot but also look upon and observe the end, a special hand and
intimation of God against that Professing* Place, where in a manner Judgment
began as at the House of God, and was removed with one of the last. The strange
sights in the Air over it, as fighting, etc. whereof I was an Eyewitness,
might po^tend the portion which providence has since prepared for them.

All endeavors were used by the Besiegers, by Sapping, and Mining; which were
again Countermined by the vigilance of Sir William Compton, Sir William Compton
the Governor yields on honorable Terms, May 8.
Brother to the Earl of Northampton the resolute Governor, who by flinging
down stones and hand-Granadoes, mightily annoyed the Enemy; who nevertheless
courageously persisting in their work, being advanced close to the Wall, Sir
William accepted of honorable Terms, and yielded it on the eighth of May, the
Anniversary of his Majesty's Proclayming. I may not pass this notable place
without another remarque.

When the Grandees of the Faction in 1648 were dividing the spoils of the
Kingdom, and Loyal demolitions (which made entire structures of some of their
partisans Fortunes) were conferred mutually by them, (of which in its place)
and several Castles were then ordered to be rased; A friend of the Lord Says,
Lord Say Proprietor of the place.
(the Proprietor of the place,) moved in the House of Commons, that this Castle
also might be ruined, as having been such a thorn to the Parliament; and that
the Lord Says consent might be procured (who had all along served them as
chief of their Council and Cabal, and dyed after the King's restitution, to say
no more of him, though a grand engine of our Troubles) Two thousand Pounds
should be given him in compensation: The Castle demolished.
A Member, (that understood his Lordships drift, who put in for his share among
the Commoners, while they were of the giving hand, and the Lords looked only
on others bounty) stood up and said, that the Public had no need of such
penny-worths, as to give his Lordship two thousand pounds for that which cost
him but five hundred; a cheaper time might be expected: which his Lordship was
forced to await, and be content with an under-sale; when it was enviously by
them, and dishonourably by him laid in its dust; the rather to be pitied,
because of its reviviscency, having bravely and vigorously recovered it self
from the decays of a long Antiquity; so much Art and industry being bestowed on
it, that neither the Approaches of Time, nor the Batteries, fury and violence
of the Enemy, were to be seen in any part of it. But it seems the Loyal Genius,
the new Penates, agreed not well with their Mansion, and so abandoned it to the
lust and spite of a deforming Reformation. May the present inhabitants
consider, and the Reader pardon this digression.

Colonel Whaley marches to Worcester.
From Banbury, Colonel Whaley was ordered to march to Worcester, and with some
Troops of Horse to assist the Siege began by Colonel Morgan, who was then
commanded to the Siege of Ragland, to command in chief the Forces before that
place; so that the Carrying on of Worcester-siege was devolved upon Colonel
Whaley, who for want of Foot could not lay a close and regular Leaguer, until
that defect was supplied by Colonel Rainsborough, Besieges it for the
Parliament.
who came with a Brigade thither, and lustily p^yed the raising of Forts and
Approaches, which in short time he effectually brought to pass; so that the
Governor (Colonel Washington, who had done the King excellent service
throughout the War, particularly at the first taking of Bristol, where the
breach he courageously entered was afterward called by his name, made terrible
thereafter by his brave Regiment of Dragoons, whose fierce and active gallantry
bestowed a Proverb on every resolute exploit, Colonel Washington the Governor
y^ildeth, July 23.
Away with it, quoth Washington) who before had refused Terms, (or to accept a
Summons) but upon his own high Conditions, seeing how feasible the forcing of
the City might prove, and that no Relief could be expected, having also
information of the surrender of Oxford, inclined now to a Treaty, which took
effect July 19. and rendered the 23 of July; the Articles being something less
equal than the General gave; which was the manner of those substitute
Commanders, who either might not, or rather were not endued with so much
Military honor, as to grant them honorable Articles, the best Military
policy: a courtesy, for which the Low-country-war is very deservedly famous;
and the great masterpiece of Soldiery in the late Princes of the House of
Aurange.

At the same time the Generals Regiment and Colonel Lilburn's were sent to
assist and carry on the Siege before Wallingford, Wallingford yielded, July 28,
to the Parliament.
where Colonel Thomas Blague commanded; and after Oxford was yielded, the
General came himself thither in person, to honor the Noble Governor, by the
rendition of it to the main Army. His Terms were as good as any that had been
given before; Sir Thomas as well respecting the merit and worth of the person,
as the value and considerableness of the place. By Treaty it should have been
surrendered on the 29 of July; but a mutiny happening among the Soldiers of the
Garrison, the Governor was forced to render it the day before, having had six
days time, from the conclusion of the Treaty, to prepare for his departure.

After this rendition, Sir Thomas Fairfax went to the Bath to refresh himself,
Sir Thomas Fairfax goes to the Bath, from thence to Ragland- Castle, to assist
Colonel Morgan, Sir Trevor Williams, and Colonel Laughorn.
after so tedious attendance on several Leaguers; and from thence, being
informed of the resolution of the Noble Marquess of Worcester in defending his
Castle of Ragland (where he had made many desperate Salleys, and kept the
besiegers at hard and constant duty) he advanced to the aid and assistance of
his Forces under Colonel Morgan, Sir Trevor Williams, and Colonel Laughorn; and
upon his arrival sent in the Marquess this Summons.

My LORD,
BEing come into these parts with such a strength as I may not doubt, but with
the same hand of good providence that has hitherto blessed us, Sir Thomas
Fairfax summons the Marquess of Worcester.
in short time to reduce the Garrison of Ragland to the obedience of the
Parliament: I have, in order thereto, thought good to send your Lordship this
Summons, hereby requiring you to deliver up to (...) for the Parliament's use,
the said Garrison and Castle of Ragland, which as it only obstructs the
Kingdom's universal Peace, the rendition may beget such terms as by delay or
vain hopes cannot be expected. Aug. 7.

Your Lordships humble servant, THO. FAIRFAX.


To which the Marquess Answered thus: SIR,
The Marquess his Answer.
ALthough my infirmities might justly claim privilege in so sudden an Answer,
yet because you desire it, and I not willing to delay your time to your Letter
of Summons to deliver up my house, and the only house now in my possession to
cover my head in; These are to let you know, that if you did understand the
condition I am in, I dare say, out of your Judgment, you would not think it a
reasonable demand. I am loath to be the Author of mine own Ruin on both sides,
and therefore desire to have leave to send to his Majesty to know his pleasure,
He desires to send to know the Kings pleasure.
what he will have done with his Garrison. As for my house, I presume he will
command nothing; neither know I how, either by Law or Conscience, I should be
forced out of it. To this I desire your return, and rest,

Your Excellencies humble Servant, H. WORCESTER.




The General denies it, shows the inconveniences of the Marquess hi^ refusal.
To which the General replied, that for sending to his Majesty, it had been
denied to the most considerable Garrison in England, further than an account of
the thing done upon the Surrender; which he offered: that for the destruction
of his Lordships house and Garrison, he should not have troubled his Lordship,
were it disgarrisoned. And repeats inconveniences upon a refusal.

To this the Marquess answers, The Marquess urges reasons on his side.
that he has twenty thousand pounds due from the King lent out of his Purse,
(it is believed the Loyal Noble Marquess might have said four times as much,
being the richest and freest Subject the King had) which would be lost, if he
in this matter should displease him, alleges his familiarity with Sir Thomas
his Grandfather in Henry Earl of Huntingtons time, President of the North; for
whose sake, he supposes, were it known to him, the General would do what safe
courtesy he could: Desires, if he might have his Means, and be at quiet by the
Parliaments approbation, and not vexed with the malice of the Committees of
that County, to be quit of the Garrison, and to that purpose expects what
Conditions he will give.

The Marquess excepted out of the Parliaments Pardon.
The General returns, that he will give such as shall be fit and satisfactory
for the Soldiers, to his Lordship and Family all security and quiet from any
that belongs to him (note that the Marquess was then excepted out of Pardon;)
he will interpose betwixt his Lordship and the Committees, that they shall do
nothing without order from the Parliament, The General promises to interpose
between his Lordship and the Committees.
to whom he has liberty to send, and from whom, upon a present Surrender and
submission to their Mercy and Favor, he may presume on better Terms than if he
stand to extremity. Proposes the sad example of the Marquess of Winchester,
who lost all by the same resolution. For the twenty thousand pounds, he may
send to the King at the same time with an account of the Surrender.

The Marquess rejoyns, and desires to be satisfied, whether if any conclusion
shall be made, he shall afterward be left to the mercy of the Parliament for
alteration at their Wills and pleasures; The Marquess cites the Earl of
Shrewsburies Case.
and cites to that purpose the Earl of Shrewsburies case, and diverse others,
whose Conditions were broken. He knows that by the Generals Will and Consent it
should never be; but Soldiers are unruly, and the Parliament Unquestionable,
and therefore desires Pardon for his just cause of Fear.

This was Answered by Sir Thomas, that what he granted, he would undertake to
make good. And as to the instance of the Lord of Shrewsbury, the Actors in that
breach, who were none of his Army, have received their Censure, and by this
time he believes Execution.

The first result between them, Ragland- Castle surrendered Aug. 19, to the
Parliament.
was, at the desire of the Marquess, a Cessation for six hours; but nothing
being concluded on, the Army proceeded in their Approaches, which were cast up
within sixty yards of their Works; when the Marquess was induced and persuaded
by them within to come to a Capitulation, which was in effect, the same with
others: And on the 19 of August the Castle was Surrendered, according to
Agreement; into which the General entered, and had some speech with the
Marquess, and so back again to Bath.

There marched out besides the Marquess, The Marquess casts himself on the
Parliaments mercy. Several persons of Quality in the Castle.
who cast himself wholly upon the mercy of the Parliament, the Lord Charley his
Son, the Countess of Glamorgan, Sir Philip Jones, Doctor Bailey, a Commissary, 4
Colonels, 82 Captains, 16 Lieutenants, 6 Cornets, 4 Ensigns, 4 Quarter Masters,
52 Esquires and Gentlemen, as by the Catalogue of them taken by the Advocate of
the Army appeared.

I do not wonder the gallant Marquess was so loath to part with his house: for
not long after, The Marquess a great Scholar, to whom the King was much
indebted: he departs this life.
and it is presumed from some thought, sadness, and trouble of mind, of being
forced from this his Castle, and exposed to the fury of his Enemies, he
departed this life. A man of very great Parts, and becoming his Honors, of
great Fortitude of mind, either Actively or Passively, and to whom the King was
much beholden. He was nevertheless better at his Pen than the Sword and a great
deal happier; for he has used that with rare success, as some of his Works in
print, viz, his Apophthegms and Discourses, and Disputes with his Majesty
concerning Religion, do abundantly demonstrate. He lived ^o see himself undone,
and a most plentiful estate spoiled and Ruined; but anticipated and fore-ran
that of the Kingdom, which soon after followed.

Conway-Castle was taken by storm, by Forces under Major General Mitton,
Major General Mitton takes Conway- Castle by Storm for the Parliament.
Carnarvan- Castle delivered; as also Ludlow, Litchfield- Close, and Borstal
house.
to whom Sir Thomas Fairfax would have spared some Forces, but he would have no
partakers of his Trophies, but those men he had raised himself, and hitherto
kept as a distinct Body, pretending he had more men than money to pay them. He
also took in Carnarvan-Castle, seconded by Major General Laugborn his
Countryman, being delivered upon good Articles by the Lord Byron, who had
before so stoutly maintained Chester. Ludlow was likewise delivered, and
Litchfield-Close to Sir William Brereton; Borstal-house by Sir Charles Campian,
slain after at Colchester; together with Goth^ridge. So that the Pen is quite
worn out with scribbling of Articles, and desires to be excused from further
particulars.

Only we may not omit Pendennis-Castle (and Mount Michael in Cornwall taken
during the siege of Exeter by Colonel Hammond) which stood out still,
Pendennis- Castle ( and Mount-Michael) taken for the Parliament, by Colonel
Hammond. John Arundel Esquire. the Governor having order from the King to
surrender.
by the resolution and Loyalty of a right Noble Gentleman of that County, John
Arundel of Treacise Esquire, the Governor: it had been blockt up by Land by
Colonel Richard Fortescue, and by Vice Admiral Batten by Sea, ever since the
General departed: no Summons could prevail, without his Majesty's special Order
to Surrender; whom the Governor was very instant to have leave to send to. All
the deficiency was in Provision; and no Relief could enter, save two Shallops,
who got in at the break of day, at which time the Parliaments Shallops that in
the nightime lay close to the Castle to intercept them, drew off, for fear of
being discovered as they were so near within the reach of the Cannon. The
Governor therefore gave the Prince notice; who not being in a condition to
relieve the place, there being a numerous Garrison within, he accepted of
Terms, which, to give Colonel Fortescue his due, were the best given by any but
the General himself, and came the nearest his generous way of Treating, and
caressing an yielding Enemy.

Not long after followed the rendition of Scilly-Island; Scilly- Island,
Denbigh and Holt- Castle Surrendered.
and the Prince departed for France: the like of Denbigh, and Holt-Castle,
which concluded the Military Actions, and left the Conquerours (whose wreathed
Bays would not well twine together; the Presbyterian Thistle, and the
Independent Bramble, not apt to such coalition, but scratching and tearing one
another,) worse embroyled than they had been throughout, or before the War, in
the greatest difficulties of their designs or defeats.

The Pricks of these Triumphant Coronets sharply troubled the heads of the
wearers; and how to set them easily they knew not. Ambition was the most
poignant and grievous to Cromwell, Disdain and Envy to the old Presbyterian
Commanders; from whence resulted a just indignation in some of their Grandees
of having taken Arms to such ill purposes against the King: But in most others
of them, the Itch of Sacrilege and Covetousness, the longing after the spoils
of the Kingdom, rebated the acuteness of those animosites, jealousies and
distrust, intending their private advantages, and chiefly aiming at the kirnel,
Wealth and Riches, and leaving the shell of Government to be cracked and broken
by other men's teeth, to give them the fruition of their projected profits and
Estates.

For Cromwell (as it might well be presumed) now took up these resolutions,
which he had staggered at some while before, to invade the Sovereignty: unto
which end, incredible will it be, how he had wrought upon the Grandees of his
Faction, and they upon the Rascality and rabble of the same leaven, into so
great a popularity, Cromwell the Idol of the pretended Saints.
that he became the very Idol of those (so then called) Saints. The News-books
every day were filled with the wonders of his Achievements; where he was
present at any success, all was attributed either to his fortune or Valor;
where they had Victory in his absence, it was acknowledged to his Counsel and
Prudence: insomuch that by sober men it was well hoped such affronts to his
General might have awakened him to some distruct of his aspiring method; but by
the secret wisdom of God he was blinded, not only in a destructive and supine
compliance with this Rebel, by a guilty omission of his care and inspection
over him, but infatuated into his most scelerate and abominable practices, to
the subversion of the Parliament, and the execrable murder of the King. They
who Raised this Army against their Sovereign, being Raised afterward by that
(one of their own listing) Usurper.

He disbands (...) of the Arm^ under Major General Massey.
His main and first engine to the overthrow of the Government and Laws, which
took its mischievous effect, was the disbanding part of the Army under
Major General Massey, a Noble person, and though formerly an enemy to the King
in that unlucky Siege of Gloucester, now suspected as inclinable to a moderate
use of that Victory the Parliament had obtained. He was known to have much
affected General Essex, of whose principles, and intentions of duty to his
Prince, one may without danger say they were tainted by the contagion of the
times, but never corrupted or alienated from the Kings person, Authority, or
Family, or Peace of the Kingdom. By disbanding the Forces under him, the design
of Cromwell was first to make a division, Cromwell designs to create differences
in the Army.
and stir some ill humor in the Army, as if that were the leading case; next,
to make the standing Officers, when they should know they were at his disposal,
more sure and obliged to him, and then to instill into them his own Traiterous
devices; in sum, to perpetuate the War till he had attained his ends, and then
continue them, as the Turk does his Ianizaries.

Colonel Cooks Brigade disbanded.
Accordingly, at the Devises, General Fairfax (for upon him it was put)
disbanded Major General Massey's and Colonel Cook's Troops, being in all 2500
Horse, prepared, but falsely Anglia Rediviva.
to obey the Ordinance of Parliament, receiving only six weeks pay for many
months Arrears: and because the Parliament so vehemently tax the King for
entertaining of Foreigners, and also because it is very strange, observe what
Anglia Rediviva.
he says further: Sir Thomas Fairfax his Pen traveling as far as great
Alexanders Sword. Many of the disbanded Soldiers of Foreign Countries.


Diverse of the disbanded came from very remote Countries, and bad Passes, some
for Egypt, others for Mesopotamia and Ethiopia.

Upon consideration of this passage (besides that it wipes away the cavil of
the Kings entertainment of Forraigners, a more general and no less envious
observation arises, viz. that in some sort it may be said (what was spoke of
the Roman Civil Wars, That all Nations and people were engaged in the fortune
and Fate of Caesar or the Senate) that the whole World was concerned in our
English Confusions: for by this black list of Auxiliaries from the other side
of the Line, and such remote Regions (it being also unquestionable how
dexterously and designedly all our potent Neighbors thrust themselves in at
our Breaches) our troubles and intestine feuds may be allowed to pretend to a
like obnoxious greatness and reputation; since the fame of our conflagration
and incendiaries flew to such distant and scorched Climates. Those Salamanders
embroyled themselves in the fire of our contentions, and by their Hue it had
been no great prejudice to the Cause they maintained, if a man had guessed them
to be the Tutelary Angels thereof; the inside of all the pretenses of the War
against the King, appearing as black and foul as the outside of these their
Fellow Soldiers.

So that while we shall now in its order and time repeat the subsequent
perpetrations of the Party and Faction, the War being wholly finished, and they
by the wise providence and permission of God possessed of all they quarrelled
for; (though it is not fair to prepossess posterity) the Reader and aftertimes
will suspect or think there is some Hiatus or deficiency in the Register of
these troubles, if after such a promising conclusion (wherein the necessity and
blessing of Peace seemed to be well accommodated in that juncture, besides the
opportunity and obligation of the Parliament to make appear their many
Declarations and Protestations, both in behalf of his Majesty and the Kingdom)
he shall be on a sudden, without any pause or expostulation, or account of the
designs and practices of the Parliament and Army, plunged immediately, and
involved again in new, The Factions begin now to unmask themselves, and lay
open their intentions.
and worser, and more perplexed actions and politics than in the middle of the
War: for now having laid aside the mask, the smooth and soft cover of their
beautiful pretenses, they put on the ghastly and terrible Vizor, that personated
the Tyranny and Usurpation which soon after followed. To proceed then,

The state of the matter was briefly this: It was thought now high time by the
principals of the conquering side, to share the Sovereignty; but the difficulty
of doing it, in regard of those mutual distrusts that waxed every day stronger
betwixt the two factions of Presbytery and Independency, The two Factions,
Presbytery and Independency distruct each other.
delayed a while the actual fruition of their desires. The Bucket of interest
went up and down a long while, one side secretly closing with the King in a
seeming tenderness for his Rights and Person, to balance the other, who by an
obstinacy against him and his Government, engaged most of the first leaven of
that tumultuous rabble to an adherence and strengthening of their party, from an
expectation of spoil and preferment upon their Models, after their subversion
of Monarchy. In these their distractions, the only expedient for both, was to
protract time, and await a more advantageous and favorable juncture for either
of them, wherein to compass and accomplish their several aims and divided
projections upon the Kingdom. Therefore the same public ends and common
concernments, which were the pretended causes of the War, were now declared to
be insisted on, as to constant and perpetual security, viz. the Laws, Religion
and Liberty. That the b^^ting the Enemy in the Field, was not sufficient alone
to that purpose, but that some provision must be made for the future; and that
those establishments of the public upon a firm Peace, would require time,
after so many commotions and dislocations, such disorder and confusion of the
policy of the Government.

To this purpose the King was held out to his people as an obstinate person,
The King maligned to his people.
no way changed in his mind as to their good, but that all his offers of Treaty
and Peace were merely to impose upon their credulous affections, intending
nothing less than satisfaction to his Parliament, against whom he had waged a
long and bloody War. That in a just resolution, they had proceeded, and would
persist on their way of Propositions, on which alone a lasting Peace might be
grounded and expected. That in the mean time they would take care that the
Common Enemy should take no advantage of raising a new War, (indeed their
tyrannical method of Composition for their Loyalty in the first, might well
make them as good as their words.) And with the old flourishes of Liberty, and
happy times, inculcating their Successes, and ascribing them to their Cause,
they thus offered to amuse the people, exchanging their fineness and smoothness
of words, for the real repose and tranquillity looked for by the Kingdom.

This proceeding highly exasperated the Kings party, and as much encouraged the
desperadoes of their own, his party highly exasperated.
to claw them with Petitions and Addresses of Thanks for these resolutions,
proving the only means to continue the rupture, and consequently their Power
and Authority; which how then and hereafter they executed, we will now more
particularly relate, having laid down these SEEDS of the SECOND WAR, as they,
and from then their Sequestrators and Committees were most wrathfully pleased
to call it, when they wrongfully placed it upon their score and account.

The Scotch Parliament and Army ingross the wealth of the Nation. The Scots are
for ready Cash, the others for Delinquents Estates.

The King in the Scots possession.


These were the transactions and the devices of the English Parliament and Army:
it will be requisite to see what the same bodies of Scotland do in reference to
the Peace of both Kingdoms; and we shall find them in as great a strangeness
to it as the former, and not with far different purposes and intentions: For
the Scots would have money in Coin and Specie, the other were for the value in
great penny-worths, and purchases of Delinquents Estates. The Scots, as was
said before, had the King in their possession, a good pawn and pledge for the
debt accrued to them before, for the pay due for their service in England;
which being not over-hastily paid, they quitted their post at the Siege of
Newark, and with the King marched Northwards, bearing him in hand that they
were his good Subjects, and would stand as far as 'twas consistent with their
Covenant, for his person and interests. As the Army marched, so did the King,
making the limits of their Quarters to be his Court, until by leasurable
journeys (and which were interrupted by several Expostulations, Expresses from
Westminster) he came at last and took up his residence at Newcastle, where
appeared such a deal of Scotch bravery, especially among the Commanders of
their Army, that the place appeared like the revived Court of King James after
his assumption to the Crown of England. Every rag worn by them, being bought
and purchased (if so fairly come by) with English gelt.

The Parliament of England consult concerning the Kings person.
In the mean while the Parlianent were debating concerning the Person of the
King; but it was so ticklish a point, that they agreed not to any present
positive settlement or entertainment of it, but negatively, in signifying to
the Scots, that in England his Majesty might be disposed by none but the
Parliament of England: That their Army in England is theirs, and under their
pay, and pretending the inconvenience of the great distance of the King from
them, as to obtaining of his assent; and then the Covenant.

This begat in the King another meditation, in his Eikon Basil. where he
discourses and deplores those events, which put him to such a choice; but
resolutely fixes himself on his own Honor and Conscience, however it should
please God to order this disposition of him in the Scots hands. And
contrariwise it raised in the faction Soliloquies and Charms, which way they
might extricate this puzling difficulty. As the first expedient, the old stalk
of courting the Prince was agreed upon; and therefore they sent a Letter to the
Governor of G^ernsey to be conveyed to him.

The King at Newcastle May 13.
At the Kings Arrival at Newcastle, he was there received with all
demonstrations of respect, both from the Town and the Scots; on the Towns part,
with the usual customs of Bone-fires, and ringing of the bells, and
apprecations for his Majesty's happy restitution, and speedy accommodation with
his Parliament; on the Scots, in a semblance of the same gladness and duty,
with protestations to the same purpose as the inhabitants wishes; but which
suddenly lost belief, The S^ots Genesis Pro^laims that no Papists nor Delinquents
shall came near the Kings Person. The Sc^ts lay heavy Assessments on the
Northern Counties.

They send for their Horse.


when their General signified by Proclamation, not only that no Papists or
Delinquents should come near his Person, but also, That although his Majesty's
Person were present, yet all men whatsoever should yield Authority to the
Ordinances of the Parliament. A parcel of which Authority they themselves
imitated, laying heavy Assessments upon all the Northern Counties, pretending
the Parliaments negligence of their pay; so that those poor people were ready
to rise and free themselves from these oppressors, having in vain Petitioned
them at Westminster for relief: which the Scots senting, they privately sent
for their Horse under David Lesly, who had defeated Montross at Philipshaugh
(of which briefly before) and driven him far enough into the High-lands, to
return to their main Army then at Newcastle, to reinforce it, and to secure
themselves in their Quarters, till the bargain should be made.

They at Westminster understanding hereof, do resent this additional force of
Scots, and thereupon in anger Vote, The English Parliament Vote them home, and
100000 l. to be paid to their Army.


That this Kingdom has no further need of the Army of their brethren the Scots
in this Kingdom, and that the sum of one hundred thousand pounds should be
advanced and paid to that Army, as follows, viz. 50000 l. after their
surrender of Newcastle, Carlisle, and other English Garrisons possessed by them
in England, and the other 50000 l. after their departure into Scotland; and
order should be taken for the payment of their Arrears.

This was a good come on, and a handsome induction to greater sums: in the mean
while the Scottish Commissioners, The Scotch Commissioners gloze with the
English Parliament.
with their Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile Dulci, address themselves to
the Parliament with their glozing oratory, protesting the good intention of
their Army and Nation, and obtesting some speedy satisfaction of money, that
they might not be burdensome to the Country; assuring them on one hand, of
their complying with the Parliament according to Covenant, and offering
something for the King too a la Mode the same Covenant; like the man in the
Fable, that could blow hot and cold with the same breath. But where so many
words pass between buyer and seller, a man may suspect little honesty or reason
in either.

To confirm this their firm adherence in all fairness to the Covenant, The
Dispates betwixt the King and Mr. Henderson at Newcastle.
Mr. Alexander Henderson, the Moderator formerly in that illegal Assembly at
Glasgow in 1639. and Commissioner here in England afterward, a famed preacher,
Scholar, and Presbyter, was set upon the King at Newcastle, whom the King
handled with that acuteness both in private Conferences and Disputes, as also
in discussive Papers of the Controversies of the Discipline of the Church of
England, and so well plied him (his Majesty's prudent and laborious undertaking
of this person serving to stop the weaker yet more malapert assaults of his
English Reformists who followed this grand Pattern) by asserting the practice
and universal consent of the Primitive Church beyond any private or modern
opinion whatsoever, that it is more than credible that Mr. Henderson convinced
in his conscience of the errors he had maintained to the promoting of Schism
and Rebellion, from such a Church, and against so excellent a Prince, whose
Learning, Clemency and Courtesy, were alike eminent, not long after upon his
return, Mr. Henderson languisheth and dies.
or rather sending home into Scotland, languished with grief and anxiety of
mind; and with plain symptoms thereof, and no other outward cause, dyed.

Mr. Stephen Marshal, Mr. Stephen Marshal a great Preacher of the Covenant at
Newcastle.
another Presbyterian Minister, and a famous Teacher of the Covenant, was there
also; but the King would not be troubled with his discourses, having such cause
of offense at his prayers; which made him afterward wholly decline any
intercourse with him: the Papers wherein he had so rationally refuted the same
principles with Mr. Henderson, being public, and therefore he might well be
disobliged from further trouble in that Controversy. Politic disputes between
the Parliament and the Scotch Commissioners.
Nor were the disputes less between the Scots Commissioners and the Parliament,
which every day came in Print, being politic, subtle wranglings for nothing,
de lana Caprina, each party endeavoring to cajole the other into absurd
beliefs: mere names of things, and distinctions, as the Person of the King,
etc. wholly employing those State-Logicians, with whom Majesty and duty were
non^Entia. Into these frivolous jars, Cromwell and his Army-Fellows put in their
Pleas, and suborned some serious fools to throw in their considerations of the
matter; (...) and (...).
which reflected bitterly on the Scots, not by way of Reason, but bold impudent
aspersions, and indeed, as to them, ungrateful and unmannerly dict^ries. Those
the Commissioners take notice of, complaining to the Parliament; but in vain,
the Independent party laughing secretly at the pudder they made for such
trifles as Religion and Government, which so forwardly and designedly they
themselves had overthrown, and aukwardly and scrupulously they would now seem
to intend and establish. It being generally received by them, as proclaimed by
others, That all was but a Juggle; and the conclusion credited that report.

Setting aside other punctilio's between them, concerning Presbytery (which now
labored grievously in the birth, being ready for the Midwifery of an
Ordinance, and was hereby retarded, A Proviso for Tender Consciences being to
be added as a superfaetation of that Discipline by the Independents, and
rejected as an afterbirth, inlet and receptacle of all Heresies, Sects, and
Schisms by the Scots, of which there will be occasion hereafter) matter of
State shall be first related, as coming first to the Kings consideration in the
Propositions after ten months time sent to him by Commissioners while he was at
Newcastle. To omit also all their disputes concerning the obligations of the
Covenant, as to mutual interests and polity of Government, whereby the one
Kingdom might not act without the concurrence of the other, insisted on by the
Scots, and waved by the Members, because these shadows and the Covenant it self
is vanished, and the best friends of it would be loath to have these
absurdities and clashings of the said League revived; the Confederates, as at
the building of Babel (such our after-Commonwealth) being divided within three
years time among themselves in the very language of it; and some great
promoters of it then, calling it now an Old Almanac: I say, not to rake in
this unconcerning matter, which is intended to be forgotten, let us proceed
only with this due insertion of another matter, That Cromwell seeing how the
Scots drove at money for pay, to ripen a division betwixt them and the Houses, ^
set Poyntz's Soldiery and Garrison of York, where he was Governor, to mutiny
for pay, and to force it as the Scots did, whose example they pleaded; and with
the same blow to discard Poyntz first from the affection, and then from the
command of his Forces; one suspected to be honester than the designs of the
Army could suffer.

(...) 11.
On the 11 of July the Propositions were finished, and sent to the King by the
Earls of Pembroke and Suffolk, Mr. Goodwyn, Sir Walter Earl, Sir John Hippesly,
and Mr. Robinson: who met on the way with a Message from the King to the Two
Houses in answer to their demand for the Marquess of Ormonds disbanding in
Ireland; wherein he desires their Propositions, as the readiest and safest way
to gratify them in that and other things conducing to the Peace of the
Kingdom. A little while before this also, Monsieur Bellieure, a French
Ambassador being sent to accommodate the difference between the King and
Parliament, ^
received thanks from the Parliament, to whom he first addressed; but the
interposition of his Master was wholly denied: whereupon he did the like
fruitless office to the King; and having had some private Audience with him,
after many good morrows departed.

^
To keep a punctual account of the Prince his Son's peregrination; the first
foreign place we find him in is about this time at the French Court in Paris;
of which the Queen, then there also, gave notice to the King by Mr. Montril the
French Agent residing there. ^


The Propositions sent now to the King were quarrelled at by the Scots
Commissioners; first, because they were not the same with those formerly sent
to Oxford and Vxbridge. Secondly, Because all the additions, omissions and
alterations made in them, are in those things which concern the joint interest
and union of both Kingdoms. And thirdly, the danger of wholly excluding the
King and his Posterity, and so the Crown, from their right to the Militia;
which was an alteration of the Fundamental Laws. And fourthly, the uncertainty
of the Religion the Parliament would establish, they refusing to give their
Brethren, the Scots, the particulars thereof; Presbytery being then piecemeal
offered by the Assembly of Divines to the Parliaments consideration.

In this point, The Scots urge the Parliaments promise of Uniformity, and their
ordering the Covenant to be printed in most Foreign Languages.
the Scots urged how many promises of UNIFORMITY the Parliament had made at
their instances to them throughout the War; and that this Uniformity might be
extensive, and become the Discipline of the Reformed Churches every where, and
so be the Catholic Rule, had ordered the Covenant as a Model or Pattern to be
printed in most of the Foreign Languages; that it should be a sin and shame to
England, that all sorts of Heresies, Sects and Schisms should be so multiplied;
Liberty of Conscience not only pleaded for, but in place already, and all the
kindnesses done them, so unhandsomly slighted. And as to the Presbyterial
Government to be established here, Exceptions were taken at the subordination
of Church Assemblies to Parliament, in the words prescribed, lest it should be
interpreted as if the Civil Power were not only conversant about matters of
the Church and Religion, but were formally Ecclesiastical, and to be exercised
Ecclesiastically, and be counted such a Supremacy in the Church, as in the Pope
and the late High Commission of England. Next, they scrupled their Provincial
Commissioners for judging of Scandal, there being no such Warrant for such a
mixture of Lay with Spiritual Officers; which they suppose may be the laying of
a New Foundation of the said High Commission or Episcopacy. Thirdly, That
admitting the Power of calling and convening a National Assembly be in the
Civil Magistrates as positive, yet they cannot allow it privative or
destructive, and that therefore such Assemblies may not be restrained to times
of Session, the safety of the Church being the supreme Law; That therefore it
should not be left ad libitum to the pleasure of the Civil Power, but that
fixed times for their meeting might be appointed.

From this the English perceived that the Scotch Yoke would not fit their
necks; and though they could be content with their Spirituals, there was no
enduring of their Temporals: which consideration, with those Cavils printed and
published, produced a Declaration of the House of Commons, The Parliament
publish a Declaration.
wherein (being now in no need of further assistance, having no Enemy left but
that Army) they come to a point, and withal thus gird their good Brethren (we
shall repeat only one Paragraph.) Concerning Church Government, we having so
fully declared for Presbyterian Government, One Paragraph thereof, relating to
Church-Goverment, etc.
having spent so much pains, taken up so much time, for the settling of it;
passed most of the particulars brought to us from the Assembly of Divines
(called only by us to advise of such things as shall be required of them by
the Parliament) and having published several Ordinances for putting the same in
execution, because we cannot consent to the granting of an arbitrary and
unlimited Power and Jurisdiction to near TEN THOUSAND IVDICATORIES to be
erected within this Kingdom, and this demanded in a way INCONSISTENT with the
FVNDAMENTALS of GOVERNMENT, excluding the POWER of PARLIAMENT in the exercise
of that IVRISDICTION; nor have we resolved yet, how a due regard may be had,
that TENDER CONSCIENCES which differ not in any Fundamentals of Religion, may
be so provided for as may stand with the word of God, and peace of the Kingdom.
And let it be OBSERVED, that we have had the more reason not to part with the
Power out of our hands, since all bypast Ages manifest, that the Reformation
and purity of Religion, and the preservation and protection of the people, has
been by Parliament, and the exercise of this power: our endeavors being to
settle the Reformation in the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline, and Government, according to the Word of God, and the
example of the best Reformed Churches, and according to our COVENANT.

That Is the burden of the Ditty; but how that comes to be set in opposition to
the Scotch Model of Presbytery, may be left to the distinguishing Expositors,
between Bell and the Dragon. The Poets Fiction concerning Proteus, was
certainly a mere vaticination and prediction of this variable Monster; for the
King, the Kirk, the Parliament, the Sectaries, for every thing according to its
present interest, as the Camelion appears in the colors that are nearest it. A
serious Kirk-fallacy, made a Parliament-Riddle.

The 23 Propositions sent to the King at Newcastle.

These the chiefest of the Propositions, the rest relating to Ireland, and
other private Concerns.


Come we now to those long-hammered Propositions sent to the King at Newcastle,
July 11. as aforesaid, which were twenty three in number.

First, That his Majesty would pass an Act for nulling all Declarations and
Proclamations against both or either Parliaments of England or Scotland.
Secondly, The King to sign and swear the Covenant, and an Act for all persons
in the three Kingdoms to do the like. Thirdly, An Act to take away Bishops,
etc. Fourthly, To confirm by Act the Assembly of Divines at Westminster.
Fifthly, To settle Religion as the Parliament shall agree. Sixthly, In Unity
and Uniformity with Scotland, as shall be agreed by both Parliaments, [ Kill
Episcopacy point blank, and shoot at Scotch wild-fowl at randome] Seventhly, An
Act to be confirmed against Papists. Eighthly, Their Children to be educated in
the Protestant Religion. Ninthly, For taking away part of their Estates.
Tenthly, Against saying of Mass in England. Eleventhly, And the same in
Scotland if they please. Twelfthly, For observation of the Lords day, against
Pluralities and Non-residents, and for Visitations and regulating the
Universities. Thirteenth, That the Militia of the three Kingdoms be in the
hands of the Parliament for twenty years, with power to raise money and
suppress all Forces, etc. Fourteenth, That all Honors, and Titles, and
Dignities, conferred on any since the great Seal was conveyed from the
Parliament, May 21 1642. be nulled; and that those who hereafter shall be made
Peers by the King, shall not sit in Parliament, without consent of both Houses.
Fifteenth, That an Act be passed to confirm all the Treaties between England
and Scotland, and a Committee of both Houses to be nominated Conservators of
the Peace between both Kingdoms. Sixteenth, An Act for the establishing the
Declaration of both Kingdoms of the THIRTIETH of JANUARY, 1643. touching
Delinquents, with other qualifications added now, which were so comprehensive,
that they seemed accommodated for the fatal prognostic of that days Revolution
in 1648. when accumulative treason (a word invented by themselves against the
Earl of Strafford) was extended to other the Kings Friends as to number, and in
the amassed guilt of all impiety, afterward practiced upon the life of his
Martyred Majesty; exempting from pardon all such as had proved themselves
zealous and stout asserters of the King and his Cause; Sequestrations, Bonds,
Fines, and Securities abiding the rest: as to the King himself, they had left
him nothing but the name and Title of Regality, the honor and support thereof
being quite taken away. The rest of them were private reserves and advantages
for themselves and their partisans, and some relating to the Kingdom of
Ireland; such an unreasonable miscellany, that the Scots for pretense of honor
could not digest them, but scrupled at most of them, as they were framed at
Westminster, for some of the reasons before mentioned, but swallowed then, and
were satisfied at their delivery at Newcastle, by the Solution of Two hundred
thousand pounds, when in a peremptory manner, as will presently be related,
they told him he must assent.

At the delivery of those Propositions on the 23 July, the King asked the
Commissioners if they had power to Treat; who replied, No: then said the King,
Discou^^ between the King and the Parliaments Commissioners.
Saving the honor of the business, an honest Trumpeter might have done as
much. I hope you expect not a present Answer to this high concernment. To which
they answered, that their time was limited to ten days. By which time the King
having viewed them, declined them altogether, though hardly be labored and
solicited on all hands to comply with them; and put into the Commissioners
hands a Paper containing offers of coming to London to Treat there; which they
nevertheless excused themselves from sending to the Parliament: whereupon the
King sent this Answer to the two Houses by a Messenger of his own.

The Propositions tendered to his Majesty by the Commissioners, The King Answer
to the Propositions

August 1.


etc. (to which the Parliament have taken up twice so many months for
deliberation, as they have assigned days for his Majesty's Answer) do import so
great alterations of Government both in Church and Kingdom, as it is very
difficult to return a particular and positive Answer, before the explanations,
true sense, and right reason thereof be understood; and that his Majesty upon a
full view of the whole Propositions, may know what is left, as well as what is
taken away or changed. In all which he finds that the Commissioners are in no
capacity to Treat with him. That it is impossible for him to give such a
present judgment of, and answer to the Propositions, whereby he shall be able
to answer to God, that a safe and well-grounded Peace will ensue; and therefore
desires to come to London upon the security of Parliament and Scotch
Commissioners, where, by his personal presence, he may not only raise a mutual
confidence betwixt him and his people, but also have those doubts cleared, and
difficulties explayned unto him, which he now conceives destructive to his
Royal power, if he shall give a full consent as they now stand: as likewise to
make known unto them his reasonable demands, which he is assured will be
conducible to Peace, etc. and will be there ready to give his assent to all
Bills for the security and stability thereof, not having regard to his own
particular. Conjuring them as Christians, as Subjects, and as men, who desire
to leave a good name behind them, that they will so receive and make use of
this Answer, that all Issues may be stopped, and these unhappy distractions
peaceably settled. And postscribes, that upon such assurance of agreement he
will immediately send for the Prince his Son, not doubting of his perfect
obedience, to return into this Kingdom.

This Answer had a various reception in the House of Commons; it startled the
Presbyterians, as who found it difficult to effect their purposes otherwise
than by and with the King; it tickled the Independents, who did all they could,
by thrusting in harsh words and terms, to make the King indisposed and averse
to all. Both became very sensible the King was not the man they took him for,
but a Prince of prudence and resolution; no evil Counselors being to be taxed
with the penning of this, as their custom was, except Duke Hamilton, Duke
Hamilton and the Earl of Lanerick industrious to work his Majesty to consent.
and his Brother the Earl of Lanerick, both of whom were very industrious in
persuading his Majesty to consent: nay, even better friends than they to the
King, who feared this peremptoriness of the Parliament would grow to somewhat
worser, were almost of the same mind, as far as preferring the safety of his
life would indulge such thoughts: whom the Presbyterians saw there was no way,
but by strict and undutiful restraint, to bend to their will; and the
Independents, by treachery and barbarous villainies to break and utterly to
destroy.

Most highly incensed therefore was the Parliament at this refusal of those
means which they said their most elaborate prudence, and diligent ponderation
of every circumstance (after so long a time) conducing to the King and Kingdoms
happiness, had prepared and digested to such an equal temperament of the rights
of the King and the people. The Fastio^s scandalize the King as being obstinate
and perverse.
The King was scandalized and reported every where as obstinate and perverse;
while nothing but the ipse dixit of the equity, justice, or reasonableness of
their Propositions was produced; nor was the Kingdom at all satisfied with
their shallow suggestions. But this served the turn with those who were glad it
should be so, and gratified the Rabble and the Army, who fearful of a
disappointment of their shares in the Ruin of the Kingdom, the hopes whereof
had so long flattered them, more especially by the better persuasions and
irresistible. Arguments of money, they (suspecting the Issue some while before)
prevailed upon the Scots reason, and faith, and honesty to Boot, who were so
clearly convinced of the Kings refractoriness to the Counsel of his Parliament
in denying those Propositions, that they would nor could no longer maintain nor
abet such his persistency therein, but would leave him to the disposal of his
English Parliament; having first procured from him an Order and severe
Injunction to the Marquess of Montross to lay down Arms (though in a probable
condition of recovering his late Defeat) and to accept such Conditions as he
could procure for him; The Marquess of Montross ordered to lay down his Arms.
which indeed were mean, and full of secret fraud and revenge against that
Noble and famous Captain. He was forced, He takes ship for Norway, sollicites
for the King in forain Courts, at last betakes himself to the Court of King
Charles the 2.
in the disguise of his Captains habit, at his prefixed time, to put himself on
board an old and leaky vessel, (designed for him by the Estates of Scotland,
but pretending want of Victual and other necessaries, while the time of his
embarquing) and set sail for Norway, where it pleased God he arrived in safety,
and after traversed much ground, soliciting the Kings cause in several forain
Courts, where he refused all employments, intent only upon his Majesty's
affairs; and at last betook himself to the Court of King Charles the second:
but of that, and what afterward happened to this illustrious Hero, there is
yet room for another Memento. The Earl of Lowdon unravels the compact of both
Parliaments to the King.


The Scotch Compact being concluded, the Earl of Lowdon very fairly tells the
King (still at Newcastle) what he must trust to, if he will not comply with the
offers of the Parliament.

If you refuse to assent, you will lose all your friends in Parliament, lose
the City and all the Country; The Lord Lowdon 's speech to the King.
and all England will join against you as one man: they will process and depose
you, they will charge us to deliver your Majesty to them, to render their
Garrisons, and to remove our Armies out of England; and so both Kingdoms for
eithers safety to agree, and settle Religion and Peace without you, to the
Ruin of your Majesty and posterity: and if you lose England, you will not be
admitted to come and Reign in Scotland. We confess the Propositions are higher
in some things than we approved of, but we see no other means of closing with
the Parliament. And immediately thereupon, Instructions are sent them from
Scotland, Instructions sent from Scotland to Newcastle concerning giving over
the King.
concerning the giving over of the King. It had been debated in their
Parliament, and from thence sent to the Assembly for their advice, by whom it
was remitted in the affirmative, and carried but by two voices in the
Parliament: and was accordingly transacted at Newcastle and London.

The Scots oppress the Northern Counties.
But the Scots were not so willing to be rid of the King, as the Northern
Counties were to be rid of the Scots; of whom, besides free quarter, that Army
had levied 20000 l. a month; an unheard of rate, and a most unreasonable.
Several general complaints had been made, but now they made up a charge of
particulars, with variety of imputation upon them; which being also Printed,
the Scots Commissioners desired the suppression thereof, or some other
reparation; which was, They agree with the Parliament to deliver the King for
400000 l. they insist upon the salt of Delinquents estates for security of
performance.
as one may think, well repaid in the sums of money they received upon this
Contract, which at first demand was no less than a Million; but in
consideration of a present round sum, abated to 400000 l. whereof 200000 l. to
be paid at two payments, the first upon quitting Newcastle (and marching beyond
the River Tine) the other upon the delivery of the King, and their departure
out of England, and surrendering Carlisle and Berwick: to the performance on
either part, Hostages to be given. The Scots insisted upon security for the
remaining 200000 l. naming very conscionably and brotherly, the sale of
Delinquents estates; but the Parliament would not so undervalue their credit,
nor prostitue it to their lustful eye, cast upon so fair a partage of their
Conquest; nor buy the King, and sell his friends. The money they had was
enviously enough bestowed on them, But are p^id out of Church Lands sol^ by
^rder of Pa^liament.
being the sacrilegious rapine of Church Lands then exposed to sale by
Ordinance of Parliament, but conveyed in pomp to the place of payment in thirty
six Wagons, six Regiments of the Army by the order of the General going with
it for its Convoy; and according to the agreement, the first 100000 l. was paid
at Northallerton in December.

Not to prosecute this subject further through so many diversities, The King
delivered by the Scots.
and change of countermines, nor to touch on those irreverend Declarations from
the Scotch Parliament and Assembly, and their Reasons as unmannerly, of not
admitting the King into that his Kingdom, it will suffice to say, that at last
they acquainted the Parliament (having received their money) that they were now
upon going home, and desired to know what service the Parliament would command
them to the Parliament of Scotland: which the King foreseeing, and that he
should be thus basely abandoned by them, he betakes himself afresh to his
solicitation of his English Parliament, wherein he says, That he had
endeavored by his Answer of the 24th of July last, The Kings Message from
Newcastle of the 20th of December.
to their Propositions delivered him in the Name of both Kingdoms, to make his
intentions fully known. But the more he endeavored it, he more plainly saw
that any Answer be could make, would be subject to misinformations, and
misconstructions; which upon his own explanations he is most confident will
give such satisfaction, as to establish a lasting Peace. He proposes therefore
again his coming to London, He pr^p^s^th. again his coming to London.
upon security of both Houses, where by his personal presence he may not only
raise a mutual confidence betwixt him and his people; but also have all doubts
cleared, etc. To conclude, it is your King who desires to be heard (the which
if refused to a subject by a King, he would be thought a Tyrant for it) and to
that end which all men did profess to desire. Wherefore he conjures them, as
they desire really to show themselves what they profess, as good Christians or
subjects, that they accept this his Offer, which he is confident God will so
bl^ss as to a happy Settlement, etc.




A Reply was sent to the former by Sir Peter Killigrew, one who had been the
Parliaments Messenger throughout; but none to this, the two Houses being taken
up with the business of disposal of his person somewhere else, which was wholly
remitted to them by the Negative Resolves of the Parliament of Scotland, Scotch
Parliament resolves concerning the Kings person.
upon the Question of the Kings coming into that Kingdom: That the Government
shall be managed in the same manner and way as it has been these five years
last past, and that fresh Assays and all means in the interim shall be used to
make the King take the Covenant. That if he shall do so, yet the taking of it,
or passing the Propositions, will not warrant them to assist him in England;
nor is the bare taking of it sufficient otherwise. That the clause in the
Covenant for defense of the Kings person, is to be understood of the defense
and safety of the Kingdom. That if he refuse the Propositions, he shall be
disposed according to the Covenant and Treaty. That he shall execute no power
or Authority in Scotland, till he do sign them, and take the Covenant; and
that the Union be kept between both Nations.

His Majesty guessing at this their desperate and perfidious desertion of him,
had sounded their Commissioners then attending him, in what condition or estate
he was among them; whether at Liberty, or a Prisoner: and put the Dilemma upon
them, If at liberty, why he might not dispose of himself any-whither? if in
restraint, what did they mean by his assenting and signing the Propositions,
which in no case could be valid or binding, if agreed by him while a Prisoner?
To this the Scots had nothing to say, but their Covenant with the English,
which they might not contravene; and that according to the above mentioned
Resolves, which they now declared, he was to be rendered to such hands as the
Parliament of England should appoint, who were expected every day upon that
errand. They further excused themselves from their reception and admission of
his Majesty into Scotland, from the danger and hazard they might incur, his
party being not yet so disbanded, but that by his near presence, and advantage
of his person, they would resume their Arms and Courages, and put that Nation
in a worse broyl than before: and for conclusion, they told him, they were in
no condition to entertain him in that state and dignity due to his person; the
Treasure exhausted, and his Revenews eaten up: so that there was but one way
for his Majesty to turn, which he might make hereafter large and convenient
enough, by a present speedy compliance with his two Houses at Westminster.

This made the King to look about him, and to cast about which way to prevent
and eschew this straight in which the baseness of the Scots had thus engaged
him. A Plot noysed of the King's escape.
A design was therefore thought on of his escape from them; but it was
presently discovered, and the surrender of him the rather expedited: for the
Scots were such honest dealers, that having received their money upon the
bargain, they would not defeat their Chapmen of their purchase. A wretched
advantage to either! the Scots never thriving after it, but being totally at
last vassalized and subdued; and the Presbyterians in England every day growing
less and less, till they were swallowed up in the Anarchy and Medly of the
following times, and benighted in the succeeding confusions and Schisms. We
will leave the King thus in the Balance between England and Scotland, The
affairs of Ireland related. 150000 men, women and children massacred by the
Irish Rebels; the English Lords of the Pale side with them. Earl of Leicester
appointed Lord Deputy, and appoints the E. of Ormond to be his L. Genesis who
after many successful encounters concludes a Cessation with the Rebels in 1643,
by order from the King.
and cross over to Ireland, of which little mention has been yet made, but
shall now be remembered in its own series.

In the first four months of that Rebellion, no less than 150000 Men, Women and
Children were Massacred there by the Irish Rebels; an account whereof has been
published, taken by the Rebels themselves, lest they should have seemed more
Cruel and Barbarous than indeed they were. Some of these Murders were committed
by old English Families Grafted upon Irish stocks, and thereby became
Roman Catholics; such as were the Lords of the Pale, who openly sided with the
Irish, and were their Chief Officers and Leaders. The Earl of Leicester had
been appointed Lord Deputy; and he hastened thither; but some difficulties
intervening, he by Commission appointed the Earl (afterward Marquess, then
Duke) of Ormond to be his Lieutenant General in that service; who after many
successful Encounters with the Irish (whose numbers maintained the War more
than their Valor, (though raised by the greatest incentive imaginable, Natural
desire of Liberty) from the pressing Calamities of the Protestants there, and
the urgency of his Majesty's affairs in England) had concluded a Cessation by
order of the King in 1643. Notwithstanding the Parliament-party and the Scots
still carried on the War: And to show the Irish what they should trust to, the
Parliament in 1644, had Arraigned Mac Mahon and the Lord Macquire (who a little
before had broke out of Prison, The Parl. party and Scots carry on the War
there: they arraign Mac Mahon and the L. Macquire, both which were executed at
Tyburn.

Ld. Inchiquin and Lord Broughil in distress.


and after a months hiding were taken) at the King's Bench Bar, where Macquire
insisted mainly on his Peerage, but was overruled, and both by a Jury of
Middlesex-Gentlemen found guilty, and sentenced for High Treason, for which
soon after they were Executed as Traitors at Tyburn. The Lord Inchiquin and the
Lord Broughil condescended not likewise to this Treaty, but with intermixed
success stood out against the whole power of the Rebels, and were at last
greatly distressed. To remedy this, the Lord Lisle, Son to the Earl of
Leicester, was now ordered to go for Ireland, with an Army of 8000 men: the
Lord Muskerry was likewise General for the Irish in the Southern parts of the
Kingdom, The Lord Lisle ordered to go into Ireland with an Army of 8000 men.

The Ld. Muskerry Genesis for the Irish. Marquess of Ormonds converts the
Cessation into Peace, it is ^^p^^ed by the Popi^h C^ergy, and the inve^^ate
Papist.


who took several places of strength in a short time; whereupon the Marquess of
Ormond proceeded to make that Cessation a kind of Peace; it being judged by the
Lords of the Council there, not only an expedient for their safety (for the
Rebels threatened to besiege Dublin) but also to divide them against one
another: the more moderate of them, who had some sense of the Kings condition,
and had not altogether Renounced their Loyalty, being for a composure; but the
Popes Nuncio and the inveterate Irish, such as the Family of Oneal and
Masquire, and generally the Popish Clergy Opposing themselves thereto.
Notwithstanding it took some effect; for the Marquess perceiving that no good
could be done at present with the Parliament of England, with whom he had
Treated for supplies and assistance, and had in lieu of it offered the
Surrender of the places he held, upon conditions, to them and the Forces they
should send, came to agreement with the Rebels there; and though the King had
by his Letters from Newcastle ordered him not to proceed farther to any
conclusion with them, according as the Parliament had desired him, yet seeing
the necessity of falling into the hands of the Rebels or the Parliament, and
considering that the King when he writ this was in restraint, and so his
Commands might be dispensed with, and that the Kings intention was to be judged
better by them who saw the necessity of it upon the place, and so not give way
to other men's designs and false representations of it to his Majesty; received
these Propositions for Peace following, being signed in November 1646, from the
haughty Irish, who thought themselves absolute.

First, That the exercise of the Roman Catholic Religion be in Dublin, and
Drogheda, and in the Kingdom of Ireland, as free as in Paris or Brussels.
Secondly, That the Council Table consist of Members true and faithful to his
Majesty, and who have been enemies to the Parliament. Thirdly, That Dublin,
Drogheda, Team, Newby, Cathirly, Carlingford, and all Protestant Garrisons, be
manned by the confederate Catholics, to keep the same for the use of the King,
and defense of the Kingdom. Fourthly, That the said Counselors, Generals,
Commanders, and Soldiers, do swear and engage to fight against the said
Parliament of England, and all the Kings Enemies; and that they will never come
to any agreement with them, to the prejudice of his Majesty's rights, or the
Kingdoms. Fifthly, That both parties, according to their Oath of Association,
shall to the best of their power and cunning, defend the Fundamental Laws of
the Kingdom, the Kings rights, and liberties of the Subject.
These the Irish insisted upon, and were held in play, that they should be
granted with such Provisoes as should become the Kings Honor and Conscience,
of which, if that Loyalty they pretended was any way Real, they ought not to be
less sollicitous than the Marquess; and in the mean while, the Peace to be as
good as Established: A half peace made in Ireland.
which indeed by the said moderate party was thenceforward observed, as to his
Majesty's Interest in that Kingdom.

The Parliament to stop this Agreement, a little before dispatched away the Lord
Lisle, who weary of his Journey at his setting out, was recalled; but part of
his Army was Transported, with whom was Colonel Monck (the after Renowned
General) who being Tampered with, Colonel Monck is sent by the Parliament into
Ireland.
and for his Liberty, having endured a long Imprisonment in the Tower for the
space of three years, undertook an Employment for the Parliament in Ireland.
The Forces shipped from Chester were near two thousand, accompanied with three
Commissioners from the Parliament to the Marquess, who having offered Dublin
upon some Terms, which they were to present to his Majesty for him to sign;
upon nonperformance thereof on their part, by keeping the Paper from the Kings
sight, now refused the delivery of the City without his Majesty's Command: so
that after a Noble Treatment given the Commissioners, they for the present
ceased any further Transaction, and shipped away the said Forces, under Colonel
Monck, for Belfast in the North of Ireland, where they did very good service
against Oneal and his fellow-Rebels.

The conclusion of this Peace was as ill resented by the Nuncio, The Parliament
and Popes Nuncio alike unconcerned in the Peace..
and all the said Popish party, as it was by the Parliament: For the Catholic
Armies having lately had several great successes, and neither of the two other
Kingdoms then in a condition to relieve that of Ireland, thought upon nothing
less than a shaking off the English yoke, which so often in former ages they
had attempted, but never had the like probabilities as now: the Clergy
therefore, who were generally addicted to the Spaniard, under whose protection
they would render themselves and the Nation, The Spaniard threatens to besiege
Dublin.
thundered out Excommunication against any that should acquiesce in the said
Peace and Agreement, and with an Army of 17000 Horse and Foot, resolve,
notwithstanding thereof, to march and besiege Dublin. This result begot a
division among them, as by the Marquess was before consulted; The Nun^io and his
party, notwithstanding some divisions among them, prosecute the War.
but yet so great a strength remained to that party against the Peace, that the
said Marquess was forced to resume his former Treaty with the Parliament,
concerning the delivery of those places he held to their Commissioners; who
being sensible how difficult a work it would prove to begin a new Conquest of
that people, if either by force or a Treacherous Peace they should possess
themselves of that little that was left to the English Protestant interest, did
labor with the King, the Marquess, and the Scots, that there might be no
entertainment of any Accommodation with them, being ready (they said) to
Transport over a numerous Army, to r^duce and subdue that Rebellion; which they
pretended had ere long been done, if the King would have permitted them, by a
compliance with their Propositions.

The King indeed was loath to abandon himself and his hopes in that Kingdom,
with his Forces in England and Scotland at the same time, sadly foreseeing how
the two Houses would use their Victory, and plainly seeing how his Scotch
Subjects had already abused him; therefore he with no little reluctance was
brought to give way to the demand concerning Ireland: but there being no
remedy, (all the assurances he had from the Marquess, and the Lord Digby, as
well as from the transaction of the Marquess of Worcester, then Earl of
Glamorgan, being disappointed by the Rebels falseness and Treachery, who indeed
thought of nothing less than Peace, whereby the English Forces there could not
be spared to his assistance) he consented to supersede and cease all manner of
Treaty with the Enemy as aforesaid; which it is probable they coming to
understand, did therefore the rather Violate their Accord which so unwillingly
they entered into, as doubting of the performance of it, it being wholly out of
his Majesty's Power and Authority. Whatsoever the matter was, the Lord of
Ormond was at last constrained (as the lesser Evil) to close with the
Parliament, and surrender: of which, and the War prosecuted there by them, in
the next year.

The Earl of Essex dies, Sept. 13. suspected to be poisoned. A Zealous man for
a composure, and an able Soldier.
The 13 of September, the Earl of Essex (the former General) dyed of an
Apoplexy, suddenly (having for a little while before retired himself to his
house at Eltham,) not without great suspicion of poison, or some such practice.
For he was known to have had his judgment rectified concerning the Quarrel, and
to have stickled for a composure of the War in the House of Peers; and his
influence on the Army not yet so weakened, but that he could make a party there
to any design he should stand for, and the Reformadoes his fast friends. He was
an able Soldier, confessed; whether so much a man, disputed; the reproaches of
his debility that way, as loud and unmannerly, as the praises of his Valor and
conduct were justly due and renowned. The Royalists derided him with the style
of his OXCELLENCY, jeering him with his two unfortunate Marriages, He was
unfortunately married to the Lady Francis Howard, and afterward married to Sir
Amias Pawlet's Daughter.
first with the Lady Francis Howard, from whom he was divorced for his
impotency and frigidity, quoad hanc; and the Daughter of Sir Amias Pawlet in
Wiltshire, suspected of incontinency with Mr. V^edal. Her he had declined
himself, who during the War continued at Oxford, while her Husband was in the
field. Nor did he suffer less reproach from the P^anatick Rabble, who
prostituted his honor at the same rate: They that were once most highly in
love with his person, scorning and contemning him; like adulterous fondness,
which converts into extreme hate and contempt. By them whom his popularity had
estranged from their first love to their Prince, was he alike repudiated, with
public dicteries and representations in Pictures. So Transitory is Vulgar
esteem, grounded no other where than upon levity and desire of change, the
deserved fate of such Grandees, who with the specious debauchery of good
Commonwealths-men and Patriots, corrupt the minds, and alienate the affections
of the Subject, to dote upon the bewitches and flatteries of Liberty, of which
such persons are held forth by their courtesy and affability to be the main
ass^rtors: so that it may be said of this Earl, that he was alike served with
his wives, and the Commonalty; saving that by the last he lost his innocence,
and the real honor of his house and Family.

But the Parliament (to which the Faction very readily concurred) to make
reparation for those indignities done him, His Funeral solemnized, Oct. 22 in a
magnificent manner.
of which they could not otherwise acquit themselves, ordered his Exequies to
be performed in a very solemn and magnificent manner. The Independent party, to
color and allay with the pomp and honor of his Funerals the envy and
suspicion of his death, not grudging belike to make a golden bridge for a
departing Enemy; as they might well reckon him to prove to their succeeding
designs, when his duty to his injured Prince, and love to his abused deluded
Country, and indignation of those affronts and contumelies put upon him, should
raise in him a spirit as able to lay that white Devil of Reformation, as he was
to conjure it up in the dreadful shape of an unnatural and disloyal War.

-- Cineri Gloria sera venit.
Mart. He was drawn in Effigy upon a Chariot, Drawn in Effigy upon a Chariot
from Essex- house to Westminster-Abby, his Funeral Sermon preached by Mr.
Vines. Most of the Parliament-Nobility in close mourning. The Effigy placed in
the Chancel, and privately defac^d.

The Earldom of Essex conferred on the Capels. The Presbyterian Government and
Directory no sooner set up but slighted.


from Essex-house in the Strand, to the Abby-Church at Westminster, (where Mr.
Vines an eminent Presbyterian Preached his Funeral-Sermon upon this Text, [
Know thou not, that a Prince is this day fallen in Israel?] very learnedly
and elegantly) most of the Parliament-Nobility in close mourning following him
on foot. The Effigy was afterward placed in the uppermost Chancel in very
great state, till a rude vindictive fellow laid his profane hands upon it, and
so defaced it privately in the night, that it was by order removed. Very few
condolements were made after, he being like to be soon forgotten, who had
neither interest, nor relation to his Honor, remaining; dying childless, and
leaving his Estate to be divided betwixt the Marquess of Hertford who married
his Sister, and his Cozen Leicester Devereux, after his decease Lord Viscount
Hereford, which only title of all the rest he now enjoys; his Title and
Dignity of the Earldom of Essex being transferred long after to the Noble and
most Loyal Family of the Capels, in the 13th year of King Charles the second.

The very soul of Presbytery now departed, that which actuated its mass and
matter, the inform Schism in the Church, to a most unnatural division in the
State, and armed its hands with Force and violence to propagate its dominion,
and Magisterial Usurpation; when from pretentions of Ecclesiastical Authority,
it invaded the Civil Supremacy and Government: it was now culminant, and with
this great Patron and Champion of it was come to its (...) or full stop, having
been declared by Ordinance of Parliament, for the only Religion and manner of
Worship in England: The Ordinance for Presbyterian Government to be in force
but three years.
but to make an experiment of in only, the Ordinance was to continue no longer
than three years; a limitation which boded its abolition, and forespoke the
inconveniences and unsuitableness thereof to our Laws, Manners and Customs.
Nothing but the best things are perpetual, say the Philosophers, all immoderate
things are short-lived; and 'twas a secret, but mortal wound, this prescription
of time gave to the pretended Divine Right of Presbytery, which by that Plea
must always be invariable, unchangeable and indeterminable. But when this first
great Pillar of it fell, (as it is observable, such Great Ones seldom go
unaccompanied) it submitted to its period; its great blaze and flames it had
raised waning into a glimmering and suspicious light, looked upon rather as a
Meteor or Exhalation, that any fixed Luminary, the ill influence thereof
confirming our belief. And the Directory established the same time, The
Directory established.
was clearly such an ignis fatuus, which was to serve as a guide to the
wandering extemporary excursions of prayer, not allowing any certain or sure
Form, the only help and promoter of true Piety and Devotion. It languished for
a while after in London, but with such slighting and disregarding, as was due
to the worshipful Pageantry of that Motly and time-serving Ordinance, wherein
Presbytery and Independency were so blended and molded together, that the
least touch would separate and divide them; as was presently seen in the
Contests between these two parties.

The Presbyterian and Independent parties divided.
It will be therefore requisite to give an account here of the manner and design
of that rupture between them, it proving the rise of all those calamities that
after befell the King. The Presbyterians were more numerous, the Independents
more active, vigilant and restless, watching all opportunities, and present
both in public and private Counsels: often have they wearied out the House with
long unnecessary debates, to unseasonable times of night; and when the Members
of the other faction, being tired and diseased, had withdrawn themselves, slipped
in a Vote of great concernment, and carried it by themselves. If in a full
House any thing contrary or destructive to their designs was ready to pass, by
putting in Proviso's, and perplexing the matter, or by instance of further
consideration of affairs of such importance, they so hindered it, that it dyed
an Embryo abortive. Some of the Grandees of the other party they likewise so
wrought upon, that they became false friends to their own side; the weaker sort
of them they amused with fair offers. They scrued themselves by one means or
other, The Independents subtle practices.
by promises, preferments, largesses, into all manner of persons who could
either hinder or advance their designs; and when they had proceeded so forward
by this smooth way, they attained the rest by Menace and Threats, and the
formidable insolence of their Army, which they had solely at their Devotion:
yet notwithstanding they were shreudly put to it, and countermined by some
eminent Patriots, whose indefatigable diligence and sagacity was yet deluded by
these following Artifices. Their prodigal liberality of bestowing 5000 l. and
10000 l. on some of the chief of the Presbyterian Members for their losses and
sufferings, far beyond the value of them, was the first. This clearly begot in
them a supine negligence of their main drift. Next, they surrogated and
substituted in the place of those Members whom they had expelled for their
Loyalty, men of mean fortunes, and wholly addicted to, and of the Army, who
awed (by drawing their Troops thither,) the several Boroughs at their
Elections, by which means they became at last a competent party in the House to
carry any thing. But the main Engine was the Self-denying Ordinance, whereby
all Members of either House were discharged from bearing any Office Military or
Civil, The self-denying Ordinance, by which the Independents outwit the
Presbyterians.
and obliged to quit all their places of profit and preferment, that the
public business might be better attended. By this shift they heaved out many
eminent Presbyterians, who were possessed of Places and Offices in the
Treasury, Garrisons and Commands of like consequence, and put in their friends,
or those whom the profit would soon render such, in their stead. So that by
this device the Presbyterians were absolutely stripped of all Power, and were
wiped and cheated out of the Militia, for which they began the War, and which
they had violently wrested from their Sovereign. Who cannot here but admire the
wonderful steps and traces of Divine Justice?

The Presbyterians were not wholly insensible whitherto this tended; but they
could not with any pretense of honesty resist the plausibility of this
Ordinance, lest they should seem all along to have sought themselves, and not
the Kingdoms good. A cry very rife and loud, put into the heads of some
Democratical and Levelling Scriblers of the Fanatic Rabble, by Cromwell and his
Privy Council. They cast about therefore to check and counterplot this grand
Stratagem by another as subtle, The Presbyterians Counterplot, of disbanding
the Army.
and altogether more feisible and necessary, that was, to disband the Army,
since they perceived they had lost their Command and disposal of it. The
Independents had used the same trick with good success in their modelling and
disbanding Colonel Massey; and the Peace of the times, and the charge of the
Kingdom, did seem more instantly to require an end of the War here, as Ireland
the translation of it thither.

But the Independent Faction soon smelt out the design, Cromwell sents it, and
^pre^s it among his Soldiers.
and gave notice to Cromwell (who was still licensed to continue in all his
Commands, his Ironsides, by which name he was now called, being
ORDINANCE-PROOF) of its undoubted effect, if the Army interposed not. He upon
conference with his Privado Ireton, agrees to spread it among the Soldiers,
and withal to add their own comment, That the Parliament by the prevailing Vote
of some unsound Members, were resolved to disband the Army, and cheat them of
their Arrears, and send them in a wanting condition into Ireland, to be
Butchered by the Rebels, for having thus faithfully served them in England. And
we may soon imagine what a quarrel and hatred this begot in the lump of the
Soldiery against the Parliament; but it was best judged by the irreconcilable
malice against them, which they made appear not long after, in those most
insolent and daring affronts, in assaulting, seizing, impeaching, and secluding
them several times in the two years ensuing. From this Military rage and
indignation they were presently put upon an unpractised, and as licentious as
dangerous a design, even to the Authors themselves (as it afterward proved,
though their confident ambition made them venture it) of choosing out two out of
each Company and Troop to be their Adjutators, They choose Adjutatours to draw
up the se^^e of the Army, ^^d assist at their Councils of War. Cromwell a
complete Politician.
and to draw up the sense of the Army, and to assist at the Councils of War,
and advise therein for the Peace and safety of the Kingdom, even to such a
saucy degree of strange freedom, as to give their Vote, and to put in their
spoke to any debate. This highly conciliated them and the whole Army to act
whatever was privately suggested to them by Cromwell, and engaged them alike in
the hazard which by these desperate courses he was resolved to run; counting it
no diminution of his greatness, if by the basest servilities, and wretched
Familiarities, he could attain his Tyranny.

By these ADJUTATORS, or AGITATORS, a Protestation of the Army was drawn and
published, where they declared not to disband nor go for Ireland, The Army
declare not to disband till all their Arrears are paid.
until all their Arrears were paid, and the people restored to those rights for
which they had engaged, and the Kingdom settled, and Peace secured, by an Act of
Indemnity principally for themselves. Which demands being formed into a
Petition (which was pretended to be no more than a Transcript of a another from
several Counties to the General to the same purpose) was delivered to the House
by Colonel Hammond, Colonel Rich, and Colonel Ireton. The Presbyterians now
plainly saw what they must trust to, and therefore put on a good face, and
generously showed their displeasure of this undutiful procedure; and to cry
quits with their Country-cheat, put the County of Essex, and some other
adjacent, to Petition them to pursue their resolutions of disbanding. In the
intrigues of which affair, we will leave them embroyled, and proceed to their
no less perplexed consultation concerning the King.

On the sixth of February the King was delivered, The King and Newcastle turned
over to the English Commissioners, Feb. 6.
and Newcastle at the same time, by the Scots, to the Parliament Commissioners,
whose names were as follows: the Earl of Pembroke, Earl of Denbigh, Lord
Mountague, Sir Walter Earl, Sir John Holland, Sir James Harrington, Sir John
Cook, Mr. Crew, (afterward Lord Crew of Stene) and Major General Brown, and
two Ministers, Mr. Marshal and Mr. Caryl, whom they might well have spared*
Marshal being an Amphibiam or Hermaphrodite of Presbytery and Independency; to
this as a Pensioner, to the other a Chaplain; and was not much unlike
Major General Skippon, who had the same Ianus aspect to the Army and City, to
the last whereof he approved himself a most Treacherous friend, as in all other
the secret practices of the Presbyterians afterward. Caryl was downright
Independent; both of them so inacceptable to the King, that he would by no
means admit either of them to preach before him; which begat such a disgust in
Caryl, that he mightily promoted ever after the Independent slander of the
Kings obstinacy: Marshal lived not long after, being discovered and slighted by
all Parties.

They ki^^ the Kings hand; he is co^veyed to Holdenby, met in the way by the
General, who a^^^^ted and ki^^'d the Kings hands the King commends him for a
truly Noble person.
The Commissioners having kissed his Majesty's hand, acquainted him with their
Order and Instructions to convey him to his house at Holdenby, in
North-hamptonshire; but the King desired New Market, as more convenient, and
nearer to London: but understanding he was not at their disposal, who were tied
up by the Parliament, he acquiesced, and with a sorrowful mind departed,
attended with near 1000 Horse, accompanied by the Commissioners. On the eighth
of February at night he lodged at Durham, next to Aukland, to Richmond, to
Kippon, to Leeds, to Wakefield, to Rotheram, to Mansfield (whereabouts he was
met by the General, who at his approach alighted, and his Majesty gave him his
hand to kiss, and this commendation, That he was a truly Noble person, and had
kept the Articles and Conditions he had so fairly given) to Leicester, and so
to Holmby; being all the way thither gratulated by the people, as if in a
Progress. So far was any part of the Kingdom (and those had been his sharpest
and sorest Enemies) from thinking him the cause of their Troubles, (as he was
afterward most untruly Blasphemed,) that with all joy and gladness imaginable
they would have brought him in with their Peaceful Troops, without more ado, to
his innocent Throne, instead of a Prison; where, upon his arrival, At the Kings
arrival at Holdenby, his friends are forbid to attend him, his Chaplains denied
admittance.
Proclamation was made, That none that had assisted him, or deserted the
Parliament, should presume to come near his person.

This solitude gave him opportunity, though (as he says most elegantly
himself) sad occasion for some of those excellent Meditations in his Eikon
Basil. particularly that of his restraint in this place; which was so much the
more tedious, This solitude the occasion of his writing his excellent
Meditations.
by their barbarous refusal of admitting his Chaplains, or but any two of them,
to minister to him in this distress. He had twice so passionately, and with
such obliging language (that his Christianity passed on his Regality) wooed the
House of Lords to do him that favor, that they could not in pity and Piety
refuse; but the House of Commons peremptorily withstood them, alleging that
those Chaplains would the more indispose him, and avert him from complying with
them as to Religion. This denial grievously troubled the King; but since there
was no persuasion of them, he endeavored to convince their Commissioners, in
whose company he past some hours of his confinement at Bowls and other
exercise; which he in particular affected with Major General Brown, who most
dutifully reconciled himself to the King, protesting his sorrow to have engaged
so far against him, Major General Brown reconciled to the King.
and his resolution to hazard as much for him if there should be occasion. With
this Gentleman and the Earl of Pembroke most an end he diverted the duress of
this recluse life, He ^iverts himself by Bowling with the Earl of Pembroke and
Major General Brown.
showing himself pleasant in the intervals of his studying and devotions; and
when the said Earl fell sick, most kindly visited him: but to all of them he
showed himself so affable and courteous in his converse, so obliging in his
discourse, yet so Majestic and Authoritative in his Argumentation and
State-conferences, that they were all (save Harrington his ungrateful
domestic) merely constrained to acknowledge their error, and to profess a
most willing obedience for the future to his person and Government. Harrington
an ungrateful servant.
Though we shall conclude this year with an indignity done him by their
Masters, who a while before had caused the Great Seal of England, The Great
Seal of England broken.
which the Lord Littleton had carried to Oxford, to be broke in pieces in the
House of Lords; presuming thereby to cancel whatever had passed it since that
time: But it made too deep an impression to be so easily obliterated, as we
shall see in the year 1660.

Anno Dom. 1647.
THus had Providence been pleased to favor the Arms of the Parliament, by
putting all into their hands they had con^ested for: we shall see them putting
all that under their feet, trampling upon the King, his Prerogative, the Laws,
and the Subjects Liberty. The City of London, their great Magazine, from whom
th^^ had exhausted so much treasure, expecting now the replenishing of those
veins, and to see her Exchange filled, straight beheld the whole Trade managed
at Goldsmiths and Habordashers-hall; Mortgages and Purchases of Land, not
Traffic and Returns from Sea, busying and employing the Usurer. Incredible is
the mass of Money extorted from Royalists for Composition: most barbarous and
Italian villainy, to make them swear illegal Oaths, such as the Covenant and
Negative Oath, directly contrary to that of Allegiance: most pertidious and
abominable Treachery, to deny their Articles, and by subornation and Trapans to
justify themselves; and not sufficed with that, to prosecute the innocent
sufferers for their lives also, as in the case of Sir John Stawel, and others,
whom they kept first in long durance, seized all their estates, and lastly
arraigned at their pretended Courts of Justice.

Et quando uberior vitiorum Copia, quando
Major Avaritiae patuit sinus?
A heap of these enormities following thick upon the neck of one another, will
wholly take up the ensuing sheets.

Nostra haec farrago libeli,
Juven. Sat. Prima. This perhaps might be endured by Subjects from their
fellows, from the consideration of precedents of other the like Commotions,
especially from such starveling Statesmen as these; but in prudential manners,
they could not be presumed to be more cruel to their Sovereign. He had waged no
War for the lust of any Favorite, nor exercised any Tyranny over his people,
but had been defended and aided in his just quarrel, by the Noblest and most
considerable of his Subjects; not abandoned like Edward the second, Richard the
second or third; but in the decay and decli^ing of his fortune, more intently
beloved, by how much his virtues in such a fiery probation became more
conspicuous and relucent. But for all this, he is treated by his two Houses as
one of the worst, and most undervalued and slighted of all his predecessors;
they vouchsafe not a thought of him, but what is scared with the jealousy of
public safety, the main thing to be attained: it is sufficient for him, that
he breathes the fresh Air, theirs is indeed too hot and contagious.

While they thus neglect him (we speak still of the Presbyterian party, Cornet
Joyce seizes the King a^ Holdenby, June 4.
who had yet the Major part of the House, and were sure of the Lords to concur
with them) the King, by an Audacious Policy, which puzzled most men what to make
on it, is on the 4 of June late at night seized on by a Guard of 1000 men from
the Army, under one Cornet Joyce a great Adjutator, who being very importunate
to speak with the King, though at such an unseasonable time, was at last
admitted; where he declared his Arrand was to remove his Majesty's person to
the Army, for his and their security. The King told him it was too late for
that night, but in the Morning he would speak with him.

Next morning the King arose early, The King deliberates what to do.
and had conference with the Commissioners, who were highly troubled with the
news; but their Guards were not sufficient to maintain them in the resolution
of keeping him; only General Brown offered to adventure; but 'twas concluded
to no purpose: for 'twas not to be doubted that they who durst attempt so
dangerous a thing, had seconds near at hand to reinforce them; and the House
was so guarded, that there was no hopes neither of his escape: so that the King
went down into the Courtyard, and after some few private words with Joyce,
asked the Soldiers, puts several questions to the Soldiers.
By whose Authority they came thither. They Answered, From the Army. He was
instant, if from Sir Thomas Fairfax his Army? they continued, From the Army.
His Majesty then replied, What if I should refuse to go with you, would you
compel me? They Answered, We hope your Majesty will not refuse; but we have
command to bring you. His Majesty concluded, I have these Questions to put to
you, which if you grant, I will go with you.

He requests them.
First, That he might have no violence offered his person. To which they all
together shouted, and cried, None, None. Secondly, He desired that his Trunks
and Papers might not be rifled and tumbled, (here were parcels of his Eik.
Basil. and some other choice Pieces, as was known since.) They promised to set
a guard upon them, and that they should not be touched. Thirdly, He required
such servants to attend him, against whom there were no just exceptions. They
Answered, He should. And Lastly, desired that nothing might be imposed on him
contrary to his conscience. They Answered, that it was not their judgment to
force any thing against Conscience on any one, much less on his Majesty.
Whereupon his Majesty took horse, His Majesty takes horse, is welcomed at
Childersly by the General, but especially by Cromwell.
and was conveyed by them to the Headquarters at Childersly, where he was
welcomed by the General, but with greater Reverence and expressions of Loyalty
received by Cromwell, who now played his Masterpiece of dissimulation,
professing himself a devoted servant to his Majesty's interest, and that the
strangeness of this action of the Army, proceeded of mere care of his person,
and out of respect to his Authority, which they should equally assert with
their own rights and the Liberty of the Subject, against any persons whatsoever.

His Majesty then propounded that they would conduct him to Mewmarket, the
house he had formerly designed to go to, there to expect what judgment or
resolutions his two Houses would make of his Treasonable enterprise; wherein
though he dealt as warily with Cromwell, as he did fallaciously with his
Majesty, not seeming to look upon it as so heinous a fact as it was, yet he
expected the Parliament, (if they were absolute, and not awed; which by this
means would be experimented) to call the principals and accomplices in it to a
severe account, and therefore reserved himself to Cromwell, till he could thence
judge of it; hoping if the Army were masterless, to make better Terms with
them, than he had yet hopes of from his two Houses; and the Impostor did not
stick to declare as much; which was more manifest and easier of belief, when
all persons that were formerly of his side, The Army suffer the Kings friends
and Chaplai^s to attend him.
without any distinction, were admitted; his Chaplains, suffered to attend him,
and the use of the Liturgy and Common Prayer publicly allowed him.

Upon the Kings first arrival at the Headquarters, the General sent to the
Parliament, giving them an account thereof, but withal clearing himself from
any hand in it, and saying as much for the Council of Officers: And it is very
credible he knew not who it was did it, or by whose direction it was done, but
was informed by his Council of Officers, that now it was done, 'twas very
requisitely and oportunely done; and it being the sense of the Army, he had
done enough in giving them at Westminster (for the Parliament sounded no more
at the Headquarters) an account of Him. But of this presently at large.

Cromwell the chief conspirator in seizing the King.
Most certain it is, that this design was laid solely by Cromwell and Ireton,
and personated by the Agitatours, suspected many of them, and that rationally,
for Jesuits; who were as good at wicked Plots and Contrivances, as either of
those Catilines; but most accomplished for execution, having such Lawless, yet
most powerful Indemnity, not only to protect them, but to shroud their other
Conspiracies for themselves, against this Church and State. It is strange
indeed to consider how many several interests were driven on among the Belials
of this Army, as then, under the appearance of honest and most just ends; the
same pretense whereof served, and was accommodate to each particular
combinating against the Public, as so many lines tending to one Center: with
all which Cromwell wisely temporized, giving secret encouragement to them all,
professing to intend the same things, and to be of the Party, but that for a
while there was a necessity of concealing his resolutions: To this purpose
cares^ing the Papists, upon all addresses or discourses with him; as also
familiarizing himself with the Levellers, Cromwell sets up the Levellers.
as the men indeed that were to do his business, and were right of his
complexion for the spoil of the Kingdom, to be compassed any manner of way, but
by setting up a Government or Laws (for their projected Democracy was but a
more exact method or Rule of Thievery) of all which they most abominated
Monarchy, as the most regular and strict, whose awful Authority could solely
restrain their loose and licentious practices, and keep the mad vulgar within
their bounds from invading all propriety, secured by the ancient Tenure of all
Lands and Inheritances from the Crown, They design to lay all things in common.
and the Laws, which their devilish intention was to abrogate and abolish, and
by a Wild parity lay all things in Common.

But for fuller satisfaction what this Intrigue or design meant, it will be
requisite to consult the King's and the General's, or rather the Armies account
thereof, just as it was done: and first from the Actors, the General and
Council of War.

Sir Thomas Fairfax his Letter.
MAster Speaker, Sir Thomas Fairfax his Leter to the Parliament.
yesterday the King was taken from Holdenby by some Soldiers, who brought him
thence by his consent, the Commissioners going along with Him: That his Majesty
lay that night at Colonel Mountagues, (after Earl of Sandwich,) and would be at
New market next day: That the ground of the removing the King, was from an
apprehension of some strength gathered to force the King from them; whereupon
he sent Colonel Whaley with his Regiment to meet the King and the
Commissioners, and to return them back again; but they refused, and were come
to Sir John Cuts near Cambridge. Professing That this remove was without his
consent, or his Officers about him, or the body of the Army, or without their
desire or Privity, and that he will secure the King's person from danger.
Further assuring the Parliament, that the whole Army endeavors Peace, will not
oppose Presbytery, nor affect Independency, or to hold a licentious freedom in
Religion, or interest in any particular party, but will leave all to the
Parliament.


Tiberius Letters about Sejanus were not half so mystical as these, nor was
there ever so daring, braving an attempt done in the face of the Sun, to the
face and person of a Prince, so covered and concealed under such obscurities
and pretended ignorances, which rendered the impudence of the action more
dangerously fearful, by how much the less it was conjecturable what it
portended; nor could the King himself at present well resolve himself or his
two Houses in this juncture, as we shall see in his acquainting of the
Parliament with it by the Earl of Dunfermling, where he says, contrary to what
Fairfax before, That he was unwillingly taken away by a strong party of Horse:
The Kings Message concerning it.
and desired of the Parliament to maintain the Laws of the Land; and that
though he might sign to many things in this condition, yet he would not have
them believed till further notice given by him to his two Houses.




The King imagined they would make use of his Authority, by forcing his consent
to some Proposals and designs of Government; but they only made a stalking
Horse of his person, keeping his interest, by pretenses of respect to him, on
foot, merely to countenance their own, and outvy and awe the Presbyterian party.

The perplexed thoughts of the Parliament and City about it.
At the news of it in London, both Parliament and City were in such confusion,
and so distracted, that they might well be excused from rightly judging of the
fact; therefore they first bethink of remedy: the Houses order the Committee of
Safety to sit all night, and provide, ne quid detrimenti accipiat respublica;
and dispatch a Messenger to the General, requesting him not to come nearer
London than twenty five miles; for news was brought them they were upon a
speedy March for the City, who at the same time shut up their shops, run to
their Arms, and make a fearful hurry for a while, and then resolve to send
Commissioners likewise, and attend the Issue in peace: in such a maze did this
accident put them.

In the mean while the King is caressed by the Army, and shown in state to the
people, who with great joy every where receive him, and applaud the Army, who
to carry their business the fairer, suffer some of his Majesty's old Friends to
have access to his person, as the Duke of Richmond, The Duke of Richmond, Dr.
Sheldon and Dr. Hammond, suffered to have access to the King.
the two Doctors Sheldon and Hammond, his Chaplains, who Officiated with him in
public, according to the Church of England, and diverse others of lesser note.
At this the Parliament take exceptions, and send again to the General,
expostulating the matter, and desiring him to re-deliver the King to the
Commissioners aforesaid, to be brought to Richmond, and there to be guarded by
Colonel Rossiters Regiment of Horse.

The Army declare.
In Answer to this, the Army declare, and require (after their like manner of
expostulation about the Irish Expedition, and Transporting the Army thither,
that it was against former Declarations of the Parliament, the precedent case
of the Kingdom of Scotland, and the liberty and freedom of the People)

That the Houses may speedily be purged of such as ought not to sit there.

That such who abused the Parliament and Army, and endanger the Kingdom, may
speedily be disabled from doing the like or worse.

That some determinate period of time may be set to this and future
Parliaments, according to the intent of the Bill for Triennial Parliaments.

That provision be made that they be not adjournable and dissolvable by any
power but their own consent during their Respective period, and then to
determine themselves.

That the freedom of the people to present Grievances by Petition to the
Parliament, may be vindicated.

That the exorbitant powers of Country-Committees may be taken away.

That the Kingdom may be satisfied of the Parliaments accounts for the vast
sums received, and in other things where the Kingdom has been abused.

That after Delinquents have passed their Compositions, an Act of Oblivion may
be passed.

Then they proceed to a Charge against ELEVEN Members; which being read to
them, they stood up and made defense. Their names were as follows:

Denzil Hollis, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir William Lewis, Sir John Clotworthy,
Sir William Walter, Sir John Maynard, Colonel Massey, Mr. Glyn, Colonel Long,
Colonel Edward Harley, Anthony Nichols Esquire; all of them active men for
Presbytery, and obnoxious to their future undertakings, and therefore by all
means to be removed.

This was sent up by Colonel Scroop, Okey, Hewson, and Pride,
Lieutenant Colonel Goff, Major Desborough, Colonel Berry, Clark, Carter, Rolph,
Saxby: to which Charge a Paper was added, wherein they set forth, That in
pursuance of these Representations, they have the heads of the Charge ready,
and shall appoint fit persons on their and the Kingdoms behalf to make it good.

That if the Parliament shall admit this Charge, that the persons impeached may
be forthwith suspended from fitting in the House, having appeared notoriously
to the prejudice and provocation of the Army.

That another Months pay be sent down.

That if those who deserted the Army, and have engaged for Ireland, have
received more, that the Army be equally paid, and that such have no more pay
till the Army are paid their Arrears.

That because of secret practices and designs to raise new Forces, and to
bring back to London those ordered for Ireland; That no Forces be raised or
invited back or other Foreign preparations to interrupt the Liberty and Peace
of the Kingdom.

That all this be speedily performed; the condition of the Army, the Kingdom
and the King (mark the order) so requiring.

This concerning no raising of Forces, The Parliament demur to the suspending
of their Members.
etc. was agreed to; but to the suspension of the Eleven Members the Parliament
demur, and answer, That by law no judgment can be given to suspend those
Members, before the particulars of their Charge be produced, and proofs made.
Nor have those Members said or done any thing for which the House can suspend
them. They forbear sitting of themselves.
Nevertheless not to enrage them, the Members forbore of themselves; whereupon
the Army drew off to Berkamstead, twenty seven miles distant, and so to
Vxbridge, having marched the King from Royston to Hatfield, and so to Causam
near Reading.

To this Answer of the Parliament, The Army quote the Cases of the Earl of
Strafford, Arch^B. of Canterbury and Ld. Keeper Finch.
the Army returned, That by the Laws and the precedent case of the Earl of
Strafford, and the Archbishop of Canterbury (observe how that blood is thrown
or flies in ^he faces of the Parliament) and the Lord keeper Finch (who upon
Papers of accusation were suspended sitting) they might not be permitted
likewise; but are contented as yet, because they of themselves have forborne the
House.

From Vxbridge the Army marched to Wickham, in compliance with the desires of
the Parliament.

See here the Villainous Artifices of this Independent faction, to so near an
imitation of Machiavel, that they were neither discoverable nor resistible,
cheating and overpowring the King, The King and Parliament over-aw^d by
Cromwell: his remarkable expression.
the Parliament, the City, nay the whole Kingdom at once: for while all men
stood at gaze what would be the event, they had so obliged opportunity by their
diligent attendance on her, that they were already in fruition of it: for
remarkable is that speech of Cromwell, who, upon notice given him that Joyce had
the Kings person in his possession, replied, Then I have the Parliament in my
pocket; making sure of his full attainment of all his ambitious purposes, by
this auspicious entrance and beginning of them. For he dared now to show his
teeth, and manifest that quarrel with the Presbyterians, which had festred
inwardly so long; and by widening the rupture, give vent to that filthy matter
enclosed betwixt them: All which cannot better be laid open, than the excellent
Pen of the King has done it, in this ensuing Meditation thereupon.

WHat part God will have me now to act or suffer in this new and strange Scene
of affairs, His Majesty's Meditation on the designs of the several factions.
I am not much sollicitous; some little practice will serve that man, who only
seeks to present a part of honesty and honor.

This surprise of me tells the World, That a KING cannot be so low, but he is
considerable; adding weight to that Party where he appears.

This motion, like others of the times, seems excentrick and irregular, yet not
well to be resisted or quieted: Better swim down such a stream, than in vain to
strive against it.

These are but the struglings of those Twins, which lately one womb enclosed,
the younger striving to prevail against the elder: what the Presbyterians have
hunted after, the Independents now seek to catch for themselves.

So impossible is it for Lines to be drawn from the Center, and not to divide
from each other, so much the wider, by how much they go farther from the point
of union.

That the builders of Babel should from division fall to confusion, is no
wonder; but for those that pretend to build Jerusalem, to divide their tongues
and hands, is but an ill omen, and sounds too like the fury of those Zealots,
whose intestine bitterness and divisions were the greatest occasion of the last
fatal destruction of that City.

Well may I change my Keepers and Prison, but not my captive condition; only
with this hope of bettering, that those who are so much professed Patrons for
the Peoples Liberties, cannot be utterly against the Liberty of their King:
what they demand for their own Consciences, they cannot in reason deny to mine.

In this they seem more ingenuous than the Presbyterian Rigor, who, sometimes
complaining of exacting their Conformity to Laws, are become the greatest
Exactors of other men's submission to their novel Injunctions, before they are
stamped with the Authority of Laws, which they cannot well have without my
consent.

It Is a great Argument that the Independents think themselves manumitted from
their Rivals service, in that they carry on a business of such consequence, as
the assuming my person into the Armies custody, without any Commission, but
that of their own will and power. Such as will thus adventure on a King, must
not be thought over-modest or timorous to carry on any design they have a mind
to.

Their next motion menaces and scares both the two Houses and the City; which
soon after acting over again that former part of tumultuary motions, (never
questioned, punished, or repented) must now suffer for both; and see their
former sin, in the glass of the present terrors and distractions.

No man is so blind, as not to see herein the hand of Divine Justice; they
that by Tumults first occasioned the raising of Armies, must now be chastened
by their own Army for new Tumults.

So hardly can men be content with one sin, but add sin to sin, till the latter
punish the former. Such as were content to see me and many Members of both
Houses driven away by the first unsuppressed Tumults, are now forced to fly to
an Army, to defend themselves against them.

But who can unfold the Riddle of some men's justice? the Members of both Houses
who at first withdrew, (as my self was forced to do) from the rudeness of the
Tumults, were counted desertours, and outed of their places in Parliament.

Such as stayed then, and enjoyed the benefit of the Tumults, were all asserted
for the only Parliament Men: now the flyers from, and forsakers of their
places, carry the Parliamentary Power along with them, complain highly against
the Tumults, and vindicate themselves by an Army; such as remained and kept
their stations, are looked upon as Abettours of Tumultuary insolences, and
Betrayers of the freedom and Honor of Parliament.

They will find that Brethren in iniquity are not far from becoming insolent
Enemies, there being nothing harder, than to keep ill men long in one mind,
etc.

The King, as before, desired the free enjoyment of what company exceptionless
he should need, wherein in part he had been gratified (though to avoid offense
the Duke of Richmond had withdrawn himself:) he thought fit therefore by a more
equitable request to desire the company of his Children, His Majesty desires
his Childrens company.
which the Parliament had denied; which the General civilly undertook, in this
Letter.

MASTER SPEAKER,
I Was sent unto by the King on Friday last, Sir Thomas Fairfax his Letter to
the Parliament concerning the Kings desire of seeing his Children.
to desire the Parliament to give him way to see his Children, and that they
might for that purpose be sent unto him. If I may be bold humbly to offer my
opinion. I think the allowance of such a thing may be without the least
prejudice to the Kingdom, and yet gain more upon his Majesty than by denying
it. And if it be in the Prayers of every good man, that his heart may be
gained, the performance of such Civilities to him is very suitable to those
desires, and will bear well with all men* who if they can imagin^ it their own
case, cannot but b^ sorry if his Majesty's natural affection in so small a
thing shall not be complied with, I engaging for their return within what time
the Parliament shall limit. Denies (occasion being taken hereby by some) any
underhand contract or bargain with the King, and assures them of their Fidelity
to them and the Kingdom; nothing being so likely to settle an agreement and
peace, as an accord betwixt them and the Army, which they shall study to
preserve. What is done in reference to a just consideration and settlement of
the Kings Rights (he first giving his Concurrence to secure the Rights of the
Kingdom) is declared in our Remonstrance, since which several Addresses have
been made to him by several Officers, to clear the intentions of such Papers as
the Representation and Remonstrance, whereunto his Majesty might make any
question, but no bargain of advantage for our selves, having thereby utterly
disclaimed any such thing: But the only intent and effect of those Addresses,
has been to desire his Majesty's free Concurrence with the Parliament for
establishing and securing the Common Rights and Liberties, etc. and to assure
him (that being done) that it is fully agreeable to their principles, and that
they should be desirous, that in such settling of the public, the Rights of his
Majesty's Royal Family should be also provided for. And that as we had
declared, so in general, if things came to a settlement, we should not be
wanting in our Sphere, to own that general desire in any particulars of Natural
or Civil Rights to his Majesty's Person or Family, which might not endanger the
public. And in the mean time, that his Majesty shall find all personal
respects and civilities, and all reasonable freedom from us, that might stand
with safety, etc. And f^r that particular of the Duke of Richmond and his two
Chaplains, Doctor Hammond and Doctor Shelden, lately admitted to attend his
Majesty, it was not done without much reluctancie, because we doubted we might
therein be misunderstood by the Kingdoms best friends. But upon his Majesty's
continual importunity, we did allow him such Company, of persons least
dangerous, such as we hoped would not do ill offices, and in whom his former
acquaintance might cause him to take pleasure, being both reasonable and just;
and the debarring of that liberty* especially of his Chaplains, would but make
him the more prejudiced against their Ministers.

In general, we humbly conceive, that to avoid all harshness, and afford all
kind usage to his Majesty's Person, in things consisting with the peace and
safety, etc. is the most Christian, honorable and most prudent way; and we
think that tender, moderate, and equitable dealing both toward his Majesty,
his Royal Family, and late Party (so far (again) as may stand with the safety,
etc.) is the most hopeful course to take away the seeds of War, future feuds
amongst us for Posterity, and to procure a lasting Peace, and settle Religion,
etc. And if God shall make us instrumental thereto, we shall thenceforth
account it our greatest happiness and honor (if God see it good) to be
disengaged from any public employment whatsoever.


This in the name of the Army, or at least most considerable part thereof.

A Letter from the King to the Duke of York enclosed.
In this Letter he likewise enclosed another from the King to the Duke of York,
wherein he ordered him to ask leave of the two Houses, for Him, his Brother,
and Sister, to come and see Him, if but for a Dinnertime; acquainting him,
that if the Parliament should make any scruple for fear lest the Army should
d^^ain them also, that he had assurance from the General and other principal
Officers (such caut^^^ was then necessarily used, for they did what they
pleased without the General that they should freely return according to the
time limited, to ^^eir Gov^rnour the Earl of Northumberland, who then kept them
by a small all^^vanc out of his Majesty's Revenue, at his Manor of St. James.
D^ the media^^^ns o^ the General, who could do more with a (...), The King
enjoy his Children company two days.
than the King by a Proclamation, he had the pleasure, or rather favor done
him to see them at Maidenh^ad, where they dined with their Father, and thence
went with him to Causam, ^ house of my Lord Cravens, where for two days they
were dispensed with in his company and ^hen remitted to their former tuition
and cus^^dy. His Nephew the Prince Elector Palatine visits him.
He was visit^^ also (...) while before, by his Nephew the Prince Elector
Palatine (eldest Brother to the Princes Rupert and Maurice) who had all along
continued from his coming ^ver l^st, in the Parliaments Quarters, allowed by
them a stipend of 8000 ^ per annum, till in 1649. after the murder of his
Uncle, they dismissed him into Holland.

To digr^ss a little to the review of the Generals Letter, but the p^oduct of
Iretons brain, who was Secretary all along to these whidling and ^^^lacious
Paper-Kites; no less than ten Salvo's or Restrictious to the ^^^ttlement of the
King: yea to curry with him, setting forth a necessity of (...) his just
rights, and the equity of their declaring for them; still not (...) the
performance of the least Syllable they wr^^^^r uttered in his behalf. They
desire not to be misunderstood, and it is impossible for any man to understand
them aright, their Language and Actions being so distanced: yet so plausible
and swimmingly they carried it, that no Party was disobliged save the
Presbyterian, with whom upon any sl^nder pretence^, they desired and had
offered to be at open defiance. But their conclusion of this Epistle bewrayed
all, and gave some light to th^se designs in the dark behind, in that they so
voluntarily offered to disband, and to take it for an honor to be dismissed,
(though with a Reserve of a Settlement) when as a more honorable service, and
a most Christian work, of assisting their poor Countrymen in Ireland, was with
so much indignation and mercilesness upbraided and refused by them. But of this
enough.

The Armies design upon the City of London.
The Armies now thinking the King securely confident, turned their designs upon
the City, which seeing they could not separate from the Parliament, and because
the late purge of the 11 Members had not awed them sufficiently; (though they
had patiently enough put it up, considering their insolence to the King, on his
demand of their Five Members) the Country being lulled also by their pretenses,
they by a Remonstrance demand the Militia of London to be put into other hands:
which insolent bravado in^^^gated this Petition to the Right Honorable the
Lord Mayor, etc. of the City of London; being styled, The humble Petition of
the Citizens, Commanders, Soldiers, and Officers, in the Regiments of
Trained-bands, and Auxiliaries, Apprentices, Sea-Commanders, Seamen and
Watermen of the same City.

The Citizens Petition the Lord Mayor in behalf of the King and the Army.
That your Petitioners taking into serious consideration, that their Religion,
his Majesty's Honor and Safety, the Privileges of Parliament, and Liberties
of the Subject, are at present greatly endangered, and like to be destroyed;
and also sadly weighing with our selves what means might likely prove the most
effectual to procure a firm and lasting Peace, without a further effusion of
Christian English-blood: We are therefore entered into a solemn Engagement,
which is hereunto annexed; and do humbly desire, that this whole City may join
together, by all Lawful and possible means, as one man, in hearty endeavors
for his Majesty's present coming up to his two Houses of Parliament, with
Honor, Safety, and Freedom, and that without the approach of the Army; there
to confirm such things as he has granted in his Message of the 12th of May
last [which was his Answer to the Pr^positions from Holdenby, not inserted,
because insignificant to that unreasonableness of the Parliament, being loath to
weary the Reader with the Kings unwearied desir^s after Peace to no purpose] in
Answer to those Propositions of both Kingdoms: And that by a personal Treaty
with his two Houses of Parliament, and the Commissioners of Scotland, such
things as are yet in difference may be speedily settled, and a firm and lasting
Peace established. All which we desire, may be presented to both Houses of
Parliament from this Honorable Assembly.


The Solemn Engagement, The solemn ^n^agement of the City.
so was it called, run thus: Whereas we have entered into a Solemn League and
Covenant for Reformation and Defense of Religion, the Honor and Happiness of
the King, the Privileges of Parliament, etc. All which we do evidently
perceive not only to be endangered* but ready to be destroyed; we do
therefore, in pursuance of our said Covenant, Oath of Allegiance, Oath of every
Freeman, and Protestations, Solemnly engage our selves, and Vow unto Almighty
God, that we will to the utmost of our power ardently endeavor, that his
Majesty may speedily come to his (...) Houses of Parliament, to the end here
specified. For effecting whereof, we do protest, and re-oblige our selves, as
in the presence of God, the searcher of all hearts with our Lives and Fortunes,
to endeavor what in us lies, to preserve and defend his Majesty's Royal person
and Authority, the Privileges, etc. and the Cities of London and Westminst^r,
and Lines of Communication, and all other that shall adhere to us in the said
Engagement. Nor shall we by any means admit suffer, or endure any kind of
Neutrality in this common Cause of God, the King, and Kingd^m, as we do expect
the blessing of God, whose help we crave, and wholly devolve our selves upon,
in this our undertaking.

This was the honestest, and most genuine aspect, as to the fair pretenses of
the Covenant, Presbyter^ ever appeared in; here being some realities of those
many semblances that Party had made before, and showed that there was a sober
misled number, and that for the major part too, who were only
Church-dissenters, hurt only in their opinions, not festered or corrupted in
their affections to the State, the Kings Person and Government. For they
prosecuted this Confederacy so vigorously, (and with all manner of diligence,
openly averring the justice and equity of his Majesty's offers, listing and
encouraging all men to a present undertaking of his quarrel, of which more
particularly by and by) that the Ind^pendents perceiving the sudden dangerous
consequence thereof, they prevailed upon the Houses in a Vote, (which they
wire-drawed by arguments of the indignity and affront, and breaches of
Privilege of Parliament, by such illegal and Tumultuous Combinations) and got
it digested in a Declaration, ^orbidding all subscriptions to the said
Engagement. See it here transcribed.

Saturday 14 July 1647.
The Lords and Commons having seen a printed Paper entitled, A Declaration of
the Lords and Commons, forbidding subscriptions to the Engagement.
A Petition to the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, etc. and the names of
diverse Citizens, etc. together with a dangerous Engagement of the same persons
by Oath and Vow, concerning the Kings present coming to the Parliament, upon
terms far different from those which both Houses, after mature deliberation,
have declared to be necessary for the good and safety of the Kingdom; casting
reflections upon the proceedings both of the Parliament and Army and ^^nding to
embroil the Kingdom in a new War: And the Lords and Commons taking notice of
great endeavors used by diverse ill-affected persons to get subscriptions
thereunto, whereby well-meaning people may be misled; do therefore declare,
That whosoever after publication, or notice hereof, shall proceed with, or
promote, or set his name to, or give consent that his name be set to, or any
way join in the said Engagement, shall be deemed and adjudged guilty of high
Treason, and shall forfeit Life and Estate, as in cases of high Treason
accustomed.

Mark how eagerly they fall upon men, the very same persons, credibly, whom at
first they had put upon the very same course to commence our Confusions* that
is now by their Authority high Treason, which by their Lawless persuasions,
then, was but the Liberty of the Subject, the birthright of English Freemen.
A good caution for the Vulgar, and for such Democraticks also, how they imbibe,
or how they instill such dangerous and lewd suggestions not warranted by Law,
which every unhappy emergency or displeasing event may retort upon their own
heads; as was most apparent in the ensuing Tumults, which the King excellently
observes as a just judgment of God upon the Authors and Actors of the like
violences and insolences against himself in the beginning of our Troubles.

But the City of London were not so scared with this Ordinance, as they thought
they would be; the cause of their discontent not only not ceasing, but being
more exasperated, by a justification of the injuries they were resolved to
redress; they continued their Subscriptions; and while the Army was yet at some
distance, and abundance of cashiered Officers, (the Presbyterian party in
Parliament being some time before surprised in a Vote, whereby all Officers and
Soldiers not of General Fairfax's Army were disbanded from their Commands) and
old Reformado^s of the Earl of Essex's now in the Town, to attempt the
execution of what they had so publicly declared. The rashness and precipetancy
of the City.
A great and fatal oversight, in lying so open to so subtle and cunnig an
Enemy, whom they needed not to have valued, if by equal and considerate
progressions, they had silently advanced their enterprise, not precipitated it
with noise, and presumptuous ostentation. For the City was furnished with men,
both Soldiers and Officers, as expert, daring, and ready for such a piece of
Service, as they could have desired. In some, their recent animosities for
those cheats put upon them by taking away their Commissions, in recompense of
their good service: In others, a true and rectified sense of what they had done
amiss against the King: In others, and the most indifferent, the very
Employment it self, which was sure to be gainful, by the certainty of Pay. But
before they could be formed, or the design digested into that formidable
appearance which the other Faction jealously dreaded, the Plot was spoiled by a
Tumul^uous Rabble, who on the 26 of July, (a Petition being delivered that
morning to the Parliament for the settlement of the Militia, The Pre^tices and
R^^^le Tumult the Parliament House.
as of the 4 of May by that Committee of Citizens) ran down to Westminster, and
forced the House of Commons to comply with their Commands, the Lords having
granted that Petition before.

For on the 26 of July, the Parliament had made an Ordinance whereby the
Militia of London was changed, and put into the hands of a mixed number of
Presbyterians and Independents, but where the latter were most prevalent;
reversing thereby their Ordinance of the fourth of May, which had vested it in
the Lord Mayor, etc. for that year. From disgust of this change, the occasion
of this Riot was taken; first therefore, the Speaker thinking to leave the
Chair, and depart at the noise of their coming, ^a man of a covetous mind, who
being in fear of being questioned for several sums of money purloined from the
Public, and wisely foreseeing the Army would have the better of it, stuck to
that Party (though he had also held intelligence with the King formerly) firmly
for the future) was seized on by them, forced to return to his Chair, and
there, with the like comp^lsion of the rest of the Members, to Unvote that
Ordinance for the change of the Militia, which now stood entrusted in the said
hands before, as if that Ordinance had never been. Next they obtained another
Vote, whereby that Declaration against abetting, carrying on, or subscribing to
the said Engagement, under penalty of high Treason, was annihilated. Yet not
content with this, (which had not done any great mischief, and seemed another
matter, no way relating to the King, whose interest was to be carried on by the
said sp^cious sh^^^s, though honested otherwise than those of the Army, with
whom the counterparts of the said deceits were to be practiced, and their
juggles colluded) a madder crew of the said multitude, just as the House was
risen, and after the Speaker had adjourned it, did constrain them back again,
and both Lords and Commons to Vote this Resolve; That his Majesty shall come to
London forthwith to Treat. ^
To the solicitation and forcing whereof, it was more than suspected, that the
multitude was instigated by the Fanatics, who had mixed and dispersed
themselves among them for that purpose; it being clearly besides the first
intention of that Tumult; which nevertheless yet ceased not, till the Sheriffs
with what force they could get together (the Militia then unsettled, through the
contradicting Order of Parliament) pacified them, and brought the Speaker home
in safety.

The Lords, who had been more ready to this compliance with the City,
especially as to the Militia, it being its custom all along before the said
alteration, to name their Commissioners for the Parliaments approbation; and
because they smelt the Armies design in it, (whose partakers in the House of
Commons said, that otherwise there was no stopping them from coming to London,
which they had hitherto in duty forborne, and greatly magnified as their
respectful observance of the Parliaments Commands) adjourned from the 26, to
the 30 of July, the Commons to the next day the 27. where they sat quietly,
and adjourned to the said time with the Lords. And the next day being
Wednesday, the Monthly Fast, they observed it at their usual Churches of St.
Peter's Abb^y, and St. Margarets Westminster.

On Friday many of both Houses met accordingly, The Parl. (...) Speak^rs.
where of the Commons appeared 140. but the Speaker was missing, The former
Speaker to the Commons m^naced by Cromwell. Both the old Speakers go to the Army.
and the House after some inquiry was informed that he was gone to the Army,
fetched thither it seems by this menace from Cromwell, That if he did not comply
with their designs, he would cause the Army to impeach him, for cozening the
State of many vast sums of money. The Earl of Manchester, Speaker likewise to
the House of Lords, was gone the same way: Both Houses thereupon, without more
hesitation, choose two new Speakers, which were the Lord Gray of Wark for the
Lords, The Lord Gray of Wark ch^^en Speaker to the Lords, Mr. Hen. Pelham
Speaker for the Commons.
and Mr. Henry Pelham for the Commons, who wanted 40 of their number that were
Army-driven; and then proceeded to Vote, and Act as a Parliament.

The first thing they did as such, and as became Englishmen, was to Vote the
readmission of the 11 Members who had subducted themselves; and then they
revived and set up again the Committee of Safety, The Parl. Vote the
readmission of the 11 Membe^s.
by Ordinance of both Houses, enabling them to join with the Committee of the
restored Militia of London; giving them power to List and raise Forces, to
appoint Commanders and Officers, and to Issue forth Arms and Ammunition, The
Committee of Safety set up.
for defense of both Houses and the City, against all that should invade them.

This would clearly have done the business, Tumults in London about listing of
Forces.
had not their openness before, laid the rubs and obstacles in the way, which
so much time of preparation against it had contrived. For while the City was in
a great division by the sticklers of Independency, yet carrying on their
levies, having appointed Major General Massey and Poyntz to Command in chief
the Forces so to be raised, who were listed at Guild Hall; several multitudes
of Fanatics broke in, and disturbed the Court of War, to so great an affront,
that the two Major-Generals were forced to draw their Swords, and wound some of
those Tumultuaries, before they could be quiet; and were scarce returned to
their seats before they had notice of the approach of the Army, who in scorn of
the Parliaments Commands of keeping at 30 miles distance, The Army approach
within 10 miles of London.
were approached to 10, and had appointed a Rendezvous on Hounsloe-heath. This
Alarm begot strange and different passions in the Citizens: the wealthier sort
began to flinch from those resolutions of adhering to their Engagement, to save
their bags; nothing being more vogued among the people, than that the City
would be plundered* as it was given out by some of the Grandees of the Army:
but the Milita^^ ^^en, and those of meaner fortunes, seemed to take courage
from the nearness of the danger, offering to meet it; and if the pusillanimity
of the Court of Aldermen had not hindered, Massey would have given the Army,
then quartering (part of it) on this side Braynford, a salute or Camisado, by
that means to make Rupture wide, and past the cure of a reconciliation.

Nevertheless the defensive part, from their own concerns, they undertook,
guarding the Works and Fortifications round the City, quartering several
reserves in whole Regiments in the fields, more particularly those parts
nearest the Army, out of dread of another Wat Tyler, or Jack Cade with his
Rebel-rout, (a judgment this famous City has been more subject to than any
City in the World, most of which have often suffered by their own intestine
divisions) but were in fine glad to seek Peace, (betrayed at their own doors by
one Hardwick, Colonel of the Southwark Regiment, and who then guarded the Works
on that side, which were opened to Colonel Hewsin;) by their Commissioners
Fouk, Gibs, and Estwick, (acceptable men to the Army, for they durst not for
fear of a dismission re infecta send others) then attending the General at
Hounsloe. The King hears this, and to avoid the Scandal of these Uproars, which
he in prudence did see primarily concern others, though they would right or
wrong be Loaded upon him, emitted this Paper to clear himself from them.

The Kings Declaration clearing himself of any design^ of war.
THere having been many Rumors spread, and Informations given, which may have
induced many to believe, that We intend to make War against Our Parliament; We
profess before God, and declare to all the World, That We always have, and do
abhor all such designs; and desire all our Nobility and Commoners who are here
upon the place, to declare whether they have not been witnesses of as frequent
and earnest Declarations and Professions to this purpose, whether they see any
color of pr^parations and Counsels that might reasonably beget a belief of any
such design, and whether they be not fully persuaded that We have no such
intention, but that all Our endeavors (according to Our many Professions) tend
to the firm and constant Settlement of the true Protestant Religion, the just
Privileges of Parliament, the Liberty of the Subject, the Law, Peace, and
Prosperity of this Kingdom.

He as a Neuter attends the Issue of Divine Providence.
This even course of the Kings, and constancy to himself so well known to the
Army, made them speak less to the Kings prejudice in the altercation about the
privileges of Parliament, of which they now (forsooth) were the main
assertors; so that the King, as he got nothing, lost as little by this brangle
between both Parties, neither of them having whereon to fasten any cavil on the
King in this matter, who without meddling with their differences, further than
his own private descants upon them, awaited the Issue of Divine Providence.

(...) Fugitive Members sit in Council with the Army.
The Army therefore, the better to proceed and countenance their Rebellion, His
Majesty and Parliament being made a mere Cipher, invite and engage the two
Speakers and Fugitive Members, to sit in consultation, and pass Votes
promiscuously with the Council of War in the nature of a Parliament; and to
Sign an Engagement, dated the 4 of August, to live and dye with Sir Thomas
Fairfax and the Parliament and Army, both under his Command; affirming therein,
that generally throughout, their sense agrees with the Declaration of Sir
Thomas Fairfax and his Council of War, The Armies Declaration.
which showed the grounds of their present advance toward the City of London.
In this Declaration the Council of the Army took upon them also to be the
Supreme Judges of the Parliament, discriminating whom of the two Houses they
held for persons in whom the public trust of the King remained, and by whose
advice they meant to govern themselves in managing the weighty affairs of the
Kingdom. They highly resent the late choice of a new Speaker by those Gentlem^n
at Westminster, and say, that as things now stand, there is no free nor legal
Parliament sitting, such being through the violence of the 26 of July
suspended. That the Orders and Votes, etc. passed the 29 of July last, and all
such as shall pass in this Assembly of Lords and Gentlemen at Westminster, are
void and null, and ought not to be submitted unto.

This Remonstrance was the second to a Letter to the Lord Mayor and Court of
Aldermen, upbraiding them with the late Tumult, as Enemies to the Peace of the
Kingdom, Treacherous to the Parliament, and uitable to secure that, or
themselves; and therefore demanding the City to be put into their hands, to
which purpose they were then on their way. And to brave the City to a
surrender, their General sends out Warrants to raise the Trained-Bands of the
near Counties to march with him against the City and both Houses, Fairfax sends
warrants for the Trained-Bands to march against the City.
although such Bands were not under pay of the Parliament, and so not under any
Command of the General by any Order or Ordinance. But armed violence was not to
be stopped with Lawyers niceties. A Bumkin in a Leather-doublet, must be a
Red-coat; by the same rule, that Foxes have Horns.

This brought the City to the expected submission, The City submits, on
dishonorable Conditions.
by which they obtained (and thank you too) these most dishonorable
Conditions: That they should yield to desert the Impeached Members, call in
their Declaration newly published, relinquish their Militia, deliver up all
their Forts and Line of Communication to the Army, together with the Tower of
London, (which they had so clamorously and impudently extorted out of the Kings
disposal) and all the Magazines and Arms therein; disband all their Forces, and
turn all the Reformadoes out of the Line; withdraw ail their guards from the
Parliament, and receive such guards of Horse and Foot within the Line, as the
Army should appoint to guard them; demolish their Works, and suffer the whole
Army to ma^ch through their City: all which were suddenly and dishonourably
yielded to, and insolently executed; the Soldiers marching in Triumph, with
Bays in their Hats, through all the principal streets of the City, boasting of
their civil march as a great courtesy, when there was men enough, if they had
offered to Plunder, to have ^aten them.

This envious disdainful Triumph being over, The Fugitive Members reseated Aug.
6. and the former Speakers placed by the General.
the next work was to reseat the Fugitive Members, whom the General himself
brought to both Houses with a strong party, (the two Palaces filled with
Soldiers, and double Files clean through Westminster Hall up to the stairs of
the House of Common, and so through the Court of Requests to the Lords House;
the Soldiers looking scornfully upon many of these Members (as they were
instructed to know them) that had sat in the absence of the Speakers) and
seated the Speakers respectively in their Chairs, and was by them, in return,
placed in a Chair of State, where they gave him special thanks for his service
to the Parliament; The Parl. appoint a day of Thanksgiving for their
re^settlement.
and likewise appointed, to signalize his desert, a solemn day of Thanksgiving
for the re-settlement of the Parliament, their usual profane and impious
practice of mocking God: to which they now added the abuse of the Creature, at
a Dinner provided for the Parliament and chief Officers of the Army by the
City; The Army feas^ed by the City.
at whose costs they s^r^eited, while the Poor thereof starved through want of
Trade, Sir Thomas Fairfax made Generalissimo and Constable of the Tower.
which decayed sensibly in a short time; no Bullion likewise being afterward
brought to the Mint.

Sir Thomas Fairfax was now likewise constituted Generalissimo (so sudden their
favor, and so great their confidence) of all the Forces and Forts in England,
to dispose of them at his pleasure; The Soldiers ordered a months gratuity.
and Constable of the Tower of London. The Common Soldiers were likewise
ordered a Months gratuity, and the General remitted to his own discretion, for
what Guards he should please to set upon both Houses; in such a servile fear
were those Members that sat in the absence of the Speakers, that they durst
not dissent from any thing propounded by the contrary Faction. The effect of
this was, that the Independents displaced immediately all Governors, though
placed by Ordinance of Parliament, and put in men of their own party, which
they could not so currantly do before; and by virtue of the same, the Militia's
of London, Westminster, and Southwark, from whence was their sole danger, which
were all united before, were now divided, to make them the weaker; the Lines of
Communication dismantled, that the Parliament and City mightly open to any
sudden invasion, that so they might have a perpetual and easy awe upon their
Counsels and actions.

The 11 im^each^d Memb^rs with^ra^.

One of them, viz. Mr. Nichols, s^ized on by Cromwell, and ab^^ed.

Sir Philip Stapleton passes over to Calice, and dies miserabl^.


The Eleven Impeached Members, before mentioned, who had superseded themselves,
and were newly readmitted, (the Army not being able to produce their Charge,
upon pretense of more weighty affairs) now altogether withdrew, and had Passes,
(though some staid in London) some for beyond Sea, and other for their homes;
in the way whither, one of them (Mr. Nichols) was seized on, and basely abused
by Cromwell: another, Sir Philip Stapleton, one who had done them very good
service, passed over to Calice, where falling sick, as suspected, of the
Plauge, he was turned out of the Town, and perished in the way near to
Graveling; whose end was inhumanely commented on by our Mamaluke like Saints,
who inscribed it to the Divine Vengeance.

All Votes, Ord^^s an^ O^^inances passed in the (...) of the Speakers a^togate^.
Having thus Levelled all things before them, they proceed to an abrogation of
all those Votes, Orders, and Ordinances, that had passed in the absence of the
said Speakers. This was first carried in the Lords House without any trouble;
the Peers that sat there that time absenting themselves, so that there was not
more than seven Lords to make up their House. By these an Ordinance was sent to
the Commons for their concurrence, to make all Acts, Orders and Ordinances
passed from the 26 of July to the sixth of August following, when the Members
did return, Void and Null, ab initio. This was five or six days severally and
fully debated, and as often put to the question, and carried in the Negative;
yet the Lords still renewed the same Message to them, being prompted and
instigated by the Army, rejecting their Votes, nor would acquiesce, but put
them to Vote again, contrary to the privilege of the House of Commons; nor
could it pass, for all the threats of the Sollicitour-General Saint John, one
mancipated to the Faction* The Sollicitour-General St. John, Hazelrigg, Sir
Hen. Vane Junior, Tho. Scot, Cornelius Holland, Prideaux, Gourdon, Sir John
Evelin ^unior, and Henry Mildway, all Regicides, and busy contrivers of the
Armies designs.
nor the fury of Hazelrigg, when he used these words -- Some Heads must fly
off, and he feared the Parliament of England would not save the Kingdom of
England, but that they must look another way for safety. To which sense spoke
Sir Henry Vane junior, Thomas Scot, Cornelius Holland, Prideaux, Gourdon, Sir
John Evelin junior, and Henry Mildway, (all Regicides, and Contrivers of it)
until the Speaker perceiving some plain apparent enforcements must be used,
pulled a Letter out of his pocket from the General and General Council of the
Army, (for that was now their stile^) pretending he then received it; which
soon terrified the Members, (either by withdrawing themselves, or sitting mute,
as if they had been Planet-struck) into a compliance; so that the next morning,
August the 20. in a thin House, the Ordinance passed; the procuring thereof
being palpably and notoriously forced and Arbitrary. This Letter to the
Speaker, was received by him overnight, as was conceived, The Ordinance of
Null and Void, passed August 20.
with directions to conceal it, if the Question had passed in the Affirmative:
But that not fadging, it was was produced in the nick, accompanied with a
Remonstrance full of villainous language against those that continued sitting
while the two Speakers were with the Army, calling them pretended Members, and
taxing them in General with Treason, Treachery, and Breach of Trust; declaring,
that if they shall presume to come there, before they have cleared themselves
that they did not give their assents to such and such Votes, they should sit at
their Peril, and he would take them as Prisoners of War, and try them at a
Council of War.

Having thus invalidated or annihilated those Laws, the Lawmakers could not
think to escape untouched: (...) Citizens of London, impeache^ and com^^^t^d.
The impeachment (...) by Sir John Evelin junior and Miles Corbet.
Judgment began with the House of Lords, whose degenerate remnant, upon an
Impeachment (carried up by Sir John Evelin the younger) of High Treason in the
name of the Commons of England, for their levying War against the King,
Parliament, and Kingdom, committed the Earls of Suffolk, Lincoln, and
Middlesex, the Lords Berkley, Willoughby of Parham, Hunsdon, and Maynard, to
the Black Rod. Then diverse of the House of Commons were suspended, as Mr.
Boynton; others committed to the Tower, as Recorder Glyn, and Sir John Maynard:
but the wrath of the Army ^ell principally on the Citizens, the chief of whom
were, viz. the Lod Mayor Sir John Gayre, Alderman Adams, Alderman Langham,
Alderman Bunch, and Sheriff Culham, with others; these without any more ado
than an Impeachment preferred against them by Miles Corbet, one of the
Regicides, and Chairman to the Close-Committee of Examinations to the House of
Lords, were (never being called to any Bar) sent Prisoners to the Tower of
London, where they lay a long time, and could never obtain a Trial; but at last
sued out a precious and precarious liberty: Poyntz and Massey (...) to Holland.
so that by this means the Spirit of Presbytery was quite daunted, and the
Independent Faction absolutely ruled the roast, and were paramount: Poyntz and
Massey fled over to Holland, and so escaped.

Having concluded this Contrast or Feud betwixt them, we will see with what
aspect they regard their Sovereign, upon whom, having worried one another in
this despiteful manner, they fly as freely, as if there had been no such
quarrel.

His Majesty after several removes by direction of the Council of Officers, The
King brought to Hampton- Court: Commissioners sent to him from the Parliament
with Propositions.
was brought to Hampton Court, whither, on the 7 of September, the Houses
having hammered out the same substance of the former Propositions, into a new
but stranger shape, sent Commissioners, to whom were joined some Scots in the
like quality from that Kingdom. The names of both were as follows; the Earls
of Pembroke and Lauderdale, Sir John Holland, Sir Charles Erskin, Sir John
Cook, Sir James Harrington. Major General Brown, Mr. Hugh Kenedy, and Mr.
Robert Berkley. The preface to which Propositions (omitting themselves, as
recited before) was this.

May it please your Majesty, The Preface thereunto.
We the Lords and Commons Assembled in the Parliament of England, in the name
and in the behalf of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and the Commissioners
of the Parliament of Scotland, etc. Do humbly present unto your Majesty the
humble Desires and Propositions for a safe and well-grounded Peace, agreed upon
by the Parliaments of both Kingdoms respectively; unto which we pray your
Majesty's Assent, and that they, and all such Bills as shall be tendered to your
Majesty in pursuance of them, or of any of them, may be Established and Enacted
for Statutes, and Acts of Parliament, by your Majesty's Royal Assent, in the
Parliaments of both Kingdoms respectively. -- And never a good word after.


To these, his Majesty, being accustomed to the unreasonableness of the men, in
two days returns this Answer.

For the SPEAKER of the House of Lords, etc.
C. R.

HIs Majesty cannot choose but be passionately sensible (as he believes all his
good Subjects are) of the late great distractions, His Majesty's Answer to
them, Sept. 9.
and still languishing, and unsettled state of this Kingdom: And he calls God to
witness, and is willing to give Testimony to all the World, of his readiness to
contribute his utmost endeavors, for restoring it to a happy and flourishing
condition.

His Majesty having perused the Propositions now brought to him, finds them the
same in effect which were offered to him at Newcastle: Those Prop^si^ti^^s
(...) with (...) a Newcastle.
To some of which, as he could not then consent, without violation of his
Honor and Conscience, so neither can he agree to others now concerning them,
in many respects more disagreeable to the present condition of his Majesty,
than when they were formerly presented to him, as being destructive to the main
principal interests of the Army, and of all those whose affections concur with
them. And his Majesty having seen the Proposals of the Army, to the
Commi^sioners from his two Houses residing with them, therewith then to be
Treated on, in order to the clearing and securing the Rights and Liberties of
the Kingdom, and the settling of a just and lasting Peace, to which Proposals,
as he conceives his two Houses are not strangers, so he believes they will
think with him, that they much more conduce to the satisfaction of all
interests; and may be a fitter Foundation for a lasting Peace, than the
Propositions which at this time are tendered unto him: He therefore Propounds
(as the best way in his judgment in order to Peace,) that his two Houses would
instantly take into consideration those Proposals, upon which there may be a
personal Treaty with his Majesty, and upon such other Propositions as his
Majesty shall make; hoping that the said Proposals may be so moderated in the
said Treaty, as to render them the more capable of his Majesty's fu^l
Concession; wherein he resolves to give full satisfaction unto his People, for
whatsoever shall concern the settling of the Protestant Profession, with
Liberty to tender Consciences, and the securing of the Laws, Liberties, and
Properties of all his Subjects, and the just Privileges of Parliament for the
future. And likewise by his present Deportment in this Treaty, He will make the
world clearly judge of his intentions in matter of future Government. In which
Treaty his Majesty will be well pleased, if it be thought ^it, that
Commissioners from the Army (whose the Proposals are) may likewise be admitted.

His Majesty therefore conjures his two Houses of Parliament, by the Duty they
owe to God, and his Majesty their King, and by the Bowels of compassion they
have to their Fellow Subjects, both for the relief of their present sufferings,
and to prevent future miseries; That they will forthwith accept of this his
Majesty's offer, that hereby the joyful news of Peace may be restered to this
distressed Kingdom. And for what concerns the Kingdom of Scotland mentioned in
the Propositions, his Majesty will very willingly Treat upon those particulars
with the Scotch Commissioners, and doubts not but to give reasonable
satisfaction to that his Kingdom.


His Majesty (...) the Army Proposa^.
The Kings h^rping upon those Proposals of the Army, (acknowledging a greater
equity, and just mensuration, and comprehensiveness of them, and that they did
much more conduce to the satisfaction of all interests, and were a fitter
foundation for a lasting Peace than the Propositions) seemed very pleasing to
Cromwell, Cromwell i^g^gl^s with his Majesty.
who complemented the King with the Armies glad sense of his preferring their
ways and method to Peace before the Parliament's, which would no doubt credit
them likewise to the People; not sticking to upbraid the Members with their
disloyal and peevish carriage toward the King, and yet secretly He enraged the
Vulgar against him. The Traitor yet knew that the King did but show them Art
for Art, for that it was impossible to produce any thing out of that Chaos of
their Proposals, without a Divine Fiat; which being made to serve only as a
temporary shift, a bone of contention, could not beyond the purpose of the
Contrivers be durable: it will be requisite therefore to take a short view of
them, that posterity may see what curious Legislators these Soldiers were, and
how well capacitated for Government. -- Bless us from the Goblin, this idaea of
STRATOCRACY.

The first principle is the dissolution of the Parliament, A abstract of the
Armies Proposals.
[a preposterous beginning, where Nature ends; but yet not intended by them
till they had served their own ends, lust, and ambition, from whence these
structures.] 1. That there be Biennial Parliaments, and at more certainty than
these. 2. Each Biennial Parliament to sit 120 days certain, afterward
adjournable or dissolvable by the King. 3. This Biennial Parliament to appoint
Committees to continue during the interval, for such purposes before mentioned
in the Proposals. 4. That the King, upon the advice of the Council of State, in
the Intervals call a Parliament extraordinary, with limitation of meeting and
dissolving, that the course of the Biennial one may never be interrupted. 5.
That a better rule of proportion may be observed in Electing, all Coun^ies to
have a number of Parliament-Members competent to their charges as they are
rated to the public; that no poor Boroughs have any more Elections; and that
an addition of Members may be allowed great Counties, that have now less than
their due proportion; and that effectual provision be made for the freedom of
such Elections. 6. That the Parliament only have Power to direct further, as
to Parliaments: and for those two ends expressed before, their Orders there to
pass for Laws. 7. That there be a Liberty for Entering Dissents in the House of
Commons; and no man further censurable for what he shall say in the House,
exclusion by, etc. from that Trust, and that by the House it self. 8. That the
Judicial Power in the Lords and Commons without further Appeal may be cleared.
The King not to be capable to forgive persons adjudged by them, without their
consent. 9. That the Peers have no Jurisdiction against the Commons, without
the concurring Judgment of the House of Commons, as also may be vindicated from
any other Judgment, etc. than that of their equals. 10. That Grand Iury-men be
chosen by several parts or divisions of each County respectively, not left to
the discretion of any Undersheriff; which Grand Iury-men at each Assize, shall
present the names of persons to be made Justices of the Peace, and at the
Summer-Assizes the names of three, out of which the King may prick one for
Sheriff.

Secondly, [being another principle,] For the future security to Parliaments,
and the Militia in general, in order thereunto, That it be provided by Act of
Parliament, 1. That the power of the Militia by Land and Sea* during the space
of ten years, shall be disposed by the Lords and Commons Assembled in
Parliament, or persons they shall nominate. 2. That it shall not be exercised
by the King, nor any from him, during the said space, nor afterward, but by
advice of the Parliament, or Council of State, or such Committees in the
Interval. 3. That the said Lords and Commons, etc. raise and dispose of Money
for the Forces thought necessary, and for payment of public debts, and uses of
the Kingdom. 4. That these ten years security may be the firmer, It be
provided, That none that have been in hostility against the Parliament in the
late War, shall be capable of any Office or Trust for five years without
consent of Parliament; nor to sit as Members thereof, till the second Biennial
Parliament be past.

Thirdly, For the ordering of the peace and safety of this Kingdom and Ireland.
1. That there be Commissioners for the Admiralty, an Admiral and Vice Admiral
now agree on, with power to execute amply the said Offices, and pay provided
for the service. 2. That there be a Lord-General for the Forces that are to be
in pay. 3. That there be Commissioners for the standing Militia in every County
(consisting of Trained Bands and Auxiliaries not in pay) to discipline them. 4.
A Council of State to surperintend the powers given those Commissioners. 5.
That the said Council have the same power with the Kings Privy Council, but not
make War or Peace without consent of Parliament. 6. That that Council consist
of trusty and able persons, to continue si been se gesserint, but not above
seven years. 7. That a sufficient Establishment be provided for the pay of the
standing Forces; [Money enough be sure, this they intended for a Law no doubt,
and might have been put first, the other being merely sub^^rvient to it.]
the Establishment to continue till two months after the meeting of the first
Biennial Parliament, or Saint Tibs Eve.

Fourthly, That an Act be passed for disposing the great Offices for ten years
by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, and by the Committees in the Intervals,
with submission to the approbation of the next Parliament; and after that time*
they to name three, and the King out of them to appoint one for the succession
upon a vacancie.

Fifthly, For disabling the Peers (made by the King since the Great Seal was
carried away May 21. 1642.) to sit and Vote in Parliament.

Sixthly, An Act to make void all the Acts, Declarations, etc. against the
Parliament and their Adherents; and that the Ordinances for Indemnity be
confirmed.

Seventhly, An Act to make void all Grants passed under the said Seal since May
1642. and to confirm and make those valid that passed under the Great Seal made
by Authority of Parliament.

Eighthly, An Act for Confirmation of Treaties between England and Scotland,
and constituting Conservators of the Peace between them.

Ninthly, That the Ordinance for taking away the Court of Wards and Liveries be
confirmed by Act; but the Kings Revenue made up another way, and the Officers
thereof to have reparation.

Tenthly, An Act declaring void the Cessation of Ireland, leaving that War to
the prosecution of the Parliament.

Eleventhly, An Act to take away all Coercive Power, Authority, and
Jurisdiction of Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical Officers whatsoever,
extending to civil Penalties upon any; and to repeal all Laws whereby the Civil
Magistracy has been or is bound upon any Ecclesiastical Censure, to proceed
ex O^^icio unto any Civil Penalties against any persons so censured. [Mark,
here is not a word of abolishing Episcopacy, or confirming the sale of their
Lands, in which they knew the Presbyterians were entangled; but the King
extremely gratified, who abominated Sacrilege, and so was the likelier never
to comply with the Parliament, (who made it one of their principal demands)
which Cromwell designed.]

They indulge the King in not abrogating the Common Prayer, and claw with the
Papist.
Twelfthly, That there be a repeal of penal Acts or Clauses enjoining the
Common Prayer, and imposing Penalties for not coming to Church; some provision
to be made for discovering of Recusancie.

Thirteenthly, That the taking of the Covenant be not enforced upon any, etc.
but that all Ordinances enjoining that be repealed.

Life to the Royalist, and death to the Presbyter.
Fourteenthly, That the things before proposed being provided for, his
Majesty, his Queen and Royal Issue, may be restored to a condition of Safety,
Honor, and Freedom in this Nation, without diminution to their personal
Rights, or further limitation to the exercise of their Power than according to
the particulars aforegoing. The rarest Article in the Pack.


Fifteenthly, For the matter of Compositions. 1. That a less number out of the
persons excepted in the two first qualifications, Diverse pretenses in favor of
the Cavaliers. Cromwell designs to please all Parties, by Proposing to regulate
the Law and Assesstments; Asserting the people^ rights in Pe^^^ioning; ag^^^st
Forrest-Lands, Excise, Monopolies, etc.
(not exceeding five for the English) being nominated particularly by the
Parliament, besides the Irish Rebels, may be reserved to the Judgment of the
Parliament, etc. [And many more good morrows in favorable restrictions of the
Parliament's severity to poor Cavaliers, whom they reserved for their more
ravenous jaws; thinking by these wiles, first to betray, and then devour them:
and therefore now the Tiger is become a mediator to the Wolf, to spare the
innocent sheep that is encompassed between them.] The rest of this batch was for
particular redresses of the Law, and abuses of the Lawyers; concerning
Imprisonments for Debts, Regulating Assessements, and remedies against the
contentious Suits of Tithes; for asserting the peoples right in Petitioning;
against Forrest-Lands; and almost all particular grievances, especially the
Excise and Monopolies; against Corporation-Oaths, as grievous to tender
Consciences, being too long to enumerate. The drift of all being to please all
sorts of people, one or other hitting the humor of every man; but chiefly
gratifying the Fanatics, and miserable Vulgar, who were to be deluded, and
then used as a bridge to their own slavery. The conclusion of them, was to tie
the hands of the Militia of the Trained-Bands, by regulating the Commissioners
and Officers, from their former Arbitrariness, that so the Soldiers might be
under no Command, and unable to offend them: To which was subjoyned a demand of
their Arrears to the utmost penny, and the public Faith to be satisfied and
relieved. [And then they have more particulars to offer; if any body that knew
their juggling should take them now at their word, which they would rather eat
their Swords than perform.]

Signed by the appointment of his Excellency Sir Tho. Fairfax, and the Council
of War. Ioh. Rushworth, Secretary.

This Hodgpodg or Alchoran, containing Jewish, Turkish, and some Christian
sentences; some of the Parliaments, and some of their own, and some of the
Kings Condescentions too, were far more tolerable than those Heathenish and
Pagan Institutes of the Parliaments, sent to the King in the name of
Propositions: which He having declined, did hope to effect his and his Kingdoms
Peace and restitution at easier terms from the Army; and therefore was instant
with Cromwell and other Grandees of the Army, Cromwell and other Grandees of the
Army, frequently with the King.
who were evermore at his Elbow, to appoint Commissioners to Treat with him of
those Proposals: His Majesty not doubting, but so to temper them, as to come to
a right understanding; which if it should happen, it would be the Glory and
Honor of the Army, that they had laid such a platform and expedient, for the
good, quiet, Peace and happiness of their King and Country.

But Cromwell began to turn a deaf ear to those Charms, Cromwell hasfleth with
the King, and is discovered.
to ^alter in his Addresses to the King, to be full of uncertainties and
scruples; and at last, to tell his Majesty that He did not rightly understand
them, and so interpret their words otherwise than they were spoken, and that
they had forgotten they had promised him any such things. He excused himself at
another time, for not performing of their Engagements, from a reverence to the
Parliament, whom as yet they durst not so openly oppose, as to take up his
Quarrel. And lastly, as the main artifice, he acquaints Him with the boldness
and malice of the Agitators and Levellers, who Conspired his Murth^r; and that
for the present he could not mitigate their violent and wicked Counsels; but
when the Discipline of the Army should be recovered, he would make good what he
had undertook to perform. And so from time to time courted the King, till the
Plot, which he might well forespeak, was ready for execution; of which by and
by.

The King was kept at Hampton Court in very great State, The King still kept at
Hampton- Court, with the public use of Common Prayer, in great State, his
friends and Chaplains about him.
as usually in times of Peace, his Chaplains and Friends about him, all people
permitted to see him, Liberty of Hunting with the Duke of Richmond, and others
of the Loyal Nobility allowed him together; so that great was the concourse
thither; and most men that judged by the outside and fine appearance of things,
concluded all things would do well, and that the Army would prove honest and
Loyal. Others contrarily thought that the Army had some design in this pompous
and open Treatment of the King, who thereby imagining himself in his Regality
and proper Orb, would keep and maintain the greater distance from the bold
approaches of the Parliament upon his Sovereignty; as all men in prosperity are
naturally more elated, more jealous of affronts, and less ductile, than in an
adverse condition. These came nearest the Mark, and yet the Kings constancy to
himself not disputed; nothing being able to make him recede from those his two
great principles of Honor and Conscience; which yet may admit of a magis and
minus in the accidental and circumstantial defense of them, sometimes more
magnanimously, and sometimes more warily.

This concourse to the King, which showed the love the people, especially the
Citizens of London, The Faction and Cromwell suspect and fear ^he Kings neerness
to London.
bare him, began to be no way pleasing to the Faction, less to Cromwell and his
party, who feared a surprise of his person out of his hands to London, and then
his designs and wits were at an end. He resolved therefore speedily to be rid
of that fear: and though he had deliberated whether it were more conducing to
his purpose to assassinate the King there, and invade the Government by a
sudden and impetuous violence, when all men should have been in a consternation
at the atrocity of the Fact, and would save all those tedious arts to be
practiced in a solemn way of Regicide; yet more slower Counsels prevailed, the
image and fright of Death should serve turn at present. To this purpose,
Colonel Whaley is ordered to tell the King, Colonel Whaley pretends to the King
that the Adjutators design to Murder him.
that the Adjutators were grown to that height of violence, as that they had
combined to Murder Him; and therefore as his duty was, besides his particular
affection for his Majesty, he could not but acquaint him, desiring him to
consult for his own Safety; it being also (as he said) the advice of the chief
of the Army, who were loath he should be Murdered while they helplesly looked
on.

They fright the King from Hampton- Court: who by the advice of Sir John
Berkley and Mr. John Ashburnham escapes to the Isle of Wight. Colonel Hammond
Governor thereof.
The design of this parricide had purposely been muttered up and down the
Court, and so came to the ear of the Kings Friends, by whom he was near the
same time acquainted with it. The King therefore called to him Sir John Berkley
and Mr. John Ashburnham then attending him, and advised with them concerning
his Escape, where between them they unfortunately, and upon deceitful grounds,
concluded to fly to the Isle of Wight, the Government whereof was newly
conf^rred upon Colonel Hammond, (Brother to that Reverend Doctor Henry Hamond,
the Kings beloved Chaplain) whom the crafty Traitor did forecast, the King in
such a perplexity would choose to trust, from that Relation. Horses being
therefore laid ready on the other side of the Water, the King leaves his
Chamber November the 11. (in a very dark and tempestuous night) with his Cloak
spread in the floor thereof, and by the back-stayrs descends to the Vault, and
so ever the Thames to his Company, who were the same of his Counsel; and by
Farnham (after much tedious straying in the night out of the way in that bad
weather) came to the Seaside near Southampton, where missing of a passage, the
Boat ^ailing the prefixed time, he was conveyed to the Countess Dowager of
Southampton at Tedworth, (...) Dowagers of Southhampton.
where he lay that night, while Sir John Berkley and Colonel Ashburnham passed
over to the Isle of Wight to the said Governor, concerning the entertainment
of him: where we rest this relation* and return to Hampton Court.

Nov. 11. The King is misled. Whaley takes ^he Kings ^apers left behind him in
his Chamber.
About 9 a clock at night the King was missed, but no doubt to the little
wonder, less trouble of his Guardians; for the Centries had been on purpose
drawn off, to give him free passage: and it had been discoursed in the Army
some while before, that He would ere long be in the Isle of Wight. No more ado
therefore was made of it, but only a Letter with a bare account of his flight
sent to the Parliament, and the watchful Guard remanded to the body of the
Army; Whaley having first taken up the Papers which the King had left, the
contents of which are as follow; the first superscribed, To the Lord Mountague
of Boughton.
MOUNTAGUE,
The First directed to the Lord Mountague.
FIrst, I do hereby give you and the rest of your fellows thanks, for the
civilities and good conversations that I have had from you. Next, I command you
to send this my Message, which you will find on the Table, to the two Houses
of Parliament; and likewise to give a Copy of it to Colonel Whaley, to be sent
to the General. Likewise I desire you to send all my Saddle-Horses to the Duke
of York. For what concerns the resolution that I have taken, my Declaratory
Message says so much, that I refer you to it; and so I rest

Your Assured Friend, C. R.


The second to Colonel Whaley.
Col. WHALEY,
I Have been so civilly used by you and Major Huntington, The second to Colonel
Whaley.
that I cannot but by this parting farewell acknowledge it under my Hand, as
also to desire the continuance of your Courtesy, by the protecting of my
Houshould-stuff and Movables of all sorts which I leave behind me in this
House, that they be neither spoiled nor Imbez'led. Only there are here three
Pictures which are not mine, that I desire you to restore; to wit, my Wives
Picture in Blew sitting in a Chair, you must send to Mrs. Kirk; my Eldest
Daughters Picture Copied by Belcan, to the Countess of Anglesey; and my Lady
Stanhop's Picture, to Carry Raleigh. There is a Fourth, which I had almost
forgot, it is the Original of my Eldest Daughter, it hangs in this Chamber over
the board next the Chimney, which you must send to my Lady Aubigney.

So being confident that you wish my Preservation and Restitution, I rest

Your Friend, C. R.


CHARLES REX.

I assure you it was not the Letter you showed me yesterday that made me to
take this resolution, nor any Advertisement of that kind. But I confess, that I
am loath to be made a close Prisoner, under pretense of securing my life.

I had almost forgot to desire you to send the Black Grew Bitch to the Duke of
Richmond.


The third was the Message to both Houses.
CHARLES REX.

LIberty being that which in all times has been, His Majesty's Message left
behind Him at Hampton Court to both Houses of Parliament.
but especially now is, the common Theme and desire of all men; common Reason
shows, that Kings less than any should endure Captivity. And yet I call God and
the World to Witness, with what patience I have endured a tedious Restraint,
which so long as I had any hopes that this sort of my suffering might conduce
to the Peace of my Kingdoms, or the hindering of more effusion of Blood, I did
willingly undergo: But now finding by too certain proofs, that my continued
patience would not only turn to my Personal ruin, but likewise be of much more
prejudice than furtherance to the Public good; I thought I was bound as well
by Natural as Political Obligations to seek my safety, by retiring my self for
some time from the public view both of my Friends and Enemies. And I appeal to
all indifferent men to judge, if I have not just cause to free My self from the
hands of those who change their Principles with their Condition, and who are
not ashamed openly to intend the destruction of the Nobility by taking away
their Negative Voice, and with whom the Levellers Doctrine is rather
countenanced than punished. And as for their intentions to My Person, their
changing and putting more strict Guards upon Me, with the discharging most of
all those Servants of Mine, who formerly they willingly admitted to wait upon
Me, does sufficiently declare. Nor would I have this My Retirement
misinterpreted: for I shall earnestly and uncessantly endeavor the settling of
a safe and well-grounded Peace wherever I am, or shall be, and that (as much as
may be) without the effusion of Christian Blood. For which, how many times have
I desired, pressed to be heard, and no ear given me? And can any reasonable man
think, that (according to the ordinary course of affairs) there can be a
settled Peace without it, or that God will bless those who refuse to hear their
King? Surely no! nay, I must further add, that (besides what concerns My self)
unless all other chief Interests have not only a hearing, but likewise just
satisfaction given unto them, (to wit, the Presbyterians, Independents, Army,
those who have adhered to Me, and even the Scots) I say there cannot (I speak
not of miracles, it being in My opinion a sinful presumption in such cases to
expect or trust to them) be a safe or lasting Peace. Now as I cannot deny, but
My Personal security is the urgent cause of this My Retirement, so I take God
to Witness, that the Public Peace is no less before My eyes: and I can find
no better way to express this My Profession, (I know not what a wiser man may
do) than by desiring and urging that all chief Interests may be heard, to the
end each may have just satisfaction. As for example, The Army (for the rest,
though necessary, yet I suppose not difficult to content) ought (in My
judgment) to enjoy the Liberty of their Consciences, have an Act of Oblivion or
Indemnity, (which should extend to all the rest of My loving Subjects) and
that all their Arrears should be speedily and duly paid; which I will
undertake to do, so I may be heard, and that I be not hindered from using such
lawful and honest means as I shall choose. To conclude, Let Me be heard with
Freedom, Honor, and Safety, and I shall instantly break through this Cloud of
Retirement, and show My self to be Pater Patriae.




From the hazard of a feigned attempt to be made on His person, behold the
Majesty of so excellent a Prince really enda^gered, and in the very pit of
destruction which his Enemies had dug for him. For upon notice given to
Hamond by the said Attendants, of the Kings Adventure, which they would have to
be valued at no less than His Liberty; He presently replied, that for security
of Him from danger he would undertake, but His Liberty and that were
inconsistent, nor could be answer it to his Superiors the Army and Parliament;
whereupon since they perceived the necessity of yielding to these terms, they
Boated over with him, accompanied by one Captain Basket to the place where the
King was, The King seized by Col. Hamond in the Isle of Wight, and conveyed to
Carlsbrook- Castle, Nove. 14.

The Parl. make it High Treason for any to conceal the King. They command Col.
Hamond to send the Kings attendants up to London, he refuses.

The King pleads in their behalf.


who delivered Himself into their hand, and was presently conveyed over to the
Castle of Carisbrooke in the said Island.

In the interim the Parliament had made it High Treason for any man to conceal
His person, and with Spies and Guards laid every place to intercept Him: but
being soon informed by Hamond that He was in his custody, they derived their
fury upon those Gentlemen that accompanied Him, commanding Hamond to send them
up to London to be proceeded against; which he refused; pretending first, the
just offense thereby given the King, in removing His only Friends and
Familiars: then, his Honor engaged, as he said, for their indemnity; and
declaring, that what they had done therein, was out of a desire of the Peace of
the Kingdom: whereas the meaning was, that their safety and protection was
obliged partly to that unwitting service they had done the Faction, who were
(honorably) pleased to shield those, who had skreened them from the odium of
that unfortunate and pernicious Escape; and partly to the King, who interposed
himself in the matter, declaring, If those Gentlemen were taken and punished as
evil doers, for Counseling Him not to go out of the Kingdom, but rather to come
to the place where he now is, for the ends aforesaid, and for their endeavors
in attending Him thither, He cannot but expect to be dealt with accordingly,
His Case being the same.

The next consideration of this affair by the Parliament was a result of five
Votes, The Parliament vote that no Cavalier or Papists be admitted into the
Island.

The Genesis has the command of his person.

The King allowed 5000 l. for the ^xpences of his Court.


which forbad any Cavaliers or Papists to be admitted in the Island, and left
the guard of his Person and the nomination of Officers to attend Him to the
General, and allowed 5000 l. for the expenses of his Court; the last of which
Hamond quarrelled at, as an incompetent pittance, but it is questionable whether
he meant not for himself; and no doubt he was better paid for his service. He
also required more aid, that (forsooth) he might be as good as his word, in
keeping the King in security and out of danger, who having passed -- (Per
varios casus per tot discrimina rerum, -- ad Latium tendit,) so many perils and
discouragements, gave not yet over his endeavors after Peace, but with a just
resolution of not being denied this time, when he now granted almost the whole
controversy, He wooes them in this Message from His Prison at Carisbrook,
(where He had only the liberty of the Walls under a Guard:) It indeed
comprehends and clears all the differences between the King and Parliament.

CHARLES REX.

HIs Majesty is confident that before this time His two Houses of Parliament
have received the Message which he left behind Him at Hampton Court the 11th
of November, The Kings Message to the Parliament from his inprisonment in
Carisbrook-Castle.
by which they will have understood the reasons which enforced Him to go from
thence, as likewise his constant endeavors for the settling of a safe and
well-grounded Peace wheresoever he should be. And being now in a place where he
conceives himself to be at much more freedom and security than formerly, He
thinks it necessary (not only for making good his own Professions, but also for
the speedy procuring of a Peace in these languishing and distressed Kingdoms)
at this time to offer such grounds to His two Houses for that effect, He
professes as he is a Christian and a King to defend the Government of the
Church, by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. Their Order being placed in the Church
by the Apostles.
which upon due examination of all Interests may best conduce thereunto.

And because Religion is the best and chiefest Foundation of Peace, His Majesty
will begin with that particular. -- That for the abolishing Archbishops,
Bishops, etc. His Majesty clearly professes, that he cannot give his consent
thereunto, both in relation as he is a Christian and a King. For the first, he
avows that he is satisfied in his judgment, that this Order was placed in the
Church by the Apostles themselves, and ever since that time has continued in
all Christian Churches throughout the World, until this last Century of years;
and in this Church in all times of Change and Reformation it has been upheld
by the wisdom of His Ancestors, as the great preserver of Doctrine, Discipline,
and Order in the Service of God. As a King, at his Coronation He has not only
taken a Solemn Oath to maintain this Order, And he and His Predecessors having
Sworn to maintain it.
but His Majesty and His Predecessors in their Confirmation of the Great
Charter, have inseparably woven the Rights of the Church into the Liberties of
the rest of their Subjects. And yet he is willing it be provided, that the
particular Bishops perform the several Duties of their Callings, both by their
Personal residence, B^t agrees that their Power may be so limited as not to be
grievous to tender Consciences.
and frequent Preaching in their Dioceses, as also that they Exercise no Act of
Jurisdiction or Ordination, without the consent of their Presbyters; and will
consent that their Powers in all things be so Limited, that they be not
grievous to Tender Consciences.

Wherefore since His Majesty is willing to give ease to the Consciences of
others, He sees no reason why he alone, and those of his Judgment, should be
pressed to a Violation of theirs. Nor can His Majesty Consent to the Alienation
of Church Lands, because it cannot be denied to be a sin of the Highest
Sacrilege, as also that it subverts the intentions of so many Pious Donors,
who have laid a heavy Curse upon all such profane Violations, which His
Majesty is very unwilling to undergo: And besides the matter of Conscience, His
Majesty believes it to be a prejudice to the Public Good; many of His Subjects
having the benefit of renewing Leases at much easier rates than if those
Possessions were in the hands of Private men: Not omitting the discouragement
which it will be to all Learning and Industry, when such eminent rewards shall
be taken away, which now lie open to the Children of the meanest persons. Yet
His Majesty considering the present great distempers concerning
Church Discipline, and that the Presbyterian Government is now in practice, His
Majesty, to eschew Confusion as much as may be, and for the satisfaction of His
two Houses, is content that the said Government be Legally permitted to stand
in the same condition it now is for three years: provided, that His Majesty and
those of his Judgment, (or any other who cannot in Conscience submit
thereunto) be not obliged to comply with the Presbyterian Government, but have
free Practice of their own Profession, without receiving any prejudice thereby:
and that a free Consultation and Debate be had with the Divines at Westminster
(twenty of his Majesty's nomination being added unto them) whereby it may be
determined by his Majesty and the two Houses, how the Church Government after
the said time shall be settled, (or sooner, if differences be agreed) as is most
agreeable to the Word of God; with full Liberty to all those who shall differ
upon Conscientious Grounds from that Settlement. Always provided, that nothing
aforesaid may be understood to tolerate those of the Popish Profession, nor the
exempting of any Popish Recusant from the penalties of the Laws, or to tolerate
the public profession of Atheism or Blasphemy, contrary to the Doctrine of the
Apostles, Nicene, and Athanasian Creeds, they having been received by, and had
in reverence of, all the Christian Churches, and more particularly by us of
England ever since the Reformation.

Next, the Militia being that right which is inseparably and undoubtedly
Inherent in the Crown, by the Laws of this Nation, and that which former
Parliaments, as likewise this, has acknowledged to be so; His Majesty cannot
so much wrong that Trust which the Laws of God and the Land has annexed to the
Crown for the protection and security of his people, as to Divest himself and
His Successors of the Power of the Sword: Yet to give an infallible evidence of
His desire to secure the performance of such Agreements as shall be made in
order to Peace, The King cons^nts that the power of the Militia both by Land
and Sea shall be ordered by the Parliament during his Reign.
his Majesty will consent to an Act of Parliament, that the whole Power of the
Militia both by Land and Sea, for and during his whole Reign, shall be ordered
and disposed by his two Houses of Parliament, or by such persons as they shall
appoint, with Powers limited for suppressing of Forces within this Kingdom to
the disturbance of the Public Peace, and against Forain Invasion; and that
they shall have Power during his said Reign to raise money for the present
purposes aforesaid; and that neither his Majesty that now is, or any other (by
his Authority derived only from him) shall execute any of the said Powers
during his Majesty's said Reign, but such as shall act by the consent and
approbation of the two Houses of Parliament. Nevertheless His Majesty intends
that all Patents, Commissions, and other Acts concerning the Militia, be made
and acted as formerly; and that after His Majesty's Reign all the Power of the
Militia shall return entirely to the Crown, as it was in the times of Queen
Elizabeth and King James of Blessed Memory.

After this head of the Militia, He promises to pay the Army their Arrears.
the consideration of the Arrears due to the Army is not improper to follow;
for the payment whereof, and the ease of his people, His Majesty is willing to
concur in any thing that can be done without the violation of His Conscience
and Honor. Wherefore if His two Houses shall consent to remit unto Him such
benefit out of Sequestrations from Michaelmas last, and out of Compositions
that shall be made before the concluding of the Peace, and the Arrears of such
as have been already made, the assistance of the Clergy, and the Arrears of
such Rents of His own Revenue as His two Houses shall not have received before
the concluding of the Peace, His Majesty will undertake within the space of
eighteen months, the payment of 400000 l. for the satisfaction of the Army. And
if those means shall not be sufficient, His Majesty intends to give way to the
sale of Forrest-Lands for that purpose; this being the public debt which in
His Majesty's judgment is first to be satisfied: And for other public debts
already contracted upon Church Lands, or any other Engagements, His Majesty
will give His consent to such Act or Acts for raising of moneys for payment
thereof, as both Houses shall hereafter agree upon, Consents that the great
Offices of State, and naming of Privy Counselors shall be in the Power of the
two Houses, during his reign.
so as they be equally laid, whereby His People (already too heavily burdened
by these late distempers) may have no more pressures upon them than this
absolute necessity requires.

And for the further securing all Fears, His Majesty will consent that an Act
of Parliament be Passed for the disposing of the great Offices of State, and
naming of Privy Counselors for the whole term of his Reign by the two Houses
of Parliament; their Patents and Commissions being taken from His Majesty, and
after to return to the Crown, as is expressed in the Article of the Militia.

^
For the Court of Wards and Liveries, His Majesty very well knows the
consequence of taking that away, by turning of all Tenures into common Soccage,
as well in point of Revenue to the Crown, as in the protection of many of His
Subjects being Infants: Nevertheless, if the continuance thereof seem grievous
to His Subjects, rather than he will fail on His part in giving satisfaction,
He will consent to an Act for taking of it away; so as a full recompense be
settled upon his Majesty and His Successors in perpetuity, and that the Arrears
now d^^, be reserved unto Him toward the payment of the Arrears of the Army.

^
And that the memory of these late distractions may be wholly wiped away, His
Majesty will consent to an Act of Parliament for the Suppressing and making
Null Oaths, Declarations, and Proclamations, against both or either House of
Parliament, and of all Indictments and other Proceedings against any persons
for adhering unto them. And His Majesty proposes (as the best expedient to
take away all seeds of future differences) that there be an Act of Oblivion to
extend to all His Subjects.

As for Ireland, the Cessation there is long since determined; but for the
future (all other things being fully agreed) His Majesty will give full
satisfaction to His Houses concerning that Kingdom.

And although His Majesty cannot consent in Honor and Justice to avoid all His
own Acts and Grants, past under His Great Seal since the 22 of May 1642. or to
the confirming all the Acts and Grants passed under that made by the two
Houses; yet His Majesty is confident, that upon perusal of particulars, He
shall give full satisfaction to His two Houses, to what may be reasonably
desired in that particular.

And now his Majesty conceives that by these his Offers (which he is ready to
make good upon the settlement of a Peace) he has clearly manifested his
intentions to give full security and satisfaction to all Interests for what can
justly be desired, in order to the future happiness of his people. And for the
perfecting of these Concessions, as also for such other things as may be
proposed by the two Houses, and for such just and reasonable demands as his
Majesty shall find necessary to propose on his part, he earnestly desires a
Personal Treaty at London with his two Houses, in Honor, Freedom, and safety;
He (...) at London with (...).
it being in his Judgment, the most proper, and indeed only means, to a firm
and settled Peace; and impossible, without it, to reconcile former, or to avoid
future misunderstandings.

All these things being by Treaty perfected, his Majesty believes his two
Houses will think it reasonable, that the Proposals of the Army concerning the
Succession of Parliaments, and their due Election, should be taken into
consideration.

As for what concerns the Kingdom of Scotland, his Majesty will very readily
apply himself to give all reasonable satisfaction, when the desires of the two
Houses of Parliament on their behalf, or of the Commissioners of that Kingdom,
or of both joined together, shall be made known unto him.


This Answer was full, and apportioned to all interests, and showed the
incomparable prudence, as well as invincible constancy of the King: at which
the Parliament showed themselves much offended, and communicated this their
displeasure to the Scots Commissioners, (who participated seemingly with them
therein) but made no Reply to the King; their custom being to set other Pens on
work to discant upon them, Several scurrilous Pamphlets published to defame His
Majesty. Especially Needham's, ^atitul^d a Hue and Cry after the King.
and pick out some jealous Observations, to keep the people still to their
party, by bold assertions of His Majesty's preva^ications and injustices in all
his Papers and Messages to the Parliament; some of them writ meanly,
scurrilously and impudently, (among the rest, a most execrable and blasphemous
Paper called a Hue and Cry after the King, upon his flight from Hampton, by one
Needham that writ afterward the News-Book for them) in others more modestly and
politely, with a fine but false edge, which yet served to wound His Majesty's
Reputation, and to carve to the Grandees the spoils of the Kingdom, which were
to be secured by these misunderstandings.

But against these Writers there appeared a Champion of Loyalty, Judge Ienkins,
who out of the Parliaments Wrath, Judge Jenkins sloutly vindicates the King's
Cause and Party.
(with the Earl of Cleveland, Sir Lewis Dives, Sir John Stawel, and others
Royalists) was Committed to the Tower, and being brought to the Chancery-Bar,
refused to own the Court and the Authority thereof, and so was remanded in
Order to a Trial at the King's Bench, where in the me^n while he fully Answered
all those Cavils against the King, by Reason, Law, and from the Parliaments own
words and Declarations, ridling their nice, time-serving distinction of the
Kings Person and Authority, his Politic and Natural Capacity, to be a mere
Fiction never heard of before; and that their as bold assumption of the Kings
Vertual presence in the two Houses, was also and alike Treasonable, as he cited
in the Case of the two Spencers, in the 7 of Edward the 2. from their own
Oracle Sir Edward Coke, in the 7 part of his Reports, fol. 11. He then runs
over the whole Case and state of the Question and Dispute betwixt the Royalists
and Parliamentarians; which being published, incredible it is how greedily they
were bought up, and how many honest people undeceived; so that His Majesty's
Cause was every where under the nose of the Faction well spoken of. We will,
for the honor of that Noble person, give this short and summary account of it,
as a Sea-mark to Posterity.

First, The Royalists have aided the King in this War (contrary to the
Parliaments Negative Oath and Votes,) warranted by the Statute of 25 Ed. 2. chapter
2. They have maintained the Commission of Array by the Kings Command against
their Votes, by the Statute of the 5 Hen. 4.3. They have maintained
Archbishops, Bishops, etc. from Magna Charta, and many other Statutes. 4. They
have maintained the Book of Common prayer, warranted by five Acts of
Parliament, in Edw. 6. Queen Eliz. for Libels against which and
Church Government, some have been Executed. 5. They maintained the Militia of
the Kingdom to belong to the King, from the Statute of the 7 Edw. 1. and many
Statutes since. 6. They maintained the Counterfeiting of the Kings Great Seal
to be High Treason, as likewise the usurpation of the Kings Forts, Ports, and
Shipping, etc. from the said Statute of 25 Ed. 3. and diverse others since, and
the practice of all times. 7. They maintain, that the King is the only Supreme
Governor in all Cases; the Parliament, that his Majesty is to be governed by
them. The former's warrant is the Statute of Queen Eliz. etc. 8. They maintain
that the King is King by an inherent Birthright, by Nature, by Gods Law, and
by the law of the Land; These say, that his Kingly Right is an Office upon
Trust. Their warrant is the Statute of the 1 of King James, and the 5 of Queen
Eliz. 9. They maintain that the politic capacity is not to be severed from the
natural; vide Coke, as before, their Oracle, who has declared to posterity,
that it is Damnable, Detestable, and Execrable Treason. 10. They maintain, that
who aids the King at home or abroad, ought not to be molested or questioned for
the same. (These practice the contrary.) Their warrant is the Statute of 11
Hen. 7. 11. They maintain that the King has power to disassent to any Bill
agreed by the two Houses; which these deny. Their warrant is the Statute of 2
Hen. 5. the practice of all times, the 1 Car. chapter 7. and 1 Jam. chapter 1. 12. They
maintain that Parliaments ought to be holden in grave and peaceable manner,
without Tumults; These abet and keep guards of armed men to wait upon them.
Their warrant is the Statute of 7 Edw. 2. 13. They maintain that there is no
State within this Kingdom but the Kings Majesty, and that to adhere to any
other State within this Kingdom is High Treason. Their warrant is the 3 of King
Jam. and 23 Eliz. 14. They maintain that to levy a War, to remove Counselors,
to alter Religion, or any Law established, is High Treason; These hold to the
contrary. Their warrant is the resolution of the Judges, Queen Elizabeth, and
Sir Edward Coke. 15. They maintain that no man should be imprisoned, put out of
his lands, but by due Course of Law; and that no man ought to be adjudged to
Death, but by the Law established. These have practiced the contrary in London,
Bristol, and Kent. Their warrant is Magna Charta, chapter 29. The Petition of
Right, 3 Car. and diverse others. 16. They believe what the Laws say, that the
King can do no wrong, that He is Gods Lieutenant, and not able to do an unjust
thing; These charge Him with the spoil and blood of His Subjects; which false
imputation was like the rest of their actions, contrary to all Law, Reason,
Christianity, or Humanity.

Judge Jenkins imprisoned, and enlarged at the Restoration of King Charles the
second.
This eye salve made the wilfully blind more peevish, and fuller of smart and
anguish, so that they were resolved to have hanged him; but he had so hedged up
their way to it, by upbraiding them with their former Illegal and Tyrannical
Cruelty, that they only kept him in a strict duress, which was enlarged by
degrees, till the time of Restitution 1660, when he was in health, and at
perfect freedom.

He was a great stickler likewise in the Feud betwixt the Presbyterian and
Independent, siding with the Army, and doctrinating them with the Principles of
Allegiance, which they pretended to; and animating them against the Parliament,
by persuading them that all their Ordinances made for their Indemnity and
Arrears, were insignificant and invalid, and were but so many blinds for the
present; and that their security and satisfaction depended wholly upon the
King: which design of his, in that juncture of time, did operate successfully,
until the cause of the contention ceasing, Cromwell having mastered and
surmounted all the rubs to his design, the effect, the ruin of both, likewise
failed.

Miserable now were the complaints from several parts of the Kingdom, by reason
of the burden of Free Quarter. The burden of Free Quarter.
In the third year of King Charles, upon the Expedition for the Isle of Rhee,
the Lords and Commons in their Petition of Right, when not above 2 or 3000
Soldiers were thinly Quartered upon the people, but for a Month or two,
complained thereof to his Majesty as a great grievance, contrary to the Laws
and Customs of the Realm; and humbly prayed, as their right, according to the
Law of the Land, that he would remove it: which his Majesty presently granted.
Yet now, though the Country was ten times more oppressed, no remedy could be
had; the Army under pretense of Lodging, Fire, and Candle, taking all other
necessaries: for which if at any time they pretended to offer money, yet durst
none take it for fear of greater damage, the spoiler being only triable by a
Council of War. This, the Soldiers were taught likewise by their Adjutators to
load upon the Parliament, Cromwell and his supernumeraries, the cause thereof.
through their neglect of paying them; when indeed the supernumeraries with
which Cromwell daily recruited the Army, without any Authority, far beyond the
pay or number established, was the cause of the Arrears, and this oppression of
Free Quarter; for upon complaints thereof made in the House, the Army being
quartered in several Brigades, supernumeraries have been disbanded in one
Brigade, their Arms taken by their Officers, and shortly after they have been
listed again in another Brigade, and their Arms sold again to the State after a
while, to new arm them. By which means Cromwell had amassed a Magazine of such,
which being lodged in the City, and rumoured by some zealots to be for arming
some Reformadoes, were now upon examination found to belong unto Him, and so
the business was hushed up; which if they could have fastened upon the other
Party, should have been noised for horrid Treason.

By this grievance of Free Quarter they were doubly and trebly paid, taking it
in one place, and Composition for it in another, perhaps in three or four
places at once, by false Billets; yet nevertheless, though by these tricks they
owed money to the State, they demanded and compelled an Ordinance from the
Parliament to secure their Arrears of the 24 of December, whereby they had the
two thirds of Delinquents Estates, mentioned or comprehended in the three first
qualifications of them, in the Propositions sent to the King at the Isle of
Wight; and all the money arising out of the remaining part of Bishops Lands,
appointed to be sold by former Ordinances; Vast sums of money raised for the
Soldiery.
and the sum of 600000 l. charged on the receipt of EXCISE, (with the
Forrest-Lands and other incomes) for the securing of the said Arrears, to be
issued out to the Treasurers at War, to such and such persons for the uses
aforesaid, in such manner as the Committee of Lords and Commons for the Army,
or any five of them under their hands would limit and appoint, which was by way
of Audit and Debentures, Debentures sold.
sold not long after upon doublings on purchases of the Crown and other
forfeited Lands for Half a Crown in the pound, besides innumerable cheats by
counterfeit hands, but more to the talk than trouble of the Kingdom, whose
general Note was -- Caveat Emptor.

Wonderful it is (since we have now mentioned that Dutch Devil, as it was
called, the Excise) what vast sums of money the Parliament had raised by it,
amounting, as by their Ordinance of the 28 of August this year appears, to that
time, from its Commencement some three years before, to One million three
hundred thirty four thousand five hundred thirty two pounds ten shillings and
eleven pence half penny, clear, and deducted of all charges in the levying of
it, which defalked not above two shillings in the pound. The Excise an
excessive Tax, and carefully upheld.
No wonder therefore they did so carefully enjoy* and uphold this Tax, which
had supported and enabled them in all their achievements; and upon this score
they made it over to the Soldiers, several Uproars and Tumults happening in
the refusal of payment, Several refuse to pay it, and tumults happen. The
Butchers at Smithfield-bars London, fire the Excise-house: several of them
tried, but acqitted.
particularly at Smithfield-bars London, where the Butchers who then paid
Excise for the Flesh sold, at two shillings in the pound, rose and fired the
Excise-house near adjoining, with all the Papers of Books of Account; for which
several of them were tried, but acquitted: thereafter, that Duty upon Cattle,
as likewise upon all Salt made in the Kingdom, was wholly laid aside. But a
most severe injunction was now made for the continuance of the rest, and the
refractory threatened with exemplary punishments.

So that while Cromwell could find Men and Arms at such a rate, and the
Parliament such heaps of Money by several Revenues, it was in vain to think of
a Peace, when such visible powerful advantages subserved to those wicked
designs of inthralling King, Parliament, City and Kingdom, now mainly
prosecuted by the Adjutators; but so lendly and unseasonably, that Cromwell, to
palliate his secret impiety, abandoned one of the Ringleaders, one White, White
a Leveller Executed at Ware. And Thompson condemned by a Council of War.
to his Execution at Ware, by a Sentence of a Council of War, for mutinous
speeches and Papers of the Levelling principle (but suspected also to aim at
himself) among the Common Soldiers. Near the same time, one Tompson of the
same Crew, was seized on in the Lobby of the House of Commons, supposed to be
ready with some Impeachment or Articles against him, and condemned in the same
manner by a Council of War. They cried out of the King as useless, and had got
a Stork of their own making ten times more dangerous, who durst crush them to
Ruin in the very rise of his Ambition.

These misdoings, and no Government, highly displeased and incensed the people,
who too late ( -- Sero sapiunt Phryges) saw how they had fooled themselves into
slavery; the resentments whereof became so public, and so fearlesly Voyced,
that the Parliament was constrained to humor it, and to personate a serious
study to an Accommodation. Hereupon, the same 24 day of December on which they
had Voted Security for the Armies Arrears, (an ill Omen of what Kindness they
had for the King, whom they would not bate an ace of their demands) their
Commissioners present to the King at Carisbrook-Castle four Bills to be Passed
as Acts of Parliament, The Parliament constrained to humor a Treaty.
(with diverse other Proposals, such or worse than those at Hampton Court)
before any Treaty might be admitted.

Four Bills tendered to the King at the Isle of Wight before the Treaty should
begin.
The first was an Act with this Title, Concerning the raising, settling, and
maintaining Forces by Sea and by Land, within the Kingdoms of England and
Ireland, and Dominion of Wales, the Isles of Gernsey and Jersey, and the Town
of Berwick upon Tweed; whereby it was to be Declared, That the Lords and
Commons then Assembled in Parliament, or whom they should appoint, (that was a
Council of State of Picked Grandees) should for twenty years have the Militia in
their disposal, against the King, His Heirs, and Successors for that term, and
after that term the same Power to be exercised by the King, but with the
consent of the Parliament, if they shall declare the safety of the Kingdom to
be concerned; and the Moneys raised for that purpose to be employed by the same
persons in the like manner: Which was in effect, to take away the Kings
Negative Voice from him and His Heirs for ever. Besides, it grants an unlimited
Power to the two Houses, to raise what Forces, and of what persons they please,
and to raise money in what sort, and as much, and of whom, as they shall think
fit, without any restriction or exception. The second was, An Act for
Justifying the Proceedings of Parliament in the late War, and for Declaring all
Oaths, Declarations, Proclamations, and other proceedings against it to be
Void; whereby they were to b^ declared to have stood upon the Defensive part,
(their Conscience pricked them with their Blood-guiltiness, and they would fain
throw it off, and by adding more Guilt to it, load it upon the Innocent; a
wicked shift!) and be Indempnified (still they are tormented) for all their
past actions therein. The third was, An Act whereby all Titles, and Honor of
Peerage, conferred on any since the 20 of May, 1642. being the day that the
Lord Keeper Littleton deserted the Parliament, and carried away the Seal, were
Declared Void. And it was further to be Enacted, that no person that shall
hereafter be made a Peer, or his Heirs, shall sit or Vote in the Parliament of
England, without the consent of both Houses of Parliament. The fourth was, An
Act concerning the Adjournment of both Houses of Parliament; whereby it was
Declared, that when and wither the two Houses shall think fit to Adjourn
themselves, the said Adjournments shall at all times be valid and good, and
shall not be judged or deemed to end or determine the Session of this
Parliament.

Their Proposals to the King.
The Proposals were, 1. That the new Seal be Confirmed, and the old Great Seal,
and all things passed under it since May 1642. be made Void. 2. That Acts be
Passed for raising moneys to pay public Debts. 3. That Members of both Houses
put from their places by the King, be restored. 4. That the Cessation in
Ireland be made Void, and the War left to both Houses. 5. That An Act of
Indempuity be passed. 6. That the Court of Wards be taken away, and such
Tenures turned into common Soccage. 7. That the Treaties between England and
Scotland be confirmed, and Conservators of the Peace and Union appointed. 8.
That ^he Arrears of the Army be paid out of Bishops Lands, Forfeited Estates
and Forests. 9. That An Act be passed for abolishing Bishops, and all
appendants to them. 10. That the Ordinance of disposing Bishops Lands be
confirmed by Act. 11. That An Act be passed for the sale of Church Lands. 12.
That Delinquents be proceeded against, and their Estates disposed of according
to their several Qualifications. 13. That an Act be passed for discharge of
public Debts. 14. That Acts be passed for set^ling the Presbyterian Government
and Directory, F^urteen of the 39 Articles revised by the Assembly of Divines,
Rules and Directions concerning suspension from the Lord's Supper. 15. That the
chief Officers in England and Ireland be named by both Houses. 16. That an Act
be passed for the conviction of Popish Recusants. 17. That an Act be passed for
the Education of the Children of Papists by Protestants. 18. and 19. Against
Papists, for levying penalties, and prohibiting the hearing of Mass. 20. An Act
be passed for Observation of the Lord's Day. 21. A Bill for Suppressing
Innovations. 22. And Advancement of Preaching. 23. And against Pluralities and
Non-residencie.

With^l, The Commissioners were to desire His Majesty to give His Royal Assent
to those four Bills by His Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England,
Signed by His Hand, and Notified to the Lords and Commons Assembled together in
the House of Peers; it not standing then with the safety of the Kingdom for His
Majesty to do it otherwise, ( to wit, at London) and a Bill to be drawn for
such Letters Patents to be presented Him, and then a Warrant to Edward Earl of
Manchester, etc. whereupon a Committee shall be sent to the Isle of Wight to
Treat with Him only.

It was not intended to show these shapeless abortions of Laws, but that they
should have been buried in their Chaos, yet being the (though unprepared)
matter of this beautiful Form of the Kings Answer, the darkness of the one
occasioning and preceding the light of the other, they are here represented in
this unreasonable lump an^ (...): Nothing indeed shows them better, or it may
be said worse; so that they (...) Paraphrase or Comment: Give me leave only to
insert the Scots sense of (...) Bills and Proposals.

The Commissioners of Scotlan^ having understood the proceeding of the
Parliament in the business, now (...) publicly protested against it here, and
immediately followed the Commissio^ers to the Isle of Wight, where they
likewise presented His Majesty with this Paper. --

There is nothing which we have more constantly endeavored and do more
earnestly desire* The Scotch Commissioners declare their dissent from the
Proposals and Bills.
than a good Agreement and happy Union between Your Majesty and your
Parliaments of both Kingdoms; neither have we left any means unessayed, that by
united Councils with the Parliament of England, and making joint applications
to Your Majesty, there might be a composition of all differences. But the new
Propositions communicated to us by the two Houses, and the Bills therewith
presented to Your Majesty, are so prejudicial to Religion, the Crown, the Union
and Interest of the Kingdoms, and so far different from the former proceedings
and engagements betwixt the Kingdoms, as we cannot concur therein. Therefore we
do in the name of the Kingdom of Scotland, dissent from these Proposals and
Bills tendered to Your Majesty.

Lowden, Lauderdale, Charles Erskin, Kennedy, Berclay.



This was the first equal and good Office meant the King, though they had
greater concerns of their own; but it something served to justify the King to
His people in His refusal to Sign them. The Kings Answer was as follows.

For the Speaker of the Lords House pro tempore, to be Communicated, etc.
CHARLES REX.

His Majesty's Answer to the Bills, etc.
THe necessity of complying with all engaged Interests in these great distempers
for a perfect Settlement of Peace, His Majesty finds to be none of the least
difficulties he has met with since the time of His afflictions; which is too
visible, when at the same time that the two Houses of the English Parliament do
present to His Majesty several Bills and Propositions for His Consent, the
Commissioners for Scotland do openly protest against them: so that were nothing
in the case but the consideration of that difference, His Majesty cannot
imagine how to give such an Answer to what is now proposed, as thereby to
promise himself his great End, A Perfect Peace. And when his Majesty further
considers, how impossible it is (in the condition he now stands) to fulfill the
desires of his two Houses, since the only ancient and known ways of passing
Laws, are either by his Majesty's personal Assent in the House of Peers, or by
Commission under his Great Seal of England; He cannot but wonder at such
failings in the manner of Address which is now made unto him; unless his two
Houses intend that his Majesty shall allow of a Great Seal made without his
Authority, before there be any consideration had thereupon in a Treaty; which
as it may hereafter hazard the security it self, so for the present it seems
very unreasonable to his Majesty. And though his Majesty is willing to believe
that the intention of very many in both Houses, in sending those Bills before a
Treaty, was only to obtain a Trust from him, and not to take any advantage by
passing them to force other things from him, which are either against his
Conscience or Honor; yet his Majesty believes it is clear to all
understandings, that these Bills contain (as they are now Penned) not only the
devesting himself of all Sovereignty, and that without possibility of
recovering it, either to him or his Successors (except by repeal of these
Bills) but also the making his Concessions guilty of the greatest pressures
that can be made upon the Subject, as in other particulars, so by giving an
Arbitrary and unlimited power to the two Houses for ever, to raise and levy,
for Land and Sea-service, of what persons (without distinction and quality) and
to what numbers they please; and likewise for the payment of the Arrears, to
levy what moneys, in such sort, and by such ways and means, (and consequently
upon the Estates of whatsoever persons) as they shall think fit and appoint;
which is utterly inconsistent with the Liberty and Property of the Subject, and
his Majesty's Trust in Protecting them: so that if the major part of both
Houses shall think it necessary to put the rest of the Propositions into Bills,
his Majesty leaves the world to judge how unsafe it would be for him to Consent
thereunto; and if not, what a strange condition (after passing those four
Bills) his Majesty and all his Subjects would be cast into. And here his
Majesty thinks it not unfit, to wish his two Houses to consider well of the
manner of their proceeding; That when his Majesty desires a personal Treaty
with them for the settling of a Peace, they in answer propose the very subject
matter of the most essential part thereof, to be first granted; a thing which
will be hardly credible to posterity: Wherefore his Majesty Declares, That
neither the desire of being freed from this tedious and irksome condition of
life his Majesty has so long suffered, nor the apprehension of what shall
befall him in case his two Houses shall not afford him a personal Treaty, shall
make him change his Resolution of not-consenting to any Act, till the whole be
concluded. Yet then he intends not only to give just and reasonable
satisfaction in the particulars presented to him; but also to make good all
other Concessions mentioned in his Message of the 16 of November. last, which he
thought would have produced better effects, than what he finds in the Bills and
Propositions now presented unto him.

And yet his Majesty cannot give over, His Majesty again presses for a
personal Treaty.
but now again earnestly presses for a personal Treaty, (so passionately is he
affected with the advantages which Peace will bring to his Majesty, and all his
Subjects) of which he will not at all despair, (there being no other visible
way to obtain a well-grounded Peace.) However his Majesty is very much at ease
within himself, for having fulfilled the Offices both of a Christian and a
King, and will patiently wait the good pleasure of Almighty God, to incline the
hearts of his two Houses to consider their King, and Compassionate their
Fellow Subjects Miseries.

Given at Carisbroke-Castle, Dec. 28.

On the third of January following, Sir Thomas Wroth flies high, and inveighs
against the King in the House of Commons.
this Answer was debated in the House of Commons. And first Sir Thomas Wroth
had his Cue (set by the Faction) to run high, and to feel the pulse of the
House; which was uttered in this, or the like Expression: The History of
Ind^pendency, p. 70.
That Bedlam was appointed for Madmen, and Tophet for Kings; That our Kings
had carried themselves of late as if they were fit for no place but Bedlam:
That his Humble Motion should consist of three parts. 1. To secure the King,
and keep him in some close Inland-Castle with Guards. 2. To draw up Articles of
Impeachment against him. 3. To lay him by, and settle the Kingdom without him.
He cared not what Form of Government they set up, so it were not by Kings and
Devils. -- Then Commissary Ireton (seeming to speak the sense of the Army,
under the notion of many Godly men, who had ventured their Lives to subdue
their Enemies) said after this manner.

The King had denied Safety and Protection to his People, He is seconded by
Commisary Ireton.
by denying the four Bills: That Subjection to him, was but in lieu of his
Protection to his People; this being denied, they might well deny any more
Subjection to him, and settle the Kingdom without him. That it was now
expected, after so long patience, they should show their resolution, and not
desert those Valiant men who had engaged for them beyond all possibility of
Retreat, and would never forsake the Parliament, unless the Parliament forsook
them first.

After some more debate, when the House was ready for the Question, Cromwell
brought up the Rear; and giving an ample Character of the Valor, good
affections, and Godliness of the Army, argued, That it was now expected the
Parliament should Govern and Defend the Kingdom by their own power and
resolutions, And both of them backed by Cromwell.
and not teach the people any longer to expect Safety and Government from an
Obstinate Man, whose heart God had hardened. That those men who had defended the
Parliament from so many dangers, with the expense of their blood, would defend
them herein with Fidelity and courage against all opposition. Teach them not,
by neglecting your own and the Kingdoms safety, (in which their own is
involved) to think themselves betrayed, and left hereafter to the Rage and
Malice of an irreconcilable Enemy, whom they have subdued for your sake, and
therefore are likely to find his future Government of them insupportable, and
fuller of Revenge than Justice; Lest despair teach them to seek their safety by
some other means then adhering to you, who will not stick to your selves; and
how destructive such a resolution in them will be to you all, I tremble to
think, Who laid his Hand upon his Sword; not long before baffled by Sir Philip
Stapleton.
and leave you to judge. -- At the latter end of this contrived Speech, he laid
his Hand upon his Sword, that Sword which by his side could not keep him from
Trembling, when Sir Philip Stapleton some while before baffled him in the House
of Commons.



Now we discover these two Matchiavels, avowing in a manner their ends and
designs, which they had hitherto cloaked by fair pretenses to the King, and
charged upon the Adjutators: And henceforward we shall see them using all
manner of scelerate practices to promote their Conspiracy. This bold Harangue
and Menace so far availed them, that the Parliament overawed therewith, after
a long debate, from 9 in the morning till night, upon the first of the ensuing
Votes, the House being divided, 141 Yeas, to 91 Noes, came to these following
Resolutions; the other three, except the last, being carried more easily: They
were prefaced with a short Declaration (yet of twelve days deliberation) dated
the 15 of January, in these words.

Die Sabbathi 15 Ianuarii 1647.
The Parliaments Declaration, wherein they make the King the Author of the War.
The Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, after many Addresses to his
Majesty for the preventing and ending this unnatural War, raised by him
against his Parliament and Kingdom, having lately sent four Bills to his
Majesty, which did contain only matter of safety and security to the
Parliament and Kingdom, referring the composure of all other differences to a
personal Treaty with his Majesty, and having received an absolute Negative, Do
hold themselves obliged to use their utmost endeavors speedily to settle the
present Government in such a way as may bring the greatest security to this
Kingdom in the enjoyment of the Laws and Liberties thereof; and in order
thereunto, and that the Houses may receive no delays nor interruptions in so
great and necessary a work, Their Votes of Non-address to the King, 16 Janua.
1647.
they have taken these Resolutions, and passed these Votes following, viz.
Resolved upon the Question, 1. That the Lords and Commons do declare, that they
will make no further Addresses or Applications to the King. None to apply
themselves to him without leave from b^th Houses.

Whosoever does, to ^^^r the penalties of High Treason.

That they will receive no more Messages from the K. and enjoin all persons not
to bring any from him.


2. That no Application or Address be made to the King by any person
whatsoever, without leave of both Houses. 3. That the person or persons that
shall make breach of this Order, shall incur the penalties of High Treason. 4.
That the Lords and Commons do declare, that they will receive no more any
Message from the King; and do-enjoyn, that no person whatsoever do presume to
receive or bring any Message from the King, to both or either Houses of
Parliament, or to any other person. Which Resolves by their Order were Printed,
and by the respective Members dispersed into the Counties, to give notice of
the intended severity against the Offenders.

But this was not all; they would be thought to do this from Right Reason, and
therefore they second this Resolution with another Remonstrance, as far beyond
the other delivered at Hampton Court, for silly and ridiculous imputations, as
that from Duty and Truth: They publish another Remonst^^nce.
The old, stale, and exploded Stories of Rochel, and the Isle of Rhee,
Ship Money, Monopolies, etc. for which the King had given them satisfaction,
(...) Arthur Haslerig 's Brother sub^ras one Smallin^* to vilify the K.
being numbered again into this Charge. They would fain have made use also of
that Story of the Plaster applied to King James by the Duke of Buckingham; but
their subornation failing, which was attempted by Sir Arthur Haselrig's
Brother, who produced one Smalling for that purpose, who dis^ppointed them, as
to the Papers he was said to have as proofs thereof, (it being a most notorious
lie) they let that falsehood alone, and betook themselves to more plausible, yet
self-guilty criminations.

But all these devices and fig leaves could not hide the guilt of their
actions; the people every were loathing to be abused any longer with these
fictions of misgovernment, when they perceived what masters of misrule they had
proved themselves. This the Grandees found at some conferences with the City,
whom still they thought to have befooled and sweetened out of their money, but
soon saw they were mistaken. The Art of persuasion had lost its power; and
plain force, if any thing, was to be used; which as the case stood, they durst
not venture: for the Town was full of rage and madness* and expected but the
first blow. However, the richer sort reserved themselves, as equally slaves to
the Army and Riches. From this difficulty therefore they turn to a more facile
undertaking, hoping to delude the King, whom his hard restraint could not but
have softened to their hands: Col. Hamond tu^^s away his Majesty's Servants.
and though Colonel Hamond upon the delivery of the Kings Answer to the
Propositions to the Commissioners, had turned away His Majesty's Servants, and
made Him a close prisoner, (telling the King, who demanded the reason of it,
The King a cl^se Prisoner.
that He was acted by ill Counsels to the destruction of the Kingdom, and that
He did it by Authority of Parliament, before they knew the said Answer, which
the King said they would never reply to) yet was he now employed by Cromwell,
during the force of these Votes, to make new Offers to the King from the Army,
the drift being to get Him to own the Army, as He had formerly done against the
Parliament, till by that means His Friends reposing themselves likewise on
their integrity, and the people also amused, they might of a sudden
irresistibly destroy Him. To this purpose they cajoled Colonel Ashburnham, and
Sir John Berkley, whom Hamond yet retained about the Kings Person, to convey
their poison of perfidy more unsuspectedly into the King; and the Earl of
Southampton was likewise dealt withal; but he better understood them, and
declined all manner of commerce or correspondence with them, having had the
advantages of liberty, and opportunity of prying into the Cabal. Several
persons were employed as Messengers in this transaction, who were never
questioned or punished, as the Resolves had declared.

Very many, as was said before, were the discontents of the people against the
Parliament, ready, but for fear of the Army, to burst out into Insurrections;
when the near sense of the Kings Captivity, whose sighs were imagined to be
heard in the Island, so affected one Captain Burleigh lately of the Kings Army,
Captain Burleigh bea^s ^ Drum in the Island for the King.
and then an Inhabitant there, that not able to endure his Princes sufferings
and injuries, he beat a Drum in the Island, intending to gather a force
sufficient to rescue Him from His Imprisonment; but was quickly seized and
suppressed by Hamond, He is suppressed and seized by Col. Hamond.
who sent him over to Winchester, in order to his trial by a special Commission
of Oyer and ^erminer. Against which time, one Major Rolf, accused by one
Osborne a Servant of the King's, Major Rolf accused for designing the Kings
death.
of a design to have assassinated Him (which accusation was with much ado
admitted, though Rolf was like to be torn in pieces by the Citizens of London,
upon his seizure in Bishops-gate-street, merely upon the bare Rumor of his
Crime) was brought down from the Gate House, and tried there likewise by the
same Judge and Jury. Seized in Bishops-gate-street.
The matter was delegated to Sergeant Wild, and Sir H. Mildmay, betwixt whom
and the said (packt) Jury, Burleigh was found guilty of High Treason, Capt.
Burleigh Executed at Winchester, Feb. 10.

Rolf quitted by Ignoramus, by the same Jury.


for levying War against (because for) the King; and the other, Rolf, quitted
by Ignoramus, for his wilful intention of parricide. Captain Burleigh
courageously sealed his Cause with his blood, dying a Loyal Martyr for the King
and his Country, and is worthily inscribed into that Roll; though the stupid,
and Subjects uncompassionate of their Princes miseries, accounted him rash and
inconsiderate.

Upon this Attempt, Rainsborough commanded by the Parliament to guard the
Island.
Hammond sends to the Parliament for an additional strength to maintain the
Island; and Rainsborough, who was newly put in the place of Vice Admiral
Batten, a Presbyterian, and who had done good service, (though now the
Independents were possessed of all places) was Commanded with his Fleet to
sorround the Island, The Army declare for the Parliament.
and to guard it: and next, out comes a Declaration of the Army, wherein they
promise to live and dye with the Parliament in pursuance of these Votes; and so
for a while they piece together again like Herod and Pilate, where we leave
them, and cast a look into Scotland and Ireland.

Scotland this year was infamous for the butchery and death of many gallant
personages, Many gallant persons put to death in Scotland.
taken at the defeat of Montross at Philipshaugh, whom the Covenanters having
carried up and down with them, till they settled at St. Iohnstons, there
Executed them. The first whereof was Colonel Nathaniel Gordon, and another of
his noble name; Col. Nathaniel Gordon and another o^ his ^ame executed at St.
Johnstons. Sir Robert Spotswood executed* Mr. Andrew Guthery and Mr. William
Murray executed. Lord Ogleby ^^ap. s.
then Sir Robert Spotswood, a man of most polite and deep learning* especially
in the Oriental Languages: he was made the Kings Secretary of Scotland, in the
place of the Earl of Lanerick; which, together with his other abilities,
accelerated his end. His last words were, -- Jesu have mercy on me, and gather
my soul with those that have run before me in this Race. Next to him, Mr.
Andrew Guthrey, Son to the Bishop of Murray. And lastly, Mr. William Murray, a
young Gentleman of some 19 years old, Brother to the Earl of Tullibardin, who
most magnanimously encountered Death, behaving himself (as he said His End would
prove) as the greatest honor of his Family. For this Blood Scotland has since
pretty well satisfied the Divine Justice; I pray God it be yet fully expiated
and attoned. There escaped out of their clutches the Lord Ogleby, the day
before his designed Martyrdom, disguised in his Sisters apparel. Ferdinando
Lord Fairfax ^^th of a Gangrene.
To conclude these Funerals in Scotland, Ferdinando Lord Fairfax, (Father to
Sir Thomas the General) whose Barony is Scottish, dyed about the same time of a
Gangrene, occasioned by cutting a Corn on his toe; and devolved that Honor to
Sir Thomas.

In Ireland, upon the advance of the Rebels in so formidable a posture against
Dublin, Ma^q. of Ormond (...) Dublin to Col. Jones.
the Marquess of Ormond was forced to capitulate with the Parliament; and in
June, according to agreement, delivered that City to Colonel Jones, and other
Parliament-Commissioners, who brought over with them 1000 Foot and 500 Horse;
and the Marquess came over into England, and attended the King at
Hampton Court, and in his removes with the Army, with an account of Ireland,
The Marquess attends the King.

Goes into France, thence into Ireland.


till upon his going into the Isle of Wight, he transported himself into
France, and from thence (not long after) back again into Ireland, by the Kings
Commission, with the above mentioned Forces, some recruits out of England, and
other broken Troops of the Marquesses, amounting in all to 3000. Colonel Jones
resolved to march against the Irish, who under the Lord Preston, within 12
miles of Dublin, Col. Jones routed.
met him at a disadvantage, and totally routed him, killing many, and taking
some few prisoners, the rest escaping with difficulty to Dublin.

The Parliament had undertaken the War, and were therefore troubled at this
unsuccessful beginning; Col. Jones kills 5470 Irish n^er Trim.
but they presently reinforced Jones, who taking courage, met with the same
Enemy again, and near Trim utterly defeated him, crying over and above quits
with him for his last defeat. After his two Wings had discomfited the two Wings
of the Irish by plain Valor, their main Battle of 3000 Foot betook themselves
to a Bog, where the English followed, and made great slaughter: those that
escaped thence, the Horse killed. This slaughter (one of the greatest during
all the War) was reckoned just to 5470. The Commander of them, with Preston,
Preston hardly escapes, and joins with O Neal.
hardly escaped, and joined with O Neal, who lately had given a terrible defeat
to the Scots in Vlster. Upon this Victory twenty several places yielded
themselves to Jones, who omitted not to prosecute his success, till the Winter
summoned him to his quarters at Dublin.

Near the same time the Lord Inchiqueen had a like good success in Munster
against the Lord Taaf, The Lord Inchiqueen defeates the Lord Taaf.
where he killed near 3000. But the Parliament designing to out him of his
Command, (he being President of that Province) and to confer it upon the Lord
Lisle or Broghil, to that purpose endeavoring to secure his person and convey
him into England; Declares for the King, and joyn^th with the said Lord.
he declared against the Independent prevailing party in England, and for a
speedy composure with the King; and forthwith joined his Forces with the said
Lord Taaf, who with a part of that Catholic Army had declared solely for the
King. This spoiled all the Triumphs of Jones his Conquest, and made the
Parliament look about them; Ireland being by this means further from being
reduced, than it was the first day of the Rebellion. An enterprise Cromwell
resolved to undertake, when he had overcome the difficulties of his Invasion,
and Usurpation of the Government in England. In the mean while a Treaty was set
on foot by the Faction with O Neal, The English Faction Treat with O Neal. The
Lord Inchiqueens Commission taken from him.
and the Lord Inchiqueen's Commission taken away; some of his Treacherous
Officers (put upon him to that purpose, as Spies, by the Parliament) revealing
and deposing his correspondencies with the Presbyterian party of the
Parliament, who were by the said Examinations sworn to have procured their
pardon of the King, to act for him for the future: which Independent Fetch (to
beget a new impeachment) bringing us back into England, we proceed in the
affairs thereof, where we shall see the Scene altered; the domineering Army,
and their Grandees at Derby-house, (which managed all) seeking shelter for
their outrages.

The House of Lords had scrupled the passing of the Votes of Non-addresses, The
House of Lords scruple the V^t^. of No^-Addresses: they at last pas^ it, and
are (...) by the (...).
10 against 10: but the Army quartering at the Mews and at White Hall, made
them come to it: whereupon, the next day, the Army gave them their Thanks; and
with those another piece of Journey-work, which was comprised in a Message sent
down from them to the Commons, to desire their concurrence to the Engagement of
those Members that fled to the Army, to live and dye with the Army. It was
debated all day until 7 a clock at night, and then the question put, That this
House does approve the Subscription of the said Members to the said Engagement;
which was carried in the affirmative by 10 Voices. To prosecute this project
(now that the Army was afraid of the Scots advance, there being sufficient
ground of quarrel, as they had set forth in their Papers) they would have the
Parliament and City to own their late forcing of them, if called to account for
it, (see the base vicissitudes of Villainy! now insolent, then most sordidly
fearful.) [Nor repeating all the Adjutators said to this subscribing the
Engagement, where they acknowledge, That they Rule by Power only, and that the
House of Commons is no longer theirs than they overawe them; and they fear the
Critical day will come, which will discover the Parliament to be no longer
theirs, than while they have a force upon it. The Independents Propose to unite
all Interests in the Houses, City and Army.

Cromwell makes a speech to that p^r^^^^ ^e is confronted. Glover sent to the
City, and rejected.


] The Independent party Proposed to unite all Interests in the Houses, City,
and Army; and Cromwell made a Speech in Parliament to that purpose, but was
snapt up by a Member, That they were chosen and trusted by the people to pursue
one Common interest, and Common good, Safety and Liberty of the People; and
whosoever had any peculiar Interest eccentrick from that, was not fit to Sit in
that Assembly, and deserved to be called to a strict account by those that
trusted him. And one of Cromwels Agents, Mr. Glover, was employed to the City
on the same errand, who offered them the release of their Aldermen, then
Prisoners, and the setting up their Fosts and Chains, upon a mutual agreement;
which the City likewise generously rejected, as foreseeing the Scots Invasion;
and therefore denied any correspondency with them; upbraiding them with their
past actions, and reiterated Violences.

Cromwell was troubled at this rejectment; Cromwell troubled thereat.
but resuming his wonted impudence, taxed his Agents by what Authority they had
made that Overture; who producing his own, he falsely renounced it. Yet the plot
ceased not here; his implacable malice cast about presently another way to
effect his mischievous intent against the City; of which suddenly, leaving him
to prepare against the storm for Scotland, whose preparations we now speak of.

The Scots Commissioners, The Scots Commissioners signify their desires, and
depart home.
upon the said Votes, had desired to know whether they did exclude them, or the
Subjects of that Kingdom, from any Addresses; and had answer by an
Interpretative Vote, that they were left at liberty, and might make
application, etc. They then demanded the Arrears of money due, and other mutual
stipulations according to Covenant; which being delayed, they departed home.

The Committee at Derby-house g^ows powerful.
This netled the Derby-House blades, which from a Committee of Safety* (as it
was constituted in the beginning of the War) being a joint Committee of Lords
and Commons of both Kingdoms, was now become a Committee of Danger; the power
of the former being vested wholly in those persons, English only (with some
other Independent Grandees added in the room of some deceased) remaining of
that Juncto; whereupon, by their appointment, the Parliament send Commissioners
to Scotland, The Parliament sent Commissioners into Scotland.
two Lords, the Earl of Nottingham and another; and four Commons, whereof Mr.
Ashurst was the chief; and two Clergymen, Mr. Marshall a Renegado and Spy, and
Mr. Herle; who did no more there but give constant notice of the Scots
resolutions, and the forwardness of their Levies.

The Scots set forth an angry Declaration. That and their Covenant is slighted.
In the mean time comes an angry and expostulating Declaration from Scotland,
where, as usual, the Covenant was mentioned; but with such scorn received, and
so opprobriously vilified, that of all its former veneration in that place, it
was now thought worthy only of a Sirreverence. This Declaration was long
debated, and several Postilions employed betwixt this and Edinburgh, with
Lemtives, Invectives, Explanations, Corrections, and such sort of scribbling,
but all to no purpose. The Scots mad (...) an Expedition.
The Scots were mad for another Expedition, being invited by (the best
pay-masters) the City of London; and a better Cause, which might assure them of
freer and more welcome entertainment; besides the unknown reward of Victory, if
it should prove their good fortune to restore the King; whose condition is the
next consideration, which we have elegantly described by himself, in his
Declaration in Answer to the Votes of No further Addresses.

To all my People, of whatsoever Nation, Qualification, or Condition.
His Majesty's elegant Declaration in Answer to the Votes of no further
Addresses.
AM I thus laid aside? and must I not speak for my self? No, I will speak, and
that to all my people, (which I would rather have done by the way of my two
Houses of Parliament, but that there is a public Order neither to make
Addresses to, nor receive Message from me.) And who but you, can be Judge of
the Difference betwixt me and my two Houses? I know none else: for I am sure it
is you, who will enjoy the happiness, or feel the misery of good or ill
Government; and we all pretend who shall run fastest to serve you, without
having a regard (at least in the first place) to particular Interests. And
therefore I desire you to consider the state I am and have been in this long
time, and whether my Actions have more tended to the public, or my own
particular good. For whosoever will look upon me barely as I am a man, without
the liberty (which the meanest of my Subjects enjoys) of going whither, and
conversing with whom I will; as a Husband and a Father, without the comfort of
my Wife and Children; or lastly, as a King, without the least show of Authority
or power to protect my distressed Subjects; must conclude me, not only void of
all natural Affection, but also to want Common Understanding, if I should not
most cheerfully embrace the readiest way to the settlement of these distracted
Kingdoms. As also on the other side, do but consider the Form and Draught of
the Bills lately presented to me, and as they are the conditions of a Treaty,
ye will conclude, that the same spirit which has still been able to frustrate
all my sincere and constant endeavors for Peace, has had a powerful
influence on this Message: for though I am ready to grant the substance, and
comply with what they seem to desire; yet, as they had framed it, I could not
agree thereunto without deeply wounding my Conscience and Honor, and betraying
the Trust reposed in me, by abandoning my people to the Arbitrary and Unlimited
Power of the two Houses for ever, for the levying and maintaining of Land and
Sea-Forces, without distinction of quality, or limitation for Money and Taxes.
And if I could have passed them in terms, how unheard of a condition were it
for a Treaty, to grant beforehand the most considerable part of the Subject
Matter? How ineffectual were that debate like to prove, wherein the most potent
Party had nothing left to ask, and the other nothing more to give? so
consequently how hopeless of mutual compliance? without which, a settlement is
impossible. Besides, if after my Concessions, the two Houses shall insist on
those things from which I cannot depart, how desperate would the condition of
these Kingdoms be, when the most proper and approved Remedy should become
ineffectual? Being therefore fully resolved, that I could neither in
Conscience, Honor, or Prudence pass those four Bills, I only endeavored to
make the reasons and justice of my denial to appear to all the world, as they
do to me, intending to give as little dissatisfaction to the two Houses of
Parliament (without betraying my own Cause) as the matter would bear. I was
desirous to give my Answer of the 28 of December last to the Commissioners
sealed (as I had done others heretofore, and sometimes at the desire of the
Commissioners) chiefly because when my Messages and Answers were publicly
known before they were read in the Houses, prejudicial interpretations were
forced on them, much differing, and sometimes contrary to my meaning. For
example, my Answer from Hampton Court was accused of dividing the two Nations,
because I promised to give satisfaction to the Scots in all things concerning
that Kingdom; and this last suffers in a contrary sense, by making me intend to
interest Scotland in the Laws of this Kingdom, (the which nothing is or was
further from my Thoughts) because I took notice of the Scots Commissioners
protesting against the Bills and Propositions, as contrary to the Interests and
Engagements of the two Kingdoms. Indeed, if I had not mentioned their dissent,
an Objection, not without some probability, might have been made against me,
both in respect the Scots are much concerned in the Bill for the Militia, and
several other Propositions, and my silence might seem to approve of it. But the
Commissioners refusing to receive my Answer sealed, I (upon the Engagement of
theirs and the Governors Honor, that no other use should be made or notice
taken of it, than as if it had not been seen) read and delivered it open unto
them; whereupon what has since passed, either by the Governor in discharging
most of my servants, redoubling the Guards, and restraining me of my former
liberty, (and all this, as himself confessed, merely out of his own dislike of my
Answer, notwithstanding his beforesaid Engagement;) or afterward by the two
Houses, as the Governor affirms, in confining me within the circuit of this
Castle; I appeal to God and the World, whether my said Answer deserved the
Reply of such Proceedings; besides the the unlawfulness for Subjects to
Imprison their King. That by the permission of Almighty God I am reduced to
this sad condition, at which as I no way repine, so I am not without hope, but
that the same God will in due time convert these afflictions unto my advantage.
In the mean time, I am content to bear those crosses with Patience, and a great
equality of mind. But by what means or occasion I am come to this relapse in
my affairs, I am utterly to seek; especially, when I consider that I have
sacrificed to my two Houses of Parliament (for the Peace of my Kingdoms) all,
but what is much more dear to me than my Life, my Conscience and Honor;
desiring nothing more, than to perform it in the most proper and natural way, A
Personal Treaty. But that which makes me most at a loss, is, the remembering my
signal comply (...) with the Army and their Interests, and of what importance
my com^^yance was to them, and their often-repeated Professions and Enga^^^^^ts
for my just Rights in general, at New Market, and Saint (...) and their
particular Explanations of these generals, by (...) and Revoted Proposals,
which I had reason to understand (...) utmost extremity would be expected from
me, and that in (...) therein I should be eased, (herein appealing to the
Conscien^^ (...) ^^me of the chiefest Officers in the Army, if what I have said
be not punctually true) and how I have failed of their expectations, or my
professions to them, I challenge them and the whole World to produce the least
color of reason. And now I would know what it is that is desired: Is it Peace?
I have showed the way, (being both willing and desirous to perform my part in
it) which is a just compliance with all chief Interests. Is it Plenty and
Happiness? they are the inseparable effects of Peace. Is it Security? I, who
wish all men would forget and forgive like me, have offered the Militia for my
time. Is it Liberty of Conscience? He who wants it, is most ready to give it.
Is it the right Administration of Justice? Offices of Trust are committed to
the choice of my two Houses of Parliament. Is it the Arrears of the Army? Upon
a settlement they will certainly be paid with much ease; but before, there will
be found much difficulty, if not impossibility in it.

Thus all the World cannot but see my real and unwearied Endeavors for Peace,
the which (by the Grace of God) I shall neither repent me of, nor ever be
slackned in, notwithstanding my past, present, or future sufferings: But if I
may not be heard, let every one judge, who it is that obstructs the good I
would or might do. What is it that men are afraid to hear from me? It cannot be
Reason (at least, none will declare themselves so unreasonable as to confess
it;) and it can less be impertinent or unreasonable discourses, for thereby
peradventure I might more justify this my Restraint than the Causers
themselves can do: so that of all wonders, this yet is the greatest to me. But
it may be easily gathered hence, how these men intend to govern, who have used
me thus. And if it be my hard sat to fall together with the Liberty of this
Kingdom, I shall not blush for my self, but much lament the future miseries of
my People, the which I shall still pray to God to avert, whatever becomes of me.

C. R.

So we have attained the end of this bustling year, the 23 of King Charles the
first, wherein the Pen labored more than the Sword, and the politic
Matchiavel-Head of the Army combated all opposition with the same success as
their victorious Arms lately before; their power now appearing Paramount, and
from whence the Kingdoms were to expect their future Government, unless they
could be able to master and disperse that Formidable Host, now jointly and
unanimously concurring with their aspiring and Rebel-Leaders. And behold, the
next year gives us a proof of a noble and gallant Attempt for the recovery of
Englands Majesty, Liberty and Safety; but the anger of Heaven was not yet near
appeased!

Anno Dom. 1648.
THat the beginning of this calamitous and black year might correspond and suit
with its end, (as the annual revolution thereof was never better assimilated,
than by the ancient Hieroglyphick of a Serpent rounding its tail to its Mouth;
the Serpentine windings of this monstrous Rebellion, terminating at the Head of
their most sacred Soverain) the Grandees of the Faction following that
State-principle, That it is as great prudence to keep as to win an Empire,
resolved to put out (as the accursed Philistines did to Sampson) the eyes of the
Kingdom, that so they might make sport with our Laws, Franchises, and
Privileges, and then ruin and fatally destroy us; at last separating the Head
from the Body Politic, in their ensuing monstrous Regicide.

To this purpose, The Parliaments Visitation of the University of Oxford, ^^d
t^ning out o^ the Loyal and Learned Sch^lars.

The Earl o^ Pembroke made by them Chancellor of the University.


under the notion and term of a Visitation of the University of Oxford,
(whereby Authority from the Parliament was delegated to certain Inquisitors,
such as were mancipated to their interest, of Clergy, and some more moderate
Laity; such as were the two Wilkinsons, Cheynel, Rogers, Langley; Sir Nathaniel
Brent, Esquire Tipping, Mr. Palmer, and others: to whom was added (as chief of
this Commission) Philip Earl of Pembroke, with the Style and Title of
Chancellor of the said University.) The aforesaid persons proceeded to the
ejectment of above two thirds of the Heads, Fellows, and Students of the
respective Colleges, the most eminent for Learning, and Piety, and Duty to the
Church, and Loyal obedience to His Majesty; for no other reason, but that they
would not subscribe and recognize, that the two pretended Houses had any Right
or Authority to visit that University; which by the known ancient Statutes
thereof, and the Laws of the Land, is invested only in the King, and such as He
from time to time shall depute thereunto.

By this most wicked practice and Dilemma, of either ruining men, or violating
their Conscience, they had nearly barbarized those Fountains of Learning; with
no less rage and fury inveighing against those Confessors of the Royal Cause,
than the Goths did to Old Rome, sparing neither young nor old; even very
Children, such of 16 years, being outed of their places, upon the same score,
and under pain of death, (having endured a civil death already) by posting up
their names at St. Mary's Church-Gates, Commanded within 24 Hours to depart
that City, or to be taken and proceeded against as Spies. It will indeed rather
require an Elegy, or some Satirical Lamentation, than an History; though I
could not pass it, out of reverence I owe my Mother, and having but slightly
touched the same rudenesses done to Her Sister of Cambridge by Cromwell and his
Accomplices; and out of commiseration to those Noble persons that suffered this
persecution, who (though perhaps the Commonwealth may recover this loss by
timely recruits of Literature) do no doubt irremediably rue this their violent
Revulsion out of that Bosom, where they might and ought to have been cherished
to a competent vigor, enabling them to serve the Commonwealth, and their own
thus enforced necessities: -- Sed quo vehor?

By these and the like distempers and pains in every part of it, England began
now to be Heart-sick; and those ambulatory running Humors which spread through
the whole mass of the people, to Center at last in the Metropolis, the City of
London; which had more successfully broke out, but for the opposition it met
with from the then Lord Mayor, Alderman Warner, Pennington's own second,
Alderman Warner Lord Mayor of London, a factious person.
a Factious and Seditious person, who discountenanced it by the Authority of
his place, appearing at the first hubbub thereof openly against it. The manner
was as follows.

On the 9 of April, being the Lord's Day, a number of Apprentices (as was usual)
were playing in Moor-fields, A Tumu^t and Insurrection is London by the Boys
and Prentices, Apr. 9.
in the afternoon; (for the Parliament had abrogated all H^lydays, and by a
venerable Order had appointed one day in every Month for their Recreation, in
lieu of those Festivals, after much coil and many elaborate Petitions, and
reference to, and reports from Committees of both Houses concerning them) which
being told to a Company of Trained-Bands then upon the Guards, whose Officers
were some precise Schismatics, they came into the Fields, and commanded them
to depart; which they refusing or delaying, they fired some Pieces at them:
whereupon the Boys incensed, took up Stones, and courageously fell upon them,
and routed them, taking from them their Ensign, which in a tumultuous and
childish bravery they marched with into the City; and being increased with
additions like themselves, affronted the Mayor, and made him hastily retire to
his own House for Sanctuary, whither they followed him, and seized on one of
the Drakes he had planted for his defense, and thence marched to the several
Gates, which they likewise secured; more especially Ludgate, which lay nearest
their Enemy the Army, who were then quartered at White Hall and the Mews, they
guarded with the same Drake: The City remaining the rest of that day and night
in great terror and confusion, the Rabble crying out for God and King Charles;
but no Person of Quality undertaking their Conduct, or to bring them into Order
and Discipline.

In the mean while, the Army-Guards take the Alarm; and conceiving it dangerous
to venture into the City by night, kept themselves in a readiness for the
morning, when Sir Thomas Fairfax himself entered by Aldersgate with Horse and
Foot, Sir Thomas Fairfax with part of the Army enters, quells it, and
disperseth them.
who fell a scouring the Streets, and driving this unarmed and ungoverned
Multitude before them, wounding and killing diverse innocent persons, Men,
Women, and Children, in a cruel and hostile manner, until they came to
Leaden Hall, where the Apprentices entered, and endeavored to maintain it: But
the avenues thereof being found defenseless, and themselves not strong enough,
besides want of necessaries requisite thereunto, they wisely (and more
prudently than any thing they did before) slipped away and shifted for
themselves, few or none falling into the Armies hand; but some upon enquiry
afterward, in the beginning of the Commonwealth, were discovered, and arrained
of High Treason, for levying War, etc. Two of whom, a Vintner and a Meal-man,
Kensey and Matthews, were convicted and condemned; but by the mediation of
Alderman Tichborn (one of the best deeds likewise he ever did) were reprieved,
Kensey and Matthews, the one a Vintner, the other a Meal-man, condemned; but
reprieved by the mediation of Alderman Tichborn, and afterward pardoned.
and by the same means at last pardoned, and assumed by him, for a
demonstration of his goodness, to be the guard to his person on public
Trayning days.

This Insurrection, or Riot rather, was quickly noised to the uttermost parts
of the Nation, where it was reported and received with great advantage, as we
usually fancy and credit what we expect; to the encouraging of all honest
people to rise now and follow this example, and redeem and rescue their
Religion, Laws, Lives and Liberties now at stake: for neither the several nor
united practices of Parliament and Army, Presbyterian nor Independents, could
impose upon them any longer. Nor was there an easy belief given to this check
of that Tumult, but was supposed an Artifice, and one of their old Lies, with
which they stuffed their News-Books; since the whole Nation saw how they had
irritated the City by their insolent carriage toward them, in changing their
Militia, etc. so that it was undoubtable they would embrace and improve the
first opportunity.

Whereupon, Col. Laughorn Poyer and Powel, rise for the King in Wales, they
secure Pembroke and Tenby Castles.
as the next Scene of this years Tragedy, Colonel Laughorn, Poyer and Powel,
who had done notable service for the Parliament in Wales, rose in
Pembroke-shire and Flint-shire, to near the number of 8000 men. They had been
by the Council of the Army (which was Authorized always by the Parliament)
ordered to disband, (as being men of better and surer principles than they
durst confide in, in order to their subsequent designs) which they
understanding the drift of, refused, and flew to their Arms; and for the
strengthening of their Party, Declare for the settlement of the King and
Kingdom; and gave notice to the Prince, who then issued out Commissions as
General for his Father, of their intentions and present posture, having secured
^enby-Castle, and the Town and Castle of Pembroke, to the same end. This sudden
and threatening defection put the Juncto at Derby-house to their dumps, when
another Express brought news that the like effects were to be looked for from
North Wales, Chopstow -Castle (...) ^^cholas Kemish: and Si^ John Owen (...)
for the King in North Wales.
where Sir John Owen was risen with a Force, and had def^ated and taken
Prisoner the High Sheriff that opposed him; and that Sir Nicholas Kemish (an
eminent Cavalier) had likewise surprised Chepstow-Castle; so tha^ all Wales was
like to be lost, without a blow stricken, from the late Conquerors, who
therefore hastened away Forces to re-establish their Dominion, and suppress
these dangerous beginnings.

Over these Colonel Horton was now Commissioned, for the reducing those new and
old Royalists; Col. H^rton sent to (...) them.
Cromwell being (if occasion should require) preparing to second him. Horton
with the Stafford and Worcester-Forces, and part of the Army quartering
thereabouts, advances against Laughorne, his whole power consisting of not
above 3000 men; with whom making more have than good speed, Col. Fleming
Commands a party against the Royalists: he is set upon and routed, lays violent
hands on himself, and dies.
a party thereof being under the Command of Colonel Fleming, fell unawares into
an Ambuscado, and were most of them cut off; the rest sheltring themselves in a
neighboring Church, were forced to render at discretion: which Fleming seeing,
and despairing that he should be able to answer this oversight at a Council of
War, or for some other cause, laid violent hands upon himself, and so dyed.
Horton no way daunted with this inauspicious entrance, marched up and faced the
Enemy, who showed themselves upon the hills and places of advantage, making
their Hubbubs to call the Country to their assistance. In their descent whence
into more even ground, the Parliamentarians desperately Engaged with them, no
way prepared, or thinking of fighting that day, (though Laughorn resolved to
fight before Cromwell should come up, St. Fagons fight May 8. Col. Horton
defeats Laughorn.
who was then on his way) and having laid an Ambuscado behind some Shrubs and
Hedges in a Meadow, did so gall and terrify these raw and undisciplined
Britons, that they could not be made to stand, or to keep any order, but
annoyed their fellows, and gave the Parliament-Horse opportunity to engage
their whole Body; which being vigorously prosecuted and maintained, the whole
Army ran, some 1500 killed, 500 Officers, besides 3000 Prisoners taken, with
all their Ammunition, Bag and Baggage: Cromwell sends Col. Eure to attempt Sir
Nich. Kemish. Chepstow- Castle retaken, May 25.
But the chief Officers, and ablest Soldiers, got some into Tenby, and others
into Pembroke, whither Cromwell came presently, and Besieged them both.

In his advance whither, that he might not give Sir Nicholas Kemish leave or
leisure, and time to nestle in his acquisition, he sent away Colonel Eure to
attempt him; who having a sufficient strength, resolved forthwith to storm
Chepstow-Castle, (having before Loyally refused all manner of Treaty) which
successfully was attempted, Sir Nich. Kemish killed in cold blood.
and a disastrous slaughter made; the resolute and noble Knight being killed in
cold blood. Sir Jo Owen' s Forces suppressed by M. Genesis Mitton, and himself
taken. Cromwell joins with Horton: Tenby stormed and yields.
Sir John Owen's Forces were likewise at the same time suppressed by
Major General Mitton, and himself likewise taken prisoner.

Cromwell was now joined with Horton; by whose united Forces, Tenby was first
stormed, and then yielded upon discretion; but Pembroke was a harder bit, being
naturally and artificially well fortified, and as well manned, though not
proportionably stored with necessaries; and two or three Parliament-Ships lay
before the Haven to keep out all supply, if the Prince should have endeavored
it, who was then at Sea; of which presently.

Pembroke besieged by Oliver Cromwell.
But Cromwell's impatience of loitering before a single Town, in a corner of the
Kingdom, when the Scots were advancing upon the same account with the besieged
into England, put him upon a resolution of storming it; to which glorious and
facile work Hugh Peter's by his Sermons and Stories of Jericho animated the
Soldiers. Hugh Peter's encourages his Soldiers in his Sermon.
Accordingly Approaches were made, and a Line drawn round, within Carbine-shot
of the Works, and the night and hour appointed for their falling on; the Horse
being drawn up, and in the dark got close under the Gates, to be ready at the
opening of them by their Foot when entered. The besieged suspecting this
stilness of the Leaguer would and in a Storm, had as closely prepared for the
onset; just about the time thereof, calling off their Guards and Centries,
Pembroke stormed to the besiegers loss.
and making semblance of betaking themselves to rest; when with great fury the
Parliament-Foot fell on, and having planted their Ladders, scaled the Works,
the Trenches being filled with men like to a swarm of Bees, making have to get
over; which being the designed advantage, the Flankers of the Town discharged
all their Cannon laden with Chain-shot, and so swept the Trenches, that not a
Ladder was standing, abundance of men killed and maimed, and left therein, the
rest forced to retreat, being pelted foreright from the Walls, and those that
were entered knocked on the Head, some few only escaping and becoming Prisoners.

This so daunted the Army, that Cromwell thought not fit to expose them any more
to such danger, but to block and starve them out; which the Besieged
perceiving, and no hopes of Relief, and being already pinched with want, they
bethought themselves of making Conditions in time, while the late Storm was yet
in recent memory, and some regard had to their strength and courage, and while
Cromwell was himself there; upon which account they entered into a Treaty, But at
length delivered.
whereby Cromwell was too hard for them: For giving good terms to the Soldiery
and the inferior Officers, who were willing to accept of less, he reserved
their three Leaders to discretion, and some Superior Commanders to two years
Banishment; and so having quieted that Welsh commotion, hastened on his
Expedition against the Scots.

While all things appeared now ready to run into worser and more desperate
mischiefs, equally feared from a new War, and that cicatrized and more perilous
Peace we had rather past than enjoyed, during the quarrelling Intrigues of the
Independent and Presbyterian parties; first the County of Essex, though not so
considerably; Essex, Surry, and London Petition for Peace.
then the neighboring County of Surrey, thought it a good and neighbourly
Office to the Parliament, to give them a taste (in fair and civil language, and
peaceable quiet deportment) of the whole Kingdoms resentment of their
proceedings with the King, that so without any more effusion of blood, a stop
might be put to those threatening evils, that visibly were imminent upon the
Nation. To this purpose, a calm, mild, and rational Petition was with all
humility, and without any tumultuous disorder (attended on by a numerous, yet
civil, and a well-reputed train) presented to the two Houses on the 16 of May,
by the hands of the prime Gentlemen of that County, who were presently ordered
to withdraw, and await their Answer, while in the mean time the Faction gave
notice to the Guards at White Hall and the Mews to come and free them from this
(otherwise unanswerable) Address.

In the interim, the Honest Countrymen understanding their Answer was
respited, The Guards of the Army fall upon them, and disperse the^.
and that the chief of their County would only be admitted to receive it,
withdrew themselves to several Inns in Westminster, to put up and refresh their
horses and themselves, where they found the Troopers very quarrelsom, and
telling them, that there was no room, nor scarce accommodation for the Army;
which made most of them go into the Suburbs; when presently the Guards of
Janiza^ies marched in haste into the Hall, and fell a hewing and cutting
(without any expostulation of the Petitioners business there,) and with some
slaughter, some are killed,
and more terror, drove them into the Palace-yards. Among the rest that were
killed, was the Miller of Wandsworth, a stout Fellow, and who died not
unrevenged, being cut and run through with a Halbert; the rest scattered and
dispersed themselves, being in no capacity of resistance, and carried home
their Answer for Peace, written in the red Letters of their Fellows Blood. This
Petition had been Subscribing a Month before, and much order and exactness used
therein; but one Rubric blot dashed it into nothing: the Triumphant Grandees
never knew the ways of Peace, and this method to it retorting their own
practices in the beginning of our troubles, was most distastful; for it
discovered to the people that the right prayer of Petitions was only for
Parliamentary Privileges, and that the Liberty of the Subject was but a
subservient pretense: They had attained the mystery and mastership of
Government, and therefore those silly Rudiments were to be forgotten; but if
their Crew would Petition against the King and their Country, (so was our
English spirit charmed and transformed before) they should be honored with the
Title of the well-effected, and have the thanks of the House for nothing.

This sanguinous reception of so innocent a Paper, was highly resented every
where; The Kentish Insurrection May 24.
but the Kentish-men reflected most upon it, who were then in a readiness with
a Petition to the same tenor, believing the Parliament would never so far vary
from that principle they had so mainly held forth and asserted, viz. the
Peoples right of declaring their grievances to that High Court: But now sadly
convinced of that opinion, they resolved to save their honor, and their
Journey to London; not to be baffled by Red-coats, or to travel up on a fools
errand, but with their swords in their Hands, which was the only reason then
prevailing, to reduce those by force to their duty, they could not induce by
the most urgent and winning entreaties; They Rendezvouze near Rochester, Lord
Goring Earl of Norwich their General.
and accordingly appointed a Rendezvous near Rochester, to resolve upon the
affair, and choose their Officers. On the 24 of May they assembled together, and
named the Lord Goring Earl of Norwich (then upon the place) for their General,
being their next Countryman of Sussex, though they had pitched upon the Duke of
Richmond then at Cobham; who declined it, out of his incapacity for action, or
that Command. Hither also resorted many hundreds of London-Prentices, the chief
and flower of the Youth, with many of the Old Cavalry; and many thousands more
had gone, but that all the ways from London thither were so laid, that there
was no passage, the River of Thames being guarded with the like diligence, and
several adventurers, and well-willers to the King and the quarrel, intercepted.

'Twas therefore thought hazardous to dally with such an Enemy who increased
every hour, being already formidable, not for the number only, but the
considerableness, experience, and gallantry of them: so that the General
himself with all the Forces he could make, being 8000, six of Foot, and two of
Horse, drew out against them: which advantage (as it was designed and hoped)
the Citizens might have taken; but it seems the Army was sensible of that; The
Army yield the Militia again to the City, and cajole them.
and since they could not keep it, were contented to part with the Militia, and
leave it according to that establishment which they so abominably quarrelled
before; which artificial kindness so obliged the City, that though several
promises had been made of their concurrence with the grand design, Colonel
Culpeper negotiating and pressing their speedy resolution and Declaration for
the King and Kingdom, Col. Culpeper endeavors to persuade the City to Declare
for the King: they refuse.
at the very same time at Guild Hall, to his no little danger and honor; yet
would they not by any means or arguments of their Honor and Safety, be drawn
into any public undertaking; not minding that story of Polyphemus to Ulysses,
whose only favor to him was, that he should be eaten up last. And it was a
strange confidence in them, to think that their Militia could secure them,
which before had seen so scurrilously and contumeliously wrested from them;
when they were upbraided in 47 that they were not able therewith to preserve
the City, much less the Parliament or the King. However, they now undertook
both the former; Skippon mad^ Major General of London.
Skippon, instead of noble Brown, being accepted (a mere bosom-Traytor to them)
as their Major General, at the salary of 600 l. per annum.

Maidstone- fight June 2.
Fairfax therefore securely and resolutely advances against these Kentish
Forces; and understanding that the Body of the Army quartered about Rochester,
whose Bridge was broke, he resolved to pass the River of Medway something lower
near Maidstone, and so march toward them. But the Royalists sensible, and
fore-judging he would attempt that way, had manned it with 1500 men, of the
resolutes^ and willingest of their Army, consisting chiefly of
London-Auxiliaries; who though surprised by Fairfax's sudden approach, who had
received intelligence from some Traitors within the Town, at what distance and
in what security the Army lay dispersed, did yet make a most manful resistance.
The first Dispute (after a slight skirmish at Crayfield-heath by Gravesend)
happened at Northfield-bridge, the pass to Maidstone, whither Fairfax sent
Major Husbands with a strong party before him, himself marching with a full
Body, not trusting altogether to his Kentish intelligence. Major Husbands after
a sharp and hot contest prevailed, more for fear of the approach of the whole
Army, than his own strength; when yet that handful of men daringly engaged this
whole Body, and fought very much of their ground with such pertinacious valor,
that Fairfax (then troubled with the Gout) was forced to light out of his
Coach, and to lead his men on in person for their animation, the service proved
so tedious and desperate. At last the Royalists (fresh supplies overpowring
them) were beat up to the Barricadoes of the Town, where they made a more
bloody defense than in the Fields and Hedges, repelling the Enemy twice: And
being thence beaten into the Town, did worser annoy them than ever before,
firing out of the Windows and Leads, and using all those ready Engines of death
which the Houses afforded, to the very great slaughter of the Redcoats, so that
it was 6 hours complete before the Town was fully gained; The Royalists Ro^ted.
and had the Royalists from Rochester moved to their relief, it was more than
probable the Army had been utterly baffled, and the Quarrel at an End. Of the
Kentish were killed 300, and almost 1000 taken Prisoners, with 400 Horse, 8
pieces of Ordnance, and some Ammunition. Fairfax confessed they were the
toughest Enemy he had met with in England. The Fight began at 7 a clock at
night, and lasted till midnight.

Earl of Norwich and Kentish Forces at Black beath,
But the main Body under the Earl of Norwich, instead of coming to their rescue,
marched in have away for Black Heath, where most of the Kentish-men (leaving
him not above 500) deserted him. (The reason of their not seconding their
Fellows, was reported to be this: The one half of them was marched to Dover,
and those places, to seize on those Castles, and secure that Country, and so
weakened the remaining Party.) For seeing few come in to his assistance, which
was to be ascribed to the strict care and industry of Major General Skippon,
they thought then of the safest course. wooes the City for passage; denied,
F^rries into Essex June 3.
From Black Heath the Earl sent a Message to the City of London, desiring free
passage through it, and declaring the intentions of his undertaking: But they
flatly refused any such thing, though some former assurances had been given of
their joining in the design; whereupon, the Royalists were forced to Ferry and
Swim their Horses, and Boat themselves into the Isle of Dogs, and so to
Mile-End-Green, whence afresh they Solicited the City to partake in this
Honorable Confederacy; but they were deaf to all such persuasions; their
Major General and his Tarriers inveagling them with the honesty and good
resolutions of the Army, both to them and the Kingdom.

Thence the Earl marched to Stratford-Bow, where joined with him the
Essex-Forces, under the Command of Sir Charles Lucas, The Essex- Forces join
with him at Bow. Sir Charles Lucas their General.
whom they had unanimously chosen for their General, being under color of a
Muster, Rendezvouzed by Colonel Far, a Gentleman of that County; whence they
were drawn to this place, to countenance and favor any Loyal attempt in the
City, and to encourage them to show themselves Men and Subjects. But that hope
proving more and more vain, so wretchedly stupid were the Londoners, they
marched into Essex; They seize the Earl of Warwick's Arms, and march to
Colchester.
and by the way, seized upon the Arms and Ammunition that then lay in the Earl
of Warwick's House at Leez, (as then in open hostility against the Prince) and
so further into the County, until at last they settled in the Town of Colchester.

Fairfax understanding of this Go-by, and their conjunction, having dispatched
away Colonel Rich and Colonel Barkstead with their Regiments, to reduce and
free those Castles which the Kentish-men (as aforesaid) had taken, with all
have passed his Army over at Gravesend, to make the quicker pursuit after them,
having underhand received recruits and supplies both of men and money from
Skippon to reinforce him, who every day privately listed men for the Service.
At Colchester the Lord Capel, Lord Capel assists them with a party of Horse.
(with some Horse of his own raising) met him: and a Troop of Veterane
Royalists from London, who fought their way at Epping, with some Army-Horse,
laid to obstruct all additions from the City by that Road, came also entire at
the same time, just as the Van of Fairfax his Army was Skirmishing at the
Towns-end where they so peppered the Enemy, that in great confusion he ran to
the Body, having had an Essay what Sparks he had to deal with. Sir George Lisle
Major General of the Essex- Forces for the King. Colchester Siege.
Sir George Lisle was made Major General of the Essex-Forces, and the rest of
the Army distributed into Regiments, and distinct Commands, and had their posts
and places assigned them.

The Town was inconsiderable, either in it self, as being intenible and
undefensive, nothing but a Brest-work cast up about it; and as to the adjacent
parts of the County, to receive any provisional relief or great Force into it;
so that there was no hopes of settling or planting in it, for in all probability
it was not thought possible to hold out a Month to an end; nevertheless, by
their industry, courage, vigilance, and patience, it held out three completely,
against a victorious Enemy, recruited (as aforesaid) and assisted with the
Forces of the Neighboring County of Suffolk, on whom deservedly the slaughter
principally fell, for so basely engaging against (whom they had promised to
join with) these Essex-Royalists. Several attempts were made by Fairfax to take
the place by Force, and many Sallies were in requital made by the Besieged, who
both in assayling and defending did great Execution. From the beginning to the
ending of the Siege scarce a day passed without actions from within, at first
to fetch in Cattle, then to cut Grass, which was stained all over with Blood;
for the Besieged would have it, who had now planted some Cannons upon St.
Mary's-Steeple, whence they cruelly annoyed the Leaguer. Insomuch that Fairfax
seeing the loss of his men, and the courage of the Defendants, gave over his
resolution of Storming, The Lord Lucas ( Sir Charles his Brother) his House
ruined.
proceeding with his Approaches to begirt them close, and fortifying his Camp
to starve them, and also to fire them out; which forced the Besieged to burn
the Suburbs, that he intended for shelter; but he possessed the Lord Lucas his
House (Sir Charles his Brother) and ruined it.

The provision they had in the Town (besides what they fought for and brought
in afterward) would not suffice for above a Month; The condition of the
besieged.
and all hopes were abandoned of getting in more; yet the courageous and
generous sufferance of these Loyal Soldiers, resolved to undergo all misery
rather than yield* and so free the Army to march against the Scots, who were
now entered England upon the same account. Their main support was the sauce and
relish to their meat, good store of Prunes and Plums with which the Town was
stored, that did a little palate their Hors-flesh to them, They eat horseflesh.
which they were forced to kill and dress for their victuals, a good while
before their Surrender; there was also some Corn, which Sir Charles charitably
distributed among the Towns-folk, but the Soldiers borrowed it again in their
extremity: in which we must leave these Noble Gentlemen, and take a view of
other concurrent endeavors for the King and Kingdom.

The Fleet which the Parliament had stolen, The Fleet comes in, and render
themselves to the Prince, July 27.
and debauched from their Duty by their first pretenses, perceiving that indeed
they were but such, and no more, repenting of their past service, did, to
satisfy for their former offenses, now turn sides, and rendered themselves to
the Prince, now made Captain General of His Fathers Forces. Their Commander
Col. Rainsborough set on Shore.
The Parliament had some inkling thereof, and therefore had Commissioned
Colonel Rainsborough (a Seaman formerly) to the Command thereof, whom the
Loyal Mariners fairly put on Shore, having posed him with this Question, of
engaging for their Soverain; and at the same time their former Vice Admiral,
Vice Admiral, afterward Sir Will. Batten, brings more Ships to the Prince.
Sir William Batten, now Knighted by the Prince, being disbanded by the
Independent Rulers, as more honest than they would have him, brought some other
Ships to His Majesty's Obedience. With this Naval Force the Prince departed
from Holland, and came into Yarmouth-Road, where it was deliberated, whether he
should land, and attempt the Relief of Colchester. There were then in company
with Him* His Illustrious Brother the Duke of York, The Prince in Yarmouth-
Road with the Duke of York, Pr. Rupert, E. of Brainford, Lord Hopton, Lord
Wilmot, Lord Willoughby, etc.
(who in April before had happily escaped from St. James's, (where he^ was kept
by the Earl of Northumberland his Guardian) by the conduct of Colonel Bamfield,
who was employed therein by the Queen; the Duke pretending to play in the dusk
of the Evening, was disguised in Maiden-habit, and landed safely at Dort in
Holland) Prince Rupert, the Earl of Brainford, the Lords Hopton, Wilmot,
Willougbby, (who had deserted the Parliament, having been charged, imprisoned,
and affronted by the Army) and Culpeper, and other Gentlemen; but understanding
that Colonel Scroop was attending thereabout, they concluded it hazardous to
venture the reputation of the Princes first Arms upon so well-appointed an
Enemy, and thereupon weighed Anchor, and stood into the Downs.

The Navy consisted of 20 Ships of War, most of the first and second Rate; the
other Frigates, well manned and furnished, which anchoring near the Mouth of the
Thames, put the City into great fear; no Ships possibly going in or out without
the Princes permission, The Prince takes a Hamborough- ship. Lord Rich Earl of
Warwick, Admiral for the Parliament, ordered to set forth a Fleet.
a Hamborough-bound Ship richly laden being seized on by him. In all haste
therefor the Parliament order their old Admiral Robert Rich Earl of Warwick to
Equip another Fleet then in the River, and to set to Sea; hoping by his
Authority and influence to reclaim their Revolters; or if not, upon the coming
of more Ships from Portsmouth (which accordingly joined with him) to fight the
Prince. In pursuance of this Command, Warwick appears with his Fleet about
Quinborough; but for all his former indearedness to the Seamen, and their
affection his Masters confided in, he durst not engage, Earl of Warwick at
Quinborough, the Prince summons him.
lest a total defection might have ensued: for the Mariners were grown sensible
how Trade, and consequently Navigation was decayed by the long continuance of
the War; and had more kindness besides for Batten, than they had for the Earl;
which the Prince was sensible of, and therefore in civil terms, by a Message
required him to submit, and bring in the Fleet under his Command, He refuses.
offering him those advantages, and so obligingly inviting him to such just
ends and purposes, that of all the unhappinesses that befell that Nobleman, (as
there were many in his Family and Relations afterward,) this his refusal made
the greatest breach of his Honor, as appeared to him not long after this, when
he was ignominiously turned out as a dangerous person by his Masters, and saw
his only Brother murdered by their Hands.

In the mean while of Warwick's preparation, the Prince, that he might not seem
to be unactive, and to have done nothing worthy his adventure and presence,
landed 500 men to the Relief of Sandwich, Walmer, and Deal-Castles, besieged as
abovesaid. At Deal they were first opposed; and though they did as much as
possible could be expected from men, yet were they finally vanquished by the
unerring victorious hand of the Army-Forces; whereupon instantly ensued the
rendition of those Castles; and the Prince, without any other effect than a
persuasive Letter sent to the House of Lords for the obtaining of a Personal
Treaty with his Father, which soon after ensued, set sail for Goree in Holland,
Prince Charles with the Fleet at Goree in Holland.
where he Anchored his Ships: Warwick vauntingly following him, and demanding
the States to thrust them out to Sea, according to the laws thereof; but the
States were civiller and wiser: Prince Rupert therefore was constituted Admiral
thereof, Pr. Rupert made Admiral.
whose Navigation we shall in its place duly observe.

To prosecute and advantage the same Royal Interest, another design was laid
in Surrey, where near Kingston appeared some 500 men, under the Command of the
Earl of Holland, Earl of Holland appears in Arms at Kingston, July 7.
accompanied by the D. of Buckingham, the Lord Francis Villiers, the young E. of
Peterborough; the Ld. Petre, etc.

T^^y are attaqued by Sir Michael Livesy 's Forces and other Parliamentaria^s.

Lord Francis Villiers slain. Earl of Holland flies into Huntington- shire, and
is taken by Col. Scroop. Col. Dalbier slain. Duke of Buckingham and E. of
Peterborough escape beyond Sea. Earl of Holland sent to Warwick- Castle.


with the Duke of Buckingham* the Lord Francis Villiers his Brother, the young
Earl of Peterburgh, the Lord Petre, and others; but they no sooner rose, but
Colonel Rich and Major Gibbons were upon the back of them, as they Rend^zvouz'd
between Ewel and Nonsuch-Park. Sir Michael Livesy joined also with the other
Parliament-Forces, and presently attaqued these upstarts, who had intended for
Rygate, but were compelled to steer their course for Kingston; in the way
whither, they were all along skirmished: for, to preserve their few Foot they
had placed before, they were forced to march slowly. In one of those onsets,
the nobly-spirited Lord Francis (being too far engaged by his metalsom courage)
was taken Prisoner, and refusing Rebels quarter, was basely killed by a mean
and rude hand; with whose fall fell the courage of all the other. For Holland
having gotten the Town, gave the Foot opportunity to shift for themselves, and
posted away with his Horse to St. Neots in Huntington-shire, where the next day
he and his Party was surprised by Colonel Scroops Regiment of Horse, Colonel
Dalbeir (formerly a great Parliamentarian) being slain in the defense of his
quarters; the Duke of Buckingham and the Earl of Peterborough escaped into
Lincolnshire, and so beyond Sea, leaving their Estates to satisfy for their
offense; and the Earl of Holland was sent Prisoner to Warwick-Castle, where he
continued till he was removed to his Trial and his Death.

To sum up all the disastrous events of this Second War, as it was called,
(though the mention and hopeful concerns of Peace should orderly and of right
interv^ne, a Personal Treaty being now Voted, of which presently) we must look
Northwards, where, on the 13 of July, the Scotch Army, after tedious debates
and struglings with the Kirk and Presbyterian party of that Kingdom, entered
England bringing with them a Declaration containing these five points. 1. That
the King be forthwith brought to London to Treat in Person with the two Houses
of Parliament. 2. That all those who had a hand in or contrived the carrying of
the King away from Holdenby, be condignly punished. 3. That the Army be
disbanded. 4. That Presbytery be settled. 5. That the Members of Parliament who
were forcibly secluded from the Houses, Scotch Army enters England un^er
command of Duke Hamilton.
may be reseated. (The third, first and last, being the very sense of the
Essex, Surrey, Kent, and London Petitions.) Of this Army Duke Hamilton (lately
freed from his Imprisonment by the Kings Commitment at Pendennis-Castle) was
made General; which when the King first understood, Colonel (afterward Earl
of) Middleton Major-Gen. E. of Calendar Lie^t. Genesis Sir Marmaduke (afterward
Lord) Langdale, and Sir Philip Musgrave join Forces with them.
he sadly and prophetically foretold the fatal Issue of that Expedition,
reckoning him as an unfortunate, if not a self-ended person; as his Service in
Germany in supply of the King of Sweden, and in favor of the Prince Elector
Palatine, to the Ruin of many brave English Gentlemen, did evidently declare.
Colonel Middleton, (afterward Earl of Middleton, His Majesty's High
Commissioner of Scotland) was Major General; and the Earl of Calender
Lieutenant General. It consisted of 15000 Horse and Foot effective, and was
increased by an addition of 3000 English, under Sir Marmaduke (after Lord)
Langdale, and Sir Philip Musgrave, ancient Families in those parts, who had a
while before surprised Carlisle and Berwick, near the same time that Major
Morris surprised Pomfret-Castle (which Cromwell afterward in his Northern march
visited, and took the Town thereof) just upon the time of the Welsh
Insurrection.

For the Honor of another brave person, we may not omit Colonel Wogan, Col.
Wogan revolts from the Parliament.
then a Captain in the Parliaments Army, who perceiving the wicked designs of
his party, deserted them; and being sent to oppose, did join with this Scotch
Army, before their advance into England, bringing a gallant Troop along with
him. He afterward did the King eminent service in Scotland and Ireland, of
which hereafter. This entire strength wandering by the way of Westmerland and
Cumberland, (which affords a pleasant passage, wherewith the Reader may be
diverted; one Colonel Stuart who was in this Expedition, being afterward set
on the Stool of Repentance by the Kirk, with others in the same Engagement, and
being asked gravely and severely by the Minister, whether he was not convinced
that by his Malignancy he went out of the way, Col. Stuart 's saying on the
Stool of Repentance.
suddenly replied, Yea, for we went a wrong through Westmerland, etc. when we
should have marched for York, and so to London)* an ominous presage (besides the
unluckiness of the General) of their overthrow, Major General Lambert opposes
Sir Marmaduke Langdale, but forced to retreat.
none of their Armies thriving that came that Road. Major General Lambert made
the first opposition, but was beaten by the English, and forced back to
Appleby, and so to a further retreat, (Sir Marmaduke taking in some small
places of strength by the way) until he joined with Cromwell now come from
Wales, to whom the chiefty of that service was committed: Cromwell joins with
Lambert.
his whole strength amounting to 11000, most of them Horse and Dragoons.

Preston- Fight August. 17.
At Preston in Lancashire both Armies faced one another; and some two miles
thence, on a Moor, on the East Side of the Town, engaged: the brunt of the
fight continued but two hours; nor had it endured so long, but through the
valor of the English Royalists, on whom the stress lay. The Scots Army was so
ill ordered, that they came not all to the Fight, nor could relieve one
another; so that a general Rout ensued; one part flying toward Lancaster, who
were pursued by Col. Twisleton and Tho^nhills Regiments of Horse; and the other
over Ribley-River, whom the Body of the Army ^ollowed: most of their Foot,
under Major General Baily, came that night to Wigan, fighting and crying
Quarter in the Rear; and the next day to Warrington-Bridge, where in their way,
at a place called Red-bank, in a narrow lane, they made a stand with a Body of
Pikes, and lined the Hedges with Muskets, who so rudely entertained the
pursuing Enemy, that they were compelled to stop (having lost abundance of men,
and Col. Thornhill himself) until the coming up of Col. Pride's Regiment of
Foot, who after a sharp dispute put those brave Fellows to the run: The Scots
defeated.
they were Commanded by a little Spark in a blew Bonnet, that performed the
part of an excellent Commander, and was killed on the place. After this, they
never turned Head, but ran, crying, Mercy, Mercy, (so that the noise thereof
was heard at 5 Miles distance) until they came to Warrington-Bridge, where
Baily made Conditions for Quarter, and rendered himself and 4000 of them
Prisoners. Major General Middleton taken.

Duke Hamilton flies.


Middleton was likewise taken with 400 Horse in his flight homeward; Hamilton
fled first to Namptwich with 3000 Horse, where the Country People surprised 500
of them; and thence in haste to Vttoxeter in Staffordshire, where he yielded
himself to the Lord Gray of Grooby, and Col. Wayt, who were ready to encounter
him; Is taken by the Lord Gray of Grooby.
and was thence brought prisoner to Ashby de la Zouch, where he was kept in
great state, and courted by those the Grandees appointed to attend him, on
purpose to cajole and fish out what Great Oues, Members of both Houses, the
City, and Clergy, had a hand in his undertaking; it being more than suspected
that he had such Invitation. But the unhappy man was yet so fortunate to
others, as to reveal little or nothing to their prejudice, reserving his
thoughts till the last extremity, for his ransom; but he overstood the Market.
To save the Reader the trouble of particulars, he may know, that all that ever
belonged to that Army was taken, the Scots that escaped (which were but few)
hardly carrying a Sword home with them: such as got home, happened to light
upon Monro, Monro coming to assist Hamilton, but returns.
who was marching after Hamilton with a Reserve; and upon news of this defeat,
hasted back again into Scotland, having intelligence that Cromwell was marching
toward him.

Cromwell marches into Scotland.
Who to complete his Successes and Designs together, thought it expedient to
make sure of a party in Scotland, that should keep all things quiet there,
while he should accomplish his intended mischief here, and under the notion of
Godliness, and the Godly Party, should amuse and cheat one another, to the
helping and bringing about his most ungodly Conspiracy. To this purpose he
marched into Scotland, complementing the Kirk-men with the civility of his
Journey to secure and settle them, in return of their kindness to the
Parliament in 1643. who cawed him again, and congratulated his Victory in
Scripture Language, who was no way behind them in those hypocritical Cantings.

He was likewise sumptuously feasted by Argyle and others of that Party; He is
feasted by Argyle.
and lastly, His policy in di^a^min^ and disbanding the Scots Forces.
by the Committee of Estates, of whom he required and obtained, that all the
Armies both of Monro and Lanerick, who yet stood out, and Argyle's in
opposition to them, should be disbanded ( Berwick and Carlisle being already
delivered to him) that so there might be none in readiness to hinder his
resolutions. Secondly, that a new Parliament be called* And thirdly, that none
should be elected to sit and Vote there, Sir Matthew Boynton Governor of
Scarbrough for the King.

Major Lilburn seizes Tinmouth- Castle for the King.

It is resurprized for the Parliament.

The Castle stormed, Lilburn* and the Soldiers put to the Sword.


or in the General Assembly, that had any hand in the late Invasion under
Hamilton. And so, after many high expressions of their thankful resentments and
obligations for his meritorious service, took his leave of them, and returned
into England; being, as he passed through Yorkshire with his Forces, desired
by that Committee to assist them in the reducing of Scarborough, some while
before declared for the King. Sir Matthew Boynton (the former Governor)
returning to his Allegiance, and securing the Town on that score.
Tinmouth-Castle was likewise seized on for the King by Major Lilburn, one of
(that famous) John Lilburn's Brothers, who only seriously repented of his
disloyalty, and would have made satisfaction, to the redemption of his Families
and his own Honor, but was presently, and before he had time to fortify and
prepare for defense, set upon by Forces sent by Sir Arthur Haslerig from
Newcastle, who stormed the Castle and carried it, putting the Soldiers and
Lilburn himself to the Sword.

Return we now to the distressed and starved Colchester, where the Defendants
had eaten up most of their Horses, in expectation of relief from the Scotch
Army, being encouraged to hold out by Letters from the Lord Langdale of their
Armies speedy advance to their succor. But understanding by information from
the Enemy without, that that Army was totally defeated, these unfortunate
Heroical Royalists were forced to bethink themselves of a Surrender; which
Fairfax would now accept upon no other terms (after much debate by Treaty) than
the Common Soldiers to quarter for life, and the Officers to mercy. These hard
Terms were disputed within, and were at the first generously scorned; and
thereupon a resolution was taken, seconded with a Protestation, whereby they
engaged one to another, by the assistance of God, to break through the Enemy on
Friday night the 23 of August: but through the dissatisfaction or personal
consideration of some of the Grandees, this noble Design was hindered, and the
Soldiers by the delay and after-consultation of it (it being respited a day
longer) being enjealoused as if the Officers would leave the Foot in the
action, and shift for themselves (and it was impossible to attempt their Line
without Foot and Pioneers) they were forced to accept of the former Conditions;
Colchester surrendered August 28. on hard terms.
and accordingly August the 28th they rendered themselves, a sad spectacle to
all, but that barbarous and insulting Enemy, who presently stripped them of all
they had left comfortable, their Money and Apparel.

Within two hours after the surrender, Sir Charles Lucas and Sir George Lisle
shot to death Aug. 28.
Col. Ireton was sent to the Inn where all the Officers were put, to acquaint
Sir Charles Lucas, Sir George Lisle, and Sir Bernard Gascoyn, that by a doom of
the Council of War they were sentenced to be shot to death within three hours,
and that they should prepare themselves accordingly. They all of them
undauntedly received this sad Message; Sir Charles only desiring some little
time longer to prepare himself, both in reference to his peace with God, and
concerns of his Relations; which he said he asked not for fear of death, or in
hope of life, which he would not value from their hands. But this was refused
by Ireton, who, on purpose to make the General odious, then the only impediment
to his Father-in-Law's Greatness (which was afterward removed by a more
innocent wile) had urged him to this murder. Seven a Clock at night was the
appointed time; to prepare them against which, Ireton proffered the Generals
Chaplain; but him they refused, the Lord Capel's being desired to assist them
in this last duty to God and Nature.

Accordingly they were brought unto the place of Execution (Sir Bernard Gascoyn
being upon more humane consideration as a Stranger reprieved) where after two
or three ejaculations, Sir Bernard Gascoyn sentenced to be shot to death, but
reprieved.
Sir Charles tearing open his Doublet, and crying, Shoot Rebels, was presently
dispatched. Sir George seeing him fall, ran to him, and fell upon his Face, and
kissed him, saying, Oh how soon has a brave Soul expired! but I shall not stay
long behind thee; my death at hand shall join us both together again. And then
standing up in a most heroical posture, drawing out of his Pocket five pieces
of Gold, four whereof he sent to four Friends, the other he gave to his
Executioners; and looking round about him, saying, Oh how many do I see here,
whom I have saved i^ but blood, and must mine now be shed in cold! sure such
barbarity is not among the Scythians! He likewise then opened his Doublet, and
with the Invocation of the Name of Jesus, and bidding the Rebels shoot and do
their worst, was likewise shoot dead and both their Bodies interred in the
Vault where Sir Charles his Family were laid: where those impious wretches, the
Common Soldiers, (as they were bid, and to fit them for succeeding Barbarisms)
did violate those Honorable Relics, by taking the Hair from the Scalps; so
extending their malice beyond his death, even to his deceased Ancestors.

This odious Fact (for which the Sufferers Memories, and the due Renown of
their Virtue and Valor shall flourish, and the Names of those blood-thirsty
men that perpetrated and counseled it, shall stink and rot) was most highly
resented: For it was very obvious, that it was done on purpose to exasperate
and grieve the King, with whom at the same time the Parliament had Voted (and
were proceeding in) a Treaty; of which we come next to speak: leaving these two
Heroes to a resuscitation of their Glories, being without any partiality of
affection declared by those that knew them, one of them the best for
Horse-service, and the other for Infantry, that ever Commanded in their quality
in the Kings Armies.

The Londoners continue Neuters.
During all these several warlike endeavors for the Kings Restitution, the City
of London, as was said before, kept it self in a kind of Neutrality, vainly
expecting to accomplish those ends which had been so powerfully prosecuted by
the Loyal Sword, by the peaceful Subscriptions of the Pen to a Petition for a
Personal Treaty. But indeed the appearance of so many dangers to the
Parliament, gave them hopes that they would begin to consider, if not of Peace
to the Kingdom, yet of safety to themselves, if any one of those Loyal Essays
should have taken effect: Nor were they deceived therein; but they did not cast
this consideration far enough, nor did they manage it rightly. For they might
have forethought of the Armies prevailing success, and consequently of the
variation and different course of their intentions to the Public, and should
have therefore kept the balance even between the Royalists (whose Revenge upon
Victory they pretended to fear) and the insolent Sectarian Host, who not long
after requited them for their looking on, by the most impudent outrages upon
their Charter; excluding all men from any place of Trust, or Vote, or Benefit
of a Vote, that signed to this Personal Treaty, which upon their unanimous
Address they obtained of the Parliament, A Personal Treaty voted* Jun. 30.
who to methodize and open the way thereto, proceeded as follows.

Seeing themselves thus compelled into this Affair, and that their former
Resolves of Non-address had so quickly altered the Scene, with the Hypocritical
Repentance of the Army at the very same time (for their former saucy
intermed^ings with them, or Civil Affairs) they fain and imitate likewise the
better part of Penitence, by a pretended Restitution, beginning at the right
place, first, b^ these ensuing Nullities (as indeed at last they proved)
Resolves or Dissolves, choose you whether.

I have thought fit to deliver the whole Treaty entire, without any
intercurrencie of other State Affairs, it being of the main and sole
concernment.

The Votes for a Treaty. Die Veneris July 28. 1648.
Resolved,

That a Treaty be had with the King in Person in the Isle of Wight, Resolves,
That a Personal Treaty with the King be held at the Isl^ of Wight.
by a Committee appointed by both Houses, upon the Propositions presented to
him at Hampton Court, and the taking away of Wards and Li^^ries, and for
settling of ^^afe and well-grounded Peace. Which was followed Wednesday the 2 of
Au^^^ with this other:

Resolved,

That a Committee of both Houses be sent to his Majesty, That a Committee be
sent to his Majesty to acquaint him therewithal.
to acquaint him with their Resolutions to Treat Personally with his Majesty by
a Committee of both Houses, in such place as his Majesty shall make choice of
in the Isle of Wight, upon (...). Propositions presented at Hampton Court, etc.
which Treaty is Resolved by the two Houses to be transacted with H^nour,
Freedom, and safety to his Majesty in the Isle of Wight.

And accordingly Instructions were given to the Earl of Middlesex, Earl of
Middlesex, Sir Io. Hippe^ley, and John Bulkley Esquire. delegated ^^ the Parliament
to attend on the King.
Sir John Hippesley and John Bulkley Esquire, delegated to attend upon the
King, what they should say to, or receive from his Majesty. At their arrival,
the King showed himself gladded with the good news brought, and received them
very affectionately, and forwith applied himself to an answer to the
Parliament, as they had desired, in haec verba.

CHARLES REX.

IF the Peace of my Dominions were not much dearer to me than any particular
Interest whatsoever, His Majesty's Answer to the two Houses of Parliament.
I had too much reason to take notice of the several Votes which passed against
me, and the sad condition I have been in now above these seven Months. But
since you my two Houses of Parliament have opened (as it seems to me) a fair
beginning to a happy Peace, I shall heartily apply my self thereunto; and to
that end, The King cheerfully embraces the overt^^es of Peace.
I will as clearly, and as shortly as I may, set you down those things which I
conceive necessary to this blessed work, so that we together may remove all
Impediments that may hinder a happy Conclusion of this Treaty, which with all
cheerfulness I do embrace.

And to this end, you your selves have laid most excellent grounds: For what
can I reasonably expect more, than to Treat with Honor, Freedom, and Safety,
upon such Propositions as you have, or shall present unto me, and such as I
shall make unto you? But withal remember, it is the definition, not names of
things, which makes them righly known; and that without means to perform, no
Propositions can take effect. And truly my present condition is such, that I
can no more Treat, Demands of the Parliament to recall those Votes and Orders by
which his Subjects are frighted from coming or sending to him.
than a blind man can judge of colors, or he run a race who has both his Feet
fast tied together; wherefore my first necessary demand is, That you will
recall all such Votes and Orders, by which people are frighted from coming,
writing, or speaking freely to me. Next, that such men of all Professions whom
I shall send for, as of necessary use to me in this Treaty, may be admitted to
wait upon me. In a word, that I may be in the same state of Freedom I was in
when I was last at Hampton Court. That all men of necessary Professions be
admitted to come to him.
And indeed, less cannot in any reasonable measure make good those offers which
you have made me by your Votes. For how can I Treat with Honor, so long as
people are terrified with Votes and Orders against coming to speak or write to
me? And am I honorably Treated, so long as there is none about me (except a
Barber who came now with the Commissioners) that ever I named to wait upon me?
Or with Freedom, until I may call such to me of whose service I shall have use
in so great and difficult a work? Note, That His Majesty had suffered his Beard
to overgrow in that solitary restraint of near seven Months; so that Compassion
wooed, where Majesty once awed.
And for Safety (I speak not of my Person, having no apprehension that way) how
can I judge to make a safe and well-grounded Peace, until I may know (without
disguise) the true present state of all my Dominions, and particularly of all
those, whose Interests are necessarily concerned in the Peace of the Kingdoms?
Which leads me naturally to the last necessary demand I shall make for the
bringing this Treaty to an happy end; which is,

That the Scots may be invited to send their Propositions.
That you alone, or you and I jointly, do invite the Scots to send some persons
authorized by them, to treat upon such Propositions as they shall make. For
certainly the Public and Necessary Interest they have in this great
Settlement, is so clearly plain to all the world, that I believe no body will
deny the necessity of their concurrence, in order to a durable Peace. The King
declaring a tend^r affection for both his Kingdoms.
Wherefore I will only say, that as I am a King of both Nations, so will I
yield to none in either Kingdom, for being truly and zealously affected for the
Good and Honor of both; my resolution being never to be partial for either, to
the prejudice of the other.

The King appoints Newport for the place of Treaty.
Now, as to the place (because I conceive it to be rather a circumstantial, than
a real part of this Treaty, I shall not much insist upon it) I name Newport in
this Isle; yet the fervent zeal I have that a speedy end be put to these
unhappy distractions, does force me earnestly to desire you to consider, what a
great loss of time it will be, to Treat so far from the Body of my two Houses,
when every small Debate (of which doubtless there will be many) must be
transmitted to Westminster, But urges the reconveniencies of Treating so far
from London*
before they be concluded. And really, I think (though to some it may seem a
Paradox) that peoples minds will be much more apt to settle, seeing me Treat in
or near London, than in the Isle, because, so long as I am here, it will never
be believed by many, that I am really so free, as before this Treaty begin I
expect to be. And so I leave, and recommend this Point to your serious
consideration.

And thus I have not only fully accepted of the Treaty which you have
propounded to me by the Votes of the 3 of this Month, but also given it all the
furtherance that lies in me, by demanding the necessary means for the effectual
performance thereof. All which are so necessarily implied by, though not
particularly mentioned in the Votes, that I can no way doubt of your ready
compliance with me herein. His Majesty (...) the Delegates to expedite the
Treaty by dispatching their Commissioners.
I have now no more to say, but to conjure you by all that is dear to
Christians, Honest Men, or good Patriots, that you will make all the expedition
possible to begin this happy Work, by hasting down your Commissioners, fully
authorized, and well instructed, and by enabling me (as I have showed you) to
Treat; Praying the God of Peace so to bless our endeavors, that all my
Dominions may speedily enjoy a safe and well-grounded Peace.

Carisbroke, Aug. 10.

All which desires of the King were assented to, The Parliament appoint
Commissioners, five Lords, ten Commoners.
to their full intent and purpose; and five Lords and ten Commoners appointed
Commissioners for the Treaty, whose names were as follows: The Earls of
Northumberland, Pembroke, Salisbury, Middlesex, and Lord Viscount Say: The Lord
Wenman, Mr. Denzil Hollis, Mr. William Pierpoint, Sir Henry Vane Junior, Sir
Harbottle Grimstone, Mr. Samuel Brown, Sir John Potts, Mr. Crew, Sergeant Glyn,
and Mr. Bulkley. The Treaty to begin ten days after the Kings Assent to Treat
as is agreed, and to continue from thence forty days. And desire his Majesty's
Royal Word for his continuance in the Island till 20 days after the Treaty.
Resolved likewise, That His Majesty be desired to Pass his Royal Word to make
his constant Residence in the Isle of Wight, from the time of his Assenting to
Treat, until twenty days after the Treaty be ended, unless it be otherwise
desired by both Houses of Parliament; and that after His Royal Word so Passed,
and his Assent given to Treat as aforesaid, from thenceforth the former
Instructions of the 16 of Nov. 1647. be vacated, and these observed; and that
Col. Hammond be authorized to receive His Majesty's Royal Word Passed to his
two Houses of Parliament for his Residence in the Isle of Wight accordingly, as
is formerly expressed, Their Votes of Non-address repealed.
and shall certify the same to both Houses. They likewise Repealed the Votes
of Non-address, and desired a List from his Majesty of those he would have to
attend him. Whereupon the King by his Message of the 28 of August (not being in
the former limitation) accepted of the Treaty, His Majesty sends the Parliament
a List of such Persons he desired might attend him.
desiring the expediting of the Commissioners; and sent them a List of those
persons he desired to be with him. First, for the Journey into Scotland, he
desired a Pass for Mr. Parsons, one of the Grooms of his Presence Chamber:
next, the Duke of Richmond, Marquess Hartford, Earl of Lindsey, Earl of
Southampton, Gentlemen of his Bedchamber; Mr. Kirk, Mr. Leviston, Mr. Murray,
Mr. John Ashburnham, Mr. Leg, Grooms of his said Bedchamber; Mr. Hen, Mr.
Rogers, Mr. Lovet, Pages of his Back-stairs; Sir Fulk Grevil, Captain Titus,
Captain Buroughs, Mr. Cresset, Abr. Dowset, Firebrace, to wait as they did, or
as he should appoint them: The Bishops of London and Salisbury, Drs Shelden,
Hammond, Oldsworth, Sanderson, Turner, Heywood, Chaplains; Davis his Barber,
Rives Yeoman of the Robes; Sir Edward Sidenham, Mr. Terwhit, Hunsdon, Esquires;
Mrs Wheeler Landress; Sir Thomas Gardener, Sir Orlando Bridgeman, Sir Robert
Holbourn, Mr. Ieffrey Palmer, Mr. Thomas Cook, Mr. John Vaughan, Lawyers; Sir
Edward Walker, Mr. Philip Warwick, Mr. Nicholas Oudart, Mr. Charles Whitaker,
Clerks and Writers; Mr. Clement Kinnersley, and Mr. Peter Newton, to make ready
the House for Treaty. To which, at the Kings request, were after added for the
Civil Law, the Kings Advocate, Dr. Rives, Dr. Duck; and these Divines, the
Bishops of Armagh, Exeter, Rochester, and Worcester; Dr. Fern, and Dr. Morley.

The Treaty began the 18th of September; The Treaty began Sept. 18.
which the King so prudentially managed single against all the Commissioners
(none of his Party being suffered to assist him at the Conferences) that there
appeared some hopes of a right understanding. The Propositions concerning
Religion took up the longest time, both in discourse and writing, whereby he
fully evinced the right of Episcopacie: which his Answers, with his Majesty's
Propositions on the 2 of October. being sent up to the Parliament,
notwithstanding produced these Votes.

Resolved by the Lords and Commons, The Parliament dissatisfied with the Kings
Propositions. They send thanks to their Commissioners.
etc. That they are not satisfied in the Propositions made by his Majesty in
his Letter; and that a Letter be sent to the Commissioners in the Isle of
Wight, to acquaint them that the Houses do well approve of their proceedings,
and do give them thanks, etc. requiring them still to proceed punctually
according to their Instructions.

His Majesty's Propositions. He is willing to confess himself Author of the
War, rather than the Peace shall be frustrated.

That the Assembly of Divines shall sit at Westminster 3 years. That the
Directory shall be confirmed for 3 years, etc.


The Sum of His Majesty's Propositions was this: He expressed his Consent to the
Proemial or first Proposition, of acknowledging his beginning the War, that he
might not by denying it be refused Peace; but that his Consent not to be valid
till all was concluded in the Treaty. Concerning the Church, he will Consent
that the Calling and Sitting of the Assembly of Divines at Westminster be
confirmed for three years by Act of Parliament; and will by Act of Parliament
confirm likewise the Directory for 3 years in England, Ireland, and Wales, and
the Form of Government by Presbyters for the same term. Provided that his
Majesty, and those of his judgment, and others, who cannot in Conscience submit
thereunto, he not obliged to comply with it. And that a free Consultation may
be had with the Assembly of Divines in the mean time, twenty of his Majesty's
nomination being added to them; whereby it may be determined how after the said
term (by his Majesty and the Parliament) the said Church Government and
Public Worship may be settled; and the Articles of Christian Religion (now
delivered him) may then be considered of, and care taken for tender Consciences.

That Legal Estates for Lives or Years shall be made of Bishops-lands, Provided
the Propriety remain in the Church.
Concerning the Bishops Lands and Revenues, and to the Contracts and Purchases
of them; His Majesty will Consent to an Act or Acts of Parliament for their
satisfaction, whereby the Legal Estates for Lives or for Years (at their
choice) not exceeding ninety nine years, shall be made of those Lands, at the
old or some more moderate rents; which if it will not satisfy, his Majesty
will propound and consent to some other way: Provided that the Propriety and
Inheritance of those Lands do still remain in the Church, according to the
pious intentions of the Donors; and the rest that shall be reserved to be for
their maintenance.

That there be a Reformation, and concerning Papists.
His Majesty will give Consent for a Reformation, viz. Observation of the
Lord's Day, and such other things in these their Propositions as they have
desired, as also Consents to those Propositions against Papists. But as to the
Thrust in by some rigid Presbyterians, and maintained there by the
Independants, because they knew the King would never Assent to it, and so no
Conclusion.
Covenant, his Majesty is not therein satisfied that he can either Sign or
Swear it, or Consent to impose it on the Consciences of others; nor conceives
it proper or useful at this time to be insisted on.

That the two Houses shall dispose of the Militia for 10 years, or during his
Reign.
Touching the Militia, his Majesty conceives that their Propositions demand a
far larger Power over the persons of his Subjects, than has ever hitherto been
warranted by the Laws and Statutes of the Realm: yet considering the present
distractions require more, and trusting in his two Houses of Parliament, that
they will not abuse the Power hereby granted; his Majesty will consent to an
Act of Parliament, wherein it shall be declared, That for the space of ten
years, or during his Majesty's whole Reign, if they shall think it more
satisfactory, the two Houses shall have the sole disposal of the Militia, and
raise Money, as in their Propositions: And that neither the King, his Heirs or
Successors, or any other, but such as shall act by the Authority or Approbation
of the Lords and Commons, shall during the space of ten years exercise any of
the Powers aforesaid; nor after that term, without the Advice of the Lords and
Commons. And Consents to the entrusting the Militia into the Cities hands,
according to their Propositions: Provided, That all Patents, Commissions, and
other Acts concerning the Premises, be made and acted in his Majesty's Name,
That the affairs of Ireland be determined by the Parliam.
by Warrant signified by the Lords and Commons, or such other as they shall
authorize for that purpose.

Touching Ireland, his Majesty leaves it to the Determination of his two
Houses, and will give his Consent as is herein hereafter expressed.

That Taxes he levied for the payment of the Army and public Debts.
Touching Public Debts, his Majesty will give his Consent to such an Act for
raising of Moneys, by general and equal Taxations, for the payment and
satisfying the Arrears of the Army, and Public Engagementss of the Kingdom,
as shall be agreed on by both Houses of Parliament, and shall be ordered by
them, or their appointment, within the space of one year after passing an Act
for the same.

That all the Chief Officers of State shall be nominated by the Parl. for 10
years.
His Majesty will give Consent that all the Great Officers of State, and Judges,
for the said term of ten years, be nominated by the Parliament, to continue
quamdiu se been gesserint; and in the intervals of Parliament, to be nominated
by such as they shall authorize.

His Majesty will Consent, That the Militia of the City of London and
Liberties, for ten years may be in the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, Common Council and
Sheriffs thereof.

With the Tower and Chief Officers thereof.


That the Militia of the City, and Liberties thereof, during the space of ten
years, may be in the ordering and Government of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Common Council assembled, or such as they shall appoint; whereof the Lord
Major, and the Sheriffs for the time being, to be three; to be employed and
directed from time to time by the Parliament: And that no Citizen shall be
drawn forth into the Field, without his own consent. And an Act be passed for
granting and confirming the Charters, Customs, etc thereof: And that during the
said ten years, the Tower of London may be in the Government of the City of
London; and the Chief Officers thereof, during the said space, to be nominated
and removeable by the Common Council, as was desired in the Propositions.

His Majesty having thus far expressed his Consent for the present satisfaction
and securing of his two Houses of Parliament, and those that have adhered unto
them, touching the four first Propositions, and other the particulars
before-specified; as to all the rest of the Propositions delivered to him at
Hampton Court (not referring to those ^eads) and to that of the Court of Wards
since delivered; as also, to the remaining Propositions concerning Ireland, His
Majesty desires only when he shall come to Westminster, personally to advise
with his two Houses, and to deliver his Opinion and Reasons of it: which being
done, he will leave the whole matter of those remaining Propositions to the
determination of his two Houses, which shall prevail with him for his Consent
accordingly.

And his Majesty does (for his own particular) only propose, His Majesty
proposes his liberty to repair to Westminster, and to be restored to his
Revenues.

Proffereth an Act of Oblivion to all persons.


that he may have liberty to repair forthwith to Westminster, and be restored
to a condition of absolute Freedom and Safety (a thing which he shall never
deny to any of his Subjects) and to the possession of his Lands and Revenues;
and that an Act of Oblivion and Indemnity may pass, to extend to all persons,
for all matters relating to the late unhappy differences: which being agreed by
his two Houses of Parliament, his Majesty will be ready to make these his
Concessions binding, by giving them the force of Laws by his Royal assent.



Though these Condescentions (nor indeed if they had been to the very letter of
the Propositions would they have been satisfactory) did not at present suit the
high and imperious humor of the Parliament; The Parliament imperious. Most of
their Commissioners dutiful in their behavior toward the King.
yet by the good temperament and respectful behavior of the major part of the
Commissioners, such a mutual confidence was wrought, that the King won with
their dutiful persuasion, did in most of those things (besides Religion and
Church Lands) comply with their demands; and then the Parliament upon debate of
the whole Treaty, Voted his Concessions a ground to settle the Kingdom: of
which presently.

But a little before the conclusion of the Treaty, which happened on the 27th of
Nov. the Army ( Cromwell being now come out of Scotland) had after a long
Consultation how to break it off, The Army's Remonstrance at St. Albans.
hammered out a villainous Remonstrance on the 16th of that Month, at St.
Albans; and on the 28th presented it to the House of Commons by Col. Ewers
(related to the Lord Ewers) and seven Officers more: the Treasonable and
Execrable Heads thereof (setting aside that Principle, That the Magistery of
the People is Supreme) were as follows: First, The villainous heads thereof.
That the King be brought to Justice.
That the Capital and Grand Author of our Troubles, viz. the Person of the
King, by whose procurement, and for whose Interest of Will and Power all our
Wars have been, may be brought to Justice, for the Treason, Blood, and Mischief
he is therein guilty of. Secondly, That the Prince of Wales and Duke of York
render themselves by a certain day, or be proclaimed Traitors.
That a Timely Day may be set for the Prince of Wales and the Duke of York to
come in; by which time, if they do not, that then they may immediately be
declared incapable of any Trust or Government in this Kingdom, or its
Dominions, and thence to stand exiled for ever, as Enemies or Traitors, to die
without mercy if ever after found or taken therein, etc. If by the time limited
they do render themselves, that then the Prince be proceeded with as on
appearance he shall give satisfaction or not; and then the Duke as he shall
give satisfaction, may be considered as to future Trust or not. That the
Revenue of the Crown be sequestered.
But however, that the Revenue of the Crown (saving necessary allowances for
the Children, and for Servants and Creditors to the Crown) be Sequestered, and
the costly pomp suspended, for a good number of years; and that this Revenue be
for that time disposed toward Public Charges, Debts, and Damages, for the
easing of the people; so as the Estates neither of Friends to public
Interest, nor alone of inferior Enemies thereunto, may bear the whole burden
of that loss and charge, which by and for that Family the Kingdom has been put
unto. That Capital punishments be inflicted on some Chief Instruments in the
Wars.
Thirdly, That Capital punishment be speedily Executed upon a competent number
of his Chief Instruments also, both in former and later Wars; and that some of
both sorts be pitched upon, as are really in your hands or reach. Fourthly, That
the rest of the Delinquents, English, may upon rendering themselves to Justice,
have mercy for their lives, and that only Fines be set upon them; and their
persons declared incapable of any Public Trust, That all Delinq^ents come in
by a certain day, or their Estates be confiscated, and they to die without
mercy.
or having any voice in Elections thereto, at least for a good number of years:
And that a short day may be set by which all such Delinquents may come in: and
for those who come not in by that day, that their Estates be absolutely
Confiscated and sold to the Public use, and their Persons stand Exiled as
Traitors, and to die without mercy, if ever after found in the Kingdom or its
Dominions. That Fines, Compositions, and Confiscations be disposed for the
payment of the Soldiery.
Fifthly, That the satisfaction of Arrears to the Soldiery, with other public
Debts, and competent reparations of public Damages, may be put into some
orderly way: And that therefore the Fines and Compositions of Delinquents be
disposed to those uses only, as also the Confiscations of such who shall be
excluded from Pardon, or not come in by the day assigned.


Now after Public Justice thus provided for, we proceed in order to the
general satisfaction and Settlement of the Kingdom.

That the Parliament set some period to their own Power.
First, That you would set some reasonable and certain period to your own
Power.

Secondly, That with a period to this Parliament, that there may be a
Settlement of the Peace and future Government of the Kingdom. And in order
thereto, First, That there may be a certain Succession of future Parliaments,
Annual or Biennial, That the future Government of of the Kingdom may be settled.
with secure provision, 1. For the certainty of their Sitting, Meeting, and
Ending. 2. For equal Elections. 3. For the Peoples meeting to Elect: Provided
that none engaged in War against the Kingdom, may Elect or be Elected, nor any
other who oppose this Settlement. 4. For clearing the power of Parliaments as
Supreme; only they may not give away any Foundation of Common Right. 5. For
liberty of Entering Dissents in the said Representatives, that the people may
know who are fit for future Trusts; but without any penalty for their free
Judgments.

That no King be hereafter admitted, but upon Election.
Thirdly, That no King be hereafter admitted, but upon Election of, and as upon
Trust from the people by such their Representatives; nor without first
disclaiming all pretense to a Negative Voice against the Determinations of the
Commons in Parliament: and this to be done in some Form more clear, than
heretofore in the Coronation Oath.

And he to accord to these Propositions as they shall be established by the
Agreement of the people.
These Matters of General Settlement, we propound to be provided by the
Authority of the Commons in this Parliament; and to be further Established by a
general Contract or Agreement of the people, with their Subscriptions
thereunto: And that no King be admitted to the Crown, nor other person to any
Office of public Trust, without express Accord and Subscription to the same.

This was the Basis, Method, and Model of Cromwels Tyranny; and though he had
changed his pretenses, according to the exigences of time and occasions, yet he
was fixed here, as having learnt from Matchiavel, Something near the same
stuff, except what touched the King, was Signed by nine Regiments of Horse, and
seven of Foot, and afterward promoted in London by Lieutenant Colonel Lilburne,
and Mr. Prince, by Petition to the Parliament, who condemned both, November.
1647. and yet the same Month next year it revived.
that there is no readier way to an Usurpation, than by destroying the
Fundamental Laws and Essentials of Government, and proposing pleasing
Innovations to the Vulgar. This he drove at in his possessed Servants the
Levellers, whom he put on to divulge this new secret of Empire; The Levellers
set on by Cromwell to prosecute this design.
but they thundering of it out (and to try its acceptance) as the rain in
unseasonable weather, he was content to abandon them to a shower of Bullets,
influenced on one of his prime Bo^tefeus, by the Command of the Parliament to
the General, as beforesaid, in 1647 at Ware. For observe the trace of his
Policy after this Critical Juncture, when he had superated all difficulties,
and removed all obstacles; and you shall see how sequaciously he copied these
Articles of Agreement (as they were called) of the people.

First, Destroy the King as a Tyrant, then exclude the Royal Progeny, then
disable its potent Friends, and ingratiate with the mean. Next, Gratify and
engage the Soldiers with promise of Arrears and Establishment. Then the next
subsequent great work is the dissolution of the Parliament; then a Chimaera of
Government, such as Barebones Convention: And lastly, A pretended Elective
Tyranny, under the Style of Protector; which his impiety afforded him not only
to subscribe, but to swear to.

The ill news of this pestilent Paper flew amain to the Isle of Wight, where
the King surprised with this monstrous disloyalty, at the reading of it to him
at Newport, propounded these Queries.

1. Whether this Remonstrance be agreeable to the form^r Declarations of the
Army? The Kings Queries to the Remonstrance.
and if not Whether the Parliament would maze good their Votes, that after he
had consented to what they desired, he should be in a capacity of Honor,
Freedom, and Safety? 2. Whether his acknowledgment of the Blood that has been
spilt in the late Wars (nothing being as yet absolutely concluding or binding)
could be urged so far, as to be made use of by way of evidence against him, or
any of his party? 3. Whether the Arguments that he has used in a free and
personal Treaty, to lessen, or extenuate, and avoid the exactness of the
Conditions, though in manner and form only, might be charged against him as an
act of obstinacy, or wilful persistence in what is alleged against him, in
that he goes on in a destructive course, and enmity against the People and Laws
of the Land; when he has declared, that his Conscience was satisfied
concerning diverse parti^ulars in the Propositions? 4. Whereas by the Letter of
the Law, all persons charged to offend against the Law ought to be tried by
their Peers or Equals, what the Law is if the person questioned is without a
Peer? And if the Law (which of it self is but a dead Letter) seems to condemn
him, by what Power shall Judgment be given, and who shall judge it, or from
whence shall the Administrators of such Judgment derive their power, which may
(by the same Law) be deemed the Supreme Power or Authority of Magistracy in
the Kingdom?
These his Queries were resolved no otherwise, A strict Guard put upon the King.
than by a strict Guard put upon him; so that the Commissioners coming to
receive his Answer of him, he told them be thought to have sent his Answer
sealed, because he had been prejudiced by sending others open: but since his
condition could not be worse (no body suffered to speak with him without
suspicion) he had sent it open; and reading it, desired their opinion; who told
him, they thought it would procure a well-grounded Peace. He then desired them
to put a good Interpretation upon his manage of this Treaty, and those vehement
expressions in some of his Debates, there being nothing in his Intentions but
kindness; and acknowledged their abilities which had taken him off from some of
his own opinions; as he doubted not, if they had had power to recede, he could
have prevailed upon theirs; as also, if he had been present, upon the two
Houses. And he desires them to use the same freedom and instance to his two
Houses, to indulge his Conscience wherein he cannot be satisfied, and to
represent him heartily to his two Houses, since he has parted with all how
near or dear soever, but wherein his Conscience is unsatisfied. And at their
taking leave, he added these Pathetick Sentences. --

MY LORDS,
You are come to take your leave of me, and I believe, we shall scarce see each
other again; His Majesty's Pathetick Expressions to the Parliaments
Commissioners at parting.
but God's Will be done. I thank God I have made my Peace with him, and shall
without fear undergo what he shall be pleased to suffer men to do unto me. --
My Lords, You cannot but know, that in my Fall and Ruin you see your own, and
that also near to you. I pray God send you better Friends than I have found. --
I am fully informed of the whole Plot and Carriage against me and mine; and
nothing so much afflicts me, as the sense and feeling I have of the sufferings
of my Subjects, and the miseries that hang over my three Kingdoms, drawn upon
them by those, who upon the pretenses of good, violently pursue their own
Interests and Ends.


After which, he presently withdrew himself to his Guards.

Let the Reader give me leave to complete his sorrow with this last Captive
Breath of the King's in the Isle of Wight, and I am confident he will not blame
me for vouchsafing him a Sympathy or Part in this Threnody and Lamentation,
sinc^ it was delivered to one of his Servants just at his departure thence, and
Commanded by him to be published for the satisfaction of all his Subjects.

His Majesty's Declaration concerning the Treaty, and his dislike of the Armies
proceedings.
WHen large Pretenses prove but the shadows of weak Performances, then the
greatest Labors produce the smallest Effects; and when a period is put to a
Work of great Concernment, all men's ears do as it were hunger, till they are
satisfied in their Expectations. Has not this distracted Nation groaned a long
time under the burden of Tyranny and Oppression? And has not all the Blood
that has been spilt these seven years been cast upon my Head, who am the
greatest Sufferer, though the least guilty? And was it not requisite to
endeavor the stopping of that Flux, which if not stopped will bring an absolute
destruction to this Nation? And what more speedy way was there to consummate
those distractions, than by a Personal Treaty being agreed on by my two Houses
of Parliament, and condescended to by me? And I might Declare, that I conceive
it had been Physic, had not the Operation been hindered by the interposition of
this Imperious Army, who were so audacious, as to style me in their
unparalled Remonstrance, their Capital Enemy. But let the world judge,
whether my endeavors have not been attended with reality in this late Treaty;
and whether I was not as ready to grant as they to ask? and yet all this is not
satisfaction to them that pursue their own ambitious Ends, more than the
welfare of a miserable Land. Were not the dying hearts of my poor distressed
People much revived with the hopes of a happiness from this Treaty? and how
suddenly are they frustrated in their xpectations! Have I not formerly been
condemned, for yielding too little to my Houses of Parliament, and must I now
be condemned for yielding too much? Have I not formerly been imprisoned for
making War, and shall I now be condemned for making Peace? Have I not formerly
enjoyed the society of my dear Wife and Children in peace and quietness, and
shall I now neither enjoy them nor Peace? Have not my Subjects formerly obeyed
me, and shall I now be obedient to my Subjects? Have not I been condemned for
Evil Counselors, and shall I now be condemned for having no Counsel but God?
These are unutterable miseries, that the more I endeavor for Peace, the less
my endeavors are respected: and how shall I hereafter know what to grant, when
your selves know not what to ask? I refer it to your Consciences, whether I
have not satisfied your desires in every particular since in this Treaty: if
you find I have not, then let me bear the burden of the fault; but if I have
given you ample satisfaction (as I am sure I have) then you are bound to
vindicate me from the ^ury of those, whose thoughts are filled with blood:
though they pretend zeal, yet they are but Wolves in Sheeps clothing.

I must further Declare, that I conceive there is nothing can more obstruct the
long-hoped-for Peace of this Nation, than the illegal proceedings of them that
presume from Servants to become Masters, and labor to bring in Democracie, and
to abolish Monarchy. Needs must the total alteration of Fundamentals be not
only destructive to others, but in conclusion to themselves; for they that
endeavor to rule by the Sword, shall at last fall by it: for Faction is the
Mother of Ruin, and it is the humor of those that are of this
Weather-cock-disposition, to love nothing but Mutabilities; neither will that
please them but only pro tempore, for too much variety does but confound the
senses, and make them still hate one folly, and fall in love with another.

Time is the best cure for Faction; for it will at length (like a spreading
Leprosy) infect the whole Body of the Kingdon, and make it so odious, that at
last they will hate themselves for love of that; and like the Fish, for love of
the Bait be catched with the Hook.

I once more declare to all my loving Subjects, and God knows whether or no
this may be my last, that I have earnestly labored for Peace, and that my
thoughts were sincere and absolute, without sinister ends; and that there was
nothing left undone by me, that my Conscience would permit me to do. And I call
God to witness, that I do firmly conceive, that the interposition of the Army
(that Cloud of Malice) has altogether eclipsed the glory of that Peace, which
began again to shine in this Land. And let the world judge, whether it be
expedient for an Army to contradict the Votes of a Kingdom, endeavoring by
pretending for Laws and Liberties to subvert both. Such acts as these must
produce strange consequences, and set open the floodgates of ruin, to
overflow this Kingdom in a moment. Had this Treaty been only mine own seeking,
then they might have had fairer pretenses to have stopped the course of it; but I
being importuned by my two Houses, and they by most part of the Kingdom, could
not but with a great deal of alacrity concur with them in their desires, to the
performance of so commodious a work. And I hope by this time, that the hearts
and eyes of my people are opened so much, that they plainly discover who are
the underminers of this Treaty.

For my part, I here protest before the Face of Heaven, that my own afflictions
(though they need no addition) afflict me not so much as my peoples sufferings,
for I know what to trust to already, and they know not: God comfort both them
and me, and proportion our patience to our sufferings.

And when the malice of mine Enemies is spun out to the smallest thread, let
them know that I will by the Grace of God, be as contented to suffer, as they
are active to advance my Sufferings; and mine own Soul tells me, that the time
will come when the very Clouds shall drop down vengeance upon the heads of
those that barricado themselves against the proceedings of Peace; for if God
has proclaimed a blessing to the Peacemakers, needs must the Peace-breakers
draw down curses upon their heads.

I thank my God I have armed my self against their fury; and let the Arrows of
their envy fly at me, I have a breast to receive them, and a heart possessed with
patience to sustain them: for God is my Rock and my Shield, therefore I will
not fear what men can do unto me. I will expect the worst; and if any thing
happen beyond my expectation, I will give God the Glory, for vain is the help
of man.

The Presbyterians satisfied with this Declaration, and troubled at the
proceedings of the Army.
This Declaration gave entire and complete satisfaction to the most refractory
of the Presbyterian Party, who when too late perceived their untoward scuffling
and debating with so excellent a Prince, had brought him and themselves to
ruin, together with three Kingdoms; the care of which, when his Protection
failed, the King as his last and most incumbent business resumed in this
following Letter. For having thus resigned himself into the hands of God, and
patiently submitted to his Cross, he in a way of renunciation and
Self-deposition of his Government, transferred and bequeathed the Scepter, with
these following excellent Advices, to his Son the Prince.

Newport, November. 29. 1648.
SON,
His Majesty's Letter to the Prince his Son, our present Sovereign.
BY what has been said, you may see how long We have labored in the search of
Peace: Do not you be discouraged to tread those ways in all worthy means to
restore your self to your Right, but prefer the way of Peace: Show the
greatness of your mind, rather to Conquer your Enemies by pardoning, than by
punishing. If you saw how unmanly and unchristian this implacable disposition
is in Our Ill-willers, you would avoid that spirit. Censure Us not for having
parted with too much of Our own Right; the Price was great, the Commodity was
Security to us, Peace to Our People. And We are confident another Parliament
would remember how useful a Kings Power is to a Peoples Liberty; and of how
much We have divested Our Self, that We and they might meet again in a due
Parliamentary way, to agree the Bounds for Prince and People. And in this give
belief to Our Experience, never to affect more Greatness or Prerogative, than
what is really and intrinsecally for the good of your Subjects (not
satisfaction of Favorites.) And if you thus use it, you will never want means
to be a Father to all, and a bountiful Prince to any you would be
extraordinarily gracious unto. You may perceive all men trust their Treasure
where it returns them Interest; and if Princes, like the Sea, receive and repay
all the fresh Streams and Rivers trust them with, they will not grudge, but
pride themselves to make up an Ocean. These considerations may make you a Great
Prince, as your Father is now a low one; and your State may be so much the more
established, as mine has been shaken. For Subjects have learned (We dare say)
that Victories over their Prince, are but Triumphs over themselves; and so will
be the more unwilling to hearken to Changes hereafter. The English Nation are a
sober people, however at present under some infatuation. We know not, but this
may be the last time We may speak to you or the world publicly. We are
sensible into what hands We are fallen; and yet we bless God we have those
inward refreshments, that the malice of Our Enemies cannot disturb.

To conlude, His excellent Advice to him*
if God give you Success, use it humbly, and far from Revenge: If he restore
you to your Rights upon hard Conditions, whatever you promise keep. Those men
which have forced Laws which they were bound to observe, will find their
Triumphs full of troubles. Do not think any thing in this world worth obtaining
by force and unjust means. You are the Son of Our Love, and as We direct you to
what We have recommended to you, so We assure you We do not more affectionately
pray for you, to whom We are a Natural Parent, than We do that the ancient
Glory and Renown of this Nation be not buried in Irreligion and Fanatic
Humor, and that all Our Subjects (to whom We are a Politic Parent) may have
such sober thoughts, as to seek their Peace in the Orthodox Profession of the
Christian Religion, as it was established since the Reformation in this
Kingdom, and not in new Revelations; and that the ancient Laws, with the
Interpretation according to known Practices, may once again be a hedge about
them; that You may in due time Govern, and they be Governed as in the fear of
the Lord.

The Commissioners are gone, the Corn is now on the Ground; We expect the
Harvest: if the Fruit be Peace, we hope the God of Peace will in time reduce
all to Truth and Order again; which that he may do, is the Prayer of C. R.


With this his Majesty's final account of this unconsummated Treaty, I will
conclude all his State-Missives and Papers, the justice and reasonableness
whereof no doubt will be so convincing, that there needed no other Pen to
assert his Quarrel. As he was the chief Subject of this History, so was he the
Life of it, affording it the greatest light of Truth toward its composition;
so that these his happy Labors shall perpetuate his just Renown, and make his
Moral and intellectual Virtues endure together, enshrined in the hearts of
pious Posterity: To contribute whereto, as far as my humble devoir would reach,
I have made these Collections; and so with reverential leave to their blessed
Author, I proceed in this Chronicle.

The Army conspire to force the House.
In pursuance of that accursed Remonstrance presented the 20 of November
aforesaid, Cromwell drew the Army into the Suburbs of London, quartering them at
the Mews and at York-house (and afterward into London it self) the General
quartering himself at Whitehall, to keep the King out in defiance of the
Treaty, with a resolution to awe the Parliament into a noncompliance with his
Majesty, whose great and most reasonable Arguments for a Composure, and his
un-exampled Condescentions in order thereunto, they could neither fairly refel
or honestly refuse. But notwithstanding, such was the justice of God in favor
of his Majesty's Cause, that the Parliament who had so obstinately and
dilatorily (to the ruin of the Kingdom) rejected all his other Accommodations,
closed with him now. For upon the 4th of December, the Question being put in
the House of Commons, Whether the Kings Answer was satisfactory or no? (though
the Army-party argued that they were not satisfactory, because the King had not
granted all their Propositions in terms (contrary to the nature of all
Treaties, where something must be bated on both parts) and so kept the business
in question (until 8 a Clock at night next day, being Tuesday the 5^h of
December) the Independents hoping (by their usual trick) to tire out the
moderate Party) it was then Resolved,

The Parliament Vote the Kings Answer satisfactory, Dec. 5.
That the Answers of the King to the Propositions of both Houses, are a Ground
for both Houses to proceed upon, for the Settlement of the Peace of the
Kingdom.

This being carried Affirmatively, and that so clearly, that the House was not
divided about it; to secure this Vote, and the earnest of a Peace, a Committee
of six Members was appointed to attend the General, to keep a good
Correspondencie, etc. but we shall now see Hell broke loose in the Arms
Insolences and Violence.

For these Caitiffs understanding the courage and honesty of the House,
resolved to play no longer with the weak Reed of Privilege, but with a bold
Sword to solve the Oracle of their Villainies, in th^s^ ensuing complicated
mischiefs. To this purpose, Pride, Hewson, and other Officers, having had some
Conference in Westminster Hall the Doors being shut) with the Speaker, sent in
a Paper to the House of Commons, The Army require that the I^p^a^hed Members
and Major General Brown be secured and brought to Justice.
Requiring the Impeached Members and Major General Brown ( as guilty of calling
in Hamilton) to be secured and brought to Justice; and that the ninety and odd
Members, who refused to Vote against the late Sco^ch Engagement* and all that
Voted for recaling the four Votes of Non-Addresses, and Voted for a Treaty, and
concurred in the Yesterday's acquiescing Vote in his Majesty's Answers, may be
immediately suspended the House; and that all such faithful Members, who are
innocent of those Votes, would by Protestation acquit themselves from any
concurrence (that so they might know their own Goats) and so be distinguished.
To this Paper they admitted no demur, not caring for, or not daigning them the
consideration of an Answer, but presently brought three or four Regiments of
Horse and Foot, The House guarded. Col. Pride, Col. Hewson, and Sir Hardress
Waller seize on several Members Dec. 6.
and set strong Guards at the Houses-doors, the Lobby-stairs, and every where
about the Palace, admitting none but Parliament Men into the Hall; where the
said two Colonels, and Sir Hardress Waller violently seized upon diverse Knights
and Burgesses of the Parliament, and forcibly carried them away Prisoners;
others were by feigned excuses called out of the House, and then pulled away,
and committed likewise without any Warrant or cause shown. And though the House
remaining sent the Sergeant of Mace to command their attendance, (when Pride
would not suffer him to pass) and sent likewise to the General about it,
declaring they would not proceed in any business without them; yet the secured
Members were still kept indurance, while the Rump (or Conventicle) became of
the Armies Complexion, and so prevaricated, and deserted their Fellows. The
Gentlemen thus detained, were afterward listed in a Catalogue by Hugh Peter's,
Hugh Peter's an Agent for the Army in this Design.
and carried to a Victualling-place called Hell, being number 41. where they
were kept without Beds, or other fitting accommodation all that night; and the
next day, after a tedious attendance on the Council of Officers, were committed
Prisoners under Guard to two several Inns in the Strand. Besides these, the
Belial Commanders standing several days with Lists of Names in their hands at
the Parliament-door, The Parliament impri^o^^d.
turned back from the House and debarred above 160 other Members, besides 40
more who voluntarily withdrew to avoid their violence. Most of those 41 Members
were after much expostulation, and their Protestation of this Force upon them
and the Houses, Ireton 's insolent expression.
released; Ireton insolently bidding them to look to themselves, and to act
nothing against the present Parliament and Army at their peril. But
Major General Brown was sent Prisoner to St. James's, where they would have put
a trick upon him, by a forged Letter brought thither and delivered him (which
he understanding their Plot, Major General Brown sent prisoner to Windsor.
would have publicly read) as from the Prince. The Messenger seeing his
Project would not take, threw the Paper into the fire, and escaped, as was
forelaid: He was afterward sent prisoner to Windsor.

The remaining Juncto having met and conferred at Sommetset-house, began to act
at Westminster as a Parliament* with whom some fawning Lords joined, and Passed
an Ordinance, Declaring all persons that had any way appeared for the King,
Note, that Skippon thrust in that clause.
even by Subscribing to the personal Treaty, should be incapable, etc. whereby
the City could not find men to supply those Trusts and Places, etc. and
Petitioned against it, but in vain; the Sectaries had packt a new
Common Council (by Authority from the Juncto) who constituted a^y 40 of them a
Court, The Iuncto take upon them to act as a Parliament.
and supreme to the Mayor) whose first work was the framing a Petition for
Justice against the King and other Capital Offenders; which was afterward
delivered by Titchburn, and had the thanks of the Mock-Parliament for their
pains, who now entered a Protestation against that satisfactory Vote of the 5th
of December aforesaid, and pursue the Dictates and Directions of the Army.

A little while before this, Rainsborough slain at Doncaster, Oct. 29.
Colonel Rainsborough was slain at Doncaster by a party of Royalists that
^allied out of Pomfract, then besieged by Sir Edward Rhodes and the
County-Forces, as he was in his Inn and his Soldiers about him, under a
pretense of delivering him a Letter from Crowel. They would have only taken him
prisoner, and carried him through his own Leaguer into their Castle; but he
refusing, they pistoled him in his Chamber, and departed untoucht. Scarborough-
Castle yielded to the Parl.
-- A strange, yet brave Adventure. Scarbrough-Castle now likewise yielded to
the Parliament, whom we will leave, and see the Armies like violence and
outrages upon the King.

Colonel Ewres was appointed by the Parliament to this Service, The Army seize
the King, and carry him from the Isle of Wight to Hurst- Castle, Dec. 1.
who assisted by Colonel Cobbet, on the first of December. according to Command,
received from Hammond the person of the King, and hurried him out of that Isle
away prisoner to Hurst-Castle, within the term of those 20 days after the
Treaty, in which he was to remain according to the Houses Declaration, in
Honor, Safety, and Freedom. This Castle stands a mile and a half in the Sea,
upon a Breach full of mud and stinking oaze upon low Tides, having no fresh
water within two or three miles of it; so cold, foggy, and noisome, that the
Guards cannot endure it without shifting Quarters. Here they frayed the King a
while, till Harrison was on his way to receive him, From thence to Winchester.
who brought him to Winchester; where the Mayor and Inhabitants caused the
Bells to ring, and at the Towns-end (as was due and usual) in the middle of the
mire presented his Majesty with the Keys of the City and the Mace; but in the
very Ceremony were tumbled in the same mire by the Horse, at the Command of
Harrison. The next day the King came to Farnham, To Farnham. To Windsor.
and so to Windsor, where he kept his sorrowful and last Christmas, being pent
up in a corner of the Castle, no man besides his Guards to come to him; and all
respect and reverence to his Person forborne, while by Order of the Juncto he
was sent for up to his Palace of St. James's, The King brought to St. James 's,
Jan* 19.
Harrison impudently riding covered in the same Coach with him, and his
Myrmidons wounding any that showed their Loyal Compassion, and lamented this
miserable condition of their beloved Sovereign. Harrison 's insolent behavior
to the King.
In which we must leave him, and return to our Grandees.

These offals of a Parliament having by an Ordinance taken away the Oaths of
Supremacy and Allegiance, usually administered to Freemen, etc. thereby to free
themselves from those ties of Duty upon them, and to make way for their ensuing
Traiterous design (in order whereunto the Council of War had forbid any
Ceremony or State to be used to the King, and his Attendants lessened) now
proceeded roundly to their Army Journey-work: for on the 28 of December, Thomas
Scot brought in the Ordinance for Trial of the King: The Ordinance for Trial of
the King brought into the Iuncto by Tho. Scot.
it was read and recommitted three several times, and the Commissioners names
of all sorts, to engage the whole Body of the Kingdom in this Treason inserted;
and to give it a Foundation, these Votes passed:

They Vote it Treason for the King of England to levy War against his
Parliament.
That the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament d^ Declare and Adjudge,
that by the Fundamental Laws of the Realm, it is Treason in the King of England
for the time to come to Levy War against the Parliament and Kingdom of England.

With this Declaratory Vote the said Ordinance was carried up to the Lords by
the Lord Gray of Grooby, The Vote and Ordinance carried to the Lords by the
Lord Gray of Grooby.
January 2. 1648. The Lords being 16 in number, met that day; and received it,
promising to send an Answer by Messengers of their own.

The first Question started by some Lords (who had rather had a thinner House)
was, Whether it should be presently debated; which was affirmed. The first
Debate was upon the Declaratory Vote, to which the Earl of Manchester said,
That the Parliament of England by the Fundamental Laws, consisted of three
Estates; King, Lords, and Commons; whereof the King is the first and chiefest:
He Calls and Dissolves Parliaments, and without him there can be no Parliament;
and therefore it is absurd to say, the King can be a Traitor against the
Parliament. Then the Earl of Northumberland added, That the greatest part, at
least twenty to one of the people of England, were not yet satisfied, whether
the King Levied War first against the Houses, or the Houses against him? And if
the King did Levy War first against the Houses, there is no Law to make it
Treason in him: And for them to declare Treason by an Ordinance, when the
matter of Fact is not proved; nor any Law extant to judge it by, is very
unreasonable. The Earls of Pembroke and Denbigh said, The Lords cast out the
Ordinance, and adjourned for 7 days.
they would be torn in pieces before they would assent with the Commons; so the
Lords cast off the Debate, and cast out the Ordinance, and adjourned for seven
days.

This netled the Commons, who thereupon resolved to rid their hands of King,
The Commons netled, they resolve to rid their hands of King, Lords, and
dissenting Commons.
Lords, and their Fellow-Commons together, by a leading Vote, That all Members
of Committees should proceed and act in any Ordinance wherein the Lords were
joined, though the Peers should not Sit nor concur with them. And added
thereunto three other Democratical Resolves, Ian. 4. 1648. 1. That the People
are under God the Original of all just Power. 2. That the Commons of England in
Parliament Assembled, chosen by and Representing the People, have the Supreme
Power of the Nation. 3. That whatsoever is enacted or declared for Law by the
House of Commons Assembled in Parliament, has the force of Law. Which passed
without one Negative Voice; which showed at whose beck they were. And thus
first they hatched this Monster, called An Act for the Trial of the King, etc.
which is here transcribed; transferring the names of the Commissioners to their
ensuing Character.

An Act of Parliament of the House of Commons for Trial of Charles Stuart King
of England.
An Act of the House of Commons for the Trial of King Charles the First.
WHereas it is notorious, that Charles Stuart the now King of England, not
content with the many Encroachments which his Predecessors had made upon the
People in their Rights and Freedom, has had a wicked design to subvert the
Ancient and Fundamental Laws and Liberties of this Nation, and in their place
to introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government; and that besides all other
evil ways to bring his design to pass, he has prosecuted it with Fire and
Sword, levied and maintained a Civil War in the Land, against the Parliament
and Kingdom; whereby this Country has been miserably wasted, the Public
Treasure exhi^^ted, Trade decreased, thousands of people murdered, and
infinite other mischiefs committed; for all which high offenses, the said
Charles Stuart might long since have been brought to exemplary and condign
punishment.

Whereas also the Parliament, well hoping that the restraint and imprisonment
of his person, after it had pleased God to deliver him into their hands, would
have quieted the distempers of the Kingdom, did forbear to proceed judicially
against him, but f^und by sad experience, that such their remisness, served
only to encourage him and his Accomplices in the continuance of their evil
practices, and in raising new Com^^tions, Rebellions and Practices.

For prevention of the like and greater inconveniences, and to the end no Chief
Officer or Magistrate may hereafter presume traitorously and maliciously to
imagine or contrive the enslaving or destroying of the English Nation, and to
expect impunity: Be it Enacted and Ordained by the Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, and it is hereby Enacted and Ordained, that Thomas Lord
Fairfax, etc. ( the other persons that actually did Si^ and Sentence are
hereafter subjoyned) shall be and are appointed Commissioners and Judges for
the Hearing, Trying and Judging of the said Charles Stuart. And the said
Commissioners, or any twenty of them shall be, and are hereby Authorized and
Constituted an High Court of Justice, to meet at such convenient time and
places, as by the said Commissioners, or the major part, or twenty or more of
them under their Hands and Seals shall be appointed, and notified by public
Proclamation in the great Hall or Palace-yard of Westminster; and to adjourn
from time to time, and from place to place, as the said High Court, or the
major part thereof meeting shall hold fit; and to take order for the Charging
of Him the said Charles Stuart with the Crimes abovementioned, and for
receiving his personal Answer thereunto, and for examination of Witnesses upon
Oath if need be concerning the same; and thereupon, or in default of such
answer* to proceed to final Sentence, according to Justice and the merit of the
Cause, to be executed speedily and impartially.

And the said Court is hereby Authorized and required to choose and appoint all
such Officers and Attendants, and other Circumstances, as they or the Major
part of them shall in any sort judge necessary or useful, for the ordering and
good managing of the Premises: And Thomas Lord Fairfax the General, with all
Officers of Justice, and other well-affected persons, are hereby Authorized and
Required to be aiding and assisting to the said Commissioners, in the due
execution of the Trust hereby committed to them. Provided, that this Ordinance,
and the Authority hereby granted, do continue for the space of one Month, from
the Date of the making hereof, and no longer.

This Act was followed by a Proclamation January 9. made by Sergeant Dendy,
Jan. 9. Sergeant Dendy makes Proclamation, that the Commissioners of the High
Court of Justice were to sit the next day, and all persons invited to give in
Evidence against Charles Stuart.
by sound of Drums and Trumpets, and Guards of Horse and Foot in
Westminster Hall, whereby notice was given, that the Commissioners of the
(pretended) High Court of Justice were to sit down on the morrow, and that all
those that had any thing to say against Charles Stuart King of England, might
be heard. The like was done in Cheap Side, and the old Exchange.

The Actors or Tragical Persons in this Ordinance, were stumbled at several
illegalities and irregularities thereof, which in a presumptuous confidence (as
drunken men passing over a dangerous Bridge) then yet slighted. But when it was
perfected, and the consummatory part of the Seal to be affixed, and the whole
result to be warranted thereby, they were at a stand, as knowing the Kings Seal
could not be made use of against him; Proclaimed in three places, Westminster,
Cheap Side, and the Old Exchange.
while the Army-Familiars inspired them, that the King and his Seal was alike
unnecessary, and that they must now (according to their advice) act by
themselves and their own Authority; which direction they followed, and gave
order for a new Seal to their ensuing Acts as hereafter.

We have omitted the Cypher-Names specified in the said pretended Act, because
cause many of them, upon reluctancie of Conscience, or more happy persuasions
of Friends, did not undertake the Impiety; as also, because we would not defame
the Names of those Lords and Peers of the Kingdom, and the Judges (whose
Function instructed them to the contrary) that were invited, and listed on^e by
the same Treasonable Combination, The Names and C^aracters of the King's Judges.
to be partakers in that Guilt: but those that appeared and prosecuted their
Power, and are worthy of their brand, are with their due Character here
subjoyned.

The Kings Judges marked with are those that were Executed.
Cromwell, a Native of Huntingdon-shire.
Oliver Cromwell, an English Monster, a shame to the British Chronicle; a name
of ruin and mischief, a Native of Huntingdon-shire, who needs no other
Character than this Chronicle, being the Troubler of our Israel; whose ruins
were his Grave, yet has found another under Tyburn, Ian. 30. Ireton, his
So^-in-law.
Henry Ireton, Commissary-General of Horse, Cromwell's Second, espoused his
Daughter as well as his Designs, -- so, like Father-in-law, like Son-out-law,
and renterised in the same manner, and at the same time, 1660. John Bradshaw,
President, Cum nemini* obtrudi potest itur ad Hunc, -- there was no such
Villain to be found among the Long-Rob^, who drowned all his wickedness and
false practices, not to be compared, under this most flagitious and scelerate
parricide of the King. Bradshaw, a Cheshire-man died obstinately, 1659.
A Cheshire-man born, but hateful to his Country, more abominable to his Name,
most odious to his Nation, whose hopeful recovery by the first endeavors of
his own County under Sir George Booth, He took the Oath of Allegiance but two
Terms before the King's death.
in 1659. he so pined at, that taking a just desperation, he died. Two Terms
before the Perpetration of the Kings Murder, he had took the Oath of
Allegiance as a Sergeant at Law, being called to that Dignity from the scolding
and railing of Guild Hall London, to convitiate and reproach his most peaceable
Sovereign. He grew conscious (as to the safety of his Body) of his Fact, when
he showed his aversness to Oliver, the very name of a Single Person frighting
him; but so cauterized as to the salvation of his Soul, that he departed in a
most damnable obstinacy and maintenance of his Fact, presuming there was no
High Court of Justice in Heaven, or else that he was judged already. The price
of this Villainy was the Presidencie of their Council of State, He is rewarded
with the Lord Cottington 's Estate and the Duchy of Lancaster.
the Lord Cottington's Estate, and the Duchy of Lancaster, with some
Advance-Money like Judas for his undertaking. It is observed he died in his
Bed, advantageously Commented on by the Imps and Abettors of his villainy; by
others, at least taken as a note of admiration, leaving his Name and Memory to
be tortured for ever. The good Providence of God removing this wretch, and the
most implacable Enemies of our Sovereign, by the same easy hand (which might
otherwise have been died in blood) with which it restored Him to his Kingdoms,
and his people to their Laws, Liberty, and Religion; he was likewise dug out
of Westminster-Abby, and thrown under the Gallows. Harrison, a Butchers Son at
Newcastle in Staffordshire, was executed at Charing Cross, October. 1660.
Col. Thomas Harrison, the Son of a Butcher at Newcastle-under-line in
Staffordshire, once Servant to Mr. Hulker an Attorney. He betook himself to
the Army in the beginning of the Wars, and by Preaching and suchlike sanctity,
came to be a Major; where his pragmatical spirit cherished by Cromwell,
preferred him to a Colonel, and the custody of the Kings person, when taken
from the Isle of Wight; which he mos^ irreverently abused, by no less saucy
behavior than Treasonable speeches. He was afterward the great Captain of all
the Schismatiques, especially Fifth-Monarchy-men, in whose love, and no others,
he died, and was expectedly Executed at Charing Cross, in that expiatory Month
of October, 1660. John Carew.
John Carew, Brother of Sir Alexander Carew beheaded in 1644. This person was
no doubt deluded by the mistaken impulses of Satan, for those of the Spirit,
being a Rank Fifth-monarchist, and so pre-disposed against all Government and
Authority, which he helped to strike at in the death of the King. John Cook,
John Cook, Solicitor of the High Court.
the Solicitor of the High Court, whose Plea (charitably taken) is his best
Character, that his Crime was not out of Malice but Avarice; being a poor man,
and in a wanting Condition, before he undertook this most scelerate piece of
Service. -- Better be out of practice, than in such as this. Hugh Peter's, Hugh
Peter's, the shame of the Clergy.
the shame of the Clergy, a Pulpit-Buffoon, a seditious abominable Fellow,
Trumpet to this Pageantry of a High Court of Justice, the most unparalleled
Ecclesiastic in all Story or Times. Thomas Scot, Thomas Scot, a Brewers Clerk,
his rash wish.
a Brewers Clerk, then turned Country-Attorney, and by countenance of the
Grandees was chosen a recruit for the Borough of Wickham in the County of
Buckingham; so violent an Enemy of the Kings, that he wished for no other
Epitaph or Inscription on his Grave, than Here lies Thomas Scot one of the
King's Judges: but he should first have wished for a Grave. Gregory Clement,
Gregory Clement, a Merchant.
a Merchant, who procured and purchased a place in Parliament, by the same
means as he did his lustful debaucheries, for the notoriety of which, his
Fellow-villains discarded him their Company. He contributed to the destruction
of his Sovereign, that he might Reign in his own wickedness. Adrian Scroop,
Adrian Scroop, Brother to Sir Adrian.
a Colonel of Horse, very active against the Kings Party in 1648. and more
diligent against his Life and Honor at this High Court of Justice. It Is sad to
think he should be allied to so Honorable a Family, and so deserving and Noble
a Gentleman of his own name, Sir Adrian Scroop Knight of the Bath, 13 Caroli 2.
Col. John Jones, John Jones, a Serving-man, marries Cromwels sister.
a Serving-man, of a mean fortune, till the times, which afforded him
advantages among the ruined Loyal Welsh, where he was first a great
Committee-man, and then a recruit to the Parliament, and married one of
Cromwels Sisters (who had as many Females to bestow as a Cardinal) and might
therefore be presumed on to make one in this Tragedy. Francis Hacker, Francis
Hacker* a Soldier of Fortune.
a Soldier of Fortune, of notable Resolution and Conduct, the success whereof
wrought him into Cromwels familiarity, from whence he had not the faculty or
power to recede, but was charmed into this desperate design; his being the
last hand through which it passed to the Scaffold. Daniel Axtel, Daniel Axtel,
a Country-Mercer, Capt. of the Guard at the Kings Trial.
a kind of Country-Mercer in Bedfordshire, obeyed the Call (as he said) of the
(seditious) Pulpits, and went forth some small Officer to fight against the
Mighty: after many Traverses, was made Lieutenant Colonel, and employed by
Cromwell out of favor to him, as the ready way to Greatness, to be Captain of
the Guard at the Kings Trial, where he made his Ianizaries by blows and
threats, to cry out, Justice and Execution. He was guilty of a great deal more
(but not to be mentioned with this) blood in Ireland, and had gotten a pretty
soul Estate. Col. Okey, Okey, a Chandler near Billingsgate, London, a daring
Commander.
formerly a Stoker in a Brew House, then a Chandler near Billingsgate; but
leaving his Trade for his hopes in the War, passed through the several Commands
to that of a Colonel, in a very short space of time. He was a daring bold
Commander, which rendered him open and suitable to Cromwels designs, who
likewise bewitched him into the Partnership of this accursed Murder. Miles
Corbet, Miles Corbet, of a good Family in Norfolk, Burgess for Yarmouth
of a very good Family in Norfolk, chosen Burgess for Yarmouth in that County,
when he had no other advantage but troublesome times to recover himself, which
he helped forward into the ensuing Calamities. -- Hoc faciunt mores Pontilianae
Tui. -- He was one of the Malcontent Members of the former Parliament, with
Sir John Elliot and others; and now took the opportunity of wreaking all those
old grudges upon the Kings life, and to share himself an Estate from several
great places in England and Ireland, where he was in effect Lord Chancellor.
Col. John Berkstead, John Berkstead, a Goldsmith, Lieutenant of the Tower.
once a sorry Goldsmith in the Strand, and having learnt a little
City-Souldiery, for want of better Commanders, was made Captain of a
Foot-company under Colonel Ven at Windsor* was afterward Governor of Reading,
and by his pliantness ingratiated with Oliver, who made him one of the Kings
Judges, afterward preferred him to the Lieutenancie of the Tower, where now
his head stands.
These of the Kings Judges marked with * are those that died before the Kings
Return.
* Col. Thomas Pride, a Brewer, to which he ascended from a Dray man, by the
same steps as from thence he became a Lord: Thom. Pride, ^ Brewer (...).
he was a resolute ignorant fellow, but of very good success, and therefore fit
to partake with Cromwell, and to venture on that prime and hardy work of
garbling the Parliament for him. That done, he deserved any employment from his
Master, and was put upon this, which he discharged with as much brutishness. *
Isaac Ewer, of (...) in Yorkshire.
Col. Isaac Ewer, descended of an Ancient and Right Honorable Family in
Yorkshire, but the Patrimony thereof so wasted, that this Cadet was forced to
be take himself to the wealthier side, where he profited alike in Principles.
He was thought fit (because of his Birth) to be the Kings Guardian from the
Isle of Wight; which he performed, and afterward to be his Murderer. His
Relacion was chosen one of Olivers Lords of the other House. * The Lord Gray of
Grooby, Son to the Earl of Stamford.
Thomas Lord Gray of Grooby, Son to the Earl of Stamford, a Colonel in the
Army, and so infected. By the Honor of his Family he escapes a mention or
condemnation for this Crime, as well as others. * Sir John Danvers, Brother to
the Loyal Earl of Danby.
Sir John Danvers Knight, Brother to the Earl of Danby, a Loyal and Noble Peer:
Sed scio quis Deus est, hunc qui tibi dividit astris. The covetousness after
his Brothers Estate (who was made a Delinquent) sucked him in, and afterward
swallowed his Name and Honor in this Whirl-pool of confusion, and Royal Blood.
* Sir Tho. Maleverer, of a good Family in Yorkshire.
Sir Thomas Maleverer, descended also of a very good Family in Yorkshire, but
obliged to the kindness of the two last Kings for their Honor, which being
above his Estate, wickedly prompted him for the equalling of it, to drain the
Fountain of his Masters life and Honor. * Sir John Bourchier, a diligent
Independent Mercenary
Sir John Bourchier, another Yorkshire Knight, an Independent Mercenary, who
from the Crisis of their prevalencie workt for them; and that he might not be
out of the way when occasion should serve them, diligently dined at Hell; and
to complete his work, consented to this Murder. * Col. Purefoy, a Warwickshire
Gentleman, and Governor once of Coventry; a great Zealot against Crosses, Col.
Purefoy, Governor of Coventry.
and no less against Crowns. He imbrued his hands in the Blood of his Prince,
but could not tell (for the ease of his Conscience upon his deathbed) how he
should wipe them. * John Blakestone, a Shopkeeper in Newcastle.
John Blakestone, formerly a Shopkeeper in Newcastle, where pretending himself
a Presbyterian while the Scots were there, he was chosen Burgess for that Town;
and juggling a while among the Independent Faction, learnt a worse Trade, and
the wicked Craft of King-killing. * Sir William Constable of Yorkshire,
Governor of Gloucester.
Sir William Constable, a Yorkshire-man, one who sold his Lands to Sir Marmaduke
(after Lord Langdale) in the beginning of our Troubles, but when the said Lord
was made a Delinquent, regained them for nothing; was a great Rumper, and at
their hand for this Parricide, he died Governor of Gloucester, and a great
Commander in the North. * Rich. Dean, General at Sea, slain by a Cannon shot.
Richard Dean, Colonel and General at Sea, where he was slain by a Cannon-shot,
standing by the Renowned General Monk his Colleague. This person was formerly a
Hoymans servant in Ipswich, and when the War began, was a Matross in the Train
of Artillery, and role to a Captains Command therein; and was famous first at
the Siege of Exeter, and being a cross Fellow, was thought fit to be one of
Cromwels Accomplices, to execute his Plots against his Sovereigns life. * Fr.
Allen, a Goldsmith, one of the Committees for the sa^e of Kings Lands.
Francis Allen, once a Goldsmiths in Fleet Street, where he leapt into a pretty
Estate by marrying his Mistress; was chose a Recruit of the Long Parliament,
and adhered to the Juncto for their admission of him; was made one of the
Treasurers at War, a Customer; and had Crone-house given him, and held it in
Capite Regis: after that Murder, was made one of the Committees for sale of
his Majesty's Lands, etc. * Peregrine Pelham, Governor of Hull.
Peregrine Pelham, a Yorkshire Tike, not of the Sussex-Family; a kind of
Governor of Hull after Hotham; the dutiful carriage of which place taught him
afterward this Traiterous deportment in the High Court of Justice. * John
Moor, John Moor.
formerly Colonel of the Guards, and had the benefit of all Passes from London.
* John Allured, John Allured.
a Soldier of Fortune, promoted (for his hand in this Villainy) to be a
Colonel, died just before his Majesty's Restitution. * Humphry Edwards, Humph.
Edwards, a Member of the Long-Parl.
a Member of the Long-Parliament, discontented against the King for being
denied by him a Preferment he deserved not; which rankled and fe^red him into
this malicious Parricide. * Sir Gregory Norton, a poor Knight, one of the
Pensioners to the King, had Richmond-Mannor and House as good as given him for
this Service against his good Master and Sovereign. Sir Gregory Norton.
* John Ven, John Ven, a Silkman, Governor of Windsor- castle.
a broken Silk-man in Cheap Side, made Governor of Windsor-Castle in the
beginning of the War, and had other profits and emoluments. It is credibly
reported that he hanged himself; certain it is, he died strangely and suddenly.
* Thomas Andrews, a Linnen-draper in London, afterward a Treasurer for the
Guild Hall Plate, Th. Andrews.
and Receiver for the Army; he afterward proclaimed the Act against Kingly
Government, and very narrowly prevented Justice. * Anthony Stapely, Anth.
Stapely.
a Sussex Gentleman and Colonel, and Governor of Chichester strangely wrought
into this wicked Conspiracy. * Thomas Horton, Th. Horton, Recruit to the Long
Parl.
a Recruit to the Long-Parliament, of so mean and unknown a Quality before St.
Fagons-Fight, that that is all the Character can be given him here. * John Fry,
John Fry, a Yeoman of Dorsetshire, an Arrian.
another Recruit to the Long-Parliament, a Yeoman and Committee-man of
Dorsetshire; he proved an Arrian in Print, which Colonel Downs charged him
with; and so no wonder he that dared deny the Divinity of Christ, was so
cruelly Traitorous to the Majesty of his Prince. * Thomas Hammond, Thom.
Hammond, B^other to Dr. Hammond: the Kings Iaylor.
Son to Prince Henry's Physician, who most ungratefully and disloyally was the
Kings Jailer, and verified that sad Presage and Oracle of the King, That there
are but few steps between the Prisons and Graves of Princes; to the great
trouble of his most Loyal and Learned Brother, Dr. Henry Hammond, the Kings
beloved Chaplain. * Isaac Pennington, Isaac Pennington, Lord Mayor of London.
Lord Mayor of London two years together, against the Kings express Command
from Oxford, a most implacable Rebel; yet for all the spoil he got, broke
twice, and hoped to make good all by the death of his Sovereign: since his
Imprisonment he died in the Tower. * Simon Meyne, Simon Meyne of
Buckinghamshire, died in the Tower.
a Buckingham-shire-man, of a good Estate, but an illegal Recruit of the
Long-Parliament; a great Committee-man and Sequestrator of other men's Estates,
and being so initiated, thought it no great matter to assist in this business
of the Kings life: since his Imprisonment he died in the Tower.
These of the Kings Judges marked with are such as are in Prison in the Tower
of London and elsewhere, and are under Sentence of Death, to be Executed at the
pleasure of the King and Parliament.
Sir Hardress Waller, Sir Hardress Waller, a Soldier of Fortune.
a Soldier of Fortune, once a Cavalier in Judgment, then a Presbyterian; upon
the new Model an Independent, where finding the uncontrollable sweetness of
Pay, and likeliness of greater Spoils, he was hardened into this Conspiracy
against the King, and mastered his hopes of Wealth in Ireland, being
Major General: he was a prisoner in the Tower of London* and confessed and
deprecated his crime. Will H^veningham Esquire (...) ancient Family in Suffolk.
William Heveningham Esquire, a Gentleman of the fairest Estate, and as Gentile
and Ancient a Family as any in Suffolk. To keep ill Company, is the way to be
wicked. Other causes and inducements to this horrid action are not public;
and I will not dive further. Henry Marten.
Col. Henry Marten, Son of Sir Henry Marten Judge of the Perrogative-Court; a
most lewd, vicious, and infamous person, who first spoke Treason against the
King and his Family in the House of Commons, and was in complement committed
and suspended. There was no question, but he would act what he spoke, when the
power thereof was in his fellow-Traytors hands. Owen Row, a Silk-man of London.
Owen Row, a Silk-man of London, a constant Commander in the Independent
Militia thereof, and so trained up to the perpetration of this wickedness.
Augustine Garland, a person relating to the Law.
Augustine Garland, a Recruit of the Long-Parliament for the Borough of
Quinborough in Kent, in 1647. Chairman of the Committee that drew up the
pretended Act for the Kings Trial: as rare a Blade as the worst of them at the
spoil of the Kingdom, a Lawyer, and suspected to have spit in the Kings Face at
his Trial. Henry Smith, one of the Six Clerks in Chancery.
Henry Smith, a Lawyer, but a mean one, of a fair Estate in Leicestershire, 40
which was added (as the hire of this villainy) a Six Clerks place in Cancery;
supposed to be drawn in, and complicated in this Guilt. Robert Titchbourn, a
Linnen-draper, of good City-Extraction, a Colonel, made by Fairfax Lieutenant
of the Tower for a while, Robert Titchbourn, Lord Mayor of London.
Lord Mayor of London, and one of the infamous Triers of his Sovereign, the
meritorious service o^ all his preferments and greatness. Col. George Fleetwood
of Buckingham-shire, Kinsman to Sir Miles Master of the Kings Court of Wards,
George Fleetwood.
and Brother to Sir William a very Loyal and honest Gentleman, and to Charles
Fleetwood a very Knave and Fool. James Temple, of Sussex, Colonel, came in to
this pack for his share of the spoil* James Temple.
a man remarkable for nothing but this horrid business. Thomas Wait, a
R^tl^ndshire-man, a Recruit to the Parliament, chosen by the Arms influence,
Thomas Wait.
and from a mean person made by them Governor of Burleigh, by which means he
became engaged to their Interests and Designs. Peter Temple, a London
Linne^-draper, B^^ges^ for Leicester.
Peter Temple, formerly a Linnen-drapers, apprentice in Friday-street, but his
elder Brother dying, forsook his Trade, and was possessed of some 400 pounds a
year in Leicestershire; was as a Recruit chosen Burgess for that County-town,
as Colleague to Sir Arthur Haslerig; made a Captain of Horse, and a great
Committee-man, but of very weak parts, and easy to be led where the hopes and
promises of profit guided him: yet got nothing (though a constant Rumper) being
fooled by Oliver into the snare, as he has often confessed it. Robert Lilburn,
Brother to John Lilburn.
Robert Lilburn, of the Bishopric of Durham, Brother of John Lilburn the
Trouble-world, sided formerly with Cromwell, and was through-paced to his
Interests; though another Brother repented, and would have kept Tinmouth-castle
for the King, when John fell off upon a Model of his own. A Colonel of Horse he
was made a while before this Regicide, and so ran fearlesly into the danger of
it. Gilbert Millington, a Lawyer.
Gilbert Millington, a Lawyer, and constant Chairman of the Committee for
plundered Ministers, the sweets of which Employment set his Teeth on edge, and
sharpened him to this cruel attempt upon his Sovereigns life. Vincent Potter, an
upstart Member.
Vincent Potter, a Recruit of the said Long-Parliament, a Mushroom-Member, so
suddenly sprung up, and from such igno^e Relations, that the only knowledge of
him came by this infamous Murder. John Downs, formerly a Citizen, then a
Colonel in the Army, and a Recruit to the Parliament, John Downs, a Citizen of
London, and a Colonel.
and by menaces and threats engaged in this fatal business: he would have
opposed the violence that carried it, but was overborn himself, his Allegiance
and Conscience being overawed by Cromwell.
These of the Kings Judges marked with are those that fled the Kingdom upon
His Majesty's Return.
Thomas Wogan, Thomas Wogan, an obscure person.
a recruit likewise to the Parliament, had his lesson set him upon his procured
Election, that he was to endeavor the Ruin of the Kingdom, for his share in
it; and to destroy the King, to become himself one of our Princes in the
Anarchy. John Lisle, John Lisle, a Gentleman and Lawyer, President of several
High Courts of Justice.
a Gentleman and a Lawyer bred, was born of a good Family, who had a fair
Patrimony in the Isle of Wight, whose Father dyed there during the Treaty: a
severe and supercilious person, clouded always with pretenses of Religion, and
Commonwealth Interest. The very picture of a malcontent, and by his
countenance (the counterfeit of Guy Fauks his Dark-lanthorn) directed to this
conspiracy. For his service done herein, he was made one of the Commissioners
of the new Great Seal, Master of Saint Crosses, a place only fit for a Divine,
worth 800 per annum, in place of a reverend Doctor; for which preferments he
became obliged to the Blood-sucking State, to assume the Scarlet Robes and the
as deep dyed guilt of John Bradshaw, and be President to all the High Courts of
Justice during the Usurpation: the last effects of his sanguinous violence
being the death of Sir Henry Slingsby, Doctor Hewit, and others of lesser
quality. He fled upon the return of the King, and not long after fell himself
by the hand of Violence. William Say Esquire, Will. Say Esquire. a Lawyer and
Deputy-speaker of the House of Commons.
a Member also of the Long Robe, and a well-practised but ill counseled Lawyer
-- who for the Fee of this wicked combination, had Liberty to get what he
could, being foysted in as one of the illegal recruits of the Long-Parliament.
He sat in the Chair of the Scorner when Lenthall the Speaker was sick of the
sullens for ten days, upon the approach of General Monk; and gave himself the
Thanks of the House, while three Kingdoms gave him their Curses. He is
relatively good, by a Brother now living, Fellow of Oriel-Colledge in Oxford,
for whose sake I will speak no more of him, till Justice find him, for he is
fled. Col. Valentine Walton, Valentine Walton, Brother in law to Cromwell, and
Governor of Lyn.
whose first remarque was the marriage of Cromwell's Sister, by whose awe and
command he was made by the Parliament Governor of Lyn, and Bashaw of the Isle
of Ely; which place he had fortified, if before Cromwell could have completed
his design, he had been forced thither. He has escaped hitherto, but remains
in the list of the Fugitives of that tribe. Col. Edward Whalley; Edward Whaley,
a Wollen-draper, his Family of Nottinghamshire, a good soldier.
once a Wollen-draper, descended from a Family in Nottingham-shire, but
decaying, left the Ell and took up the Spear, and from our first Troubles
continued in them, till he rose to be Commissary-General of the Horse. These
advantages taught him first to betray the King at Hampton Court under pretense
of affection, when he made him fly to the Isle of Wight, and to murder him
afterward, without any scruple. He is fled also. Edmund Ludlow, Edm. Ludlow
the son of a Traitor, a daring soldier.
whose Father was a Traitor before him, and uttered Treasonable words against
the King in the House of Commons in 1643. which were afterward accomplished by
his Son in this unparalleled Fact, who by several gradations in the Parliament
and Army came to be a Lieutenant General, and one of the chief Commissioners
for Ireland. Sir Michael Livesey of Kent.
Sir Michael Livesey, a person of an undone reputation and Estate in Kent,
whose Plunder-Master-General he was in the progress of the War; a fit person
for the employment, John Hewson, a Shoo-maker, dead in Exile, a bold Commander.
Dignum patella operculum. John Hewson, a broken Shoo-maker or Cobbler, who by
degrees rose to be a Colonel: a Fellow fit for any mischief, and capable of
nothing else, as his story will declare, and therefore no wonder that he was a
partaker in this impiety. He is since dead in Exile, and was buried by report
at Amsterdam. William Goffe, Will. Goffe, a Salters Apprentice, and a bold
Commander.
a Salters Apprentice, run from his Master into the Army, and by his boldness
was notified to the Grandees thereof, who liking of his humor preferred him,
and served themselves with his company in this flagitious crime. Cornelius
Holland, Cor. Holland, a servant to Sir Hen. Vane.
a Servant to Sir Henry Vane, and preferred by him to the Green-cloth in the
Kings Household. His Father was a poor man, and dyed a Prisoner in the Fleet;
but this Fellow got a vast Estate by his disloyalty against a good Master,
Thomas Challoner, a great speech-maker against the K.
whom he not only robbed but murdered. Thomas Challoner, a great Republican,
and Enemy to the King, his Family and Government, since he knew what it was;
the great Speech-maker against him, having been a traveller, and no doubt
Jesuitically affected, as he made more visibly manifest in the practice of
their Doctrine of Regicide. Will. Cawley a Brewer of Chichester.
William Cawley, a Brewer of Chichester, and returned for a recruit of the
Long-Parliament, could not for Trade-sake but concur with his Brethren Oliver
Cromwell and Thomas Scot. Nic. Love son to Dr. Love of Winchester.
Nicholas Love, Doctor Love's Son of Winchester, Chamber-fellow with the
Speaker Lenthall, made one of the six Clerks of Chancery in Master Penrudducks
place; a violent Enemy against the King and his Friends, from the very
beginning of our Troubles, John Dixwel, Governor of Dover- Castle.
and an Army-partaker in this horrible Act. John Dixwell, a recruit of the
Long-Parliament for Dover, Colonel and Governor of Dover-Castle; one so far
obliged to them for their promotion of him, Daniel Blagrave, a recruit for
Reading.
that he could do no less for them, than assist them in this grand Conspiracy
against the King. Daniel Blagrave, a recruit also for Reading in Bark-shire, of
a small but competent Fortune, there to have kept him guiltless of this great
offense. Daniel Broughton, a Clerk.
Daniel Broughton, a Clerk, bred up among Committees in the War, and preferred
therefore at last to be chief Scribe to this Pharisaical murderous crew of the
High Court of Justice. Edward Dendy, Edward Dendy, Sergeant at Arms.
Sergeant at Arms to the said Court, who had outed his Father from the
employment of the Mace before: no wonder such a Rebel to his Father, should
prove a parricide to his Prince.
These following being of the Kings Judges, but recanting, were pardoned, or
otherwise mulcted and punished.
John Hutchison fined.
Col. John Hutchison, who both Sentenced and Signed to his Majesty's Execution,
by a timely repentance (which he publicly testified by tears) obtained his
pardon, being only discharged the House of Commons, and all future Trusts, and
fined a years profit of his Estate to the King. Col. Francis Lassels, a
Yorkshire man, who sat once, but neither Sentenced nor Signed, Francis
Lassels fined.
was mulcted accordingly as Colonel Hutchison, having alike given* proof his
sorrow and detestation of that monstrous Fact. Lord Munson. Ja: Challoner Esquire.
Sir Hen. Mildmay. To. Wallop Esquire. Sir Ja: Harrington and John Phelps, their
Estates Forfeited, drawn to Tyburn, and Imprisoned during life.
William Lord Munson, James Challoner Esquire. deceased in the Tower, Sir Hen.
Mildmay, Robert Wallop Esquire. Sir James Harrington, and John Phelps another of
the Clerks, for sitting in the said pretended High Court of Justice, were by
Act of Parliament deprived of their Estates, and ordered to be drawn to Tiburn
in Sledges, with Ropes about their Necks, as Traitors are used, and so back
again to the Tower, there to be imprisoned during their natural Lives.
This is the perfect Catalogue and Character of these unfortunate men, who in
obedience to the said pretended Act, or rather out of dread of Cromwell and his
Red-coats, (though some others named in the said Act wisely withdrew
themselves) met according to appointment in Westminster Hall, having adjourned
thither from the Painted-Chamber, where they had chosen Sergeant Bradshaw for
their Bold President, and had made Proclamation at the Palace-gate and in
London for the Witnesses (whom they had raked out of the refuse and most
perdite sort of the People) to be ready there with their evidence; which
Witnesses were numbered to near 40. So much for the preparation, come we now to
the perpetration.

The High Court of Justice.
On Saturday, The High Court of Justice sits Jan. 20.
being the twentieth day of January, 1648. Bradshaw President of the High Court
of Justice, with about seventy of the Members of the said Court, having Colonel
Fox, and sixteen Fellows with Partisans, and a Sword born by Colonel Humphrey,
and a Mace by Sergeant Dendy, with their, and other Officers of the said Court
marching before them, came to the place ordered to be prepared for their
sitting, at the West End of the great Hall in Westminster, A crimson
Velvet-chair and Cushion for the President.
where the President in a Crimson-Velvet Chair, fixed in the midst of the
Court, placed himself, having a Desk with a Crimson-Velvet Cushion before him.
The rest of the Members placing themselves on each side of him, upon the
several seats or benches, prepared and hung with Scarlet for that purpose; and
the Partisans dividing themselves on each side of the Court before them.

The Court being thus set, Silence made, the Hall-gate set open.
and Silence made, the Great Gate of the said Hall was set open, to the end
that all persons, (without exception) desirous to see, or hear, might come into
it; upon which the Hall was presently filled, and Silence again ordered.

This done, Col. Thomlinson commanded to bring his prisoner.
Colonel Thomlinson, who had the charge of the King, as a Prisoner, was
commanded to bring him to the Court; who within a quarter of an hours space
brought him, attended with about twenty Officers with Partisans marching before
him; there being Colonel Hacker and other Guard-men, to whose care and custody
he was then committed, marching in his Rear.

Being thus brought up within the face of the Court, He is brought to the Bar,
a chair of crimson-Velvet set for him.
the Sergeant at Arms, with his Mace, received and conducted him straight to
the Bar, where a Crimson-Velvet Chair was set for the King. After a stern
looking upon the Court, and the people in the Galleries on each side of him, he
placed himself, not at all moving his Hat, or otherwise showing the least
respect to the Court; but presently rose up again, and turned about, looking
downwards upon the Guards placed on the left side, and on the multitude of
Spectators on the right side of the said great Hall. Silence made, the Act for
the Trial of Charles Stuart King of England read.
After Silence made among the people, the Act of Parliament for the Trying of
Charles Stuart King of England, was read over by the Clerk of the Court; who
sat on one side of the Table covered with a rich Turkey-carpet, and placed at
the feet of the said President; upon which Table was also laid the Sword and
Mace.

After reading the said Act, The Names of the Commissioners read.
the several names of the Commissioners were called over; every one who was
present, rising up, and answering to his call.

The King having again placed himself in his Chair, with his face toward the
Court, Silence being again ordered, the President stood up, and said;
President. Charles Stuart, The Presidens speech to the King.
King of England, The Commons of England Assembled in Parliament, being deeply
sensible of the Calamities that have been brought upon this Nation, (which is
fixed upon you as the principal Author of it) have resolved to make inquisition
for Blood, and according to that debt and duty they owe to Justice, to God, the
Kingdom, and themselves, and according to the Fundamental Power that rests in
themselves, They have resolved to bring you to Trial and Judgment; and for
that purpose have constituted this High Court of Justice, before which you are
brought.


This said Cook Sollicitor-General of the Commonwealth (standing within a Bar
on the right hand of the King) offered to speak; Cook Solicitor-General offers
to speak; is forbid by the King.
but the King having a staff in his hand, held it up, and laid it upon the said
Cooks shoulder two or three times, bidding him hold: Nevertheless, the
President ordering him to go on, he said: Cook. My Lord, He proceeds.
I am commanded to charge Charles Stuart King of England, in the name of the
Commons of England, with Treason and high Misdemeanors; I desire the said
Charge may be read.

The said Charge being delivered to the Clerk of the Court, the President
ordered it should be read, but the King bid him hold: Nevertheless, being
commanded by the President to read it, The Charge read.
the Clerk begun.

The Charge being read, (which, for its falsehood and Treasonable impudence, is
purposely omitted, as imputing to the King the Blood spilt, by his presence in
several Fights; President demands the Kings Answer.
) The President replied: Sir, you have heard your Charge read, etc. The Court
expects your Answer.


King. I would know by what power I am called hither: I was, not long ago, in
the Isle of Wight; how I came there, is a longer story than I think is fit at
this time for me to speak of; but there I entered into a Treaty with both Houses
of Parliament, with as much public faith as it is possible to be had of any
people in the World. I Treated there with a number of Honorable Lords and
Gentlemen, and Treated honestly and uprightly: I cannot say but they did very
nobly with me; we were upon a conclu^ion of the Treaty. Now I would know by
what Authority, His Majesty refuses to Answer, and disowns the Authority of
the Court.
I mean, lawful: there are many unlawful Authorities in the world, Thieves and
Robbers by the high ways; but I would know by what Authority I was brought from
thence, and carried from place to place, (and I know not what) and when I know
by what lawful Authority, I shall answer: Remember I am your King, and what
sins you bring upon this Land. Think well upon it, I say, think well upon it,
before you go further from one sin to a greater; therefore let me know by what
lawful Authority I am seated here, and I shall not be unwilling to Answer: in
the mean time I shall not betray my Trust. I have a Trust committed to me by
God, by old and lawful descent, I will not betray it, to Answer to a new and
unlawful Authority; therefore resolve me that, and you shall hear more of me.


President. If you had been pleased to have observed what was hinted to you by
the Court at your first coming hither, you would have known by what Authority,
which Authority requires you, in the name of the people of England, of which
you are Elected King, to answer them.


King. No Sir, I deny that.


President. If you acknowledge not the Authority of the Court, they must
proceed.


King. I do tell them so, England was never an Elective Kingdom, but an
Hereditary Kingdom for near these thousand years: Proves his Title to the
Crown, by succession, not Election.
therefore let me know by what Authority I am called hither. I do stand more
for the Liberty of my people than any here, that come to be my pretended
Judges; and therefore let me know by what lawful Authority I am seated here,
and I will Answer it, otherwise I will not Answer it.


President. Is prevented by the Presidents insolent rebukes.
Sir, how really you have managed your Trust, is known: your way of Answer is
to interrogate the Court; which beseems not you in this condition. You have
been told of it twice or thrice.


King. Here is a Gentleman (Lieutenant Colonel Cobbet) ask him, if he did not
bring me from the Isle of Wight by force? I do not come here as submitting to
the Court; I will stand as much for the privilege of the House of Commons,
rightly understood, as any man here whatsoever. I see no House of Lords here
that may constitute a Parliament, and (the King too) should have been. Is this
the bringing of the King to his Parliament? Is this the bringing an end to the
Treaty in the Public faith of the world? Let me see a legal Authority
warranted by the Word of God, the Scriptures, or warranted by the Constitutions
of the Kingdom, and I will Answer.


President. Sir, You have propounded a Question, and have been Answered: seeing
you will not Answer, Who urges for an Answer.
the Court will consider how to proceed; in the mean time, those that brought
you hither, are to take charge of you back again.

The Court desires to know whether this he all the Answer you will give, or no?


King. The King still refuses, demanding their Authority.
Sir, I would desire that you would give me and all the world satisfaction in
this; let me tell you, it is not a slight thing you are about. I am sworn to
keep the Peace by that duty I owe to God and my Country, and I will do it to
the last breath of my Body; and therefore you shall do well to satisfy first
God, and then the Country, by what Authority you do it: if you do it by an
usurped Authority, that will not last long. There is a God in Heaven that will
call you, and all that give you Power, to an account: satisfy me in that, and
I will Answer, otherwise I betray my Trust, and the Liberties of the people,
and therefore think of that, and then I shall be willing. For I do avow, that
it is as great a sin to withstand lawful Authority, as it is to submit to a
Tyrannical, or any other ways unlawful Authority; and therefore satisfy God,
and me, and all the World in that, and you shall receive my Answer: I am not
afraid of the Bill.


President. The Court expects you should give them a final Answer: The
President answers, their Authority is Gods and the Kingdoms.
their purpose is to adjourn till Monday next, if you do not satisfy your
self, though we do tell you our Authority, we are satisfied with our Authority,
and it is upon Gods Authority and the Kingdoms: and that Peace you speak of,
will be kept in the doing of Justice, and that is our present work.


King. Let me tell you, if you will show me what lawful Authority you have, I
shall be satisfied: But what you have hitherto said, satisfies no reasonable
man.


President. That Is in your apprehension; we think it reasonable that are your
Judges.


King. It Is not my apprehension, nor yours neither, that ought to decide it.


President. The Court has heard you, The Court rises
and you are to be disposed of as they have commanded.


Two things were remarkable in this days proceedings.
It is observed, That as the Charge was reading against the King, the silver
head of his staff fell off, The head of the Kings staff falls down, ^e stoops
and takes it up.

Some cry, God save the King; others, Justice and Execution, by Axtels
directions.


the which he wondered at; and seeing none to take it up, he stooped for it
himself, and put it in his pocket. The other, that the people as the King went
out cried aloud and shouted God save the King, while the weaker noise of hired
and commanded Soldiers cried out Justice and Execution, at Colonel Axtels
Threats and Bastinadoes.

At the High Court of Justice sitting in Westminster Hall, Monday, January 22.
1648.
Upon the Kings coming a shout was made. The Court sits, the King comes in, the
people shout. Solicitor moves for the Kings Answer.


Solicitor. May it please your Lordship, my Lord President, I did at the last
Court in the behalf of the Commons of England, exhibit and give into this Court
a Charge of High Treason, and other High Crimes, against the Prisoner at the
Bar, etc. My humble Motion to this High Court is, That the Prisoner may be
directed to make a positive Answer, or else the Charge may be taken pro
confesso, and the Court may proceed according to Justice.


President. Sir, You may remember at the last Court you were told the occasion
of your being brought hither, etc. you were then pleased to make some scruples
concerning the Authority of this Court, etc. Since that, the Court has taken
into consideration what you then said, they are fully satisfied with their own
Authority, and they hold it fit you should stand satisfied with it too: and
they do require it, that you do give a positive and particular Answer to this
Charge that is exhibited against you: President insists upon it.
they do expect you should either confess or deny it; if you deny it, it is
offered in the behalf of the Nation to be made good against you; their
Authority they do avow to the whole world, that the whole Kingdom are to rest
satisfied in; and you are to lose no more time, but to give a positive Answer
thereunto.


King. When I was here last, it is true, I made that Question; and truly if it
were only my own particular case, His Majesty still denies the Authority of
the Court.
I would have satisfied my self with the Protestation I made the last time I
was here against the Legality of this Court, and that a King cannot be tried by
any Superior Jurisdiction on Earth; but it is not my case alone, it is the
Freedom and Liberty of the people of England, and do you pretend what you will,
I stand more for their Liberties. For of Power without Law, may make Laws, may
alter the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, I do not know what Subject he is in
England, that can be sure of his Life, or any thing that he calls his own;
therefore when I came here, I did expect particular Reasons, Refuses to plead*
and offers to show his Reasons.
to know by what Law, what Authority you did proceed against me here, and
therefore I am a little to seek what to say to you in this particular, because
the Affirmative is proved, the Negative often is very hard to do: but since I
cannot persuade you to do it, I shall tell you my Reasons as short as I can.

My Reasons why in Conscience, and the duty I owe to God first, and my people
next, for the preservation of their Lives, Liberties and Estates; I conceive I
cannot answer this, Here the King would have delivered his Reasons, but was not
suffered.
till I be satisfied of the legality of it.

All proceedings against any man whatsoever --


President. Sir, I must interrupt you; which I would not do, but that what you
do is not agreeable to the proceedings of any Court of Justice: you are about to
enter into Argument and Dispute concerning the Authority of this Court, before
whom you appear as a Prisoner, and are Charged as a Delinquent; if you take
upon you to dispute the Authority of the Court, we may not do it, nor will any
Court give way unto it; you are to submit unto it, you are to give in a
punctual and direct Answer, whether you will Answer to your Charge or no, and
what your Answer is.


King. Sir, by your favor, I do not know the forms of Law, I do know Law and
Reason: His Majesty presses to show his Reasons,
though I am no Lawyer professed, yet I know as much Law as any Gentleman in
England; and therefore (under favor) I do plead for the Liberties of the
people of England more than you do, and therefore if I should impose a belief
upon any man without Reasons give for it, it were unreasonable; but I must tell
you, That by that Reason that I have as thus informed, I cannot yield unto it.


President. Sir, I must interrupt you, you may not be permitted: you speak of
Law and Reason, but cannot be permitted.
and there is both against you. Sir, the Vote of the Commons of England
Assembled in Parliament, it is the Reason of the Kingdom, and they are those
two that have given that Law, according to which you should have Ruled and
Reigned. Sir, you are not to dispute our Authority, you are told it again by
the Court. Sir, it will be taken notice of, that you stand in contempt of the
Court, and your contempt will be recorded accordingly.


King. I do not know how a King can be a Delinquent: not by any Law that ever I
heard of; all men (Delinquents or what you will) let me tell you, they may put
in Demurrers against any proceedings as legal, He desires to Demur.
and I do demand that, and demand to be heard with my Reasons; if you deny
that, you deny Reason.


President. Sir, you have offered something to the Court, I shall speak
something unto you of the sense of the Court; Sir, neither you nor any man are
permitted to dispute that point, He is overruled by the Court,
you are concluded, you may not Demur to the Jurisdiction of the Court; if you
do, I must let you know, that they overruled your Demurrer: they sit here by
the Authority of the Commons of England, and all your Predecessors and you are
responsible to them.


King. I deny that, show me one precedent. --


President. Sir, you ought not to interrupt while the Court is speaking to you;
this point is not to be debated by you, and Interrupted.
neither will the Court permit you to do it; if you offer it by way of Demurrer
to the Jurisdiction of the Court, they have considered of their Jurisdiction,
they do affirm their own Jurisdiction.


King. I say Sir, by your favor, that the Commons of England was never a Court
of Judicature, I would know how they came to be so.


President. Sir you are not to be permitted to go on in that speech, and these
Discourses.

Then the Clerk of the Court read as follows.

Charles Stuart, The Cle^k re^d.
King of England, You have been accused on the behalf of the people of England,
of High Treason, and other high Crimes; the Court have determined, that you
ought to Answer the same.


King. I will Answer the same, as soon as I know by what Authority you do this.


President. If this be all that you will say, The Guards charged to take away
their Prisoner.
then, Gentlemen, you that brought the Prisoner hither, take charge of him back
again.


King. I do require that I may give in my Reasons why I do not Answer; and give
me time for that.


President. Sir, It Is not for Prisoners to require.


King. Prisoner? Sir, I am not an ordinary Prisoner.


President. The Court has considered of their Jurisdiction, and they have
already affirmed their Jurisdiction: if you will not Answer, we shall give
order to Record your default.


King. You never heard my Reasons yet.


President. Sir, your Reasons are not to be heard against the highest
Jurisdiction.


King. Show me that Jurisdiction, where Reason is not to be heard.


President. Sir, we show it you here, the Commons of England: and the next time
you are brought, you will know more the pleasure of the Court, and it may be,
their final determination.


King. Show me wherever the House of Commons was a Court of Judicature of that
kind.


President. Sergeant, take away the Prisoner.


King. Well Sir, remember that the King is not suffered to give his Reasons for
the Liberty and Freedom of all his Subjects.


President. Sir, you are not to have liberty to use this Language; how great a
friend you have been to the Laws and Liberties of the people, let all England
and the World Judge.


King. Sir, under favor, it was the Liberty, Freedom and Laws of the Subject
that ever I took -- defended my self with Arms: I never took up Arms against
the people, but for my people and the Laws.


President. The command of the Court must be obeyed; no answer will be given to
the Charge.


King. Well Sir.

Then the President ordered the default to be recorded, and the contempt of the
Court, The Court order the default and contempt to be Recorded.
and that no Answer would be given to the Charge.

And so the King was guarded forth to Sir Robert Cotton's house.

Then the Court adjourned to the Painted-chamber on Tuesday at twelve a clock,
The King guarded to Sir To. Cottons.

The Court adjourns.

The Court sits again.


and from thence they adjourned again to Westminster Hall, at which time all
persons concerned were to give their attendance.


At the High Court of Justice sitting in Westminster Hall, Tuesday, January 23.
1648.
O yes made. Silence commanded, The Court called, seventy three persons present.

The King came in with his Guard, The King comes.
looking with an austere countenance upon the Court, and sat down.

Cook. Sollicitor-General. May it please your Lordship, my Lord President,

This is now the third time, that by the great grace and favor of this high
Court, the Prisoner has been brought to the Bar, before any Issue joined in
the Cause. My Lord, I did at the first Court Exhibit a Charge against him, etc.
--

The Solicitor moves the Court for Judgment.
My Lord, after this great delay of Justice, I shall now humbly move your
Lordship for speedy Judgment against him. My Lord, I might press your Lordship
upon the whole, according to the known Rules of the Law of the Land, That if a
Prisoner shall stand as contumacious in contempt, and shall not put in an
Issuable Plea, Guilty or not Guilty of the Charge given against him, whereby he
may come to a fair Trial; that as by an implicit Confession, it may be taken
pro confesso, as it has been done to those who have deserved more f^vour than
the Prisoner at the Bar has done: but besides, my Lord, I shall humbly press
your Lordship upon the whole Fact. The House of Commons, the supreme Authority
and Jurisdiction of the Kingdom, they have Declared, that it is notorious, that
the matter of the Charge is true, as it is in truth (my Lord) as clear as
Crystal, and as the Sun that shines at Noonday; which if your Lordship and the
Court be not satisfied in, I have notwithstanding, on the People of Englands
behalf, several Witnesses to produce: And therefor I do humbly pray, and yet I
must confess it is not so much I, as the ^nnocent Blood that has been shed,
the cry whereof is very great for Justice and Judgment; and therefore I do
humbly pray, that speedy Judgment be pronounced against the prisoner at the
Bar.


President. Sir, you have heard what is moved by the Counsel on the behalf of
the Kingdom against you. Sir, you may well remember, and if you do not* the
Court cannot forget, what Dilatory dealings the Court has found at your hands.
You were told, The Presidents speech in behalf of the Court,
that it was not for you, nor any other man, to dispute the Jurisdiction of the
Supreme and highest Authority of England, from which there is no appeal, and
touching which there must be no dispute; yet you did persist in such carriage,
as you gave no manner of obedience, nor did you acknowledge any Authority in
them, nor the High Court that constituted this Court of Justice.

Sir, I must let you know from the Court, that they are very sensible of these
delays of yours, and that they ought not, being thus Authorized by the Supreme
Court of England, to be thus trifled withal; and that they might in Justice, if
they pleased, and according to the Rules of Justice, take advantage of the
delays, and proceed to pronounce Judgment against you; yet nevertheless they
are pleased to give direction, and on their behalfs I do require you, that you
make a positive Answer unto this Charge that is against you. Sir, in plain
terms, for Justice knows no respect of persons, you are to give your positive
and final Answer in plain English, he demands a positive answer from the King.
whether you be Guilty or not Guilty of these Treasons laid to your charge.

The King after a little pause, said,

His Majesty desires to speak for the Liberties of the people:
When I was here yesterday, I did desire to speak for the Liberties of the
people of England; I was interrupted: I desire to know yet whether I may speak
freely or not.


President. Sir, you have heard the resolution of the Court upon the like
Question the last day, and you were told, that having such a Charge of so high
a Nature against you, and your Work was, that you ought to acknowledge the
Jurisdiction of the Court, And to Answer to your Charge. Sir, if you Answer to
your Charge, which the Court gives you leave now to do, though they might have
taken the advantage of your contempt, but is not permitted till he gives his
Answer to Guilty or not Guilty.
yet if you be able to Answer to your Charge, when you have once Answered, you
shall be heard at large; make the best Defense you can. But Sir, I must let you
know from the Court, at their commands, that you are not to be permitted to
issue out into other discourses, till such time as you have given a positive
Answer concerning the Matter that is Charged upon you.


King. For the Charge, I value it not a Rush, it is the Liberty of the People
of England that I stand for; for me to acknowledge a new Court, that I never
heard of before, I that am your King, that should be an example to all the
people of England, to uphold Justice, to maintain the old Laws; indeed I do not
know how to do it: you spoke very well the first day that I came here, (on
Saturday) of the Obligations that I had laid upon me by God, to the maintenance
of the Liberties of my people: The same Obligation you spoke of, I do
acknowledge to God that I owe to Him, and to my people, to defend, as much as
in me lies, (...) to give any particular answer, desires (...) to show his
Reasons.
the ancient Laws of the Kingdom; therefore until I may ^now that this is not
against the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, by your f^vo^r, I can put in no
particular Answer: If you will give me time, I will then show you my Reasons
why I cannot do it, and this --

Here being interrupted, he said,

B^ your favor, is interrupted,
you ought not to interrupt me: how I came here, I know no^, th^re's no Law for
it, to make your King your Prisoner: I was lately in a Treaty up on the public
Faith of the Kingdom, again,
that was the known -- the two Houses of Parliament, that was the
Representative of the Kingdom; and when that I had almost made an end of the
Treaty, then I was hurried away and brought hither, and therefore --


Here the President interrupted him, and again.
and said, Sir, you must know the pleasure of the Court. King. By your favor
Sir, --


President. Nay Sir, by your favor, you may not be permitted to fall into
these discourses; you appear as a Delinquent, you have not acknowledged the
Authority of the Court; the Court craves it not of you, and once more they
command you to give your positive Answer -- Clerk, do your Duty.


King. Duty Sir!

The Clerk reads. The Clerk reads
Charles Stuart, King of England, you are accused in the behalf of the Commons
of England, of diverse high Crimes and Treasons; which Charge has been read
unto you; the Court now requires you to give your positive and final Answer, by
way of confession or denial of the Charge.


King. Sir, I say again to you, So that I might give satisfaction to the people
of England of the clearness of my proceedings, His Majesty justifies his
proceedings, and refuses to Answer to the Charge.
not by way of Answer, not in this way, but to satisfy them that I have done
nothing against that Trust that has been committed to me, I would do it; but
to acknowledge a new Court against their Privileges; to alter the Fundamental
Laws of the Kingdom; Sir, you must excuse me.


President. Sir, this is the third time that you have publicly disowned the
Court, and put an affront upon it; how far you have preserved the Privileges
of the People, your Actions have spoke it; but truly Sir, men's intentions ought
to be known by their Actions: you have written your meaning in bloody
Characters throughout the whole Kingdom: but Sir, you understand the pleasure
of the Court. -- Clerk, Record the default, The Guards ordered to take charge
of their Prisoner.
-- and Gentlemen, you that took charge of the Prisoner, take him back again.


King. I will only say this one word to you, If it were only my own
particular, I would not say any more, nor interrupt you.


President. Sir, you have heard the pleasure of the Court, and you are
(notwithstanding you will not understand it) to find that you are before a
Court of Justice.

Then the King went forth with his Guard, The King goes forth, and the Court
adjourns.
and Proclamation was made, that all persons who had then appeared, and had
further to do at the Court, might depart into the Painted-Chamber, to which
place the Court did forthwith adjourn, and intended to meet in Westminster Hall
by ten of the Clock the next morning.


Crier. God bless the Kingdom of England.


His Majesty's Reasons against the Jurisdiction of the Court, which be intended
to speak in Court, but was hindered.
His Majesty's Reasons against the pretended Jurisdiction of the High Court of
Justice, which he intended to have delivered in writing on Monday, January 22.
1648. But was not permitted.
HAving already made my Protestations, not only against the illegality of this
pretended Court, but also that no earthly Power can justly call Me (who am your
King) in question as a Delinquent; I would not any more open my Mouth upon this
occasion, more than to refer my self to what I have spoken, were I in this case
alone concerned. But the duty I owe to God in the preservation of the true
Liberty of my People, will not suffer me at this time to be silent: For, how
can any freeborn Subject of England call life, or any thing he possesses, his
own, if Power without Right may daily make new* and abrogate the old
Fundamental Law of the Land? which I now take to be the present case.
Wherefore when I came hither, I expected that you would have endeavored to
have satisfied me concerning these grounds which hinder me to answer to your
pretended Impeachment; but since I see that nothing I can say will move you to
it (though Negatives are not so naturally proved as Affirmatives) yet I will
show you the Reasons why I am confident you cannot Judge me, nor indeed the
meanest man in England: for I will not (like you) without showing a Reason,
seek to impose a belief upon my Subjects.

No proceeding just, but what is warranted by the Laws of God or man.
There is no proceeding just against any man, but what is warranted either by
Gods Laws, or the Municipal Laws of the Country where he lives. Now I am most
confident, this days proceeding cannot be warranted by Gods Law; for on the
contrary, the Authority of obedience unto Kings is clealy warranted, and
strictly commanded both in the Old and New Testaments; which if denied, I am
ready instantly to Prove: and for the Question now in hand, there it is said,
That where the word of a King is, there is Power; and who may say unto him,
What do thou? Eccles. 8.4. Then for the Law of this Land, I am no less
confident that no learned Lawyer will affirm that an Impeachment can lie
against the King, No Impeachment can lie against the King.
they all going in His Name: and one of their Maxims is, That the King can do
no wrong. Besides, the Law upon which you ground your proceedings, must either
be Old or New: if Old, show it; if New, tell what Authority warranted by the
Fundamental Laws of the Land has made it, and when. But how the House of
Commons can erect a Court of Judicature, The House of Commons cannot erect a
Court of Judicature.
which was never one it self, (as is well known to all Lawyers) I leave to God
and the world to Judge: And it were full as strange that they should pretend to
make Laws without King or Lords House, to any that have heard speak of the Laws
of England.

And admitting, but not granting, that the People of Englands Commission could
grant your pretended Power; I see nothing you can show for that: for certainly
you never asked the question of the tenth man in the Kingdom: and in this way
you manifestly wrong even the poorest Plowman, if you demand not his free
consent; nor can you pretend any color for this your pretended Commission
without the Consent at least of the major part of every man in England, Nor are
the Membe^^ of this House Co^^issioned by the people of England.
of whatsoever quality or Condition, which I am sure you never went about to
seek; so far are you from having it. Thus you see that I speak not for my own
right alone as I am your King, but also for the true Liberty of all my
Subjects; which consists not in the power of Government, but in living under
such laws, such a Government, as may give themselves the best assurance of
their lives, and propriety of their goods. The Privileges o^ ^a^liame^t
Violated
Nor in this must or do I forget the Privileges of both Houses of Parliament,
which this days proceedings do not only violate, but likewise occasion the
greatest breach of their public Faith, that I believe ever was heard of; with
which I am far from charging the two Houses: for all the pretended Crimes laid
against me, bear date long before this late Treaty at Newport, in which I
having concluded, as much as in me lay, and hopefully expecting the Houses
agreement thereunto, I was suddenly surpised, and hurried from thence as a
Prisoner, upon which account I am against my will brought hither; where since I
am come, I cannot but to my power, defend the ancient Laws and Liberties of
this Kingnom, together with my own just Rights. Then for any thing I can see,
The higher House excluded, and the major part of the lower deterred from
sitting.
the Higher House is totally excluded; and for the House of Commons, it is too
well known that the major part of them are detained or deterred from sitting;
so as if I'had no other, this were sufficient Reason for me to protest against
the Lawfulness of your pretended Court. Besides all this, the Peace of the
Kingdom is not the least of My thoughts: and what hopes of Settlement is there,
so long as Power reigns without Rule or Law, The frame of Government changed.
changing the whole frame of that Government, under which this Kingdom has
flourished for many hundred years? (nor will I say what will fall out, in case
this lawless unjust Proceedings against me do go on.) And believe it, the
Commons of England will not thank you for this Change, for they will remember
how happy they have been of late years, under the reign of Queen Elizabeth, the
King my Father, and my Self, until the beginning of these unhappy Troubles; and
will have cause to doubt that they shall never be so happy under any new. And
by this time it will be too sensibly evident, that the Arms I took up, were
only to defend the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, against those who have
supposed my Power has totally changed the ancient Government.

Thus having showed you briefly the Reasons why I cannot submit to your
pretended Authority, without violating the Trust which I have from God, for the
Welfare and Liberty of my People: I expect from you either clear Reasons to
convince my Judgment, showing me that I am in an Error (and then truly I will
Answer) or that you will withdraw your proceedings.

This the King intended to speak in Westminster Hall on Monday, Jan. 22. but
against Reason was hindered.

The Court sits.
The Proceedings of the High Court of Justice sitting at Westminster Hall, on
Saturday the 27 of January, 1648.
Silence commanded.
O yes made. Silence commanded. The Court called, Sergeant Bradshaw President,
in his Scarlet-Robe (suitable to the work of this day) with sixty eight other
Members of the Court called. As the King came into the Court, The King comes,
the soldiers cry for Justice.

His Majesty desires to be heard.


in his usual posture, with his Hat on, a cry made in the Hall by some of the
Soldiers for Justice, Justice, and Execution.

King. I shall desire a word to be heard a little, and I hope I shall give no
occasion of interruption.


President. You may Answer in your time, hear the Court first.


King. If it please you Sir, I desire to be heard, and I shall not give any
occasion of interruption, and it is only in a word: A sudden judgment --


President. but not permitted.
You shall be heard in due time, but you are to hear the Court first.


King. Sir, I desire it; it will be in order to what I believe the Court will
say; and therefore Sir, a hasty Judgment is not so soon re-called.


President. Sir, you shall be heard before the Judgment be given, and in the
mean time you may forbear.


King. Well Sir, shall I be heard before the Judgment given?


President. Gentlemen, it is well known to all or most of you here present,
That the Prisoner at the Bar ^ath been several times convented, and brought
before the Court, to make Answer to a charge of Treason and other high Crimes
exhibited against him, in the name of the People of England; to which Charge,
being required to Answer he has been so far from obeying the commands of the
Court, by submitting to their Justice, as he began to take upon him to offer
Reasoning and debate unto the Authority of the Court, and of the highest Court
that constituted them to try and judge him; but being overruled in that, and
required to make his Answer, he was still pleased to continue contumacious, and
to refuse to submit or Answer, etc. But Sir, if you have any thing to say in
defense of your self concerning the matter charged, the Court has given me
command to let you know they will hear you.


King. Since I see you will not hear any thing of debate concerning that which
I confess I thought most material for the Peace of the Kingdom, and for the
Liberty of the Subject, I shall wave it, I shall speak nothing to it; but only
I must-tell you, that this many a day all things have been taken away from me,
but that that I call more dear to me than my life, which is My Conscience and
my Honor; and if I had respect to my life more than the Peace of the Kingdoms
and the Liberty of the Subject, certainly I should have made a particular
defense for my self; for by that at leastwise I might have delayed an ugly
Sentence, which I believe will pass upon me: therefore certainly Sir, as a man
that has some understanding, some knowledge of the world, if that my Zeal to
my Country had not overborn the care that I have of my own preservation, I
should have gone another way to work than that I have done. Now Sir, I conceive
that an hasty Sentence once past, may be sooner repented than recalled; and
truly the self-same desire that I have for the Peace of the Kingdom, and the
Liberty of the Subject, more than my own particular, does make me now at last
desire, that having somethimg to say that concerns both, I desire before
Sentence be given, that I may be heard in the Painted Chamber before the Lords
and Commons: this delay cannot be prejudicial to you, whatsoever I say; if no
Reason, those that hear me must be Judges; if it be Reason, and real for the
Welfare of the Kingdom, and the Liberty of the Subject, I am sure on it, it is
very well worth the hearing; therefore I do conjure you, as you love that you
pretend, I hope it is real, the Liberty of the Subject, the Peace of the
Kingdom, that you will grant me the hearing, before any Sentence ^e passed: I
only desire you will take this into your consideration; it may be you have not
heard of it beforehand; if you will, I Will retire, and you may think of it: but
if I cannot get this Liberty, I do here protest, that so fair shows of Liberty
and Peace are pure shows, and not otherwise, and that you will not hear your
KING.


President. Sir, you have now spoken?


King. Yes Sir.


President. And this that you have said is a further declining of the
Jurisdiction of this Court, which was the thing wherein you were limited
before.


King. Pray excuse me Sir, for my interruption, because you mistake me; it is
not a declining of it, you do Judge me before you hear me speak; I say it will
not, I do not decline it, though I cannot acknowledge the Jurisdiction of the
Court; yet Sir, in this give me leave to say, I would do it though I did not
acknowledge it in this: I do protest it is not the declining of it, since I
say, if that I do say any thing but that that is for the Peace of the Kingdom
and the Liberty of the Subject, then the shame is mine. Now I desire that you
will take this into your consideration, if you will I Will withdraw.


President. Sir, this is not altogether n^w that you have moved unto us; not
altogether new to us, though the first time in person you have offered it to
the Court: Sir, you say you do not Decline the Jurisdiction of the Court?


King. Not in this that I have said.


President. I understand you well Sir: That which you now tender, is to have
another Jurisdiction, and a coordinate Jurisdiction. I know very well you
express your self, Sir, that notwithstanding what you will offer to the Lords
and Commons in the Painted-Chamber, you would nevertheless proceed on here.
Sir, because you shall know the further pleasure of the Court upon that which
you have moved, the Court will withdraw for a time.


King. Shall I withdraw?


President. Sir, you shall know the pleasure of the Court presently. The Court
withdrew for half an hour into the Court of Wards. The Court withdraws.


Then the Court commanded the Sergeant at Arms to withdraw the King, and to
expect order for his return again. Serejant at Arms withdraws the King.


The Court withdrew for half an hour, and returned (this withdrawing was
occasioned by the importunacy and disturbance of Colonel Downs, who sat next
to Cromwell; The Court returns,
but Downs was quickly quieted, being awed by Cromwell during this short stay.)


President. Sergeant at Arms, send for your Prisoner.

Sir, their withdrawing and adjournment was pro forma tantum; for it did not
seem to them that there was any difficulty in the thing; resolving to proceed.
the Court is now resolved to proceed.


King. Sir, The King brought into the Court: he urges to be heard, and
advises the Court against a ha^ty Judgment.
I know it is in vain for me to dispute, I am no Sceptick for to deny the power
that you have, I know that you have power enough: Sir, I confess I think it
would have been for the Kingdoms Peace, if you would have taken the pains to
have shown the lawfulness of your power. For this delay that I have desired, I
confess it is a delay, but very important for the Peace of the Kingdom; for it
is not my person that I look on alone, it is the Kingdoms welfare, and the
Kingdoms Peace: it is an old sentence, That we should think on long before we
have resolved of great matters suddenly; Therefore Sir, I do say again, that I
do put at your doors all the inconveniency of an hasty Sentence. I confess I
have been here now I think this week; this day eight days was the day I came
here first; but a little delay of a day or two further, may give peace, whereas
an H^sty Judgment may bring on that trouble and perpetual inconveniency to the
Kingdom, that the Child that is unborn may repent it; and therefore again, out
of the Duty I owe to God, and to my Country, I do desire that I may be heard by
the Lords and Commons in the Painted-Chamber, or any other Chamber that you
will appoint me.


President. The Court will proceed.


King. I say this Sir, That if you will hear me, I doubt not but I shall give
some satisfaction to you all here, and to my people after that; and therefore I
do require you, as you will answer it at the dreadful day of Judgment, that
you will consider it once again.


President. Sir, I have received direction from the Court.


King. Well Sir.


President. If this must be re-enforc'd, or any thing of this nature, your
Answer must be the same, and they will proceed to Sentence if you have nothing
more to say.


King. I have nothing more to say; but I shall desire that this may be entered
what I have said.


President. The Court then Sir has something to say to you, which although I
know it will be very unacceptable, yet notwithstanding they are willing, and
are resolved to discharge their Duty. The Presidents speech in defense of the
Courts proceedings.
[and so proceeded by way of ^iery, how other Nations in all times had taken
the same course with their Kings and Princes, deposing and executing of them,
especially, and more frequently in the Kings Native Realm of Scotland;
mis-citing, and wresting, and abusing the truth of History, to varnish the
Rhapsody and Treason of this lying Harangue: of all which, one most remarkable
paragraph, as noted by the King himself with an admiration, is here inserted.

Sir, That that we are now upon by the command of the highest Court, has been
and is to Try and Judge you for those great offenses of yours. Sir, the Charge
has called you Tyrant, a Traitor, a Murderer, and a public Enemy to the
Commonwealth of England. Sir, it had been well, if any of all these terms
rightly and justly might have been spared, if any one of them at all.


King. Ha! --


President. -- To do Justice Impartially, and even upon You, is all our
Resolutions. Sir, I say for your self, we do ^eartily wish and desire, that God
would be pleased to give you a sense of your sins, that you would see wherein
you have done amiss, that you may cry unto him, that God would deliver you from
Blood guiltiness. A good King was once guilty of that particular thing, and was
clear otherwise, saving in the matter of Uriah. Truly Sir, the story tells us
that he was a repentant King, and it signifies enough that he had died for it,
but that God was pleased to accept of him, and to give him his pardon. Thou
shall not dye, but the Child shall dye; thou have given cause to the enemies of
God to blaspheme.


King. I would desire only one word before you give Sentence, and that is;
That you would hear me concerning those great Imputations that you have laid to
my charge.


President. Sir, You must give me leave to go on, for I am not far from your
Sentence, and your time is now past.


King. But I shall desire you will hear me a few words to you; for truly, what
ever Sentence you will put upon me, in respect of those heavy Imputations I see
by your speech you have put upon me, His Majesty is interrupted.
that I Sir, it is very true that --


President. Sir, I must put you in mind: truly Sir, I would not willingly at
this time especially interrupt you in any thing you have to say, that is proper
for us to admit of; but Sir, you have not owned us as a Court, and you look
upon us as a sort of people met together; and we know what Language we receive
from your party.


King. I know nothing of that.


President. You dis-avow us as a Court, and therefore for you to address your
self to us, and not to acknowledge us as a Court to judge of what you say, it
is not to be permitted: and the truth is, all along from the first time, you
were pleased to dis-avow and disown us, the Court needed not to have heard you
one word; for unless they be acknowledged a Court, and engaged, it is not
proper for you to speak: Sir, we have given you too much liberty already, and
admitted of too much delay, etc.


The President commands the Sentence to be read. Make an O Yes, and command
Silence while the Sentence is read.

O Yes made, Silence commanded, the Sentence read.
Silence commanded.

The Clerk read the Sentence, which was drawn up in Parchment.

Whereas the Commons of England in Parliament, have appointed them an high
Court of Justice, for the Trying of Charles Stuart King of England; before whom
he had been three times convented, and at first time a Charge of high Treason
and other Crimes and Misdemeanors was read in the behalf of the Kingdom of
England, etc.

Here the Clerk read the Charge. The Charge read.


Which Charge being read unto him as aforesaid, He the said Charles Stuart was
required to give his Answer; The King required to give his Answer, he refuses.
but he refused so to do. [expressing the several passages of his refusing in
the former proceedings.]

For all which Treasons and Crimes, this Court does adjudge, that He the said
Charles Stuart, as a Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, and a public Enemy, shall be
put to Death by severing his Head from his Body, Jan. 27. 1648. Which being
read, Bradshaw added -- This Sentence now read and published, it is the Act,
Sentence, Judgment, and Resolution of the whole Court.

To which they all expressed their assent by standing up, as was before agreed
and ordered. And then the King (not being admitted to reply) was taken by his
Guards and carried to Sir Robert Cottons: The King guarded awa^.

He is abused by the Soldiers,


the Soldiers as he passed down the Stairs, scoffing at him, and casting the
smoke of their Tobacco (a thing odious to him) in his Face, and strewing the
Pipes in his way. And one more insolent than the rest Spitting in his Face;
which his Majesty according to his wonted Heroic Patience, took no more notice
of, than to wipe it away. As he passed along further, hearing the same wretches
crying out Justice, Execution; He said -- Alas poor souls, for a piece of
money they would do so for their Commanders.

Being brought thus to Sir Robert Cottons, a house near adjoining and thence by
water to White-^all; the Soldiers (at their Commanders instigation, who were
set on likewise by Cromwell) continued their brutish carriage toward him,
abusing all that seemed to show any respect or even compassion to him, not
suffering him to rest in his Chamber, but thrusting in, and smoking their
Tobacco, disturbed in his Devotions. His admirable patience.
and disturbing his privacy. But through all these Trials (unusual to Princes)
he passed with such a calm and even temper, that he let nothing fall
unbeseeming his former Majesty and Magnanimity. In the Evening, a Member of the
Army acquainted the Committee with his Majesty's desire, that seeing they had
passed a Sentence of Death upon him, He desires to see his Children and Doctor
Juxon.
and his time might be nigh, he might see his Children, and Doctor Iuxon Bishop
of London might be admitted to assist him in his private Devotions, and
receiving the Sacrament. Both which at length were granted.

At this time did some of the Grandees of the Army tempt the King with new
Proposals; The King tempted with new Proposals from some Grandees of the Army.
but so destructive to the peoples Liberty and Safety, so contrary to his
Honor and Conscience, and so reproachful to any Christian Government, that he
with the like courage and constancy which he had showed throughout his
Troubles, rejected, and chose the Cross; to prepare him whereto, the Lord
Bishop of London on Sunday (being that day guarded at Saint James's) preached
before him on these words -- In the day when God shall judge the secrets of all
men by Jesus Christ, B. Juxon preaches before him at Saint James 's.
according to my Gospel.

On Monday following, His Maj. gives his Blessing to the Duke of Gloucester,
and the Lady Elizabeth. His pious advice to them.
the day before his death, the Duke of Gloucester and the Lady Elizabeth were
brought to him, whom he most joyfully received; and giving his Blessing to the
Princess* He had her remember to tell her Brother James, when even she should
see him, That it was his Fathers last desire, that he should look no more upon
Charles as his eldest Brother only, but be obedient unto him as his Sovereign:
And that they should love one another, and forgive their Fathers Enemies. And
then said unto her, Sweetheart, you will forget this. No, said she, I shall
never forget it while I live. And pouring forth abundance of Tears, promised
him to write down the particulars.

Then the King taking the Duke of Gloucester upon his Knee, said, Sweetheart,
now they will Cut off thy Fathers Head. (upon which words the Child looked very
wishfully on him.) Mark Child what I say; They will Cut off my Head, and
perhaps make thee a King: But mark what I say, you must not be a King, so long
as your Brothers Charles and James do live; for they will Cut off your Brothers
Heads (when they can catch them) and Cut thy Head off too at last: and
therefore, I charge you do not be made a King by them. At which the Child
sighing, said, I will be torn in pieces first. Which falling so unexpectedly
from one so young, The Duke of Gloucester 's reply.
it made the King rejoice exceedingly.

Another Relation from the Lady Elizabeth's own Hand.
What the King said to me 29 of January last, being the last time I had the
happiness to see him: The Lady Elizabeth's Relation of what passed between his
Majesty and her.
He told me he was glad I was come, and although he had not time to say much,
yet somewhat he had to say to me, which he had not to another, or leave in
writing, because he feared their Cruelty was such, as that they would not have
permitted him to write to me. He wished me not to grieve and torment my self
for him; for that would be a glorious Death that he should die, it being for
the Laws and Liberties of the Land. He bid me read Bishop Andrews Sermons,
Hookers Ecclesiastical Policy, He advises her to read Bp. Andrew 's Sermons,
Hookers Policy, and Bp. Laud against Fisher.
and Bishop Laud 's Book against Fisher, which would ground me against Popery.
He told me, he had forgiven all his Enemies, and hoped God would forgive them
also; and commanded us, etc. to forgive them. He bid me tell my Mother, that
his thoughts had never strayed from her, and that his Love would be the same to
his last. Withal, he commanded me and my Brother to be obedient to her. And bid
me send his Blessing to the rest of my Brothers and Sisters, with commendation
to all his Friends. So after he had given me his Blessing, I took my leave.

Further, he commanded us all to forgive those People, but never to trust them;
for they had been most false to him, and to those that gave them power, and be
feared also to their own Souls. And desired me not to grieve for him, for he
should die a Martyr; and that he doubted not but that the Lord would settle his
Throne upon his Son, and that we should all be happier than we could have
expected to have been if he had lived. With many other things, which at present
I cannot Remember.

A Committee appointed to consider of the time and place for Execution.
The same day the Regicides met (being sixty four in number) at the
Painted-Chamber, in pursuance of their Bloody Sentence, and appointed Sir
Hardress Waller, Harrison, Ireton, Dean, and Okey, to be a Committee to
consider of the Time and Place for the Execution; who having made a report,
forty eight of the Commissioners meeting again the same day, made this Resolve.

Upon Report made for considering of the Time and Place of the Executing of the
Judgment against the King: that the said Committee have Resolved, that the
open street before White Hall is a fit place; They agree upon the open street
before White Hall the morrow following.
and that the said Committee conceive it fit, that the King be there Executed
to Morrow, the King having already notice thereof.

The Court approved thereof, and ordered a Warrant to be drawn for that
purpose; which Warrant was accordingly drawn and agreed unto, and ordered to be
engrossed: which was done, and Signed and Sealed accordingly, as follows.

At the High Court of Justice for Trying and Judging of Charles Stuart King of
England, January 29. 1648.
Whereas Char^es Stuart King of England, The Wa^ra^^ for the Kings Ex^^ut^^^.
is and stands Convicted, Attainted, and Condemned of high Treas^n, and other
high Crimes; and Sentence upon Saturday last was pronounced against him by this
Court, to be put to death, by severing his Head from his Body; of which
Sentence Execution yet remains to be done: These are therefore to will and
require you, to see the said Sentence Executed in the open street before
White Hall, upon the morrow, being the 30 day of this instant Month of January,
between the hours of ten in the Morning, and five of the afternoon of the same
day, with full effect: And for your so doing, this shall be your sufficient
Warrant. Sig^^d by Joh. Bradshaw* Tho Gray, Ol. Cromwell, (...) to Col. F^.
Hacker, (...) Hunks, an^ Li^^. Co^o^el ^hray.
And these are to require all Officers and Soldiers, and other the good People
of this Nation of England, to be assisting unto you in this Service.

To Col. Francis Hacker, Colonel Huncks, and Lieutenant Colonel Phray, and
every of them.

Given under our hands and S^als, etc. John Bradshaw, Thomas Gray, Oliver
Cromwell, etc.


But to amuse the people, for prevention of a rescue, they caused it to be
rumoured as if they would respit the King, and better consider of so weighty
and important a business, when the next day discovered their villainy.

For Tuesday the 30 of January (the Fatal day) being come, the Comissioners
met, and ordered four or five of their Ministers to attend upon the King at
Saint James's, Factious Ministers appointed to attend the King; he refuses to
confer with them.
where they yet kept him; but his Majesty well knowing what miserable
comforters they were like to prove, refused to have conference with them.

That Morning, before his Majesty was brought thence, the Bishop of London d^d
again Officiate, and read Divine Service in his presence; to which Duty, the 27
Chapter of Saint Matthew, being the History of our Saviors Passion, was
appointed by the Church-Calendar for the second Lesson. The King supposing it
to have been selected on purpose, thanked him afterward for his seasonable
choice. But the Bishop modestly declining those undue thanks, told him that it
came by course to be read on that day; Bp. of London reads prayers to him,
and administers the Sacrament.
which very much comforted his Majesty, who proceeded to the remaining duties
of receiving from the Bishop the Holy Sacrament, and the other preparations for
his approaching passion.

His Devotions being ended, about ten a clock his Majesty was brought from
Saint James's to White hall by a Regiment of Foot, The King brought to
White Hall.
with Colors flying, and Drums beating, (through the Park) part marching
before, and part behind, with a private Guard of Partisans about him, the
Bishop on the one hand, and Colonel Thomlinson (who had the charge of him) on
the other, bare-headed. The Guards marching a slow pace, as on a solemn and sad
occasion, to their ill-tuned Drums: He bid them go faster, (as his usual manner
of walking was) saying -- That he now went before them to strive for an
Heavenly Crown, with less Solicitude than he had often encouraged his
Soldiers to fight for an Earthly Diadem.

B^ing ^ome to the end of the Park, he went up the stayers leading to the
Long-(...) in White Hall, where he used formerly to lodge. There finding an
unexpected delay in being brought upon the Scaffold, which they had begun but
that Morning, He past the most of that time (having received a Letter from the
Prince in the interim by Mr. Seymor) in prayer. Mr. Seymor presents his Majesty
with a Letter from the Prince.


About twelve a clock his Majesty (refusing to dine) eat only a bit of Bread,
and drank a g^ass of Claret; and about an hour after, Colonel Hacker with other
Officers and Soldiers, brought him with the Bishop and Colonel Thomlinson
through the Banqueting House to the Scaffold, whereto the passage was made
through a Window. A strong Guard of several Regiments of Horse and Foot were
placed on all sides, which hindered the near approach of his miserable and
distracted Subjects, The Kings friends ^arbarously u^^d. Engines to force the
King (...) had ^^s^ted.
(who for manifesting their sorrow, were barbarously used) and the King from
speaking what he had designed for their Ears: whereupon his Majesty finding
himself disappointed, omitted much of his intended Matter; but having viewed
the Scaffold (which had Irons driven in it to force him down to the Block by
Ropes, if he should have resisted) and the Axe, (of whose Edge he was very
careful, having minded one (a Knight then present) of touching it wi^h his
Cloak.)

The King being come upon the Scaffold, looked very earnestly upon the Block,
and asked Colonel Hacker if there were no higher: And then spoke thus:
(directing his Speech chiefly to Colonel Thomlinson.)
I Shall be very little heard of any body else, I shall therefore speak a word
to you here: Indeed I could have held my peace very well, His Majesty had ^ot
spo^en b^t that ^therwise he might be thought to submit to the guilt.
if I did not think, that holding my peace would make some men think that I did
submit to the Guilt, as well as to the Punishment: But I think it is my duty
to God first, and then to my Country, to clear my self, both as an honest man,
a good King, and a good Christian. I shall begin first with my Innocence; and
in troath, I think it not very needful for me to Insist long upon this: For all
the world knows, that I did never begin a War with the two Houses of
Parliament; H^ began not (...) War;
and I call God to witness, unto whom I must shortly make an account, that I
did never intend to incroach upon their Privileges: They began upon me; it is
the Militia they began upon: span^ Ho^s^s.
They confessed the Militia was mine, but they thought it fit to have it from
me. And to be short, if any body will look to the dates of Commissions, of
their Commissions and mine, and likewise to the Declaration, he will see
clearly, that they began these unhappie Troubles, not I. So as for the guilt of
these enormous Crimes that are laid against me, I hope that God will clear me
out. I will not (for I am in charity) and God forbid that I should lay it upon
the two Houses of Parliament, His Majes^y lays not the (...) the two (...): i^l
^^struments the cause of it.
there is no necessity of either, I hope they are free of this guilt; but I
believe, that ill instruments between them and me, have been the chief cause of
all this bloodshed: So that as I find my self clear of this, I hope (and pray
God) that they may too: Yet for all this, God forbid that I should be so ill a
Christian, as not to say, that Gods judgments are just upon me: Many times he
does pay justice by an unjust Sentence, (...) Sentence pu^^shed with another.
that is ordinary: I will say this, That unjust Sentence that I suffered to
take effect, is punished by an unjust Sentence upon me: So far I have said to
show you, (...) am an innocent man. Now to show you that I am a good Christian;
I hope there is a good man that will bear me witness, that I have forgiven all
the world, His Majesty forgives all the world, ev^^ the ca^sers (...) his death.
and even those in particular, that have been the chief causers of my Death:
who they are, God knows I do not desire to know, I pray God forgive them. But
this is not all, my charity must go further; I wish that they may repent, for
in ^eed they have committed a great sin in that particular; I pray God with St.
Stephen, (...) wa^ to P^ace.
that this be not laid to their charge: And with^^ that they may take the way
to the Peace of the Kingdom; for my charity commands me, not only to forgive
particular men, but to endeavor to the last gasp, the Peace of the Kingdom. So
(Sirs) I do wish with all my soul, (I see there are some here that will carry
it further) that they endeavor the Peace of the Kingdom. (Sirs) I must show
you, both how you are out of the way, and put you in a way. First, You are out
of the way; for certainly all the ways you ever had yet, as far as I could
find by any thing, is in the way of Conquest: Conquest an ill way, seldom
(...).
certainly this is an ill way; for Conquest, in my Opinion, is never just,
except there be a just and good cause, either for matter of wrong, or a just
Title; and then if ye go beyond the first quarrel that ye have, that makes it
unjust at the end, that was just at first: for if there be only matter of
Conquest, then it is a great Robbery; as a Pirate said to Alexander, That he
was a great Robber, himself was but a petty Robber: And so Sirs, I think for
the way that you are in, you are much out of the way. Now, Sirs, to put you in
the way; believe it, you shall never go right, nor God will never prosper you,
To give God his due, and the King his (...), is the right way.
until you give God his due, the King his due (that is, my Successor) and the
people their due; I am as much for them as any of you. You must give God his
due, by regulating rightly his Church, according to the Scripture, (which is
now out of order. Give God his due in set^ing the Church.
) And to set you in a way particularly, now I cannot; but only this: A
National Synod freely called, freely debating among themselves, must settle
this: When every Opinion is freely heard. As to the King, it concerning (...),
hi^ Majesty ^aves it.
For the King, indeed I will not, the Laws of the Land will clearly instruct
you for that; therefore because it concerns mine own particular, I only give
you a touch of it. For the People, truly I desire their Liberty and freedom as
much as any body whomsoever: Peoples Liberty consi^^s in having Government, not
s^aring in it.
But I must tell you, that their Liberty and their freedom consist in having
Government under those Laws, by which their lives and theirs may be most their
own; it is not in having a share in the Government, that is nothing pertaining
to them: A Subject and a Sovereign are clean different things; and therefore
until you do that, I mean, that you put the People into that Liberty, as I
say, certainly they will never enjoy themselves.

Sirs, it was for this that now I am come hither; for if I would have given way
to an Arbitrary way, for to have all Laws changed according to the Power of the
Sword, I need not have come here; and therefore I tell you (and I pray God it
be not laid to your charge) that I am the MARTYR of the people. His Majesty the
Martyr of the People.
In troath Sirs, I shall not hold you any longer; I will only say this to you,
that I could have desired some little time longer, because I would have put
this, what I have said, a little better digested than I have done; and
therefore I hope you will excuse me. I have delivered my Conscience: I pray God
you take those Courses, that are best for the good of the Kingdom, and your
own Salvation.

Dr. Juxon. Will your Majesty (though your Majesty's affections may be very
well known to Religion,) yet it may be expected that you should say somewhat
for the worlds satisfaction.


King. I thank you very heartily, my Lord, for that I had almost forgotten it.
Introath Sirs, My Conscience in Religion I think is very well known to all the
world, and therefore I declare before you all, His Majesty de^^ares h^s
R^ligio^.
That I die a Christian, according to the profession of the Church of England,
as I found it left me by my Father: and this honest man I think will witness
it. Then turning to the Officers, said, Sirs, excuse me for this same; I have a
good cause, and I have a gracious God, I will say no more. Then turning to
Colonel Hacker, he said; Take care they do not put me to pain; and Sir, this,
and it please you. But then a Afterward Sir William Clerk.
Gentleman coming near the Ax, the King said, Take heed of the Ax, pray take
heed of the Ax. Then the King speaking to the Executioner, said, I shall say
but very short prayers; and when I thrust out my hands

Then the King called to Doctor Iuxon for his Nightcap; and having put it on,
he said to the Executioner, The King makes ready for Execution.
Does my hair trouble you? who desired him to put it all under his Cap; which
the King did accordingly, by the help of the Executioner and the Bishop: Then
the King turning to Doctor Iuxon, said, I have a good Cause and a gracious God
on my side.


Dr. Juxon. Dr. Juxon comforts him.
There is but one Stage more; this Stage is turbulent and troublesome, it is a
short one: But you may consider, it will soon carry you a very great way: it
will carry you from Earth to Heaven; and there you will find a great deal of
cordial Joy and Comfort.


King. I go from a corruptible to an incorruptible Crown; where no disturbance
can be, no disturbance in the world.


Dr. Juxon. You are exchanged from a Temporary to an Eternal Crown; a good
exchange.

The King then said to the Executioner, Is my hair well? Then the King took off
his Cloak and his George, giving his George to Doctor Iuxon, It is known for to
give it the Prince.
saying, Remember.

Then the King put off his Doublet, and being in his Wast-coat, put his Cloak
on again: then looking upon the Block, said to the Executioner, You must set it
fast.


Executioner. It is fast, Sir.


King. His Majesty gives the Signal.
When I put my hands out this way, stretching them out, then, --

After that, having said two or three words (as he stood) to himself, with
hands and eyes lift up; Immediately stooping down, he laid his Neck upon the
Block; and then the Executioner again putting his hair under his Cap, the King
(thinking he had been going to strike) said, Stay for the Sign.


Executioner. Yes, I will, and it please your Majesty.


And after a very little pause, the King stretching forth his Hands, the
Executioner at one Blow severed his Head from his Body. He is Executed.


The Head being off, the Executioner held it up, and showed it to the people;
which done, it was with the Body put in a Coffin covered with Black Velvet for
that purpose, and conveyed into his Lodgings there: And from thence it was
carried to his House at Saint James's, where his Body was Embalmed and put in a
Coffin of Lead, and laid there a fortnight to be seen by the people: and on the
Wednesday sevennight, his Corpse Embalmed and Coffined in Lead, was delivered
chiefly to the care of four of his Servants, The Corpse committed to the care of
his servants.
viz. Mr. Herbert, Captain Anthony Mildmay, his Sewers; Captain Preston, and
John Ioyner, formerly Cook to his Majesty: they attended (with others) clothed
in Mourning ^utes and Cloaks; accompanied the Hearse that night to Windsor,
Carri^d to Windsor.
and placed it in h^t which was formerly the Kings Bedchamber: next day it was
removed into the Deans Hall, which Room was hanged with black, and made dark,
with Lights burning round the Hearse; in which it remained till three in the
afternoon, about which time came the Duke of Lenox, the Marquess of Hertford,
the Marquess of Dorchester, Some Lords get an order for the burial of the King.
and the Earl of Lyndsey, having obtained an Order from the Parliament for the
decent Interment of the King their Royal Master, provided the expense thereof
exceeded not five hundred pounds. At their coming into the Castle, they showed
their Order of Parliament to Colonel Whichcot Governor of the Castle, They
desire it might be in St. Gorge 's Chapel by Common Prayer: are denied.

They expostulate, but prevail not.


desiring the Interment might be in Saint George's Chapel, and by the form in
the Common Prayer Book of the Church of England.

This request was by the Governor denied, saying, it was improbable that the
Parliament would permit the use of what they had so solemnly abolished, and
therein destroy their own Act. To which the Lords replied, There was a
difference betwixt destroying their own Act, and dispensing with it, and that
no Power so binds its own hands, as to disable it self in some Cases. But all
could not prevail, the Governor persisting in the search of a convenient place
for the Burial of the Corpse; Seeking a place for Burial, they find Hen. 8 's
Vault.
the which after some pains taken therein, they discovered a Vault in the
middle of the Quire, wherein, as it was probably conjectured, lies the body of
King Henry the eighth, and his beloved Wife, the Lady Jane Seymor, both in
Coffins of Lead: in this Vault, there being room for one more, they resolved to
interre the Body of the King; the which was accordingly brought to the place,
The Funeral.
born by the Officers of the Garrison, the four Corners of the Velvet Pall born
up by the aforesaid four Lords, the Lord Bishop of London following next, and
other persons of Quality; the Body was committed to the Earth with sighs and
Tears, especially of the Reverend Bishop, as denied to do the last Duty and
Service to his Dear and Royal Master; the Velvet Pall being cast into the
Vault, was laid over the Body. Upon the Coffin were these words set: KING
CHARLES. 1648. All Elegies are useless and in vain,
While Charles the Second shall be King again.
No learned Grief can tell the Church and State
What Heaven conceals in this blessed Martyrs Fate.
Fortune may play with Scepters for a time,
Yet make the Peoples Liberty their Crime.


A CHRONICLE OF THE CIVIL WARS OF ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND. THE SECOND
PART: BEING The Democracie.
THe Scepter had not departed from Great Britain, nor had the Imperial Majesty
of England been ever darkened, England had not been without Regal Government
from the begininng.
or in any part so Eclipsed, since the Nation first Inhabited the Island, which
is beyond the computation of any History. Regnum Britanniae principio Regis
habuere, was an original and constant truth through innumerable successions,
nor did it ever vary in the most difficult perplexities of whatsoever
Revolutions. Indeed Monarchy was so congenerous with the People and Inhabitants
of this Island, that civil Fortune, when she had given up the rest of the world
to the potent Arms of Romes Senate, and that victorious Commonwealth (for
Caesar had Conquered France and Spain as a General in their service) yet
reserved us to be the infallible next and immediate Omen of his future Empire,
when he parted hence with a resolved and facilitated Ambition of seizing the
universal Sovereignty; and it is observable, that the Britains were never taken
into the protection of the Senate and people of Rome, but of Caesar only.

After the decay of that Empire, we changed our Governors only, It had change
of Governors, not change of Government.
not the Government, which in our British, Saxon, and Danish Rule, was one and
the same, save that it was divided into several Principalities under the
Heptarchy, and afterward parted among the Invading Potentates, until the
Norman Line successfully grasped all, and united the whole Realm of England
under one entire Regality.

The Royal race had continued 562 years in ou^ Regality.
In this Royal race the Crown had continued 562 years; and though some of those
Princes had been dispossessed and outed of the Throne, yet was it but
transferred to another proprietor; changed only the Temples, that it might sit
faster and easier, and with more spreading splendour show its self to the World.
Of such a veneration was the Royal right always esteemed, that the Laws placed
it beyond the power of Fate, and made it the supreme sanction, that the King
never Dies; like the Sun in his Glorious Orb, that perpetually shires, though
our interposed sight conceives him benighted, Moritur and Oritur, In the some
instance and moment he sets and rises.

Now clouds a^^ darkn^^^, black^ess and (...).
But oh, the thick gloominess, those dismal Clouds, that palpable Darkness,
which enveloped the setting of this our Martyred Sovereign! The Face of the
Kingdom gathered blackness, and we seemed to have returned to our first Cha^s;
nothing of Order, Frame, or Constitution remaining to be seen. If we l^oked
upwards, the incensed Heavens had veiled themselves from beholding this
Impiety: if upon our selves, our stupefied senses and our despairing looks gave
s^gnes, Humanity was fled, and Nature could not long continue: if round about
us, the reproaches and derision of the world, and the affronts and impudence of
these flagitious Regicides, pointing at, and deriding us for our disloyal
cowardice, sharpened those stings of Conscience, and made us seek Soli^udes, and
wish for a total dissolution: If downwards, the mournful Earth gaped for
vengeance, and represented us the infernal Tomb of less wicked Rebels, Corah
and his Tribe. Horror and Amazem^nt.
Nothing but horror and amazement possessed us, Hope abandoned us; Women
miscarried and died. Young people made vows of abstinence and perpetual
chastity, Old Men's spirits ^ai^ed them, and they gave up the Ghost, Children
wept and lamented (by a natural instinct) for this Father of their Country; an
universal outcry there was to Heaven for help and mercy: those whose stronger
hearts could not presently yield, felt such Convulsions within them, as if they
were in travel with grief, and knew not how to be delivered of their unwieldy
burden. In fine, shame and anguish laid hold upon us, and our Glory departed.

(...) dissolution.
No less ecstasies of grief could serve to show how sensible we were of the
dissolution of that Political Machine, which had so long and so happily
conserved our Honor, our Lives, and our Liberties; wherein the Princes
Prerogative, and the Subjects Propriety, so harmoniously moved, without the
least jar and discordance for so many hundred of years, till our unhappy
Reformers took too much upon them, and would be tampering with that Noli me
Tangere* the sacred (and not to be profaned) right of Princes; boldly
distingui^^ing betwixt the personal and political capacity of the King, and so
making him coordinate with his Parliament: An impious Treasonable Tenet, and
the corrupt Founta^n and bitter source of all those undutiful and rebellious
actions against that blessed Prince, and since damned by a Parliament it self
in those ^x^ress Epithets.

It therefore the Indians do customarily every night with sorrowful
Lamentations take le^ve of the Sun, whom yet undoubtedly they expect in the
Morning; no wonder will it seem to posterity (nor will these evidences of our
consternation (before recited) be thought an hyperbolical strain) if so
disconsolately we saw our Sun pulled out of his Orb, and darkened in the shadow
of Death; his Beams cut off and eloigned into obscure and remote corners, from
whence, it was treason against these Princes of Darkness to return, and with
their hereditary successive influence to re-visit and revive the drooping dying
hearts of a forlorn and deserted people.

Such was our condition in the deprivation and extinguishing of that lamp of
life, which supplied with so many virtues and graces, rendered our Martyred
Sovereign the most conspicuous of all Monarchs, His Majesty might have lived
very long. The Prince ab^^^t,
and might have prolonged his days to an extraordinary term; so proportionate
and fit, had God and Nature made him to Eternity. The same was our fearful
case, in the absence and exile of our present miraculously-restored Prince,
Charles the second; whom yet wiser and kinder providence had secured in that
cloud, but in safety.
and by a timely rescue had in safety conveyed into Foreign Parts, out of the
reach of these Herod's, who would have stretched out their Hands also against
his innocent and most precious Life.

Now when there was neither Sun, Moon, nor Stars (the King murdered, Regal
Authority abolished, the Heir excluded, the House of Lords turned out of doors,
and the House of Commons turned into a Den of Thieves, and packt Juncto and
Conventicle of a most perdite sort of men) did these Bats and Scritch-owls
usurp the Dominiou of the night of our confusions, In the night of confusion,
Bats and Scritchowles rule.
and take upon them to Enact and give Laws suitable to their interests, as
rational as true; which showed they concerned the Lawgivers, not the receivers.

The first hoarse and ominous noise they made, as a foundation and main
principle of their wild Government, was a fained note to catch the Vulgar and
the mad rabble, on whom they wholely depended, and whom they were to flatter
(no force) into slavery and servitude, by the specious hopes of their arriving
also in time to be Governors and Statesmen, and to share in the honors and
profits of their new Commonwealth. They make an Act forbidding the Proclamation
of a King, etc. Jan. 30.
This was concluded, as is mentioned before, in these few words, viz. That all
power and Authority is originally in the people: And in order to that, they now
emitted a Tidy Act by way of a Proclamation; which was with wonderful
Expedition sounded all the Kingdom over, in these or the like words.

That where as several pretenses might be made to this Crown, and Title to the
Kingly Office set on foot, to the apparent hazard of the public Peace; Be it
Enacted and Ordained by this present Parliament, and the Authority of the same,
that no Person whatsoever do presume to Proclaim, declare, publish, or any ways
to promote Charles Stuart, Son of the said Charles late King of England,
commonly called Prince of Wales, or any other person to be King on chief
Magistrate of England or Ireland, or of any Dominions belonging to them; by
color of Inheritance, Succession, Election, or any other claim whatsoever,
without the free consent of the People in Parliament first had or signified by
a particular Act or Ordinance for that purpose: any Law, Statute, Usage, or
Custom to the contrary notwithstanding. And whosoever shall contrary to this
Act, Proclaim or cause to be Proclaimed, etc. shall be deemed and adjudged a
Traitor, and suffer accordingly.

So did they contrive and imagine to obstruct and bar the way to the Throne
which themselves had Invaded, and parted into shares; but such monstrous
wickedness boiling up to an excess of malice toward the dead and living
Proprietors of the Crown, was not suffered to pass without an allay and cooler,
in a Printed Proclamation thrown about streets, A Proclamation thrown about
streets.
letting them see the people would not run a gadding after their Calves at
Bethel, as they would have fancied to themselves, but would keep in the old
path, and beaten track of Government, in the succession of Charles the second
to the Majesty of England. Which Proclamation was as follows: We the
Noblemen, The Procclamation.
Judges, Knights, Lawyers, Gentlemen, Ministers, Freeholders, Merchants,
Citizens, etc. and other Freemen of England, do according to our Allegiance
and Covenant, by these Presents, heartily, joyfully, and unanimously
acknowledge, and Proclaim, the Illustrious Charles Prince of Wales, next Heir
of the Blood Royal to his Blessed Father King Charles (whose late wicked and
Traiterous Murder we do from our so^ts abominate, and all parties and
consenters thereunto) to be by Hereditary Birthright, and Lawful Succession,
rightful and undoubted King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, and the
Dominions thereunto belonging -- And that we will faithfully, constantly, and
sincerely, in our several places and callings defend and maintain his Royal
Person, Crown, and Dignity, with our Blates, Lives, and last drop of our Blood,
against all Opposers thereof, whom we do hereby declare to be Traitors, and
Enemies to his Majesty and his Kingdoms. In Testimony whereof, we have ordered,
and caused these to be published and Proclaimed throughout all Countries and
Corporations of this Realm, the first day of February, and the first year of
his Majesty's Reign.

God save King Charles the second.



This without any solemnity, or indeed open appearance, met with the cheerful
reception, and inward Loyal resolutions, as if vent had been given to a public
manifestation of Duty and Joy, upon his Majesty's present accession to the
Crown: for it revived the Hearts of mourning and disconsolate Subjects, to see
the sure and certain Succession thereof to be continued in the same most
beloved name, the Eldest Branch and descendant of their Martyred Sovereign, in
whose ruins the Regicides thought to have raked up and buried all the claims
and just Titles to this Impartial Diadem.

In tendency whereunto, they first considered how to keep the honest Members
(the Army had Secluded) from entering in again, They Vote the Exclusion of the
Members the Army had secluded.
that they might not have too many partakers in the spoil of the Kingdoms; and
therefore another Legislative by-blow was Enacted, That all those Members that
had assented to the Vote of the 5 of December, concerning the Kings
Concessions, should never be readmitted; and such as Voted in the Negative
should presently enter their said dissent, or before they were to be admitted.
And this characteristical discrimination they most punctually insisted on to
the very last, as the main Pillar of their Oligarchy: and we shall see this
difference hardly labored throughout their Usurpation.

The House of Lords Voted useless, Feb. 5.
On the 5 of February they fell again upon the standing remains of the dissolved
Government, the Peerage and Nobility of the Kingdom, whose meddling in
State Affairs to the settlement of the Nation, and their Message to that
purpose, they had scornfully rejected, not looking upon them as a part of the
people; but at one blow, and with the breath of one Vote, which imported that
the House of Lords were useless and dangerous, and so ought to be abolished,
they laid them aside, having given order for an Act to be drawn up accordingly;
yet so far indulging their Honors the favor of any mean Subjects privilege,
to be Elected either Knight or Burgess to serve in their House.

Against this civil and political Execution, came forthwith likewise a
Declaration and Protestation, The protestation of the Nobility against it.
dated, February the 8. in the name of the Nobility, braving them with their
illegal, Traiterous, Barbarous, and bold saucy Usurpation, with other
arguments, mingled with threats, menaces, invectives, which will be too tedious
to recite: And indeed it was to little purpose then, for it was too late to
argue with, or to Vapor against those men, who were so Fortified in their new
Empire, by a so numerous, and potent, and well-paid Army. -- Something might
have been done when this Cockatrice was a hatching; but now its angry looks
were enough to kill those that enviously beheld it. And to let them see how
little they valued, and how slightly they thought of the injury the Peers so
highly urged, they with the same easy demolition of Kingly-Government, The
Kingly Power Voted Useless, Feb. 7.
by a Vote that it is unnecessary, burdensome, and dangerous, overwhelm the
whole Fabric together, bidding them seek a place to erect their Monumental
Lordships; and Honor was never yet so near a shadow.

Now that they were thus possessed of the whole entire Power and Authority, for
the better-exercise thereof, and the speedier fruition of the sweets thereof,
they agree to part and divide the Province, the Government among them. To this
end, they concluded to erect an Athenian Tyranny of some 40 of them, under the
Name and Title of a Council of State, A Council of Sat in Force.
to whom the Executive part of their Power should be committed, while the
Parliament (as they called their Worships) should exercise only the Judicatory
part thereof; and so between them make quick work of their business, in
confounding and ruining the Kingdom.

And that they might likewise appear to the people as great preservers of the
Laws, and to study their weal in the due aministration of Justice; their next
care was for drawing up Commissions for the Judges; Judges Commissioned.
which ran in the new style of the Keepers of the Liberties of England, by
Authority of Parliament; and to that purpose, a Conference was had by a
Committee with the Judges about it;-six whereof agreed to hold, upon a Proviso
to be made by an Act of the House of Commons, that the Fundamental Laws should
not be abolished: a very weak security, but that it met with strong and
prepared confidence: these were Lord Chief Justice Rolls, and Justice Iermyn of
the King's Bench; Chief Justice Saint-Iohn, and Justice Pheasant, of the
Common Pleas, and Chief Justice Wild, (how he was made so, Captain Burleigh
tells us,) and Baron Yates: the other six refused, as knowing the Laws and the
present Anarchy were incompatible and incapable of any expedient to suit them
together. But the one half was very fair, and served to keep the Lawyers in
practice, and from dashing at their illegal Authority.

In pursuance of that promise made to those Judges that held, and to deceive
and cologne the people, they Passed a Declaration, That they were fully
resolved to maintain, They declare to preserve and maintain the Laws.
and would uphold and maintain, preserve and keep the Fundamental Laws of the
Nation, as to the preservation of the Lives, Liberties, and Properties of the
People, with all things incident thereunto, saving those alterations concerning
the King and House of Lords already made. And yet notwithstanding, they at the
same time were Erecting High Courts of Justice; impressed Seamen, and levied
illegal Taxes by Soldiers, and many other Enormities. But it seems those
Judges were content with the preservation of the litigious part of the Law,
extending this Proviso no further, than to the private disputes of Meum and
Tuum, whilst this public Monster swallowed all.

Having thus established themselves in the Civil Power, with some face of a
Democratical Authority, they proceeded to other Acts of State, to give
reputation to themselves, and strength to their Government; the first whereof,
was their Voting a New stamp for Coin, A new stamp for Coin Voted.
whereby their Sovereignty might be notified to all the world, in the Trade and
traffic thereof: Next, designing several Agents and Envoys to go to the
Courts of Foreign Princes, Agents and Envoys designed to Foreign Princes.
and there by their specious challenges and shows of Liberty and public good,
the pretense of the Law of Nations, peculiarly the Municipal Laws of this, to
palliate over, the Justify their unparalleled proceedings against the King;
of which Messengers we shall presently speak. And so we shall for a while leave
these Usurpers amidst the several Complements given them by way of Salutation
from the Army and Sectarian party, under the yet-continued Notion of the Godly;
who forsooth highly magnified their Justice in this, and urged them in their
Addresses to extend it further. The monthly Fast Nulled.
(About this time the Parliament Nulled the Monthly Fast on Wednesday, which
had continued through all the War, thinking to impose upon the people, as if
God had answered all their prayers in that Murder of the King, and that the
work of Reformation was now accomplished.)

It was high time therefore for such of the Kings party as were in their hands
to look about them; for besides the rise and most certain rumor of a general
Massacre intended against the whole, which was debated at a Council of War; and
carried but by two Votes, Several escapes of the Cavalier party. viz. Col.
Massey, Sir Lewis Dives, Mr Holden, and Lord Capel; the last of them betrayed
by Davis a Water-man,
they had special information of proceedings to be had against them, in the
same way of Trial, before a High Court of Justice. First therefore Colonel
Massey escapes away from Saint James's, just upon the Kings Death; next, Sir
Lewis Dives and Master Holden being brought to White Hall upon examination,
pretending to ease themselves, got down the Common-shore to the Waterside, and
escaped, leaving their Warders in the lurch; and to a vain research after them.
The Lord Capel likewise made a handsome escape out of the Tower; but passing by
Water to Lambeth, in the Boat of one Davis a Water-man, and unhappily and
fatally casting out some words by way of enquiry of the said Lord; the wicked
villain suspecting the truth, seized him at Lambeth, and retaken.
from whence he was re-conveyed to the same Prison, in order to his speedy
Trial; his Betrayer being preferred by the Parliament, became the scorn and
contempt of every body, and lived afterward in shame and misery. Lord
Loughborough escapes from Windsor-Castle with several others.
And the Lord of Loughborough Brother to Ferdinando then Earl of Huntingdon,
famous for several Loyal Services, but most maligned by the Parliament for the
last effort thereof at Colchester, gave them also the slip from Windsor-Castle
(where he and the Colonels Tuke, Hamond, and Francis Heath (newly at liberty
upon his parole to find good security) and other Royalists were imprisoned)
and got cleaverly away, and in March arrived at Rotterdam in Holland, where on
the New-bridge he accidently met with Colonel Massey, who claiming knowledge of
him, from Lidbury-figh^, where they more unhappily encountered each other; his
Lor^ship was civilly and Nobly pleased ^upon the Colonels protestation of a
^^urn and entire obedience to his Majesty's Authority) to pass with him in
company to the Hague, whither. this occasion happily directs us.

The King at the Hague, Feb. etc. The Prince of A^range a friend to the Royal
Family.
The King our Sovereign, Charles the second, then kept his Court there,
furnished with Blacks and other mournful Embl^^s of his ra^^^rs Death, at the
charge of the Prince of Aurange, whose mo^^ ^ignal kindnesses to the Royal
Fa^^^y may not pass without a due Commemoration. The King was here attended by
the Lord Marquess of Montress the Lords Hopton, Wilmot, Culpeper, We^worth, and
other great Personages, Sir Edward Hide, Sir Edward Nicholas, and a Noble
(though poor) retinue of old Royalists, who had vowed to his Majesty's
Fortunes. The Relator was present, when the Lord of Loughborough added Colonel
Massey to that number, both of them kissing the Kings Hand the same morning;
the Lord in his Majesty's Privy-Chamber, where he was received by the King with
all possible gladness and joy of his escape, and other endearments; the Colonel
was very respectfully and civilly treated, and confirmed into the Kings Service
and Trust, by his Majesty's gracious acceptance of his sorrow for his former
actions, and his resolutions of reparatory Duty.

The new Estates of England liked not well of his so near neighborhood and
entertainment, in a Commonwealth too, and thought their greatness so
formidable, that it could persuade (without any more trouble) all places and
people to his dereliction; and to this purpose, they insinuated the same
intentions to Mine Here Pauw (the then Dutch Resident here) who was sent over by
the States, as also another Ambassador from the French, besides the earnest
intervention of the Scots Commissioners, to intercede for the King) with whom
they had several discourses about the dangerous greatness of the Prince of
Aurange: and it is reported the Man was made by them. He departed hence about
the middle of March, very well pleased with the pronts of his Embassy.

Though they could not reach the King, and though some of his best Subjects had
outreached them, yet many others could not so escape them. Master Beaumount a
Minister belonging to the Garrison of Pomfret, then beleagured by Major General
Lambert, in place of Rainsborough, who was killed, and buried at Wapping near
London, as aforesaid, was taken for holding correspondence in cipher; and by a
Council of War Condemned and Hanged before the Castle, Mr. Beaumont Executed at
Pomfret, Feb. 7.
presently after the Kings Death; and deserves to be placed as the Protomartyr
for King Charles the second. But this was but a puny victime to the ensuing
Sacrifices: for the old pretense of Justice challenged new does, by the
evidence of its former administration, which would have been thought but a step
purposely made to their ambitious Usurpation, if other blood, not so obnoxious
to their grand design, should not (in pursuance of their declared impartial
bringing to condign punishment all sorts of Delinquents) be offered up to
their Idol of Liberty. There was also another Reason of State in it; for that
the House of Lords being so easily laid aside, it was requisite while the first
violence was yet recent, utterly to disanimate the Nobility by another as
lawless, more bloody infringement of their Privileges.

In order to this, A new High Court of Justice erected.
a new High Court of Justice was Erected, by an Act to that purpose, wherein
other Drudges were named under the conduct of the former President; for that
the State-Grandees could not themselves intend such minute matters, as the
lives of the Peerage. Before this Tribunal were brought (as in the said Act
were named) James Duke Hamilton as Earl of Cambridge, and Naturalized thereby
in this Kingdom, Henry Rich Earl of Holland, George Lord Goring then Earl of
Norwich, Arthur Lord Capel, and Sir John Owen of North Wales.

Duke Hamilton was the first of those that came to this Bar, Duke Hamilton,
Earl of Holland, Lord Capel, Tr^ed by the High Court of Iusti^^.
where he was sooth^d by Bradshaw according to instruction, in hopes he would
be won to discover his partakers in the late Parliament and City; and Peter's to
that purpose gave evidence that Lambert gave him quarter, when Colonel Wait
(who took him) denied it to the House: but when the Court perceived he was not
so free therein, offering in lieu of such Treachery 100000 l. for his life, and
promising to join interests with Arguile in Scotland; Bradshaw took him up
short, and for all his plea of quarter, and to what he further ^rged against
his Naturalization, (that he himself was never Naturalized, but that it was his
Father, whose right devolved no more to him by the Civil Law, than the same
Franchise does to Children in other Countries) hastily was answered, that in
the 15 year of King Charles, he was called to Parliament by Writ as Earl of
Cambridge. They objected against him also his breach of Faith passed to the
Governor of Windsor for his true Imprisonment, from whence he had escaped, and
was retaken in Southwark; which breach he denied, and challenged the Governor
of untruth in that particular. After much delay, which he obtained in hopes of
a discovery, and several arguments of his Counsel assigned for him, Bradshaw at
last snapt him up, telling him of his Treasons and Murders, and gave final
Sentence. The Lord Capel' s legal Defenses.
The Lord Capel likewise after several brave legal Defenses, as his Peerage,
etc. and his plea of quarter given by Fairfax, who in open Court construed that
quarter to be but a present saving from the promiscuous slaughter, with a
reference still to a Judicial proceeding, was overruled; they urged also
against him, his escape out of the Tower, which he proved to amount to no more
(at the most of it in any other case) than a bare Felony, and within the
benefit of the Clergy. His resumed argument (when all would not do) was the
Honor of the Sword, which seeing how little those (that should have justly
asserted it) did value, he resolved to trouble himself no longer at their Bar;
but being demanded what he could say more for himself, replied nothing; but
with a cheerful resignation of himself to providence, expected his Doom, then
impending over him. The Earl of Holland came not to their Bar while they had
finished with the other Lords, by reason of his indisposition which delayed him
at Warwick-Castle; but such was their impatient pretensions to Justice, that
they got him conveyed to their High Court, and as they had done by the rest,
overruled his plea (which he argued in much weakness, taking a spoonful of
some Cordial every foot between his words) of quarter given, and concluded him
in the same Sentence.

The Lord Goring so artificially and wisely pleaded to them in Form, The Lord
Goring and Sir John Owen reprieved.
Not Guilty, and withal insisted upon his Commission and Authority, and
harmlesness therein, that he escaped the Execution of the like Condemnation; as
also did Sir John Owen, who with a Britain confidence denied every tittle of
the Charge against him; especially that part relating to the death or Master
Loyd the Sheriff of Cardigan, and came off with the same danger, and the like
success as the Lord preceding, whose Fate being referred to the Parliament,
proved fortunate but by the decision of one Vote, 24 to 24 being divided in the
question of his life; and as I Remember, it was the saving double voice of
Lenthall the Speaker; Sir John Owen was carried more affirmatively; the rest
all in the Negative, being turned off with their Ladies and their Relations
Petitions, to the same High Court, who to show their civility more than their
mercy, were pleased to gratify the Ladies with a respit of two days, as long
as their Commission and power lasted.

Duke Hamilton, E. of Holland, and Lord Capel beheaded, Mar. 9.
On the 9th of March, the Duke, the Earl of Holland; and Lord Capel being
guarded from Saint James's to Sir Robert Cottons House, (the next fatal Stage
of late to the Scaffold) were severally brought to the Palace-Yard through the
Hall, their Judges then sitting, and looking fore-right upon their Execution.
The Duke ascended first; and to give him his due, he kept a good seeming
decorum in his last words and actions. The Earl of Holland succeeded to this
bloody Theater, who very Christianly, penitently, and compassionately enough,
prepared him for his end, justifying his honest intentions in that his first
and last action for the King, and intimating that Duty we all owed to our
present Sovereign, and so suffered for him. But the Lord Capel (like a true
Christian Hero) as he came last, so did he sum up all (both in his Speech,
Countenance, and Gestures) that was good, praiseworthy, and generous in them
both; resolutely asserting his own actions, his late Sovereigns Cause, and his
present Majesty's Rights; recommending him to his people as the great example
of true English worth, and as the only hope of the Kingdom. So as with Sampson
he may be said to have done these Philistines more harm at his Death than in all
his Life, raising and renewing the desires of the people after so deserving a
Prince.

This Tragedy being over, they resume afresh the debate of what persons were
yet within their Clutches, Other capital Delinquents in nomination. As Sir John
Stowell, Judge Jenkins, and Cap. Brown Bushel, Marq. of Winchester B^ Wren,
Ma. Gen Brown, and Sir John Clo^worthy hardly escaping. Several qualifications
of Delinquents to life and E^tate. The chief of whom were, the Kings Majesty,
the D. of York, E. of Britol, D. of Buckingham, Lord Digby, Lord Cottington,
Marq of New Castle, Marq of Worcester, Sir Ed. Hide, Lord Culpepe^, and Lord
W^ddrington.
any way obnoxious to their Cannibal-Idol of Justice, who could not be pleased
but with whole Hecatombs: and therefore the Noble Sir John Stowel and Judge
Ienkins, those Champions of Law and Loyalty, with Captain Brown Bushel, were
next ordered to be put in that fatal List of Traitors against their
Commonwealth: the Marquess of Winchester, and Bishop Wren, who had lain
prisoner from the beginning of our Troubles, hardly escaping the like dangerous
qualification; which was upon a ^orged information intended likewise against
Major General Brown, and Sir John Clotworthy; and to that purpose the Case of
all those secluded (and thereafter imprisoned) Members was ordered to a
Committee, to make a discrimination of their offenses, and render those two the
most liable to their severity. As for those who had escaped their hands by
departing the Kingdom, they satisfied their indignation, by a decree of
perpetual Banishment, and present death upon the return of any so sentenced.
The chief of these, besides the Kings Majesty, whom God long preserve, and the
Duke of York, etc. were the Earl of Bristol, the Duke of Buckingham, the Lord
Digby* Lord Cottington, Marquesses of Newcastle and Worcester, Sir Edward Hide,
Lord Culpeper, Lord Widdrington, and some others, who were very well satisfied
they could do no more to them, and were then following ^he hopeful fortunes of
the King. The rest of that unfortunate party were put to Ransom, a Fine being
set upon their Heads, proportionable to their Estates; to be paid within such
times, or else to be in the same predicament with the condemned.

Having thus made good their Conspiracy or (by them styled) Agreement, of
bringing Delinquents to Justice, that the exactness of their dire performances
might credit their intentions and resolutions, and make them seem to the Vulgar
the most impartial lovers of their Lives and Liberties; (but rather of their
Estates) they proceeded in the political part of Government, by filling up
their Committee of Estates to the number of 41. who were ordered particularly
to enter their Assent to whatsoever the Juncto had done in reference to the
King and Lords, before they should act in that Committee; and Cromwell thereupon
reported to the House, being empowered by them, that of that just number, 22
had refused to engage, as to what was past; but would join with them for the
future, and acknowledge the Supreme Power to be vested in them. There could no
expedient be found to salve this sore; so they were contented to cicatrize it,
and gently lay aside all disputes, or further contrasts about it: but though
they past it without doors, they would not so within, but totally precluded any
further pretenses of the Members of taking their places in Parliament, Secluded
Members totally Excluded.
who in some numbers returned to Westminster; for they Voted, That all such as
^ad absented themselves from the 5 of December, should not sit till further
order; which was never vouchsafed till such claimers had given evidence of
their adherence and closing with them.

In this same Month, The Parliaments proce^dings in reference to the City.
to take away the same dignity and privilege as the House of Lords was to
them) from the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, and to make the Government of
London a la mode Democratical, they ordered a Quorum of the Common Council to
act without the Lord Mayor or the said Aldermen, if they should refuse to join
with them: and not long after, to put another affront (though distant some
space of time, being the 24 of March ensuing) upon the Mayor, they order him to
proclaim their Act for abolishing Kingly Government; which he disdainfully and
generously refusing, (his Lady likewise not suffering their Messenger that
brought it to drink in her House, but bidding him return to his Masters for his
Wages) upon the report thereof by Alderman Atkins a Member of their House,
Alderman Reynoldson the Lord Mayor outed and fined, and Alderman Andrews one of
the Kings Judges placed in his stead. He proclaims the Act for abolishing
Kingly Government.
they Voted him Imprisonment in the Tower for two Months, and to be degraded of
his Honor, and disfranchised, and to pay 2000 l. to be distributed among the
Poor of Westminster, the Hamlets and Southwark; which was rigidly levied, and
Alderman Andrews (one of the Kings Judges) was Elected in his place; for whose
choice at his presentment for their approbation, the House gave the City
thanks, and ordered the Barons of the Exchequer to swear him in these words,
That he should be faithful to the Commonwealth (as it was now established) in
the Government of the City, where he in state Proclaimed the said Act, though
the people hooted and reviled it, and cried aloud, God save the King, and would
have made worse work, but that the Guards of Horse awed them. Sir Thomas Soams,
and Alderman Culham degraded.
Alderman Sir Thomas Soams, and Alderman Chambers, for absenting themselves,
and justifying their conscientious refusal, as from former Oaths, were likewise
degraded from their Dignity in the City; Alderman Culham and Gibs excused
themselves by business in the Country at the same time. A^ Exeter likewise, the
Mayor and Sheriffs refused to act or join in Commission with Baron Wild, sent
down that Circuit; and diverse other places were very stiff in compliance with
these new Masters: but their Iron Bodies quickly brought them to perform those
new Instructions the Parliament had given for altering the Patents and the
Oaths of Sheriffs, as in all Indictments, a little before, instead of Contra
Coronam and Dignitatem, they had ordered it, Contra Rempublicam and pacem
publicam, and so Mutatis Mutandis.

To complete the Martyrology of those that fell with, and accompanied their
Sovereign, Col. Poyer Executed April, 25. Col. Laughorn and Col. Powel
condemned.
Colonel Laug^orn, Colonel Powel, and Colonel Poyer, were now brought before a
Court Martial, for the Welsh Insurrection at Saint Fagons and Pembroke, where
they were all three Condemned: but at the importunity of their Wives and
Friends, the General was pleased to exempt two of them, such as the Lot should
spare; which being delivered out of a Hat by a little Child, fell upon Poyer,
his scroll of Paper being a Blank, the other ha^ing written in it, Life given
by the Lord. Accordingly Poyer was Executed in Co^ent-garden against
Bedford-House-wall, on the 25 of April, where he died in some reluctance, but
ought nevertheless to be numbered with other Loyal Sacrifices, from whom
therefore I could not, though against order of time, disjoyn him: Nor indeed is
the thread of this Chronicle possible to keep straight, in such a diversity and
multitude of transcurrencies, which weave it up and down in the various
confusions of this new-fashioned State; but we shall now proceed more
regularly: Our Lords a Westminster having lickt their Cub into some form, and
showed us a glimpse of its Complexion, and how like it was to its monstrous
Parent (a Rebellion) in the shapes ensuing. Yet first we must Northward in our
way to Scotland, Pomfret-Castle delivered, Mar. 24, to Maj. Genesis Lambert.
and behold Pomfret-Castle, that had held out 9 Months, now delivered (after
much debate) to Major General Lambert, with this condition, That Colonel Morris
the Governor, and five more, should be exempted from Mercy; but if they could
escape any way, they might attempt it betwixt the Agreement and the Surrender;
the Article to stand force otherwise to all purposes. These six-divided
themselves into two parties, wher^of Morris, Cornet Blackburn, and another,
broke quite through the Leaguer, but the other three were taken; the rest of
the Garrison had liberty to go home, leaving two Months Provision, and some
Ammunition behind them. Lambert was the willinger to give these terms, for the
easing of the Country, which by reason of an Armies lying before it so long,
was wasted and exhausted of all provisions; who to avoid the like future
inconveniences, solicited and procured the Demolition of that Castle, which
from the Grave of Richard the second, became now the Sepulcher of departed
Layalty, whose last efforts Expired here, as became the repository of a Princes
Ashes, and his Royal Manes.

There is something to be said in this place, concerning the seizing of
Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn, John Lilburn, and some of his party secured.
Master Walwyn, Master Prince, and others of the Levelling Faction, which began
now to show it self in the same rise and danger to the Independent Faction, as
that did to the Presbyterian; but we will take that story all together: upon
which account we refer the Reader likewise as to the sale of the Kings Goods,
Movables, and Houshouldstuff, now condemned there, to a more exact account in
the year following, which begins with the Scotch affairs.

Anno Dom. 1649.
THe Estates, and Parliament, and the whole nation of Scotland, having received
Advertisement of the horrible Murder of the King, An account of the state of
Scotland.
to the impeding whereof they had used what endeavor they could by their
Commissioners intermediation at London, did with all manifestation and
expressions of sorrow bewail and deplore his Death; and on the 6 of February
ensuing, to testify the truth of their constant Allegiance to the Crown, did
in most solemn manner Proclaim his Son, King Charles the second, Charles the
second proclaimed King at Edingburgh.
at Edingburgh, the Cross there being hung with Tapistry, and the
Parliament-Lords in their Robes, the Chancellor himself reading the said
Proclamation (reciting the Murder of the King) to the King at Arms, and the
night concluded with all usual Demonstrations of joy and gladness. This being
over, the Estates sent an expostulatory Letter to their former Brethren at
Westminster, concerning their proceedings with the King, and were in the mean
time by Letters flattered with the cajole of good amity and friendship, and
other fineries from those Regicides, with many other flams of advantage, if
they would concur with, or acquie^ce in what the Mogens of Independency had
done in England.

The English* (...) State tampers with the Scotch Parliament.
But the passion of the Scot, as seeing how his Countries Honor had been lost
by the same Traiterous proffers, boiled too high, and would give no ear to such
overtures, nor would they enter into any Treaty with them, nor own them
(directing their Messages to the Honorable William Lenthall Speaker of the
House of Commons) unless they were a free Parliaments, consisting of both
Houses, without any force upon, or seclusion of their Members.

The Scots were mainly intent upon another guess Treaty with the King, and Sir
Joseph Douglas was ordered to be gone forthwith to give his Mejesty an account
at the Hague, Sir Jos. Douglas is sent from the Scots to the King at the Hague.
what they had done, and were preparing to do; when on a sudden some of the
Mackenzeys, a great Sept in the North of Scotland, and the Lord Freezer's
Brother, seized Innerness for the King, and put them into perpleased Counsels
about it: Innerness seized for the King.
The news whereof those at Westminster thought a good occa^ion for them to lay
hold upon in order to a rupture with their King; and when that distemper came
to the Head (some of the Gourdens (whose Father, the Marquess of Huntly, was
Beheaded about the beginning of March, when he died a resolute Royalist) with
Lieutenant General Middleton, who had made an escape from Barwick into those
parts, and the Lord Rea joining with them) they failed not of doing their
devoir, ^
by offering their assistance, and ince^sin^ the Scots against the King, for
whose sole sake they said all those Troubles w^r^* and still were like to be
raised and fomented; but Colonel Ker, and Stra^ghan defeating that party,
killing 400, and taking the Lord Rea and 800 Prisoners* and Middleton
submitting, that disturbance ended, and the Kingdom was again reduced into
peace and quietness.

The Commissioners in the mean while were dispatched to the King, ^
being one Earl, one Lord, one Burgess, and one Minister; of which the Earl of
Cassils was the chief; and their Commissioners at London, viz. the Earl of
L^thian, Sir John Cheisly, and Master Glendonning remanded; who having sent a
peremptory Paper to the Juncto, withdrew themselves privately, intending to
pass by Sea to Scotland; but at Gravesend they were intercepted, and by a Guard
conveyed by Land, an Envoy going with them to the Scotch Parliament, to know if
they would approve of the aforesaid Paper; who stomaching the Rump worse and
worse, turned him home again without any Answer; but prepared for defense,
intending to Levy 17000 Foot, and 6000 Horse* as expecting the return of their
Commissioners, who landing about the middle of the Summer, though they brought
no Confirmation of Agreement, yet gave certain hopes of it, by Treaty presently
to be Commenced; the King offering all whatever his Father had promised to the
settlement of Presbytery: whereupon the Lord Liberton was dispatched to wait on
the King, Lord (...)
now intending to remove from the Hague through Flanders into France.

The English Army next comes under our consideration, who perceiving this
Principle of the Levellers (which was to lay all things in Common, and ma^^an
Hodgepodge, an Ochlarchy of Government) was very taking, and fl^w high in their
speeches, and was higher in the Noddle of the covetous Soldier; had ordered,
That no Soldiers or Officers should keep any private Meetings, to bege^ a
disturbance in the Army, their right of Petitioning being still preserved:
whereupon several Soldiers were seized, and sentenced to ride the Wooden-horse
with Papers on their Heads, and Cashiered. Lieutenant Colonel Lilburn, etc. as
aforesaid, was likewise seized, for a Book of his called, Englands New Chains
Discovered, which was the bottom and foundation of the Levellers design; and
one Lockier a Trooper, for promoting of the like Models, and two others, were
sentenced by a Court Martial; Lockier the Leveller shot to death in Saint Paul
's Churchyard.
and Lockier was shot to death accordingly in Saint Paul's Churchyard, and
most sumptuously, and in great state, a Footman leading his Horse in black
after his Hearse, attended by thousands with black and Seagreen Ribbons, all of
his party, and some men of note and Estates, carried to his Grave in the New
Churchyard London.

These appearances of danger from the same party, whom Cromwell had used as his
foot-step to his designs, looked very untowardly upon Him and the Grandees, whom
this deceived people were ten times more enraged at, than ever against the
King. For the prevention therefore of this evil, he had timely bethought
himself of a Remedy, the transporting of these Mutineers and Malcontents
under any Government, Eleven Regiments designed by Cromwell for the Irish
service.
to the service of Ireland; (for which 11 Regiments, besides one of Dragoons
under Colonel Abbot, were by lot designed, viz. of Horse, Iretons, Scroops,
Hortons, and Lamberts; of Foot, Eures, Cooks, Hewsons, and Deans; and three new
ones, viz. Cromwels, Venables, and Phayrs) their combining against or
discouraging one another whereto, he had ca^tioned before by the said Order:
but that proved the mere crisis of that disease; for the Army being generally
infected and bewitched with the promises Cromwell himself and his Agents had
spread abroad (in order to the bringing about the death of the King) of sharing
the Kingdom among them, could not endure to hear of fighting in another
Country, where they were sure of hardships and more desperate service, and
leaving their sweets (they had already swallowed in their fancies) of their
Conquest here. There was one Thompson the great ringleader of them, a Cornet,
who had for these tricks of meddling with Government, and other adjutating
pranks, and pragmatical boldness to his superior Officers, Thompson a corne^
with 2 Tro^ps, enters Northampton and declares his and the Armies resolution
against that Expedition.
been condemned at a Council of War, and reprieved. This fellow now with two
Troops of Horse enters Northampton, and emits a Declaration, showing the Armies
resolution of not going for Ireland (though they think that Expedition in time
fit to be undertaken) till those main ends, the peoples Liberty, for which the
Army first engaged, should be secured: and generally the Army was of this
leven, through the licentio^sness and intolerable boldness which their
Antimonarchical Leaders had trained them up in, to fit them to their purpose.

The first formidable eruption of it was at Salisbury, where Colonel Scroop's
Regiment of Horse laid aside their Officers, Several Regiments confederate in
the same design.
and with their Colors marched thence, in order to a conjunction with
Harrisons, Iretons, and Skippous Regiments, who had confederated (by means of
those Adjutators) in the same design: which affair admitting no delay, Fairfax
and Cromwell with his own Regiment advanced to them, to Bagshot, and to Alton,
where they had notice that they were marched to Abingdon, whither (after a
tedious march of forty miles in one day) the General came; and Cromwell fell
presently to work with his old arts of Treachery, for Harrison's Regiment was
hasting to the Conjunction.

His first finess in order to their reducing, was the offer of a Treaty,
wherein satisfaction might be mutually given; Cromwell by treachery surprizeth
them.
and that done, that neither party should come within ten miles of one another:
whereupon the Levellers marched to Burford, and being opposed at a Pass called
Newbridge over the River, to avoid any quarrel, and hoping the Soldiery there
would no doubt join with them upon the Treaty, passed a mile lower, and
arriving at the Town, relied so much upon the Generals and Cromwels
engagements, that most of them had put their Horses to Grass, leaving a Corpse
de guard of some 60 men, the whole party making in all 900 men, consisting of
12 entire Troops, reputed the best in the Army, and whose defeat would have
cost many men lives, if the Army would have stood against them. But to save
that difficulty, while those secure Troops were resting themselves, and their
Horses put in the adjoining Meadows, about twelve a clock at night Colonel
Reynolds fell into their Quarters, Levellers defeated at Burford in May.
having notice from some Traitors within of their posture, and presently
mastered the Guard, not dreaming of such a Camisado, and seized most of the
other, then tippling or asleep. Here were taken near 900 Horse, and 400
Prisoners, whereof there only were Executed one Thompson and two more,
Thompson and two more Executed.
who died very resolutely: Cornet Den expressing his grief and sorrow, was
reprieved at the instant of Execution, which their fellows beheld from the
Leads of the Church, and were saluted with a Message of Decimination: but that
Cromwell might ingratiate with the Army, for his sake, and at his instance they
were pardoned, and sent home to their own Houses; Their Chieftain slain in
Wellingborough- wood.
the great Chieftain of them being pursued as he was marching toward this
party, took into Wellingborough-wood, where courageously defending himself, he
was killed by Carbine-shot, refusing to take Quarter at such perfidious peoples
hands. This Hurliburly being over, and ended like a flash, Fairfax complemented
at Oxford, and treated at Dinner in the City of London.
the General came to Oxford, where he was highly Treated, and he and Oliver
made Doctors of the Civil Law, and Lambert, etc. and Hewson made Master of
Arts: from thence having intelligence of the like commotions feared in
Portsmouth and the Isle of Wight, he hasted thither through Hampshire, and was
received every where in great state, and so back in triumph to London, where he
was complemented by the Parliament and City, the last inviting both to Dine
with them at Grocers-hall, where they had a very Magnificent Entertainment.
They present Fairfax and Cromwell with Gold and Plate.
Fairfax (as their farewel-complement) being presented with a Basin and Ewer of
Beaten Gold, and Cromwell with 300 pounds worth of Plate, and 200 pieces of
Gold; and great rejoicing there was, and smiling too, at this the Cities
kindness; whose Proclaiming of the Act for abolishing the Kingly power having
touched before, I think I am not obliged to the worth or worshipfulness of the
matter, to say any thing more of it here in its place; but in lieu thereof,
will pleasure the Reader with a contra-aspect in this Archive and Premier
Record of Englands being a Free State Created by these Hogen Mogen words.

Be it Enacted and Declared by this present Parliament, and by the Authority
thereof, that the People of England, and all the Dominions and Territories
thereunto belonging, are and shall be, and are hereby Constituted, Made, and
Declared a Commonwealth, and Free State, and shall so be Governed by the
Supreme Authority the Representatives of the people in Parliament, England made
a Free State, June.
and by such as they shall constitute as Officers for the good of the people,
and that without any King, Single Person, or House of Lords. And for the Honor
and Grace of this Free State, A new Mace made.
a new Mace was now made, and brought to be Consecrated in the House, wrought
with Flowers instead of the Cross, and on the bottom and the top, the Arms of
England and Ireland; which was so well liked, that they ordered all the Maces
in England should be made after that pattern. But that which they did most like
a Free State, was giving and bounteously bestowing Estates upon one another:
for besides smaller Rents and lesser Sums, kindly squandered and reciprocated
among the Journey-men by themselves; 4000 l. a year out of the D. of
Buckinghams Estate, given to Fairfax.
no less than 4000 a year was given to Fairfax, out of the Duke of Bukingham's
Revenues; the Lord Cottington's Estate to Bradshaw, and so to other their
deserving Favorites. And to requite the City for their civility of the late
Treatment, and to engage them at a pinch; New-park with all the Deer therein,
Lord Cottington's Estate to Bradshaw.
was liberally conferred upon them, to hold it in Common Soccage, [from any
body; a very excellent Tenure and Title.]

Great givers must be great receivers, and therefore, besides their former Act
of selling the Kings Houshold-goods (which was pretended to satisfy his Debts,
but such Creditors as ventured upon them, found them dear pennyworths, not
only in conclusion, but for the present, being rated and prized so
unreasonably, that 100 l. in goods would not yield above ten in money) There
came out an Act for the sale of Deans and Chapters Lands, Several Acts to raise
money.
the product whereof (though encumbred with Debentures) amounted to a clear
account of incredible sums; and another for the sale of the Manors, Houses,
Lands, and Forests of the King, Queen, or Prince: but White Hall (for that it
was the residence of my Lords the Committee of Estates) Saint James's and
Windsor-Castle were by them excepted; and Cromwell for a pleasant retreat for
his future greatness, saved Hampton Court and Greenwich; and the French-Church,
having obtained the use of the Chapel of Somerset House, rescued that likewise
from sale, because the Purchasers could not build upon the ground with any
conveniencie, if that were not demolished. But the grand money-making Act, the
very Mint of their Commonwealth, was an Act of the 7th of April, for 90000 l. a
Month, which rose higher afterward, though in the middle of the War it was
never more than 56000, and there were three Armies in pay; but it seems the
good Husbands had accounted, and then published it, that the Monthly charge was
160000 pound, and that the standing force amounted to 40000 men in England and
Ireland. Several Castles demolished.
About this time several Inland Castles were demolished, as Winchester,
Lancaster, Belvoir, Nottingham, etc. and some reparations made to the several
Proprietors.

It will be requisite now to enquire what and how the King does, A short
account of the King at the Hague.
since we left him at the Hague, while his Rebels rant it away in such ample
manner, and carry all before them. It Is true, he wanted not a Kingdom, being
looked upon by the people of those United Provinces with the same respect as if
he were their Sovereign, nor did they ^ail of giving manifest demonstration
thereof. His Fathers Death was with all State Condoled, and his ascent to the
Throne Gratulated, and that moreover both by the Swedish and Danish
Ambassadors, then resident at that Court; especially the Prince of Aurange by
his respects and observance, obliged all persons to the reverence of his
Person, as if no such misfortunes had befallen him; nor could any thing but a
virtuous tempered mind (amidst such caresses and Honors) been sensible of so
sudden, so dis-regarded and discountenanced adversity. To better also his
condition as to his Kingdoms, came forth several defenses of his Authority in
several Treatises, especially that of Salmasius called The Royal Defense (which
one Milton, Salmasius (...) in the Kings defen^e. Is (...) by Milto^ the
lik^wise answer^ His Maj^^ties Meditations; which Answer was since burned by
the common Hang-ma^. The condition his Majesty was in at the Hague.
since stricken with blindness cavilled at, who wrote also against that
imcomparable Book and Remains of King Charles the Martyr, about this time
produced to light, though endeavored by all means to be suppressed, called Eikon
Basilike, in an impudent and Blasphemous Libel, called Iconoclastes, since
deservedly burnt by the Common Execution^r) does justly challenge to be here
Registered.

Thus He triumphed by the Pen, and great were the expectations of his like
success by the Sword, Scotland being wholely his, and Ireland v^ry near reduced
to the same obedience; the affairs of both which Kingdoms calling him away, He
resolved to depart from this His long-continued abode, and after mature
consultations with the Princes His Allies, and His nearer Relations, His
disconsolate Mother then in France, to determine to which Realm He should first
betake Him: but before His departure, fell out this remarkable passage at His
Court at the Hague.

One Doctor Dorislaus a Dutchman and Schoolmaster that fled his Country, and
here became a Civilian, then pertainer to the University of Oxford, and a
Professor there, but disappointed of his ambitious expectations, in the
beginning of the War became the Parliaments Judge-Advocate in their Army, and
at the expiration thereof, by his acquaintance with Sir Henry Mildmay, a great
Enemy to (though raised by) the King (at whose House in Essex, he ordinarily
played at Cards on Sundays) was promoted to the Employment of drawing up that
Charge against the King; and the rather, for that no Englishman durst find or
make a way to that illegal and unprecedented business. After that perpetration,
he was thought the only fit man to be sent over as an Envoy to his
Countrymen, to prosecute the designs of that Fact; which would look the
handsomer to them, by this their Subjects hand in it (though he durst not have
app^ard there but in the quality of a Foreign Minister.) He arrived there in
May, and the first night, as he was at Supper there, one Colonel Whitford a
Scotch-man (then attending the Kings Court) with some twelve other Royalists,
regretting and disdaining the affront done to the King, by the impudent
boldness of this F^llows address in the Face of His Majesty; entered his
Lodging, Dr. Dorislaus their Env^r to the Estates General killed at the Hague.
May.
and with a broad Sword cleaved his Head and killed him, suffering his Pag^ to
escape, but by a mistake, wounding another Dutchman for him at their (...)
coming in; and having done the deed, quietly departed: and though the States
pretended a Hue and Cry, yet the people were generally well satisfied, and
applauded the Execution; but our States here were outragiously mad, and
published a Paper, wherein they imputed this Fact to the Royalists, and upon
the next occasion threatened to retaliate it upon those of that party then in
their Hands: Ascham their Envoy to Spain killed by one Sparks, ^ho was
therefore Executed.
yet Ascham their Agent and Envoy to Spain some time after, with (...)
Interpreter Signour Riba, was served in the same manner, at his arrival at
Madrid, in his Inn, by one Sparks, and other English Merchants* upon the same
account: Sparks fled to the Venetian Ambassadors, and thence to Sanctuary; but
by the subtle Don, to curry with our Masters, then dreadful to his
Plate-trade, and for other designed advantages, was at their important instance
taken thence, and with all men's pity and indignation at the meanness of the
Spaniard, thereafter Executed.

King Charles the second departs for France, June.
The King on the 15 of June departed from the Hague, in company with his Sister
and her Husband the Prince of Aurange in their Coach, and came early to
Rotterdam, where the Burgers were in Arms, and was Nobly received and saluted
at his passing the Gates with all the Artillery, and Ringing of the Bells, and
other signs of Joy and Honor; though the English Company there durst not (as
of themselves) give any particular proof thereof. From thence to Dort, where he
was received in the same ample manner; and then to Breda, and so to Antwerp,
where by the Archdukes order he was met and entertained with (...), and
presented with a most splended Chariot, with eight Horses (...) welcomed by the
Marquess of Newcastle (who had fixed (...), out of respect to the great
Civility he found from that people* (...) him Excise-free, with other
immunities and privileges) and (...) to Brussels, wh^re his Treatments were
most Royally ordered (as the King ^ft^rw^rds acknowledged, The King
magnificently treated by the Archduke.
for the most sumptuous magnificen^y and p^easing (...) He ever met with) and
with the same grandeurs as if the King of Spain had received them himself:
which Amplitudes were observed throughout (...) passage; and at his departure
thence, the Duke of Lorrain gave him the like entertainment, and conveyed him
on his way to France, where in Comp^^gne the French King (accompanied with the
most and chiefest of his Nobility*) received him with all the Testimonies of
affection and Honor, and brought him in State to Saint Germains to the Queen
his Mother, where we will leave him in Counsel with his surest and most beloved
friends. The Duchess of Savoy his Aunt, The Duchess of Savoy assigns him
50000 crowns per Ann.
having made him an assignment of 50000 Crown: a year; and several the like
proffers from others of his Family: while His Brother the Duke of Glo^cester,
and the Princess Elizabeth, were transferred from the Earl of Northumberland's,
to the care of the Countess of Leicester at Penshurst, Duke of Gloucester and
the Princess Eliz. at Penshurst, with the Countess of Leicester.
with the maintenance of 3000 a year, which was afterward lessened when they
came into the custody of Anthony Mildmay at Carisbroke in the Isle of Wight,
there being a bold but credible rumor of a resolution of our States putting
the Duke to a Merchant or some other Trade.

The Commonwealth of England was now whol^y busi^d about the affairs of
Ireland; The affairs of Ireland summed up together.
which proving very desperate, Colonel Monk, lately dismissed from his
Imprisonment in the To^er, upon account of his service in this Kingdom (having
vowed (...) draw* Sword against the King in England) was ordered privately to
j^yn (...) O Neal, and Nuntio party, the bloodiest of (...) the R^bels, Note,
they taxed the King with what themselves were guilty.
to p^^^erve what was yet le^t the Parliament (of which more hereafter) and in
the mean time, all possible speed was made for the Expedition henc^; money was
mainly wanting, and therefore the City was desired to lend ^ 20000 l. upon the
security of the Act of 90000 l. per mensem; but that not proving satisfactory,
the Act for the sale (...) Dean and Chapters-lands, then greedily bought up by
old Arrears, Debentures, and Doublings, was offered, and additional Acts for
removing of Obstructions were passed, and sums of money to be raised thereupon
secured for the same: Lieut. Genesis Cromwell Voted Lord-Governour of Ireland.
Lieutenant General Cromwell was complemented with the Command, which after some
debate he accepted, and was Voted Lord-Governour of I^eland, Fairfax yet
continuing General in both Kingdoms.

Toward the second of July, The Parl. Army hi^^* from Milford-Haven to Wales.
most of the Army designed for that service, was drawn to the Seaside, and
Colonel Venables Regiment shipped over, with some 1500 more, which (with
Tuthills Regiment newly landed before) made Jones the Governor of Dublin 7000
strong, with which he attempted several times against the Marquess of Ormond,
with little and various success. On the 13 of August, Cromwell having passed to
Bristol, and by reason of cross weather compelled to go for his passage to
Milford-Haven, with a Fleet of 60 Dutch and English Bottoms, Cromwell lands at
Dublin.
set sail, and the next day after landed at Dublin: his whole Force with Jones,
now made his Lieutenant General, amounting to 15000 men.

It will be now very necessary to give an account of the state of that Kingdom:
and because it is the first achievement of the New State, it shall be rendered
entire, without any interfering affair; though without any other Apology, it
will take up the most part of the remaining year: The Relation whereof we have
from an Actor and Eyewitness there, as he has most elegantly and orderly laid
it down, worthy of all belief, and even pleasant in the ruins he deplores; who
with many other Loyal English Gentry having escaped or left England to the
barbarities of the Usurpation, joined with the more civiller Irish, and pursued
the Kings Cause in this, another of his Kingdoms.

The State of the Kingdom ^f Ire^and.
The Marquess of Ormond Lord Lieutenant of that Kingdom, being pressed with the
danger of a Siege from the Roman-Catholick-Confederates, who had broken their
League and Treaty with him, had delivered Dublin, as aforesaid, in 1647. to the
Parliaments Commissioners, having articled for his free passing to the King,
and for those sums of money he had expended for the English Interest out of his
own private purse, when that Exchecquer was drained; and accordingly having
waited on the King, while the Army carried him about, with an account of his
Actions, passed into France, whence about September, 1648. the said Catholic
Confederates perceiving a storm impending on them from England, The English
Roman Catholics declare for the King, and desire the Marq. of Ormond may be
their General.
had by Letters to the King importuned His resending to them, upon their
Engagement and Protestation of plenary submission to his Majesty's Authority,
and to him as his Lieutenant, as being the only fit qualified person, for his
Interest, Birth, and Relation, to preside in that Nation. His Lordship
accordingly undertook the Commission; and though all things promised fair, by
the agreement made with the Lord Inchiqueen, who had had several successes
against the Rebels, and had joined Forces with the said Confederates, yet did
the Popish and Nuntio Party under General O Neal, very much perplex the hopes
of these Affairs.

For this Nuntio Party had Excommunicated the Confederates, which consisted of
most of the old English Papists, and some Irish, who wisely foresaw their
further obstinacy against the King or the Protestant Interest would finally
give them up a pr^y to the English Usurpation (which yet fatally ev^ned) which
had made an association by Cromwell's pract^ses with the said O Neal, An
Association with O Neal, by Sir Charles Coot, and Col. Monk, then in Arms for
the Parliament.
with Sir Charles-Coot and Colonel Monk, then in Arms in Vl^ter for the
Parliament. On the other side, the Confederates had Proclaimed the Nuntio party
Rebels and Traitors, and were making ready to Reduce them by force.

Their strength and the Lord Inchiqueens* with add^tions from the Marquess of
Clanrickard and the Earl of Castlehaven, The C^nfederates and the Lord
Inchiqueens Forces do not brook one another.
being now joined under the Command of the Marquess of Ormond, though upon hard
restrictions and conditions, as it was very difficult for him to divide himself
conveniently betwixt those two former opposite Interests; the English under
Inchiqueen grudging at the Exercise of the Romish Religion among the Irish, and
they at the constancy of the Englishes pay and contribution; the
Lord Lieutenant had little else to do, but only go in and out before this
Army, without any power or Authority, more than they themselves pleased to
allow: the source and occasion of all those mischiefs which thereafter followed
thick upon these ill associated and misunderstanding parties. they with the
Marq. of Clanrickard, and the E. of Castlehaven design to reduce Dublin.
For the Lord Lieutenant having drawn down their united Bodies as soon as there
was Forage for his Horse, and some advance-money in the beginning of the year
1649. to the reduction of Dublin, having in v^in Courted Jones the Governor
there, and Owen O Neal, to the Kings Obedience: In the very entrance of the
Expedition, an ominous Rub befell him; Inchiqueen's Forces would not march, nor
the Scotch- Vlster Forces (then advanced also to the aid of the said Union)
unanimously submit before the Lord Inchiqueen was Declared Lieutenant General
of the Army, Lord Inchiqueen Lie^. Genesis for the King.
to the dissatisfaction of the Marquess of Clanrickard and the Earl of
Castlehaven; though the former made his merit and Honor presently yield to his
Loyalty, and the other very patiently (for a while) absented himself from the
marching Army.

In the time that this was in doing, the Lord Lieutenant was also busied in
Treating with, O Neal joins with the Independent party.
and Courting Jones and Owen O Neal unto the Kings Obedience; the first of
which (being as is believed) corrupted by Cromwels bribes, and large promises,
positively declined the Lord-Lieutenants favor, as appears by their Printed
Letters: the latter having at last waved all things concerning Religion, more
than what was granted in the Peace, insists finally upon the Command of 6000
Foot, and ^00 Horse, together with those other conditions that since were
granted him. The Confederate Commissioners will permit his Excellency to allow
him no more but 4000 Foot, and 800 Horse; which number they obstinately refused
to exceed, denying him also several other of his l^^s^r demands: whereupon O
Neal seeing them willing to leave him quite out, or to have him come in upon
such terms as he judged inconsiderable (they peradventure thinking themselves
able to do the work without him) makes present application unto Monk, and
Jones, either to be revenged upon the Commissioners, the Lord Inchiqueen, the
Scots, and all the rest that he conceived to oppose him; or else, as he
afterward said, to make himself more considerable, and thereby facilitate his
conditions with them.

Whatsoever his motive was, at last Colonel Monk makes an agreement with him,
Col. Monk agrees with him.
in the name of the Parliament (though they very wisely by Cromwels advice did
afterward think fit to disclaim it, because of its ill aspect and odiousness
to the English, but acknowledged his faithfulness and well-meaning by a Vote to
that purpose) upon which score howsoever, he assisted them all he could,
undertaking the Relief of Derry, O Neal Relieves Londonderry.
which he afterward effected; and notwithstanding that his Excellency (during
all this time) was very sensible of the great consequence of Owen O Neal's
coming in, or standing out, in order to the service or disservice of the King;
and that he looked upon the dispute of denying him the Command of 6000 men,
when they were content to entrust him with 4000, as a strange kind of
oversight in the Commissioners, and the rest concurring with them, the rather,
because he knew that by his standing out, that accursed quarrel between the
Kings and the Nuntios party (not unlike that of the Guelphs and Gibbelines in
Italy) was kept on foot, The ill consequence thereof to the Kings affairs.
the refractory Clergy were countenanced and upheld in credit with the people,
and the great Cities were animated to refuse Garrisons, to deny the payment of
impositions, and to disrespect both the Lord Lieutenant and the Commissioners:
yet was it not in his power to help it by any means, unless he would have
broken Conditions with the Confederates, which no consideration of any
advantage (how great soever) could induce him to do.

Other difficulties overcome, his Excellency makes directly for Dublin, all the
Garrisons in his way (but Ballisanon) by force or fair means surrendering unto
him; yet is he set forth so slenderly provided with money, that near Kildare
the Army is ready to mutiny, and fall to pieces for want of a very small sum,
had not a worthy person (that was there but accidentally) supplied them in that
extremity. This straight also being over-past, and the Lord Inchiqueen's Forces
being come wholly up, The Marquess of Ormond comes before Dublin, Aug.
they hold on for Dublin, and compel Jones (that was drawn out as far as the
Naas, with what strength he could make to interrupt them) to retire into the
Town: whither being come at last, and finding it competently well fortified,
and plentifully manned, both with Horse and Foot, insomuch that it was judged no
ways fit to hazard the Army upon a desperate assault; and being not as yet a
number able to invest the place, especially whilst O Neal and Monk, together
with the Garrisons of Drogbeda and Trim lay so convenient to attempt upon them:
it was resolved that the Lord Lieutenant should (with the greatest part of his
Army) Encamp at Finglasse, from thence to awe and distress the Town, and be
ready to countenance any stirs or revolts within, whilst the Lord Inchiqueen
with a great Body of Horse, and above 2000 Foot, endeavors to take in Trim and
Drogbeda. All this time his Excellency found great wants to encounter with, his
Provisions and Contributions coming in so slowly, and disproportionably to the
necessities of his Army; and many Factions to compose and temper; the Munster
and the rest of the English Forces murmuring against the Liberty the Irish had
there in the exercise of their Religion, and the Irish again repining to see
themselves murmured at; but more especialy, to see the English Munster-Forces
(though they were fewer in number, and had Contributions of their own) to
swallow up both their Pay, and Provisions also; which though the rest of the
Army did Petition against, his Excellency could in no ways remedy, being
constrained to humor and comply with that party, as being a people so ticklish,
and unsteady, that if disgusted, might probably either side with Jones, or
retiring to their own Garrisons, compel the Army to withdraw from Dublin, by
declaring themselves for the Parliament, of which Grudge slightly hinted before.

Sir Thomas Armstrong, Col. Trevors, and the Lord Moor declare for the King.
Sir Thomas Armstronge and the Lord Moor, being come in to the Lord Inchiqueen;
Colonel Mark Trevors (that was but newly declared for the King) having got
notice of a choice party of O Neals, sent to Dundalke, to convey thence such
Arms and Ammunition as Monk had undertaken to supply him withal, invited the
Lord Inchiqueen to intercept them, who came so opportunely thither, that he
gained O Neals supply of Ammunition, with the utter de^eat of his Party;
whereupon, soon after the gaining of Drogheda, which ensued immediately upon O
Neales defeat, O Neal defeated, Drogheda taken, Dundalke surrendered to the King.
Dundalke it self being summoned, the Soldiers compelled Monk to a Surrender,
and themselves took Arms for the King.

Immediately after this defeat of his Party, O Neale hastneth toward the
Relief of Derry, which was the only Town in that Province untaken, all the
rest being already reduced by the Lord of Ards, Sir George Monr^, and Colonel
Trevors, who were now hindered only by O Neales Army and the Siege of Derry,
from bringing up a considerable Body of Horse and Foot to the Leaguer of
Dublin. Where may be observed how great a prejudice the Faction of those men
(who desiring out of animosities and ends of their own, to stave off O Neal and
his party from the benefit of the Peace, stood chaffering with him about his
Command of 4000, or 6000 men, and other trifles) have done to the Kings
service, and to the whole Kingdom, in depriving themselves thereby, not only
of the forementioned assistance of the Scots, but also of the possession of
Londonderry, together with so considerable an addition of Forces, as O Neal
could then have brought; whereby not only the whole Province of Vlster would
have been secured to the King; but Dublin it self either reduced, or so
strongly surrounded, that it would have been impossible, either for Jones to
relieve himself, or Cromwell to invade the Kingdom: Which, notwithstanding all
these forementioned disadvantages, was upon the matter, even gained already,
and would have been entirely, without any manner of question, if it had
fortuned that His Majesty had seasonably come thither himself in Person, which
by all parties was desired with infinite passion; but especially by those whose
prudence made them best able to Judge, how effectual his presence would be, His
Maj^sties Presence most necessary and most desired in Ireland.
not only for the animating of his own Loyal Party; but also suppressing of
all Factious humors, and uniting all Interests cheerfully and unanimously to
go on against the common Enemy: which must soon have put a period to that War,
and made his Authority absolute in that Kingdom, without dispute; for as upon
his arrival His Majesty should have found Munster entirely in the Irish and the
Lord In^hiqueens possession, Vlster all reduced, but the Fort of Culmore and
Derry into the Hands of the Scots; Connaght by the Marquess of Clanricards
fortunate gaining the strong Fort of Slego (with what else the Enemy had then
remaining in that Province) wholly cleared: In Leinster, nothing left for
Rebellion to nestle in, but Dublin and Ballisannon; both which were so well
attended upon, that the Defendants had but little pleasure to air themselves
without the circuit of their Works: so by his coming he would undoubtedly have
diverted Owen O Neal (who would immediately have submitted unto the person of
the King) from relieving Londonderry, and thereby have secured both that Town
and Province, with Dublin also, as it is thought: for they that had reason to
know Iones's mind, apprehended that his leaving the Kings party did proceed
from a Pique, ^^^her against the Lord Lieutenant or Sir Robert Byron, about a
Lieutenant-Colonels place, which was conferred over his head upon another; and
that then the Scene being altered in England, and his old Friends out of
Authority there, his new terms with the Independents also yet unmade, he
himself would come over, if the King had been there in person; or if not, yet
his Party would have all deserted him, and the work have been done one way or
other; that Kingdom wholly reduced without a blow, all Factions (as I said
before) extinguished; and his Majesty had had an Army of above 20000 men, to
have employed where he pleased.

After the taking in of Trim (which followed soon upon the surrender of
Dundalke) the Lord Inchiqueen brings up his Forces (now much improved in
number) to the Army before Dublin; whereupon his Exellency leaving a part of
his Army at Castleknock, under the command of the Lord Dillon of Costelo (a
person of much Gallantry) to keep them in on that side the Water; removes his
Camp to the other side the Town, to distress the Enemy that way also: Which,
whilst they are endeavoring to do (upon intelligence that Cromwell was ready
with an Army to Embark himself for Ireland, and that he intended to land in
Munster) the Lord Inchiqueen thought if fit, that he should with a good party
of Horse go down into those parts, to secure his Garrisons and provide for the
worst.

His Lordship was no sooner gone, The Siege of Dublin by the Kings Forces; Aug.
but the Lord Lieutenant designing to shut up the Enemy within his Works, and
quite impede as well their getting in Hay, as the Grasing of their Cattle
without their Line; gave order to Patrick Purcell, Major General of the Irish
Foot, to march with a sufficient Party of men and an Engineer to Baggot-Rath,
there to possess himself of that place immediately, and cast up such a Work as
had been already designed: Sir Wiliam Vaughan Commissary-General of the Horse,
had order likewise to draw together most part of the Troops that were on that
side the Water, and to keep them in a Body upon a large plowed Field looking
toward the Castle of Dublin, there to countenance the Foot while the Works
were finishing, and to secure them in case the Enemy (out of the Town) should
attempt to interrupt them. These were the Orders given, but not executed: for
notwithstanding it did not much exceed a mile whither the Foot were to go, yet
through the ignorance or negligence of the Officers that were to conduct them,
many hours were spent ere they came at the place: whither when they were come,
they found the Work so wretchlesly advanced by Master Welsh the Engineer, and
(to help all) themselves kept such negligent Guards, that many judged it was
done on purpose; and that these neglects proceeded from those lurking seeds of
discord between the Kings and the Nuntio's Parties: For it is certain, that
about that time, upon an apprehension that things went on too prosperously with
the Lord Lieutenant, there were Letters written to Owen O Neal about broaching
a New War, in case Dublin had been taken. Whatever the grounds of these
failings were, the Enemy never stood to examine, but being troubled to see a
Fort designing there, (where, with so much ease they might not only be kept
from all Forage and succor by Land, but intercourse with the Sea also) and
perceiving the posture they were in, destitute of Horse to Guard them, resolved
upon a desperate Sally to disturb this Work, which they happened to make about
eight of the clock in the morning, when his Excellency who had been on
horseback most part of the night (as his constant custom was since his coming
near Dublin) was newly laid him down in his Tent to take his rest, however the
Westminster-Scandals of those days did asperse him.

The Enemy found the new Fortification so slight, Dublin Relieved by a sally
the Forces of the Gairison made, Aug. 22.
and the resistance there so weak, that they soon became Masters of the place;
from whence seeing the Irish fly in such fright and disorder (contrary to their
first intentions) they pursued them up to the Avenues of their Camp, where
finding the Soldiers also that were in Guard with great security and
unconcernment looking on, they laid hold on the advantage, Charging briskly in,
and in a trice beat them off their Posts; which if they had defended (as a far
less number might very easily have done) the Camp being no way accessible
toward the Town (excepting by those few Avenews which there purposely had been
left open, nay some of them thrown open (contrary to orders) for the
convenience of the Soldiers) they could possibly have run no hazard.

But these Passes being thus lost and abandoned, and more men coming out of the
Town to reinforce those that were alr^ady so successful, the whole Army (in
the greatest t^rrour and confusion that might be) falls a running every one a
several way: and in this condition were all things brought, before the Lord
Taafe, then General of the Ordnance, had awaked the Lord-Lieut^nant, who
presently taking Horse, together with the Lord Castlehaven (who was now
returned back to his Command) and Colonel Milo Power, made toward the Enemy,
taking all such along with them, as they could either by force or fair means
persuade to face about, with intention to beat them back, or at least, by
making head a while, to stop their progress, till some considerable part of the
Army could be Rail^^d and brought up again to oppose them: But by that time
they came near the Enemy, their followers were g^own so thin* that his
Excellency (after the having exposed himself to much danger, The Marq of Ormond
(...) D^blin, Aug. ^.
and rec^ived a shot upon his Arms, in a brisk Charge that he made upon ^^e
foremost of the Enemies T^oops) was fain to retire at last, and s^ek to recover
his Army that was gone before; Sir William Vaughan being already ki^led, Sir
William Vaughan (...) Wogan (...) p^isoners.
his Brother Colonel Richard Butler taken, and the whol^ Camp in effect
abandoned, except by those that could not get them ready, o^ wanted means o^
flyi^g. This was ^o^ght on the second of August.

Thus, besides the slaughter that was made, and the Prisoners that were taken,
one of which, was the lot of mo^^ o^ the English that were under the Command of
Colonel Wogan, (whose b^^^viou^ that day deserves much commondation) who having
gotten tog^^^^r (...) Body, defended themselves so gallantly, and with so much
r^s^^^^ion against the whole power of the Enemy, as at last, after a great
slaughter, the (...) made Conditions ^or themselves before they could be
in^orced to yield or lay down their Arms.) The total plunder of the Camp, with
all the Ar^il^ery, T^n^s and Baggage fell into the Enemies hands. Most of the
Lord Inchiqueens Foot, that at first made some resistance, seeing the day lost,
upon this disaster changed sides, and revolted to the Enemy. All this was done
in so short a space, and with so little noise, that the Lord Di^^on, and the
res^ of the Forces that were on the other side the River of the I^iffy* knew
nothing of what was done, till the business was over, and some runaways brought
him word of it; the Irish making such have every one toward his home, and with
such distraction, that it was impossible for the Lord Lieutenant to draw any
Body of them together; and therefore (having met with the news of the Surrender
of Ballisannon (that very day) into the hands of his Forces that lay before it)
he rested at Caterlo that night, Marq. o^ Ormond ^akes B^ll^sannon for the King.
and went the next day to confer with the Commissioners of Trust and the Lord
Inchiqueen at Kilkenny.

A ^ust deploration of this calamity.
When this great disaster is well considered, scarce any other ^ound reason can
be given for so sad a misfortune, but the good pleasure of Almighty God, who
(if it be lawful to look so far into the Judgments of Heaven) knowing the ill
int^ntions and designs that were in the Hearts of many, both of the Irish and
English there, in case Dublin had been taken, saw them unworthy of that
Blessing, and took that time for their punishment and humiliation; not only
this, but a torrent of other crosses following in the neck one upon another:
for besides this mischance before Dublin, to the ruin of so great an Army,
about which same time O Neal Relieves Coot in Londonderry, O Neal relieve^
Coot.
to the immediate loss of that Province, and the future scourge of his own
followers: Not long before likewise the Plague was brought by a Ship out of
Spain into Galloway, The Plagu^ in the Loyal Provinces of Ireland.
and besides the havoc it made in that Town, so dispersed it self over all the
Province of Connaught, that the Lord Marquess of Clanrickard being deprived,
through the Calamities that were upon that Town and Country both of Money and
Means to march withal, could not for many Months draw his Army together, either
to act any thing alone* or join with any other, for fear lest by that means the
Plague that had made such spoil while they were asunder, should Mow them down
now when they were all together.

This rout at Dublin, the Relief of Derry, and the Plague, might be thought
competent afflictions to be cast upon a people so impoverished, and a Kingdom
so wasted before; yet this suffices not, there are heavier losses yet to
follow, and a worse Pestilence to land shortly at Dublin, that will sweep away
their Men and Towns together. But here you may justly interrupt me, and say,
that though it must be confessed, that whatsoever befalls us in this Vale of
misery is to be attributed to the Hand of Heaven, or the permission at least of
the Divine Providence (into the Reasons of whose secret and hidden Counsels our
weak capacities are unable to search) yet nevertheless, those visible causes
whereby we draw misfortunes upon our selves, by such who through neglect of
their Duty, and disobedience to their Superiors, are apparently the Authors
thereof, ought not to pass unpunished; and therefore you see no reason why
those were not called to an account, that deserved it both by their cowardice,
and so shameful omission of their Duty, as could admit of no excuse.

But when you shall be pleased to reflect upon what I said before, The Marq. of
Ormond not able to punish the cowardice and treachery of the Parties.
that the Lord Lieutenant Commanded this Army, and indeed the Kingdom, but as
it were upon courtesy, all his Authority in effect consisting in the awing one
Faction with another, the best of which he found to be on so uncertain and
unsettled terms, that you will I doubt not when you reflect upon it easily
grant, that the Lord Lieutenant could not in prudence do an act that was likely
to give so great and general a distaste, as indeed to have proceeded against
Major General Purcell would have been to the Confederates, amongst whom he had
so many alliances and friends: and the running away of the rest was so
universal a fault, that it was hard to discover who deserved punishment most,
and harder to find a Court of War to censure them.

During this short residence at Kilkenny, The Marq. of Ormond recruits his
Forces.
his Excellency having taken Order with the Lord Inchiqueen to bring up what
Forces he could possibly make, and with the Commissioners, for the recruiting,
drawing together, and arming their dispersed Forces as soon as could be, to the
end they might be sent after him; he speeds away himself (in the Company only
of 20 or 30 Horse) toward Trim and Drogheda, as the places both nearest the
Enemies attempts, and likeliest to totter back, if not secured in time: At
Tecroghan (a House of Sir Luke Fitzgarretts) he makes a stay, till those
several Bodies that he then expected were come up; and upon notice of their
coming removes to Trim, where he meets with news of Jones his being before
Drogheda, who soon after, upon intelligence that the Lord Lieutenant was at
Trim, and supposing his Forces to be greater than indeed they were, drew off in
the night, and returned immediately to Dublin.

The next day his Excellency went through to Drogheda, Drogheda Garrisoned with
the flower of the Army.
where a party of the Scotch Horse and Foot, under the Command of the Lord of
Ards and the Lord Clanbrazill came up unto him; but whilst they were consulting
what to do, they received assurance of Cromwels landing with very considerable
Forces: Whereupon concluding that Town necessary to be kept, to entertain the
Enemy before, whilst they made up their Army, as they hoped to do very
considerable, and soon enough to come to the Relief of the place; of which if
they should fail, no question was made, but after the gaining of time (which
was then precious) they in the Town should be able to make Honorable
Conditions for themselves, whilst Cromwell is refreshing his own men in Dublin,
and reducing Iones's: There is put into Drogheda a Garrison of 2500 Foot, and
300 Horse, Sir Arthur Aston made Governor of Drogheda.
which was thought sufficient; and so having furnished it with Provisions, as
well as that short time would give them leave, his Excellency commits the
charge of that place to Sir Arthur Aston, as a person whose Experience,
Courage, and approved Fidelity, did worthily deserve the highest Trust. These
things thus ordered, Col. Daniel O Neal Governor of Trim, dispatched to treat
with Owen O Neal.
his Excellency returns to Trim, and from thence he dispatched away Colonel
Daniel O Neal, then Governor of that place, with a Commission to set on foot
the Treaty again with Owen O Neal if it were possible, and to endeavor the
reducing of the Vlster-Army, even upon any conditions; a person esteemed by all
best qualified for that employment, as well in regard of his singular ability,
and approved Fidelity to the King, as for the great Interest he was supposed to
have in his Uncle, who managed the business with that dexterity, Sir Richard
Barnwell and (...) Nicholas Plunkett sent to assist him, and conclude an
Agreement.
as he won his Uncle to hearken again unto an Agreement: whereupon Sir Richard
Barnewell and Sir Nicholas Plunkett are sent after, to make an absolute
conclusion with him; though by the way this may not be unworthy of observation,
that those persons who were formerly most opposite to this Agreement, were now
become the greatest sticklers to promote it with his Excellency, being grown
sensible of the imminent and approaching danger that now threatened them.

Tecroghan is the next Stage his Excellency removes unto: here he makes a
stand, as being the most ^^portune place to draw his Army together in, and
lying most convenient (after that was done) to Relieve Drogheda, or make any
other attempt upon the Enemy: Where, besides the remains of the Irish Army,
already somewhat recruited, there joined unto him a good Regiment of the Lord
Marquess Clanrickards of above 1000 Foot, together with 300 Horse; likewise
that party of the Scots before mentioned, Sir Thomas Armstrong and Colonel
Trevors, together with what Forces the Lord Inchiqueen could bring out of his
Precincts: these being got together, and daily additions being still expected,
to the making them up a more considerable Body than they were at Dubllin; the
Lord Lieutenant received several advices from Sir Arthur Aston, to precipitate
nothing; Drogheda besieged by Cromwell.
for he doubted not of finding Cromwell play a while, as certainly he had done,
had not Colonel Wall's Regiment, after the Enemy had been twice bravely
Repulsed, upon the unfortunate loss of their Colonel in the third Assault,
being so happily dismayed, as to listen (before they had need) unto the Enemy
offering them Quarter, and admitted them in upon these Terms; thereby betraying
both themselves and all their Fellow Soldiers to the slaughter. For Cromwell
being Master of the Town, and told by Jones, that he had now in his hands the
Flower of the Irish Army, The Mas^^^^ at Drogheda. Sir Arthur Aston, etc.
kili^, Sep. 16. 3000 Soldiers put to Sword.
gave order to have all that were in Arms put to the Sword: Where, besides the
gallant Governor, Sir Arthur Aston, Sir Edmund Varney, whose Namesake was
Standard Bearer to King Charles the first, Colonel Warren, Colonel Fleming, and
Colonel Brin, Lieutenant Colonel Finglasse, and Major Tempest, together with
many other excellent Officers and Gentlemen, there were Butchered near 3000
Soldiers, and those truly reputed the best that Kingdom afford^d.

This Massacre at Drogheda having lopt off a principal Limb of the
Lord-Lieutenants Army, The Marquess of Ormond endeavors to strengthen other
places.
and the loss of that Town letting the Enemy loose, caused his Excellency to
remove his Army from Castle-Iordan, down toward the Counties of Wexford and
Kilkenny, there not only to lie secure till General O Neal's Army came up unto
them (with whom now at last, he having been rejected by the Parliament and the
Commissioners, and whipped to Reason with adversity, there was an Agreement made,
and he submitted to the Kings Authority) but also ready to be drawn into either
Wexford or Kilkenny, as there should be occasion; for upon one of those places,
after the Enemies retreat from Drogheda to Dublin, it was concluded they would
tall on next. For which reason, his Excellency for many days Courts the Town of
Wexford to take in a Garrison, Sir Edmund Butler Governor of Wexford for the
K. It is besieged by Cromwell, surprised and stormed, 2000 put to the Sword.
Kilkenny having received one already; but they (affirming they were able to
defend their Town themselves) would never be brought to admit of one, till the
Enemy was at the Walls, and then tumultuarily Sir Edmund Butler with near 1500
men was received in as Governor; whom to reinforce, after the Enemy was now
set down before it, the Lord Lieutenant comes with new supplies within sight of
the Town, and had put them in, to the infallible preservation of the place, if
(before his Excellencies eyes) the Town had not been given up into the hands of
the most Cruel and Faithless Enemy, who Butchered there also, after they were
Admitted in, above 2000 more.

Several Troops of the Lord Inchiqueens Revolt.
There was nothing more remaining to be done, the Vlster Army being not yet come
up, (and several Troops of the Lord Inchiqueens being since the Siege of
Drogheda run away to the Enemy) but to put a Garrison into Ross^ which was sent
in under the Command of Luke T^^se, Luke (...) Ros^e (...) Ros^e surr^^dred.
with orders (for the place was judged scarce Tenable against powerful ^n
Enemy) to make Conditions when they saw themselves able to resist no longer; as
at last they did, when the breach was made, and the Enemy ready to give an
Assault, having Terms to march away with their Arms.

About Graigge and Thomas Town his Excellency hovered with his Horse, and the
small remainder of his Foot, until the coming up of the Vlter Army, under the
Command of Lieutenant General Farrell (the General himself lying then a dying:
Litu. Ge^. Farr^ll (...) of O^mond.
) This new Conjunction with Owen O Neal, and so great an accession of Forces,
brings the Lord Lieutenant into a condition not only of putting a stop upon
Cromwels hasty progress, but even of gaining ground upon him, as questionless
he would have done, had not another misfortune greater than any of the former,
intervened to frustrate all: which was this, the Lord Inchiqueen having (as I
said before) conditioned to have the ordering of those Garrisons and Forces
that he brought in with him to the Kings Obedience (...) wholly to himself, out
of desire (as is believed) to keep himself still considerable upon a bottom of
his own, would never hearken unto any Proposition of admitting a proportion of
Irish into any of his Towns, Kingsale only excepted, into which place (at the
importunity of Prince Rupert) he at last admitted some: Being confident that
the English Forces under his Command, having served under him so long upon
several scores, all or the most of the Officers whereof, being either creatures
of his own, or men obliged and indeared unto him upon a long account, would
never separate themselves from his Fortune, or abandon his Service. But his
Lordship (it seems) took wrong measures; for the most part of them being
steered wholly be self-Interest, and knowing the way already how for advantage
to serve against the King (whose business they saw so much declining, that no
more was likely to be got that way) whilst Cromwell was full of money and
success; Conspired together how to possess themselves of the Lord Inchiqueens
Person, Lord Inchiqueen 's Officers are treach^rour.
together with the Towns under his Command, that they might make a surrender of
all at once unto the Enemy. Youghall begins the dance, and taking occasion to
mutiny against the English Royalists under Wogan's Command) that were quartered
there, imprisoned and disarmed them all, and afterward stood upon their Guard.

Whilst the Lord Inchiqueen is by all gentle means endeavoring to reclaim back
this Town, several of his Officers combine to seize upon him (then lying secure
at Lieutenant General Barries house of Castle Lions) but they and their design
being discovered to his Lordship by one of their accomplices, were so far
prevented, They are discovered and taken, and no conditions Released.
as to be seized upon all themselves. Whereupon the Town of Youghall seeing
Cromwell yet at too great a distance, and the time of his coming into Munster
uncertain, offered to submit, upon assurance of Indemnity, the relief of the
Imprisoned Officers, and removal of the Royalists; which his Lordship either
wanting the means to compel them, or being willing with kindness and fait means
to win upon them, and keep them in Order, Assented unto. After which, having
visited his Garrisons, and believing all things so secure, as not to require
either his stay further there, or the bringing any proportion of the Irish into
those other Towns; Cromwell ba^^^ed by Colonel Wogan at Duncannon.
he returns unto his charge in the Army. And now Cromwell having newly received
an affront before Duncannon, through the Courage and Gallantry of Wogan, with
those English Gentlemen that were put in with him upon that occasion, was
retired back to Rosse, there (under the Protection of the Town) to make a
Floting-Bridge over the River, to the end, that by having a passage to the
other side, he might at his pleasure, either compel his Excellency to divide
his Army to attend upon his motions, and so give him an opportunity of setting
upon one part or other of it; or at least, if it kept together, of getting a
passage into Munster, where he expected to find a general Revolt of those
Garrisons under the Lord Inchiqueens Command, as it afterward happened.

The Lord Taafe was sent with a part of the Army to hinder the work; but what
through want of Powder (and indeed all sorts of Ammunition) which was now grown
exceeding scarce, extremity of soul weather, distempers amongst his men, and
other ill concurring accidents; he was not able to effect it. The
Lord Lieutenant (through Cromwels sudden retreating in the night from before
Duncannon having lost the opportunity of fighting him, as he was then resolved,
finding his Army cheerfully desiring the occasion) had nothing left him now to
do, but wait upon the Enemies motion, and endeavor to cut off his Provisions,
which the Country People (allured by the orderliness of his Soldiers, who had
money to pay for what they took, and Command it seems to do so) brought them in
as fast as could be; whilst his Excellency having no money to pay his Army, nor
indeed a competence of Bread to give them, was constrained to let them take
their sustenance where they could find it.

Cork, Youhall, and all the English Towns of Munster revolt.
During this intermission of Action, Cork, Youghall, and all the English Towns
of Munster (even through the incitation of those Officers that were but lately
released) being openly Revolted, and the Lord Broghall with some men landed in
those parts; very many of the Lord Inchiqueens party (both of Horse and Foot)
deserted the Lord Lieutenant, and ran daily over to the Enemy; insomuch, that
both the Commanders and Soldiers of the Irish (not without reason) grew very
jealous of the rest that remained behind, fearing that if ever they came to
Engage against the Enemy, they would turn upon them, and betray them: there
wanted not diverse also (though doubtless very unjustly) that extended their
jealousies unto the Lord Inchiqueen himself, Lord Inchiqueen suspected, accused
by the Marq. of Antrim.
grounding their accusations upon his Lordships not punishing the Conspirators,
when he had them in his Power, upon so fair a warning, and just an occasion, as
was then given him; his not putting Irish into his Garrisons; upon his Wife,
his Family, Plate, and Goods being sent him safely out of Cork into the Irish
Quarters; upon his not consenting to the dismounting and disarming the rest of
his men, when some of the Commissioners pressed the doing of it; upon his
delivering his advice in Council (as they heard) for his Excellencies coming to
Conditions with Cromwell, and making this an Argument for it, That his men would
fight no longer; and lastly, upon an impertinent accusation without Head or
Tail (as appeared when he came to be examined in the business) brought against
him by the Marquess of Antrim, for holding correspondence, and having made
Conditions underhand with the Enemy.

Upon these Foundations, and such as these, did many of the Irish represent
unto the Lord Lieutenant the necessity of discharging the Lord Inchiqueen of
his Command, and securing his person; which his Excellency being more tender of
the Kings Honor and his own, than upon bare surmises and suspicions to deal in
that manner with a person that had but lately deserved so well both of the King
and him, would not be brought unto; choosing rather to run any adventure, than
to be guilty of breach of Conditions with him; which he must needs have been,
if before a Conviction of apparent Treachery, he should upon the score of the
Lord Inchiqueen's over-sights, or the uncertain jealousies of the Irish, have
condescended unto either of the things proposed.

This Temper and Justice in the Lord Lieutenant (in not suffering himself to be
led by the clamors and importunity of the people and Soldiers) involves him
also at last under their displeasure and mistrust; so that out of want of
confidence in their Chief Commanders, and out of diffidence in one another, the
Army was now fallen into a very unfit condition of hazarding a battle with the
Enemy, if an occasion should offer it self: and to make it worse, the Scots
that were there (being tired out with the necessities the whole Army suffered,
and receiving news of the Enemies prevalence in their Country) desired leave to
return into the North; which after great importunity at last being granted
them, they immediately withdrew their Forces, and hasted homewards; where they
were no sooner come, and Sir George Monro joined with them, but they received
so sore a blow from Coote, with so much loss and dispersion of their men, that
they were never able to make Head in Vlster after.

Cromwell now finding the Army so much weakened by the desertion of so many of
the Lord Inchiqueens men, and the departure of the Scots, and likewise knowing
that it was in such disorder through the distrust and animosities that were
amongst them, so that in reason he was like to have much the advantage if they
should fight him; adventures over his Bridge at Rosse, into the County of
Kilkenny, where by facing the Lord Lieutenants Army, and moving after it up and
down* he amazed the Irish; whilst Jones his Lieutenant General, with parties,
Carrick taken by Lieu. Genesis Jones.
took in the Castles of the Country, and had Carrick given into his hands
wretchedly by Martyn that Commanded there: Upon notice whereof Cromwell hastens
thither, to pass his Army over into Munster, which was now his business; for
notwithstanding his purse to buy provisions of the Country, and his Ships that
wherever he went waited continually upon him, his Army through the
unseasonableness of the weather, and want of Quarters, was so much harassed and
wasted, many of his men falling sick and dying daily, that it he did not hasten
to his Winter Quarters, he would in probability have perished without a blow;
which nevertheless to make sure work, the Lord Lieutenant (whose Army also was
qui^^tired out with wants, sufferings, and continual marches) nearing that he
was gone toward Carrick, intended to bestow upon him, before necessity forced
him to disperse his men; and to that end his Excellency marched speedily after
the Enemy, The Marq. of Ormond de^^^^ to sight Cromwell.
with design to s^t on him, whist he was either Engaged before Car^ick, or
else incumb^^^d at some other Pass upon the River: but after all this
diligence, when his Excellency came near the Town, he then learnt that the
place was lost before, and that Cromwell leaving a competent Garrison therein,
had only past his Army over, and was gone toward Waterford; which Town during
Cromwels Residence a^ Rosse, through the persuasion (as it is said) of Geoffry
Baron and Hugh Rochford, had underhand begun a treaty with him for the delivery
of the Town unto him; which Treaty only stuck upon the free exercise of their
Religion and the Churches, denied unto them by Cromwell.

The knowledge of this, caused the Lord Lieutenant now to hasten thither, with
no small danger to his person, to press them to admit of a Garrison; which
being a long time denied, and the Lord Castlehaven, with diverse others that his
Excellency propounded, being utterly rejected by them; yet at last they were
content to admit of Farrell and the Vlster-men, who accordingly were sent
immediately unto them. Lieu. General Farrel made Governor of Waterford.
After Farrells admittance, he upon notice of the Enemies motion that way,
fearing some commotion in the Town, and thinking himself not strong enough to
resist the Enemy without, and master them within; writes unto his Excellency
for a supply of men; and these his Excellency (seeing Cromwell so unexpectedly
got over into Munster, through the Treachery of the Garrison of Carrick)
intends now to conduct himself out of hand into Waterford, before which the
Enemy was supposed to be: thereupon, some Principal Officers of the Army
desired leave that they might in the interim attempt the re-gaining of Carrick;
against whom his Excellency objecting the want of materials necessary for such
an enterprise, was assured they had enough to serve their turn for that work;
yea, and some of them positively undertook the taking of the place that night.
Wherefore leaving them to their business, his Lordship bends his course for
Waterford, Cromwell attempting Waterford, in vain departs.
where he arrived when it was late; upon notice whereof, Cromwell despairing of
doing any good upon that Town, and finding many of his men fall sick and dye of
the Flux, which then raged amongst them, draws off in the night, and hastens
toward his Winter Quarters at Cork and Youghall; in which march, as he gained
Dungarvan, so he lo^^ Jones his Lieutenant General. Col. Jones dies of the Flux.


During the Lord-Lieutenants absence, the Army at Carrick assaults the place,
the Foot falling on with extraordinary gallantry and resolution, The Kings
Forces Assault Carrick; but depart with loss.
where after the loss of many of them, they failed of carrying the place only
for want of a few Pickaxes and Spades, which being called for, were no where to
be found; which necessitated the poor Foot, after having done so handsomely,
and stood under the Walls some hours, to quit the business and draw off; when
extreme want of Food (they having eaten nothing almost for two days) enforced
them to march away toward Clonmell; all the Country betwixt Carrick and
Kilkenny being totally spoiled already. This Carrick was gained and now
defended by Colonel Reynolds.

The removal of the Army hence, without sending notice of it to the
Lord Lieutenant, had like to have put his Excellency into the Enemies hands:
for he making full account of the regaining of Carrick, upon the former
assurance that was given him, was upon his way directly thither (where the
Enemy had 300 Horse, and he not 40 in his Company) when Colonel Milo Power by
good fortune found him out, and told him of the ill success of the Enterprise,
and the motion of the Army thence: whereupon he altered his course another way.
And then considering that the Enemy was now retired into his Garrisons, Both
Armies retire to their Winter Quarters.
that the weather was bitter and unfit for action, the Winter being now come
on, or if it were not so, that he had neither Meat, nor Money wherewith to keep
his men any longer together; having since the Revolt of Munster (which deprived
him of the greatest share of his Contributions and Provisions) been a long time
already forced to live upon the spoil of the rest of the Country; he concluded
upon dispersing his Army into Quarters also, which (because the Principal Towns
refused to admit them in) he was fain to scatter over all the Kingdom. The
greatest part of the Vlster-Forces were sent into their own Province, there to
choose a new General, according as their conditions allowed them, for Owen O
Neal was dead; Genesis Owen O Neal dies. the Ulster- Forces sent into their own
Province. Luke Taafe sent into Connaght, Lord Inchiqueen goes to Clare, Lord
Dillon into Mead. Maj General Hugh O Neal made Govern^ur of Clonmel for the
King. Kilkenny garrisoned for the King.
and Luke Taafe with his men were sent back into Connaght to the Lord of
Clanrickard: The Lord Inchiqueen with the remainder of such as belonged unto
him, went over into the County of Clare; the Lord Dillon with his into Mead,
and toward Athlone; all the rest were scattered several ways, only
Major General Hugh O Neal was admitted with about 1600 Vlster-men into Clonmell
as Governor; and Kilkenny received also a competent Garrison, to secure them
against so ill Neighbors as both Rosse and Carrick were.

Here you may behold a summary of what past in the field, since the Army first
set forth, until their going to their Winter Quarters; in all which time, how
ill soever the success has been, nothing can with any color of reason be laid
to the Lord-Lieutenants charge, except the not punishing those many Failings,
Treacheries, and Disorders that were committed during this Summers Expedition:
Yet as to the disobedience and neglects in the Siege of Dublin, I gave you
Reasons why that was past over before; and those that were committed since,
were for the most part by men of that condition and interest, that it was
neither safe nor fit (all things considered) to call them to an account. As for
Treacheries, most of the Authors of them took care to secure themselves, and in
time get out of reach; only Crosby that betrayed Kingsale, Crosby betrayeth
Kingsale; he is Reprieved and pardoned.
after he was designed to dye by the Lord Lieutenant, upon the Lord Inchiqueens
coming to Town, was (I know not for what considerations) reprieved and saved.
The want of money to pay the Soldiers, and the exigences they were for the
most part in, after the mischance at Dublin, did so much Authorize their
disorders in the Country, that if they had not been past by and connived at,
there had been no means of keeping them together.

So that I have many reasons to believe, that notwithstanding the defeat at
Dublin, and success upon Drogheda, Cromwell with all his great Army, his Fleet,
and store of Money, had been lost and sunk to nothing, if the Castles of
Wexford and Carrick had not been so foully given up; nay, and after that too,
if those Towns and Forces in Munster had not so treacherously Revolted.

Thus did the knavery and malice of a few, steal away the Hearts of the
generality of that undiscerning simple people from the Lord Lieutenant, few of
them being able to judge at all of the Prudence and Integrity of his Conduct;
or to consider that the Army that was in the Field the foregoing Summer, would
have required four times the Contribution that was raised, without leaving any
surplus, The Marq. of Ormond offers to morgage his Estate for the s^pport of
the A^my.
either to be hoarded up or sent beyond Seas: From which his Excellency was so
far, that on the other side, he frequently offered to engage at a very low
rate, all that remained Unmorgaged of his Princely Estate, for the support of
the Army.

The Surrender of Dublin truly had been made unto the people of Ireland by the
arts of those that were at that time in Government amongst them, a most odious
thing; though those very persons knew well enough, it was themselves and not
the Lord Lieutenant, that was in the fault, by twice foully violating their
Public Faith with him: First, in breaking a Peace made, and solemnly published
both at Dublin and Kilkenny (the Respective seats of the Kings Lieutenant, and
the Council of the Confederates) and in seconding that Act (after having
imprisoned the Lord Muskery, Sir Robert Talbott, Sir Lucas Dillon, Master
Brown, Master Belings, and the rest of their Supreme Council, that had made the
Peace, and still stood honestly to what they had done) with bringing their
Armies before Dublin, where having caused the burning and destruction of those
quarters* the Town it self must have been lost unto them, it upon overture of a
Treaty with the Parliament they had not sent Men and Supplies to rescue it. And
next, in the breach of that solemn Engagement made between them and the
Marquess of Clanrickard, as soon as (upon belief of their resolution to return
unto their Duty) the Treaty was broke off, and the Forces of the Parliament
sent home again. Could it be expected that after two such acts as these, any
wise man would trust or treat with the Irish any more, whilst the Government
was still in the same men's hands? who after all this, wrought the whole
Assembly to declare they would never have any Protestant Governor more, and
namely not the Lord Lieutenant; and who were not ashamed at the same time, both
to annul the Peace, and yet acknowledge that the forementioned Gentlemen that
had been makers of it, and suffered in justification of it, had neither
exceeded their instructions, nor done any thing misbecoming honest men.

His Excellency was now at Kilkenny, He is at Kilkenny.
where having in vain endeavored to qualify the universal discontents, and
observing how fast (notwithstanding the admonitory Declaration of all the
Bishops from Clonmacnosse to the contrary) the people being alienated with the
ravaging and disorder of their own Armies, and allured with the successes and
smooth invitations of Cromwell, run headlong in to him for Protection, and under
Contribution; as also, how great numbers of the Irish Soldiers, The Irish
Soldiers, some frighted with the Plague, others in necessity, revolt to
Cromwell.
some frighted with the Plague, which now began to spread into the other
Provinces of the Kingdom; and others for want of livelihood, as having neither
meat nor pay, flockt in unto the Enemy: He went into Connaght to confer about
carrying on of the public business, and the remedy of those disorders, with
the Marquess of Clanrickard, at his Castle of Portumna, about the end of
Christmas; who being a person of that eminent Merit toward our King and
Nation, and deserving so much Honor from all honest men, I must, I believe, do
a thing very displeasing to you, not to give you a due Character of him here.

Upon his coming to Portumna, the Lord Lieutenant meets with Sir George Monro,
who was posted thither out of the North, to make some Proposals in order to the
reduction of Vlster to his Excellency and the Lord Clanrickard (who had the
Summer before assisted him toward his Vlster Expedition, The Marq. of
Clanrickard Character.
with a Regiment of Foot, 100 Horse, and 1000 pounds in money, out of the
Province of Counaght) and in case those overtures of his were not approved of,
to demand his Pass, that he might leave the Kingdom: but what he propounded was
so plausible, that in case Money and Arms could be had in time, and in
proportion to what he demanded (as the infection of Galloway, out of which Town
chiefly both were to be had, made it very difficult) they judged it a very
likely Expedition: Whereupon the Lord ( Clanrickard, desirous to keep so able a
Commander as Sir George in the Kingdom, He supplies Sir George Monro with money.
furnishes him with what Money he could at the present, and sends him
Northwards to lay and prepare the business before; promising to do his
uttermost endeavors to procure him those supplies of Money, Ammunition, and
Arms, by the time appointed; as also to bring his Army up as far as Sligo,
there to countenance Sir George in his undertakings, and be ready for any fair
occasion that should present it self for the mastering of the Country.

Marq. of Ormond at Kilkenny endeavoring with the Lord Clanrickard to provi^^
an Army against next spring.
After four or fiv^ days stay at the most, his Excellency took his leave, and
hastened toward Kilkenny, obliging the Lord Clanrickard to come after him, to
be present at a meeting he had appointed there, for the procuring of a good
understanding between the Clergy, the Commissioners, and himself, and for
taking the best order they could, for the raising and maintaining an Army
against the next Spring: But though they met, nothing at that time could be
done or agreed upon; wherefore the Lord Clanrickard returns into Connaght, to
take order for his Northern Exp^dition; which out of the great difficulties of
getting his men together, arising out of the universal distractions that were
then in the Kingdom, the hard Season of the year, the Pestilence, the want of
Moneys and Provisions, he could not possibly go through with against February,
which was the time designed; nor even then when he did, without very great
necessities and inconveniences to himself and his Army; though that Noble
Person declined no difficulty, nor spared no Charge in his Majesty's Service.

This failing in point of time, and a great part of the Moneys promised him
(which nevertheless as things stood, no man's industry could have remedied) Sir
George Monro complained very much of, affirming, that their opportunity was
lost thereby, especially, now they being come, the Army was able to move no
further through extreme want of Provision (kept from them by foul and contrary
weather) for which, and the residue of the Money, together with hopes of an
accord between the Lord Lieutenant and the Commissioners, some days were spent
in expectation; but nothing in the end, except only a Letter from the Lord
Ormond summoning the Lord Clanrickard suddenly away; his Lordship was forced
to leave his Army and the Northern business to the hazard, and return back to
meet the Lord Lieutenant and the Commissioners at Loghreogh: W^ereupon Sir
George Monro believing now the Lord Lieutenant would leave the Kingdom, seeing
the divisions amongst the Irish grew daily greater, and giving all for lost
(having received a defeat by Sir Charles Coot, Sir Charles Coote defeats the
Iri^^, and takes the Earl of Claneboys. Sir Geo: Monro delivers Eniskillin to
the Enemy.
where the Earl of Claneboys was taken Prisoner, and Colonel Henderson killed,
with some 800 Private Soldiers) and lastly, finding the impatience of his own
party to treat with the Enemy, (as he had often before publicly declared he
would) retires himself to Eniskillin; and having made Conditions for himself,
the remainder of his Party, and his Officers that were in Prison, gave up that
place to the Enemy, and departed the Kingdom. Very soon after whose retirement,
the Lord Clanrickard's Army through extremity of want was forced to return from
Sligo back toward the County of Galloway.

Where I will leave it, and come back to his Excellency, who being left by the
Lord Clanrickard lately in Kilkenny, Capt. Tickle Executed for designing to
betray Kilkenny.
after having caused Captain Tickle to be Executed for a design he had of
betraying that Town to Cromwell; was by the breach growing daily wider between
him and the Kingdom, and through the increase of the Sickness now come thither,
at the joint request of the Commissioners and Officers, induced to remove
toward Limerick; Marq. of Ormond at Limerick, departs in di^^ast to Clare.

Cromwels Army takes the Field.


where being negligently received, without the accustomed respect used to the
Kings Lieutenant, he after a short stay departed thence into the County of
Clare. Immediately thereupon, the Enemy having refreshed his men, and increased
his Army with a great accession of old Soldiers that had formerly served under
the Lord Inchiqueen and the Lord Lieutenant, takes the field, and falls a
Summoning Castles, and bringing the Country under Contribution; wherein he had
a general success, most of the Castles surrendering upon appearance of a party
of Horse; except Kiltenan, which gave him some resistance.

His Excellencies Army, The Kings Army dispersed.
through the forementioned obstinacy and disobedience of the Towns against
receiving Garrisons, was so far dispersed, that there was no means of drawing
them together; neither, if that were done, of drawing them in a Body; for the
Country was destroyed and wast, so that it could not supply him: besides,
during these disagreements between the Lord Lieutenant, the Clergy, and the
Commissioners, there were few or none of the Irish Soldiers (if there had been
Provisions for them) that would obey his Excellencies Orders. Of all which
Cromwell was well aware, and therefore went securely, and with confidence to
work, carrying all before him. Amongst other of his successes, Ballisanon sold
to Cromwell.

Cahir- Castle given him.


Ballisanon was sold unto him, and Cahir Castle (then the dwelling house of
Master Matthews, a young youth, and half Brother to the Lord Lieutenant) given
him, contrary to those strict orders left by his Excellency with Master
Matthews for the keeping of it; who was so conscious of his own misdoing in the
Act, that he refused upon several summons and invitations to appear before his
Lordship, and stayed s^^ll in the Enemies quarters to secure himself from his
Excellencies indignation. The affairs in Ireland (...). Marq. of Ormonds (...).
But nevertheless, this act of Master Matthews is made a ground of new
sus^^^^ns, and fresh clamours against his Lordship himself by the Irish, who
all this while run on in their extravagancies, intent only upon their disputes
in hand, as if there were no such man as Cromwell in the Kingdom; insomuch, that
seeing so many several meetings assigned, and so much time spent to so little
purpose, his Excellency concludes that those people would never be brought into
order by him, and therefore resolves to withdraw himself from the Government,
if not to depart the Kingdom, and to commit the management of all unto the
Marquess of Clanrickard; He withdraws, leaving the Marq. Clanrickard to Govern
that Kingdom.
which was the reason of his Lordships being sent for back again from Sligo.

The Enemy in the mean time having the Castles of Gowran and Laghlin, together
with the Officers Commanding in them, delivered into his hands by the
Common-Souldiers, sets at last upon Kilkenny; whence (a while before) the Earl
of Castlehaven (who was now left with chief Command in Lemster) was drawn out
with his Forces, by reason the Sickness raged so, leaving Sir Walter Butler and
Major Walsh, with about 50 Horse, and some 400 Foot in the place, where a
breach being made, and the Enemy Assaulting, they were bravely Repulsed,
leaving 600 Arms behind them; after which check, they resolved to march off,
and are sending their Artillery away silently before, whilst the Townsmen
convey a Drummer privately over the Wall, and upon I know not what accord,
Kilkenny taken.
let the Enemy in, unknown to the Soldiers, who were then forced to retire to
the Castle, and make their Terms, which being granted them, they march away.

Kilkenny being gained by him, Cromwell at Cashel.
let us leave Cromwell at Cashel for a while amongst his Committee Men, and
return into Connaght, where the Clergy and Commissioners seeing that the Lord
Clanrickard having refused to take the Government upon him, The Lord
Clanrickard refuses to take upon him the Government.
was resolved in case they continued disobedient unto the Lord Lieutenant (lest
the Kings Authority should be exposed to further disobedience and contempt) to
leave the Kingdom together with his Excellency: and considering what a certain
Ruin their departure would be unto them all, are now courting the
Lord Lieutenant to stay, The Marq. of Ormond courted to continue it.
and offer to come to composition with him; who demands assurance from them,
that the Respective Towns of Limerick and Galloway shall receive sufficient
Garrisons, and that themselves with all the Soldiers and people shall
hereafter readily obey him; which they undertake unto him, upon condition that
all the English whatsoever (under his Excellencies Command) might be disbanded
and sent away; that the Bishops of the Kingdom might have a share in Council,
and the management of things; that the Receiver-General (which was Sir George
Hamilton, Brother-in-law to the Lord Lieutenant, to which on certain conditions
he agrees.
a person of great parts, Honor, and Merit) might give in his accounts; all
which his Excellency, out of his great desire to satisfy and unite the people,
thereby to preserve the Country and the Kings Interest (if it were possible) at
last assents unto

This Agreement being made, the English were accordingly (to free the Irish of
their Jealousies, who either were or would seem to be equally suspicious of the
Royalists, as of those that had served the Parliament before) disbanded; and
since there was no further employment for them, The English under Ormond
disbanded and take Conditions.
nor means of getting away by Sea, they had leave to make their Conditions with
Cromwell, to pass through his quarters out of the Kingdom: which being granted
by him all, all the small remainder of the Lord Inchiqueens men (except a few
that Colonel Buller was to carry for Scilly) went under the conduct of Colonel
John Daniel into the Enemies quarter; so did the Lord Ards, and after him Sir
Thomas Armstrong, with whom went also Master Daniel O Neal, upon the score of
carrying a Regiment into Spain. There remained none behind that was permitted
to bear any charge, but Lieutenant Colonel Treswell, at the Lord Ormonds
particular instance, to Command his Guards of Horie; only John Digby, Colonel
Henry Warren, and Colonel Hugh Butler said to wait upon his Excellencies
person, and bear him company in his a^^entures: Colonel Trevor rendered himself
likewise upon the same account.

But before I go on, I must not omit to tell you, how Dean Boil, who was sent
to treat with Cromwell for the English that were disbanded, being offered it (as
he says) by Cromwell, and imagining (as himself affirms) to do a service to the
Lord Lieutenant and the Lord Inchiqueen in it, adventured of his own head to
take Passes from him, for their departure out of the Kingdom; whereof, as soon
as ever Dean Boil was gone, he makes use, to debauch the Irish Garrisons to
take Conditions from him, assuring them the Lord Lieutenant had received his
Pass to depart the Kingdom; though the Passes were absolutely without his
Lordships privity or license accepted, and with indignation resented; but in
the mean time Emer Mac Mahon Bishop of Cloghor, Emer Mac Mahon Bp. of Cloghor,
made General of the Ulster- Army.
who had been chosen General of the Vlster-Army, having a good while since
received his Commission from the Lord Lieutenant, was now gathering together
his Army, which in a short time after he had made up to be about 6000 men,
wherewith having taken several little Castles in his way, he was marched up
into the Claneboyes, and become Master of the field.

Cromwell repulsed and worsted at Clonmel, by Maj. General Hugh O Neal Governor
thereof.
The next enterprise Cromwell went in hand with, was to take Clonmell which was
kept by Major General Hugh O Neal, who behaved himself so discreetly and
gallantly in defending it, that Cromwell lost near upon 2500 men before it; and
had notwithstanding gone away without it, if they within had had store of
Powder; but their small proportion being spent, the Governor with his
Soldiers was fain to go out of the Town on the other side of the River, by
night, toward Waterford, and leave the Townsmen to make Conditions for
themselves; which they did the next morning, the Enemy not knowing but the
Garrison was still in Town, Clonmel surrendered to Cromwell.
till the Conditions were signed. Thus the loss of this place, and several
other Garrisons, for want of Ammunition, was another effect of the disobedience
of the Towns; insomuch, that had it not been for a little Magazine that the
Lord Clanrickard had providently made beforehand, and wherewith (since the loss
of Drogbeda) his Excellencies Army, the Scots, the Vlsters, and most of the
Garrisons were furnished; all might have gone to an irrecoverable ruin, whilst
the Walled-Towns (like Free-States) looked on as unconcerned, denying to afford
it to them.

David Roch defeated by the L. Broghall. The Bp of Rosse and two other Priests
hanged.
About the time of the Siege of Clonmel, David Roch having raised above 2000 men
in the Counties of Cork and Kerry, and beginning to make head with them,
received a small brush from the Lord Broghall, which only dispersed his men
for a few days, his loss being not considerable for any thing but the Bishop of
Rosse, who being taken was hanged with two other Priests by Cromwell, for being
found in Arms (as he said) against the States of England.

Soon after the gaining of Clonmel, Cromwell goes for England, Ireton chief
Commander in his place.
Cromwell upon Letters out of England inviting him thither; went to Sea, and
leaves Ireton in chief Command behind him, to subdue the rest of that miserable
wasted Kingdom, whilst himself went about the Conquest of new Empires, more
worthy of his presence. Here I cannot but observe, that of all those thousands
that either came with him thither, or were sent after, there are now few tens
surviving, either to reap the benefit, or report the stories of their
Victories; his Army upon his departure being sunk to a very inconsiderable
number, especially in Foot; and near three parts of those, consisting of either
Irish, Ione's, or the Lord Inchiqueen's men, who only are able to undergo the
woeful incommodities of that Country, now groaning under a universal Plague,
Famine, and Desolation, to that degree, that if they had known but half the
miseries that expect them there, An account of the Irish affairs.
I am confident that no Threats nor Flatteries could have persuaded men out of
England thither, in hopes of reaping the fruits of their fellows labors, in
that destroyed Kingdom. Which, as low as it is brought, may chance to cost
Cromwell a second Expedition, and another Army, and yet go without it.

For they have Waterford, Galloway, and Limerick, three of the strongest and
most considerable Towns of the Kingdom still untaken; any of which, if they be
well Garrisoned (as questionless now they are) will be near a Summers work to
reduce: The Forts of Duncannon and Sligo, the Castles of Caterlo, Athlone,
Charlemont and Neanagh, are not easy purchases: the Province of Connaght is
still preserved entire by the Lord Clanrickard, who will be able to bring 4000
men of his own into the field, now that Galloway and his Country is somewhat
cleared from the infection of the Plague; which begins to rage greatly in the
Enemies quarters, as Cork, Youghall, Wexford, and Dublin it self; Kilkenny,
Clonmel, with several places thereabouts being left desolate with it. The
County of Clare in Munster brought unto the Lord Lieutenant at a Rendezvouze at
the same time above 2000 men, wherewith his Excellency (being invited by the
Magistrates) was ready to march into Limerick to Garrison that place, and to
make it his residence.

What Forces the Irish had in Vlster and toward Kerry, I have already told
you, as likewise what Connaght and the County of Clare afforded: I must add
that Hugh Mac Phelim had in Wi^klow, and toward Wexford, hard upon 2000 men;
and at Waterford, General Preston and Hugh O Neal had little less: to conclude,
besides all this, the Lord Castlehaven, the Lord Dillon, and the Bishop of
Drummore, made account they should draw together a considerable Body in Mead,
and the rest of Leimster to join with the Marquess of Clanrickard toward the
relief of Tecroghan, then besieged by Colonel Reynolds. Thus you may see that
(provided they be united amongst themselves, and that means can be found of
keeping them in bodies together) there are men enough in Arms yet to dispute
the business with an Enemy that is not half their number, and whose quarters
are pestered likewise with the Plague and Famine, as well as theirs; especially
these having such strengths and fastnesses still in their hands, as are almost
inaccessible to Cromwels Soldiers. Who after having mastered the greatest part
of Munster and Leimster, their supplies from England coming in but slowly, have
made bold at last with the people they flattered with before, and altered their
manner of proceedings, taking from them by force what they pleased, and
violating their protections given; making not nice to tell them, they suffered
them to possess their Estates but during pleasure, and till they could have
Planters to put into their rooms: by which kind of clear dealing, they have so
lost and made desperate the Natives, that lamenting their former too ready
compliance with the Enemy, they now called for the Lord Lieutenant again, and
taking Arms in their hand, began to rise in all quarters of the Kingdom, so
that it is impossible for a greater power than Ireton has there to attend to
the suppression of them all.

This is the perfect account of the Irish affairs, whereby the first Trophies
of the English Commonwealth raised themselves to greater Achievements, by a
chain of successes; but Winter growing on, their Army was put into
Winter Quarters, Cromwell himself to that purpose taking up Youghall lately,
with Cork (wherein were the Lord Inchiqueens Lady and Family) revolted by the
treachery of the Colonels Gilford, Warren, and Townsend: Col. Wogan defeated
and taken prisoner. Prince Rupert departs Kingsale with his Fleet, leaving
three empty ships behind him. Oct. 24.
(Colonel Wogan newly defeated in his attempt in Passage-Fort, and then taken
prisoner by Colonel Zanchy) whereupon Prince Rupert with the Constant
Reformation, the Convertine, wherein was Prince Maurice, the Swallow where was
Sir John Mien, and some other Sips, set sail from Kingsale, where he had
continued Blockt up most part of the last Summer by Admiral Popham, and betook
themselves to the Narrow Seas, now that the Parliament had most of that Coast
in their possession, and sailed for France. In the mean while Captain Young had
fired the Antilope (one of the Kings ships) at Helvoet-sluce in Holland, and
the Guinny-Frigot was mastered and taken near Scilly, the Rendezvouze and
Harbor of his Majesty's Fleet, that did very much hinder and obstruct the
Trade at Sea, wherein his Majesty's Rebels were now principally concerned; of
which we shall have yet further occasion to speak in the ensuing year.

The Parliament had in June filled up the Benches at Westminster. Ask from
Clerk of the Crown (one of their Beagles at the High Court of Justice) was made
one of the Justices of the Upper (so was the Kings) Bench newly called; and
Broughton (a Clerk to the same Court) had his former Office. Puliston and
Warberton in the Common Pleas, to whom in the place of Judge Phesant, Sergeant
Atkins was added: Colonel Rigby and Thorpe were made Barons of the Exchequer;
Col. Morris and Cornet Blackborne Executed at York, Aug.
by the last of whom, Colonel Morris (the late noble Governor of Pomfret) and
Cornet Blackborne, were Condemned and Executed at York, on the 18 day of
August; at which Sessions Thorpe likewise in his Charge to the Grand Jury
magnified the late Actions of the Parliament, and justified their Authority,
and endeavored to show its consonancy to the Laws: which fine Oration is yet
extant in Print. About this time, after much debate by these Judges, and at the
instance of the Army, the Parliament passed the Act commonly called the Five
Pound Act, whereby Debtors in Prison, upon their Oath that they were not worth
five pound, were discharged; by Virtue whereof, most of the Goals in England
were emptied, and room made for Cavaliers and Royalists; of which party Sir
Robert Heath, Lord Chief-Iustice Heath dies.
the Noble and most Loyal Lord Chief Justice of England (being an excepted
person by the Parliament) died at Caen in Normandy, about the end of August;
and Sir Kenelm Digby and Master Walter Mountague were ordered to depart the
Kingdom, Sir Kenelm Digby and Mr. Walter Mountague ordered to depart the
Kingdom Foreign Princes, how affected.
as not being within any of the qualifications for Delinquents Composition.

Thus stood things at home, in a Commanding and Authoritative posture: we will
see next how they fadge abroad; and first, the Scot their next Neighbors
having an Army moving up and down in the North of that Kingdom, to suppress the
Montrossian Party, which appeared in the Isles of Orkney [the Marquess then
bestirring himself in the Court of the Duke of Holstein for supplies, and ready
to Embarque, having sent a forerunning Declaration, The Marq. of Montross his
Declaration.
wherein he recited the greatness of those condescentions to, and that
confidence his late Majesty had of them, when he put himself into their Hands
at Newark; both which some wicked persons of that Nation had Traitorously
abused, even to the Murder of that blessed Prince, and thereafter would impose
Conditions and Limitations to their present Sovereign; and desired all good and
honest Subjects who had been misled, to appear with him to the vindication of
those injuries, as well as reproach of the Scotch Nation, etc.] and other
Forces quartering about Edenborough, had Decreed that no Provision whatsoever
should he carried into England, and showed an absolute averseness to any
further Treaty or Correspondence with the English; but had dispatched away the
Lord of Windram, one Master Libberton, to the King, who after his arrival at
Zeland, sailed to the King at Iersey, with the only Conditions of taking the
National-Covenant, and renouncing of Montross and other Royalists of that
Nation. For in the beginning of September, the King was arrived there with His
Brother the Duke of York in company with Sir George Carteret the Governor, and
other his Nobles and Confident Followers, having before his departure designed
some of his Lords as Ambassadors to several Princes.

The French also had prohibited the Importation of Cloth into France (in a
proud revenge and quittal whereof, The French (...) the importation of cloth.

The States of Holland d^^y Audi^^^^ to Strickland the Stat^^ of Englands
(...). The Spaniard pr^^ibits his Sub^^^s to se^ve our King at ^ea

The Gallantry of t^^ Emperor Russia.


the Parliament forbad the Importation of French-wines) and the States General
of the United Provinces had denied Audience to Walter Strickland their new
Resident, after several instances; only the Spaniard (who had lately before
acknowledged the same Provinces for a Free State) began to wind about, and to
insinuate a Compaliance with the English One, as imagining it no way dangerous,
but advantageous to his Interest and Stale Ambition of Universal Sovereignty,
as Campanella had designed it. For in tendency thereunto, he prohibited his
Subjects in Flanders to serve the King at Sea, his Ports being before open to
such Vessels that served the King, and were Manned with Flemings for the most
part, and did also under^tand hold Intelligence with this State. But the
Emperor of Russia no sooner heard of the Kings Death, but he immediately
Commanded all the English to depart his Dominions, and was hardly persuaded
(having first secured their Goods) to give them leave to stay a while in
Archangel, his only Port of Trade, whither from his Court and City of Musco
he had driven them. He had proffered to the Lord Culpeper (His Majesty's
Ambassador) to have given him all the English Estates; but he declining it, and
telling the Emperor the King conceived very well of those His Subjects, He
lends the King of England 20000 l.
he very frankly lent the King 20000 l. with a protestation of his further good
will, if he had not been so greatly engaged in a War at home. The Dane, the
Swede, and the Pole knew not what to make of our New Lords, and so let them
alone: the Portugal's actions Declared Him.

Several Affronts were likewise given them under their very Noses: Presbyterian
Ministers decline t^^ Parliament.
the London Presbyterian Ministers would not Officiate, neither at their Fasts
nor Thanksgivings; for which Contempts, several of them were brought before
their Committees, and after severe reprehension and warning dismissed, as
namely Master Love. Master Ienkins, and Master Ash: The Level^rs discontented.
And the Levellers began to make new broils, the Garrison of Oxford, of Colonel
Ingoldsby's Regiment, mutining, and securing their Officers; while Lilburn and
his Associates vex them in print, by a new Pamphlet called the Apprentices
Outcry.

The Mutineers were suppressed in a manner by themselves, and two of them shot
to Death: New commotions by the Levelers.
Lilburn having been kept a long while before Prisoner in the Tower, was now
brought to his Trial at Guild hall, by a Commission of Oyer and Termier,
directed to the new Lord-Commissioner Keeble, Justice Iermin, and others; where
after a confident defense of himself, reading of several Statutes, and thumming
of Magna Charta, and a hundred Slurs upon the Court, he was acquitted by his
Jury, John Lilburn chosen a Common-Council-man for London, but disabled by the
Parliament.
and not long after chosen a Common-Council-man for the City; though the
Parliament (by Vote afterward) disallowed it, and made him incapable of any
Office: And finally, that I may have done with this Trouble-world, not long
after Sentenced him to Banishment, which was procured by the old Feud betwixt
him and Sir Arthur Hasilrigge.

To secure themselves therefore from that and all other Parties, they
Legislated a thing called an Engagement, The Engagement Voted, October.
which though at its first designment it reached only persons in Office and
Trust, and the Lawyers that Pleaded (with an additional precept to the several
Benches, to remove out of their Chambers (in the Respective Inns of Court) all
who had served the King in the late War (saving the benefit of Articles) as
they had kept them some good while before from the Bar) yet at last it included
all sorts of men from 18 years old and upwards, who were enjoined to recognize,
and then subscribe this knack, in these Republican words, -- You shall promise
to be true ^^d faithful to the Commonwealth of England, as it is now
established without King or House of Lords. And their repeated prosperous
violation of all things Sacred and Civil, had so (prob Dolor!) Atheisted the
Land, that people jested themselves into this snare: the Royalists and some
such sober Presbyterians only disavowing it, though no protection or benefit
of the Law was to be had without it.

The terrible Powder-blow in Towerstreet, Jan. 4.
On the 4 of January, happened a most terrible blow by Gunpowder in
Tower-street, out of a Ship-chandlers cellar, who going down about 8 of the
Clock about some business there with a Candle, it unfortunately sparkled into
the Powder, as was conceived, and blew up and spoiled above 100 Houses, some 60
persons being killed, the most whereof were slain as they were drinking in the
Rose-Tavern, in whose Ruins they were overwhelmed. This accident invited the
curiosity of some to say, that the Treason committed that time Twelve month
before, was followed with this its suitable attendant, to point to the Authors
the likeness of their Villainy. But whatever that disaster signified, the Death
of Alderman Hoyle (a great Rumper) of York, Alderman Hoyle hanged himself, Jan.
30.
who hanged himself on the same day and hour Twelve month that the King was
Murdered, plainly showed the vengeance and displeasure of God against that
monstrous and abominable Fact.

This was the Evening-Sacrifice to their Thanksgiving-Devotion, in most solemn
manner celebrated by the States a^ Westminster, in commemoration of their
lately recovered Liberty from the Laws and a just Government, by the Death of
the King, being the Anniversary of his Martyrdom; but had so many ill Omens and
sinister Prognostics, that they rased this Festival out of their Calendar,
which carried in it so many signal remarques of the just Judgment and
Vengeance of God upon that impious Fact, and their no less abominable mockery
of Him as the Author thereof, in this their pretended religious observation of
that fatal Providence.

Genesis Blake commands a Fleet.
General Blake was now fitting out to Sea with a lusty Fleet, to hinder Prince
Rupert, (now Commanding in the Western-seas) from doing further prejudice to
the Trade, the Nation being then much incommodated by several Ships of War set
out by His Majesty's Commission, the execution whereof could not discern
betwixt His Subjects and His Rebels. The Prince was then in Harbor at Lisbone,
Prince Rupert blockt up Lisbone, Mar.
whither Blake directly sailed with 16 able Men of War, and blockt up the Port,
demanding license to fall upon the Prince in the River; which being denied, an
attempt was made by him; but the Castles firing upon his foremost Frigots, in
favor and protection of the Prince's Fleet, he was forced to give it over, and
come to an Anchor at the Mouth of the Tagus, resolving to stop and seize such
Vessels of the Portugals as should make for that place: and the Brazile
Sugar-Fleet was then daily expected.

An Act now passed for removing obstructions in the sale of the King, Queen,
and Princes Lands, as they then called them: and several Manors and Lands were
apportioned to the Soldiers for their Arrears, whose Debentures were now
stated by the Committee of the Army, the Common Soldiers purchasing in manner
of a Corporation by Regiments; the frequency of these Debentures (which the old
Officers and Reformadoes sold at Half a Crown in the pound, and so drew in a
great number of Citizens to be Bargainers with the Trustees named in the Act
for the sale of the said Lands and Hereditaments, which were thereby invested
and settled on them for the use of the Commonwealth) gave an opportunity to one
Granger and his Accomplices to counterfeit the Hands of the said Committee,
Granger 's notorious Cheats.
by which means several false Debentures were put upon the Commissioners, and
more Cheats upon those that bought them, when at last they came to be
discovered. This Granger, who justified his little Cheats by their great ones,
continued this kind of Trade throughout the Usurpation, in levying
Assessements by Warrants, which he would counterfeit and make use of to any of
the Treasurers of the Costome-house or Chamber of London, and to any Collectors
and Receivers of any public Money, especially in Cromwels reign, and yet never
suffered further than the Pillory and a Temporary Imprisonment, and is yet
alive, and in custody for his former Cheats, and the like endeavors and
attempts of late.

The King was yet at Iersey, whither the Lord Libberton was Arrived, and having
delivered his Letters to the King from the Committee of Estates of Scotland,
Lord Liberton brings Letters from Scotland to the King at Jersey.
was very well received and liked of by the King, and in February dispacht
away, and on the 18 of the said Month landed at Leith with Letters likewise
from the King, which though they were not in all particulars according to the
wish and mind of the Estates; The Scots appoint Commissioners to treat at Breda.
yet did they so far satisfy, that Commissioners were appointed forthwith to
go for Holland, to commence the Treaty which was appointed by the King at
Breda, the Prince of Aurange being desired by the Scots to moderate and mediate
in that affair. The King in danger of drowning.
The King in his departure from Iersey, was by a sudden Gust of Wind near
over-set (it being a little Bark that conveyed him into France) had not one of
his Retinue very fortunately with his Knife cut the Cordage that held the
Main-sheet, and let it fly in the Wind. So the good hand of Providence still
took care of and preserved him to most glorious and wonderful Revolutions.

In the interim the Scots are busy in purging their Army of al^ Officers who
were any way concerned in Hamilton's Engagement, The Scots purge their Army
(...) send^ Co^^issioners to the King.
and were not throug^ly Kirkified, twelve of such being turned out of Command
in L^shes own Regiment, to leave no advantage to the King of requiring any
favor for such of hi^ own or that Party to be admitted into Places or Trust;
and withal, they thought fit now to give an answer to that mentioned
Declaration of the Marquess of Montross, most virulently and falsely answering
the Contents thereof, by utter denial of their promoting the War in England, or
selling the late King, or tying his Son (their present Sovereign) to any
further Conditions or Agreements than what his Predecessors had constantly been
bound to, and the Laws and Customs of the Nation did require; and finally,
adjured all men to beware of Apostacy, or taking part with that Monster of Men
(so they styled that Martyr, the Honor of their Country) James Graham, more
deservedly and famously known Marquess of Montross. But the Sun was not clearer
at Noonday, than the truth of that Charge in very particular, as full
experience did convincingly demonstrate. The Commissioners names that were
sent, and who departed in March, were the Earls of Cassils and Lothian, Sir
John Smith, the Lord Libberton, Lord Broady, Iefferies, Leviston, Wood, and
Hutchinson, who had In^^ructions to acquaint the King, that the Committee of
Estates and General Assembly were not satisfied with his last Letters, and to
insist that he would take the National Covenant, and enjoin others to do it;
that he would abandon the Counsel and Company of the Marquess of Montross, and
other such Malignants; that then they should invite him to come into his Realm
of Scotland, They except against Malignants.
and take his Word that he would not bring any Cavaliers over with him, they
having already excepted (not deigning further mention of Montross) against Duke
Hamilton, the Earl of Lauderdaile, Dunfermling, Ruthen, the Lords Napier,
Fendraught, St. Clare, Garnegy, and Eython, and some others; and commanded the
Earl of Calendar upon penalty of 100000 Mark Scots to depart the Kingdom: other
matters upon the Treaty the King left to the Parliament, which he likewise
allowed and confirmed, and all proceedings had been had or done therein: which
shall suffice for the account of that Transaction; neither the King nor the
Commissioners taking any notice of Montrosses preparation to come into that
Kingdom, but purposely avoiding any dispute about it, of which we shall have
occasion to speak presently.

At home, the Parliament to comply with the Proposals of the Army and their
former Agreements, made show of dissolving themselves, and choosing a new
Representative, and debated upon qualifications of Members, for new Tumults
were feared among the Soldiery; and one Marston a notable Adjutator, Marston
the Leveller kills two Messengers, and wounding a third, escapes* is afterward
taken and executed.
who had escaped from Burford defeat, was now ordered to be taken into Custody.
The Messengers accordingly came to his Lodging in Aldersgate Street, and
sending him word to come down, he with a Stilletto killed two of them
outright, and sorely wounded the third, and escaped; but being retaken, and
terribly cut in his endeavoring to make another escape, he was Arraigned at
the Sessions House in the Old Baily, and condemned to be hanged in the said
Street; which was accordingly executed, so preventing another death from the
grievousness of his wounds. He was a truly stout person, and died as resolutely
as his weakness would permit.

Sir John Berckley and Col. Walter Slingsby secured.
Sir John Berkley and Colonel Walter Slingsby were now taken at Colonel
Travanions house in Cornwall, and secured; which made them conceive there was
some designs on foot for the King to be put in execution. At the same time
they proceeded with the old Vizor of Piety, voting some Expedients for the
propagation of the Gospel, and withal, very strictly urging Subscriptions to
the new Engagement; The Engagement pressed by the Parliament.
which at last visited the University of Oxford, and was as unwelcome and
destructive to the new Fellows and Scholars, put in by the Presbyterian Party
of Parliament in 1647, and 48. as the Covenant was (being tendered in the like
manner) to the rightful proprietors (the Loyal Students) then ejected;
particularly Doctor Reynolds, who come in the place of Doctor Fell, resigned it
to one Owen, who was made Doctor in Divinity (famous for his primer and his
better Lesson of flattery with Oliver) and Dean of Christ-Church. Never greater
or more Robberies committed by Thieves than at this time, Great Robberies.
for which almost 60 suffered at Tyburn at two Sessions.

A new Council of State.
A new Council of State was (as their annual change required) now constituted,
Basil Earl of Denbigh being first named in the Act by which it was appointed;
by whom Mr. Anthony Ascham and Mr. Charles Vane were sent Agents to the
respective Kings of Spain and Portugal, Mr. Ascham and Mr. Vane sent Agents
into Spain and Portugal.
in the Fleet with General Blake. Care was likewise taken for another Fleet to
be presently equipped, which should consist of 30 great Men of War: and several
Frigates of great Force were now upon the Stocks, and preparation made for
others; the Names of most of the former Navy being changed, The Names of Ships
changed.
taking their new Names from the several places of the Parliaments Successes
and Victories; others relating to the Dignities of the Government, as the
President, and the Faithful Speaker, now newly lanched; so that the Dutch began
to look about them. Several Complaints were now made to them, from some that
had suffered for their disloyalty in the Isle of Barbados, A Fleet sent to
Barbados against the Lord Willoughby of Parham.
as also from other of the Loyal American Dominions, except New England, that
yet kept in Statu quo; whereupon the State decreed to send a Fleet thither to
reduce that place, it being now Governed by the Lord Willoughby of Parham, sent
thither by the King from Holland, whither his Lordship had withdrawn from the
violence of the Army, being one of those Peers whom they questioned for Treason
in 1647.

Cavaliers to depart London.
And Act came now out likewise, Commanding all Royallists to depart London, and
twenty miles beyond it, with an injunction not to stir five miles from their
own habitation, and to give notice to the next Officer of their arrival there:
and to make through work with them, the Parliament was now in Debate of
exposing several of their Estates to sale, Orders concerning Delinquents
Estates.
and such in the first place who were then beyond Sea; and (to raise these
unhappy forfeitures to their greater advantage) ordering that no Estate not
Compounded for in the Delinquents lifetime, should be now Compounded for by
his Heirs, but should accrue entire to the State. Against several Branches of
this and other harsh usage, particularly of that restraint and confinement
within five miles of their dwelling, the kinder Army interposed their desires,
as not consistent with their former Proposals: but they well knew they were not
to ask, and must be disobeyed in that particular; yea, even in this most
reasonable request of Liberty to those, who had the benefit of Articles, A new
High Court of Justice constituted. Keeble made President thereof.
and had Compounded. Another High Court of Justice was now a forming, which
though the Act that Constituted it bore date the 5 of April in the year
ensuing, yet we mention it here, because Montrosses Expedition and final defeat
do challenge an entire space of time to register them. Of this Court, Keble one
of the Commissioners of the Seal was now made President, Bradshaw being too
high to do that Journey-work any longer, being President of the Council of
State: it was erected in revenge of Ascham's and Doristaus's death, as a Vote
and Declaration of the States angrily expressed. An Act passed likewise for the
better managing of Estates under Sequestration; which trust was committed to
Samuel Moyer, James Russel, Edmund Winstow, Josias Barners, William Mullins,
Arthur Squib, and Rowland Moor; names so terrible, and Haberdashers-Hall their
Court or Judicature so hated and infamed, for the violences done by these
persons there, that they are not to be passed without a mark to Posterity. They
likewise Enacted the outing of all Officers who should not nor had taken the
Engagement; another Act against Mariners serving of Foreign Princes, which
still carried an ill aspect toward the Dutch: another (according to their
tenor of professed Sanctity) against Fornication; which was passed in April,
An Act against Fornication.
but was not to take place till the 24 of June ensuing; the first Reading
thereupon was Harry Martin's, who said it was made to catch Fools, for that
there was a Clause in it, That no person should be convicted without the
joynt-testimony of two witnesses; yet an Old Man and an Old Woman of above 80
years old apiece suffered afterward for it; and for the open guilt whereof,
they had turned out Gregory Clement, one of their Members, though others lewd
enough kept their Seats; and finally, one for the levying of 90000 lib. per
mensem for the three first and 60000 l. for the three last months, by which
they hoped to ingratiate with the people, now heavily complaining of the
pressures and the ruin of their Trade. And so we conclude this first year of
the Government of our Novel Free States.

Anno Dom. 1650.
WE begin the Year with the end of one of the Noblest Gallantest Persons that
Age saw amongst all the Wars and Broils in Christendom: An Account of the last
actions of the Marquess of Montross.
A Captain whose unexampled Achievements have famed a History; and were its
Volume ten times bigger, it would yet be disproportionate to the due praises of
this matchless Hero. Enter and Exit the glorious Marquess of Montross, whose
most lamentable Fare and Catastrophe, we will here sum up in this (no way
competent) compendious Narrative.

After his departure out of Scotland, He was offered to be Capt. of the Scots
Guards to the King of France.
as you have read, he betook himself to the Court of France, where he was
proffered the Captainship of the Scots Guards to that King, a place of great
Honor and Revenue; but being delayed by Cardinal Mazarine, who affected not
that Nation, and his spirit aiming at his own Princes Service, he betook
himself to the King then at the Hague, where he endeavored after the Murder
of King Charles the first, a like new Commission for Scotland; but being
thwarted therein by Duke Hamilton, then residing there likewise (and his
confident Friends the Earls of Lauderdale and Calendar) who was aemulous of his
former glories in the Government, and late War of that Kingdom; he betook
himself to the Emperor at Vienna, where he was presently proffered the Command
of an Army of 10000 men, and to be independent of any other General; The
Emperor at Vienna offers to make him one of his Generals.
but the Peace being concluded betwixt the Swede and the Emperor, he departed,
upon pursuit of his adventure into Scotland, having obtained a Commission from
the King; and in order to that Expedition, was furnished with four ships from
the Duke of Holstein, some supplies from the King of Denmark, and 1500 Arms
from the Queen of Sweden (and some Horse promised under General King from
thence) and a little neat Frigate ^or his own conveyance; some moneys also were
disburst to him, which were transmitted to Amsterdam, for other the like
occasions and necessaries, and there falsely and basely squandred away by one
Colonel Ogilby, an old friend, and now entrusted by the Marquess in that affair
unfortunately and unhappily enough, a limb of the Design being thus broken.

With these the Marquess (as is supposed) fearing lest he should have an
express command to desist from his purpose, because the Treaty betwixt the
Prince and the Scottish Commissioners was now very near a conclusion, did
precipitate himself and those that were with him into a most inevitable ruin.
Now all those great Levies and Aids, those mighty preparations for the Invading
of a Kingdom settled in a posture of War, and well forewarned of his
intentions, amounted not above the number of six or seven hundred at the most,
strangers and all. The Common Soldiers which adventured over with him, most of
them Holsteyners or Hamburgers. He had sent him by the Queen of Sweden, for the
arming of such Gentlemen as should upon his arrival betake themselves to his
Party (as before) 1500 Arms complete for Horse, Back, Breast, Headpiece,
Carbines, Pistols, and Swords; all which (after his defeat in Cathnes) were
taken untouched. With this small preparation, it was a desperate action to
attempt so mighty a business. And although his touching first upon the Island
did increase his number, and gave him almost the beginning of an Army; yet were
those barbarous people so raw and unacquainted with Discipline, that they
proved in a manner useless and unserviceable. It Is true, the Inhabitants of
those Isles were a people in former times very fierce and warlike, Marquess of
Montross Arms for the King in Scotland.
and have under their own Captains made many great Impressions into the very
heart of the Kingdom. But whether it was the policy of the late Kings to leave
them untrained of purpose to break their natural fierceness, or because their
own Captains being quelled or cut off, they cared not much to engage under any
other; certain it is, that Kingdom for 200 years last past has not made less
use of any they had under their Jurisdiction, nor have they at this present
less opinion of any Scots for Military courage and valor. And this may be
alleged as a great cause of their remissness and unweildiness, whilst they
were in the Marquesses Service. I told you a little before of Montross's whole
strength which did accompany him from Germany, whereof two ships (with near
upon a third part) were sent before; but by storm of weather (which is both
frequent and dangerous) amongst those Northern Islands, His ill success.
they were lost with all the men and Arms, nothing saved: This was another
check, and as it were a warning and a forerunner of the sad event which
followed. But the business being fatal, he must needs contribute his own
endeavors toward that destruction which his cruel fortune had provided for
him. For he being nothing terrified with this success, sends out a second
party, which making a more prosperous Voyage, landed at Orkney, and entered the
Island without any resistance; there being at that time no Garrison or defense
placed in any of those Islands by the States of Scotland: together with these
he sent several Commissions for levying Horse and Foot. Immediately there were
several dispatched to Scotland, and the Islands adjacent for that purpose: the
people of the Country being in no condition to resist these Officers,
endeavored in hopes of favor as much as they could to further the design:
And those who were not so earnest, were by their own neighbors, favorers of
the Cause, and these violent Commissioners, forced to take up Arms. Not long
after, landed. the Marquess himself with the rest of his Company, together with
those Gentlemen which were resolved to partake of his fortune; amongst whom
were several persons of note: Colonel Hurry was there, a man who had engaged in
all Quarrels, but never prospered in any; the Lord Frendraught (for his Kinsman
the Lord Napier was left in Holland) Colonel Johnson a resolute man and an old
Soldier, Colonel Gray a German Soldier, Harry Graham his own natural Brother,
Colonel James Hay of Naughton, Sir Francis Hay of Dalgety, George Drummond of
Ballach. For he had employed as was thought Colonel Sibbalds (his Companion
heretofore) as his Agent in Scotland; but he was apprehended at Musselburgh,
and did accompany his General in death upon the same Scaffold. The Marquess
continued a considerable time in Orkney, raising of Forces, and strengthening
himself with such Recruits as the place would afford: Neither was there any
preparation at all made in Scotland to dispossess him of these Islands, either
because it might be thought a difficult business to assail him within those
places naturally guarded with a rough and dangerous Sea, or because they
knowing his strength, expected a better opportunity of him, as they found
indeed, within the Country.

After this poor rabble of silly creatures was amassed, he resolved at last to
Embarque; and to that purpose gathers all the Boats he could find, ships his
men, and in a short space Lands them all upon the point of Cathnes, which is
the farthest land to the North-west of Scotland. The people having some
experience of the carriage of his former soldiery, and now far more dreading
the name of Forrainers, partly by the terrible reports which were constantly
given out of him, fled away in heaps, many of them not stopping till they came
to the chief City Edenborough, The Parliament at Edinburgh Alarmed.
and there gave the terrible Alarm to the Parliament then sitting. The
Commanders were immediately summoned, and charged with all possible have to get
the standing Forces in readiness; and a Rendezvouze (in order to the States
Command) was hereupon presently enjoined at Brechin Northward. Col. Straughan
sent with a choice party of Horse to oppose him.
Colonel Straughan (who was then in high esteem with the great ones for his
Valor lately expressed in the English service, and his Zeal to the
Presbyterian Cause, much extolled at that time) had an ample and particular
Commission granted to him by the Parliament, to command a choice party of
Horse, which should not be subject to David Lesly's Orders, but might Engage
and Fight with the Enemy at his best advantage. With these (being not above
300) he advanced before the Army; After him follows Lesly and Holborn.
David Lesley with the rest of the Horse, and Holborne with the Foot marching
after him. In the mean time the Marquess advanced, but very slowly; and that he
might not be mistaken, (since all the world was much astonished at this
Invasion now whilst the King was upon a Treaty) he published a second
Declaration, The Marq Publishes a Declaration.
wherein he labored to clear himself of any aspersion of sinister ends. That
his intention was only against some particular persons, who had against the
Laws of the Kingdom, raised and maintained a War against the Kings Father, and
did now by their subtle practices endeavor to destroy the Son also. That he
intended nothing against the Generality of the Kingdom. The danger of this
attempt.
Lastly, Exhorting all Subjects of that Nation to endeavor to free themselves
from the Tyranny of those who for the present ruled the State, and the
oppression of the Ministry. But the Country, for several Causes, did not come
to second him as he expected. For the Earl of Sunderland, Earl of Sunderland
opposes him.
a potent man in those parts, his Lands being next to the place where the
Marquess then was, raised a great power of his Tenants and Friends, and did his
best to terrify and hinder all that were willing to join with him. And though
he found himself unable to deal with the Marquess's Forces, yet did he stop all
intercourse betwixt him and his Friends. And those Gentlemen who had heretofore
followed him, and yet inclined to assist him, knowing the danger of the
enterprse, considering the fewness of his number, and that his Soldiers were
much undisciplined, and unlike to the former with whom he had done so great
things, began to be averse, and have a suspicion of the event. Yet have I heard
some say, which knew well enough the situation of that Country, that if he had
not been suppressed in the nick, he might have gained such strength amongst the
Hills, as might have given him leisure enough to have strengthened his own
Party, and tired out the Enemy. Howsoever, he was not altogether unmindful of a
retreat: There is in that Country a Castle called Dumbath; Dumbath- Castle
surrendered to the Marquess his Forces.
the Lord or Lord thereof is the head of a very Ancient Family, but no friend
of the Marquesses. This Gentleman (having left his House in the keeping of his
Lady and some servants) fled to Edinburgh. The Lady (though the place was
naturally fortified) yet upon summons delivered it to Colonel Hurry, (who was
sent thither by the Marquess with a party of Foot to reduce it) upon conditions
her Goods and Estate might be secured, and she with her Servants suffered to
march away. Hurrey having placed a Governor and a Garrison (as he thought)
sufficient for the defense of the place, returned to the Marquess, who was
advanced to the place, or near it, where he was to lose at one Throw both his
Life and Fortune. The Marquess hearing of the Enemies approach, made his whole
Forces March at a great Trot, to recover a Pass which they were not very far
from, when he himself in the Vanguard discovered the first party, which was
Straughan's Forlorn-hope, Col. Straughan sets upon him.
advancing very fast upon him. So that these, with their has^e and the Soul
diers running, found them both out of Breath and Order. The second Party was
Commanded by Straughan himself, and the Rear-guard by Colonel Ker, for he had
divided them into three Bodies: But now the first party being very near, there
was a Forlorn-hope of 100 Foot drawn out to meet them, who giving fire upon
them, put them to a disorderly retreat; but being immediately seconded by
Straughan's Party, they made good their Charge, and so terrified the Islanders
with that breach, that most of them threw down their Arms, and called for
Quarter. Only the Dutch-companies (after they had bestowed a Volley or two
amongst the Horse) retreated into some shrubs hard by, and there very valiantly
defended themselves a while, The Marq. of Montross defeated Ap. 29.
but were all taken at last. There were killed in this business to the number
of 200. taken 1200; very few escaped. For the whole Country being in Arms,
especially Sunderland-men (who came not to the Fight, but to the Execution)
they killed or took Prisoners all such as fled. In that skirmish was taken the
Standard which he had caused to be made on purpose to move the affections of
the people, with this Motto, Judge and revenge my Cause, O Lord; and the
Portraict of the late King beheaded, exactly well done. The Standard Bearer (a
very gallant young Gentleman) was killed, His Standard taken, and the bear^r
thereof slain taken besides on the Marquess his side, Col. Hurrey, Lord
Frendraught Sir Francis Hay, etc.
after he had several times refused quarter: there was Colonel Hurrey taken,
the Lord Frendraught, Sir Francis Hay of Dalgetie, Colonel Hay of Naughton,
Colonel Gray, and most of the Officers, and two Ministers.

The Marquess (after he saw the day was absolutely lost) threw away his Cloak,
which had the Star on it (having received the Order of the Garter a little
while before:) his Sword was likewise found, and not very far off his Horse,
which he had forsaken: For so soon as he had got clear off that ground where
the Skirmish was, he betook himself to foot; and lighting upon one of that
Country, or one of his own Soldiers (I know not whether) took his Highland
Apparel from him, and so in that Habit conveyed himself away: But such narrow
search being made for him, he could not long escape; yet he continued in the
open fields three or four days, without any notice gotten of him. At last the
Lord of Aston (being in Arms with some of his Tenants, and abroad in that
search) happened on him: He had been one of his followers before. The Marq. of
Montross taken, May 3. by the Lord of Aston,
In that place he had continued three or four days without Meat or Drink, with
one only man in his company. The Marquess knowing him, and believing to find
friendship at his hands, willingly discovered himself; but Aston not daring to
conceal him, and being greedy of the reward which was promised to the
Apprehender by the Council of State, seized upon him and disarmed him. It Is
said he proffered great sums for his Liberty; which being in vain, he desired to
dye by the hands of those that took him, rather than be made an object of
misery and shame (as he knew very well he should) by his enraged Enemies. But
neither of his desires was granted, but in place of them a strong Guard set on
him, and so conveyed to David Lesley. and conveyed to David Lesley.
Straughan having achieved his business with great expedition, and freed the
State from this much-feared danger, returned to Edinburgh, leaving the rest of
the business to Lesley and Holborn, where he received great rewards and thanks
for his Eminent Service; not without the great heart-burning of David Lesley,
who seeing a rival risen up to his honor, and one whom he looked upon as an
upstart Soldier, have so great success, fretted not a little. Howsoever,
forwards he moves to accomplish the rest of the work, which was now of no great
consequence; for there rested nothing within the Country, but only the Castle
of Dumbath, Dumbath- Castle yielded to the Covenanters.
which being out of all hopes of relief after the defeat, so soon as they were
perfectly assured thereof by some Prisoners they knew, yielded the Garrison.
The Governor was prisoner at mercy; the Soldiers being Dutch, were upon terms
to return homewards. There was nothing else to be done, save the reducing of
the Islands, and the Town of Kirkwall in Orkney, where Colonel Johnson and
Colonel Harry Graham were left, when the Marquess passed over to Cathnes: but
Montross (either because he could not spare any Soldiers, or because he
expected better success) had left them almost naked, though there were several
places in those Isles which might have been made very Tenable. Colonel Johnson
having had notice of the defeat, with those that were with him, took shipping,
and returned from whence he came; so did Harry Graham likewise, else both of
them had tasted of the same sauce which their General did. Thus Lesley's Forces
entered without any resistance, seized upon the Arms which Montross had brought
thither, together with two pieces of Ordnance, the Queen of Swedens present;
the little Friggot of 16 Guns which lay in Harbor, the Master of her being gone
ashore into one of the Islands, and the Company seeing the event of the
business, revolted, and brought in that likewise. The Victory being now
complete, The Covenanters give solemn thanks for their Victory.
there was a solemn day of Thanksgiving appointed through the whole Kingdom,
Bonfires, Shooting of Ordnance, and other testimonies or joy: but many of the
Gentry who had been under his Command before, having now engaged with him
again, were no partakers in this joy. For some of his Papers being taken, many
of them were afterward discovered, and suffered in their Estates. The Marquess
being now in the Custody of his mortal Enemies, from whom he could not expect
the least favor; yet expressed a singular constancy, and in a manner a
carelessness of his own condition. Coming to his Father-in-laws house, the Earl
of Southesk, Montross visits his Children at his Father-in-laws the Earl of
Southesk.
where two of his Children were, he procured liberty from his Guard to see
them; but neither at meeting or parting could any change of his former
countenance be discerned, or the least expression heard which was not suitable
to the greatness of his spirit, and the same of his former actions. It Is
Memorable of the Town of Dundee, where he lodged one night, though it had
suffered more by his Army than any else within that Kingdom, yet were they
amongst all the rest so far from insulting over him; that the whole Town
testified a great deal of sorrow for his woeful condition; and there was he
likewise furnished with Clothes suitable to his Birth and Person. Being come to
Leith, His journey to Edinburgh.
he was received by the Magistrates of the City of Edinburgh; and staying a
while there to refresh himself, he was afterward led toward the City, by that
way which goes betwixt Leith and the Watergate of the Abbey, and with him all
the Prisoners of quality on foot, betwixt thirty and forty; but he himself had
the favor to be mounted on a Cart-horse. He is mounted on a Cart-horse and
delivered to the Executioner;
Having ended this part of his journey, with as much state as in Triumphs is
accustomed to be, he was met at the end of the Cannon-gate by some other
Officers, and the Executioner in his Livery-coat, into whose hands he was
delivered. There was framed for him a high seat in fashion of a Chariot, upon
each side of which were holes, through which a Cord being drawn, and crossing
his Breast and Arms, bound him fast down in the Chair. bound with Ropes in a
Chair, and d^spitefully used The people pity him,
The Executioner (being commanded so to do) took off the Marquess's Hat, and
put on his own Bonnet; and the Chariot being drawn by four Horses, he mounted
one of the first and very solemnly began to drive along toward the Tol-Booth.
The people who were assembled in great multitudes, and were many of them
heretofore very desirous to see this spectacle, could not now refrain from
tears; and those who had heretofore wished him all misfortune, began to be
shaken with the first Scene of his Tragedy. But the implacable Ministry having
him now at their mercy, but the Ministers revile him.
could never be satisfied with his Calamities: they reviled him with all
possible spite, objected frequently to him his former condition, and his
present misery, and pronounced heavy judgments against him. Being come to the
Tol-Booth, He is Imprisoned in the Tol-booth. His friends not suffered to visit
him.
he was very closely shut up, and strong Guards set upon him, and access denied
to him; no, not his Father-in-law, or any of his friends suffered to come nigh
him. There he was a considerable time, the Ministers never ceasing to
exacerbate his misery: of whom one being asked why they could not otherwise be
satisfied, but by so ignominious handling of him? He answered, They knew no
other way to humble him, and bring him home to God.

The Parliament having notice of his approach to Edinburgh, fearing his gallant
presence might gain favor among the people (which the Kirk-Ministers thundered
at afterward) appointed a Committee to draw up a Sentence against him on the
17 of May, which they did presently: The first part about his entrance we have
already seen performed; The Marquess of Montross sentenced to die by a
Committee of Parliament in Scotland.
the latter part ran thus, That he should be hanged on a Gibbet at the Cross in
Edinburgh until he died, his History and Declaration being tied about his Neck,
and to hang three hours in public view of all the people; after which he
should be Beheaded and Quartered, his head to be fixed upon the Prisonhouse of
Edinburgh, and his Legs and Arms over the Gates of the Cities of Sterling,
Glascow, Perth, alias Saint Johns-town, and Aberdeen: And in case ^e repented
(whereby the Sentence of Excommunication may be taken off by the Church) the
bulk of his Body should be buried in the Gray-Friers; if not, in the
Borrow-moor (a place like Tyburn.)

Some Members and Ministers sent to examine him.

He refuses to answer them.


It was seven a Clock at Night before he was entered into the Prison; and
immediately the Parliament met, and sent some of the Members and some Ministers
to examine him; but he refused to answer any thing to them, until he was
satisfied upon what terms they stood with the King, his Royal Master: which
being reported unto the Parliament, they ceased proceedings against him until
Monday, and allowed their Commissioners to tell him, that the King and they
were agreed: he then desired to be at rest, for he was weary with a long
Journey; and said, The Complement they had put upon him that day was somewhat
tedious.

The next day (being Sunday) he was constantly attended by Ministers and
Parliament Men, who still pursued him: he told them, They thought they had
affronted him the day before by carrying him in a Cart, but they were much
mistaken; for he thought it the most honorable and joyfullest Cavalcade that
ever he made, God having all the while most comfortably manifested his presence
to him, and furnished him with a resolution to overlook the reproaches of men,
and to behold Him, for whose Cause he suffered.

The Chancellours Speech in Parliament against the Marquess.
Upon Monday in the forenoon he was brought before the Parliament, and after the
delivery of a long-penned discourse by the Chancellor, wherein he was pleased
to take notice of his miscarriages against the first Covenant, the League and
Covenant, his Invasion and joining with the Irish Rebels, and blood-guiltiness;
and that now how God had brought him to just punishment: He desired to know if
he might be allowed to speak for himself; The Marquess of Montrosses Answer in
Parliament.
which being granted, he said, Since you have declared unto me that you have
agreed with the King, I look upon you, as if his Majesty were sitting among
you; and in that Relation I appear with this Reverence, Bare-headed: My care
has been always to walk as became a good Christian and a Loyal Subject* I
engaged in the first Covenant, and was faithful to it, until I perceived some
private persons under color of Religion intended to wring the Authority from
the King, and to seize on it for themselves; and when it was thought fit, for
the clearing of honest men, that a Bond should be Subscribed, wherein the
security of Religion was sufficiently provided for, I subscribed. For the
League and Covenant, I thank God I was never in it, and so could not break it;
but how far Religion has been advanced by it, and the sad consequences that
have followed it, these poor distressed Kingdoms can witness: for when his late
Majesty had by the blessing of God almost subdued those Enemies that rose ^p
against him in England, and that a Faction of this Kingdom went in to the
assistance of them* His Majesty gave Commission to me to come into this
Kingdom, and to make a diversion of those Forces that were going from hence
against him. I acknowledged the Command most just, and I conceived my self
bound in Conscience and Duty to obey it. What my carriage was in this Country,
many of you may bear witness; disorders in any Army cannot be Prevented, but
they were no sooner known than punished; never was any Blood spilt but in
Battle, and even then many thousand lives have I preserved; and as I came in
upon his Majesty's Warrant, so upon his Letters did I lay aside all Interests,
and retreated.

And for my coming in at this time, it was by his Majesty's Command, in order
to the accelerating of the Treaty betwixt Him and you; His Majesty knowing,
that when ever he had ended with you, I was ready to retire upon his Call. I
may justly say, that never Subject acted upon more honorable grounds, nor by a
more Lawful Power, than I did in this Service; and therefore I desire you to
lay aside prejudice, and consider me as a Christian, in relation to the justice
of the Quarrel; as a Subject, in relation to my Royal Masters Command; and as
your Neighbor, in relation to the many of your lives I have preserved in
Battle: And be not too rash, but let me be judged by the Laws of God, the Laws
of Nature and Nations, and the Laws of this Land; if you do otherwise, I do
here Appeal from you to the righteous Judge of the World, who one day must be
both your Judge and mine, and who always gives righteous Judgment.

This he delivered with such gravity, The Chancellor comands the Sentence to be
read.
and without passion, as was much admired even of his Enemies. After which the
Chancellor commanded the Sentence to be read; which he heard with a settled
and an unmoved Countenance; and desiring to be further heard, was presently
stopped by the Chancellor, who Commanded he should be presently removed back
again to prison; And the Marquess to be conveyed back to prison.
where he was no sooner come, but the Ministers assault him afresh, aggravating
the terror of the Sentence, thereby to affright him. He acknowledged himself
much beholding to the Parliament for the Honor they had put upon him, saying,
He took it for a greater honor to have his Head stand upon the Prison-gate for
this Quarrel, than to have his Picture in the Kings Bedchamber. His noble
behavior there.
And (lest his Loyalty should be forgotten) they had highly honored him, in
designing lasting Monuments to four of the chiefest Cities, to bear up his
Memorial to all Posterity; wishing he had had flesh enough to have sent a piece
to every City in Christendom, to witness his Loyalty to his King and Country.

His Friends were not suffered to come near him, but a Guard was always in the
Chamber with him, insomuch as he had neither time nor place for his private
Devotions, but in their hearing.

The next day being the 21. clothed in a Scarlet-cloak richly laced with
Goldlace, He comes to the Scaffold in rich attire.
he was brought to the Scaffold: He came along the Streets with so great state,
and there appeared in his Countenance so much Beauty, Majesty, and Gravity, as
amazed the Beholders; and many even of his Enemies did acknowledge him to be
the gallantest Subject in the World. But because all his Friends and
Well-willers were debarred from coming near him, there was a Boy (designed for
that purpose on the Scaffold) who took his last Speech; which was to this
effect: I Am sorry if this manner of my End be scandalous to any good
Christian. The Marquess of Montross his Speech on the Scaffold.
Does it not often happen to the righteous according to the ways of the
righteous? does not sometimes a just man perish in his righteousness, and a
wicked man prosper in his malice? They who know me should not disesteem me for
this; many greater than I have been dealt with in this kind: yet I must not
say, but that all Gods Judgments are just: For my private sins, I acknowledge
this to be just with God, I submit my self to him; but in regard of man, I may
say, that they are but Instruments, God forgive them, I forgive them: they have
oppressed the poor, and vioiently perverted Judgment and Justice, but he that
is higher than they will reward them.

What I did in this Kingdom, was in obedience to the most just Command of my
Sovereign, for his defense in the day of his distress, against those that rose
up against him. I acknowledge nothing, but fear God and Honor the King,
according to the Commandments of God, and the Law of Nature and Nations; and I
have not sinned against man, but against God, and with him there is mercy,
which is the ground of my drawing near unto him.

It is objected against me by many, (even good People) that I am under the
Censure of the Church: This is not my fault* since it is only for doing my
Duty, by obeying my Princes most just Command for Religion, his Sacred Person
and Authority. Yet I am sorry they did Excommunicate me, and in that which is
according to Gods Laws, without wronging my Conscience or Allegiance, I desire
to be relaxed: if they will not do it, I appeal to God, who is the righteous
Judge of the world, and who must, and will, I hope, be my Judge and Savior.

It is spoken of me, that I should blame the King (God forbid;) for the late
King, he lived a Saint, and died a Martyr; I pray God I may so end as he did:
If ever I should wish my Soul in another man's stead, it should be in his. For
his Majesty now living, never people I believe might be more happy in a King:
His Commands to me were most just: in nothing that he promises will he fail.
He deals justly with all men, I pray God he be so dealt withal, that he be not
betrayed under trust, as his father was.

I desire not to be mistaken, as if my carriage at this time in relation to
your ways were stubborn; I do but follow the light of my own Conscience, which
is seconded by the working of the Spirit of God that is within me: I thank him,
I go to Heavens Throne with joy. If he enable me against the fear of Death, and
furnish me with courage and confidence to embrace it, even in its most ugly
shape, let God be glorified in my end, though it were in my damnation. Yet I
say not this out of any fear or mistrust, but out of my Duty to God, and Love
to his people.

I have no more to say, but that I desire your Charity and Prayers. I shall
pray for you all I leave my Soul to God, my Service to my Prince, my Good Will
to my Friends, and my Name and Charity to you all. And thus briefly I have
exonerated my Conscience.



Mark the horrib^^ unchristianity of the Scotch Kirk.
Being desired to pray apart, he said, I have already poured out my Soul before
the Lord, who knows my heart, and into whose hands I have commended my Spirit;
and he has been pleased to return to me a full assurance of peace in Jesus
Christ my Redeemer; and therefore if you will not join with me in prayer, my
reiterating it again will be both Scandalous to you and me. So closing his
eyes, and holding up his hands, he stood a good space at his inward Devotions,
being perceived to be inwardly moved all the while: The Marquess gives mo^y to
the Executioner, who according to the Sentence hanged his Declaration and
History about his Neck.
when he had done, he called for the Executioner, and gave him money; who
having brought unto him (hanging in a Cord) his Declaration and History, hanged
them about his Neck, when he said, Though it has pleased his Sacred Majesty
that now is, to make him one of the Knights of the most Honorable Order of the
Garter, yet he did not think himself more honored by the Garter, than by that
Cord and Book which he would embrace about his Neck with as much joy and
content, as ever he did the Garter, or a Chain of Gold; and therefore desired
them to be tied unto him as they pleased.

When this was done, and his arms tied, he asked the Officers, If they had any
more Dishonor (as they conceived it) to put upon him, He is hanged on a Gibbet.
he was ready to accept it. And so with an undaunted Courage and Gravity
suffered according to the Sentence past upon him.

Thus fell that Heroical Person by a most malicious and barbarous sort of
cruelty, but -- Sequitur ultor a tergo Deus, there is a Fury at hand ready with
a Whip of Snakes to punish this Viperous Brood of men: Cromwell for England, May.
For Cromwell having been secretly called for over from Ireland, to amuse all
parties (both the Irish who trembled at his presence, and made no considerable
resistance against him and his fortune; and the General himself at home, who
expected not such his sudden rivalship to his Command, which gave him no time
for mature consideration of the design; the Scots, who though allarmed by
frequent rumors of an English Invasion, yet were not so forward in their
Levies, as having assurance of Fairfax's dissatisfaction) was now wasted over
into England, preventing his Letters he had sent to the States to know their
express pleasure for his departing that Kingdom; which before we leave, we must
insert some omissions. Colonel Hamond a Kentish Gentleman, and firm Royallist,
who was a Colchestrian, and had been imprisoned at Windsor, Cromwels cruelty to
the English Royallists.
being by the mutiny of his Soldiers (the Marquess of Ormonds Regiment) which
he Commanded, forced to render himself and Officers at discretion (the Garrison
being the Castle before mentioned of Gowran, accepting of life from Cromwell,
and refusing to fight) was immediately shot to death, one Lieutenant only
escaping: The like fate suffered a Dutch Colonel, one Major Syms, and another
Lieutenant Colonel of the Lord Inchiqueens Loyal Party that yet adhered to him,
being worsted by the Lord Broghil, where in fight they lost 600 men near
Bandon-bridge. Col. Wogan escapes.
Colonel Wogan, that noble person, who had been so constant a terror to them,
having corrupted or converted his Keeper Colonel Phair's Marshal, escaped with
him to his old friends, being reserved to the same death by Cromwell, but by
Providence to be a further plague to them, An Ambassador from Holland.
in that and another Kingdom and place, as we shall see in the continuation of
this Chronicle. About the same time with Cromwell arrived here from Holland the
Lord Ioachimi, in quality of Ambassador from the States General, sent on
purpose to understand the condition of affairs here, and what stability this
Commonwealth was yet grounded upon or like to obtain, and report it to his
Superiors.

Further yet in Ireland. After the departure of Cromwell, in the Province of
Vlster, where the Bishop of Cloghor, Emir Mac Mahon was Generalissimo, the
Irish not being to be satisfied till the Conduct of Affairs was wholly left to
themselves, having gathered an Army of 5000 Foot and 600 Horse, was ranging
that Country at his pleasure, having so ordered and interposed his Forces, that
Sir Charles Coot the President of Connaught, and Colonel Venables who Commanded
in Chief in Vlster for the Parliament, could not join Forces; and though other
additions had been made to Coot, with which they had faced Finagh, and that
part of that Province some while before, yet durst they not engage till June;
on the second of which Month, Cloghor being encamped on a boggy ground within
half a mile of Sir Charles his Leaguer, who was about 800 Horse and as many
Foot, stood and faced him for almost four hours, and then drew over a Pass,
wherein Coot fell upon his Rear with 250 Horse, and charged through two
Divisions of Foot, and had routed them, but that their Horse came in to their
rescue, and repelled that Party: but Colonel Richard Coot likewise advancing,
both came off with even hand, and so the enemy over Faggots passed another way.
This was but a Trial of Skill; but on the 18 of June, Colonel Fenwick with 1000
having joined with Sir Charles, Bishop of Cloghor defeated June 18. by Sir
Charles Coot. Mortally wounded and taken with his Lieut. Genesis Hen. Oneale.
the matter came to a final decision. Cloghor was encamped strongly on a side
of a Hill, to which Coot approached; the Irish courageously descended to
Battle, but were so most resolutely received, that in an hours time this Mitred
General was defeated, himself mortally wounded and taken, with his
Lieutenant General Henry O Neale, together with most of the Officers, all of
them Irish, to the total loss of that Province, and the utter ruin and
destruction of that Rebel-Party that began the War, and continued it when it
might have expired by the closing with the Marquess of Ormond, to the taking of
Dublin and Londonderry. The remaining Irish War was merely defensive, and of
such weak dying efforts, that all was given over there for desperate and lost:
and who cannot, must not, here acknowledge the unerring certainty of Divine
Justice upon that bloody and pitiless people?

Now appeared in Print, Marchamount Needham the Parliament-Droll, Author of a
scurrilous Pamphlet.
as the weekly Champion of the new Commonwealth, and to bespatter the King with
the basest of scurrilous raillery, one Marchamount Needham, under the name of
Politicus; a Jack of all sides, transcendently gifted in opprobrious and
treasonable Droll, and hired therefore by Bradshaw to act the second part to
his starcht and more solemn Treason; who began his first Diurnal with an
Invective against Monarchy and the Presbyterian Scotch Kirk, and ended it with
an Hosanna to Oliver Cromwell, who in the beginning of June returned by the way
of Bristol from Ireland to London, Cromwell returns from his Conquest in
Ireland, June 6.
and was welcomed by Fairfax the General, many Members of Parliament and
Council of State at Hounslo-heath, and more fully complemented at his Lodgings,
and in Parliament, by the Thanks of the House, and the like significant address
of the Lord Mayor, etc. of London, being looked upon as the only Person, to the
Eclipse and diminution of his Generals Honor, whom we shall presently see
paramount in the same supreme Command.

Prince Rupert was yet in the Harbor of Lisbon, Prince Rupert blockt up in
Lisbon.
whither the Parliament had sent a Fleet to fight him and reduce those Ships to
their service; which the Prince declining, and the King of Portugal refusing to
suffer Blake to fall on in his Port, and trom his Castles shooting at some of
the Frigates who adventured within their reach; a Quarrel arose betwixt that
King and this State, whose Men of War seized on nine Brazile-ships as they were
passing into that Harbor.

The Estates of Scotland had now notice of the Kings present coming into that
Kingdom; the Earl of Dunfermling, Mr. Murrey, and Sir William Fleming, being
sent before by the King to acquaint them therewith; when the two last were
dispatched again, to give the King to understand the exceptions they took
against some uncovenanted Scotch Lords, as Hamilton and Lauderdail, and other
English Royalists coming over with Him; but before their Arrival the King was
shipped, having newly received the distastful intelligence of the Murder of his
faithful Servant the Marquess of Montross, which, as Cases then stood, He was
forced to pass by, having expostulated very sorrowfully thereof with the
Parliament, who by all means endeavored to smooth and color that perpetration
with the Vows of their Allegiance; in order whereunto, they said, they Executed
that Nobleman, and some others with him, viz. Sir John Vrrey, Colonel
Spotswood, Ogilby, and Sibbald: a very inauspicious entrance and beginning of a
right understanding between his Majesty and them, that was cemented with such
Loyal Blood.

The King ships himself for Scotland from Schevelt, June.
The King (as was said before) shipped himself at Terbeyden, a Village near the
Hague, aboard a Friggot (an excellent Sailor) Commanded by young Van Trump, old
Van Trump attending the King on board, and charging his Son to do his utmost
devoir for the Kings preservation, and with Tears parting (for there was some
intelligence of the English Fleet lying to intercept him:) there were also two
other Men of War in Company, who carried his Goods and Retinue, well provided,
and alike able for Fight and Defense. With these Ships He had not long been
under sail, but a Tempest drove Him upon one of the Danish Islands unknown to
the Fleet, but where they were most humanely and civilly Treated, and whence
(after a tedious Navigation) they Arrived at the Spey in the North of Scotland
(Colonel Graves and Captain Titus alone of the English attending on his person)
just as the English King-catchers were set sail from thence, under their
Admiral Popham, His Majesty complemented by the Nobility of Scotland.
to seek out after him. At His Arrival He was Complemented in great State by
the Nobility, and brought to Saint Iohnstons, and so to Sterling, being
presented in the way with very great gifts, according to the ability of that
Nation, who were now rising generally in Arms; and a Party of Horse under Major
Cuningham, sent to visit the English Borders, and to get intelligence; for the
Messenger they had sent to London (Colonel Gray) was secured, (at which time
Mr. Prin was laid up in Dunster-Castle) and dismissed with a Guard back again
unheard, an Answer being then in preparation to be sent by a General, a more
honorable and more powerfully-attended Officer.

Fairfax lays down his Commission, June 26.
That Command of course was devolved upon the Lord Fairfax, and he desired to
accept it; but he being inscrupled by some of the Presbyterian Ministers (who
were highly incensed at this War) as it was cunningly foreseen by Oliver and
his Party, who never endeavored his satisfaction) and pretending a reluctance
from the obigations of the National Covenant to engage against their Brethren,
totally declined it, transferring the long-expected Military Supremacy by a
Vote of the Parliament to Cromwell, who very zealously accepted the Charge, and
with all readiness prepared for the Expedition; which makes the second Trophy
or Garland of these strangely and wonderfully prosperous Free-States of England.

The Army marches into Scotland, July 22.
On the 12 of June it had been resolved that the Army should Advance Northward,
but it was the middle of July before they Arrived there; for on the 21 of that
Month Cromwell quartered at Berwick, from whence he sent a Letter and
Declaration to the Committee of Estates, fraught with hypocritical canting
expressions; which the said Committee suppressed, returning answer that they
would reply to it by Messengers of their own. And lest any of their people
should be deluded by the like fair words, they made it Treason for any person
to Correspond with the English, and fell a driving all their Cattle and
Provisions in the parts next adjacent to them, beyond Edenborough.

Cromwell's Army was now reckoned 16000 men effective, with which he came first
to Mardington his Headquarters, July 25. thence to Hadington, within 12 miles
of Edenborough, on the Hills whereabout the Scots had Encamped themselves,
declining to Engage till their additional Forces were come off the Hig^-lands.
On the 25 of July the English advanced, and attempted one of the said Hills, A
light Skirmish and Encounter at Mussleborough, July 29.
where a small party of the Scots were, and beat them presently off; when a
party of Scotch Horse fell in their Rear with such fury and vigor, that they
wholly disordered it, and with Reserves and fresh Bodies seconded and pursued
this advantage: which being perceived by Major General Lambert and Colonel
Whaley, who had the Rear-guard, they courageously Repulsed them to their
Trenches; in which action Lambert had his Horse shot under him, was r^n through
the Arm with a Lance, and was taken Prisoner, but was rescued by one Lieutenant
Empson. This past, and the Army wet and weary on their way to Muscleborough.
Betwixt 3 and 4 in the Morning, another party of some 1500 Horse, the flower of
the Army, being veterane Blades, under the Command of Colonel Montgomery and
Straughan, fell with great fury, and more exact valor upon them betwixt
sleeping and waking, and brought a terrible fright and dismay upon the whole
Army, Charging almost clear through upon the Sands; but returning with their
Prisoners, were set upon by fresh Troops under Colonel Okey in good order, and
forced to double their speed home to their Camp, having lost 100 men (to the
same number in the former attempt) and some of their Officers slain and
wounded, but came off otherwise with Honor enough, giving the Invaders little
hopes of so easy a Victory and Conquest, as the Fates had decreed to them, and
their invincible Fortune.

At Home the Parliament was busy about their High Court of Justice, and making
orders for the Composition of Royalists, excluding all such who within six
weeks (from their last limitation some time before) should not effectually have
finished it; and in order thereunto, they Debated upon an Act August the 6
(being pressed for Money to carry on this great undertaking abroad) for the
sale of Delinquents Lands; and Voted so many Estates to be sold, as would make
up security for 200000 l. and that an Act should likewise be Passed for
doubling on the Purchases of those Estates of Deans and Chapters, etc. And into
this black list the Earl of Derby was now put, and other unfortunate Royalists:
of which hereafter.

In the Month of June Doctor Levens, Dr. Levens hanged in ^ Cornhill.
formerly a Doctor of the Civil-law, who had all along served the King, was
apprehended in his Lodgings, being set by the State-spies, and several
Commissions from the King, and such papers found with him; whereupon he was
brought before a Court Martial, and there Sentenced to be Hanged: which was
accordingly Executed on the 13 day of July, against the Old-Exchange in
Cornhill, where he Triumphed in his suffering.

See we next a piece of their Justice upon an inanimate Statue, the old Kings
Effigies in the Old-Exchange, and the same with his Fathers at the West End of
Saint Paul's: the first they had ridiculously (in imitation of their more
scelerate cruelty) decollated; but ashamed of that impotent Revenge, had now
ordered to be taken out of its Nich altogether, and under the Basis thereof
these words were decreed to be inscribed: The Kings Statues pulled down Aug.
-- Exit Tyrannus Regum ultimus, Anno Libertatis Angliae restitutae primo,
Annoque Domini 1648. Which stood a long while, a Testimony of their Guilt, and
a memorial to Strangers of their impudent and bold-fac'd Treason; which gave
not only Truth, but even Time it self the lie: For never was there such a
thing, as the first year of the Peoples Liberty under their Anarchical
Usurpation. The other Statue of the King at its fall from the Gallery at St.
Paul's aforesaid, light upon its Feet; which was taken as a good and sure Omen
and Presage, that His Majesty's glorious Memory, Fame, and Posterity, should
recover and dure, magure all the designs and present prosperous successes of
His and their Enemies.

Mine Here Joachim Resident from the States of Holland sent home.
Mine Here Ioachim was Resident here about the same time from the
Estates-General, whom the Parliament (because the said Estates had refused to
give Audience to Mr. Strickland their Agent) had sent home, having limited his
stay here to a prefixed time; but at his departure gratified him with the free
transport of some able Horses, expressing likewise their desire of Amity: at
the same time they were somenting a Rebellion in France, by offering aid to the
City of Bordeaux, then in Arms against their Sovereign; hoping to make all the
world follow their humor, and that, as their Libellers said, the Government
thereof might return to that Form and Constitution it obtained most
universally, before the Ambition and Tyranny of Single Persons, within 1600
years last past, had invaded and overthrown it; the great motive and argument
used to the Dutch, for a nearer and strict alliance with that Plebeian
Authority and Free State.

The Duke of York had for a good while after the Kings departure continued at
Iersey (in which time Sir Richard Lane Lord Keeper of the Seal died there)
until the latter end of August, Lord Keeper Lane dies at Jersey.
whereabouts he arrived at the Louvre in Paris, bringing with him a
considerable sum of Money, the value of such Prizes as his Iersey-Frigats had
brought in, intending speedily to go thence into Holland, which journey he
pursued. In London, on the 22 of the same month, Eusebius Andrews (a former
Royallist, and Secretary to the Lord Capel) being trepan'd [a word newly heard
in England, being a Denomination of a lewd sort of people that prostituted
Strumpets under pretense of their being their Wives, and having deprehended
persons of Estates (by a sign given) in the Fact, prosecuted them at Law, to
the recovery of great damages] by one Bernards, formerly his Major, and engaged
in a kind of Plot against the Parliament; who having made a most accurate legal
Plea against the lawfulness and Authority of the High Court of Justice, and
notably defended himself, was notwithstandnig Sentenced as a Traitor, and had
the favor only of altering the manner of his Execution, Col. Andrews Executed
Aug. 2 on Tower Hill.
which was by the Axe, on Tower Hill, where he died like other Martyrs before
him, full of joy and blessed hope. Sir John Gell, who had been one of their
prime Champions in the beginning of the War, was now, in recompense of his
service, principally aimed at, and endeavored to have been wrought into the
same Confederacy (by the innocent solicitation of Colonel Andrews, and the
partaking of his Man Captain Benson therein, who was to that purpose only,
concerned in this Plot of their own contrivance, being both an old Reformade
(and so obnoxious to them for Arrears and inveterated discontent) and a
Presbyterian, of which Party Sir John was thought the only Chieftain;) but he
wisely and prudently declining all such matters, save a professing himself the
Kings Servant when opportunity should serve; though the High Court of Justice
did what they could to bring him within the danger of their new Act of new
Treason, after several hearings at their Bar, he was found only guilty of
Misprision of Treason, Sir John Gell Sentenced, and Cap. Benson Executed,
October 7.
for Concealing of it, and to lose his Estate, and suffer perpetual
Imprisonment; but Benson and Astly were Condemned, and Benson, October 7,
Executed at Tyburn, where he Loyally and Christianly (taxing their treacherous
cruelty and ingratitude) finished his Course.

Several surrenders in Ireland.
In Ireland, the resolute Garrison of Tecroghan, Governed by the Lady
Fitzgarret, with the same prudence and magnanimity as Latham-House was by the
Countess of Derby in England, having endured a very hard and long Siege,
rendered at last to the Parliaments Forces on the 26 of June; and that as
ennobled place for brave defense, the Garrison of Duncannon (where the famous
Colonel Wogans Royalists resided) together with Waterford, surrendered on the 20
of August ensuing, upon very good terms, considering how the Plague and the
Enemy had so destructively annoyed them; and the Lord Preston the Governor
Sailed into France. Caterlogh and Charlemont (two more important places)
followed the same Fortune, and gave the Parliament such hopeful assurance of a
sudden plenary Conquest, that they were thinking of transporting some of their
Foot thence into the West of Scotland, where Sultan Cromwell was now practicing,
hoping to gain Colonel Ker and Straughan (a kind of Puritan-Presbyterians of
the last Edition) over to their Party: All in a Zealous way for the Gospel, put
up in Bags here at London, for their new good Brethren of the Rebellious Kirk:
of which fine juggle more anon.

Several jealousies, Animosities among the Scots.
animosities and discontents, were now reigning among the Scots, more supremely
than the Kings Authority: the Kings friends wholly discountenanced and laid by,
even Presbyterians themselves no way understanding one another; some willing to
give the King His Rights without more stipulation and Engagements; others of
them thinking they could not sufficiently debase His Authority, and that it
should wholly depend on the Kirk; and to that purpose several irreverend
Postulata were put to him, beyond the Tenor of the Treaty at Breda; and in
fine, that party prevailed so, as that the Army then on foot was in effect but
very little for the Kings Interest and Service, but was wholly at the disposal
of the rigid Covenanters. This was not unknown to Cromwell, Cromwell makes use of
them.
who thereupon never ceased Scribbling and Divulging of the English Armies good
intentions to the people of Scotland; With whom they have no Quarrel, but
against a Malignant powerful Faction, who had brought in the King to the
disturbance of the Public National Peace and Friendship betwixt the two People;
and that he was willing by Conference to give and receive satisfaction therein,
otherwise to decide the Justice of that Cause by Battle. To which when no
Answer would be returned, he advanced on the 10 of August (having recruited his
Army by those Provisions that were plentifully brought by sea, the Fleet
sailing an even pace with him, and observing the same Signals) on the West Side
of Edinburgh up to the Line of the Scotch Army, playing his Cannon, which were
likewise Answered, and Encamped on Pencland-hills a little above
Edenburgh-Castle; intending to march for Queens-ferry, but the Passes were so
difficult, and other considerations intervened, that he proceeded no further.
Next morning came a Letter to the General, with a Declaration from the Estates
and Kirk, by sound of Trumpet, Declaring that the Quarrel being now stated, and
the King ready to consent to their demands, they were resolved to put it to the
Issue: and that the world may see what that was like to prove, it will be
worthy the memory of those transactions, to particularize them in this short
abstract.

In the Declaration of the Kirk (or Commissioners of the General Assembly) to
Cromwell as the state of the Quarrel, they most undutifully set forth (to the
giving up the merit of the Cause) That the King stumbling at, and refusing to
Subscribe unto the Declaration offered him by the Committee of Estates, and
Commissioners of the Kirk, concerning His former carriage, and resolution for
the future, is cause of just grief and offense, in reference to the Cause of
God, and the Enemies and Friends thereof. The peremptory resolution of the Kirk
of Scotland.
And therefore they do Declare, that they do not, nor will not Espouse any
Malignant Party or Quarrel, but that they Fight merely upon their former
grounds and Principles, in the Cause of God and the Kingdom; nor will they own
the King, nor his Interest, further than be owns and prosecutes the Cause of
God, etc. Concluding that they will Answer Oliver Cromwell 's Letters, and clear
themselves from the Falsehoods contained therein, as if they owned the late
Kings proceedings, and were resolved to prosecute His present Majesty's
Interest upon any other terms than as above mentioned. And this peremptory
Kirk-resolution was Signed by A. Ker, then one of the chief Colonels of the
Scotch Army.

To this Cromwell takes very good occasion to reply, Cromwell causes the
Kirk-Declaration to be read to his Army.
and help out their Sophistry with some more of his own; and to let the Scots
see of how near affinity the Kirk and the Congregational way were in this
respect to the King, he permitted, nay, caused their Declaration to be
publicly read to his Army; putting the Scotch-remonstrants upon these
Dilemma's; namely, That their professed disowning of Malignants, and receiving
and assisting their Head and Chief, in whom all their hope lies, cannot consist
in common sense or prudence, (reciting (as evidence thereof) the late Popish
affairs in Ireland, and Prince Rupert 's raving at Sea) That suppose He (the
King) should give security of his turning, it must be some other way, than by a
few and feigned formal submissions; for it is his necessity and his old
Accomplices that Counsel him to that Compliance: Nor is it possible for the Scots
(in the way that they are now in) to be able to secure themselves or England;
and concludes, that upon this Quarrel, if they be ready to fight, his Army
attends there for that purpose; and therefore the Scots cannot complain for
want of an opportunity.

These pestilent and alike dangerous Papers, (which in effect seemed rather an
Agreement than cause of quarrel between the Antagonists) were warily considered
by some, even of themselves, who loved the King, as of sudden and desperate
consequence to His Majesty's Person and Government, so highly vilified and
disregarded; so that a Declaration (to the liking of the Kirk) was extorted
from him, that there might no cause of pretense remain, either for their
obstinate carriage toward Him, or ready Compliance with the Enemy.

Hereupon the English Army advanced again; and though several Bodies of Scotch
Horse appeared, yet they presently withdrew upon their approach: which that it
might not be altogether frustrate, Cromwell in sight of them caused a Garrison
(called Red-house, Red-house stormed.
within a mile and a half of Edinburgh) to be stormed, wherein were taken 60
Foot, and the House made Tenable, and manned by the English; while the Scots
(being necessitated for Provisions, and to join with some other Forces from
Fife and the West) had marched two miles beyond Edinburgh, The Armies face one
another.
having a great Hill on the one side, and the City and a River on the other, so
that it was very hazardous to Engage them, being drawn up in Battalia, the
great Guns playing on both sides. In which posture and attendance the Scots and
English stood, and neither changed ground, till Provisions growing exceeding
scarce, Cromwell retreated to Pencland-hills ( Lambert having had some discourse
and conference with Straughan, etc. about the former equity of their Cause, de
lana Caprina) and thence with some difficulty (by reason of bad weather) to
Mussleborough for provant, and thence a few days after to Dunbar, The English
retreat to Dunbar.
with intention by shipping or any other way to get into England, being now
closely followed by the Scoth Army in their Rear; who rightly guessing the
English to be weakened with long marches and want of Victual, made cock-sure of
a total Victory, which snatching at before it was ripe for them, fearing
nothing more than that they would escape them; they saw themselves miserably
frustrated, and their despairing Enemy, a most insulting Conqueror.

On Sunday at night, the first of September, the English (making at most not
above 12000 men) came to Dunbar, whither the Scots (keeping close at their
Heels) came also and drew up their whole Army, consisting of between 20 and 24
thousand men, upon a high Hill within a mile of the Town, to the great
amazement at first of the English; but despair adding resolution to their
Courage, they presently drew out in Battalia, in the Corn-field near adjoining,
and so stood all night, being Encamped upon a neck of Land, whose breadth was
not a mile and a half from Sea to Sea; so that they were by Land quite cooped
up. In confidence therefore of an assured Victory, David Lesley who Commanded
this Kirk-Army in chief, began to advance as early as the Sun next morning, and
drew down the Hill, fixing at the foot thereof, and about four a clock in the
afternoon brought down his Train, there being a great Ditch betwixt both the
Armies. That night the English (by Command) placed themselves close to the
Ditch, and placed their Fieldpieces likewise in every Regiment, that they
might be in a readiness in case the Enemy should attempt any thing upon them,
who were vainly expecting terms of a Rendition; boasting that they had them in
a worle Pound than the King had the Earl of Essex at Lestithiel in Cornwall.

The Ministers having their Voice in the Council of War held by this Kirk-Army,
most earnestly urged the Engagement, and Fight, (against those that were of
opinion to let the English escape, and not venture the fortune of War upon an
Enemy made desperate, of which there were so many sad examples) saying, that
God had delivered Agag (meaning Cromwell) into their power; and if they let him
go, would require him at their hands.

On Tuesday-morning at four of the Clock, a Brigade of the English Army drew
down to possess themselves of a Pass upon the Road between Edinburgh and
Berwick; which being had, they might with the more ease and advantage make
their way home, and in order thereto, pass over to the Enemy, to fall upon
them. Dunbar fight, Sep. 3.
This Brigade consisted of three Regiments of Horse, of Major General
Lambert's, Commissary-General Whaley's, and Colonel Lilburn's, and two of Foot.
This gave the Scots a great Alarm, and a sore dispute happened about the Pass,
which lasted above an hour, the great Guns playing in the mean time against
both the Bodies. At length that stout Brigade gained and possessed the Pass,
much gallantry and bravery being showed on both sides. (This Pass lay at
Copperspeth in the English way homewards; to impede which, they had drawn off
their best Horse upon the right Wing to receive the English, whose Word was,
The Lord of Hosts; theirs, The Covenant.

The Enemy charged hereupon with their Lanciers, so that the Horse gave way a
little, but immediately Rallied* and the Foot advancing to second them, the
Scots were charged so home, that they put them presently to the rout, it being
about six a clock in the morning; the left Wing of Horse without striking one
stroke following the same way: the Foot seeing this rout and flight of the
Horse, and not able in any order by reason thereof to Engage, were all of a
sudden so confused and confounded, that without any resistance or offer of
Engagement, they threw down their Arms and fled, giving the English the full
pursuit of them above eight miles beyond Haddington. The Scots routed.
The number of the slain were 4000, 9000 Prisoners, many whereof were
desperately wounded, and 10000 Arms, Prisoners of Note, Sir James Lumsdale,
Lieu. Genesis of the Army, Lord Libberton, who died of his wounds,
Adjutant-General Bickerton, Scout-master Campbel, Sir Will. Douglas, L^.
Cranston, Colonel Gurden, etc.

Their Colors taken ordered to be hung up in Westminster Hall.


all their Ammunition, Bag and Bagage. Prisoners of Note were, Sir James
Lumsdale Lieutenant General of the Army, the Lord Libberton, employed by the
Estates to the King lately, and died of his wounds presently after the Fight at
Dunbar, Adjutant-General Bickerton Scout-master Campbel, Sir William Douglas,
Lord Cranston, and Colonel Gurden; 12 Lieutenant-Colonels, 6 Majors, 42
Captains, 75 Lieutenants, 17 Cornets, 2 Quarter Masters, 110 Ensigns, Foot and
Horse Colors 200, 27 Guns, some Brass, Iron and Leather: with the loss of not
above 300 English, and one Major Rookisly, who died after of his Wounds: There
was likewise taken the Purse to the great Seal of Scotland, which was presently
sent up to London, and the Colors, with those taken before at Preston, ordered
forthwith to be hung up in Westminster Hall. The full Contents of all which,
was signified in a Letter from the General in his usual strain of devout zeal,
tending very much to strengthen the Independent against the Presbyterian at
home, and the advancement of a Commonwealth to the imitation of the rest of the
World; the latter part thereof, for the severe aspect it had toward the
Ministry, in favor of Anabaptists, with which the Army swarmed, I have here
inserted. --

The Ministers of Scotland have hindered the passage of those things (meaning
his Affection to the good people of Scotland) to those to whom we intended
them, Cromwell 's Letter after the fight.
and now we see that not only the deceived people, but some of the Ministers
(three or four) are fallen in the fight. This is the great hand of the Lord,
and worthy of the consideration of those who taking into their hands the
Instrument of a foolish Shepherd, to wit, meddling with worldly policies, and
mixtures of Earthly powers, to set up that which they call the Kingdom of
Christ, (which is neither it, nor if it were it, would such be found effectual
to that end) and neglect, or trust not to the Word of God, the Sword of the
Spirit, which is alone able and powerful to that end, and when trusted to, will
be found effectually able, etc. This is HUMBLY offered for their sakes (who
have lately turned too much aside) that they might return again to Preach Jesus
Christ, etc. and then no doubt they will discern and find your protection and
encouragement. Which Humble offer was to command a strict Inquisition upon
them, as those most probable to obstruct the new Model and his future greatness.

The glory of this field, though it were by his own party ascribed to his
Valor, yet it laid a great blemish on his Conduct: and indeed the rescue of
his honor is principally to be referred to Colonel Monk, General Monk chiefly
conc^^^'d in the honor of this field.
whose company he had obliged in this Expedition, (being very understanding in
the choice, and as subtle in the shaking off his Friends and Familiars.) He
had newly had a Regiment conferred on him, made up of recruits and other
imp^rfect Comp^^^es, and did now at the Generals request draw and design the
fight, and embattle the Army, and seconded that deliberate speculation, with
forwardest of action; for which indeed most of the Officers were very
praiseworthy. After the fight, Cromwell used some catching courtesies to the
wounded Soldiers, and the feebler sort of Prisoners; but the poor Highlanders,
The Highlanders sold for Slaves.
and suchlike, paid dear for that partial kindness showed their Countrymen,
as many as with difficulty lived being sold for slaves.

Nor were their Lords and Superiors at home in much better condition of mind,
being confounded and distracted at this strange and most unexpected disaster.
The Kirk immediately ran to her old trick of humiliation, assigning their vain
confidence in the arm of flesh, to be the sole and most just cause of this
their defeat; not considering their disloyal arrogance to, and most unnatural
diffidence in their Leige-Lord and Sovereign, was that accursed thing, which
God made inquisition after in this blood, though they had hidden it, and most
hypocritically veiled it under the covering of the Covenant. These were the
rigid Kirk-men, whose peevish obstinacy this remarkable success of the English
was so far from reclaiming, that in the conclusion they totally prevaricated
from the interest of their Nation.

Others the more sober, being taught by this Lesson what it was to set up and
maintain parties and factions when the Enemy was at the door, A union of
parties endeavored by the Scots.
and so Victoriously potent, were for the perfect reconciling and uniting them;
which necessary, most incumbent, and pressing affair, was yet unhappily hindered
by even those men themselves, who when they began to consider how they must
part with that Supreme and extraordinary power they had so long Usurped, made
so many nice difficulties, by their Cavils and Disputes about the admission of
the Royal party, that Cromwell had fixed such ^ooting in their Country, that
made it a difficult task to them to keep any part for themselves. The Royalists
only, and the King himself, by all manner of tenderness and condescentions,
studying the common preservation, and suffering any thing from these, though
uncertain friends, rather than expect it from so implacable an Enemy. And in
some sort it may be said, that this overthrow did much serve to conciliate both
interests: for the Kirk could not now defend it self with its own Arms, and was
constrained to accept of help from those they had rejected; so that the Earl of
Cleaveland, Lord Wilmot, and other English Royalists (we shall mention the
Scotch by and by) who were upon their departure, (none but the Duke of
Buckingham, and Colonel Massey, Graves and Titus being permitted to stay) now
continued there; so that the common voice then was, that the King had lost
nothing in the discomfiture of that Army of the Kirk. The same day in the
afternoon presently after this blow, the Scots quitted Leith and Edinburgh,
whither old Leven got by nine of the clock, Lesley at two, and had packt up
their Bag and Baggage, and by Queens-ferry marched to Sterling. Cromwell marched
fast after them, and the next day quartered at the two places aforesaid, with a
resolution to fortify Leith; Lieutenant Colonel Paul Hobson being made
Governor thereof, and Colonel Overton of Edinburgh with his Brigade to secure
it, while the Army marched toward Sterling, having received recruits by
shipping from Dunbar. Upon occasion of this Victory, several Ministers in
London, of the Presbyterian way, were summoned to appear, Sept. 18, before the
Committee of the Militia, The Parliament at Westminster appoint a Thanksgiving
day.
according as Cromwell had intimated in the before-recited Letter, and charged
to observe the Thanksgiving day the Parliament had appointed for this their
great success in Scotland.

On the 14 of September, General Cromwell marched out of Edinburgh with 7 days
Provision, Cromwell marches for Sterling, Sep. 14.
for the Scots had not left any manner of subsistence betwixt that and
Sterling, and on the 15 reached beyond Linlithgow, but through bad weather was
constrained to retreat thither that night for shelter: the 16 to Falkirk,
within a mile of Sterling, from whence fresh Letters of the old strain were
sent into that City, but the Trumpeter was not suffered to enter; whereupon
Order was given for a Storm, but upon better thoughts of the danger, forborne,
so that on the 19 of September they returned to Linlithgow, (whither came
General Dean to him from shipboard, being newly arrived at Leith in the Speaker
Frigot) and fortified the Town, being the Road-way betwixt Edinburgh and
Sterling, and a sufficient Garrison was left to maintain it; and so on the 22
the English returned to Edinburgh, where Colonel Whaley had offered the
Ministers fled to the Castle leave to come out and Preach in their several
Parishes; but they refused.

Now was the time of the Independent Ecclesiastical Government: for the
Parliament would no longer halt between two opinions. Liberty of Conscience
Enacted in England.
An Act was now published for relief of Religious and Peaceable people, from
the rigor of former Acts of Parliament, whereby the compulsive Authority of
Presbytery, and its appurtenances of Lay Elders, was quite annihilated, and the
Separatists and Sectaries were the only Church countenanced then in London;
who to make themselves more considerable, and in grateful acknowledgment to the
Parliament, raised one Regiment of Horse, The Sectaries raise an Army.
and another of Foot, of well-affected persons, to be ready upon all occasions
for defense of the Commonwealth, and marched in good equipage through the City
to Hide-park, being then made up three Regiments of Foot, and two of Horse, to
the number of 8000. being led by Colonel, then made Major General Harrison:
Col. Harrison. made Maj. Genesis
Several other recruits for the Army were now drawn out of Colonel Barkstead's
Regiment in the Tower, and new men raised in diverse Counties for the same
service.

The Duke of York was now at the Hague, The Duke of Yoke at the Hague.
from whence he went to Breda, whereabout at a Town called Longstraet in
Brabant, His Brother the Prince of Aurange was raising of some Troops, designed
as it was thought for Scotland, to be commanded by the Duke; from whence a
while after he passed to the Rhyne in Guelderland, accompanied with some
English Noblemen, and Sir George Ratcliff, Sir John Byron, and Sir John
Berkley, and thence returned to the Hague, where the Lords Iermyn and Seymor,
with Colonel Progers, left him with the Piercy, (the Lord Culpeper taking his
journey into the Duchy of Cleve:) the Lord Cottington, and Sir Edward Hide,
were at the same time at Madrid in Spain, negotiating the Kings affairs at that
Court; where finding nothing but shows and temporary Counsels in relation to
any assistance from thence, they resolved to depart. The Lord Goring was
likewise newly come into the Low Countries.

Prince Rupert having disengaged himself of the English Fleet at Lisbon, Prince
Ruperts Fleet dispersed, Nov.
that had long blockt him up, being now at Sea on the same coast of Spain, on
the beginning of November, where at Velos and Malaga he had burnt five or six
English ships, advice hereof was presently given to General Blake, then with
the same Fleet, hovering about that shore, who on the 3 and 4 of November, with
some of his said ships, first mastered the Robuck; another of the Princes,
named the Black Prince, of 44 Guns, being ready to be boarded, ran on shore,
and on the 5 of November four more ran a ground, the Guns, Tackle and Furniture
of all which were then demanded of the King of Spain, by Fisher the Parliaments
Agent there, and promised to be delivered, as a pledge of that respect the King
of Spain was now manifesting to the Authority of the Commonwealth of England;
Prince Rupert with the Reformation, and his Brother Prince Maurice in the
Swallow, by good intelligence avoiding the same Fleet, sailed into the
Adriatic Sea, and refreshing themselves a while at Sicily (when Blake sailed
to the Isle of Majorca, guessing that for their Rendezvouze) put to Sea again,
and took an English ship called the^ Marmaduke, laden from Archangel in Russia
to Legorn, with Caveer and Hides of a great value, and with her sailed into
Toulon, and there exposed her to sale, and ^ook up their remaining part of
Winter in that station: In requital of which e^tertainment, the Parliament made
seizure of several ships, both of War and Merchandise, belonging to the French
Nation.

But before this loss, came a greater to the King; for it pleased God on the 16
of September to lessen the number of that sorrowful Family, by the death of the
Princess Elizabeth, Princess Elizabeth dies at Carisbroke- Castle: is buried
in Newport.
who died at Carisbroke-Castle; having lain sick a fortnight: she first
complained of her Head, after her coming from Bowls with her Brother the Duke
of Gloucester; and though little care was taken there, the place affording no
learned Physician, yet Dr. May^rn sent down some fitting Cordials; but her
grief was irremediable: In October she was buried in the Church of Newport, the
Mayor and Aldermen attending her to her Grave. This was seconded with the death
of the Prince of Aurange, who some while before having had several contests
with the Burgermasters of some of the chief Cities of Holland, and had designed
the seizing of Amsterdam, in order to the accomplishing his intentions of
reducing the stubborness of some of the principal there to their obedience, in
the discussing and conclusion of that affair, as he was Hunting near Arnhem, a
destemper seized him, which turning to the Small Pox, and a Flux of putrified
blood falling upon his Lungs, Prince of Aurange died Octb. 27.
presently carried him away, on the 17 of October, not without suspicion of
Poison; leaving behind him the Princess Royal near her time, who to the great
joy of the Low Countries, was deliv^red of a young Prince on the 5 of November,
as a cordial to that immoderate grief Her Highness and her Family took from
this sad providence; the Prince being the most sincere and absolute friend his
late and present Majesty found in the greatest difficulties of their affairs.

The War in Ireland went on prosperously still with the Parliament, the success
being very much facilitated by the misunderstanding and divisions that were
among the Catholics and the Protestant Loyal party there, Divisions among the
Loyal parties, in Ireland.
in so much that the Lord Ormond the Lieutenant was not regarded among them,
nor he able through this means to make any head against Ireton, then left
Deputy in that Kingdom; so that little of any memorable action passed in the
field till the expiration of the Summer, at which time Ireton intending to
besiege Limrick, one of the strongest Cities in Ireland, marched from
Waterford, and made a compass into the County of Wicklow, which being stored
with plundered Cattle, furnished him with 1600 Cows for provision in that
Leaguer, and so marched to Athlo^e in hopes to gain it; but finding the Bridge
broke, and the Town on this side burnt, he left that, and took two other
Castles, and the Bur on the same side, and presently clapped down before
Limrick, having marched 150 miles (and in some Counties 30 miles together, and
not a house or living creature to be seen.)*

The Marquess Clanrickard (to whom the Military power was by general consent
devolved, as being a Papist, and a Native of most Ancient and Noble Extraction,
and by the very good liking of the Marquess of Ormond, who had had large
experience of his exemplary fidelity to the King and the English interest, ever
since the very first Rebellion in 1641) having notice of the Enemies being at
Athlone, marched with 3000 men, to whom joined afterward young Preston late at
Waterford, presently to the relief of it, if any thing should have been
attempted; and passing the Shanon, having notice of Ireton's quitting Athlone,
took the two Castles again, and laid siege to the Bur, where two great Guns had
been left by the English. To the relief whereof likewise Colonel Axtel (having
faced them before, but now reinforced) marched with a resolution to Engage,
being in all some 2500 men: whereupon the Marquess Clanrickard quitted the
Siege, and retreated to Meleke Island, bordering upon the Shanon, into which
there was but one Pass, and a Bog on each side: On the 25 of October, a little
before night, Axtel made a resolute attempt upon them, and after a sharp
disp^te beat them from the first and second Passes; The Marq* of Clan^ickards
Forces ^e^eated by Col. Axtel, October. 25.
and at the third, which was strongly fortified, came to the B^t-end of the
Musket, and entered the Island, which the Irish in flight deserted, leaving
most of their Arms behind, 200 Horse, all their Wagons and Baggage* so that
what by the Sword and the River, one half of that Army perished: On the English
side, Captain Goff and a hundred more were killed: the Marquess was himself not
present, but was gone upon a design against the Siege at Limerick, which
advanced very slowly. The next day the Irish quitted all the Garrisons they had
taken, and fired them; whereupon Ireton drew from Limerick, and took in the
st^o^g Castle of Neanagh in low Ormond, and so retreated to his Winter Quarters
a^ Kilkenny in November.

These untoward events and misfortunes one upon the neck of another, together
with the displacency and dissatisfaction among themselves, The Marq. of Ormo^^,
and Lord Inchiqueen, resolved to depart out of Ireland, Nov.
made the Lord Ormond despair of retriving His Majesty's interest in that
Kingdom without foreign assistance, and therefore he resolved to depart; and
signified his intentions accordingly to the Council of of the Irish, who after
some arguments and entreaties of his further stay, did at last humbly and
sorrowfully take leave of him, rendering him all expressions of thanks and
honor for those unwearied Services he had done his Country, and passed several
Votes in record thereof, desiring his Lordship to excuse those many failures
which evil times and strange necessities had caused in them, and desiring him
to be their Advocate to His Majesty, and to other Princes, to get some aid and
supplies from them, to the defense of that gasping Realm, that now strugled
with its last Fate. About the beginning of December the Marquess took shipping
in a little Frigate called the Elizabeth, of 28 Tuns and 4 Guns, and set sail
from Galloway, followed by the Lord Inchiqueen, Colonel Vaughan, the Noble
Colonels Wogan and Warren, and some 20 more persons of Honor, intending for
France, Scilly, or Iersey, but happily landed at St. Malos, in France in
January; whence they went to Paris, and gave the Queen Mother an account of
that Kingdom. Thence the Marquess of Ormond removed to Flanders, and the Lord
Inchiqueen into Holland, and came to Amsterdam; the Valiant Wogan taking the
first opportunity in Scilly, in order to his further service of the King in
Scotland, where he first manifested his Zeal and gallantry to the Royal Cause.

The noise of these lucky Achievements, had made most of the Neighboring
Princes consider a little further and more regardfully of this Commonwealth,
more especially such whose Trade by Sea might be incommodated by their
Naval-force, which now Lorded it in gallant Fleets upon the adjoining Seas. The
first whom this danger prevailed upon, was the King of Portugal John the 4.
whose Fleet (laden with Sugar from Brasile) General Blake had met with, and for
his entertainment of Prince Rupert with his Fleet (now newly taken and
dispersed) brought away 9 of them into the River of Thames, where they were
delivered to the Commissioners for Prize-goods, then newly established by
Authority of Parliament (upon which score the State received in few years many
hundred thousand pounds, and was cheated of almost as much) whose names were,
Blackwel, Blake, Sparrow; and upon the Dutch-War others particularly named for
that very Affair, because of its continual Employment.

In the Month of December therefore he sent hither his Ambassador, An
Ambassador from Portugal to the new States. Dec.
who landed at ^he Isle of Wight, and gave notice to the Council of State of
his Arrival, who (instead of a better complement) sent him a safe Conduct for
his Journey to London, there being then open Hostility between the two Nations,
for that the King of Portugal, to satisfy himself of his damages sustained in
his Sugar-fleet, had sei^^d all the English Merchants goods in Lisbon. On the
11 of December, he had Audience before a Committee of Parliament (attended with
the Master of the Ceremonies and 20 of his own retinue) in the House of Lords;
which he at first refused to accept, as being a Diminution to his Masters
Greatness; but at last was forced to accept of the Lord-Commissioner Whitlock,
Major General Harrison, Sir Henry Vane, Thomas Challoner, and others, being
appointed thereunto. He delivered his Credentials, which were to the Parliament
of England, and made an excellent Rhetorical Harangue, setting forth the
Constant Friendship betwixt both Kingdoms, and the Civilities they had received
formerly and of late from the English, and desiring that the late
misunderstanding might occasion no further breach thereof, but that a firm and
new League might be ratified as formerly. He had answer, that the Committee
would report his Message to the Parliament: and so after a mutual Salutation
upon the Ambassadors rising from his Chair, he withdrew with the same
attendance. But the reason he had no solemner Reception, was the pride and
opimonastry the States had of themselves, by the Courtships and flattering
Insinuations of the Spanish Kings Ambassador, who had likewise desired Audience
of them, and came with a most welcome acknowledgement of their Commonwealth;
and it was a reciprocal kindness to him, not to allow the Portugal (his
pretended Rebel, and a much less potent Prince) the said Grandeurs and Legatory
Honors, considering besides the uninterrupted amity that had yet been
maintained by the Spaniard.

On the 16 of December, therefore, Don Alonzo de Cardenas, who had lain Leiger
Ambassador in the Kings time throughout the War, The Spanish Ambassador
likewise acknowledged them a Free State, December.
was with all State received to Audience in the Parliament House, he having
delivered his Credentials to the Speaker, which were directed [ Ad Parliamentum
Reipublicae Angliae] and Conducted back again with large protestations of
friendship, and good correspondence on their part to be inviolately observed.

During these Foreign Agencies, the New State was Alarmed with an Insurrection
in Norfolk, An Insurrection in Norfolk:
where some hundreds of men were gathered together, Declaring for King Charles
the second: but the County-Horse quartering at Lyn, and a Troop of Rich's men
that were near at hand (being there before) having some intelligence of the
design, Suppressed.
presently dispersed them, most flying into Lincolnshire; and saved the
London-Forces the trouble of a long Journey, who were then on their way. A High
Court of Justice Erected at Norwich.
To try these Insurrectors, a High Court of Justice was Erected by the
Parliament at Norwich, the Members and Commissioners whereof chose out of
themselves; Justice Iermin their President, and Justice Puliston and Warberton
to be his Co-adjutors. Those Condemned 24, whereof 20 were Executed: Mr. Cooper
a Minister, Maj. Saul and others Executed.
the chief of those thus Condemned, were Mr. Cooper a Minister in the same
County, who was Executed at Holt, and died a Loyal and Christian Martyr; Major
Saul, formerly an Officer in the Kings Army; and a Merchant and a Brewer in the
City of Norwich. There were several persons of quality besides, as Sir John
Tracy, Gibbons Esquire. and others secured and committed; but no proof coming in,
they were at last acquitted.

While we mention the High Court of Justice, A memorable accident at Oxford.
a very remarkable instance of the Justice of Heaven (the Highest Court)
deserves mention. One Anne Green, a Servant in Sir Thomas Read's House at
Dunstu in Oxfordshire, being supposed to be gotten with Child by one of that
Family (as the woman constantly affirmed when she had no temptation to lie)
near the fourth Month of her time, with over-working her self by turning of
Malt, fell in Travel; and not knowing what the matter might be, went to the
House of Office, and with some straining, the Child (not above a span-long,
and of what Sex not to be distinquished) fell unawares (as she all along
affirms) from her. Now there appearing the signs of such a thing in the
Linen where the Wench lay, and carrying a suspicion thereof; and she before
confessing that she had been guilty of such matters as might occasion his being
with Child; thereupon a search was made, and the abovesaid Infant was found on
the top of the Jakes, and she after three days from her delivery being carried
to the Castle of Oxford, was forthwith Arraigned before Mr. Crook, sitting as
Judge in a Commission of Oyer and Terminer, and by him Sentenced to be Hanged;
which was Executed on the 14 day of December in the said Castle-yard. She hung
there near half an hour, being pulled by the Legs and struck on the Breast by
diverse Friends, and above all received several strokes on her Stomach with the
But-end of a Soldiers Musket. Being cut down, she was put into a Coffin, and
brought to a house to be Dissected (before a Company of Physicians, according
to appointment) by Doctor Petty the Anatomy-Reader in that University. When
they opened the Coffin to prepare the Body for Dissection, they perceived some
small rattling in her Throat; and a lusty Fellow standing by, thinking to do an
act of Charity, stamped upon her Breast and Belly. Doctor Petty, Mr. Willis of
Christ-Church, and Mr. Clerk of Magdalen-Colledge, presently used means, and
opening a Vein, laid her in a warm Bed, and caused one to go into Bed to her;
and continued the use of diverse Remedies, respecting her senselessness, Head,
Throat, and Breast; so that it pleased God within 14 hours she spoke, and the
next day talked and prayed very heartily, and was in a hopeful way of perfect
health: whereupon the Governor presently procured her a Reprieve; thousands of
people coming to see her, and magnifying the just providence of God in
asserting her Innocence of Murder. After two or three days of her recovery,
when Doctor Petty heard she had spoken, and suspecting that the Women about her
might suggest unto her to relate of strange Visions and Apparitions to have
been seen by her in that time wherein she seemed dead (which they had begun to
do) having caused all to depart the room but the other Gentlemen of the
Faculty, she was asked concerning her sense and apprehensions during that time
she was Hanged. At first she spoke somewhat impertinently, talking as if she
had been now to suffer; and when they spoke unto her of her miraculous
deliverance from so great sufferings, she answered, That she hoped that God
would give her patience, and the like. Afterward, when she was better
recovered, she affirmed, and does still, that she neither remembereth how her
Fetters were knocked off, how she went out of the Prison, when she was turned
off the Ladder, whether any Psalm was sung or not, nor was she sensible of any
pain as she can remember. Another thing observable is, that she came to her
self as if she had awakened out of a Sleep, not recovering the use of speech by
slow degrees, but in a manner all together, beginning to speak just where she
had left off on the Gallows. I have thought this occurrence no way unworthy of
a Remembrance in this Chronicle, but very fit to be transmitted to Posterity,
for Gods Glory, and Man's Caution in Judging and punishing.

Several Acts passed the Parliament this January; Several Acts of Parliament
Passed.
as namely, for continuance of the Committee for the Army, and Treasurers at
War; for the Receiving and Issuing of the several sums of Money appointed to be
received and paid, by virtue of their Act for the raising of 120000 pounds per
mensem, for 4 Months, to Commence the 28 of December. 1650. for the Maintenance
of the Army, etc. Another Act passed for Importation of Bullion, with the usual
privileges, and to have free passage and protection without any seizure upon
any pretense whatsoever; (which was very well cautioned) and another against
Forced and Stolen Marriages, Enabling Commissioners of the Great Seal to Issue
Commissions of Delegates in case of pretended Marriage; and lastly, one for
taking away the Fee of Damage-clear, or Damna Clericorum, from the first of
January 1650. Not to omit in this place, that Sir John Stawell was now the
third time before the High Court of Justice.

From the Gown pass we to the Sword. The Progress of Cromwell in Scotland.
The English Army in Scotland, not being able to effect any thing against the
main Army of the Kings that lay on Sterling-side, resolved to be doing with a
party that then lay in the West of Scotland, under the Command of Colonel Ker
and Stra^ghan, with whom Cromwell had maintained an open intercourse, and had
proffered them a Cessation; driving at this, to take them off, and subdivide the
Nation in several parties: and the effect of his Papers taxing the Scots with
the admission of the King upon the old Malignant score, did operate as he
projected; for thereupon out comes a Declaration or Remonstrance from these
Western Fellows, The Traiterous Western Remonstrance of some Scots,
full of saucy and Treasonable Language, which accordingly was Voted both by
the Commissioners of the Kirk, and the Committee of Estates, to be scandalous
and seditious: Sir James Stuart, and Sir John Cheisly, and one Mr. Leviston
(who seemed to countenance it) were strictly watched, and Straughan taken and
made Prisoner in Dunbarton, and after in Cathnes-Castle, whence he escaped, and
came over to the English at Edinburgh: but 'twas more the sacred hunger of Gold
than Zeal for Religion, made him first betray his King, and his Country after:
and we shall see all Cromwell's Proselytes of that Nation, both Dundass,
Warreston, and Giffin, to love nothing so much as the Mammon of Presbytery.

Straughan thus removed, Major General Lambert was sent to prevail with Ker,
either by blows or words; the latter being thought as feasible as the former:
and accordingly on the last of November, having difficulty found and passed a
Ford over Hamilton-River, Ker got notice of it, and resolutely fell into the
Major-Generals Quarters at a Town of that name; but the Horse being in a
readiness to receive him, he lost a hundred men, had his Hand almost cut off,
and was taken Prisoner; Ker defeated and taken Prisoner.
and the rest of his party, being 5 Regiments of Horse, two whereof were the
Earl of Cassels and Kirconbrights, pursued as far as Air, where
Commissary-General Whaley was now left to Command in chief in those
Western-parts. Cromwell had marched with his Army this way as far as Glasgow in
October; but understanding or dreading the Enemy would come and relieve
Edenburgh-Castle with Provisions and another Governor (being in Treaty with
the present for a sum of Money) he forthwith retired; having there took and
Garrisoned two Houses, while Colonel Whaley took in Dalkeith and another nest
of Moss-Troopers: yet his coming thither hindered Major General Mountgomery from
marching into those parts, to reduce Ker likewise to his obedience to the King.

Edenburgh-Castle had been Besieged some Months and upwards, with little loss
on either side, save that the Great Guns from the Castle did some mischief in
Edenburgh-streets, and one Captain Hamilton was shot in the Head with a Musket
as he was viewing the Castle, and the Morter-pieces made semblance of great
terror and annoyance to the Besieged; a Mine was likewise carried on some 60
foot, the Stone being cut all the way; but then they could proceed no further,
being come to the Rock whereon the Castle stands: nevertheless the
Derby-shire-Miners (being 12 in number) did what they could to proceed, the
Enemy throwing Pitch and Flax, and other combustible stuff into the Works. At
last the personated Hostility came to a period; and Dundass old Levens
Son-in-law pretending want of Water, came to a Parley; and having premised a
colorable request of 10 days time, to send to the Committee of Estates, by
whom he said he was entrusted, which he knew was to be denied; and after
several Missives betwixt Cromwell and Him, concluded the rendition of that most
important place to the Kings Service, Edinburgh- Castle yielded Dec. 24.
in these Articles agreed on betwixt Major Abernethy Dundasses man, and Captain
Henderson on one side, and Colonel Monk and Lieutenant Colonel White on the
other. (It was always before called the Maiden, it may henceforth be called the
Prostitute- Castle.) The Articles were as follow.

The Articles for the Rendition of Edenburgh-Castle.
That the Castle should be Surrendered to his Excellency Oliver Cromwell, with all
the Ordinance, Arms, Magazine, and Furniture of War thereunto belonging, on
Tuesday the 24 of December. 2. That the Governor, Officers and Soldiers
should march with Drums beating, etc. in Military posture, to such place as
they shall appoint. 3. The Public movables, private Writs and Evidences to be
removed to Sterling. 4. That Proclamation should be made for all that had Goods
in the Castle, to come or send to own and receive them. 5. All sick Officers
and Soldiers, as well such as hurt (in reputation) to have liberty to stay in
Edinburgh, and the English to provide Horses and Wagons for the Governor and
other Officers, and Hostages to be given on the Scots part for performance.

There were found in it five French Cannon, nine Dutch half-Cannon, two
Culverings, two demi-Culverings, two Minions, two Falcons, 28 Brass Drakes
called Monkeys, two Petards, betwixt seven and eight thousand Arms, near eighty
Barrels of Powder, and a like store of Cannon-shot. Col. Fenwick mad^ Governor
(...), and of Leith for the Parliament.
Colonel Fenwick was presently upon the Surrender made Governor of this and
Leith. Sir Arthur Haslerig and Mr. Scot were present at the Rendition thereof,
and then departed, their work being done; which that it may the better appear
for a piece of the vilest Treachery any Scot ever committed (though Cromwell
ascribes it in his Letter to the Speaker to the alone wisdom of God, beyond all
humane power and accomplishment) take this account from the lovers themselves
of this Treason at Edinburgh. The greatest want they had was of Beer; but as
for Oatmeal, Butter, Fresh Water, and Salt Meat, they had enough. The Master
Gunner told me, that when our Guns were a drawing to the Batteries, he had so
placed his Pieces that ours could not possibly have been planted without great
loss; but when he prepared to give fire, he was forbidden by the Governor upon
pain of death. His man Abernethy went often out of the Castle upon pretense of
getting Intelligence; (but it was to hold it with Cromwell:) sure it is, that
Dundass and he and some others were a little wiser, and went not over the Water
as they had made Conditions, some of th^se that did being Imprisoned (the Court
and Camp being sadly affected with this loss.) The Provost of Edinburgh, Sir
James Stuart, is in Town, but keeps private, lest the Wives in the streets
should abuse him as they did Straughan and Ker at their coming hither: the Lord
Warreston, who came as he pretended for the Records, is not yet returned, but
stays in Town, for he cares not to go back. He and the rest of that Remonstrant
Tribe are Summoned to come to Parliament; Colonel Dundass, Straughan* and
Captain Giffan, with Abernethy, Swinton and Andrews, were else to be
Excommunicated, and Declared Traitors, which was done, January 14. Mr. James
Guthry, and the Earl of Lothian, and General Holborn, were generally suspected,
with Sir John Chiefly, who are every day expected in our Quarters. Rutherford
and Gillespy are likewise dissenters from the present manage of affairs. Ker
says, his wound on his right hand is Gods Justice against him, for lifting it
up against us in such a cause as he maintained. And so I will conclude all
those Treasonable practices, and fomented divisions of that Nation against
their common Interest.

Having first acquainted the Reader with an occurrence of the like nature, from
the better mannered and necessity-instructed Kirk, who yet would fain have been
paramount, The Scots boldly sollicitous with the King.
and were most boldly sollicitous with the King to consent to some other Acts
mis-becoming the Majesty of a Sovereign, and the Honor of His Crown; which the
King generously and disdainfully refusing, there flew such rumors and
whispers, as if some disloyal and dishonest Counsels were hatching against his
Person; His Majesty withdraws to Genesis Middleton.
whereupon the King privately withdrew himself to his Northern Friends and
Forces under General Middleton, till such time as a right understanding
(Hostages being given on both sides, as to his party and theirs) was settled
betwixt them; which was firmly and absolutely concluded in an unanimous resolve
of his immediate Coronation, which was solemnly performed on the first of
January in this manner.

First the Kings Majesty, The manner of His Coronation January 1.
in a Princes Robe, was conducted from his Bedchamber, by the Constable on his
right hand, and the Marshal on his left, to the Chamber of Presence; and there,
was placed in a Chair under a Cloth of State by the Lord of Angus,
Chamberlain, appointed by the King for that day; and there after a little
repose, the Noblemen, with the Commissioners of Barons and Buroughs, entered
the Hall, and presented themselves before His Majesty.

Thereafter the Lord Chancellor spoke to the King, to this purpose: Sir, your
good Subjects desire You may be Crowned, The Lord-Chancellors Speech to the
King.
as the righteous and Lawful Heir of the Crown of this Kingdom; that You would
maintain Religion as it is presently professed and established: Also that You
would be graciously pleased to receive them under Your Highness's Protection,
to Govern them by the Laws of the Kingdom, and to defend them in their Rights
and Liberties by Your Royal Power; offering themselves in most humble manner to
your Majesty, with their Vows to bestow Land, Life, and what else is in their
Power, for the maintenance of Religion, for the safety of Your Majesty's sacred
Person, and maintenance of Your Crown; which they entreat Your Majesty to
accept; and pray Almighty God, that for many years You may happily enjoy the
same.

His Majesty's Answer.
The King made this Answer: I do esteem the affections of my good People more
than the Crowns of many Kingdoms, and shall be ready by Gods assistance to
bestow my Life in their defense; wishing to live no longer than I may see
Religion and this Kingdom flourish in all happiness.

He is accompanied by the Nobility to the Kirk of Scoone.
Thereafter, the Commissioners of Borroughs and Barons, and the Noblemen
accompanied His Majesty to the Kirk of Scoone, in order and rank according to
their quality, two and two. The Spurs being carried by the Earl of Eglington.
Next, the Sword by the Earl of Rothes. Then the Scepter by the Earl of Crawford
and Lindsey: And the Crown by the Marquess of Arguile, immediately before the
King. Then came the King, with the great Constable on the right hand, and the
great Marshal on his left, his Train being carried by the Lord Ereskine, the
Lord Montgomery, the Lord Newbottle, and the Lord Machlelene, four Earls Eldest
Sons, under a Canopy of Crimson-Velvet supported by six Earls Sons, to wit, the
Lord Drummond, the Lord Carnegie, the Lord Ramsey, the Lord Iohnston, the Lord
Br^chin, the Lord Yester; and the six Carriers supported by six Noblemens Sons.
Thus the Kings Majesty entered the Kirk.

The Kirk being fitted and prepared with a Table, whereupon the Honors were
laid, and a Chair set in a fitting place for His Majesty to hear a Sermon, over
against the Minister, and another Chair on the other side, where He received
the Crown, before which there was a Bench decently covered, as also for seats
about for Noblemen, Barons and Burgesses; and there being also a Stage in a fit
place erected of 24 foot square, about four foot high from the ground, covered
with Carpets, with two stairs, one from the West, another to the East; upon
which great Stage there was another little Stage erected, some two foot high,
ascending by two steps; on which the Throne or Chair of State was set.

The Kirk thus fittingly prepared, the Kings Majesty entered the same,
accompanied as aforesaid; and first set himself in his Chair, for hearing of
Sermon, which was Preached by Mr. Robert Douglas, Mr. Robert Douglass preaches
before the King.

Prince of Aurange Christened.


A la mode the Covenant. About this time the young Prince of Aurange was
Christened; at which celebration the States General of Holland, of Amsterdam,
of Delf, were his Godfathers, and the Queen of Bohemia and the old Princess of
Aurange his Godmothers, and was named William Frederick Henry.

But this being over, the King intended to march Northward, to hasten the said
levies by his presence: but the Nobility and Gentry of the High-lands,
promising to effect that affair with all expedition, he went no further than
Aberdeen, having more occasion to continue in the Southern parts to keep the
newly re-cemented friendship betwixt both parties entire, and from other new
Ruptures, and to countenance his friends, Several of the King Friends preferred
and entrusted.
who now were admitted into the chiefest places of Trust and Offices: Duke
Hamilton being received into the Army; Earl of Crawford made Governor of
Sterling, Middleton Lieutenant General, and other Loyal Scotch Lords in Offices
and Commands befitting their quality, and to their seats in Parliament, which
was to set down the 15 of February; the King diverting himself in the mean time
at his house of Falkland, care being taken to secure the Castle of Fife from
any Invasion; two attempts that way being already made in the beginning of
February, upon Brunt Island; which nevertheless miscarried, with a great loss
of men: but the want of Provisions the English then labored under, and their
having hopes of plenty on that ^ide ( Fife being the fertilest and most
abounding place in all Scotland) made them every day contrive and venture a
landing thereon, Fife- Castle attempted by the English.
and flat-bottomed Boats and Sloops were now a coming from Newcastle and London
for the accommodating their passage.

Cromwell likewise was very earnest and intent upon making or finding a way by
Sterling; and therefore on the eighth of February he marched thither again,
having been informed of some Fords thereabouts where he might pass his Army, or
at least impede their raising of new Forces, and way-lay their marching into
England, which was given out as the grand design, a Force being lef^ on that
side the Water sufficient to sustain any impression of the English; and to that
Expedition Duke Hamilton, Duke of Buckingham, Lords Cleaveland, Wentworth,
Wilmot, and Colonel Massey, who had a Noble and full Reg^ment, and was to be
Major General, with Titus, and Colonel Graves, were designed. Cromwell, as was
said, to this purpose, in very tempestuous weather reached his intended passes;
but found the approaches to them so boggy and unpassable, that in the same
stress of weather his Army half spoiled with cold and other discommodities, he
was forced to retire again, as he had done twice before, (having only Alarmed
the Scots, and put them into a sudden posture of defense) and to await the time
of his Boats arrival, and a happier season of the year. About this time
Hume-Castle was taken by Colonel Fenwick, Hume- Castle taken Feb. 4, by Col.
Fenwick for the Parliament.
the Garrison having held it to extremity, being forced to deliver it at mercy,
February 4. A Copy of the Governors Answer to the Summons, for the quaint
briskness thereof, I have thought fit to pleasure the Reader withal.

Right Honorable,
I have received a Trumpeter of yours, The Governors Answer to the Summons.
as he tells me, without your Pass, (he had forgot it, it seems, and left it
behind upon the Table) to Render Hume-Castle to the Lord-General Cromwell;
please you I never saw your General, nor know your General: as for Hume-Castle
it stands upon a Rock: given at Hume-Castle this day before seven a Clock. So
rests without prejudice of his Native Country,

Your most Humble Servant, John Cockburn.


Timtallon-Castle, Timtallon- Castle yielded by Sir James Seaton, to the
Parliament of England.
which had been very prejudicial to the English Sea-traders to Leith, and had
taken more men than all the Garrisons in Scotland, having been Besieged above a
week by Colonel Monk; upon the 21 of February, after the Mortar-pieces had
played, and a Battery of six Great Guns was raised, yielded to mercy; Sir James
Seaton the Governor, newly knighted, not being able to obtain any other
Condition; but Colonel Monk, out of his usual civility, suffered not a man of
them to be stripped or plundered. There were 15 Great Guns taken in it, and the
passage not only freed, but an Inlet opened to the Bass Island. General Ruthen
Earl of Brentford and Forth, General Ruthen, Earl of Brentford and Forth,
deceaseth.

David Lesley General for the Scots.


nominated to be this Kings General also, deceased about this time, and left
that Command without any further competition to David Lesley, old Leven having
likewise retired himself both from Counsel and Service as superannuated; but
indeed disregarded.

Our New States at home found it opportune, being grown so potent abroad, and
so dreaded at home, to discard their Journey-men of the Council of Sat, A new
Council of State, March.
whose assistance they were forced to use (though they would not assent and
concur with them in their alteration of the Government, and the Murder of the
King, etc. but would act as it was now altered) in the rearing of their Model;
twenty one of them, such as were instrumental and principal in the Change, as
Cromwell, Bradshaw, and others of the Kings Judges, being continued, and twenty
new ones of the same gang were surrogated in the others places: for they could
now do the work and receive the wages themselves. To those a power was given of
executing the Admiralship to all purposes and intents, as any Admiral of
England had executed it before. John Fry one of the Kings Judges, writts a Book
against the Trinity: he is Voted to leave the House, and his Book to be burned.
About this time one John Fry another of the Kings Judges, having written a
blasphemous Book against the Trinity, but purposely against the Divinity of
Christ, as the Socinians teach, was by a Vote disbanded their Company in the
House, and his Book ordered to be burnt by the Sheriffs of London: not a word
of the Hangman in the Order, for that would have sounded ominous to the whole
pack of them, now in pomp and great splendour.

The King having visited Dundee, Aberdeen, and other places, accompanied with
Arguile, who had raised men for Him in his Countries, returned to St. Iohnstons
and the Low-lands, against the sitting down of the Parliament at that City;
which was appointed on the 2 of March; in which interim, He gave Audience to a
Dutch Envoy, A Dutch Envoy complains to the King of Sir Jo. Greenvile Governor
of the Isle of Scilly, and others.
who came to complain of the taking of 20 of their Merchant-ships by Sir John
Greenvile, Governor for the King in the Isle of Scilly; to which the King gave
a favorable Answer. The Earl of Derby likewise seized diverse Vessels belonging
to the English Irish Trade, and held intelligence with the King in Scotland;
having employed one Master Berkenhead in the business, who was taken about the
beginning of March by Colonel Lilborne; Sir Philip Musgrave and Sir Theophilus
Gilby hardly escaping by rowing away in a Boat. Several Dutch ships laden with
Ammunition, sent by the Lord Iermin (as the Dutch pretended) arrived likewise
at Dundee; whereabouts, and over all the adjacent parts, Drums were beating,
and a speedy march was resolved on. The Earl of Calender, a great Hamiltonian,
which party now swayed, being newly come over Sea, an Employment in spite of
the Kirk was intended to be conferred on him. On the 27 of February the Prince
of Aurange was Buried in great state at Delf in Holland, The Prince of Aurange
buried, Feb. 21.
and Interred in the Vault of his famous Predecessors.

By the taking of these Papers and Mr. Berkenhead, after the Earl of Derby's
design in Lancashire, whither Massey was to have marched with a flying party
(and a kind of a motion he made that way, but immediately retreated) the States
at Westminster to exact scrutiny addressed themselves: and having traced it, gave
order for the apprehension of one Thomas Cook of Grays-Inne Esquire, Tho. Cook
of Grays-Inne Esquire. committed to the Tower.
who being brought, and attending at the Council-door, gave his Keeper the
slip, and was pursued with a Proclamation, and 100 pounds offered to any should
take him and bring him in; and was taken thereupon the next Week in an
Upholsters-house in London, Maj. General Harrison ordered to march into
Lancashire.
and committed to the Tower; and Major General Harrison was ordered to march
speedily into Lancashire, to attend all motions and designs in those parts.

This Month Maj. Harrison of Guernsey Island (kept for the Parliament) having a
design upon Cornet-Castle (held by Colonel Burgess for the King, being now and
then relieved with Shallops and Boats which struck in thither from the Coast of
France) attempted it by Storm, having false information that most of the
Garrison were dead, and the rest weak and feeble; but were so stoutly received,
that very few that Engaged got off again, the Tide too coming in and drowning
many of them, to the utter disheartning of them from any future Assault; so
that they resolved to try what fair means would do, and by a sum of Money
amounting to 1500 pounds, Cornet- Castle delivered by Col. Burgess to M.
Harrison for the Parliament.
with other good Conditions and Indemnity, which (there being no likelihood of
doing His Majesty any Service by longer keeping it, relief also being so very
scarce, difficult, and uncertain) was at last accepted, and that little Citadel
delivered into their Hands.

The Irish defeated at Finagh, March 13.
In Ireland, the Forces there remaining being now under the sole Command of the
Marquess of Clanrickard, whom the Earl of Castlehaven did to the last assist in
the Kings Service, being drawn to the relief of Finagh, were there totally
routed; 800 taken and killed, Colonel Macdonnel, his Lieutenant Colonel and
Major taken prisoners, Colonel Mac Hugh and Colonel Caban killed, and 376
Officers besides taken; upon which followed the Rendition of Finagh upon
Articles. After these successes, several Officers having liberty to go for
England, it was the fortune of the Colonels Axtell, Sadler, the Irish
Adjutant-General, and Colonel Le Hunt to be taken Prisoners by a Frigate of
Scilly, and there Landed and Imprisoned, till such time as that Island
acknowledged the possession of the States of England; who having erected their
High Court of Justice, had in revenge of Dorislaus and Ascham Sentenced Sir
Henry Hide Cosen to Sir Edward then Lord-Chancellor with the King, for taking
upon him the quality of an Ambassador from His Majesty to the Grand Seignior at
Constantinople, and demanding Audience in his Name; which they aggravated with
imputations of his design of seizing those Merchants Estates there, and
Affronting Sir Thomas Bendish the old Resident there with his new Commission.
It booted nor availed Sir Henry (who at his Trial (having been long out of
England) would have used the Italian Tongue as the readiest for his defense;
which was also charged upon him as his vanity and pride) to deny, extenuate or
justify the several parts of his accusation: Sir Henry Hide Beheaded June 4,
in London.
his Name was guilt enough. He was Sentenced to be Beheaded; which Death he
suffered against the Old Exchange on Cornhill, with as much courage of mind,
as weakness of Body, and is justly inscribed to the Roll of Martyrs. Captain
Brown Bushel, C^pt. Brown Bushel Executed, Mar. 29.
(who had delivered Scarborough to Sir Hugh Cholmly, then revolted in the year
1643. from the Parliament, and being Prisoner at Hull for the same, had been
exchanged by Hotham, then winding about to his Allegiance) suffered in the same
manner the 29 of March. But it is not a rude Prolepsis of the time, to assign
him (because of the nearness of their Deaths for the same cause of Loyalty) his
place in this year, in the Company of Sir Henry Hide.

Yet before we conclude the Revolution of this year, we must add one of the
most remarkable occurrences in it, viz. the Ambassadors sent by this State to
that of the Low Countries, who departed hence about March the 10, and landed at
Rotterdam the 14, being met by the way by two Yachts of State, and handsomely
accommodated at the English-house there, by some of the said Company. The Names
of them were, Chief Justice Saint John of the Common Pleas, formerly the Kings
Solicitor, and the Earl of Straffords vehement Adversary; and Mr. Walter
Strickland; styled in their Credentials the Lords Ambassadors Extraordinary
from the Parliament of England, and were the first that they ever sent to any
Foreign Princes; for as from Kings and Sovereigns they had just cause to fear
their united Forces, to chastise that infamous Regicide, whose example was so
dangerous to themselves.

Anno Dom. 1651.
ON the 30 of March (attended by a gallant Retinue of their own, and such as
that State sent with Coaches) they were received to Audience, The Lord Saint
John and Strickland Ambassadors to Holland. They desire a firm League.
where Saint John in a well-composed Speech, very gravely declared, that
notwithstanding several injuries received by the English Commonwealth and
Subjects from that State; yet the Parliament had sent them first to make a firm
League and Friendship with them, if they should think fit. 2. That to that
purpose they would renew that most amicable Treaty of Commerce, made between
the King of England and the Duke of Burgundy, their then Sovereign in 1495. 3.
He set forth those many advantages in point of Trade and Navigation the Dutch
might receive from England by such a League, discoursing of the commodiousness
and Excellent Situation of the Ports and Harbors, and other Emoluments. 4. He
expressed the just resentment of the Parliament for the Death of Doctor
Darislaus, and that he doubted not but their High and Mighty Lordships would
give satisfaction therein, and cause Justice to be Executed upon those
Offenders. Which said, a Committee was appointed to confer with him further,
and he conducted in the same manner as he came, to his own Lodgings.

The States General show no forwardness to this new friendship.
But the States General showed no great readiness to embrace this new Friendship
of their Rival States, although the Province of Holland did endeavor to
promote it; for the Prince of Aurange's Interest was yet very potent in their
Assemblies, which was the reason no Address had been made before in his
lifetime from the Parliament, who very much courted this peoples Amity, not
only from the nearness and likeness of both their rises to be Commonwealths;
but for that no danger was so near, and to be feared elsewhere from the
Interest and Alliance of the King. But the people were far more averse to any
accommodation with Traitors and Murderers, as they called these Ministers and
their followers; which Clamours were heightened by the Royalists, then yet in
great numbers residing there. The Duke of York being then in the Country with
the Princess of Aurange his Sister, as also the Queen of Bohemia, and Prince
Edward her Son, who first gave these Ambassadors an Affront as they chanced to
meet him in their Coach, taking the Air near the Hague, with his Sister the
Princess Henrietta in his Hand, where in indignation he gave them the
opprobrious names of Dogs and Traitors. The Ambassadors affronted by Prince
Edward son to the Queen of Bohemia.
The next day several uproars were made about their House, as if there were a
resolution to Storm it; nor was it safe for them or any of their Gentlemen to
stir abroad, and several advices were given them of designed attempts upon
their persons: Of both these affronts and injuries they complained to the
States; They complain to the States, and have a Guard appointed them.
who after a long and tedious delay, summoned Prince Edward to appear and
answer; but he pleaded he was a Prince of the Empire, and Subject to no other
Jurisdiction; and for the other appointed them a Corpse du guard to secure the
House; and by a Proclamation prohibited all manner of injuries or violence to
be done unto them: but notwithstanding the said indignities were yet committed
frequently.

In this sort they continued there, expecting an Answer and Conclusion (which
Mounsieur Bellieur did likewise hinder what in him lay, his Servants and
attendants being as quarrelsome and slighting of these English as any
whosoever) and in the interim six of the chiefest Gentlemen of their Retinue
traveling upwards the Country, were met by a Lorain-Colonel one Harter then
going to the Spaw, and kept Prisoners for a Ransom, which at length was paid
to the Spanish-Governour of Limburgh, into whose hands upon a remove they
lighted. This troublesome delay so displeased their Westminster-masters, that
on the 18 of May the Parliament recalled them; which being notified to the
States, they seemed surprised, and by consent of the Ambassadors sent away an
Express, accompanied with Mr. Thurloe, Saint John's Secretary, to London, to
desire a longer respit, in hope of a satisfactory Conclusion. But after a
vain^r Expectation thereof [saving this dubious insignificant Resolution, as
the States called it, In haec verba, -- The States General of the Netherlands
having heard the report of their Commissioners having had a Conference the day
before with the Lords Ambassadors of the Commonwealth of England, do declare,
That for their better satisfaction, they do wholly and fully condescend and
agree unto the 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11 Propositions of the Lords Ambassadors
(which were the most unconcerning) and also the said States do agree unto the
1, 2, 3, and 5 Articles of the year 1495. Therefore the States do expect in the
same manner as full and clear an Answer from the Lords Ambassadors, upon the 36
Articles delivered in by their Commissioners the 24 of June 1647. -- This
indifferency being maintained and strengthened by the presence and Arguments
used in a Speech made by Mr. Macdonald the Kings Agent, then at that time
Resident at the Hague, who also printed their Articles or Propositions, with
his Comments on them.] another Months time being spent, They depart for England
June 20.
they were finally remanded, and departed on the 20 of June, re infecta, to the
trouble (as was pretended) of most of the Lords of Holland.

When Saint John gave the States Commissioners who came to take leave of him,
Saint John 's Speech at his departure.
these parting words, -- My Lords, You have an Eye upon the Event of the
Affairs of the Kingdom of Scotland, and therefore do refuse the Friendship we
have offered; now I can assure you that many in the Parliament were of opinion
that we should not have come hither, or any Ambassadors to be sent to you,
before they had superated th^se matters between them and that King, and then
expected your Ambassadors to us. I n^w perceive our error, and that those
Gentlemen were in the right: in a short time you shall see that business ended,
and then you will come to us and seek what we have freely offered, when it
shall perplex you that you have refused our proffer. -- And it ^ell ou^ as he
had Divined it. Upon his coming home, after those welcomes and thanks given him
by the Parliament, he omitted not to aggravate those rudenesses done him, and
to exasperate them against the Dutch: and the angry effects of his Counsels and
report soon after appeared.

On the 9 of April, in order and design to abolish all Badges of the Norman
Tyranny (as they were pleased to call it) now that the English Nation had
obtained their natural Freedom, they resolved to Manumit the Laws, and restore
them to their Original Language; which they did by this ensuing additional Act;
and forthwith all or most of the Law Books were turned into English, (according
to the Act a little before, for turning Proceedings of Law into English) and
the rest written afterward in the same Tongue; but so little to the benefit of
the people, that as Good store of Game is the Country-mans Sorrow, so the
multitude of Sollicitors and such like, brought a great deal of trouble to the
Commonwealth, not to speak of more injuries by which that most honorable
profession of the Law was profaned and vilified, as being a discourse out of my
Sphere. At the same time they added a second Act, explanatory of this same
wonderful Liberty: both which here follow.

Be it Enacted by this present Parliament, The Law and its Proceedings turned
into English, Apr.
and by the Authority thereof, That the Translation into English of all Writs,
Process and Returns thereof, and of all Patents, Commissions, and all
Proceedings whatsoever* in any Court of Justice within this Commonwealth of
England, and which concerns the Law and Administration of Justice, to be made
and framed into the English Tongue, according to an Act, entitled, An Act for
the turning the Books of the Law, and all Process and Proceedings in Courts of
Justice into English, be, and are hereby refered to the Speaker of the
Parliament, the Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal of England, the Lord
Chief Justice of the Upper-Bench, the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas,
and the Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, for the time b^ing, or any two or
more of them: and what shall be agreed by them, or any two or more of them, in
Translating the same, the Lords Commissioners shall and may affix the Great
Seal thereunto, in Cases where the same is to be fixed: And so that no
miss-Translation, or Variation in Form by reason of Translation, or part of
Proceedings or Pleadings already begun being in Latin, and part in English,
shall be no Error, nor void any Proceedings by reason thereof.

Provided, That the said recited Act shall not extend to the certifying beyond
the Seas any Case or Proceedings in the Court of Admiralty; but that in such
Cases the Commissioners and Proceedings may be certified in Latin as formerly
they have been.

An Act for continuing the Assessment of 120000 l. per mensem, for five Months,
from the 25 day of April 1651. for maintenance of the Armies in England,
Ireland, and Scotland, was likewise passed.

By our way to Scotland, A new Welsh Insurrection started.
we must digress to a petty commotion in Wales; Hawarden, and Holt-Castle
Seized, and a Hubbub upon the Mountains, which engaged Colonel Dankins to a
craggy expedition; Sir Thomas Middleton purged, and the Coast cleared of a
Presbyterian discontent, upon which score the noise was raised; but the story
not taking, Presto on, all is gone, and the invisible Royalists cannot be found,
or sequestered for their combination in Lancashire-plot, now started, and hotly
sented, and pursued by the Grandees of the Council of State, and the
Bloodhounds of their High Court of Justice again unkennelled: of which more
presently.

Blackness- Castle delivered to Cromwell.
Blackness-Castle was now delivered to General Cromwell in Scotland, on the
first of April (while he yet continued sick of an Ague,) General Dean being
newly arrived with Money and supplies from England two days before: and on the
11 of the same Month the Scotch Parliament sat down, where they rescinded that
often-mentioned Act of Classes of Delinquents; whereby way was made to the
restoring of the Loyal Nobility to their seats in Parliament: The Loyal
Nobility in Scotland restored to their Seats in Parliament.
and an Act passed from the perceipt of the dangerous consequences of the
Western Remonstrance; that it should be Treason to hold correspondence with, or
abet the Enemy. Cromwell having already made another journey into those parts,
to carry on his business at Glascow, which place had been infamed at the
beginnig of the Scotch Troubles, and was now by the just Judgment of God the
Stage designed to act the Catastrophe, and last act of three Kingdoms Ruin:
For I must remember the Reader, The Kirk conv^^^d at Glascow.
that here the first Scene of our misery was laid, by the illegal convention of
the general Assembly of the Kirk.

E. of Eglington surprised in his design of raising Forces for the King.
By his Forces thereabouts, the Earl of Eglington, with his second Son, and some
other persons of Note, were surprised in their design of raising Forces for
the King at Dunbarton: His Majesty still continuing at Sterling. London the
Chancellor being now outed of his Presidentship, Mr. Gutbery, and Bennet, and
other Kirk-blades Committed for their refractoriness to the Kings Authority,
which yet they would not own but as subordinate to the General Assembly. But
for the prevention of such future sidings and divisions those men had caused, a
Committee by Parliament was now empowred to manage the War, and substitute
Officers, without any more impertinent reverences to the Presbytery; the King
being also declared Generalissimo. Cromwell after some debates and public
disputes with the Ministers, viz. Gillespy, Rutherford, etc. of Glascow
aforesaid, concerning the lawfulness of his Invasion, which he performed; as he
said, in much weakness of (both Argument and) Body, seeing there was no drawing
the Scot out that way to fight, which way they intended for an undisturbed
march, marched back to Edinburgh by the beginning of May, (and in his way
burned the Lady Kilsithes House, Cromwell burns the Lady Kilsithes house.
for holding intelligence with the King) having notice of the arrival of his
Boats at Leith, for the Transportation of his Army into Fife; which was the
last remedy; the failure of Victuals in the Scotch Camp, which therefore they
should be forced to abandon and march, proving a mere delusion.

In the mean while, on the 15 of April, in a mist, the Lord Montgomery, Son to
the Earl of Eglington, and Lord Cranston, with 500 Horse and Dragoons marched
from Sterling, and resolutely charged into Lithgow, (a Garrison the English had
fortified upon their first march to Sterling) to the Marketplace, whence
having taken what Prisoners they could in have meet with, they retreated; and
being pursued by Major Sydenham of Sir Arthur Haslerig's Regiment, Maj.
Sydenham slain, and his party defeated, Apr. 15 by the Lord Montgomery, and
Lord Cranston.
the Governor, in place of Colonel Sanderson lately deceased, they faced about
and routed him, killing most of his Followers, to the number of some 60;
himself being wounded mortally in the Groyn, whereof not long after he died,
that Government being twice vacated already. The Lord Register Warriston now
had a Pass from Sterling to come to Edinburgh about the Records, and the ships
loading that was staid after Cromwels Pass and permission by Articles; and
prosecuted the business so to effect, that the said Goods, Papers, and lading
got before him to Sterling, May 31. whither he had no more mind (after Cromwell
and he had conferred) to return.

The Reduction of Scilly- Island in May.
The Dutch had now sent Van Trump their Admiral with 12 sail of Men of War to
Scilly Island, to demand satisfaction for 20 ships which Sir John Greenvile the
Governor had seized; and had further instructions to Treat with the said
Governor: which, besides the aim this State had to integrate all the Ancient
Dominions of England under a new Commonwealth, did very much enjealous them
that that important place might be put into Dutch hands: thereupon a Fleet was
presently manned for the Reduction of that place, and Sir George Ayscue (who
was then preparing for a Voyage to Barbados in the Rainbow and two other Men
of War upon the same account) was ordered to attend General Blake in that
Service, who Imbarqued in the Phoenix-Frigat; and on the 18 of May with great
resolution he landed some of his Forces in the Islands of Tresco and Brier,
which were as stoutly defended by the Noble Colonel Wogan, who in his Voyage
from Ireland had taken up Arms here for the King again, and made a very great
slaughter of the first Invaders: but footing being gained by fresh Boats
succeeding the other, he past over to the Isle of St. Mary's, both more
naturally and Artificially Fortified, and of very difficult access. Some few
attempts were nevertheless made; but rather to show there was an Enemy there,
who would fain be admitted, and who otherwise might prove very troublesome to
their Trade: and to that effect a Summons or invitation was sent unto the
Governor; who having (as it was believed) the Kings leave for what he should
do therein, and knowing with England it would return, and without would be of
little use to the Crown; after some Messages accepted of a Treaty; which after
caresses and civilities on both sides, concluded in a Rendition of the Isle, St
Mary's Island surrendered June 2, by Sir John Greenvile, to Genesis Blake and Sir
Geo* Ayscue.
on the second of June, upon very Honorable Terms. The Governor Sir John, the
son of Noble Sir Bevil Greenvile, after Earl of Bath, a person always much in
the Kings Favor, receiving a considerable sum of Money and Indemnity for his
Estate and person, freed from all manner of Arrests and molestations
whatsoever: the Officers and Soldiers to go whither they would; of whom, Sir
Fulk Hunks with Doctor Lesley the Bishop of Down sailed for Ireland, Colonel
Wogan for Scotland, to pursue the quarrel there also. In all, there went out 9
Colonels, 4 Lieutenant-Colonels, 10 Serjeant-Majors, 60 Captains, (says the
Catalogue) 40 Lieutenants, and other Underofficers of a proportionable number:
which over, Sir George Ayscue proceeded in his Voyage.

Prince Rupert was now at Sea from Toulon, Pr. Rupert and Pr. Maurice at Sea
from Toulon.
with five Men of War, and two Fireships, sailing the Mediterranean-sea, in
Company with his Brother Prince Maurice; and much discourse there was of the
Duke of Lorrain's shipping and Transporting some Forces for Ireland, by an
Agreement made with the Irish, and promoted at the French Court (whither the
Duke of York was now expected, and Sir Edward Hide arrived out of Spain) and
several Provinces and Cities were by report assigned him for his security; but
the whole story proved mere Castles in the Air: for it is supposed the Duke was
unwilling to come where his plundering Troops should find Blows instead of
Booty; and he had his own Country and Dominions to regain first. An Agent from
the D. of Florence to the Parliament of England.
An Agent likewise came now to the Parliament of England, and owned them as
such, from the great Duke of Florence, May the 21. The Lord Howard of Escrick a
Peer, who had got himself returned a Burgess for Carlisle, was about this time
convicted of Bribery, dismissed the House, and committed to the Tower. Lord
Howard committed to the Tower for Bribery.


Cromwell being at Edinburgh, having notice how the King lay encamped at
Sterling, Lesley's Foot quartering on the South Side, and Middleton's on the
North-side of the Park encompassed with a Stone-wall; and that abundance of
Provision was brought in daily, supposing they would march, drew all his Forces
out of the West with as much care and conduct as could be, and Encamped
likewise in the Fields by Edinburgh in a readiness for them, whether to march
or fight: Cromwell sick May.
But in the mean time he was taken very ill of his Ague, so that Doctor Wright,
and Doctor Bates (an eminent Physician, and a concealed Royalist, as appears by
a polite Piece of his, written some time before, entitled, Elenehus Motuum
nuperorum in Anglia) were sent down to attend his Cure; and many blithe and
anxious discourses were concerning his Death, as either party wished, for he
was brought very low; but being recovered to some degree of Health by these
Gentlemen, it was presently sounded like a Proclamation; and I have therefore
thought fit to transcribe a piece of the Letter, that the World may see what
queer Hypocrites his Attendants, like himself and his times, were, by the pious
Nonsense and most Blasphemous Flattery of this Apocryphal Epistle. If I knew
the Secretary or Inditer, I would Chronicle him for his Pen. -- Truly Sir, Part
of a Letter from one of Cromwels Creatures.
His Life and Health are exceeding precious, and I account it every day a
greater mercy than other that we have his Life, observing that every
dispensation of God draws him nearer to himself, and makes him more Heavenly
and Holy, and by consequence more useful for his Generation, in the management
of that power God has Committed to him, etc.

An Act of Oblivion in Scotland.
The Parliament of Scotland after long debate had Passed an Act of Olivion for
all things done thitherto; inviting thereby all Parties to join in carrying on
the Service of King and Kingdom; and a new Engagement with the Sacrament was
taken by the Kings Army to adhere to him: whereupon all Faction and Division
seemed to be laid aside; the Royalists and Kirk-men good Friends, The Royalists
and Kirk-men good friends. Earl of Calender Commander in chief of their new
Levies.
and the Earl of Calendar made Commander in chief of the new Levies: and this
newly made Peace and Friendship was no more than just necessary, for the Wolf
was at the Door, and ready to seize. In the interim, it was thought expedient
for some of their Horse to march to Dumfrize in the West of Scotland, now
deserted by the Enemy, and to make more considerable Levies.

The Presbyterian Ministers seized by the Council of State, in order to their
Trial, May.
On the 7 of May, Mr. Love, Mr. Ienkins, Mr. Drake, and other Presbyterians had
been seized by order of the Council of State, in order to their Trial before
the High Court of Justice, as yet standing by Adjournments (and having three
times convened before them old and resolute Sir John Stawel, who so gravelled
them, that at the third Hearing they were forced to desist from the pursuit of
his Blood; and making report thereof to the Parliament, they Voted the sale of
his Estate, giving him sad cause to complain with Job, With the Skin of my
Teeth am I escaped; making an exception to that general Rule, -- Vestigia cerno
omnia te adversum spectantia nulla retrorsum: He first escaping Condemnation at
that Tribunal.) Now the aforesaid Ministers, with some Laics (Engaged in the
said practice for the King) were brought thither; and Mr. Love first and
principally charged with High Treason against the State, Mr. Love charged with
High Treason.
for holding correspondence with the King and his Party, and supplying them
with Money, contrary to an Act of Parliament in that case provided. After
several appearances, in all which Mr. Love very undauntedly disputed the Court,
one Mr. Iackson a Minister denying to give in Evidence against him, Mr. Jackson
fined 500 l. and committed to the Fleet, for refusing to give Evidence against
Mr. Love.
was fined 500 l. and committed to the Fleet (which made him more passionate
and confident) but the accusation being at last proved against him, he desired
Lawyers to assist him, and had them assigned; but they not having taken the
Engagement, would not be admitted to Plead, Mr. Hales only excepted. In sum,
his main defense appearing to be equivocal, in that he averred he did not
personally correspond, neither Write, nor receive Letters, nor send any, or
receive any Money to that use himself; and to consist also of an allegation of
his merits, mixed with invectives against the Court and its Authority, which he
aided with Scripture Proof, in an Oration of two hours, on the 15 of June: On
the 5 of July they proceeded to Sentence; Mr. Love Sentenced, July 5.
which was, that he should be Beheaded: the time appointed, the 15 day of the
same Month, which by several Petitions of his Wife and others was respited to
the 15 of August.

Mr. Potter and Mr. Gibbons Sentenced, July 25.
And in the mean time, on the 18 of the same Month, Mr. Potter an Apothecary in
Blackfriars, and one Mr. Gibbons, were tried before the same Court- Potter
confessed, and craved their mercy; Gibbons pleaded matter of Law: but on the 25
of July they were both Sentenced as Mr. Love, who not coming up to the
Parliaments expectation of discovery, and more humble submission and
acknowledgement of their Authority, and the King advanced into England, had his
Reprieve cassated by the Parliament, Mr. Love and Mr. Gibbons* Executed on
Tower Hill.
who referring him to the High Court of Justice, they ordered his Execution
with Gibbons on the 22 of August; which was done on Tower Hill accordingly. Mr.
Love resolutely enough, and I am loath to prejudice his Memory; for his design
was good proof of his Loyalty: Gibbons bewrayed something of pusillanimity, as
being a Tailor, and after, a kind of Solicitor to Mr. Hollis, for whose
relation more than his own guilt, he was thought fit to suffer; for when the
Blow was just a coming upon his Neck, he turned his Eyes and Face toward the
Executioner, in hopes (or desire at least) of some Reprieve; but present Death
freed him with other troubles and sollicitudes of Life from that sudden
anxiety. And so we have done with our High Court of Justice for this Session.

This High Court of Justice was so much their darling, that the ancient
Judicatures had little or no respect, especially they could not endure any of
those Courts that more immediately related to the King: and as they had changed
the name of his Bench to the Vpper-Bench; so now, that there might remain no
footsteps of a Court, An Act for abolishing the Marshals-Court in Southwark.
or the Majesty of a Prince, they abolished the Marshals-Court at Southwarke,
which was a kind of a peculiar King's Bench for the Verge, that is, 12 miles
circuit every way round the Kings Residence and Palace (that there might be no
annoyance nor disorder committed near his Person.) It was resolved therefore
July the 8, that the Court of the Knight-Marshal held in Southwarke, should be
from and after the first of August next, absolutely dissolved and taken away,
and no further Suit, Action, or Proceeding to be had thereupon.

About this time they passed another Act, Another for the sale of Delinquents
Lands.
which as that struck at the Root of the Royalty of England, so this lopt the
Branches that clave to it, viz. An Act for the sale of Delinquents Lands, such
as had with the utmost of their Lives and Fortunes served the late King in our
unnatural Wars. It will be needless and too bulky to name them particularly; we
will mention only some of the principal: the Duke of Buckingham, the
Marquesses of Newcastle, Worcester, Winchester; the Earls of Cleveland,
Norwich, Scarsdale; the Lords Hapton, Wilmot, Langdale, Gerard, Cottington,
Iermin, Percy, Culpeper, Hide, and lastly the Lord Craven, whose Princely
Estate was enough to help them to a quarrel against him; which they managed by
a perjured Fellow one Faulkner, Faulkner a perjured witness against the Lord
Craven.
into a suspicion of Treason* he deposing that the said Lord Craven had
delivered a Petition to the King at Breda, from him, and other
Cavalier-Officers, wherein the Parliament were termed Bloody and Barbarous
Rebels and Traitors. This wretched subornation was laid to the charge of the
Lord Gray of Grooby, who afterward sold his own Inheritance to purchase some
of this Lord's, whom the Parliament had peremptorily summoned to appear by a
day at Westminster* which he wisely declining, as having heard sufficiently of
their High Court of Justice, they proceeded to sale; and although afterward he
convicted the abovesaid Villain of wilful Perjury, and afterward prosecuted
his right before a Committee appointed to adjudge claims, where Bradshaw had
the Chair; (who to captate an opinion of Justice, seemed to favor the merit of
the Cause, and gave a resolution accordingly:) yet could his Lordship by no
means recover his possession; being baukt and wearied with a fruitless Suit and
Attendance during the Usurpation.

To single also out of the number of the Honorable the Loyal Commoners, Sir
John Stawel, who for all the Honor of the Sword, his Articles at Exeter (which
as they saved his Life, should in the same manner have preserved his Estate)
was now put into this Black Bill of Forfeiture and Attainder; the Estates of
them all being vested in the hands of William Skinner, The Estates of the
Royalists put to sale.
William Robinson, Sampson Sheffield, Samuel Gookin, Henry Seely, William
Lisle, and Arthur Samuel, as Trustees; Robert Manwaring Register-Accountant,
Randal Manwaring Comptroller, and John Baker Surveyor-General. These were again
named to the same trusts in the second Edition of this libellous Act, which
began with a Preface of Treason and Rebellion against the Commonwealth: and
great fear there was that such Acts would at last become as constant as those
of the Monthly Assessments, till they had not left a Royalist but what was
enslaved and sold.

And that they might appear the more like to what they had reduced them in this
emptiness and meanness of Estate, The Honors of the Royalists given by the
King since Jan. 1641. abolished.
they Enacted the stripping them of those Honors which their Loyalty and worth
had purchased them, that they might be fit Peers to sit with any Lower House,
and the Gentry be suitable Mates and Company to their finical Rabble, who had
now Coached their Fellow-Servant-maids, with all the other distinctions of
Gentility, even to the laughter of the enraged people; who perceived they had
Fought for those, that were so much uninteressed in the Quarrel, as to what
they had to lose, as the meanest of those wretches, who sneak in for Drink to
Games and Matches, have in the Stake and Adventure. It was made by these men, a
penalty of 5 l. for any Knight, proportionably 50 l. for a Duke, to receive a
Title which had been conferred on him since January 1641. And the several
Patentees or Titulado's were Commanded to bring in their Patents by such a
time, or else to incur worser Forfeitures. But this not being such an Affront
and Indignity as the abrogating the power of the whole Peerage, was taken but
for a bravado; nor did I ever hear any one that paid for giving or receiving
this due civility; which even such of them as had Breeding and Manners, would
be guilty of themselves.

The Irish affairs June.
In Ireland the Lord Broghal had given a notable defeat to the Lord Muskerry;
who having beaten up his Quarters could not so conveniently and nimbly retire,
but Brogal was at his Heels: Lord Broghall defeats the Lord Muskerry.
It was a dispute with all Cavalry, no Foot on either side; which before had
not happened in Ireland: there was loss on both sides; but the least thereof
with the Victory fell to the English. About the same time Sir Charles Coot
having attended a Pass over the Shanon, Sir Charles Coot succesfull.
which was guarded all along the other side by the help of three Cotts, and a
Boat, landed some few Forces upon one of the Enemies Guards, (who suspected no
Boats possible to be had without danger of sinking as they passed) and mastered
it; whereupon all the Irish Forces disposed thereabouts in several Posts, ran
away to Limerick, leaving the River free; which was laid over presently with a
Bridge to bear Horse and Artillery. Athlone a week before had been delivered by
the Lord Dillon to the said Sir Charles; by which means the whole Irish Council
and the Marquess of Clanriekard, The Irish Council and Commanders in great
straights. Scots Leaguer in Tor-wood.
and Castlehaven, were put into great straights and confusion of Councils.

The English Army in Scotland was now in motion for grass, and marched upon
their old design of Sterling to Newbridge, so to Lithgow, from whose
Castle-Battlements they might espy the Tents of the Scotch Army, Encamped in
Tor-wood, some four miles off this side Sterling: (whither Warriston was now
summoned by the Commissioners of the Assembly peremptorily by the third of
July) having cast up a regular and well-fortified Line with Bulworks mounted
with Guns, and having a River behind them, which they might pass at pleasure:
in this posture they awaited the English, who coming up and facing them the
third of July, in the night following the Scots drew up their Cannon, and
planted them on the brow of the Hill, and next morning saluted Cromwell with 50
Great Guns; but with little Execution; which made him quickly draw out of shot,
and give over his once-begun resolution of attaquing them at so much
disadvantage. The English therefore marched back again: Major General Lambert
being sent from Glascow a week after to view the Passes; which he reported by
reason of the boggy approaches there, to be very hazardous. Upon their
departure from Lithgow to Glascow the Scots removed from Tor-wood, and Encamped
at Kilfith, a place environed with insuperable desences, having a Bog on one
hand, and craggy Mountains on the other: but the English Army having eaten up
all at Glascow and those parts, and trod down the Corn standing, that the Scots
might find no sustenance that way, if they should march, appearing and
marching with great noise; on the one side, they imaging the English meant to
clap in between them and Sterling, Cromwell stormeth Calendar- house, the
defendants put to the Sword.
hastened back again to their old Line at Tor-wood, July 13, whither Cromwell
followed, and to provoke them to an Engagment, Stormed Calendar-house in their
view, and put all the Defendants except the Governor to the Sword, and then
seeing there was no possibility of fighting with them, but that they were
resolved to keep them in play, till Winters scarcity of Horse-meat should make
them give over and depart the Kingdom; he Encamped himself, awaiting the
success of his design by Boat into Fife: In the mean while, Newark-house,
Newark- house and two others taken.
lying, before Dunbarton-Castle, was taken, and two Houses more.

Prince Rupert, and Captain Pen Commander of a Fleet in the Streights for the
Parliament, were now both at Sea together; but it was not their fortune to meet
one another. The Prince had lately taken a Spanish Ship, Pr. Rupert takes a
rich Spanish ship.
worth 100000 Crowns, and had put forth a Declaration, showing the reason
thereof, (satisfying partly his own Revenge for the Spanish injuries toward
the Palatinate) which were, First, That Kings giving Protection and Free Port
to the Kings Rebels, and Owning them, and denying the like to His Majesty's
ships, contrary to the Treaty between both Crowns; his forcing the Mariners
that were put on shore by Blake, on board the said Admiral, and making them
serve the Rebels against their wills, etc. The like he declared against the
Genoese, from whom he had taken another Vessel; the objections against them
being their Entertainment of Captain Hall, sent into those Seas before Pen. As
for the recognition of this State, the Genoese did not that till afterward,
when they saw what Influence the potent Fleets of this Commonwealth had upon
all the Trade of Italy. With these two Vessels and his own Men of War, the
Prince sailed to the Isles of Madera, upon a design against the Spanish
Plate-fleet, and Domingo; but his ship the Reformation was so crazy and
leaking, that they could hardly bring her thither, where it had been happier
she had been broken up, than so bunglingly mended; those Carpenters and
Ship-wrights not well understanding the Repair of such our Ships; but indeed
she was too Old for any slight Remedy.

While Cromwell attended the Scots at Tor-wood, within a mile and a half of them
at Falkirk, at length the long-expected success of a Transportation into Fife
manifested it self; for Colonel Overton with 1400 Foot of his own, and Colonel
Daniels Regiment, with four Troops of Horse of Colonel Lydcots, having with the
loss of a few men gained a place called North-ferry on the other side the
Frith, on the 17 of July had as the time served entrenched themselves; and
before the Scotch Army then beyond Sterling could reach them with a sufficient
Force to drive them out, Major General Lambert was passed over to them, it
being an Arm of the Sea, on the 19 being Saturday, in the afternoon; whereupon
Sir John Brown Major General of the Scotch Forces, drew down upon them; but
Lambert with his Foot defended himself till his Horse came over, the next day,
and then he drew out; which Brown perceiving, and that the Enemy was stronger
than himself, he wheeled about, intending a retreat; but being closely
followed, he Embatteled himself on the side of a Hill, intending to protract
time (unless Lambert would venture up to him) till more Forces then near him
were come up. Lambert perceived as much, and therefore committing the right
Wing of the Horse to Okey, himself in the Battle, and Overton in the Reserve,
and Colonel Lydcot in the left Wing of Horse; a furious fight began, A fight in
Fife between Sir John Brown and Maj. Gea. Lambert, July 20. The Scots worsted,
Sir John Brown taken, and a while after dies.
Okey courageously charging up the Hill, and was as gallantly charged by the
Scots Lanciers; the Highland-Foot did likewise good service, for the whole
Army, was in a trice Engaged, and in a trice ceased, the brunt of it not
continuing above a quarter of an hour: the slaughter was very great, occasioned
(said the English) by reason of the Highlanders not understanding English, and
so incapable of crying Quarter; but by others it is more justly imputed to
Command, for that the Highlanders were most hateful of all Scots to the Army,
as being more Loyal than the other, the only cause of the Quarrel. However it
were, here were no less than 2000 slain, and some 1600 taken Prisoners; few of
4500, as they were computed (the English far Exceeding them in number) escaped
with the lamentable tidings. Sir John Brown their Major General, and Colonel
Buchanan and Scot were taken Prisoners: in which condition Brown died not long
after at Leith.

Before this defeat the Scots marched over Sterling-bridge to step this
Invasion; but understanding the remedilessness of it, and Cromwell marching
toward Sterling, made him to retreat thither again: in the mean while most of
the Army was boated over. Major General Harrison who had attended about
Carlisle and Cumberland, to stop the Kings advance if He should have come that
way, when Cromwell lay about Edinburgh, which was the shorter cut to London, was
now marched by Edinburgh way, and the charge of the Army on this side the Frith
(with Colonel Riches and Colonel Bartons Forces then upon the same march)
committed to his Command, while the English Army in Fife advanced to Saint
Iohnstons, from whence the Parliament and General Assembly had fled to Dundee,
affrighted with this news. Inchigarvey- Castle and Brunt-Island delivered to
the English.
Inchigarvey-Castle standing in the midst of the Frith, having been delivered
on the 24 of July with the Guns therein, and Brunt-Island followed the said
fortune on the 27, on which day Cromwell having sat down before Saint Iohnstons
with his whole Army, though a relief of two Regiments of Foot had been newly
put in from over the Water, yet despairing of holding out against so prevalent
and numerous an Enemy, St. Johnstons delivered to Cromwell.
upon the Englishes opening their Sluices, Rendered upon Brunt-Island Articles,
which were the usual Military ones of Drums-beating, etc. on the third of
August. On the first whereof, Cromwell had notice of the Kings removal from
Sterling; but nevertheless resolved to proceed with his business at Saint
Iohnstons; which being thus over, he marched his men with all have to
Brunt-Island, where he Ferried to Leith, leaving General Monk to Command in
Scotland, with 7000, and on his march to reduce Sterling, and hastened after the
King.

The King marches for England, July 21.
It had all along been the Kings desire to have marched into England before this
fatal opportunity, and His coming was expected by His Friends every day, though
in no condition able to help Him, being so spent, wasted and terrified with the
late and yet grievous Sequestrations and Sales; but the King was imagined here
by His Party to be able to do His business without them; and the late immature
discovery of Loves design and his Sentence, had quite bogled his Presbyterian
well-wishers, whatever they muttered to themselves of their adventurous
Loyalty. Indeed nothing so much heightened the hopes of all good men, as those
fears, and distrusts, and ill looks which the Phanatick-party discovered upon
this occassion, the rather because Harrison had lain so long in those parts by
which the King entered, on purpose and by express order to keep him out if
possible, or at least retard Him so in the Borders, that Cromwell might overtake
him there, who was now three days march behind, and Harrison also not very
forward in his march: And surely Cromwell was very sensible of his loytering at
Saint Iohnstons, through a proud humor of not rising without it, since England
was of the far greater concernment; and it set him a little awry in the opinion
of his Partisans.

The Parliament no sooner had notice of this Emergency by several Expresses
(who Rid as if their Necks had been at stake) but out come three Acts or
Proclamations together; The Parl. settle the Militia. Royalists forbid to
depart their Houses.
the one for the Militia, settling it as it stood established, and further
forbidding all Royalists to depart from their Houses, and Commanding all other
people to give an account of their Servants to the next Officer, if they shall
absent themselves. An Act forbidding Correspondence with the King or His Party.
Correspondence with the King or his Party forbid.
And therewith another product of Treason in grain against the King, His Person
and Authority: which said Decrees they did with confidence command to be
published, setting a good gloss and resolute Face upon their despairing and
misgiving thoughts, lest they might not seem (what they were most sure of from
the people) to be wanting to themselves, in this perplexed and unconsulted
occurrence.

The King at Carlisle, Proclaimed there King of Great Britain: He publishes
his Declaration.
The King departed from Sterling the last of July, and came into England by the
way of Carlisle; and upon His first footing there, was Proclaimed rightful King
of Great Britain, and did thereupon publish his Declaration, wherein He offered
His free Grace and Pardon (to be confirmed by an Act thereafter) to all His
Subjects of England, Offers an Act of Pardon to all but Cromwell, Bradshaw,
and Cook.
of whatever Nature or Crime their Offenses, were, excepting Cromwell, Bradshaw,
and Cook, the more immediate Murderers of His Father; and therewith prosecuted
His march, being Proclaimed in the same manner through all the Towns He passed.
The English that accompanied Him of Note, were the Duke of Buckingham, Earl of
Cleaveland, Lord Wentworth, Lord Wilmot, Colonel Wogan, (I find him in all
Services) Colonel Matthew Bointon, Major General Massey, and Colonel Graves,
Titus, and Major Ashurst.

The King marched directly North-west to Lancashire, whither Harrison with some
of Lamberts men had got before Him, intending to stop His further passage at
Warrington; Warrington- fight.

Lambert and Harrison defeated by Massey.


to which service they had obliged and animated the new-raised Cheshire-Foot,
amounting to near 3000; but both they and Harrison received a notable defeat at
that place by the conduct of Colonel Massey, who set them a forerunning with a
greater speed than they had made hitherto to overtake the King; to whom in this
County came the Earl of Derby, who landed at Wye-water from the Isle of Man,
The Earl of Derby joyus with the King in Lancashire.
though not with the same instantaneous (or indeed any) success, which his
great Ancestor the noble Stanly brought to His Majesty's Royal Progenitor King
Henry the seventh, upon his like dispute, for the regaining of the Crown. With
the Earl of Derby the King left some Forces of English under his Major General
Sir Thomas Tildesly, to strengthen what Forces he brought with him, and to
countenance those Levies he was to make in that County, where he was very well
beloved, both for his own and his Ancestors worth, and most liberal
Hospitality. Massey was left here behind, but presently recalled.

From Warrington the King passed with quick marches through part of Cheshire to
Newport in Shropshire, The King summons Shrewsbury, in vain.
whence He sent His Invitations and Summons to Colonel Mackworth Governor of
Shrewsbury, and Sir Thomas Middleton. Mackworth confidently refused, directing
his answer to the Commander in chief of the Scotch Forces, not owning the King
for so much as their Sovereign.

On the 22 of August, the Van of the Kings Army entered Worcester, some
resistance being attempted to be made by some new-raised Forces under one
Colonel James, The King comes to Worcester, Aug. 22.
and by the influence of Baron Wild; but the Townsmen saved them the labor
of driving them out, and most joyfully welcomed these weary guests, and such
too as in 1645. had been extremely oppressive and intolerably burdensome, at
the Siege of Hereford: but their gladness at the Kings presence, and hope of
his Restitution, obliterated all other considerations and remembrances
whatsoever. The Mayor and his Brethren at the Kings Intrado did him the
customary, but most cheerful Obeysances, tendering Him the Keys and the Mace
upon their Knees, and bidding Him and His Forces welcome to this His Majesty's
Ancient and Loyal City; where the same day with great solemnity He was anew
Proclaimed, and the tired Soldiers most abundantly provided for, being in all,
Scotch and English, some 13000, who had marched 300 miles outright in 3 weeks.

In the mean time the Parliament had amassed a numerous Militia in all the
Counties of England, The Parl. raise the Militia and London- Regiments.
and had mustred the London-Regiments in Morefields, with a full, yet not
quarter appearance of such as would fight for them against their Prince, as
they witnessed by that dumb silence which was obstinately kept, upon the
Reading of their Proclamation against the King, and burning his Declaration at
the head of every Regiment; who were designed only for the service and
security of the City. The Country-Troops in the mean time advanced, and glad
were the Members that the King stayed for them; for nothing was more dreaded
than His continued march to London, which place would have soon ridded their
fears, upon an approach of the Kings Army but 30 miles further from Worcester:
but to prevent that, as Essex did before at the beginning of the War (whose
first efforts took this way) Cromwell by long marches through Newcastle, Rippon,
Ferrybrigs, Doncaster, Mansfield, and Coventry, had interposed himself, and
joined with his Army at Keynton, where a General Council of all his Officers
was held, and a speedy advance to Worcester resolved on; Lieutenant General
Fleetwood being dispatched to bring up his Forces then on their way at Banbury,
the gross of all the Forces amounting to above 40000 effective, Militia and all.

The King Summons the Country.
The King had Summoned in all the Country to his assistance, and Rendezvouzed on
the 26 of August upon Pitzfodder-Heath near that City, and went on with the
Fortifications and rearing the Mount. Of the chief of those that came in was
the Lord Talbot after Earl of Shrewsbury, and Colonel Howard, Colonel Sir
Edward Broughton, and Captain Benbow, and some adventurers from London, who
were forced to pass through the Parliaments Army; nor could it be expected any
could appear, when such powerful Militia's were up every where, so that all the
new accessional strength the King received, was no way considerable, save for
the Gallantry and Noble Loyalty of such as in these disadvantages owned His
Majesty's Cause and Fortunes.

Yet there was a Noble Person, and some few of his partakers, whom froward
unkind Fate had banded from one ruin to a worse, and had added to that number
of English at Worcester. This was the truly Honorable Earl of Derby, that was
left behind in Lancashire to raise that County, whose Levies with that Force
left him did not amount to above 1200 men, though a little more time had
rendered him formidable; with those he was marching upon a design to fall upon
Cromwell's own Regiment, quartering upon their march in Lancaster, when in the
nick comes Colonel Lilburn with 10 Troops of Horse sent by the General from
York upon this very Service, having with him two Regiments of the
Cheshire-Foot, and other additions of Horse. The Earl was now in the midst of
both these Parties, and therefore resolved to fight with Lilburn, finding his
men courageous and desirous to engage, though most Horse, and in Lanes, and
accordingly charged them so furiously, that he totally routed their first
Troops, Wigon- fight, August 25. Lilburn defeats the Earl of Derby.

Slain on the Kings side, Lord Widdrington, Ma. Genesis Sir Tho. Tildesly, Col.
Mat. Boynton Sir Francis Gamul, etc.


and made an impression into their Body so far that they began to run, while
other fresh Reserves coming in, they were forced to face about, being annoyed
with the Muskets; yet did they renew the charge again, and had they had but
another Reserve, they had in all probability won the day; for it was upon a
second Turn, when another supply resisted the torrent of their Valor, which
left undeniable proofs of it self, in the death of most of the Commanders of
their Wounds in and after the Battle; the names of which were the Lord
Widdrington, Major General Sir Thomas Tildesly, Colonel Mat. Boyton, Sir
Francis Gamul, Lieutenant Colonel Gallyard, and Major Trollop, and Chester; the
Prisoners were Sir William Throckmorton, Colonel Richard Leg, Colonel Robinson,
Bayns, Gerard, Lieutenant Colonel Rigby, Constable, and Major Gower, and some
300 Prisoners, among whom were some Reformadoes, and some 80 slain, for the
chief slaughter fell on the other side during the fight. The Earl of Derby
having lost his George and Garter, fled with some 30 toward Worcester, The
Earl l^sing his George and Garter escapes.
having by the good providence of God, who alone is able to bring Evil out of
Good, sheltered himself one night in a house called Boscobel, which Heaven by
this means had prepared for the Kings retreat and preservation.

Cromwell surrounds Worcester, Au. 13. and possesses Upton- Bridge.
By this time Cromwell had surrounded that City with his spreading Host, in as
near a compass as the Rivers and Passes would suffer him, the Kings Army as yet
lying out of the Town a mile in the fields. The first Pass endeavored to be
taken, was Vpton-Bridge on Fleetwoods side, which Major General Lambert
attempted with 500 Horse and Dragoons, and after a brisk dispute wrested from
Col. Massey, who in defense thereof received a wound in his Hand, the first
mark of his redeemed honor, in that member which had been so unhappily active
and successful against the King. The Scots having thus abandoned the place, it
was presently possessed by a strong party of Horse and Foot, in order to the
present advance of the rest of the Army.

The Scots now drawn closer to Worcester, made many Salleys, breaking down two
or three Bridges over the River Team, and showing a well-ordered and governed
courage; but September the 3 that ominous day being arrived, Cromwell resolved
to venture the event upon its former auspicia, and to that purpose having his
Boats in readiness passed over his men: in the afternoon of that day he drew
out from his own Post, and (having given the signal to the whole Army to fall
on) began the Fight in this manner.

Cromwell himself in person (about three a clock, Worcester- Fight.
with his Lifeguard, and Colonel Hacker's Regiment of Horse, with part of his
own Regiment and Colonel Ingoldsby's, and Fairfax's entire) passed over his
Bridge of Boats upon the Severn, and marched toward the City; after him,
Lieutenant General Fleetwood, who had been most part of that day marching of
five miles from Vpton to Powick-bridge, which the Kings Army had broken down,
passed with Colonel Goff's and Major General Dean's Regiments, and jointly
advanced; the Kings Forces encountering them at the Hedges, and disputing every
field with them, in such order, and with such gallantry, that these already
over (lest they should not be wholly discouraged with the hotness of the
Service) were relieved by Reserves, and they by others; no considerable
progress yet made, the Highlanders proving excellent fire-men, and coming to
the But-end at every foot, till weary, and their Ammunition spent, the King
being then upon the place Commanded them in some haste into the City, and
hastened himself to the other side, where Colonel Hayn's Regiment with Cobbet's
stood about Powick-Bridge, and were entertained with no less manhood and
slaughter: and though Colonel Matthews was the Reserve to the other two
Regiments, yet did the Scotch Foot fairly drive them from their ground, till
their little Army being every way engaged, and no seconds or supplies to be
expected, after some wheelings in a careless regard of the Enemy, as if they
feared not to make which way they pleased, they drew likewise into the Town, as
did that Brigade which opposed the Regiments of the Lord Gray, Colonel Blague,
Gibbons, and Marsh.

But they stayed not long there; but as if their pent spirits had broke out
with greater fury, they sallied out in great Bodies upon the Generals side, who
had now brought the Militia-Forces into play, the Veterans wisely detrecting to
engage first upon the Storm which was then intended; but there was yet
field-matter enough to do. In the head of one of those Squadrons, the King
himself Charged with that gallantry which would have become our admiration in
other men, and showed he had not forgot the Discipline of War in which he had
been brought up from his youth: In one of those Charges he made, Duke Hamilton,
a better Soldier, and noble gallanter person than his Brother, received a shot
in his Thigh, whereof presently after he died. The loss that was sustained by
the Enemy, fell principally upon the Essex-Foot, and those of Cheshire and
Surrey, who returned in thin Troops and Companies to their Counties: but fresh
and entire Brigades and Regiments, in Reserves, namely Desborough's Regiment of
Horse, Cromwell's of Horse, Major General Lambert's of Horse, Whaley's,
Harrison's, and Tomlinson's Brigades, with other Foot re-inforcing them; the
Scots by the over-powering multitude were driven into the Town, Lesley with
2000 Horse (upon what account not known) not stirring out of the Town to
relieve them, when the Enemy entered pellmell with them, and gained the
Fort-Royal about seven a clock at night, at which time the King left the Town,
The King defeated at Worcester, Sep. 3.
it being dusk, and accompanied with some 60 Horse of the chiefest and most
confident of his Retinue, (though many more pressed to bear him Company)
departed out of St. Martins gate; and it was reported that Cobbet very narrowly
mist of him as the King left his Lodging, whither he first hastened.

The Enemies Foot was now got into the Town, and according to their order fell
a Plundering the Town in a most barbarous manner, as if Turks were again
Sacking of Constantinople, and giving no Quarter to any they found in the
Streets: Through this their greediness of spoil, they kept the Horse out, lest
they should have shared the better part, and to that purpose kept the Gates
fast as they were, and so favored (as God would have it) the Kings escape.
Some Scots who had got into one of the Churches held out till next morning,
when they obtained Quarter for Life, by which time there was not an Inhabitant
in Worcester Friend or Foe left Unplundered: Worcester miserably plundered.
but the Loyal Inhabitants soon recovered themselves, being supplied with fresh
Wares to their desires from London, without any scruple of credit or payment,
and their Debts forborne till such time as God should enable them; which the
Gentry and Inhabitants round about them endeavored to bring to pass, by th^i^
more than ordinary resort to that Market, for all necessaries, and upon all
occasions. The Mayor (being Knighted by the King) and Aldermen were Committed
to Prison, and the Wife of one Guyes (who for betraying the designs of the
King in that Garrison was Hanged) was rewarded with 200 l. per annum, A Traitor
hanged, and his Widow bountifully rewarded.
and 200 l. down.

There were slain in Field, and in Town (in the last the most) and in pursuit,
some 2000, and some 8000 taken Prisoners in several places, most of the English
escaping by their Shibboleth; the principal were Duke Hamilton, Slain of the
Kings side Duke Hamilton.
who presently died of his wounds; and at Newport the Earl of Lauderdale, the
Earl of Rothes, the Earl of Carnwarth, the Earl of Kelly, the Earl of Derby,
the Earl of Cleaveland, Sir John Packington, the Lord Spyne; Sir Ralph Clare,
Sir Charles Cunningham, Colonel Graves, Mr. Richard Fanshaw Secretary to the
King, 6 Colonels of Horse, 13 of Foot, 9 Lieutenant-Colonels of Horse, 8
Lieutenant-Colonels of Foot, 6 Majors of Horse, 13 Majors of Foot, 37 Captains
of Horse, 72 Captains of Foot, 55 Quarter Masters, 89 Lieutenants: there were
taken also some General Officers, with 76 Cornets of Horse, 99 Ensigns of
Foot, 90 Quarter Masters, 80 of the Kings Servants, The Kings Standard, his
Coach and Horses, and Collar of SS, taken.
with the Kings Standard which he had set up when he Summoned the Country, the
Kings Coach and Horses, and Collar of SS; but that which was ten times more
worth than all, the Kings Person, they had no power to touch.

He (as was said before) departed in the dusk, leaving Colonel Carcles (now by
the King (in honor of his carefulness of his Majesty's person) Named Carlos,
and a Coat of Arms pointing at this service added) in his Rear, to keep the
Enemy in dispute while he was something onward on his way, and the dusk and
deliberation might favor his escape. To which end, all persons about him were
Commanded to speak French; The King deliberates whither to fly.
and a present consultation was held which course they should steer, and it was
resolved by the Earl of Derby, that they should make what speed they could, and
recover a place called Whiteladies before morning, which was some 25 miles from
Worcester; and thereupon one Mr. Giffard then in the Company was called, for
his guidance thither, it belonging to his Family, and one Walker that had been
formerly a Scout-master in the Kings Army was his assistant; yet the way was
mistaken as they passed a Heath, but by good providence soon recovered.

Betwixt three and four a Clock the King reached this place, and Mr. Giffard
(after some knocking at the Door) called up one George Penderill, a servant in
the House, who heating and knowing his Voice, ^an down in his Shirt and opened
the Door, and the King and his Retinue entered; where after a little debate
about the security of his person, the said Earl having called thither William
Penderill the Housekeeper of Boscobel, and another dispatched toward Tongue to
see if the Coast was yet clear; His Majesty having had his Hair cut off, and
his Buff-doublet and Linnen-breeches Buried, and disguised in Country-Habit,
was with adjuration of the Fidelity of the Penderills (who were with their
Brother-in-law George Yates in number five) Committed and entrusted by the Earl
of Derby to their Tuition, which they most solemnly and dutifully promised.
Then the Earl and the rest of the Lords, The Lords leave him at Whiteladies.
viz. the Duke of Buckingham and that train, with Tears took their leave (
Derby would have staid; but there was no probability of secrecy for two) and
the Lord Wilmot with John Penderil withdrew himself from that Company to
another retreat: The rest (except the Duke, who lay concealed in other friends
houses about that Country) were taken as aforesaid at Newport by Lilburns
Horse, the same who had defeated the Earl of Derby, who now rendered himself a
Prisoner to one Captain Edge of Lancashire, on promise of quarter for Life.

As soon as the King was thus left by his Company, The King in the wood
Thursday morning Sep. 4.
with a Wood-hill in his hand he was conducted into a Wood or Coppice near
adjoining, borrowing the Name of William Jones a Wood-cutter newly come thither
for Work, and was accordingly instructed in his Tongue and Behavior. That day
proved very wet, so that Yate's Wife brought him a Blanket to cover him, and a
dish of Milk and Apples for his refreshment, and at night against his coming
home (where the Mother of the Penderils at her Son Richard's most joyfully
welcomed him) provided an ordinary Country Supper: which ended, the King with
Richard his Guide resolving for Wales, went to one Mr. Wolfe's of Madely, The
King at Madely.
where for fear of search, the King was fain to take up his quarters in the
Barn; Mr. Wolf and his Wife attending on him there, while no accomodations was
good enough for his Rebels, now lying in multitudes up and down that Country.
Here his Majesty understood that the Passes over the Water and the River Severn
were so guarded, that it was unfeasible ^or him to adventure over into Wales,
so that on Friday-night the King retreated in his Woolen accoutrements about
his Legs, in which he had lain in that hard lodging in great pain and soreness,
to Boscobel, To Boscobel.
where he found Colonel Carlos, who had also betaken himself thither for
shelter: by his direction that Saturday the King went into the Wood, from the
pleasantness whereof the House took its name, and by his assistance ascended
into the top of that most Celebrated Oak, Col. Carlos directs the King to the
Oak.
which being thick with Branches stretching and shaddowing foreright, was
altogether impervious to the sight; and here the Colonel bore him Company while
He laid his Head and slept upon a Pillow in his Lap: At night they both
descended and came into the House, and refresht themselves. The King perceiving
the secrecy of the place, was not willing to keep longer abroad: Sunday the
King past away in a kind of Arbor or Banqueting House at the end of the
Garden. At this House John Penderil found him, being sent before by the Lord
Wilmot, to conduct him to Mr. Whitgraves at Mosely, whither with much
difficulty and danger he himself had arrived; but the safety there answered
all. The King approved of the Lord Wilmot's Residence, and on Monday night
(with the guard of the five Brethren) on Humphrey the Millers Horse, and like
accoutrements, came to Mr. Whitgrave's, At Mosely with Mr. Whitgrave.
where he was joyfully welcomed by the Lord and that Gentleman, and conveyed
into a secret place; and there consultation was held, for a further progression
in this happy escape; To Bently with Mrs. Jane Lane for Bristol.
and to this purpose one Colonel Lane of Bentley was made acquainted with it,
and by them agreed, that Mrs. Jane Lane, upon pretense of assisting at the
Childbed of her Sister, should Ride to Bristol, and the King as her Servant
before her, with Mr. Lassels and his Wife behind him; a Pass accordingly
having been procured.

On their way thither, the Lord Wilmot (as of chance) met with them, The King
met by the Lord Wilmot.
having a Hauk on his Fist; and so they journeyed together to Bromsgrove, where
the Kings Horse losing a Shoe, His Majesty was forced to carry the Horse to a
Farrier, who enquiring of News of the King, and being answered with the success
of the Fight at Worcester, but that the King was escaped into Scotland;
replied, that no doubt the King was secretly somewhere in England, The
dangerous Expression of a Farrier.
and wished he knew where, for that he could get 1000 l. by taking of him. That
he providentially mist, the King departing from thence to Evesham, The King by
Evesham.
where advising how to avoid Troopers then Grazing their Horses in the Meadows
adjoining, they light upon them in a near Village, but were civilly past: from
thence to Cirencester to the Crown, At Cirencester to Mr. Nortons at Leigh.
where one night they Lodged, and so to Bristol, within three miles of which
place was the House of Mr. Norton at Leigh, the designed Journeys end. Here the
King feigned himself sick, and took his Chamber by the order and care of Mrs.
Lane; but the next morning coming into the Celler, He was taken notice of by
the Butler, one John Pope, a Soldier formerly in His Majesty's Army, who upon
an intent look discerned him, and in all dutiful manner discovered to him his
trusty discovery of the King, which gained His Majesty's belief so far as to
employ him in getting a Ship for his Transportation. Thence the King was
conducted by the Lord Wilmot to one Colonel Windham's at Trent in Dorsetshire,
where, though to the knowledge of six or seven persons of that Household, He
yet continued almost three weeks, in expectation of a passage from Lime. Soon
after his arrival here, Mrs. Jane Lane with Mr. Lassels parted, being openly
entertained as Kinsfolk, and came in safety back again to Staffordshire. The
occurrences that happened here, I cannot certainly relate, only the King was
disappointed of a Passage, which a Merchant had procured for him at Lime; but
by some strange accident (though it pleased God no dangerous one) he performed
not his Word, though a very Loyal and True-hearted person. The King was a while
Sick at this place.

The King and Lord Wilmot in danger of discovery at Chayermouth
The Lord Wilmot who lay hereabouts, was employed about this shipping with
Colonel Windham; but this error or disappointment had like to have proved his
ruin, by the shooing of his Horse, (there was one Mr. Hen. Peter's that
attended him for his Guide.) The Ostler and the Smith, who discovered by the
Shoos that they and the Gentlemen were come somewhere from the Northern parts
by their manner of Nailing them, presently raising a rumor of the King being
thereabouts, and some Horse presently scoured the Road to London; but his
Lordship was got away by providence, and the King directed also out of his way,
Adventures of the King.
and came to Bridport; where, as it is since reported, he had like to have been
known by an Ostler, as he was setting up the Horses, who welcomed him, as
having formerly seen him at Exeter, but did not fully at present discern him;
and the King with a proffer of drinking with him when he was more at leisure,
withdrew himself from any further sight of him. That night they touched at
Broad-Windsor, where again the King met with some disturbance by Soldiers,
then filling those places in order to their shipping for Iersey.

The King now returned to Mr. Windham's with the Lord Wilmot, who had overtaken
them, and passed by them at Bridport as was agreed, and thence (for it could
not be safe to continue longer in that place) was sent to Salisbury to look out
for another Sanctuary, and to confer to that purpose with Mr. Coventry, who
agreed to bring the King to Mrs. Hides, At Heal at Mrs. Hides.
at a Village called Heal, (the King in his way to Salisbury, came to a Town
called More to the George at one Christ. Philips an acquaintance only of the
Colonels, where drinking in the Celler, the Host seeing the King stand off (as
a Servant) said, Thou look like an honest Fellow, here is a Health to the
King; who unreadily answering it, made the man expostulate with the Colonel
what Fellow he had brought:) Here the King (the Servants being sent abroad) was
introduced to a secret place, having visited Stonehenge upon that plain,
attended only with Colonel Robert Philips (also Dr. Hinchman since Bishop of
Salisbury had the honor to be made acquainted with the Kings Condition) and
the Colonel presently dispatched away to procure some shipping at Southampton,
where the Barks being taken up and employed by the Juncto, after he had hired
one, he returned with his labor lost, save that he met with Colonel Gunter,
who being informed of the business, happily engaged another at Brighthemstead
in Sussex, wither the King (and the Lord Wilmot) having taken leave of this
Noble Matron, By Portsmouth to Brighthemstead.
accompanied with Colonel Philips by night, near Portsmouth, came in two days
to an Inn at Brighthemstead, where Colonel Gunter and Mr. Maunsell the
Merchant that hired the ship, and the Ship-master Tetershal (since a Captain in
his Majesty's Navy, the ship that Transported the King being since brought up
and preserved in the River for a perpetual memorial of this Happy Deliverance)
met him, and at Supper sat down together with his Majesty, when the Master
presently discovered the King, Tetershal discovers the King.
having formerly seen him in the Downs, when he obtained the release of his
ship laden from Newcastle.

Whereupon the King was beckoned to come and confer with the Master, Tetershal
resolves to proceed in his voyage with the King.
who being wrought upon by promises, and Money paid down, and his own Loyalty,
agreed to perform his bargain, and departed to call up his Mariners then on
shore, pretending his ship half laden with Coals was a drift; and coming home
for a Bottle of Aqua Vitae, his Wife by the unseasonableness of the night
suspecting the truth, encouraged him to the undertaking, not caring (as she
said) if she and her little ones begged their Bread so the King were
Transported in safety. The Iune-keeper also guessing at the matter, gave the
King an apprecation, King Embarques.
and himself the hopes of being somebody hereafter. About five a clock, in the
dark of the morning, about the 20 of October, the King Embarked, with the Lord
Wilmot; and keeping the shore all that day, in the evening crossed over, and at
dark night landed near Diepe in France. A notable passage.
[In their passage the King sitting upon the Deck, and observing and directing
the course, or as they call it, Conning the ship, one of the Mariners blowing
Tobacco in the Kings Face, the Master bid him go further off the Gentleman, who
murmuring, unwittingly replied, That a Cat might look upon a King. Arrives at
Rohan, to Paris.
] At Rohan the King had his Clothes changed by two English Merchants residing
there, and was there saluted (though at first hardly known) by Doctor Earls
after Lord-Bishop of Worcester; and upon notice of his arrival, the
Queen Mother, and Duke of Orleans, and that whole Court went out to meet him,
and congratulate his wonderful Deliverance. A Providence indeed not paralleled
in History, and able to have convinced his Rebels, if their rage had not
blinded them; but it cheered the minds and hopes of his Subjects, by this
pledge of their salvation in this mavelous protection of Gods Anointed: no
less than 50 men and women being privy to his escape.

But very few of his Nobles and Officers that came in with him escaped. Most of
the Scots taken Prisoners.
David Lesley and Lieutenant General Middleton were taken in Lancashire, and
carried Prisoners to Chester, whence the Earl of Lauderdale, Earls of Kelly and
Rothes, etc. were Committed to the Tower, from whence the Lord Middleton
happily escaped; the rest were (not long after) sent to Windsor-Castle, where
they continued till the Restitution. On the 21 of September, Cromwell and his
Prisoners to London, Sep. 12.
Cromwell came to London, and was met about Acton with the Speaker and the
Members, and the Lord Mayor, and Recorder Steel, who in a set Speech
congratulated his great Successes, and like a false Prophet, by a mistaken
Prolepsis, applied these words of the Psalmist, -- To bind their Kings in
Chains, and their Nobles in Fetters of Iron, The Prisoners sold.

The Colors taken, hanged up in Westminster- hall.


in an arrogant Exaltation of his Achievements. Next day the Common Prisoners
(being driven like a herd of Swine) were brought through Westminster into
Tuthill-Fields, (a sadder spectacle was never seen, except the miserable place
of their defeat) and there sold to several Merchants, and sent to the
Barbados; the Colors taken, were likewise hanged up in Westminster Hall, with
those taken before at Preston and Dunbar.

The heart of the Scotch War was now broken; yet some struggling there was in
the Limbs and extremities thereof for Life. Sterling- castle surrendered, Aug.
14, to Genesis Monk for the Parl. Dundee stormed Sep. 1, and taken by Genesis Monk,
the defendants put to the Sword.
Sterling-Castle seeing it to no purpose to endure a Storm or a Siege, rendered
upon Articles August the 14 to General Monk: a more sumptuous stately building
than Edenburgh-Castle, where the Kings Royal Robes, the Cloth of State, and all
the Scotch Records were found and seized. From hence the General came before
Dundee (whither the Scots had conveyed the best part of their Movables as a
secure depository) and Summoned it; which the Governor slighting, having 800
men besides the Citizens in Garrison; General Monk gave order to Sorm it, and
accordingly Horse and Foot about noon September the first having a piece of
white out behind, fell on resolutely, and the besieged being then in their
cups, and worse drunk with a haughty confidence, after a short but sharp
resistance, mastered the place; and put all they found in Arms to the Sword,
and plundered the Town of all its former and newly-put-in wealth, The Town
miserably plundered.
which amounted to vast sums. Houshould-goods were of so mean an account, that
nothing but Plate and Money was regarded, and for which Feather-beds were ripped,
and the Feathers thrown about; for it was absolutely the richest Town in
Scotland, but now lest not worth a groat: there were taken here also 60 sail of
all sorts of ships that lay in the Harbor, which likewise came into the
Conquerours hands. Aberdeen yielded.
Aberdeen (40 miles further Northwards) yielded without any further constraint;
and St. Andrews (the other University) was fined 500 l. for not surrendering
upon the first Summons; St. Andrews Fined 500 l.
but upon their humble Petition, setting forth that the Town was no more than a
Receptacle for poor Scholars, it was most part remitted.

Just a little before the storm of Dundee, a party sent under Colonel Matthew
Allured, Scotch Nobles taken at Ellet in the Highlands, and Sir John Daniel and
Col. Douglas taken at Dumfreiz, Aug.
surprised a Convention or Pack of Scotch Peers and Presbyters at Ellet in the
Highlands, not without suspicion of their own setting themselves, or at least
of some treacherous persons among them; their names were, General Lesley, Earl
Marshal, Earl of Crawford, Earl of Keith, Lord Ogilby, Lord Burgenny, Lord
Humly, Lord Lee, Sir James Fowls, Sir James Lockbart, and 20 more Knights and
Gentlemen, Mr. Mungo Law, and Mr. Robert Douglas, eminent Kirk-men, and Mr.
James Sharp, now Lord-Arch-bishop of Saint Andrews, and five or six more, with
70 Servants: the Soldiers that took them had as good (if not a better) Market
than the Dundee-blades, getting many of them 500, or 400 pounds apiece, and all
of them very considerable sums. These Lords and Lairds, and their fellows the
Ministers, were ^hipt for London (that they might give no disturbance to the
Parliaments new-intended settlement and union of that Kingdom with this:) old
Lesley obtained the favor from Sir Arthur Hasilrig (stopping at Newcastle) to
stay at his Son-in-laws Mr. De la Val of Northumberland.

A New Representative debated of.
The first thing the Parliament now debated upon after Cromwell's sitting in the
House, was a new Representative, at his instance and motion; which same project
he had hinted covertly in all his Letters to the Parliament, under the true
interest of a Commonwealth-Foundation: but that which was least talked of, and
mainly intended, was an Act for the encouragement of the English Navigation;
the Sovereignty at Sea, being the main controversy which both in point of
Honor and Interest, neither State (we nor the Dutch) would acknowledge to the
other. The High Court of Justice pardons Mr. Jenkins and others.
The Judges of the High Court of Justice now proceeded where they left off with
Mr. Love, in the Presbyterian-Plot; and accordingly on the 10 of October
Colonel Vanghan a Leatherseller, Captain Hugh Massey, Mr. Ienkins, Mr. Drake,
did all of them confess their fault and guilt, alleging only for defense
their Oath of Secrecy, etc. After this confession they were remanded to Prison;
but at the intercession of the Lord Fairfax, as it is supposed, and to honor
their late-acquired Victory, the Parliament was pleased upon their Petitions
(that of Mr. Ienkins coming home to their haughty humor, and acknowledging
their Authority from God, and which was Printed here by their Order for a
pattern to the rest of the Presbyters, and reprinted at Holland, to divulge
their other Conquest over the stubborn Rabbinical Tribe) they were quitted of
their Imprisonment, and restored.

But though they escaped, it was not other persons good hap: A Court Marshal
was now established at Chester, whither diverse English Prisoners taken at
Newport and in the pursuit had been brought; ten whereof were Comdemned by
Virtue of the Act against holding correspondence with the King; and five
Executed, among whom was one Captain Symkins, Cap. Symkins, Sir Timothy
Fetherstonhaugh, and Col. Benbow Executed, Oct.
a Gentleman that carried the Kings Letter of Invitation to Sir Thomas
Middleton; and presently after Sir Timothy Fetherstonhaugh, Colonel Benbow, and
the Earl of Derby, were Tried by the same Court-Marshal, wherein Colonel
Mackworth (above mentioned) sat President, and Major General Mitton assisted,
with other standing Officers. The Earl would fain have been heard by the
Members at Westminster, and writ up to the General, and sent a Petition,
offering the surrender of the Isle of Man; but nothing would move the
inexorable Rhadamanths of the Parliament, though he had subjoyned an account of
the design, at their own or their Agents desire: whereupon, he held to his
Plea for Quarter given him by Captain Edge; which being overruled with the
same argument and solution as they made to the Lord Capel, they avowing the
Court to be a Civil Authority, as proceeding upon and by direction of Authority
of Parliament, he, as the other two Gentlemen afterward, was adjudged to dye;
the Earl at Bolton, The Earl of Derby Beheaded at Bolton, October. 15.
the 15 of October, Sir Timothy at Chester by the Axe, and Colonel Benbow to be
shot at Shrewsbury. After Sentence the Earl made an escape out of the Window,
being as it is supposed, Tranpann'd out of some money in hope and proffer of an
Escape; but was presently retaken upon the sands of the River Dee, and secured
and guarded till the day of his Martyrdom at Bolton aforesaid, where to the
public grief and lamentation of the Inhabitants, who refused to lend a Nail or
Stick to the building of the Scaffold though the very pretense of his Execution
there, was for the Blood spilt there by him on Prince Rupert's Storming the
Town in 1644.) which was the reason it was late ere he suffered, and beyond his
appointed time by three hours, piously spent by him: He most Christianly and
worthy of all Memory gave up his Soul to his Redeemer, being a little troubled
at his longer detainer in this Vale of misery, by the Executioner's missing the
Sign.

And this sad occasion will direct us to a further account of those English
Royalists who were taken in and after the same defeat; Several other Royalists
taken:
among whom were, besides others mentioned, the Lord Grandison, Sir John
Packington, Colonel Blague the late Governor of Wallingford, Colonel Broughton
after Sir Edward, and Colonel Massey, who having escaped the fate of that day
at Worcester, and being tired with Riding, having wounds yet green, threw
himself at last upon the Countess of Stamford, engaging his parole for his true
Imprisonment in her House till he was cured; when he was removed likewise to
the Tower, and by a disguise shortly after made an escape. The
often-to-be-with-Honour-mentioned Colonel Wogan came off and got away
untouched, and recovered the Highlands, with an indesistible courage of
prosecuting the Kings quarrel, even where Nature had fixed her non ultra; James
Hind the sam'd High-way-man taken and Hanged, drawn and quartered at Worcester.
while James Hind the famous High-way-man (some time before in England) for
Robbing of the Parliament-party, adventuring Southward, was betrayed in
Fleet Street at his lodging, and being from Newgate carried to the next Assizes
of Abington and Worcester, was at the last place, when none would come in to
swear against him, either to Felony or Treason in the late Invasion (as 'twas
called) by the King, betrayed by a Minister of their sending, whose name I
cannot get, and by his Evidence Convicted, and Hanged, Drawn and Quartered in
that City.

An Act for sale of Delinquents Lands had passed some time before; now their
Trustees with Boon Courage resolved to proceed, the danger of voiding their
Trusts and the Authority conferred on them being now past, and some more Grist
being like to come into their Mill by new Forfeitures; wherefore they appointed
the 8 day of September for their sitting down, in pursuance of those powers
granted by the said Act of Sale, The Estates of the Lord Craven and other
Royalists exposed to sale.
and chose Drury-house (the Mansion of the Lord Craven) for the place of their
Sitting; where they made several conveniences for their Registers,
Accountants, Cashiers, and Clerks, like to any other legal Office, and there
with other Estates exposed that Lord's to common sale.

The Members had appointed the second of October for the Thanksgiving-day for
this Worcester-Victory; but because they would have it Celebrated with the
greater solemnization by notice thereof throughout the three Kingdoms together,
they adjourned it till the 24 of the same Month; in the Evening whereof,
General Popham one of their Admirals at Sea, General Popham 's Funeral, October.
24.
deceased on the 19 of August before, attended by Cromwell and most of the
Members, was Interred in Westminster-Abbey. This day was without any more
scruple punctually observed; the Presbyterians, who were in the best Livings
generally, (and indeed no body else scarce in any) not offering to mutter
against the Command of these their (not-to-be-contended-with) Lords and
Superiors.

The Scotch affairs were now the consultation of the Parliament: for having
reduced that Kingdom to near a plenary Conquest, no English Forces, or scarce a
single man having passed so far as their Army was now Quartered and in
Garrison, the Civil Government was very fit to be considered of, and how it
should be managed. In the beginning of the reign of King James, much pains and
endeavors were used by Him, about the draught and accomplishment of an Union
between both Kingdoms, The Scotch Union projected.
which might be so comprehensive as to be equally advantageous to both people;
and the Lord Bacon writ an Elaborate discourse and project of it; but all came
to nothing, so many Scotch proud and surly difficulties were thereupon raised:
but now one Weeks work finished that mighty matter in a short Vote and
Resolution, That England and Scotland shall be Incorporated into one
Commonwealth; Commissioners named to go into Scotland.
and Commissioners were named to go into that Kingdom, viz. Oliver Saint John,
Sir Henry Vane, Alderman Titchburn, Major Salway, Major General Dean, Colonel
Fenwick, and General Monk, before whose arrival (only Major General Lambert
and Dean were upon perambulation of the limits already gained, and receiving
submissions and granting terms) several of the Scotch Nobility (whose Ancestors
thought the English Union a diminution of their Greatness, and disdainfully
rejected all tendencies thereunto) came quietly in, having made a bluster of
doing something in the Highlands; such were the Marquess of Huntly (who to be
repaired of some injuries done him by Arguile, though his near Kinsman, thought
good to prevent him by a timely acquiescence, upon pact of having right done
him in the said controversy) the Lord Balcarris, the Earls of Weems, Angus and
Calendar: and Arguile himself was now in Treaty; but to show himself more
considerable, held it on foot almost half a year, guarding his Castles the
County, and Levying Assessments like a Prince upon the Country. The late
Marquess of Montross his Children and Family were honorably taken into
protection by General Monk. Genesis Monk protects the Marq. of Montross his
Children and Family.


Nor were the Royal Party half so averse and intractable to the English
Usurpation (for they had (as they well hoped) shaken off the insupportable
Tyranny of the Presbytery, and could hardly suffer more by any power
whatsoever, which might in time veer about unto its lawful Scepter) as the
Kirkmen and that brood, who having lost their Arbitrary and most Tyrannical
sway over the Consciences, Estates, and Lives of men, raged at this Change, the
rather for having fooled and bewitched themselves into an opinion, that they
should be able by the Keys of the Kirk (which they doubted not to re-establish
in that Kingdom) to oversway the Sword of the Sectary, and to bring him to
conform, there being such a proximity in many of their Principles, assigning to
themselves that time-serving Complement of Oliver's, The good people of the
Nation of Scotland, that were to be preserved in their Rights, Civil and
Spiritual; and accordingly the Grandees of the Western Remonstrants took upon
them to indict an Assembly, and there they damned all which had been done by
the late Parliament and Assembly, and published a Fast, with the grounds
wherefore they were to humble themselves (which being ridiculous Crambs of
miscarriages about the King, are purposely omitted) and proceeded afterward to
that boldness, as to expostulate and refuse in Print the Tender of Union for
several Reasons, which we shall hint in its proper place.

Limerick besieged by Deputy Ireton, for the Parl.
In Ireland, while the Deputy Ireton lay before Limerick, which Siege had
continued most part of the Summer, the Irish played pranks, offering at a
redemption of their losses; but were too far spent: for though Colonel
Venables, Hewson, and Reynolds were out in parties to attend their motion, Sir
Walter Dungan Stormed Ross-Town, and Castle-Iordan, and had carried the Castle
of Ross, but for want of Provision, which made him in have to retreat into his
Fastnesses, where the Marquess Clanrickard kept about Slego and the County of
Cavan; they surprised likewise three Troops of Colonel Sanchy's Regiment, and
the notable Quarter-beater Nash killed Colonel Cook coming with a party from
Cork; but was slain in the onslaught, though his party were victorious. The
besieged likewise in Limerick made many fierce Salleys, refusing to hearken to
any Conditions, Hugh O Neal G^v^r^our t^ereof.
being governed by that right-valliant Hugh O Neal* who defended Clonmel so
resolutely, and resolved to hold this out to extremity. In one Salley of 1000
men they killed above 300, five whereof were Captains, two of them in Colonel
Henry Cromwell's Regiment; and upon the English attempt made upon the Island
before the Town, which was encompassed with a Line, and a Fort in the middle of
it, (by reason the Boats not being able to carry above forty men, and being but
three Boats in all, could not return with seconds to make good the Landing and
footing that was made in time) the whole party consisting of 160, was partly
cut off and drowned with their Leaders, Major Walker, Captain Graves, and
Captain Whiting, in the view of the Leaguer, but out of their power to relieve
them. This happened on the 15 of July; Ireton defe^ted before Limerick.
and being so signal a defeat, was imputed by Ireton who pret^nded too great
acquaintance with Gods Counsels) to breach of Articles, (as to Quarter promised
to the Irish, who delivered a Castle near adjoining) by Colonel Tuthil, who
after caused the men to be knocked on the head, and for which he was worthily by
Ireton cashiered the Army.

Ireton was nevertheless resolute not to depart without it, though the
Governor, in hopes that Winter would force him to draw off, or else some happy
r^ncounter, might relieve him, was as obstinate on the other side; but at last
the Victuals being all spent, about the middle of October he was forced to
embrace a Treaty, hoping for those Articles which Ireton had offered the Town
three months before; but they would not be granted, so that in conclusion
himself and 21 more were constrained to yield to mercy; Limerick (...), October
29.
of whom the chief were, M. G. Patrick Purcel, who lost the Leaguer at Dublin
by his Treachery or Cowardice, David Roch the Lord Roch's Son, Sir Richard
Everard, and the Mayor of the Town, and an Alderman, through whose resolution
the Citizens were encouraged to hold out; the rest were Friars, and persons
guilty of the Massacres in the first years of the Rebellion, whom divine
Vengeance found out here, (and a general Article of that nature was inserted
upon all surrenders thereafter) and delivered them on the 29 of October upon
some hard terms for the Citizens and Soldiers. Sir Charles Co^t (...) a party
of Irish.
About the same time Sir Charles Coot defeated a party of Fitz Patrick's and
Odwyr's Forces, (who had re-gained Meleck Island, after the taking of it by
Colonel Ax^el) after a resolute defense thereof, to the quite ba^fling of his
Foot, who were worsted two or three times together; but the gallantry of the
Horse recovered the day, and made 300 desperate Irish accept of Quarter only
for their Lives, some 300 more being slain and drowned.

Limerick being taken, Ireton marched to join with Sir Charles Coot to attempt
something further, and together took in Clare-Castle; but the weather not
proving so seasonable, Clare- Castle taken by the English.
and the Soldiers tired out with duty at the Siege of Limerick, they parted
into Winter Quarters; Coot to straighten Galloway, near which he had built some
Forts; ships of War lying about the Harbor to intercept Relief, (and a Summons
having been sent in to G. Preston, by way of Catechizing that vanity of a
Soldiers Honor, with a Letter to the Citizens from Ireton, offering
Limerick's first Terms, and laying open their suffering from their
stubbornness, on purpose, as Preston elegantly answered, to divide them to
their common Ruin) and Ireton back again to Limerick, in the way whither he
fell sick on the 15 of November, and after Purging and Bleeding, and other
means used, Ireton dies of the Plague at* Limerick, Nov. 25.

Edmund Ludlow constituted in his place.

Ireton lies in state at Summerset- house.


died of the Plague in that City, on the 27 of the same month; the
Commissioners for the Parliament there substituting to his Command in the Army
(while the Parliament or General) (for Cromwell was lately so made of Ireland)
should otherwise appoint) Edmund Ludlow the Lieutenant General of the Army in
that Kingdom. On the 17 of December his Carcass was landed at Bristol, and
pompously dismissed to London, where it was for a time in State at
Sommerset-house, all hung with black, and a Scutcheon over the gate with this
Motto, Dulce est pro patria mori; how suitable, that Countryman best told, who
Englished it in these words, It is good for his Country that he is dead. On
February 6 following he was Interred in H. 7's Chapel; but has since found,
to say no more, His Character.
a more fitting and deserved Sepulture. A man of great parts and abilities; but
natured to mischief, and the evil of those times he was born to make worse, and
most prodigiously Infamous: no man came suited with so great capacity to the
overthrow of the Government, reckoning his impiety, or rather vizarded piety,
into his indowments.

The Council of State was now, November the 24, the one half of it changed,
according to the annual custom, in which month all that remained of the
English Dominions unreduced was attaqued, namely Iersey-Island, Jersey
surrend^^d, Nov. and Dec. to the Parliament. Mount Orgueil and Elizabeth Castle
^urrendred.
where Colonel James Heyns, who Commanded in chief, landed his men up to the
Neck in the Sea, and bravely withstood a gallant charge of the Island-horse,
and got firm footing thereon, and forthwith fell a Summoning the Castles: Mount
Orgueil, wherein was Sir Philip Carteret, yielding presently upon good
Conditions, which that civil Commander ever used to offer; but it was the 18 of
December before Elizabeth-Castle, one of the most impregnant places in the
World, came to a surrender, upon very honorable and advantageous terms, as the
importance of the place deserved; (Sir George Carteret having order from the
King to make what terms he could for himself:) there were some Morter-pieces
first played, one of which lighting and bursting in the Chapel of the Castle,
killed some 20 men, and tore the stones into shivers, and made him the
willinger to Treat. Sir George having clearly indemnified himself and the
Islanders, and some way bettered his condition, departed into France; and
General Blake came home by G^ernsey-Castle, which having faced, not willing to
attempt or stay before it, he le^t order to buy it; which was now about this
time effected, as we have anterelated it, (in the account of its storming by
Major Harrison, the Commander in chief of that Island, and since at Iersey) for
fear so little a spot of ground should have mist our observation.

Isle of Man reduced, Dec.
The Isle of Man was also at the same time reduced by Colonel Duckenfield,
without any considerable opposition: Rushen and Peel-Castle stood out a while;
but upon the news of the Death of the Earl, whom Duckenfield in his Letters
(not thinking a Summons befitting him to a woman) had styled the late Earl of
Derby, grief overcame their courage; and it being resolved before to deliver
it, as the Earl had proffered: that former resolution da^ht any other, so that
though Sir Thomas Armstrong who was come thither out of Ireland, a famous
Soldier, offered to have maintained Rushen-Castle, where the Lady was; yet
upon very slender terms it was rendered: Into such distractions do the continued
strokes of persecuting Fortune drive the most resolute minds, that the most
constant magnanimity (for which this Countess was highly famous, as at
Latham-house) is at last depressed, and forced to submit to her arbitrary and
uncontrolable Tyranny.

The Isle of Barbados, where the King had been Proclaimed, and was now in open
defiance of the Parliament, and prosecuted their Trade only with the
Hollanders, was the next and only place to be reduced, with some other of the
Caribbe-Islands there adjacent. About the 16 of October. Sir George Ayscue having
coasted several places about Spain and Portugal, to find out Prince Rupert,
arrived at Barbados, Barbados reduced by Sir Geo: Ayscue, Jan.
in Carlisle-bay, where he found fourteen sail of Hollanders in the Road; and
to prevent their running on shore, sent in the Amity Frigate commanded by
Captain Peck, with three other ships, to seize them; who presently Commanded
the respective Masters aboard, and so gained the Vessels, and kept them as
prize, for Trading with the Enemies of the Commonwealth in that Island, with
three other Hollanders, as they were sailing to the other Islands. The Fleet
having plied up and down in the sight of the Islanders, who were now in Arms to
the number of 4000 Horse and Foot, came to anchor at Spikes-bay: and the
Virginia-Merchant-Fleet arriving in December, Sir George advised it very
advantageous for the Service, by the countenance of those ships which seemed as
his reserve of Men of War, to attempt a landing; which accordingly was done by
a Regiment of 700 men, made up with 150 Scotch Slaves, the rest being Seamen.
This was effected on the 17 of December, and the Islanders beaten up to their
Fort, which on a sudden was by them deserted, after the loss of some 60 men on
both sides, and the same Fort, and four pieces of Ordnance gained by them; and
then the Seamen retreated again to the ships, which lay crusing up and down
continually to intercept any Trade or Traffic coming thither. That
inconvenience made some of the Islanders weary of the War: which Sir George
very well understanding, negotiated with one Colonel Muddyford, a chief man in
one part of the Island, about a peace and accommodation; and the conclusion of
that transaction was Muddyford's public declaring for Peace, Lord Willoughby
Governor thereof.
and joining with Sir G Ayscue, to bring the Governor the Lord Willoughby to
reason, as it was called. Sir George and his Forces made up 2000 Foot, and 100
Horse, so that to avoid the uncertainty of battle, and the Effusion of blood,
both parties agreed to treat, and the 11 of Ian. agreed upon the Rendition on
Articles every day comprehensive and honorable. Commissioners names for Sir
George were, Captain Peck, Mr. Searl left Governor there, Colonel Muddyford,
and Mr. Colleton; and for the Lord Willoughby, Sir Richard Peers, Mr. Charles
Pym, Colonel Ellice, and Major Byham: his Lordship having his desired
Conditions of Indemnity, and freedom of Estate and person, not long after
returned into England, St. Christophers the same.
as did Sir George, having vis^^ed Mevis and St. Christophers. Before his
coming, Major General Poyntz newly Governor thereof had shipped himself for
Virginia, the only retreat for Royalists, as lying so far up in the Continent,
and affording subsistence of it self. Thus nothing remained of all the British
Dominions, either of profit, honor, or security to the Nation, which their
Handmaid Success had not attained to; and that in as short a space of time, as
the most indulgent Fates ever apportioned to their greatest and whitest
Favorites; whose Glories of Conquest they increased, by sparing and lessening
their sweat and travail in the Achievement.

In Scotland, the Major-Generals- Lambert, Dean, and Lieutenant General Monk,
had brought things to that pass, that the people were rated by Assessments
toward the charge of the Army: and this the Kirk in their new Assembly (since
it could not be otherwise) would permit to be paid; but expressly forbad the
people to comply, or give meeting, or cause any to be ^ad, in order to the
closing with the Declaration of the Commissioners, who were to receive from the
Deputies of each Shire (who were ordered to choose such) their Subscriptions to
the projected Union, now directly remonstrated against, besides other
arguments, yea and from the Covenant, The Scotch Kirk reject, and declare
against the Union.
from this main one, because that incorporation would draw with it a
subordination of the Kirk to the State in the things of Christ: for here the
Shop painfully wrung them. This was dated Ian. the 21.

The Parliament to correct this perverseness, and in pursuance of their
Commissioners Declaration to the same purpose, Decreed, 1. An Act for the
Union, Abolishing Kingly Government, etc. and for punishing such as should
contrav^ne or offend against the meaning and purpose of the said Act. 2. That
in Compliance with the said Union, the Shires or Burghs should Choose their
Deputies or Burgesses in a proportionable number as the Parliament should think
fit to represent them in Parliament; and this was styled a great favor, and a
freeing the Nation from the villanage of their Heritors, Lairds and Lords, most
of whose Estates (that were in the two late Invasions with Hamilton and at
Worcester) they had declared Confiscate, together with all the Crown Lands and
Houses, to the use of the Commonwealth of England, toward the defraying of the
charge of this their labor of Love, in the reducing of that Kingdom. The
Bishops lands could not be found, for the Kirk had mingled and mixed them with
their own sacred rights and perquisites, so that the most quick-sighted
sacrilege could hardly discern them.

By these Summons the Deputies of the Shires of this side and the other side
Tay, were ordered (the most remote) to appear on the 26 of February, and in the
mean time, about the black 30 of January, the Commissioners proceeded with
their instructions, and issued out several Proclamations against the King's,
and Monarchical Government, and that Writs should no longer run in His Name,
and Mutatis mutandis in Scotland as in England; Monarchy abolished in Scotland,
Jan.
His Arms defaced, and for an English Judicature to be there established, and
to keep the Sessions, which was the Term. Thus far the Political and Civil
Government was provided for already; nor was there any thing of Note among the
Martialists, save the taking in Dumbarton-Castle, Dumbarton surrendered, Jan.
5, by Sir Charles Erskin, to the Parliament.
which was rendered by Sir Charles Erskin upon Articles, January the 5, with a
Salvo to the Duke of Lenox and Richmond of his Goods and Great Guns therein, as
being the proper Goods of the said Duke. This surrender opened a way to the
same terms with Bass-Island (the most dangerous place in the Frith to the
English Navigation) some time after. Some Forces under Colonel Overton landed
in the Isles of Orkney, and Colonel Fitch's Regiment marched toward Innerness.

The Dutch had rankled with spleen at the successes of this State, as no way
compatible with, but surmounting those indifferent equal Proposals and
Overtures made before the accomplishment thereof: and perceiving how regardless
and cool the Parliament was now as to any further transaction of a League, but
that on the contrary their Fishing was molested in these Seas upon the old
Title of Sovereignty, The Dutch Commerce, and Fishing molested at Sea.
and that upon any the least pretenses of French Goods and Lading, their
Merchant-ships were searched, stayed, and sometimes adjudged Prize; thought it
advisable to send over Ambassadors, as well to obtain reparation for those
damages, as to provide for future security against the like, by a Treaty; and
in case they perceived the aversness or untowardness of the State thereto, to
fully inform themselves what Naval preparation there was in hand, and in what
readiness, and how the Nation stood affected to or would yet endure the
Government; as by a Copy of their Instructions since appeared.

The Ambassadors, Mine heeren Catz, Schaep, and Vande Perre of Zealand (as of
custom and right one of that Province must be in the Embassy hither) were
ordered to be gone with all speed, upon the notice of the Act for the
encouragem^nt of the English-Navigation, etc. But the Wind blowing at Southwest
from the very day of the date of the said Act, neither they nor other ships
bound thence from England with East and West India Commodities, Spice and
suchlike, could stir out of their Ports, to the great exasperation of that
people; who when they see the day elapsed, The 1 of Dec. the time limited by
t^^ Act, ^^omacked by the Dutch.
being the first of December, and had notice that the Parliament would not
allow a day longer (even to the English themselves upon any account whatsoever,
though to the breaking of several Merchants, whose Estates were coming over in
such Goods thence) procured the Lords to make an Arrest and Imbargo upon all
English ships then in the Texel; but which the States were willing soon after
to recall, and make show of good Correspondence and Friendship, as in this and
other occasions they yet testified.

The Ambassadors with the first opportunity (the rather to prevent Monsieur
Speering, then at the Hague, and Commissioned by the Queen of Sweden for her
Ambassador into England, as unwilling to be the last should own this
Commonwealth) put to Sea, and arrived here about the middle of January; and for
the greater credit of the sincerity of their intentions to Peace and Amity,
they brought over their Families, by which it might appear they intended to
stay till that great affair was finished by them; being also men for their
particular persons, very acceptable to the State here. The Dutch Ambassadors
t^eat January.
Soon after their Reception they had Audience in the Parliament House, and a
Committee appointed to confer with them, by whom they were at the entrance of
their business choked with our claim to and their dues for the
Herring-fishing, with the old story of bloody Amboyna, and a demand of a
Free-trade in the Schelde from Middleburgh to Antwerpe, where the English had a
good Trade once within 100 years, then the most famous Mart of the
Low Countries, yea of Europe; but by the Hollanders seizing of Flushing, and
building the Fort Lillo opon that River in their Wars against the Spaniard, the
Merchants and Inhabitants, disaffected otherwise to the King of Spain, in the
beginning of that War betook themselves to Amsterdam, which by the sudden
breaking in of the Sea, and breaking down of Dams, became a most convenient and
capacious Harbor, and consequently a great Mart, as lying most opportune for
the Trade of the East, and North-East Seas.

Monsieur Speering arrived here likewise, and was well received a short while
after, and laid a foundation of that Treaty, which was afterward concluded by
the Lord Whitlock with that Queen: but he deceasing here, soon after Monsieur
Appleboom, Resident also at the Hague, was substituted to his Embassy in like
manner. The Parliament publish an Act of Oblivion.
The 24 of February came out their Act of Oblivion, whereout Sir John Webster
of Amsterdam was totally excluded, together with the Executors of the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the slayers of Dorislaus and Ascham, the Viscount
Mansfield, and Lord Goring, and General George Lord Goring, and Charles his
Sons: which particulars out of a multitude of public exceptions (as H. Martin
discanted on it) I thought fit to give the Reader a hint of, that such a
precious Record of their absolute greatness (as the taking upon them to pardon,
when they needed it only themselves,) might not totally be lost: the Preface
and Induction to it being a fallacy, a non concesso, that because the
generality of the Nation had showed themselves ready to suppress the late
Scotch Invasion at Worcester; therefore the Parliament out of mere grace, etc.
but all this favor to be of no benefit to any one without taking the
Engagement. Their Committee for Regulation of the Law had likewise proceeded so
far, as to take an account of all Courts and Offices concerning their Fees, and
to see they did Execution of Justice; for corruption wherein, John Lilburn and
Josiah Primate having taxed their Commissioners at Haberdashers-hall (about a
Cole-pit Primate pretended to, but Sir Arthur Haslerig had possession of, by
virtue of one Colonel Wray's Delinquency) the said Lilburn was banished on the
30 day of January, John Lilburn Banished.

Josiah Primate fined 4000 l.


and Primate fined 4000 l. to the said Commissioners and Sir Arthur, and
committed to the Fleet; but upon submission Released.

In Ireland the War was almost at an end, nothing considerable but Galloway and
some few Castles holding out, and some loose parties forraging the Country;
whereupon the Lord ^lanrickard then in Galloway, about the beginning of March
sent a Letter to Lieutenant General Ludlow, Lord Clanrickard sues to Lieu. Genesis
Ludlow for a peace.
to desire of him, that in order to a composure and conclusion of that bloody
wasting War in that Kingdom, he or the Commissioners would give safe conduct
for the chief persons of the Irish, out of every County, to meet and to agree
of terms about a Peace; not doubting, as he expressed, if it should be refused,
but that they were able to maintain themselves, till supplies from abroad, and
courage at home, and their wants and discouragements from England, should alter
the case.

To this was answered by Ludlow, His Answer;
That the Commissioners could not, nor would allow such a thing as a Council of
the Irish to settle the Kingdom; but that if they would submit, they should
have such Articles and Conditions as was fit for them. For that the Parliament,
whose that Kingdom was, would have the ordering and Government of it; and that
it was not for those in Arms against their Authority, to think of such an
absurd condescension.

This Answer being returned to two or three offers of surrender, took not
effect; yet prevailed on several parties, as the Lord Muskerry's, Fitz
Patrick's, and the Odwyr's, to come in and submit, with liberty of transporting
their Forces into the service of the King of Spain, or to abide at home under
such and such fines; but none to be indempnified by any Articles, that should
be found guilty of any Massacre in the first year of the Rebellion. Galloway
had before offered to capitulate; but because the Articles were somewhat of the
largest demand, they were first transmitted to the Parliament; for there was no
plenipotence then in Ireland; Lambert was nominated, but by Cromwell mocked of
the honor of Lord-Deputy; a person too brisk (and understanding, and seeking
his Interest too much) for that employment, it being reserved for Fleetwood
after his Marriage with Oliver's Daughter and Ireton's Relict.

The English had now a meeting with the Marquess of Arguile, after many delays
and put offs, Arguile treats with Commissioners, at Dumbarton.
and fine excuses for them, about the 20 of March at Dumbarton-Castle, whither
within an hour after the arrival of the Parliaments-Commissioners
(Major General Dean, and Major Saloway; for Dean was not thought Mercurial
enough of himself, to word it with the Scot) he came attended by some 30
persons, having ordered before the most of his Name and Septs of
Highland-Gentry to wait on him. He insisted much upon the Salvo Iure of the
Kirk, who had fasted and prayed for a blessing on this meeting, the Marquess
being the Patron and principal defender of their mouldering Presbytery. After
two or three days conference, the Sophie's parted, having entertained their
time with some Godly descants upon providence, the Parliaments most Supreme
Authority, Blackness- Castle ordered to be blown up.
and his Highland mightiness. Blackness-Castle was now ordered to be blown up
with Powder by Dean, who passed by Newark-house, (Garrisoned as was said last
Summer by the English, but retaken soon after by Colonel Massey in his march
upon the Lancashire design) to Air, where the platform of a Citadel was now
laid, as being most convenient for the Trade either of France or Ireland, lying
the most Westward part of Scotland to the Highlands. Moss-Troopers busy and
mischievous.
Several mischiefs were about this time done by the Moss-Troopers about the
Borders.

A considerable party of Horse and Foot under Commissary-General Reynolds, were
sent to Athlone, which lies in the center of Ireland, where he in this month of
March reduced Bally League, Several places in Ireland taken by the English.
and two other Garrisons in the Collough, and thereby gained a very
considerable Pass over the Shannon, and firm hold and footing in the County of
Longford, so that in all with Logh-rea, Portumna, Ballinaston, Melecha, Ragera,
etc. thirty several places were taken: Galloway was now likewise upon Treaty of
a surrender, and had sent out their Propositions, in the framing whereof some
disputes and difference arose betwixt the Soldiers and Citizens; but by the
wisdom and menage of the Marquess Clanrickard were again accommodated. That
which made this willingness of yielding, was the several losses of Vessels with
Corn and Provision intercepted by some ships of the Parliament, who watched
that Harbor; and Lorrain was despaired of, being now engaged upon a march into
France. Those Articles being thought too high by L. G. Ludlow then Commander in
chief in Ireland, were by him and the Commissioners transmitted to England.

An Act for removing obstructions in the sale of Crownlands.
The year ends with an Act for removing obstructions in the sale of the King,
Queens Lands, etc. the Commissioners being, Sir William Roberts, Francis
Mussenden, and others, who made quick work of the Royal Revenue.

Anno Dom. 1652.
Black-monday March 29, predicted by Will. Lilly.
THis Year began with a most dreadful expectation of an approaching Eclipse on
the 29 of March, the effects whereof one William Lilly (a man infamous for
Prognostics and Divinations against the King, His Cause, and His Party) and
others of that Astrological Tribe had predicted should be sudden and most
pernicious; and during the time thereof, it should be so dark, that men should
hardly be able to Read or Write without a Candle; the day it happened on being
therefore called by them Black-munday: But Lilly so shot beyond the mark, (it
proving not half so gloomy and terrible, though most people were so foolishly
fearful, as to take Antidotes and keep close for fear of some malign
Influences and Vapors) that his credit of Vaticination was utterly lost, and
regarded no more for the future than one of his old worthless Almanacks. I
mention this the rather, because this man's wild presages were the Oracles of
the Vulgar; for on his fatidical Lips they depended, which never failed of
pronouncing successes to those Worthies of Westminster, whose Balaam he might
have been said to have been, being hired by them to detract from the King.

The Parliament having the Dutch business mainly in their Eye, it was necessary
that a full and plenary deliberation and resolution should be used in that
affair; and therefore they ordered the vacating of several Committees, that the
House might be better attended, and the Public first served: the powers of the
Committees for the University and Indemnity (which it had been happy for the
Royalists had never been in (...).) were now recalled; the one was utterly
extinct, the other revived soon (...), in that of-it-self-enough injurious
Judicature at Haberdashers-hall, the C^^missioners thereof being Authorized to
proceed in this.

The King was yet at Paris during the Commotions and Broils between the French
King and the Princes of the Blood, The King at Paris, April.
more especially the two Princes of Conde and Comi; for the Duke of Orleans,
the Kings Uncle, was rather an abettor than a principal in the Quarrel, which
arose from Cardinal Mazarine's prevalency and Authority at Court. Paris was
then troubled with the same Meagrome that whirled the City of London into those
tumultuous Uproars in 1641. and as mad against the Errors of Government and
evil Counselors; and had the like, nay, greater advantages and countenance of
a Nobility and the Blood Royal, though that King was not then to seek for Arms,
Money, or his Castles, but with a well-furnisht Army was able to chastise these
undutiful demeanors of His Subjects. The Spaniard (whose Interest it was to
keep these dissentions on foot) foreseeing the weakness of the Princes Forces,
offered them his assistance (having almost mastered Barcelona the Capital City
in Catalonia held by the French, and Graveling in Flanders just upon the
surrender and Dunkirk designed also to the same Conquest) and presently sent in
the Duke of Lorrain with all his Forces into France, while in the interim
Marshal De Turenne the Kings General had defeated the Duke De Nemours with the
Princes Army at Estampes.

But these Auxiliaries seemed so to turn the balance of that Victory, that the
King our Sovereign, who had from his first arrival labored in the intrigue of
that difference, persuading the French King to some condescentions of Peace,
and had passed personally betwixt both parties, advising that King, from the
unhappy Issues of the War in England, which had so fatally evened to Himself,
not to refuse an Accommodation; and accounting to the Princes the Kings
strength and power, and probability of reducing them, though to little effect:
Now to save the further effusion of Blood, and to prevent that Ruin which he
saw so near at hand, wherein He was so much concerned (by the obstinacy of the
Princes party, who would not yield to any thing without the Cardinals removal,
which the King and Queen Mother would no way grant at the Command of their
Subjects) He betook himself to the Duke of Lorrain then at Dampmartin, where he
was received with all possible demonstrations of Honor, by that Army drawn up
in Battalia, the Irish Officers of three Regiments of that Nation being
admitted to kiss his Hand.

In this encounter at Estampes, the Duke of York (then on the Kings side) did
so nobly and valiantly behave himself, The Duke of York Renowned for this
Service.
that the Marshal de Turenne his General, gave a very obliging Character of him
in his Letters, as the only meriting person in that Service; which procured
him especial regard and Honor from that Court, and all the Grandees of that
Nation, which they abundantly testified on all occasions. In the interim of
that Action, the King, His Brother, after some Conference with the Duke of
Lorrain, had engaged him to a kind of Neutrality, which he declared and made
evident; just as the two Armies of the King and Princes were facing one
another, to the disappointment of a resolution and desperate Engagement on the
Princes ^ide, who were compelled to retreat to Paris, and resume those thoughts
of Peace, which from their Confidence in Lorrain they had totally abandoned.
The frantic Parisians were so incensed at this peaceful conclusion, that they
publicly taxed the King and His Mothers menage thereof with that Duke; so that
till the advantages thereof should reclaim their mistake, the King withdrew
himself for some time to St. Germains, The King at St. Germains with the Marq.
of Ormond and E. of Castlehaven.
whence upon the conclusion of the whole affair he returned most infinitely
welcome to those so lately-passionate and inconsiderate people. Whither a while
before, the Marchioness of Ormond, having left Ireland, came to meet the
Marquess her Husband, and was followed by the Earl of Castlehaven.

We must back again return to that Kingdom, now quite spent with the continued
Calamities of a luckless War, which after several Surrenders and Capitulations,
was managed there by flyi^^ (...), and sudden Excursions and Retreats; the sum
of which was in (...): Several parties of the Irish submit.
On the third of April, Roscommon-Castle was yi^lded (as likewise (...)-Town)
to Commissary-General Reynolds, by Major Daly; and Colonel Connor Teige O. Roe
submitted at the same time upon Articles; soon after the Earl of Westmeath, and
Sir William Tungan, Sir Francis Talbot, and many others, to the number of 800,
after a Treaty at Kilkenny did the same* and the Lord Muskerry was sending the
same way, but thought his past Actions and his Condition more considerable,
than to be hudled up in common and ordinary Terms. Only the Lord-Marquess
Clanrickard, according to the Tenor of his past promise upon his first
undertaking the Service, and after the sole Command of the Army, resolvedly and
Loyally waived the proffer of those Kilkenny-Articles (which were now tendered
as their standing Rule to all the Irish, namely, upon submission, protection;
and those who ever they were that should be found guilty of the Massacres in
the first Rebellion, to be questionable for it, and to be excluded from any
benefit of Conditions) and prosecuted the War afresh. On the 16 of May, with
the Connaught-Forces he marched to Ballishannon, having drawn with him some
Ordnance from Slego, Lord Clanrickard takes Ballishannon, and Dungal- Castle.
and after two days Battery made a breach and Stormed it, and after two
repulses carried it by main force, and gave such Quarter as his Party on the
like occasion used to receive; next he took Dungal-Castle, and there the
Vlster-Forces under Sir Phelim O Neal, the O. Relies and Mac Mahon's joined
with him; but upon notice of Sir Charles Coot's advancing thither after him,
and of Venable's Brigades to assist him, he departed to Armagh, intending for
Raphoe; and in the mean time Lieutenant General Ludlow marched toward Ross in
Kerry, to attaque that strength of the Lord Muskerries: and Lieutenant Colonel
Throckmorton May the 6 defeated a party of 500 Foot and 400 Horse near Wexford,
under Commissary-General Duncan, at the same time in Treaty with Ludlow, who
now likewise had reduced the Lord Muskerry to a necessity of such Terms (a
party of his Forces being defeated by the Lord Broghil, 300 killed, and Colonel
Supple and other Officers taken Prisoners) as he bogled at first, his strong
Hold of Ross having yielded on the 27 of June, Lord Muskerry yields.
and his Field-forces laying down their Arms upon Articles for Transportation,
July 5. And Colonel Grace had a brush from Colonel Henry Ingoldsby, and another
part of that Army of the Vltoghs under Mac Reli defeated in Gavan by Sir
Theophilus Jones on June the 14. These Losses and Defeats, together with the
rendition of Galloway on the 12 day of May, Galloway surrendered.
and Proclamation of the Commissioners for Outlawing the County of Wicklow and
parts adjacent to it, (out of which those salleys of Tories were frequently
made, and not pursuable therein by reason of the Fastnesses and Bogs) it being
the Storehouse and Magazine of Victual for the Irish, and now miserably
harassed with Fire and Sword without mercy by the English (the rather for the
death of Colonel Cook, Irelands R^ines, Submissions, and surrenders.
slain by Nash and his party of Irish, though Nash died also upon the same spot
some while before) made Ireland a Scene of blood and misery, and the stubborn
Natives, and the resolute Loyal English-Irish, a mournful consideration to
their Friends, and a wanting laborious defense to themselves; nothing being to
be afforded further upon the most considerable Surrender, than common
protection and Indemnity from the Parliament. Ballishannon retaken, and Slego
surrendered to the Parliament.
Ballishannon was again retaken upon quarter for Life; and Slego Rendered to Sir
Charles Coot; Colonel Grace got over the Shanon from Colonel Ingoldsby, having
lost 2 Colonels, 7 Captains, and 800 Soldiers killed and taken, June 20.

In May the Commissioners of the Parliament for the settlement of the Nation of
Scotland, The affairs of Scotland.
having had conference with the Deputies of some Shires, who accepted the
Union, and refused to Treat with others, that came not with a Plenipotence for
their acquiescing therein, and engagement to it, and the Authority of the
Parliament; and to the fuller effect thereof, had caused Proclamation to be
made, that such Deputies as should acknowledge and accept the said Union,
should proceed to the Election of 14 Deputies of Shires, and 7 for the Burghs,
by August, to attend the Parliament at London, in the behalf of the whole
Kingdom; departed out of Scotland for London to make report of their
transaction, which had hitherto met with very obstinate averseness to the
Parliaments tender of Incorporation; the provincial Assemblies of the Kirk
every where declaring against it, and forbidding the people to accept or
embrace any such motion. Nor did the new English Judges find better welcome
than the Commissioners, though three of them were noted men of the Scotch
Nation, the chief of whom was the Lord Swinton and Colonel Lockhart; and though
at their opening of the Session or Term, they declared the Parliaments
resolution of not altering any thing from their Laws, save the Style and Form
of proceedings in the Kings Name; nor would lay aside their Church Government
if peaceable, nor suffer long such as were Ignorant and Scandalous persons to
preach, or Exercise in public, the great Eyesore to that Kirk-governed
people. At first the Officers of the several Courts refused to give their
Attendance, and absented themselves; but seeing their places wou^d be without
demur disposed of, they as suddenly complied.

As to Martial Affairs, Dunotter- Castle yielded, May 28.
Dunotter-Castle after the Cannon had played two days against it, was rendered
to Colonel Morgan, with several Regalia and Goods belonging to the Crown
(though that and the Chair of State and Scepter, supposed to be there, could
not be found) and the Earl Marshal, on the 28 of May: the Garrison having
yielded upon Souldier-like Honorable Articles: Colonel Fitch's Regiment was
sent to Innerness, where a little Frigate of four Guns, built six mile up Land,
was brought down by the strength of Men to the Logh wherein the Highlanders
passed to and fro, to secure and provide for the Garrison, and hinder the
intercourse of the Scots. A Citadel was likewise now designed here, Citadels
built in Scotland.
and another at Air, by Major General Dean, consisting of six Bulworks, which
being to be raised upon Sand, it was ordered that within and without it should
be lined with Lime; and these two Fortifications, with two more, one at Leith,
and another at St. Iohnstons, being all built with Freestone, became the most
artful and impregnable places, and a Bridle to any Scotch Insurrection or
National design of Liberty. Some Companies of Colonel Overton's were likewise
shipped for the Orkney and Shetland-Islands, the most Northern parts and point
of Scotland, who forsooth had readily embraced the English Union, to no other
purpose I wis than to give friendly Entertainment and Harbor to General Blake,
upon his sailing near this time thither, after Van Trump and the Dutch East
India ships then expected home that way.

The Treaty continued yet with Arguile and other the Highland Hogens, where he,
and Marquess Huntly and Montross's Sons had another conference at Saint
Iohnstons; but neither concluded nor abrupted the matter of their meeting,
saving promises, and protestations of Friendship, and Peaceableness, and a
kind of neutrality, in order to satisfy the expectation of a Plenary
compliance, of which Arguile was most prodigally complemental; so that now
neither from Irish nor Scot, nor other of the Kings Dominions, was there any
thing more to be feared, than that the States of England would loose the profit
of Seizure and Confiscation by the submission and timely application of those
in Arms against the Authority of their Victorious Commonwealth. And they had
sufficiently cautioned against such retrenchments of their Conquest, except in
case of Articles to important places and persons (in Ireland (as is said
before) it being taken for a known and unvariable Rule:) as for England, there
were now more. Forfeitures hastening to their Corban, by a new List of
Papist-Delinquents, to be Limboed by the States Inquisitors General at
Drury-House.

These were their civil Garlands and Ovations, not because they had saved, but
because they had ruined so many of their Fellow Subjects, whose Fortunes and
Estates Oyled the Wheels of their Triumphant Chariots, and galloped it over all
Obstacles and Impediments, even through Rivers, nay an Ocean of Blood. For
their precipitant Successes, disdaining to be taken off their Glorious Career,
made the Belgic Lion stoop to the Yoke, and draw his part in the progress of
their Fame, which flew swift to all the parts of the World; more to the
wonderment than expectation of all Men: who thinking the Circum abient Seas of
their new-acquired Dominions, not Water enough to wash off that Pollution and
deep-dyed Guilt of the Murder of their Sovereign, saw them most officiously to
receive and swallow a further tribute of Blood, as due to their challenged
Sovereignty thereon, and their impatient ambition of being supreme Lords over
the High and Mighty, and to domineer far and wide without Rivals or
Competitors, in this extended Empire of the Ocean.

The rise of the Dutch War.
The rise of this War on this side, we partly hint here, and have partly touched
before, namely the rejectment of their civil offer and Embassy made to the
Dutch by Saint John (from the similitude of their Governments, and their
Arrival to it, the danger they feared from Monarchs and Princes, and from the
interest of the Prince of Aurange with these States, which by all means was to
be weakened by the nearer alliance of both Commonwealths) their indignation and
disdain to be thus refused, and lastly the proud felicity of their
Achievements, which gave the advantage of Quarrel with whom they pleased; and
especially, to revenge those Contumelies done to Dorislaus and Saint John, in
the very presence of the States General; their displeasure whereat they gave
the Dutch a taste of, in their Act forbidding foreign ships to trade hither,
etc. the last October.

On the Dutch side the Quarrel arose chiefly from a vain presumption that they
were able to Master the English at Sea, for that people naturally measure their
interest by Power, not by Justice; and there wanted not those great ones
(related to the Prince of Aurange) who mainly promoted this Rupture among the
States themselves; and indeed they proved the Major part, hoping then well of
his Majesty's affairs in Scotland. But they proving bad, the States of Holland
and Zealand, being maritime Provinces, who had at first stickled for an
alliance, as was tendered, had prevailed that three Ambassadors, to wit, Mine
Heeren Cats, Schaep, and Vandeperre, should immediately pass into England, upon
the notice of the abovementioned Act, and resume the Treaty offered at the
Hague: these being at last come, found very cool and difficult tendencies or
inclinations to Peace; for the case (as Saint John said) was now altered:
whereupon another Ambassador the Lord Newport was sent, with private
Instructions, (but no power to conclude) to enquire and inform himself, in what
readiness and preparation the Parliament were for a Naval War; what discontents
from the Royalist, or Faction in the Army, or Ambition among the Grandees
themselves, might effect to their advantage: where though he mist of the main,
about Cromwell's intended overthrow of the Parliament; yet they had
encouragement enough to proceed on the design of the Ocean^mastership, and
making themselves absolute Lords of the Worlds Commerce: for having beaten and
overcome the English, and having their Harbors at command, no Prince or people
whatsoever, should be able on dare to offend them; but endure all whatsoever
they should insolently enough command and require.

This was the main original and Bottom of that War, though hastened and urged
by some peremptory unexpected demands made here to their Ambassadors,
concerning the old duty of the Herring-fishing, the opening of the Scheld
Custom-free from Middleburgh to Antwerp, the Right of the Flag, and the
business of Amboyna; which showed they must now enter into League upon unequal
Terms, and that the Market was risen, and the Exchange higher here than it was
at the Hague; so that without further trifling away time in such stiff-neckt
debates, it was resolved that the Dutch Lion should no longer couch and fawn,
but raise up himself, and try by one seizure how the English Pulse beat,
whether to Fear or more Courage; and so accordingly govern themselves. They had
besides, about the time of this resolution, several Advertisements of injuries
done their ships and Traffic upon account of the said Act, purposely laid in
their way to give them the occasion.

Just before, and at the entrance of War, several fore-running Accidents were
taken notice of: in Scotland, a great Fire at Glascow, A great Fire at Glascow.
which defaced that City, and did damage to the value of 100000 l.
Congleton-Church in Cheshire fired by Lightning, Congleton- Chu^^h in Cheshire
fired by Lightning.

The like Fire in Essex.

The State-house of Amsterdam burnt. S^a-fights seen in the Air.


with ^1 men killed thereby; the same fire at East-Okendon in Essex, preceded
by a great and continual drought. On Holland-side, the State-house of Amsterdam
was burnt, much money lost, and other Writings and Goods lost and burned. At
the mouth of the Maze, Sea Fights were seen in the Air at noonday with English
and Dutch Colors; and such other the like Prognostics, which much amazed all
people, who were now solely intent upon the Issue of this War.

To the riddance of this anxious Expectation, the Dutch had prepared a Fleet of
War under their old Admiral Van Trump, and given order for the speedy equipping
of another Fleet of 150 sail, while the Parliament was yet unprovided of an
answerable Force; for General Blake plied then about the Downs with about 25
sail, and no more: thither the Dutch Fleet came, in pretense of Convoy to some
of their Merchantmen from the Straights; attempted by some Parliament-Frigats
under Captain Young; and thereupon ensued an Encounter, An Encounter between
the Forces of England and Holland.
to the open breach of Amity and Peace between the Commonwealths: In which,
because both parties pleaded the Defensive part, though apparently the Dutch
began it in the Downs, it will be best to give you what either of the Generals
or Officers said and writ themselves on this occasion: Whereunto are added the
Memorials of the Dutch Ambassadors, and the Answer of the Parliament upon the
same.

The open rupture was honested on both sides with a punctilio of Honor, the
Right of the Flag, which the Dutch could not without prejudice to their more
Ancient State give to this puisny Commonwealth; who contrarily more confidently
expected it: and therefore take these accounts from several of their Commanders.

The first, in a Letter from Capt. Young.
Right Honorable,
As I was coming to the Westward to take the Command of the West-guard, Capt.
Young 's Letter.
the twelfth instant, off the Start, I descried a Fleet of ships about a dozen
sail, coming from the Southward, being Admiral, Vice, and Rear in the Fleet, so
that I did conceive them to be Sir George Ayscue's Fleet; but I making sail off
to them, found them a Fleet of Hollanders come from Genoa and Legorn; those
three with Flags were Statesmen of War their Convoyers, the other Merchants
ships, some upwards of thirty Guns, and some under; so I bore with the Admiral,
and did send to him by my Master, that he should strike his Flag, and did
desire a right understanding might be between us before any Blood was shed in
the controversy; on this the Admiral took in his Flag, and put abroad a
Pendant: he said he did belong to Amsterdam, but his Name I know not, but the
ship has two wild men or the like in her Stern, and some other things between
them; she has some 38 Guns: to then the Vice Admiral came up with me with his
Flag abroad, being a ship of 42 Guns; so I called to persuade him to strike: he
bid me come on board and strike it; so I sent my Boat on board to persuade him
to it, to prevent the loss of Blood, if it might be; but he sent me word by my
Master he would not strike; so then being fitted for it, I came up very near on
the Weather-quarter; but before I fired, I called to the Captain my self to
take in his Flag, but he said he would not; so then I commanded a Broad side
and a Volley of small-shot to be fired on him, and I received the like from him
again: thus we past some four or five Broad sides each at other, though I was
forced to be at some further distance from him than at first, I fearing the
Admiral would have laid me on Board on the Weather-side, he having fitted his
ship, and come up Main-sail, and all to gain the Wind of me, forced me to keep
the Wind of him; then Captain Reynolds being come up fair within shot of his
Weather-quarter, having fired six Guns before at the Rear-Admiral, as he came
in amongst us; so he fired part of a Broad side at the Vice Admiral, just at
that instant as he was taking in his Flag, the Recovery being come up even
within shot just as his Flag was in, and the Rear-Admiral struck likewise: So I
sent aboard the Admiral, That I did demand the Vice Admiral, either in his
person or his ship to carry into Port, to make good what damage was done: he
told my Master, he did not meddle in the least himself as yet, as long as it
was only about striking the Flag, the which he said was now taken in; but if I
sought any further matter, as the Surprizal of him or his ship, he was bound
and would assist, she being the States-ship as well as he, not then knowing, or
could take any notice of any further intentions: So I desired Captain Reynolds
and Captain Chapman to come on board to consult with me what further to do in
it; it being near night; and it was the Judgment of us all, not to proceed any
further in it, the Flag being taken in, by reason the Treaty being between the
Nations at present, the case of Breach of the Peace might not be any way
imputed on our part. I have received some damage in my Hull, Sails, and
Rigging, the which I shall soon; God willing, get repaired again. I had one man
even as good as killed outright, died ^ince, and some four wounded, but I hope
they will recover. For my own part, I bless God for it, I am very well: I do
believe I gave him his Belly-full of it; for he sent me word he had Orders from
the States, That if he struck he should lose his Head; but at length he did
strike, which makes me conceive he had enough of it.

Your Honors humble Servant at Command, Anth. Young.
President, Plymouth-Sound, May 14, 1652.

The second, in a Letter from Genesis Blake.
Right Honorable,
Genesis Blake 's Letter.
I have dispatched away this Express to your Honors, to give you an account of
what past yesterday between us and the Dutch Fleet. Being in Rye-bay, I
received intelligence from Major Bourn, that Van Trump with 40 sail was off the
South-sand-head, whereupon I made all possible speed to ply up toward them,
and yesterday in the morning we saw them at Anchor in and near Dover-Road;
being come within three Leagues of them, they weighed and stood away by a Wind
to the Eastward: we supposing their intention was to leave us, to avoid the
dispute of the Flag; about two hours after they altered their course and bore
directly with us, Van Trump the headmost; whereupon we lay by, and put
ourselves into a fighting posture, judging they had a resolution to engage.
Being come within Musket Shot, I gave order to fire at his Flag, which was
done thrice: after the third shot he let fly a Broad side at us. Major Bourn,
with those ships that came from the Downs, being eight, was then making toward
us: we continued fighting till night; then our ship being unable to sail, by
reason that all our Rigging and Sails were extremely shattered, our Mizenmast
shot off, we came with advice of the Captains to an Anchor about three or four
Leagues off the Ness, to refit our ship, at which we labored all the night^
this morning we espied the Dutch Fleet about four Leagues distance from ours
toward the Coast of France, and by advice of a Council of War, it was resolved
to ply to windward to keep the Weather-gage, and we are now ready to let fail
our Anchor this Tide: what course the Dutch Fleet steers we do not well know,
nor can we tell what harm we have done them; but we suppose one of them to be
sunk, and another of thirty Guns we have taken, with the Captains of both; the
Mainmast of the first being shot by the Board, and much water in the Hold,
made Captain Lawson's men to forsake her. We have six men of ours slain, and
nine or ten desperately wounded, and 25 more not without danger, amongst them
our Master and one of his Mates, and other Officers. We have received about
seventy great shot in our Hull and Masts, in our Sails and Rigging without
number, being Engaged with the whole Body of the Fleet for the space of four
hours; being the Mark at which they aimed. We must needs acknowledge it a great
mercy that we had no more harm, and our hope is the Righteous God will continue
the same unto us, if there do arise a War between us; they being first in the
Breach, and seeking an occasion to Quarrel, and watching, as it seems, an
Advantage to brave us upon our own Coast, etc.

Your most humble Servant, Robert Blake.
From aboard the James, three Leagues off the Hydes, the 20 of May, 1652.

The third, in a Letter from Maj. Bourne.
Upon the 18th of May, Maj. Bourne 's Relation.
the Wind being at North-East, the weather something hazy, about ten in the
morning we saw a great Fleet on the backside of the Goodwyn-sand, which lay
with their Sails hayl'd up, and drove to the Southward, the latter Tide of Ebb
in land; about twelve they were so nigh, that we plainly descried them to be
all Men of War, consisting of 41 in number, one whereof had a Flag at the
Main-top-mast-head, the rest Jacks and Ancients, Hollands Colors, at which
time they were near the South-sand-head. There was in the Downs, the Andrew,
Triumph, Fairfax, Entrance, Centurion, Adventure, Assurance, Greyhound, and
the Seven Brothers, all the rest of the Fleet being with the General to the
Westward, by whose special Command I wore a Flag at the Main-top-mast-head; the
appearance of which I humbly conceive was one cause amongst others which moved
their General to send two Frigates toward me; which as soon as I perceived
plying into the Road, I sent out the Greyhound to Examine them, and know the
ground of their Approach; who returned this Answer to the Captain, That they
had a Message from their Admiral to the Commander in the Downs; at which he
made sail toward me, and permitted them to come in: the two Frigates came near
and saluted the Flag, and then the Captains came on Board, whose Names were,
one Tyson, and the other Aldred, who brought this Message from their Admiral
Van Trump, That by reason of much Northerly Winds, he with his Fleet was put to
the Southward further than he intended, and having Anchored the day before off
Dunkirk, many of his ships had lost Anchors and Cables, and so were forced to
Leewards; but withal declared, that they had special Command from their Admiral
to signify thus much, That it was the only cause of their coming to prevent
any thoughts or misapprehensions, for that he had not the least purpose to
offer injury to any of the English Nation; but for fear lest any Noise or Alarm
should be given either at Land or Sea, he thought good to send this Message.
And further, the one of them in discourse said, that their Admiral Trump would
have come himself into the Road, but that he was not willing to breed any
difference about his Flag, forasmuch as he had not order to take it down. To
whom I replied, That I presumed there would be no new thing required of them,
and neither more nor less would be Expected from them, but what they knew to be
the Ancient Rights of this Nation; and withal I desired them to return this
Answer from me to their General, That their Message was civil, that our General
was to the Westward, whom I looked for hourly, and that received; and if what
they delivered was so intended, I desired the Reality thereof might be
manifested by their speedy drawing off from this place with their Fleet, for
else this their appearance would be otherwise expounded: and so I dismissed
them, who made sail to their Admiral, who lay off the South-sands-head. I
expected them to come into the Road every moment, and therefore was in
readiness with the small strength I had under my charge. So soon as the two
Frigates (before mentioned) came back to their General, they all made Sail and
stood toward Dover, and there they came to an Anchor that Tide. At the first
appearance of them, after I had made them certainly to be the Holland-fleet, I
did according to my Duty give such an Account thereof to the Right Honorable
the Council of State, as the time and other business would permit; and withal I
immediately dispatched a Ketch to our General, who met with the advice thereof
that night about Ness. All the next night we lay in readiness, our Anchors
apeak, and kept two Frigates one at a distance from the other betwixt us and
them, giving them Instructions to make a Signal to me, either night or day,
that I might understand their motion, whether toward the General or elsewhere,
to the end I might the better be able to order my self and the party with me to
the best advantage, for security of the General's Fleet and our selves. In the
morning about ten a clock I received-advice from the General, being a little to
the Westward off Foulstone; and according to Order received from him,
Calculated the Time and Tide, so that we might most opportunely make
Conjunction of our Forces. About twelve a clock I set sail out of the Downs,
the Wind being Easterly: immediately after I p^rceived the Hollanders to be
under sail some of them, and the rest making ready. We Steered along, and
when we came as high as the South-foreland, the Holland-Fleet was got off the
Shore, and were half Channel over, plying to Windward toward Calice; at which
time I saw our General and those with him; and within an hour after or
thereabouts, the Holland Fleet bore up and made sail toward him: We hastened
toward him, and hope I may say, seasonably came in, for by that time the Guns
were fired betwixt the Admirals, we were with the Body of their Fleet, and
Engaged with them from half an hour past four in the afternoon till it was
dark: What Execution we did upon them they best know, I shall not determine it;
but surely they were sensible of us, for they did their utmost to decline us,
and avoid our coming near, which we endeavored by all means; but their Admiral
leading the Van, they all made Sail after him, and so shot themselves to
Leeward of us, and so left the Rear of the Fleet to us, which we endeavored to
sever from the rest, and accordingly did in part break the Body; and some of us
who were the nearest, and had the advantage of the Wind, fell upon the
Sternmost, who I suppose found it hot work: the one of them of 30 Guns we took,
which fought stoutly; another of the same force so lamed, her Mainmast shot
down, and having much Water in Hold yielded, and the Captain thereof came into
our Boat to save himself; the night coming on and no hope left him: I presume
she sunk in the night. We not knowing what might be the Issue of this
beginning, endeavored to find out our General, to the end we might receive
Instructions how to order our selves in the morning, expecting certainly to
prosecute the business then, for which end we presently came to Anchor because
we would be near them in the morning; but they did not stop, so that, in the
morning we could scarce discern them at Top-mast-head; by which we concluded
that they were bound over to the Coast of France, and were not willing to try
it further at this time, and therefore that evening emplyed it up toward
Foulstone, and between that and Dover Anchored again, and the next day came
into the Downs.

Your very assured Friend and Servant in the work of God, N. Bourn.
May 29, 1652.

To which may be added, the Translation of the Letter of the Admiral Trump to
the States General.
High and Mighty Lords,
My last Letter was of the tenth instant, Admiral Trump 's Letter to the States
of Holland.
sent by the Messenger that brought my Instructions aboard, since when I
crossed the Sea before the Mase, Vilistringen, Ostend, and Newport, until the
24 of the same Month, when we were forced to cast our Anchor, and stay there in
a hard Weather and a rough Sea, until the 26 in the Morning. The Weather
growing fairer, and being under sail, diverse Captains of the Direction came
aboard, complaining, That they had lost their Anchors and Cables, some having
but two Anchors and two Cables left; so it was resolved, because the Wind did
grow big, to go under the point of Dover, to prevent the loss of our ships. At
one of the clock, coming before the Downs, we did send the Commander John
Thissen of Flissingen, and Captain Peter Alders toward the Downs, to the
Commander Bourn, who was there with some ships of the Parliament, whom they
saluted in my Name, advertising him that we were bound to cruse the Sea about
our Coast; and that having lost some Anchors by the last hard Weather, we were
forced to Anchor under Dover, to help one another, and so to return to our
appointed limits; having also no other order but to protect our Merchant-ships
and Fishermen, and to maintain the Honor of our Country. That we therefore
thought it fit to acquaint the said Commander with the same, because he should
not suspect any thing to the contrary; who also did salute me, and thankt me
for this notice. Upon the 19th, at two of the clock, we made sail, the Wind
North-East, good Weather, sailing toward Calice, with intention to cross
toward our Coast, to provide us of Cables and Anchors: Coming about
Calice-cliff, we met with Captain Ioris van Sanen of Amsterdam, coming out the
Streights, with Captain Hugeluyt, having in their company 7 rich Merchants
ships, who are esteemed at above 50 Tuns of Gold, whom he left the 19th at
Anchor right against Feverly, where about 12 ships of the Parliament did lie,
and diverse Frigates came to see them: and forasmuch as the said Ioris van Sanen
upon the 12 of May, about Goutstart, was met by a Frigate of the Parliament, who
fiercely set upon him to make him strike, and against whom he defended him near
about two hours, and so was left by the said Frigate; whereupon the said
Commander Hugeluyt, and the said Van Sanen, did endeavor to find out our main
Fleet, and to give us notice of it; as he did accordingly, fearing much, that
the said Merchants Vessels already might be taken: Thereupon I presently went
thither, to take them under my protection, and if they were taken, to put them
at Liberty, if it was possible, according to the seventh and eighth Articles of
my Instruction of the 6 of May instant. Upon the way we met 15 Ships and
Frigates of the Parliaments, among whom one was an Admiral, whom I intended to
view, taking in all my Sails, except both my Marsh-sails, whom we did avail
until the midst of the Stangs. Being within a Cannon-shot, he shot a Ball over
our ship, we answering not, he shot another, to which we answered with one;
presently he gives me a Broad side, being within a Musket Shot, and shot all
his side through our Ship and Sails: Diverse were Wounded, some with the loss of
their Arms, some otherwise; whereupon we presently gave him our Broad side, not
knowing what they intended, which as yet I know not, because they did not speak
a word to us, neither we to them; and we fell thereupon to a general Fight. In
the mean while came the Commander Bourn out of the Downs, with 12 of suchlike
ships and Frigates mounted, as he told himself to the said Commander John
Thyssen and Captain Peter Alders, being aboard of him, with 60 to 70, and the
Frigates with 38, to 50 pieces of Ordnance, who in the same while Assaulted our
Fleet from behind; and we fought thus from half an hour past four, till nine
of the clock, the darkness parting us from one another; when both the Admirals
a little beyond the reach of our Ordnance cast their Sails toward the Lee, to
gather their Fleets, and to mend what was shot to pieces, we floted the whole
night with a Light on every ship. The 20th in the Morning we saw the English
Fleet driven Windward from us, who made sail and went toward Dover. We wanted
two of our Ships, who were in the Rear of our Fleet; the Captains, Tuynman's of
Middleburgh, and Siphe Fook's of Amsterdam, both ships of the Direction;
whereof we found that of Captain Siphe Fook's about noon, floating without
Masts: The Skipper and the Officers declared unto us that they were taken by
three ships of the Parliament, two hours after Sunset, who took from aboard
the Captain and Lieutenant, with 14 or 15 men more, and put instead of them
many of the English; but they fearing that the ship would sink, they took the
flight, after they had plundered all in hostile manner. They declared also,
that they see the said Tuynman's (being with them in the Rear of our Fleet) an
hour before he was taken. We intend with this Easterly wind to cross to and
fro, that we may find out the said Straight vaerders, if it be possible, and
with all other Ships with whom we may meet, to bring them safe in our Country.
So ending, was Subscribed,

M. Harp Trump.
Dated the 30 of May, 1652. from aboard the Ship.

The Lords Ambassadors Paper, Exhibited ^3/3 June, 1652. To the Council of
State of the Commonwealth of England.
Most Illustrious Lords,
The Datch Ambassadors Paper to the Council of State.
Even as both by word of mouth, and also by Writing, we have signified to this
Council on the 3 and 6 days of this Month, taking God the searcher of Men's
Hearts to witness, that the most unhappy Fight of the Ships of both
Commonwealths did happen against the knowledge and will of the Lords States
General of the United Netherlands; so also are we daily more and more assured
both by Messages and Letters, witnessing the most sincere hearts of our said
Lords, and that with Grief and astonishment they received the Fatal News of
that unhappy rash Action; and that upon what we thereupon presently sent them
word of, they did consult and endeavor to find out what Remedy chiefly may be
applied to mitigate that raw and Bloody Wound: To which end, they have written
out for to gather a solemn Meeting or Parliament of all the Provinces, whereby
we do not doubt but there will be provided for these Troubles (by Gods favor)
such a Cure and present help, whereby not only the outward cause of all
further Evil may be taken away; but also by an Int^rn comfort, the minds may
be redressed and reduced again to a better hope of our Treaty in hand; which
thing being now most earnestly agitated by our Lords, for the common good of
both Nations, to shun that detestable shedding of Christian Blood, (so much
desired, and would be dearly bought by their common Enemies of both Nations,
and of the Reformed Religion) We again do crave of this most Honorable
Council, and beseech you by the Pledges both of the common Religion and
Liberty, mean while to suffer nothing to be done out of too much heat, that
afterward may prove neither revocable nor repairable by too late idle Vows and
Wishes; but rather, that you would let us receive a kind Answer without
further delay upon our last Request.

Which we do again and again desire so much the more, because we understand,
that the Ships of our Lords and of our Skippers, both on the broad-sea, as in
the Ports of this Commonwealth, some by force, some by Fighting are taken by
your men and kept. Given at Chelsey, 13/3 June, 1652.

Signed, I. Cats. G. Schaep. P. Vanderperre.


The Answer of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, to the Papers
presented to them by the Council of State, from the Ambassadors Extraordinary
of the Lords the States General of the United Provinces. The first whereof was
dated the 3 of June, the second the 6 of June, and the last dated the 13 of
June, 1652. new Style, upon occasion of the late Fight between the Fleets.
The Parliament of the Commonwealth of England calling to mind with what
continued Demonstrations of Friendship and sincere Affections, The Parliaments
Answer thereunto.
from the very beginning of their Intestine Troubles they have proceeded
toward their Neighbors of the United Provinces, omitting nothing on their
part that might conduce to a good Correspondence with them, and to a growing up
into a more near and strict Union than formerly; do find themselves much
surprised with the unsuitable Returns that have been made thereunto, and
especially at the Acts of Hostility lately committed in the very Roads of
England, upon the Fleet of this Commonwealth; the matter of Fact whereof stated
in clear Proofs, is hereunto annexed: upon serious and deliberate consideration
of all, and of the several Papers delivered in by our Excellencies to the
Council of State, the Parliament thinks fit to give this Answer to those Papers.

The Parliament, as they would be willing to make a charitable Construction of
the Expressions used in the said Papers, endeavoring to represent the late
Engagement of the Fleets to have happened without the knowledge, and against
the mind of Your Superiors: So when they consider how disagreeable to that
profession the Resolutions and Actions of Your State, and their Ministers at
Sea have been, even in the midst of a Treaty offered by themselves, and managed
here by Your Excellencies; the extraordinary preparations of 150 Sail of Men of
War, without any visible occasion but what does now appear (a just ground of
jealousy in your own Judgments, when Your Lordships pretended to excuse it)
and the Instructions themselves given by Your said Superiors to their
Commanders at Sea, do find too much cause to believe, That the Lords the
States General of the United Provinces have an intention by Force to Usurp the
known Rights of England in the Seas, to destroy the Fleets that are, under God,
their Walls and Bulworks, and thereby expose this Commonwealth to Invasion at
their pleasure, as by their late Action they have attempted to do: Whereupon
the Parliament conceive they are obliged to endeavor, with Gods assistance, as
they shall have opportunity, to seek Reparation of the Wrongs already suffered,
and Security that the like be not attempted for the future.

Nevertheless, with this mind and desire, That all Differences betwixt the
Nations may (if possibly) be peaceably and friendly composed, as God by his
Providence shall open a way thereunto, and Circumstances shall be conducing to
render such Endeavors less delatory, and more effectual than those of this
kind heretofore-used have been.

This Answer Insinuating the intention of a War, being Communicated to the
States General, they ordered their remaining Ambassador to insist upon, and
demand a Categorick-Answer (so was it called) to their Proposals in the Treaty,
positively off or on; which being made,

The House took into debate the business of the Ambassador Extraordinary from
the States General of the United Provinces, and thereupon Passed these
Resolutions, to be sent to the Ambassador in Answer to his fourth and last
Paper.

1. That the Lords the States General of the United Provinces do pay and
satisfy unto this Commonwealth the Charges and Damages this State has
sustained, Their Demands.
and been put unto by the Preparations of the said States General, and their
attempts this Summer, the Particulars whereof shall be in due time produced. 2.
That upon the payment of the sum to be agreed upon (as aforesaid) for Charges
and Damages, or securing the same to the satisfaction of the Parliament, there
shall follow immediately thereupon a Cessation of all Acts of Hostility, and
the Ships and Goods taken since the Difference shall be Released. 3. The two
former Propositions being assented unto, and put in Execution, the security for
the time to come which the Parliament does expect, is by both States
contracting a firm Alliance and Consistency of Interest for the good of both,
which the Parliament of England is willing on their part by all just ways and
means to endeavor.
And so we pass from these civil Debates, to the prosecution of the War.

This rude accost being over by reason of the night, the two Fleets parted, Van
Trump to the back of the Goodwyn-sand, whence he sailed for Zealand; and being
recruited to the number of 120 sail (while General Blake with 70 Men of War was
gone Northwards to seize upon their Busses and Fishing-trade, and to meet their
East-India-men, five in number, coming as usually since Amboyna home that way)
came into the Road of the Downs again, where Sir George Ayscue, who arrived at
Plymouth, May 25, from the Barbados, and came thither on the 6 of June, was
ordered by the Parliament to attend, till a Fleet was made ready in the River
of Thames to join with him; having in the interim on the first of June seized
on 10 sail, with a Man of War of 22 Guns, sent to give notice to all
Merchantmen; and on the 17, fourteen more, some whereof were stranded, with
three Men of War of twenty, twenty six, and thirty Guns.

Trump in the Downs.
Van Trump (having understood the aforesaid opportunity) clapped in between the
River and Sir George, leaving part of his Fleet to the Westward, resolving to
surprise those ships coming out, or to sink those under Sir George Ayscue; but
advice being immediately given from Dover of the posture of the Enemy, the Navy
within budged not; and thereupon the Dutch presently addressed themselves to the
other part of the design, and the opportune time of Ebb coming on, the 8 of
July they sailed toward Sir George; but the Wind failing, they came to an
Anchor a League off, and the next Ebb (against which time, a Platform was cast
up between Deal and Sandown-Castles, and Cannon planted thereon to bear upon
them as they came in, and the Militia thereabouts in Arms at the shore, from
whence several Mariners reinforced the Fleet, which consisted of no more than
15 ships) as they were under sail the Wind came fully about South-west (which
the Dutch afterward said was the Witch-Act Wind) and blew so directly in their
Teeth, that they could not possibly make up to them; and it being likely to
continue so, for it came in with a brisk gale, Trump that had no longer time to
stay, the Fleets of Merchants for the Northern, Eastern, and West India Seas,
waiting his return for their Convoy Northwards, departed for Holland; and
having received the said charge of ships, and order about the Fishing, sailed
toward the Sound, whence having secured and left that part of his Fleet to
their Voyage, he proceeded with the rest toward the Northermost point of
Scotland, the Isles of Orkney, where General Blake was newly in Harbor, The
English and Dutch Fleets July- Encounter.
after a Squadron of his Frigates had spoiled the Herring-fishing, by driving
most, seizing some other Busses, which after the accustomed Toll of every tenth
Herring, as was in gross computed, being paid, were released, with a charge of
Fishing there no more without English leave, and the taking of their 12 Men of
War that guarded them, 3 whereof were afterward sunk. (They made a stout and
gallant resistance, and killed abundance of the English.)

They are scattered by a Storm.
It was Trump's Resolution to have here Engaged likewise with Blake, having met
already with the Dutch East India Fleet of five Sail; but upon a sudden such a
Storm arose, that he was glad to put to Sea, and there his Fleet was so
scattered and dispersed, that he came home but with 42 sail; the rest came
after much tossing to an Anchor, some at Norway, the rest in Scotland, with two
of the East India ships which at first were given for lost, with those
War-ships that were missing, but shortly after, all except six came home in
safety: Trump to Scheveling, Blake takes several of their Frigates, and diverse
Prisoners.
and so to the Hague, to give an account: Blake first to the Coast of Holland
with six of the Dutch Frigates he had taken, and 900 Prisoners in them, and
thence to Yarmouth for Victual, and cross again to the Enemies Coast; several
losses having happened to both Nations in the mean time by private
Free-booters, and some small Men of War taken from us.

While Van Trump's Fleet was now rigging and fitting out, another Fleet of 50
Men of War set to Sea from Zealand to go Westward, and Convoyed a Fleet of
Merchantmen the same way where Sir George Aycue's station was about Plymouth
(at which Port two Streights-men newly arrived, De Buyter and Sir Geo: Ayscue
's Engagement at Plymouth, Au. 16.
and five East India ships came in soon after in safety) in expectation of
them. They were seen first at Bright hemstead in Sussex, where they chased and
took some Barques, and so Westward (...) the back of the Isle of Wight;
advertisement whereof being given, it was resolved that Sir George with his
Fleet of 40 Men of War, most Merchantmen except the Flag-ships, should stretch
over to the Coast of France to meet them. Accordingly on the 16 of August,
between one and two of the clock in the afternoon, they got sight of the Enemy,
who quitted their Merchantmen, being 50 in number. About four the fight began,
the English Admiral with 9 others charging through their Fleet; but received
most damage in the Shrouds, Masts, Sails, and Rigging, which was repaid the
Dutch in their Hulls: Sir George having thus passed through them, got the
Weather-gage and Charged them again; but all his Fleet not coming up, and the
night already entered, they parted with a drawn Battle. Captain Peck the
Rear-Admiral lost his Leg, whereof soon after he died; several Captains were
wounded, but no ship lost, only some shattered and torn; of the Dutch not one
was said to be lost, though many of them shot through and through, but so that
they were able to proceed in their Voyage, and Anchored the next day after,
being followed by the English, at the Isle of Bassa; but no further attempt was
made by our Fleet, by reason, as 'twas pretended, of the danger of the French
Coast, from whence they returned to Plymouth sound to mend and repair their
damage. Whatever the matter might be, Sir George was never employed more in
their Service; but 'twas judged not any default here, but the Honorable
largeness of his Articles at Barbados were the cause thereof; and Dean was now
remanded and returned from Scotland, as a more confiding deserver, on whom
another Sea-General was to be conferred. Sir Geo: Ayscue rewarded for h^s
service. The States of Holland excite several Princes to assist them.
Sir George had 300 l. in Ireland per annum, and 300 l. in Money for his pains.

In the mean time the States of Holland sent away Messengers and Expresses to
Denmark, and the Hans Towns, to Sweden and Poland, to give notice of the
Commencement of this War, and to gain these several States to their party,
Cordage and Tar being no way else to be had, as also to give timely advice to
their Merchants, how to manage and secure their Estates from the English. A
Proposal was likewise framed of sending for Prince Rupert (then about the
Western Isles of America, having taken some West-Country Ships, being known by
his black Ancient which he wore in his Poop, as a mourning Emblem of the Kings
Death, attended but with a Fleet of six ships) and espousing the Kings Quarrel;
but those were but high-flown vapors of their own without any ground, save
that the Prince of Aurange was generally and publicly commended to, and almost
enforced upon the State as Statdholder, and Captain General as was his Father;
and some affronts were done to those that were known to be disaffected to that
Family, among whom was the Lord Ambassador Paw, whose house they attempted to
Storm; nor was De Wit, one of their prime Seamen, much more in favor, as the
Zealanders soon after evidenced. Their Interest indeed was so much the more
considerable, because of the Marquess of Brandenburgh, the next ally but the
King (whose Usurped Rights, it vindicated and asserted, would much conduce to
the advantaging of them in a vigorous prosecution of the War) from whom they
had already promises of a large assistance of 10000 men, upon no other score
but his Nephews, as appeared in his nonperformance of that proffer, when the
States of Holland boggled at the Overtures and Demands made by the other
Provinces about the Prince; and in the same kind he served them, having
engaged their concernment in the Polish War not long after, leaving them in the
lurch after the Elbing-Treaty: So that of all Princes, their Friends, they now
relied most upon the Dane and the French, with whom they doubted not to make a
League Offensive and Defensive against the English, Slily assisted by the
Spaniard, and hoping of a fair beginning of Amity with Sweden only.

Yet nevertheless confident were our States of going luckily through this
hazardous and potent Enmity, or would their proud stomachs (Drunk with success,
as the Dutch Declaration twitted them) abate a syllable of what they had
determined: for having given that Categorick or positive Answer above recited,
upon the Dutch Ambassadors desire of leave to depart, according to their
Superiors as peremptory orders; they without any more ado, presently offered
them Audience in order thereunto (Monsieur Paw in a Latin Speech delivered the
sense of the Quarrel and Breach in very equal words) without any further
expedients mentioned by them to resume the accommodation. Paw at his return
quickly died of a surfeit of broyl'd Salmon, The Lord Ambassador Monsieur Paw
dies of a surfeit by broyld Salmon.
no way lamented by the house of Aurange: a man suspected of ill Counsel given
against the Martyr-King, he being sent hither about the time of his Martyrdom,
and known to have some of his Majesty's Houshold-goods and Jewels as Bribes
(however honested by a pretense of purchase) for his service to the English
States. The Lord Williamson and his colleague, Ambassadors of Denmark demanded
the same Audience the same time, being about the 29 of June.

In Ireland, after Sir Charles Coot had taken in Ballymote, he pressed so hard
upon the Lord Clanrickard, that he was forced for shelter to betake himself
into the Isle of Carick, while Sir Charles quartered at Portumna resolved to
reduce him; which being inevitable, the gallant Marquess came now at last in
this desperate Juncture to an Agreement, which was no more than ordinary
Liberty to Transport himself and 3000 Irish more into any Pieces Country and
service then in Amity with England, Marq. Clanrickard lays down Arms.
within a short limitation of time. Not long after, Colonel Richard Grace being
pursued into his Fastness, being the strong Fort of Inchlough in a Bog, yielded
upon the like Terms, on the first of August, to Colonel Sanckey; there marched
out with him 1050 men for Transportation. O Brian yet held out in the Mountains
of Kerry and Cork; Birn, Phelim, Mac Hugh, and Cavenagh, in the Fastnesses of
Wexford and Wicklow; O Neal and Rely in Vlster: to all which places, under
Reynolds, Venables, Sanchy, Sir Charles Coot, and Lieutenant General Ludlow,
distinct Forces were ordered to march. Fitz Patrick and Odwire's men were also
now shipped, the Commissioners for the Parliament very willing to be rid of their
Company, and they as glad to be gone, to avoid the Halter, then threatened by a
High Court of Justice. In Scotland there were some stirs in the Highlands, by
Glengary, the Frazers, and Mac Reynolds, and some other Septs, whereof one Mac
Knab was killed, with some more of his men, being in a party which was met with
by the English Highland-Forces of Lilburn and other Regiments Encamped at
Innerara one of Arguile's strong Castles; but nothing else happened, though the
Scots were 1500 strong: but Arguile absolutely complied with the Parliament,
sending them provision and supplies of all sorts; yet before Summer was quite
spent, the Highlanders had made a shift to surprise two of their new-Garrisoned
Castles in these parts, and made good their several Clans and possessions.

Cromwell 's design upon the Parliament appears.
At home the Parliament had a greater mischief breeding against them, than they
feared from the most dangerous of their Foreign Enemies: A dangerous Imposture
of Ambition, whose quabbing beating pains gave them no rest, nor could all
their skill tell how to assuage or cure it. It swelled every day more and more,
in continual Addresses, Desires, Petitions, Declarations, till it came to be
ripe, and then burst out to the dissolution of this Political body. This was
the reiterated and inculcated story of the Parliaments providing for future
equal Representatives, and putting a period to this; than which, nothing could
be more distastful, and of greater antipathy to the present Members: which yet
they did most artfully conceal and dissemble, in a hundred complying Votes and
Resolves, even to the ascertaining of the longest day, November the 5, 1654.
for their sitting; but that was two years too long for Cromwell, whose Fingers
itched to be managing a Scepter. In order to this delay, the Committee that
first sat and hatched upon this Bill, were removed from the Nest, and the addle
Eggs put under the chill incumbency of other Wilde-towl, and they to proceed
therein with all expedition: a thing so unlikely, that Sultan Cromwell, who
expected a Grand Cairo brood, resolved not to be baffled much longer, or await
the leisure of his Mercenary servants, as after a Fast and Humiliation of him
and his Council of Officers, and the Communication of the grounds thereof to
the whole Army in England and Ireland (which was a Lamentation for the tedious
continuance of self-interested persons in the Authority, and other Religious
melancholy about Charity, the want whereof was greatly bemoaned) we shall fully
discover.

An oblique glancing hit of Fortune now saluted the successful Forces of this
State by Sea: Dunkirk taken by the Spaniard, and the French Fleet with relief
seized by Ge^. Blake.
yet far more advantageous to, and directly concerning the Spaniard, to whom a
more obliging good turn could not any way be done. The Archduke Leopold now
Besieged Dunkirk about the middle of August, and the French prepared to relieve
it by Sea; to which purpose their Lord Great Admiral the Duke of Vendosme had
equipped a Fleet, which from the Coasts of Normandy and Britanny came to an
Anchor at Calice-road, where some of General Blake's Frigates, Crusing up and
down from the Body of the Fleet with Him, espied them; who thereupon weighed,
and made what sail they could toward Dunkirk; but were presently fetched up by
those nimble Vessels, and 7 of that Kings ships (the Admiral whereof was the
Triton of 31 Guns, and aboard her the Sieur Dimulet, who Commanded in chief)
having most of them between 20 and 30 Guns, with a little Frigate of 8, were
taken and brought to Dover; by which disaster the Besieged were necessitated to
capitulate, and the Governor the Count d'Estrades (who was also after in the
same Command) yielded it thereupon: a more difficult task than so, had the
Broils in France not been so high, or we so near, or the Dutch proffer of Money
for it (as well knowing what a good stationary Port it would be for their
Navies upon all occasions) would have been admitted: of which injurious
imprudence, their Ambassador Boreel very highly and angerly complained. It was
taken with a great loss of men, and troublesome Siege, by the Prince of Conde,
in the 1647. and the expense of some English Blood of the Oxford-Disbands in
1646. under Colonel Tillier; after retaken, and has since suffered many
vicissitudes under the Dominations of three Princes and one Usurper.

A General Assembly now convened themselves at Edinburgh, A General Assembly in
Scotland.
with as much Authority as they did heretofore, when they began the War; but
such a Chatter there was of Remonstrants and Protestations, and suchlike
knacks amongst these crumbs of the Kirk, which was now in a hundred fractions,
that for very quietness sake, and some small considerations of the public
Peace (whose danger in their former more unanimous Rebellion was not quite
forgotten) one Lieutenant Colonel Cotterel was sent to dismiss them from their
Seats; Dismissed by Lieu. Col. Cotterel.
which he roundly did, charging them upon their peril not to attempt any such
further meeting; and that to that purpose, not any three of them should presume
to meet or be seen together. So that what the King by Proclamation, by the
force of Laws, by his Viceroys or Governors General could not effect, an
Armed Officer quickly speeded, to the perpetual shame and infamy of that lewd
Convention. Episcopacy had the honor to precede (nor could Monarchy be
abolished while it stood) and Presbytery had the disgrace of following the
Regal Ruins; so after King exit Kirk. The Judges there now went their Circuit,
where they met with innumerable Accusations and Indictments of Adultery, and
Fornication, and Incest, and as many almost of Witchcraft, the ordinary and
most public frequent crimes of that Nation; but such the Kirks cruel usage of
those supposed Sorcerers, and upon such weak conviction, that though at first
the same severity was exercised toward them, yet the Judges finding there was
sometimes more devi^ish Malice in the Accuser than the Accused, superseded that
numerous Condemnation of them as formerly. Some Murderers and Moss-Troopers
were likewise Executed, for that no small parties could go any whither without
danger of being knocked on the Head, the ways were so infested.

De Ruyter with a Fleet at the mouth of the Channel.
Return we to the Dutch. That Fleet under de Ruyter, that fought with Sir George
Ayscue in the West, lay now at the Mouth of the Channel, crossing to and ^ro,
to stop and seize all English Ships and Goods coming from the Southern and
Western parts of the World; yet notwithstanding, six East India (and two from
the Streights) whereof the Eagle was the chief, arrived safe at Plymouth, and
there staid in Harbor till the Fleet of War Convoyed them home, having fitted
and Armed themselves for the Encounter. De Ruyter was ordered to stay here,
upon this design, till de Wit, another Admiral, should be sent to bring him
home through the Channel, with what Merchantmen he had ready in his Convoy,
and such as should casually light upon him at Sea, where he ranged at pleasure.
He sent Sir George Ayscue word, in a Bravado, by a Vessel he took and freely
discharged, that he stayed there for him to fight him; but Sir George had no
such orders; nor indeed was he in a condition, ever since his last Encounter
with him. In the mean time de Wit appeared, De Wit joins with him.
(while General Blake was gone Westward to bring about the Plymouth-Fleet) on
the 21 of September, at the South-sands-head, (and it was no more than time,
for Blake had seized five West India ships of good value, sneaking by the
French Coast; and Vice Admiral Pen had taken six Streights-men most richly
laden, that had been, and were newly come out of the Duke of Venice's Service,
worth above 200000 l. being laden with Piece-goods, and the best Commodities of
those parts) and came in ^ight of the English Fleet near Torbay in Devonshire,
with the Wind almost in his Teeth; but it proving thick and hazy Weather, by
the obscurity thereof, he slipped and made aboard to the French Coast, and joined
with de Ruyter, and received six Plate-ships, laden from Cadiz, into his
Convoy, and set sail homewards; and Blake having touched at Portsmouth, came
Eastward likewise, and on the back of the Goodwyn discovered him again, having
dismissed his charge into Holland; but the Wind blowing hard, could not Engage
him; nor would de Wit move from his station, then on the side of the
North-foreland, knowing most of the English ships to be very great, and to draw
much Water; and there was a Shallow and sand lay betwixt the Fleets. On the 28
of October, notwithstanding, General Blake in three Squadrons (as the Dutch
were divided, one Commanded by himself, the second by his Vice Admiral Pen, and
the third by Rear-Admiral Bourn) sailed toward him; and as de Wit had
fore-laid it, struck most of them upon the Sand; among the rest the Sovereign,
Rigged and Manned for this present service, the first she ever was in, was on
ground; but was presently got off again, and stood aloof, till de Wit came
freely from his advantages to the Engagement, which was first begun by Bourn,
and seconded immediately by the whole Fleet, and was fought stoutly on both
sides (a courageous Drunken Dutch man of War presuming to give the Sovereign a
Baoad-side, and a vapor of Boarding her, was presently sunk by her side, so
that she obtained among them, the Name of the Golden Devil;) soon after a
Rear-Admiral of the Dutch was Boarded and taken, and two more of their Men of
War were sunk, and another Blown up at the same time; so that de Wit was glad
to give over the Conflict, and to ply his Sails (being followed till the
English Fleet was no more than 12 Leagues East-South-East off the Maze, De Wit
worsted by Blake.
and that Coast of Holland, which was no good shore for them to trust to) and
with the remainder of his Fleet, pitifully torn, came into Goree, and there
Harbored. This Defeat he imputed to several of his Captains, who did not their
devoir in the Fight; so that Commissioners of the Admiralty were appointed, to
try such as he should charge for their Cowardice or Failure; he also added, for
another Reason, the over-match of the English in number and ships, which being
beyond expectation, more troubled the States, than this easy Discomfiture.
Blake with Triumph came into the Downs, and the most of his Fleet into Port, to
mend and recruit the Damages they had received, having lost besides near 300
men, and as many wounded (the Dutch twice their number) for whose cure and
entertainment, several Houses in the nature of Hospitals were erecting on the
Coast of Kent, near Dover and Deal, by order of Parliament, who enacted also
the return of all Seamen out of the Service of any other Prince or State into
England in 40 days, in these parts of the World, allowing a twelvemonth to
those in the East Indies; confirming the usage and custom of Death without
mercy, by throwing overboard such Carpenters and Ship-wrights as should be
found in the Enemies ships, etc. The Noble Marquess of Worcester lately come
from beyond Seas (where his wants and distresses suffered him not to continue
any longer) was this Month of September taken in London, and Committed to the
Tower, Marq. of Worcester taken, and committed to the Tower.
and ordered for a speedy Trial; but after consideration of the matter, it was
superseded, and his Lordship left in that forgotten durance.

There had been great discontents among the United Provinces, concerning their
choosing of a Sta^dholder, Mutiny in Holland.
and Captain General, which was to be the Prince of Aurange, as was said
before; and these Disorders and Misfortunes at Sea did rather improve the
Pince's Interest (and therefore the States of Holland and Friesland
prudentially bethought themselves of a means to be rid of both, and that was by
sending a Letter tending to an accommodation into England; which at the worst
should happen, would be of much advantage to them: this came about this time
after the Fight, and was in like manner answered as their other Papers) so that
as de Wit went out with a Mutiny, (the Seamen refusing to go on Board till
they were paid for their service already done in this War; for which two of
them were Executed at Amsterdam, Some of their Seamen Executed.
and some Burgers shot upon a sudden surmise of a Rescue) so was he welcomed
home with the like Uproar of the Women of Flushing, who hated him the rather,
because he was a main Anti-party to the Family of Aurange, to which that
Province was always so addicted, that though the States of Holland sent an
Embassy to them, to dissuade them from their resolution taken in favor of the
Prince; (and they hardly labored it with Arguments of the Common Safety, and
the Nature of the War in hand, which would thereby upon all events be made
Irreconcilable) yet they prevailed not, but were dismissed to the next General
Vergadering or Assembly of all the Provinces, who had effected their design in
Denmark, by making sure of that King to their Interest, he refusing to let the
22 English Merchantmen go away out of his Port, being laden with Hemp, and
Tar, and such other necessaries for shipping, and had recalled his Ambassadors
here in England; but till their Arrival, proceeded no further than a bare
Imbargo, having brought them within the Booms of his Castle at Elsenore, for
the better securing of them.

The want of those Commodities (which mightily retarded the equipping of the
English Fleets) caused the Parliament to give order to Blake to send away
Captain Ball with a Squadron of 18 Men of War, A Fleet of War sent to the
Sound, etc.
to sail for the Sound, and to carry a Letter to the King, desiring him to
deliver the said Ships and Goods, to be Convoyed (for the Dane at first
pretended his care of saving them from the Dutch) home by the said Fleet, who
in ten days time, came to an Anchor within a mile of Elsenore-Castle, and sent
the Letter ashore by one of his Captains, (who was affronted by some of the
Dutch there seizing his Boat) but received a cold Answer, that the King would
not deliver them, and did wonder they did approach so near his Royal Residence
with so great a Fleet: which being received, Captain Ball concluded presently
to return; but the night of his departure, on the last of September, the
Antelope (a new stately built Frigate, of 50 Brass Guns) run upon a Rock on
Iutland side (by the unadvisedness of the Pilot) about three in the Morning,
and was there bulged and broke to pieces. In his return he met and took 14
Holland Fishermen; but the Tyger-Frigat, after a fight, took and Boarded a Man
of War of 20 Guns, having killed and wounded 40 of them, and brought them all
up to Yarmouth. Upon further dispute of this detainer, which was of such evil
consequence to our States, it was at last alleged by that King, that he kept
those ships and Goods in lieu of those Moneys due to him from the late King,
according to his engagement with his Father in the German-War, for the
maintenance of so many Regiments against the Emperor, and for other Sums
accruing to him, in the right of his Aunt, the Mother of the said King: and the
Dutch were very willing to be dealing and chaffering on that account, offering
him the value of the Goods, to what they should be rated at there, in ready
Money; or rather than fail, they would content the English Merchants that were
concerned in those Bottoms and Ladings. Mine Here Boreel was likewise instant
with the French King at this time for a speedy Conclusion of a League Offensive
and Defensive.

Captain Pen having been recalled out of the Streights to this Service here,
Captain Badiley was sent in his place, with the Paragon, a Navy-Ship, and 3
nimble Frigates, the Phoenix, the Constant Warwick, and the Elizabeth, who
meeting with four Merchantmen from the Streights, were set upon near
Portolongone in the Kingdom of Naples, belonging to the Spaniard, by Van Galen,
Commander of the Dutch Fleet of War in those Seas; and after a day and a halfs
dispute, the English being sore battered, and having by the ill managing of the
fight, by the ships crew of the Phoenix, lost that Frigate, were forced to
retire under the protection of the Fort of Longone, where the Dutch would have
fallen upon them, but were not permitted; which made the Dutch block up the
Port for a while; but the Governors Command, and another Fleet of the English
under Captain Appleton, then at Legborn, engaging of their Ships away, the two
Frigates made away from Longone, and took a ship claimed by the Genoese, and
brought her to their Fleet, whose Commander was now at Legborn, interceding
with that Duke for the liberty of Captain Appleton, there restrained upon some
picque; for the Great Duke of Florence, in whose tuition that City is, was not
over-qualified with respect to this Republic; however, his Interest, and
advantage of our Trade, and famous Mart there, kept him neutral and indifferent.

Lord Hopton dies at Bruges in Flanders, September.
The Lord Hopton, that most Renowned General in the West for the King, departed
this Warfare of Life in the end of September, at Bruges in Flanders; an Hero
worthy of Pompey's distanced Urns, that each Region of the World should have
inhumed a piece of him, that his Interment might have been as large as his
Fame, which has told the Universe the Glory of his Actions; but what is so
envied him, was direfully indulged to the Royal Cause, and the assertors of it.

-- Iacere, uno non potuit tantae ruina loco.
All Nations and people saw and felt the woeful Effects and Consequences of our
subverted Monarchy, and in that overthrow nothing was more miserable than the
undeserved Wanderings and Distresses of these Loyal and most Noble Exiles, whose
Condition minds us to attend it a little further.

Against the French Kings returning in peace to his tumultuous City of Paris,
in this Month, wrought by the means and counsel of our Sovereign, He with the
rest of his Lords and Nobility, then of his Council at Paris, in great State
went out to meet him, and welcome him home to his Palace of the Louvre. A most
acceptable glad Complement to that Prince, but a sad reduction to his own
mind, of that untamable force and injury, by which he was kept out from his
Kingdoms; though now the progress of Providence did seem to verge and dispose
events to the former course of the English Sovereignty: For the French King
before the Cardinals return, gave most express assurance of his utmost
assistance to the regaining his Crowns, as soon as he had settled his own, and
was thereby rendered capable of doing it; and the Dutch had now likewise made
overtures to him of espousing his Interest, and had granted him already free
Ports in their Country for his Men of War to harbor in, and sell their Prizes
they should take; and there was every day expectation of Prince Rupert to come
and command a Squadron in that Service, upon the Kings account. The same
forward hopes he had likewise received from several Princes of Germany, viz.
The Emperor himself, with whom the King had one Mr. Tailor his Resident in
honorable esteem; the Marquess of Brandenburgh, the Dukes of Brunswick and
Lunenburgh, and the rest of those Potentates: (His Cousen the Prince Elector
Palatine was yet raw in the World, having newly Frankendale delivered to him by
the Spaniard, who had kept it near forty years) as also from the King of
Denmark. A Diet was now also to be held at Ratisbone, for the Election of a
King of the Romans; the only opportune time for ^^m to prosecute his business,
for supplies and assistance to recover his Rights, finding all the respective
Princes personally present. Therefore the Lord Wilmot, now honored upon this
grand Affair with the Title of Earl of Rochester, The Earl of Rochester to the
Diet in Germany.
(the Duke of Buckingham was designed his Colleague) was honored with the
Embassy thither, and provision made to discharge the State and expense of it,
that the King might appear not altogether lost in the world, or as an abject
and forlorn Prince; since not pity of his misfortunes, but indignation at his
injuries, was the best motive to his assistance: and this becoming Grandeur was
in good time set out amply and honorably enough, by the liberal Purse of his
dear Relations, and the seasonable payment of his Money out of the French
Treasury. His Lordship departed home but in January, and by the way of
Heidelberg (where the same Prince Elector was gone before) arrived at
Strasburgh, and was with all possible evidence and expressions of Honor and
Devotion to his Majesty's cause, and present business, received by that most
Illustrious and grand Assembly. The Lord Wentworth was afterward sent in the
same Employment to the King of Denmark, and by him welcomed and entertained
with all demonstrations of love and affection, becoming his Relation; where the
Dutch upon their engagement of saving that King harmless from any demand, or
whatsoever pretense of the English, had engaged him to join in a League
Offensive and Defensive with that State, and to concur in any other design
whatsoever. The King yet at Paris amidst a hundred Caresses, Gratulations, and
Treatments given him by the King, the Queen Mother, and all the Grandees of
that Court, upon the happy occasion of the late peaceful settlement.

The Dutch with extraordinary diligence and intent care of their honor and
interest in this Quarrel, Van Trump at Sea with a Fleet.
had equipped another Fleet, which was now committed to Van Trump, (though some
rumors were spread, as if he should be honorably laid aside in the
administration of another Land-Office in the inspection of the Admiralty) a
Fleet of 300 Merchantmen bound for France, and the Levant, and these
Occidental parts, being ready for his Convoy. Intelligence was now likewise
given him, that (as formerly the States had been informed) the English Fleet
was no way recruited, but that the most part of that Fleet with which De Wit
Engaged, was gone into Ports, and that now Blake might be easily beaten in the
Downs, and so the Mouth of the River stopped, the War come to a period, and the
Dutch have satisfaction for the damage done them, and Sea-Towns in England put
into their hands for future security; and nothing less would content Hans in
this Top-gallant humor.

On the 29 of November, Trump presented himself with 80 Men of War, and ten
Fireships, Blake defeated in the Downs by Trump, Nov. 29.
on the backside of the Goodwyn again, and according to expectation found
General Blake attended with no more than forty and odd fail, as if he had been
ignorant how to use his late Victory (which came now to the dispute, and to be
an undecided controversy again:) yet Blake generously disdaining to be
affronted again in the Downs, having called a Council of War, it was concluded
he should fight, though at so unequal disadvantage: but the Wind rising, the
Engagement was hindered till the next day; and Anchoring the night before a
little above Dover-road, fair by the Enemy, near morning both Fleets plied
Westward, we having the Weather-gage, and about eleven or twelve a clock
Engaged, near the same place where the first Encounter was; but not with the
same success; for half the Fleet did not Engage; the Victory, Vantguard, and
the Triumph, the Admiral-ship, bore most of the stress of the Fight, being at
one time engaged with 20 Dutch men, and were sorely torn in their Rigging,
Sails, Yards, and Hull; yet they fought till after it was dark; a little before
which, the Garland, (whose venturous Captain, out of a noble resolution,
boarding Van Trump himself, was slain in the fight, and overpowred with his
Reserves:) a Navy-ship of the third Rate with forty Guns, was boarded by two
Dutch Flags, and taken; as likewise the Bonadventure, attempting to relieve
them, its Captain Hookston being slain before the Triumph, could succor them:
and this was not done without great hazard; for Blake was boarded twice, and
had his Topmast shot by the board, and had not the Vantguard and Sapphire stood
resolutely to him, might have gone near to be lost; the Hercules was likewise
run on shore, and all the whole Fleet that engaged, was miserably rent and
torn, and had it not been for the night, would hardly have come off, whereas
now they retreated to Dover, and so into the River against Leigh, to save
themselves. The Dutch Triumphantly continued where they were, resolving to fall
upon Blake with their whole Fleet and Fireships the next day at two of the
clock; The Dutch Seamen steal Sheep at Rumney- Marsh, and come off with loss.
but missing of them, sent their Scouts to Harwich and Yarmouth, to see if they
were there, purposing to pursue the same Resolution. In the mean time, some of
their Seamen went ashore into Rumney-marsh to steal Sheep; but the Troopers
were in a readiness, and killed six of them, and took eight more.

Trump near the Isle of Wight.
Trump still continued with his Fleet plying between the Isle of Wight and the
North-foreland, somewhat betwixt Calice and Dungenness, having put ashore the
Lieutenant of the Garland and other Seamen, who informed, that one Dutch ship
was blown up, and but two men saved; and that Trump, and another Flag-shi^, and
de Ruyter, had received damage. Amidst all this Fray, a rich Streights English
ship, called the Employment, valued at 200000 l. got safe into Harbor at
Portsmouth, being pursued by seven Dutch sail of Frigates. And a little before
this Grand Engagement, the Diamond had more luckily light upon a Hollander from
Spain, laden with 100 Buts of Sack, a great quantity of Cocheneal, 60 Bags of
fine Spanish-wool, 2000 Bars of Silver, 400 West India Hides, to a great value:
the Ruby and the Portsmouth had likewise set upon two Dutch Men of War, and
were just upon boarding of them, having disabled their sailing; but at the very
instant, an unlucky shot came and carried away the Ruby's Masts by the Board,
and put her into the same condition, being Towed home by the Portsmouth, and
leaving the Hollanders a drift at Sea: but for that disappointment, see a more
successful, and deservedly famed English Exploit.

It was related before, how the Dutch at Portolongone-fight had taken the
Phoenix Frigate and brought her into Leghorn-Road, where they blockt up Captain
Appleton and his Squadron; this was (...) an eyesore to the English, as well
for the scandal and dishonor of it, she lying in view, Commanded by young Van
Trump, as also for the ill consequences of it, being a pattern or module for
the Dutch to build by (for she was an excellent Saylor) and might be made use
of also to decoy other ships: that Captain Cox (the former Lieutenant of her)
having imparted his design to the rest of the English, on the twentieth of
November at night, being St. Andrews day (which is an usual Feasting day with
the Hollander, as well as the Scot) accompanied with three Boats, in which were
about 100 men, Rowed close on board the Phoenix, The Phoenix regained, Nov. 30,
by Capt. Cox.
and answering the Sentinel that they were Fishermen, got under her Stern, and
so by her Sides, and presently entered, and having shut down the Hatches, and
secured the Decks, they made toward the Great Cabin, where Van Trump and other
Captains were making merry: one of those with his Servants about him, made some
resistance, and killed one with a Pistol: Trump got out of the Windows in the
mean while into a Boat that was tied at the Stern, and escaped. 'Twas an hour
and a half before they had subdued the Dutch to a submission, being
nevertheless all the while under sail, and no noise, so much as of a Musket
(to give notice to the Dutch Fleet) being to be heard; and so came with her
cleverly away to Naples; having killed in the Conflict nine of that Company.

The Parliament had now constituted three Generals, The Parliaments three
Ge^^rals, Blake, Dean, and Monk.
for the next years Sea-service, namely Blake again, Dean, and General Monk;
and had constituted a Committee for the better managing of the Navy, viz. young
Sir Henry Vane, Mr. Saloway, Colonel Thompson, and John Carew; and for the more
vigorous prosecution of the War, now looking with a very ill aspect toward
them; but sink that must, A Ma^que on the Taxes.
they would swim; the Tax was raised again to 120000 l. per mensem (at which
rate it had almost continued since their Stateship, and outlived them but two
Months.) And lo, a new Scene, the Council of State shifted for the next year
again, 21 of the old customarily to stand, and 20 new ones added, that it might
be share and share like, and every man have his Cue in this Play of Princes.

Van Trump having thus in part effected his design upon Blake, who avoided
sinking or stranding by his getting into the River, plied somewhat more
Westward betwixt Calice and Dungenness, and there met with some English ships
come from the Barbados, wherein were most of the Goods and other things
belonging to the late Governor for the King, the Lord Willoughby of Parham;
and so leisurely crossing up and down the Channel to Guernsey Island (on which
it was voiced they had concluded an attempt, having examined a Master of a
Barque belonging to the place concerning its Ports and Havens) intending
thereby with Fleets of War to impede altogether our Navigation. And so
confident were they grown by this success, The Dutch Bravadoes.
that they reported their General wore a Broom in his Main-top, intimating that
he would sweep the Narrow Seas of all English shipping; who in this Rant and
Vapor arrived at the Isle of Rhee, to stay there for his re-convoying the
Merchants from those quarters.

The States of Holland were not more perplexed about their admission of a
Stadtholder, than ours were cunningly and imperceptibly undermined, by a (would
be) Protector; who to leave no Competitor to that single Greatness he grasped
at, and was to lay hold on, very dexterously quitted his fears from those
dangers his ambition of being a Monarch did so fairly invite, from the
indubitable Right, and near assumption, and ascent to the Throne, of Henry Duke
of Gloucester, The Duke of Gloucester sent away from Carisbrook to Dunkirk, Feb.
whose claim and person was ready against his intrusion, and at hand upon any
such occasion. On the 17 of December, he carried a Vote of Transporting him
beyond Sea, on pretense of lessening the charge of the Commonwealth; all which
should now allow him a pittance, and that quamdiu se been gesserit, as long as
he should please them, and not keep his Brother company: which condition was
sure to discharge their fine Exhibition before any payment would come about.
Accordingly in February ^ollowing they sent him away to Dunkirk from his Prison
at Carisbrook, (where none but a Barber and a sorry Tutor attended him, besides
Anthony Mildmay his Keeper) where he was very joyfully received, and thence
conveyed to Brussels, where he had further grandeurs and civilities done him,
and brought thence in the Princess of Aurange's Coach, to Breda in Holland, to
the great joy of the Royal Family, who every day feared his Life from those
Bloody Usurpers. Soon after he had enjoyed the Company of his Sister, Conducted
into France by the Lords Langdale and Inchiqueen.
he was conducted into France by the Lord Langdale, and the Lord Inchiqueen, to
visit his Mother, his Royal Brothers, and the Princess Henrietta, whose delight
and content in the fruition of him, as one risen from the Dead, I will not be
so bold as to take upon me to express.

Some while before his arrival at Dunkirk, and just upon the news of his leave
and dismission out of England, the French King had by the advice of the
Cardinal Mazarine (who was returned in great state to Court and Council, being
accompanied by most of the principal persons of that Kingdom, and more
particularly by the Duke of York, who was in high Reputation in the Army, and
met by the King of France himself out of the Town) notwithstanding all the
persuasions and obstructions that were used by the Queen Mother of England, and
her Interest in that Crown, sent hither Monsi^ur Bourdeaux Neuville, The French
Envy M. Bourdeaux owns the State, etc. December.
(a creature of the said Cardinals) his Envoy hither to the Parliament, who
delivered his Letters to them on the 14^ but the Superscriptions not being as
full and as ample as other Princes we^e, they were returned again unbroken up
to the Ambassador, who having others by him (as was supposed) presented them
shortly after; which were well ^eceived, and an Answer promised to be with all
speed returned. The Portugal Ambassador concludes.
The Portugal Ambassador (who had been in Treaty here about the Damages-done
the English in 1649.) came now to a conclusion thereof; and there remaining
15500 l. in difference betwixt Him and the Parliaments Commissioners, upon his
submission, and reference of it to the Parliament, they defaulked and abated
the said sum, as a token of their respect and good will to that King. M.
Bourdeaux's Negotiation was most abominably resented here, as well as abroad,
for a piece of the uncivilest policy the French were ever guilty of; but the
Cardinal could not be secure, nor better ingratiate with the Traffiquers and
Traders, which consists of the Commonalty, who had suffered more by English
Sea-Rovery, than by a Peace here; the Superscription of those Letters being a
mere Falsify, and a present satisfaction to the desires of the said Queen.

The Dutch Lion was now Rampant, and roaring out Proclamations and Placa^^s
against bringing in any English Manufactures, or holding correspondence with
us; as if he had the Prey under his Paws, and were sure of Victory: all Princes
were made acquainted with this late success, which lost nothing by carrying,
and their Friends and Allies encouraged to come in and take part of the spoil;
The Dutch forbid any to supply the English with provisions of War.
and to Friend and Foe, they peremptorily forbid by a Declaration the supply of
the English with any Utensils or provisions of War; and Trump had already
seized eleven Lubeckers, laden with Eastland Commodities, pretending to Ostend;
by which Lubeckers and Hamburgers, most of the Holland-Trade in single ships
was disguised, so that the English ships resolved to seize all those that spoke
IA, without any Shiboleth or distinction.

Torce of their Hamburgh ships laden with Plate taken.
Upon this score, three Hamburgh ships, laden with Plate, coming from Cadiz,
were brought into Plymouth, though they pretended to be bound for Flanders, and
that the Money belonged to the King of Spain, and was consigned for the pay of
his Armies: immediately upon notice of their Seizure, the Spanish Ambassador at
London made application by a special Audience in Parliament for their delivery,
and did most industriously solicit and prosecute the same; but the Wealth was
too considerable, and of as great concernment to their occasions in this Dutch
War, as the Spaniard could allege any; and therefore they remitted the
Examination of the business to the Judges of the Admiralty, where it proved a
most tedious Affair; one Mr. Violet a Goldsmith, and Prosecutor for this State,
engaging himself most busily, in procuring their adjudication for lawful Prize.

A High Court of Justice in Ireland.
In Ireland the High Court of Justice was now erected and in Circuit; the first
place of their sitting being at Kilkenny, where the Grand Council of the Rebels
in 1641. had their Residence; and thence to Waterford, Cork, Dublin, and
Vlster, etc. They were attended and sat in very great State, near the pattern
in England, with 24 Halberdiers in good Apparel for their Guard, and all other
Officers suitable. The President of this Court was one Justice Donelan, Justice
Donelan President thereof.
an Irish Native, picked out on purpose for the greater terror of the
Delinquents; to whom as assistants were joined Justice Cook the Infamous
Solicitor against the King, (whom they would have most wickedly, and by all
abominable artifices (by urging and soothing their Prisoners to confess as
much) entitled to that Rebellion; but found not by all their scelerate
practices what they sought for) and Commissary-General Reynolds: Several
persons Condemned.
many persons were by these Condemned; some of the chief whereof, as Colonel
Walter Bagnal, Colonel Tool, Colonel Mac Hugh, and a greater number of lesser
Quality, suffered Death; Bagnal being Beheaded, a manner of Execution not usual
in Ireland: the Lord Clanmallero, the Viscount Mayn, and some others escaped;
but the Nation was was so generally scared, and in such a fright, that happy
was he that could get out of it: for no Articles were pleadable here; and
against a Charge of things done 12 years before, little or no defense could be
made; and the cry that was made of Blood, aggravated with the expressions of so
much horror, and the no less daunting aspect of the Court, quite contounded
the amazed Prisoners, so that they came like Sheep to the slaughter, which had
been such ravenous Wolves in preying upon the Lives of the poor unarmed
English: but the Spanish Army was so full of them, and their late revolt at
Bordeaux to the French side made them so suspicious, that thereafter they
became very unwelcome Auxiliaries; and upon that account the Lord of Muskerry,
who had according to Articles Transported himself, came back again to Ireland
without leave, and was taken and committed to Dublin-Castle, Lord Muskerry
taken, and committed to Dublin Castle. Sir Phelim O Neal the great Rebel
hanged, etc.
and some while after Tried at the same High Court of Justice. Sir Phelim O
Neal, that great and prime Ringleader of the Rebellion, was likewise betrayed
by his own party in February following at Vlster near Charlemount, and brought
Prisoner to the Lord Caufield's house, whose Father he had treacherously
Murdered; and sent with a Guard to the same place, and Hanged and Quartered.
Insomuch that all Ireland was now wholly reduced: for Colonel Barrow had taken
most of the places in Vlster, save what Forces were skulking in the Fastnesses,
and made a kind of thieving War, and that was yet very desperate. Captain
Gibbons with 100 men staid in Kerry, where the Irish out of fear and distrust
of any preservation or favor from the English, rose in Arms again: there
remained too the Island of Enisbuffin, whose Forces had in December, to the
number of 500 in Boats, fallen down upon the Isles of Arran, Garrisoned by an
English company of 150, under a Captain, who upon the first Summons rendered the
Fort in that Island upon leave to depart; for which he was condemned to dye,
and the Officers under him Cashiered.

To recover this Isle, being of consequence to the peace of the Neighboring
Country, Commissary-General Reynolds was sent with a sufficient Force, and
likewise to reduce Enisbuffin. At his approach to Arran, it rendered to him upon
the first Summons, as before it was lost, on the 15 of January; where he left
some ships for the better securing of it, their absence being the occasion of
the loss of it before; and so marched to Enisbuffin, but with more have than
good speed, 300 of the Van of his Forces being cut off: but the Island being
blockt up, Colonel C^sack the Governor accepted of the usual Articles for
Transportation, and Surrendered that place. The Condition of Ireland.
Never were any Christian people or Nation in such a wretched condition as
those Irish, who from a vain conceit of obtaining their Liberty, and shaking
off the English Yo^k by their Rebellion, now found i^ set closer and harder on,
suffering the very extremity of Revenge, and the dregs of Rage, from a
merciless Conquering Enemy, to whom first the crying Sin of their barbarous
Massacres, and then their contempt of the Kings Authority when received among
them; and lastly their fatal divisions among themselves, caused by their Friars
and the Nuncio-party, had given them over. As to the Priests, The Priests
Banished.
they were by Proclamation, upon pain of Death, Banished for ever out of the
Kingdom, as the like had been done lately before in England, and many of them
had already been snapt by the Irish High Court of Justice.

The Parliament were no way insensible of the Damage and disgrace they had
suffered from the Dutch in the Downs, Cromwell and his Officers keep a Fast.
(and to mind them the more of it, Cromwell and his Officers kept a Fast by
themselves upon that occasion, but added other causes, viz. the delay of the
new Representative, according to the old strain) and therefore thinking the
meanness of their Pay might dishearten the Seamen from serving in the Fleet,
Seamens Wages raised.
they raised their Wages from 19, to 24 shillings a month, and 20 Nobles for
every Gun in any ship they should take from the Enemy, with other advantages as
to the shares of the Prizes: and the better to defray this allowance, The Kings
Houses of Hampton Court to be sold, etc.

Moneys there^pon at six per cent.


they ordered the Sale of Somerset House, Windsor-Castle, Greenwich, Hampton
Court Va^^^ hall in Lambeth and Cornbury-Park. For the invitation to which
purchases, and all other Forf^i^^d Lands, they had abated the interest of
Moneys from eight to six per cent. that the advantages of laying out their
Money with them, might appear to the Usurer, who by such Bargains could not get
less than 50 l. per cent. provided it would last, and the Lands continue in
their possession. Those Houses notwithstanding escaped, by the hinderance and
artful delays of Oliver Cromwell, who designed them for his own greatness and
State in his projected Supremacy. He was now debating in Council with his
Bashaws about the very same matter, and the Parliament fell presently upon the
Bill to prevent him and his Armies desires for the same Representative, and
offered fair, January the fifth.

The Danish Ambassadors had in the beginning of October departed England; and
by the way visited Holland, and continued their Journey by Land home; where
upon their arrival, that King had declared himself for the Hollander; yet the
Parliament hoping to reclaim him, and the want of those Merchandises he had
seized urging them to it, Agent Bradshaw to Copenhagen.
sent Bradshaw a bold fellow like his Kinsman who preferred him, to Copenhagen
from Hamburgh, where he resided with that City as their Agent. He came to the
Court before Christmas, but was delayed Audience till after the Holy Days; and
when he had it granted, it was to so little purpose, He is affronted and in
danger.
and of so great danger to him at his return, he being besides affronted highly
in the streets, that he wished himself quit of his Employment, and at home
again. At his request for a Guard to convey him back, and his payment of them,
and passing by-ways, and over several Waters, he at last in much fear (being
certainly waylaid) recovered Hamburgh, whence he sent the Parliament an
account of his fruitless Negotiation, (for the goods were unladen and sold, and
the Merchants Books of Account seized, and in the Kings hands, desiring also
the repayment of those Moneys he had disbursed, for the carrying the Masters
and Seamen of those ships to Lubeck and those parts, being not able to stay in
Denmark any longer; where a Comet newly appeared, the effects whereof were very
visible in those calamities that presently began in this and the Swedish War,
in which that King was desperately Engaged.

The Dutch had been Commanded to Sea from Porto Longone some while before, by
the Spanish Governor, so that the English ships were at liberty; and Badiley
was now at Leghorn, of whom the Great Duke demanded the Phoenix to be restored
to the Dutch, at their instance to him, as taken in his Port; which being
refused, he commanded that those English ships that then lay within the Mole,
being six in number, should put to Sea within ten days: the debate had lasted
a good while before this resolution, which the Duke said he could not in
justice and by the Law of Nations deny to the Hollander; the event of which we
will presently relate.

At home the Dutch were still far perter; Songs, and by words, and Pictures,
made of this English defeat; the names of the ships discanted upon that were
taken, as ominous to us, having lost the Garland, etc. and the like devices:
this the Vulgar: the Great ones were consulting of sending a Fleet to seize all
our America-Isles, and to Lord it there, as their Ships did in the Streights;
and de Wit was also now almost ready to put to Sea, with another F^eet of 40
ships, and Van Trump was ordered to come away speedily, with such Merchantmen
as were r^^dy to set Sail, and Anchor at the Thames mouth, and block up General
Blake, and the Fleet that was there ready: but he came too late to effect it,
English under Blake at Sea.
for on the 8 of February, from Quinborough, the General set sail with about 60
men of War, intending to join with 20 more from Portsmouth; such a Force, and
of so sudden a rise, that the Dutch found themselves much deceived in their
design abroad, and Conclusions at home. On the 11 of February, the
Portsmouth-Fleet, the Wind blowing Eastward, joined with the General at Beechy
head, and thence sailed over against Portland, where they lay a cross the
Channel, half Sea over, to discover Van Trump on either Shore he should pass
by. Van Trump returns through the Channel, Feb.
On the 18th, just at break of day, the Southermost ships, among whom was the
Admiral, having General Dean aboard also, descryed the Dutch Ships, being
betwixt three and four hundred Vessels, close by the Land, betwixt them and
Portland; and immediately the English made what sail they could toward them;
and Van Trump having recollected his Ships of War, did the same: About eight a
clock in the Morning, the Triumph with 12 ships more (for all the Fleet could
not get up) Engaged Board and Board: Portland- fight Feb. 18, between Dutch and
English.
the Triumph was hardly put to it, and was as gallantly relieved by Captain
Lawson in the Fairfax; for which Service he was much looked upon afterward:
Both were lamentably shattered, and lost 100 men out of each ship; it being
Trump's resolution and Command, if possible, to have carried them both: the
Vantguard played her part here again, but lost her Captain Mildmay, as the
Triumph lost her Captain Ball, and Mr. Sparrow the General's Secretary; Blake
was wounded in the Thigh with a piece of Iron a Shot had driven, and Dean's
Coat and Breeches torn therewith; the Prosperous, a ship of 44 Guns, was
boarded by the Dutch, but presently recovered by the Merlin Frigate, Commanded
by Captain Vessey: the Assistance, the Vice Admiral of the Blue Squadron, was
disabled in the very beginning of the Fight, and was brought off to Portsmouth,
whither followed the Advice, being not longer able to keep the Sea. The Dutch
lost six Men of War taken and sunk, the Rigging of those that were taken being
besmeared with Brains and Blood in a most terrible manner: Night coming on,
they parted. Saturday-morning they were seen again, being judged seven Leagues
off Weymouth, and over against Dungenness, whither the English plied, and in
the afternoon began the Fight again, the Frigates fetching upon them, while the
whole Fleet came up: Trump now had put his Merchantmen before him, and fought
retreating toward Bulloign, in his way whither, the English Frigates at large,
snapt many of his Merchants, and Captain Lawson boarded a Dutch Man of War, and
carried her, and brought her to the Downs. Sunday-morning the Dutch were at
Bulloign, where the Fight began again, but with little effect, and in the dark
Trump slipped away (having sent his Merchantmen before) to Calice-sands, where
he Anchored that day with forty sail, (the Wind lying cross at N. N. E. but no
further dispute or encounter happened) and thence Tyded it home, whither a
Fleet of 100 sail from Roan, Guarded by ten Men of War, had slipped through the
Channel a little before, during the Fight) having lost in all eleven Men of
War, and thirty Merchants, 1500 killed, and as many wounded. On our side we had
one ship, named the Sampson, shot through and through, and the Captain Button
wounded, was sunk by him in the fight, the men being saved aboard other
Vessels. Though it could not be dissembled that the Dutch had the worst of it,
yet Van Trump was highly magnified for his good conduct, especially for his
bringing off the Fleet from Calice, which argued the English had no more mind
to fight, as they said in Holland. It was a stiff bout, especially the first
day, and both English and Dutch did very gallantly, Stoutly maintained on
either side.
more especially our Red-Coats, who were put on board for want of Seamen, did
most gallantly and undauntedly behave themselves, perpetually firing and
keeping their Station, in all danger either of Fire or Water, so that half of
the Victory belonged to them; there being little odds on either Side, save that
we were the cleaner, being newly Tallowed and trimmed, and just set out to Sea.
Several Collections were made in the West Country of Money and Linen for the
maimed and wounded Seamen and Soldiers, and Provision made for their
Reception into Hospitals.

A Fight at Leghorn, March 2.
The next Encounter we had with this Enemy, was off Leghorn; for Captain
Appleton (according to the Duke's Command) now put to Sea, diverse Voluntier
English freely adventuring themselves on board for their Countries Honor, the
whole Coast being filled with Spectators to see the Combat; for the second of
March was the longest day allowed for their stay in that Port: Now it was
agreed between Captain Badiley and Appleton, that as soon as Appleton should
see the Dutch set sail after him, for he was come from Porto Ferraio with 9
ships and a Fire-ship, that he should come out and make have to join with him.
Accordingly as soon as Badiley appeared, and the Dutch made semblance of making
to him, the Wind blowing off the Shore, he weighed and came out; which the
Dutch observing, they ceased their prosecution of Badiley, and turning the
Helm, sailed directly upon Appleton, not any way to be relieved by Badiley as
the Wind stood; who suspecting the event, with all speed got off to Sea and
away, left when that Encounter was over, the whole brunt would fall also on
him. Nevertheless these six ships resolved to make a stout resistance, being in
sight of that City and Country where their Reputation had been hitherto nobly
maintained: in the very first Engagement the Henry Bonadventure was unluckily
blown up, by a shot from Van Galen the Dutch Admital, that came into the
Powder; the Sampson (another of the six) was Boarded on both sides, and Entered
by young Van Trump, and afterward fired by a Fire ship; the Peregrine was set
upon by four Dutch Men of War, and having her Masts shot by the board, was
entered and taken; the Levant having fought four hours side by side with two
Dutch Flag-ships (one whereof was the Virgin of Enchuysen) was likewise taken;
The English worsted.
but the Mary (amidst the Smoke and confusion of the fight) got clear away,
there remained only now the Leopard, a Navy-ship of 50 Brass Guns, who after
six hours fight with Van Galen himself, and another Flag-ship, by Name the Sun
and the Julius Caesar, after a great slaughter was commanded by Appleton to be
blown up, to prevent the coming into the Enemies hands; but the Mariners
securing the Gunner, and forcing him to yield, the ship was possessed by the
Dutch, Van Galen having lost one of his Legs in the fight, whereof soon after
he died. There were taken Prisoners in this fight 400, one hundred whereof were
wounded (among them was Captain Wood of the Peregrine) who were set on shore
and at liberty, and care taken by the English for their return home and
recovery.

Prince Rupert had been Seafaring about the ^aribbe Islands with seven or
eight ships, Prince Maurice drowned in the West-India's.
and had taken four or six Prizes, but lost his Brother Prince Maurice by a
Hurricane, either at St. Christophers, or near the Isle of Tortudas,
whereabouts the Prince had carefully expected him some two Months; but not
hearing of him (for Death had Transported him to farther Regions, and left no
account of that most Excellent Personage, eminently beloved for his Conduct,
Valor, and Civility in our late War, and whose great Actions well deserve a
particular History; so that though his Death be unknown, yet his Life and the
Renown of it is famous, and the Glory of it Proclaimed throughout the World) he
set sail from those unfortunate Islands, Prince Rupert arrives in France, Mar.
and arrived at Nants in Bri^any in March, with the Swallow, and a Prize laden
with Tobacco, and a little Frigate, and soon after his Arrival fell Sick; but
happily recovering, he was invited to Paris, and Complemented by the French
King, who sent the first Gentleman of his Chamber to salute him; and highly and
cordially welcomed by our Sovereign yet in that Court, where now the whole
Royal Family were very near met together.

Monsieur Bor^el Ambassador from the Queen of Sweden (being the third within
the space of a year) arrived in England about the same time, and other Letters
came again from the States of Holland and West-Friezsland to the Parliament;
the Dutch at the same time meditating on a speedy Peace, and a potent carrying
on of the War, having prohibited the Greenland-Voyage again for that year, and
making all Expedition to set de Wit with another Fleet to Sea; De Wit at sea
with another Fleet.
the Balance of Victory standing still in aequilibrio, for what was lost in
the Channel, was gained in the Streights; and 'twas concluded, they that could
raise most Men and Ships, would be sure to carry it. And their first design
was now upon our Colliers, The Dutch design of weakening us by taking our
Colliers.
the great Nursery and Seminary of Seamen for the Service, whom if they could
intercept, being about 150 sail, and but ten Men of War for their Convoy, the
Work was done. A Fleet of 20 great ships and some little Frigates was dispatched
first, and de Wit followed; which first Squadron having been descryed by the
Colliers at Sea, they with their Convoy put into Scarborough, and there under
the protection of that Castle, and new Platforms raised to gall the Dutch if
they approached (which was well perceived by them) they Anchored till the Dutch
drew quite off (having pretended it twice before) upon the coming of
Vice Admiral Pen with his Fleet that way.

The year ends with the release of Sir John Gell, Sir John Gell and several
Scots released from the Tower, and others preferred.
and some Scotch Prisoners out of the Tower, among whom was Mr. Robert Douglas;
and submission of the Lord Iniskillin, Colonel Conuer, and Mac Guire in
Ireland, upon the usual Terms of Transportation, and an Act Constituting John
Bradshaw their bold President and their great Favorite to be Chancellor, and
Bartholomew Hall one of the Lord Whitlock's Dependants to be Attorney of the
Duchy of Lancaster, that they might do something for their Friends before they
dye. And lo a Revolution.

A CHRONICLE OF THE CIVIL WARS OF ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND. THE THIRD
PART: BEING The Protectorate.
Anno Dom. 1653.
NOw to the reproach of Fortune, and her glorious Pageant of an English
Commonwealth, which she had set up for another Wonder in the world, to brave
the Pyramids of Stone, Colossus of Brass, as to the defense of Times injury,
having subdued all likelihood or appearance of danger from without (all Princes
being ready to entertain their Friendship:) See the frailty of this structure,
the undermines, and the cheating deceitful labor of their Architect and prime
Workman in the Groundwork of this Republican Fabric.

That Foundation was laid upon the Ruins of Monarchy, the seeds whereof being
laid in the King's Death, through a four years corruption of time, reared its
Head now, though with a forced and precoce blade (a fading verdure that bespoke
its unseasonableness and sudden perishment in the Family and Person of this
Usurper) and exerted it self afterward in the Hundredfold Fruits of an
yielding and obedient people to their Rightful Sovereign.

It was perceivable now what Chimera's were in the projection of the
Commonwealth, which had so many ambitious and covetous Masters, every one of
them managing his design, and stretching it to the same measure of perpetuity;
Sons and Nephews being brought into the Parliament, and the same Relations upon
the score of Inherent Merit brought into the Army, and these interessedly
opposite and contrary to one another; the Single self (to the reducing of it to
Monarchical Regiment in this very Democratick form) being solely intended; so
that it was little labor for Cromwell with his Instrument in his Hand to charm
the several divided Factions of that Individuum vagum, there being no other
cement or obligation of their holding together, but that glutinous and sticking
Guilt of the Kings Blood; and all places of Command and Profit were already in
the Hands of his Friends and Favorites, without any quarrel, or indeed without
any perceivance of his Grand design, which as it had worried the Kingdom to
the destruction of the King, so was it after to weary them with another
Parliament, by their barbarous and strange proceedings, and so recommend
himself to the People.

He indeed took a very happy juncture for the Execution of it, just as the
Scale of the Dutch difference was turned, and Victory was inclining to the
English, and when a very potent Fleet was out at Sea, and the Moneys at the
rate of 120000 l. per mensem was just coming in, and their Exchequer and other
Receipts pretty full with the several Incomes, Forfeitures, and Revenues: and
as to his assurance of it, he wanted not any assistance, the Army only his,
and a third part of the Parliament joining with him in his Conspiracy; which
yet was a rash and hazardous venture. There had been no Law nor Government
before; now even Prudence and Wisdom forsook the Grandees and Principals in the
proceeding Rebellion.

For it was then clearly and truly judged, that the setting up of this private,
and indeed debaucht Person and Family in opposition to the King (the memory of
whose super-excellent Virtues, Gifts and Graces, and His cruel Martyrdom, were
yet recent) and His Heirs, would presently ruin the Usurper: for it being like
to prove a War betwixt the Crown and Jack Cade, it was rightly concludible,
that no longer than his Rebel-rout could be maintained and kept together, could
it be expected that Oliver's bloody house could stand.

The prosperous Rebel never boded this, nor did he think it within his
consideration: his great aims were upon the Parliament, an impotent and feeble
Crew that stood upon his Crutches, and yet threatened to beat him with them;
such Masters of Defense they were. This made him forsake his Wiles and Fabian
delays, and with his Sword riddle the Oracle of this Delphick Parliament by its
dissolution.

Fate never played such a frolic prank, nor was there ever such a Scene of
Mirth in all her Mazes and Varieties of Government. Nor often do wicked great
men survive the infamy and dishonor of their Actions, and live the infamous
obloquie and reproach of themselves: but as if God would invert the threatened
punishment of the breach of the fifth Commandment, these unexampled parricides
were decreed to outlive the desire of Life, and to see all their Greatness
buried; their Reputation abroad, and their Dread at home, fallen into such
Ignominy and Disgrace, that it was turned to a Ballad, Twelve Parliament Men
for a penny.
in the most scummy and vilest Language conceivable; and this so all of an
instant and sudden, that the Portugal Ambassador, who then attended them here,
said, That his Masters assumption to that Crown in 1640 was very speedy and
miraculous, but this Revolution did far exceed it, both as to the bloodlessness
and stilness of it; it seeming to be done as in a dream, so pitifully and
abjectly did these petty Princes behave themselves in this rencounter, which
happened on the 20 of April, in this manner.

Oliver himself, attended by Major General Lambert, Harrison, and some 8 more
Officers (having after several conferences with their Committees (who showed
him the danger of calling a new Representative, as the case then stood with the
Commonwealth, for that no Qualifications could sufficiently secure the Interest
thereof; and that the only way was to recruit the House, which could judge of
such Elections by their own Authority) received no satisfaction) entered the
House, (some Members being made privy to his design before, especially Sir
Gilbert Pickering, who had held consultation the night before with him, and was
up armed in his Chamber till the very time) and after a Speech therein, showed
the reasons and necessity of their Dissolution, did declare it to be so, and
desired them to depart: and presently Major General Harrison peremptorily bid
the Speaker to leave the Chair; The manner of dissolving the Parliament.
which he refusing to do without the Order of the House, and till he was pulled
out, Harrison desired him to lend him his Hand, and gently heaved him out.
Cromwell also commanded that Bauble (as he called the Mace) to be taken away,
and to be carried no more in State before him: and so having turned them out of
Doors, locked them up, and clapped Guards before them, and about all the Avenues
of the Palace, to keep these Spirits out from possessing it again.

The news of this Luciferian fall, was quickly spread throughout the City, and
from thence into the Kingdom, being related and received with all imaginable
gladness, while the Members slunk away, muttering to themselves the affront
they had received, and laying their Heads together how to retrieve themselves;
for loath they were to suffer this violence, or acknowledge their Dissolution,
which they would by no means hear of. But what ever they fancied to the
contrary, raving at this boldness and audaciousness of their Servant, as they
styled Cromwell, he minded it not, but went on in his work.

The Government (such as it was) was now lodged in the Council of Officers of
his own making and preferring; and the first thing done by them after this new
Model, was the emitting of a Declaration from him and his Officers, showing the
grounds and reasons of this Dissolution of the Parliament, with an account of
their Intentions as to the present and future Government of the Nation: which
that it may appear by how slender a Thread the Sword of this Lawless Commander
hung over the Heads of those Parliament-Tyrants, is very requisite to be
inserted, it holding forth the present intrigues of Cromwell's designs and
method of Ambition.

A Declaration of the General and Council of Officers about the Dissolution,
etc.
Our intention is not to give an account, at this time, of the grounds which
first moved us to take up Arms, and engage our Lives and all that was dear unto
us in this Cause; nor to mind in this Declaration the various Dispensations
through which Divine Providence has led us, or the witness the Lord has born,
and the many signal Testimonies of acceptance which he has given to the
sincere endeavors of his unworthy servants, whilst they were contesting with
the many and great difficulties, as well in the Wars, as other transactions in
the three Nations; being necessitated, for the defense of the same Cause they
first asserted, to have recourse unto extraordinary actions; the same being
evident by former Declarations published on that behalf.

After it had pleased God not only to reduce Ireland, and give in Scotland,
but so marvelously to appear for his people at Worcester, that these Nations
were reduced to a great degree of Peace, and England to perfect quiet, and
thereby the Parliament had opportunity to give the people the Harvest of all
their Labor, Blood, and Treasure, and to settle a due Liberty both in
reference to Civil and Spiritual things; whereunto they were obliged by their
Duty, their Engagements, as also the great and wonderful things which God has
wrought for them: it was matter of much grief to the good and well-affected of
the Land to observe the little progress which was made therein; who thereupon
applied to the Army, expecting redress by their means; notwithstanding which,
the Army being unwilling to meddle with the civil Authority in matters so
properly appertaining to it, it was agreed, that his Excellency and Officers of
the Army, which were Members of Parliament, should be desired to move the
Parliament to proceed vigorously in reforming what was amiss in Government, and
to the settling of the Commonwealth upon a foundation of justice and
righteousness; which having done, we hoped that the Parliament would seasonably
have answered our expectations: But finding (to our grief) delays therein, we
renewed our desires in an humble Petition to them, which was presented in
August last; and although they at that time, signifying their good acceptance
thereof, returned us thanks, and referred the particulars thereof to a
Committee of the House, yet no considerable effect was produced, nor any such
progress made, as might imply their real intentions to accomplish what was
petitioned for; but on the contrary, there more and more appeared amongst them
an aversion to the things themselves, with much bitterness and opposition to
the people of God, and his Spirit acting in them; which grew so prevalent, that
those persons of Honor and Integrity amongst them who had eminently appeared
for God and the Public good, both before and throughout this War, were rendered
of no further use in Parliament, than by meeting with a corrupt party, to give
them countenance to carry on their ends, and for effecting the desire they had
of perpetuating themselves in the supreme Government. For which purpose, the
said party long opposed, and frequently declared themselves against having a
new Representative, and when they saw themselves necessitated to take that Bill
into Consideration, they resolved to make use of it to recruit the House with
persons of the same Spirit and Temper, thereby to perpetuate their own sitting.
Which Intention diverse of the activest amongst them did manifest, laboring to
persuade others to a consent therein: And the better to effect this, diverse
Petitions preparing from several Counties for the continuance of this
Parliament, were encouraged, if not set on foot by many of them.

For obviating these evils, the Officers of the Army obtained several Meetings
with some of the Parliament, to consider what fitting means and remedy might be
applied to prevent the same: But such endeavors proving altogether
ineffectual, it became most evident to the Army, as they doubt not it also is
to all considering persons, that this Parliament, through the corruption of
some, the jealousy of others, the non-attendance and negligence of many, would
never answer those ends which God, his People, and the whole Nation expected
from them, but that this Cause which the Lord has so greatly blessed, and
bore witness to, must needs languish under their Hands, and by degrees be
wholly lost, and the Lives, Liberties, and Comforts of his people delivered
into their Enemies hands.

All which being sadly and seriously considered by the honest people of this
Nation, as well as by the Army, and Wisdom and Direction being sought from the
Lord, it seemed to be a duty incumbent upon us, who had seen so much of the
power and presence of God going along with us, to consider of some more
effectual means to secure the Cause which the good people of this Commonwealth
had been so long engaged in, and to establish Righteousness and Peace in these
Nations.

And after much debate, it was judged necessary, and agreed upon, that the
Supreme Authority should be by the Parliament devolved upon known persons, men
fearing God, and of approved Integrity; and the Government of the Commonwealth
committed unto them for a time, as the most hopeful way to encourage and
countenance all Gods people, reform the Law, and administer Justice
impartially, hoping thereby the people might forget Monarchy, and understanding
their true Interest in the Election of successive Parliaments, may have the
Government settled upon a true Basis, without hazard to this glorious Cause, or
necessitating to keep up Armies for the defense of the same.

And being still resolved to use all means possible to avoid extraordinary
courses, we prevailed with about twenty Members of Parliament to give us a
Conference; with whom we freely and plainly debated the necessity and justness
of our Proposals on that behalf; and did evidence that those* and not the An
Act for filling up the Parliament.
Act under their Consideration, would most probably bring forth something
answerable to that Work, the foundation whereof God himself has laid, and is
now carrying on in the World.

The which notwithstanding found no acceptance; but in stead thereof, it was
offered, that the way was to continue still this present Parliament, as being
that from which we might reasonably expect all good things. And this being
vehemently insisted upon, did much confirm us in our apprehensions, That not
any love to a Representative, but the making use thereof to recruit, and so to
perpetuate themselves, was their aim.

They being plainly dealt with about this, and told, that neither the Nation,
the honest Interest, nor we our selves, would be deluded by such dealings; They
did agree to meet again the next day in the Afternoon for mutual satisfaction;
it being consented to by the Members present, that Endeavors should be used,
that nothing in the mean time should be done in Parliament that might exclude
or frustrate the Proposals beforementioned.

Notwithstanding this, the next Morning the Parliament did make more have than
usual in carrying on their said Act, being helped on therein by some of the
persons engaged to us the night before, none of them which were then present
endeavoring to oppose the same; and being ready to put the main Question for
consummating the said Act, whereby our aforesaid Proposals would have been
rendered void, and the way of bringing them into a fair and full Debate in
Parliament obstructed.

For preventing whereof, and all the sad and evil consequences which must upon
the grounds aforesaid have ensued, and whereby at one blow the Interest of all
honest men, and of this glorious Cause, had been endangered to be laid in the
Dust, and these Nations embroyled in new Troubles, at a time when our Enemies
abroad are watching all advantages against us, and some of them actually
engaged in War with us; We have been necessitated, though with much reluctance,
to put an end to this Parliament; which yet we have done, (we hope) out of an
honest heart, preferring this Cause above our Names, Lives, Families, or
Interests, how dear soever; with clear intentions, and real purposes of heart,
to call to the Government persons of approved fidelity and honesty; believing,
that as none wise will expect to gather Grapes of Thorns, so good men will
hope, that if persons so qualified be chosen, the fruits of a just and
righteous Reformation, so long prayed and wished for, will (by the blessing of
God) be in due time obtained, to the refreshing of all those good hearts who
have been panting after these things.

Much more might have been said, if it had been our desire to justify our
selves by aspersing others, and raking into the Mis-government of affairs; but
we shall conclude with this, That as we have been led by Necessity and
Providence to act as we have done, even beyond and above our own thoughts and
desires; so we shall and do, in that of this great Work which is behind, put
our selves wholly upon the Lord for a Blessing; professing we look not to stand
one day without his support, much less to bring to pass any of the things
mentioned and desired without his assistance: And therefore do solemnly desire
and expect, that all men, as they would not provoke the Lord to their own
destruction, should wait for such issue as he shall bring forth, and to follow
their business with peaceable spirits; wherein, we promise them protection by
his assistance.

And for those who profess their fear and love to the Name of God, that seeing
in a great measure, for their sakes, and for Righteousness sake, we have taken
our Lives in our hand to do these things; they would be instant with the Lord
day and night on our behalfs, that we may obtain Grace from him: And seeing we
have made so often mention of his Name, that we may not do the least dishonor
thereunto; which indeed would be our confusion, and a stain to the whole
profession of Godliness.

We beseech them also to live in all Humility, Meekness, Righteousness, and
Love one toward another, and toward all men; that so they may put to silence
the Ignorance of the Foolish, who falsely accuse them; and to know, that the
late great and Glorious Dispensations, wherein the Lord has so wonderfully
appeared in bringing forth these things, by the travel and Blood of his
Children, ought to oblige them so to walk in the Wisdom and love of Christ, as
may cause others to honor their holy Profession, because they see Christ to be
in them of a truth.

We do further purpose, before it be long, more particularly to show the
grounds of our Proceedings, and the Reasons of this late great Action and
Change, which in this we have but hinted at.

And we do lastly Declare, That all Judges, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace,
Mayors, Bailiffs, Committees, and all other Civil Officers, and Public
Ministers whatsoever, within this Commonwealth, or any parts thereof, do
proceed in their respective Places and Offices; and all persons whatsoever are
to give Obedience to them as fully as when the Parliament was sitting.

Signed in the Name and by the Appointment of his Excellency the Lord-General,
and his Council of Officers. William Malyn, Secret.
White hall, the 22 of April, 1653.
The next thing they published, was an Injunction to all the Officers and
Soldiers in the Army, forbidding them to make any disturbance in Churches, or
affronting of Ministers and people in Congregations; which was done to gain
them an opinion of Religious Piety and Zeal for the Worship and Service of God,
now frequently profaned by the Sectarian Principles of Anabaptism, Quaking, and
Ranting, (the two later whereof began to spread about this time, and be very
infectious in the Army and their Quarters) which were licensed among the
Soldiery, who were every where drawn together to Rendezvouzes, to subscribe
Addresses to their General, Addresses to Cromwell.
declaring their approbation of what he had done to the Government, and
promising to assist him in his undertakings with their Lives, with their
hopeful expectation of the great and glorious Work to be accomplished by him,
to the building up of Sion, etc. The like he received from the Fleet upon the
news of the Change communicated to them, who resolved with the same courage to
proceed against the common Enemy the Dutch; Vice Admiral Pen in the Downs, with
a Fleet of 70 sail.
Vice Admiral Pen being now in the Downs with seventy sail of ^^out Men of War,
and General Monk and Dean expected with some more of the Western squadron,
with which they now Anchored at Saint Hellen's Point.

The first Foreign Address that was made to this DICTATOR, (for such another
Regiment was that of Lucius Scylla, and C. Marius amongst the Romans, for by
that term of Authority he is b^^t distinguished* was from the Agents of the
Rebel-City of Bourdeaux, (then maintained by the Prince of Conti against the
French King) while his Ambassador Bourdeaux was here for a Peace; whose
offering a more advantageous Treaty to the Interest of Cromwell, was one
occasion of crushing that transaction; and Cromwell besides was ready to Prince
it himself; and those Examples were no way to be encouraged by him.

The Dictator having held the Supreme Power some few days, Cromwell a Dictator.
devolved it by a Declaration to a Council of State; (his ignorant conceited
Officers soaring such flights, and such their extravagant notions of
Government, and their pertness in them, that made him quickly weary of such
Counselors or Companions:) these were partly the greatest Officers in the
Army; as Lambert, Dean, Harrison; and partly Members of the late Parliament,
(among whom the Lord Fairfax was by name now listed into this Juncto) and some
other new Gamesters of Cromwell's Cabinet Counsel. At the latter end of this
Declaration, he limited the time of their power till the persons of known
Fidelity and Honesty should meet, according to the nomination and appointment
of his Council, to take upon them the Supreme Authority; A Council of State.
and in the interim, to this Council all obedience upon Peril was required, and
all Justices and Sheriffs, and other Officers were ordered to continue in their
respective Commissions and places, and Writs to run in the same style, of the
Keepers of the Liberties of England. The first work this Council did, was the
publishing of an Ordinance for six months Assessment, from the 24 of June, and
was obeyed in all points like an Act of Parliament, and better welcomed than
any of the late ones, for its decrease of the Tax to a considerable fall;
another Artifice to gain the people: but the Treasuries were now reasonable
full by the Providence of all Parliament. The Town of Marlborough was reduced
almost to Ashes April 28, Marlborough burnt, Ap. 28.
an ominous Commencement of this Incendiaries Usurpation, whose red and fiery
Nose was the burden of many a Cavalier-Song.

This turn and Translation of the Government was very acceptable news to the
King at Paris, his Friends and Counselors saluting and complementing him with
the infallible hopes of his Restitution by those means; and much Jollity and
Gladness there was concerning it, and many Treatments given the King. The Earl
of Bristol, Lord Digby honored with the order of the Garter.
late Lord Digby, was now honored with the Order of the Garter at Paris, and
great expectation there was of a successful Issue of the Earl of Rochester's
Negotiation at the Diet at ^atisbone, and of potent assistance from other
Princes His Allies and Confederates, among whom the Dutch were now reckoned not
the least considerable; General Middleton being on his Journey thither to Treat
with them about furnishing an Expedition into Scotland, where he was to Command
in chief: but the Dutch having offered a Treaty at any neutral place, which was
now refused by Cromwell except at London, they would not presently Engage, till
that Issue was known. The King of Denmark now also published his Manifesto
against the English, and declared a War, and Rigged his Fleet, and secured and
strengthened his Castles against any attempt of their Fleets, if they should
approach so near as they had done when Captain Ball commanded a Squadron
thither the end of last Summer. In Ireland, the main of the Forces of Vlster
under the Command of the Lord Iniskellin, Colonel O Rely, and Mac Mahon, and
Mac Guire, yielded, and put an end to that War, Ulster- forces in Ireland
submit.
May 18, upon the old Articles for Transportation.

On the 4 of May, Trump with 80 Men of War set sail again from the Texel, to
meet a Fleet of 200 sail from Nants and other parts in France coming round
about by Ireland, and to secure other ships from the Eastland laden with
Cordage and other Ship-materials and necessaries; which the Nants Fleet being
ready for him, he nimbly effected, missing of our English Navy, who having
Rendezvouzed at Humber-mouth, sailed to Aberdeen, and so to Shetland, and
thence passed over to the Danish Shore, where they had intelligence that Trump
had dispatched his errand by that lucky meeting of his Nants Fleet, and had
returned for Holland: whereupon they presently steered for England; but before
their arrival in any Port, Van Trump having quitted his Merchantmen, and
delivered them sat, to the great rejoicing of the Dutch, came instantly into
the Downs, Trump in the Downs, having given the English a go-by.
with a resolution to fire and seize all such Ships as were before Dover, there
being no Guard nor protection near them; and on the 26 of May, missing of his
aim, rantingly battered Dover with his whole Fleet all that day, to the
Alarming of all the Coast adjacent; while the English Fleet, having visited the
Coast of Holland, put them into no less consternation and wonder how we were
able to Equip and Man 100 sail of War-ships in so short a time, and in such a
distracted condition of State. Next day Trump having laid his Scouts abroad to
get intelligence of the English Fleet, as also to intercept all Trade and ships
coming into the Downs and River, Anchored on the back of the Goodwyn; Generals
Monk and Dean being in Yarmouth-Road, and General Blake fitting himself to
join with them; for Trump stayed in his Station. On the second of June in the
Morning, the English Fleet discovered them, and about eleven or twelve a clock
Engaged them, and Fought till six at Night: in the b^ginning of the fight, and
the first Broadside, General Dean was shot almost off in the Middle by a
Cannon-Bullet, Engaged by Genesis Monk and Dean, etc. June 2 Genesis Dean slain.
as he stood by General Monk, who without any disturbance bad his Servants and
Seamen to remove him, and continued the Service without further notice of the
accident. Of the Dutch side an Admiral was blown up, the Captain Cornelius Van
Velso, and Captain Bolter's ship and three more sunk; which made Trump sail for
the Dunkirk-Coast between, and some of his ships over the Flats, in hope to
strand the English upon the pursuit; and in case the great ships should with
more heed desist from the Chase, that the nimble and foremost Frigates being too
far Engaged, and that without succor from them, in those Shallows might fall
without recovering into his hands, by his turning upon them with his ablest and
lightest Vessels, of which he had store, and so escaped that night.

In this days fight, Rear-Admiral Lawson so Engaged with de Ruyter and two
other Flag-ships, and part of their Squadrons with his, that Trump was forced
to come in to his Relief, with other of his best ships, whilst the ordinary Men
of war were caught up and Boarded; there being six more reckoned taken and
sunk: in the night whereof, Trump by good Piloting made to the Coast aforesaid
over those Shallows; but the English found them again, and Engaged them about
eight in the Morning, (General Blake being now joined with them, with a
Squadron of 18 more Men of War) and continued till eleven or twelve, when the
Dutch began to fly for it, and Van Trump to fire at those ships that ran; but
they being not to be staid, run all into a huddle, which made them an easy
prey, by reason of their confusion; ninety Men of War being so mingled one with
another, that they could not come to do any Execution upon us, without greater
damage to themselves. This lucky pursuit was continued till night, Trump
defeated, June 2, 3.
and some fifteen more ships taken; and had day lasted, few of them had
escaped. Trump now steered S. and by E. with a fresh Eastward Gale, it having
been calm before; and General Monk E. N. E. to Zealand, and came to an Anchor
at seven Fathom water, and found the Dutch Fleet arrived at Blackenburgh, one
of those places of strength pawned to Queen Elizabeth for security of that
assistance in men and money she afforded those States. Van Trump laid the
misfortune of this Defeat upon the ignorance and unskilfulness of his Captains.
And thus ended this Dutch Bravado upon our Coast, and in the Downs, where they
had first attempted the trial of strength, and to wrest the Sovereignty of the
Seas; The Dutch hang out a white Flag, and send a Messenger to the English, in
order to a Peace.

A new Parliament called.


to the so breaking of their Stomachs, that a resolution for Peace and
Agreement was presently taken up, and a Vessel with a white Flag, and a
Messenger to prepare the way for two Ambassadors, was sent into England: so
uncertain and ridiculous is the greatest Humane confidence!

The Council of State now issued out Summons for the Parliament Men the
Officers had nominated and presented to Cromwell, being persons of Integrity and
Fidelity to the Commonwealth, as the project was, because there was no choice
could be made by the Country without apparent hazard to the good Cause so long
contested for, for that the disaffected would creep in; and therefore this
extraordinary Proceeding was to be Authorized by the safety of the people, the
Supreme Law. This was Sophistry in the Parliament: it was the highest reason
now with Oliver, though the most palpable and bold subversion of the English
Freedom that could be imagined; but Oliver had the Sword, and thought he
gratified the people another way in exchange, by freeing them from the
Taskmasters of the Parliament, than whom, with the Old Woman, they thought
they could not have worse, whoever came next.

And that the new Commonwealth and its friends might see that there was no good
to be done by a Parliament after the utmost experiment of it, and to prepare
the greater acceptableness of his Image of Government; (which had the Brass,
the Iron, and the Clay to its Composition, in its rise, maintenance and
perishment) he gave them a taste and sight of the gross and most absurd
destructive errors of this Purest Convention, men differenced from the rest by
the Character of Nathaniel, being without Guile; to whom he directed this Paper.

Forasmuch as upon the Dissolution of the late Parliament, The Summons.
it became necessary that the Peace should be provided for; and in order
thereunto, diverse persons fearing God, etc. and of approved Fidelity and
Integrity, and c. are by my self and the Council of Officers nominated to the
Trust, etc. and having good assurance of your Love, and courage for God, and
the Interest of his Cause and good people: I Oliver Cromwell, Captain General of
all the Forces raised, and to be raised within this Commonwealth, do require
and Summon You -- being one of the persons nominated, to appear in the Chamber
commonly called the Council Chamger in Whitehall in the City of Westminster, on
the 4 of July, there to take upon you the Trust, etc. to which ye are called,
and appointed a Member for the County of A. -- And these good men and true
resolved to come together and give their Verdict against the Public.

A good juncture now offered it self to the Scotch Nobility, and the Loyal
Party their adherents, to redeem themselves and Country from the slavery of
their new Master, a great deal more costly and absolute than their Kirk-Rulers,
as having no other Communion with this, New Scotch Troubles.
than in the perilous concerns of Person and Estate: The chief of these Nobles
were the Earls of Glencarne, Seaforth, and Athol; the Lairds Mac Cloud, Mac
Renalds; the Frazers; the Lord Kenmore, the Earl of Kinoule, though at present
a Prisoner in Edenburgh-Castle, from whence he, Colonel Montgomery, and
Lieutenant Colonel Peter Hay very nearly afterward escaped into this Party.
They had lately received a Commission from the King, (and in Parties appeared
up and down) in order to their raising new Levies, which they increased to some
competent numbers, expecting additional supplies from beyond Sea, and their
Friends in the Low-lands, and some English Auxiliaries; of all which, and the
Velitatory War made by them, hereafter in its place expect an Abstract and
Epitome. Nothing remarkable in Ireland but the raging of the Plague, which
followed the Sword, and accompanied the High Court of Justice; as if no
affliction could satisfy for the Barbarous Wickedness of that Nation; on whom
notwithstanding it fell not alone, but spread it self afterward into the
English Quarters, and carried away a great number of people. Colonel Sullyman
was now defeated in Kerry, and his Major Fitz Gerald taken Prisoner; and the
Transplantation now begun.

The English still lay upon the Coast of Holland, (having for a while refreshed
themselves at Soal-Bay) into whose Ports and Harbors, upon the pursuit as far
as the Texel, they had driven and scattered the Dutch Fleet; which had so
brought down the stomachs of the Hollander, that that Province having as before
sent away a Boat with a white Flag, with a Messenger for a Pasport and a
Safe Conduct for two Ambassadors; and having obtained it, sent away the Lords
Youngstall and Vande Perre, to follow two others newly gone before. These
arrived the 20 of June, and had Audience the 22, their Message being of such
importance: for every day their Merchant-ships were taken coming home, and
there was no stirring out for any, so that there was an absolute Cessation
there of Trade, The Dutch Trade at a stand.
no less than 30 ships of good lading having been taken by our Fleet riding up
and down about their Havens. But this expedited and the more hastily and
intently carried on their preparations for War, if Peace should not be
presently concluded; the major part of their Fleet being put into Zealand and
that Coast, was new Rigging there, and some new ships off the Stocks, and this
Van Trump supervised: another new Fleet was equipping at Amsterdam, and that De
Wit took the care and charge of: the Mariners Wages (though there was no other
Employment for them) were now raised: the Lords States themselves came down to
the several Ports, and saw the men imbarqued, to whom they gave Money in hand,
and took them by it, requesting of them now to do valiantly for their Country;
and telling them, that if they fought well this time, they should fight no
more: and for the better incitement, and to see every man do his duty, two of
the States went on board a nimble-Frigat, to be present at the Fight, now with
all speed resolved on; and in confidence of success, this Fleet was Victualled
for five Months, which time it should continue abroad, blocking up our Harbors
in like manner as we did theirs; for as yet in Foreign Courts and Countries
they would not confess we were too hard for them; and this bout would rectify
all, and adjust their Stories.

The last Dutch Engagement between Genesis Monk and Van Trump on the Coast of
Holland, July 29.
This happened in the end of July; it having been so ordered, that both the
Fleets under Van Trump from the Weilings in Zealand, and De Wit from the Texel,
should meet upon the Engagement: General Monk with the English Fleet lying as
it were in the midway. On the 29 of July, the Scouts a Head discovered this
Dutch Fleet, whereupon the General made after them; but they standing away for
De Wit, it was five a clock at night ere any of our Frigates got up to them,
when they appeared to be 90 sail of Men of War, and ten Fireships: about 7
that night, General Monk (aboard the Resolution) got up to them, with some 30
ships and Frigates in all, and charged through their whole Fleet; when it
beginning to grow duskish, the Masters advised the General not to stand to them
again that night for fear of the Fireships: but the noble General turning
himself with indignation toward them, commanded them in some disgraceful, but
more unproper terms, that they should To um again, for, said He, The very
Powder of the Guns of this Ship is able to blow away a Fire-ship from it; and
so they tackt about, and through the Dutch again: in which by a Ball from the
Enemy (both Fleets being close to one another) the Mizen-shrouds of the
Resolution were fired, but quickly put out again by the courageous Activity of
one Captain Joseph Tailor, then assisting and standing by the General. Nothing
of more remarque was done that night, save that the Garland with the Enemy
received much prejudice, being known and saluted by every ships Broadside,
though the Dutch had altered her Decks: and so the English stood to the
Southward, and Van Trump to the Northward that night, and joined with De Wit,
and withal got the Weather-gage, by reason his sailing Northwards was no way
suspected by our Fleet.

The next day there being much Windy and foul Weather, both Fleets could not
Engage, the Sea was so high, but found it a difficult work to get off of a
Lee-shore, which was so much the worse to the English, being on an Enemies
Coast; but a most gallant delightful sight it was to see the two Fleets so near
one another, plying their Sails, filled with as much Revenge and desire of
Engagement, as with those envious Gusts that kept them asunder. But next
morning being Sunday, the Weather proving fair, and little Wind, July 31, both
Fleets Engaged again in a most terrible Fight; the Dutch animated with the
equal if not the inclinable success of Friday, and the English loath to contest
so long for a resolved Victory, as if three days were always to be the
apportioned time of their labor in Conquest. It is impossible to give a
distinct account of this Battle, in Fire and Smoke, Board and Board, for eight
hours together incessant. The Garland was the first disabled, and the Dutch
Fireships notably managed their business: the Andrew, Victory, Triumph, and
Rainbow, the great ships (at whom the Dutch spite was greatest) being so
endangered, that out of the Triumph (which was fired by one of them) several of
the ships crew threw themselves into the Sea; but others of better spirits
(remaining behind) with great gallantry quenched the Fire, and gave a merry
occasion of a Civil Law or Admiralty-Controversie, Whether the Chests, Goods,
and Clothes (which those that stayed in the ship had got on) of those that
deserted it, and when the danger of the Flame was past got in again, should
belong to the present Possessor, who refused to d'off or re-deliver them to the
former owner, who was much troubled to see other men in his Apparel. The
Victory (in which was Captain Lane) was stoutly beset with a Vice Admiral and
two other Flemish War-ships, and so distressed, that another Dutch Vice Admiral
(in an East-India-ship of 60 Guns) coming up by her Quarter, and mistaking the
Condition as well as Resolution of that Captain, proffered him Quarter, and bid
him yield; which was answered with the thanks of a Broadside, that sunk the
Dutchman immediately by his side. No less gallant service did the
Speaker-Frigat, so well known to the Dutch by the name of the Prater; and truly
there was nothing but the ancient glory and right of the English to be
Superiors to that Nation, which differenced the valor of both; since had the
Dutch fought upon a juster Quarrel, Fortune might have been as equal. Besides,
the Death of their Admiral (the brave Van Trump) in the beginning of the Fight,
by the shot of a Musquet-bullet in his left Pap, Van Trump slain, and the Dutch
defeated, July 31.
mainly contributed to their Defeat: His Flag, the Original of the War, was
stricken with a shot; and whether they would not, (for a sign to their Fleet
to revenge his Death) or could not make it stand, there was no such Ensign the
greatest part of the Fight; which having continued from seven in the morning
till one or two in the afternoon, the Dutch at last gave out and fled toward
the Texel, having but one Flag standing among them, the English Frigates
pursuing them; the smalness of some whereof made an Admiral-ship turn the Helm,
and stand to them and Engage; but just upon his Boarding of one of them, the
biggest Frigates came in and took the Dutchman, whose Commanders with Lights in
their Poops (for day was so far spent in the Chase) recovered the Texel; and
the English not daring to venture too far upon that Coast, rode some ^ix
Leagues that night over against it, having lost two ships, the Oak, who
perished by fire, thrusting her self between, to preserve the Rainbow from a
Fire-ship; and the Hunter-frigat, an English Fire-ship, who attended the orders
of the Rear-Admiral Lawson, whose behavior this day, also of Vice Admiral Pen,
was very noble and Renowned: most of the Fleet were maimed in their Rigging,
Shrouds, and Masts; especially the Merchantmen, (whose Captains having
withdrawn themselves formerly from the brunt of the Engagement, to save their
Owners, were now transferred to one another Commands, and sought here
stoutly,) especially the May-flower was terribly battered, and hardly able to
keep above Water: but the greatest loss was of Commanders, whose Names and
their respective Ships out of which they were killed and wounded, were as
follows.

The Dutch lost, and had Burnt and Sunk 26 Men of War; 30 were first reckoned,
but two of that number got into the Elbe much torn, and two into Zealand; the
particulars of whose Captains taken Prisoners were as follows; the rest were
lost beyond our research, for the Dutch would never publish them.

English Captains Slain.
Andrew, Captain Thomas Graves, Golden Cock, Capt. Edmund Chapman. William,
Capt. John Tailor. May-flower-Merchant, Capt. William Newman. Prosperous, Capt.
Crisp. Phoenix, Capt. Owen Cox, that took her from the Duth before. And 500
Common Soldiers Slain.
English Captains Wounded.
Triumph, Captain Peacock, Laurel, Capt. John Stokes. Dragon, Capt. John
Seaman. Portland, Capt. William Rou^* Assurance, Capt. P. Holland. Tulip, Capt.
Joseph Cubit. And 800 Common Soldiers Wounded.
Dutch Captains taken Prisoners, the Slain unknown.
Cornelius Evertson, Vice Admiral of Zealand, and Captain of the Zealand-Lyon,
28 Guns, and 130 men, Sunk. Glause Johnson Zanger, Captain of the Westcappall,
26 Guns, and 104 Men, Sunk. Andrew Fomeen, Captain of the Concord of
Zirick-Zee, 22 Guns, 100 Men, Burnt. Gerbion Scotter, Captain of the Golden
Dolphin, 30 Guns, 110 Men, Sunk. John de Hayes, Commander of the Garland, a
ship formerly taken from us by the Dutch, 44 Guns, 180 Men, Burnt. It is
suspected there were more Captains Prisoners, but they were not discovered. At
least 4500 Dutch slain and wounded; and it was certain, of 120 Sail, there
returned but 90 into the Texel.
To honor and recompense the desert of the Generals, Gold Chains and Meddals
ordered by the Parl. to be given to the chief Commanders and Officers.
and the Vice Admiral, and Rear-Admiral, and their Flag-Officers, the
Parliament ordered them respectively Gold-Chains, and to all the Officers and
Captains Meddals of Gold. Provision and Maintenance was likewise ordered for
the Widows and Children of those that were slain; as also care taken for the
Wounded, the moiety of all Hospital-revenues applied to their particular Cure,
as likewise the Tenths of all Prizes formerly belonging to the Lord-Admiral;
and lastly, as an acknowledgment of this Victory, A Thanksgiving appointed.
a Thanksgiving on the 25 of August, managed by Owen and Cradock.

The Dutch had given their Reward before, having ordered 1000 l. besides the
ship and furniture, to those that should take the chief Admiral, other Admirals
600 l. their Flag-ships 400 l. and 100 l. to those that with a valiant and
courageous hand should take down the Admiral's Flag, and so proportionably; but
none of these Payments were ever claimed, for the attempt was found more
unfeasible. The Dutch got upon the Steeples at the Hague, and other high places
about Scheveling, and saw something of the Fight, which they fancied to their
advantage; but the perfecter fight at Amsterdam undid their belief:
notwithstanding the English presently leaving their Coast, heightened them to a
vapor, that it was an equal Combat; and they gave it out accordingly. General
Monk having staid 12 Leagues to the Westward of the Texel some three or four
days, sailed for Soal-Bay again, and met upon the English Coast with a terrible
Storm, to the endangering the Fleet, but especially such ships as were
shattered; and thence some while after sent away Vice Admiral Lawson to the
Coast of Holland, while De Wit was got ready, and to Sea and home again, with a
Fleet of 60 Sail of War, to fetch home 300 Merchantmen from the Sound, De Wit
conveys a great Fleet from the Sound.
from the East Indies and all parts of the World, (the Sound being the
appointed Rendezvous of them all) and brought them in safety home, to the no
little rejoicing and Triumph of the Dutch Merchants, and to the asswaging the
public discontent at their late defeat. The States had been in election of a
Lieutenant-Admiral in place of Van Trump, and at last agreed upon the Lord
Opdam, Lord Opdam made Lieutenant-Admiral in place of Van Trump, who was
Interred at Delf in great State.
one that had been a Colonel of Horse in their service, and of good Conduct and
personal worth, whom, in imitation of the English, they chose to this
Sea-employment. Trump's Funerals were ordered to be solemnized in the beginning
of September, when he was Interred at Delf in great State, becoming so great a
Captain, the honor and defense of his Country, in which he nobly fell. A
person of great affection to the Family and person of our King, and very much
an Englishman in all things but his Nativity. Of such an interest in this War,
that with him it begun, and with him expired, he being the soul that actuated
it throughout. In his glorious Urn we will deposite therefore this History and
Record thereof, and reassume the mention of the Dutch in more friendly and
amicable language: but it is very necessary to look first homewards, and
retrospect the elapsed sitting down of Oliver's Juncto at Westminster.

According to their Summons, on the fourth of July, Little Parliament met July
4.
the Members of approved Fidelity, etc. met at the Council Chamger in
White Hall, where Cromwell in a zealous Speech, much to the purpose of his
Declaration, and the occasion of the present meeting, stuffed with various
citations of Scripture (I am loath to nauseate the Reader with any more of his
Harangues at large) to his (but far from the) purpose; devolved the supreme
Trust, which they translated into more common English, adjourning themselves
after a short Consultation to Westminster, and giving themselves the Title and
Authority of the Parliament of England, voting Mr. Francis Rouse for their
Speaker; but with a Collateral Vote, Mr. Francis Rouse their Speaker.
that he should continue in the Chair no longer than for a Month. They were
persons for the most part of such mean and ignore extractions, that so far were
they from being taken notice of by the Shires each of whom but two or three
represented* that they were scarce known in the very Towns they were born, or
afterward inhabited, till the Excise, then Committees for Sequestration, and
the War in the respective Counties, made them infamously known. The rest were
of his Partisans in the Parliament and High Court of Justice; and for
credit-sake some two or three Fanatick-Noblemen, (excepted always the latent
honor of the Renowned Monk, Howard, and Montague) and some Knights, and
amongst them, for honesty sake, Sir A. Ashley Cooper; though for all those
Titles and Generosities, it was better known like it self by the Name of
Barebone's Parliament, Called Barebone 's Parliament, a Leather-sellers Name in
Fleetstreet, one of the said Convention.
whose Christian-Name was Praise God, a Leather-seller in Fleetstreet, a
Brownist, or such kind of Separatist from the Church of England, long before
the War, and now a Member in this Convention, into which these Evocati had
adopted Cromwell, Lambert, Harrison, Thomlinson, and Desborough; because
forsooth none of the Army would intrude; and generally none to be admitted, but
such of whom this House should be satisfied of their real Godliness; and this
by a preliminary Vote, July 5. These strangers to our Israel, but Proselytes of
the Good Cause, and Jewish in every other respect, since they obtained the Name
of a Parliament, are as well worth a show, as the other a Ballad: and these are
the Names of the Monster.

The Names of the Parliament men.
Berks.
Samuel Dunch. Vincent Goddard. Thomas Wood.
Bedford.
Nathaniel Tailor. Edward Cater.
Buckingham.
George Fleetwood. George Baldwin.
Cambridge.
John Sadler. Thomas French. Robert Castle. Samuel Warner.
Chester.
Robert Duckenfield. Henry Berkenhead.
Four Northern Counties.
Charles Howard. Robert Fenwick* Henry Dawson. Henry Ogle.
Cornwall.
Robert Bennet. Francis Langdon. Anthony Rous. John Bawden.
Derby.
Iervas Bennet. Nathaniel Barton.
Devon.
George Monk, one of the Generals at Sea. John Carew. Thomas Sanders.
Christopher Martin. James Erisey. Francis Rous. Richard Sweet.
Dorset.
William Sydenham. John Bingham.
Essex.
Ioachim Matthews. Henry Barrington. John Brewster. Christopher Earl. Dudly
Templer.
Gloucester.
John Crofts. William Neast. Robert Holmes.
Southampton.
Richard Norton. Richard Major. John Hildesly.
Hertford.
Henry Lawrence. William Reeve.
Hereford.
Wroth Rogers. John Herring.
Huntington.
Edward Montague. Stephen Pheasant.
Kent.
Lord Viscount Lisle. Thomas Blount. Wil^iam Kenrick. William Cullen. Andrew
Broughton.
Lancaster.
William West. John Sawrey. Robert Cunliff.
Leicester.
Henry Danvers. Edward Smith. John Prat.
Lincoln.
Sir William Brownlow. Richard Cust. Barnaby Bowtel. Humphrey Walcot. William
Thompson.
Middlesex.
Sir William Roberts. Augustine Wingfield. Arthur Squib.
Monmouth.
Philip Jones.
Northampton.
Sir Gilbert Pickering. Thomas Brook.
Norfolk.
Robert Iermy. Tobias Freere. Ralph Wolmer. Henry King. William Burton.
Nottingham.
John Oddingsels. Edward Clud.
Oxon.
Sir Charles Wolsley. William Draper. Dr. Jonathan Goddard.
Rutland.
Edward Horseman.
Salop.
William Bottrel. Thomas Baker.
Stafford.
George Bellot. John Chetwood.
Suffolk.
Jacob Caley. Francis Brewster. Robert Dunkon. John Clarke. Edward Plumstead.
Somerset.
Robert Blake, one of the Generals at Sea. John Pyne. Dennis Hollister. Henry
Henley.
Surrey.
Samuel Highland. Lawrence March.
Sussex.
Anthony Stapley. William Spence. Nathaniel Studeley.
Warwick.
John St. Nicholas. Richard Lucy.
Wilts.
Sir Anthony Ashly-Cooper. Nicholas Green. Thomas Air*
Worcester.
Richard Salwey. John James.
York.
George Lord Eure. Walter Strickland. Francis Lassels. John Anlaby. Thomas
Dickenson. Thomas St. Nicholas. Roger Coats. Edward Gill.
London.
Robert Titchborn. John Ireton. Samuel Moyer. John Langley. John Stone. Henry
Barton. Praise God Barebone.
Wales.
Bushy Mansel. James Philips. John Williams. Hugh Courtney. Richard Price. John
Brown.
Scotland.
Sir James Hope. Alexander Bredy. John Swinton. William Lockart. Alexander
Ieffries.
Ireland.
Sir Robert King. Col. John Hewson. Col. Henry Cromwell. Col. John Clark. Daniel
Hutchison. Vincent Gookyn.
Such an Assembly, or Trim Tram, was very unlikely to settle the Nation, who
though they expected all mischief imaginable from them, yet could not forbear
with the Sun in a Cloud to smile at their ridiculous unhappiness. Indeed it was
but a Cloud, for it soon vanished and disappeared at the storm of Oliver's
furious Ambition; and therefore there needs not much more to be said of it,
than Astrologers do of Comets and Eclipses, who reckon only their continuance,
which was from the 4 of July, to the 12 of December, in which these angry
products were visible.

First, an Act for Marriages by a Justice of Peace, Act for Marriages.
(having been in debate by the Long Parliament) the Banes to be published in
the Market three several days, and the words of that Sacred Ordinance only
inverted, and the fashion changed, with an Appendix concerning
Church-Registers, and a Proviso that no other Marriage should be valid and
Lawful: whereupon all civil people were forced to be twice joined, though but
once Married. Next after this Matrimonial Coupling, in a wilder humor they
fell upon a Consultation of Repudiating the Body of the Law, A new Body of the
Law to be made.
by divorcing it from the People, and a new Foundation to be laid, and Systems
of their own projections to be brought in the place of it; and these were to be
adequated to the measure and square of a Fifth Monarchy, and those Monstrous
absurdities. Then in order thereunto, an Act was hammering for abolishing of
Tithes, ejecting scandalous Ministers, and constituting Commissioners to go the
Circuit to enquire and visit the Parishes: and most of their Debates were spent
hereupon. And lastly, in preparation to Oliver's design, (who yet managed and
put them upon those enormous Whimseys, to the making them most odious, and all
Parliame^ts with them) though under pretense of grievance to many Godly people
especially, and the whole Nation in general; the non-procedure at Law without
subscribing the Engagement, was taken away; also all Fines upon Bills,
Declarations, and Original Writs, were taken off, and the Chancery very near a
total subversion, a Bill being ready to that purpose. Those were their devices
as to the Law, and the Regulation of Government; see the rest to the
maintenance of it* and the carrying on of the Affairs of the Commonwealth, as
their Secretaries t^^med it. First, an Act was framed out of an Ordinance of
the late preceding Council of State, for a Lottery of the Rebels Lands in
Ireland, in which one Methuselah Turner, a Linnen-draper in Cheapside, and one
Brandriffe a Cloth-drawer, were Named Commissioners, and had already sat in
Grocers-Hall, with such other most incompetent Judges of the affair: In this
Act, the Rebellion was declared to be at an end, An Act for ^^^^h Adventurers
and Allotments.
and that the several Adventurers and Soldiers for their Arrears should have
ten Counties set out and assigned for their satisfaction; and if that should
not satisfy, the County of Louth should be added to make it up; with many
other clauses of length and restriction: and this was passed as an Introduction
to the Grand Grievance of Public Faith-money, undertaken by those shrimps,
which was able to crush their House full of such as Hercules; but it was well
applied to cajole the People, (many of whom had been very forward in supplies
of Money to the Irish war) and the Soldiers there, that were to be made firm
to Cromwell's Interest, by such obligations of Lands and Estates. A new Council
of State was now of the same teeming, but of a mightier strain; Oliver, and his
Grand Officers and Partisans entirely constituting it, not a puny of those
Dwarfish Politicians being admitted into the number. Those Hogens of the
Council did all the business, transacted with Foreign States, kept the Wheels
of Government on going here and abroad, received Ambassadors, particularly the
Spanish, Dutch, and French Residents, and a new one from the Great Duke of
Florence, and other Princes* and put upon the Parliament all their Intrigues
and ill-looked necessities of Money, so that this Convention at first dash ran
the Tax up again to 120000 l. per mensem for six Months; as if Pluto kept Court
there again, and that like possessed men they could speak nothing else but that
and Excise, now continued, and an additional Act for sales of Fee-farm Rents,
Forrest-lands, and more Delinquents Estates, for the finishing of that whole
affair.

Whitlock Ambassador to Sweden.
The Lord Whitlock (between whom and the Lord Lisle the Embassy of Sweden was
in dispute for a while, till Cromwell had made sure of Whitlock) was now
recommended to the Parliament for their Approbation and Commission to proceed
in his Voyage with all have, to pursue those designs of Agreement which had
been laid by that Queens Ambassadors here; that Kingdom laboring with such
another Change, in some manner, as we did here: and accordingly he was
dispatched, and his Instructions (as all other things of design and
consequence) referred to the Council of State. He departed about the beginning
of November, in the Phoenix and Elizabeth Frigates, and arrived the 15 at
Go^tenburgh in that Kingdom, with a Retinue of 100 persons very gallant, with a
suitable state of Furniture; and traveled from thence in very ugly way, and
base Accommodation, (no Beds being to be had for Money) to Vpsal, an
University, where the Queen then resided, because of the Plague at Stockholme,
the chief City and Metropolis of that Kingdom. General Blake, Monk,
Desborough, and Pen, were commended likewise to be Generals at Sea for the next
year, (a suitable Change with that inconstant Element) and approved of. And
lastly, that they might in all things be like a Parliament, and alike odious to
all people; and that the Cavaliers might have recent cause to hate them, a High
Court of Justice was Enacted again, and Lisle made President: for Bradshaw, as
a great Commonwealths-man, and Enemy to a Single Person, was quite lain aside.
This is the sum of what these Sages and men of Fidelity did during their
Session, A Summary of what the Parliament did.
besides their Prayers and Preachments in the House, so that from the something
Honorable Style of a Convention* it raised not it self above the Reputation of
a Conventicle; and in effect, the Parliament was but a Sub-committee, that
truckled under the Council of State and Oliver for their occasions, and Feake's
(a great Fifth-Monarchy-Preacher) Congregation held at Blackfriars, (this H^y
of the Commonwealth being betwixt S^ylla and Charybdis) who cut out every days
work for the House; the very last knack of their Legislative-power being a Bill
formed in Paper, and ready drawn to the last Clause, (and would have presently
passed) for the perpetual meetings of Parliament one upon the Dissolution of
another, (the very Coloquintida of their Counsels to Oliver) and that the
people should be judged by Committees, and no Courts remain at Westminster, but
the Mosaical Law should take place; Magistracy and Ministry both being to be
abolished, that the Saints of the Earth might Rule in all things. -- But see
the Evil Spirit laid by their own artful Conjurer.

On the 12 of December, Barebone 's Parliament dissolved, Dec. 12.
(as it had been directed by the Council of State) the Parliament being sat,
some of the Members stood up, one after another, and made a motion for a
Dissolution thereof, for that it would not be for the good of the Nations to
continue it longer: this Court-Air almost Blasted the Men of Fidelity and
Committee-Blades, who had scarce warmed their Fingers ends in the Government,
and were newly settling themselves and their Friends in a thriving way, as they
had done in their Offices they had passed before; and thereupon they began one
after another to make Perorations of the Cause of God and the Godly people
committed to their charge: which they could not tell how to answer to Him, if
so easily they should give it up, and leave the Commonwealth in such a
distraction as would inevitably ensue: and Major General- Harrison, Squib 's,
and Harrison 's Speeches upon this occasion in the House.
and Arthur Squib (the great Sequestrator of Haberdashers Hall) were very
copiously zealous in defense of their Authority: but the Military or
Court-party being the Major part, not thinking them worthy of a dispute or
longer Debate, the Speaker being of their side, rose, and left the House, and
them sitting in it, where to Prayers they went, and then resolved to continue
^itting.

In the mean time Rous the Speaker (with the Mace before him and his followers)
came to White Hall, and there resigned the Instrument he gave them, The Speaker
resignes the Instrument.
by which they were constituted a Parliament; and gave him likewise to
understand and how they had left their Fellows. Their Surrender was kindly
received by Oliver, and they thanked for the pains they had taken in the
service of the Commonwealth; however he and they had missed of their intentions
of the good should thereby have come to the Commonwealth, which a strange
spirit, and perverse principle in some of the Members had solely hindered. And
as to them yet sitting in the Parliament House, he dispatched away
Lieutenant Colonel White, a confident of his, to dislodge them; who accordingly
with a guard of Red-coats came thither, and entering the House, Commanded them
in the Name of the General to depart, for that the Parliament was Dissolved:
who replying to the contrary, and telling him they were upon Business, and
ought not to be thus disturbed; he asked, What Business? they answered, We are
seeking of God. P^gh, says he, is that all? that is to no purpose; for God has
not been within these Walls these twelve years. And so fairly compelled them
out, muttering with the same wrath, and sorrowful look-backs, as those that had
sat 30 times the same term, and could almost have pleaded prescription.

Thus was the Power emptied from one Vessel to another, as the Scribes and
Chaplains of the Grandees phrased it; and could find settlement, till Oliver
was called to it by his Council of Officers, to supply this Gap in Government.
And now a Single Person with a Council is the only expedient for the safety of
the People, for that there is no Trust nor Truth in Parliaments, as their often
aberrations and failures had sufficiently declared: and it was dis^cursed by
the Abettors of this Change, that 'twas not Monarchy which was quarrelled at,
but the corruptions and abuses of it, in its unlimited, unbounded Prerogative;
all which would be avoided, by the circumscription of it in a Protector, by his
Council, and a new Instrument of Government, and the Supreme power of a
Trie^nial Parliament, in whom during their Session the Sovereign Authority
should reside.

So they said, and so they did: for after four days time (in which Feak and his
Freaking Partisans were almost run from their Wits in rage and madness) Cromwell
was Appointed and Declared for Protector of this Infant-Commonwealth, (and it
was a tedious interval to him:) the Chancery-Court at Westminster Hall being
prepared for the Ceremony of the Instalment in this manner, after the usual
seeking of God by the Officers of the Army.

The Protector Install's, Dec. 16.
The Protector about one of the clock in the afternoon came from White hall to
Westminster to the Chancery-Court, attended by the Lords Commissioners of the
Great Seal of England, Barons of the Exch^quer, and Judges in their Robes;
after them, the Council of the Commonwealth, and the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Recorder of the City of London, in their Scarlet Gowns: then came the Protector
attended with many of the chief Officers of the Army. A Chair of State being
set in the said Court of Chancery, the Protector stood on the left hand thereof
uncovered, till a large Writing in Parchment (in the manner of an Oath) was
read; there being the power with which the Protector was Invested, and how the
Protector is to Govern the three Nations: which the Protector accepted of, and
subscribed in the face of the Court, and immediately hereupon sat down covered
in the Chair. The Lords Commissioners then delivered up the Great Seal of
England to the Protector, and the Lord Mayor his Sword and Cap of Maintenance;
all which the Protector returned immediately to them again. The Court then
rose, and the Protector was attended back as aforesaid, to the Banqueting House
in White Hall, the Lord Mayor himself uncovered, carrying the Sword before the
Protector all the way: and coming into the Banqueting House, an Exhortation was
made by Mr. Lockyer; after which, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Judges departed.

The Instrument or Module framed to be the Foundation of this present
Government, was chiefly made up of these following Heads.

The heads of the Module of Government.
1. The Protector should call a Parliament every three years. 2. That the first
should Assemble on the third of September, 1654. 3. That he would not Dissolve
the Parliament till it had sat five Months. 4. That such Bills as they offered
to him, he not Passing them in twenty days, should Pass without him. 5. That he
should have a select Council, not exceeding one and twenty, nor under thirteen.
6. That immediately after his Death, the Council should choose another Protector
before they rose. 7. That no Protector after him should be General of the Army.
8. That the Protector should have power to make Peace or War. 9. That in the
Intervals of Parliament, he and his Council might make Laws that should be
binding to the Subjects, etc. With some other popular Lurdes and common
incidencies of Government, not worth the recital, which were confirmed and
strenuously validated by this his Oath.

The Protector's Oath.
I Promise in the presence of God, not to violate or infringe the matters and
things contained in the Instrument; but to observe, and cause the same to be
observed; and in all things to the best of my understanding, govern the Nations
according to the Laws, Statutes, and Customs; to seek their Peace, and cause
Justice and Law to be equally administered.

The Feat needed no more security, as good altogether as its Authority, in this
fo^lowing Proclamation, which was published throughout England, Scotland, and
Ireland, in these words.

Whereas the late Parliament Dissolved themselves, The Proclamation of the
Protector.
and resigning their Powers Authorities, the Government of the Commonwealth of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, in a Lord Protector, and successive Triennial
Parliaments, is now established. And whereas Oliver Cromwell, Captain General of
all the Forces of this Commonwealth is declared Lord Protector of the said
Nations, and has accepted thereof: We have therefore thought it necessary (as
we hereby do) to make publication of the Premises, and strictly to charge and
command all and every person or persons, of what quality and condition soever,
in any of the said three Nations, to take notice hereof, and to conform and
submit themselves to the Government so established. And all Sheriffs, Mayors,
Bailiffs, etc. are required to publish this Proclamation; to the end none may
have cause to pretend Ignorance in this behalf.

Great shooting off Guns at night, and Vollies of acclamations, were given at
the close of this mock-solemnity, by Cromwell's Janissaries, while the Royalists
were more joyfully disposed at the hopes of the King's Affairs; but no body of
any account giving the Usurper a good word or miskiditchee with his Greatness,
save what was uttered in Fur by the Lord Mayor and the Accomplices in this Fact,
who tickled his Ears with the Echo of the Proclamation done with the usual
Formalities. These Triumphs so disgusted Harrison, Major-Gen. Harrison, and
other Colonels disgust the Usurper.
(as also Colonel Rich) that he withdrew himself from the Gang, and turned
public Preacher or Railer against his Comrade Oliver, who was glad to be rid
of such a busy and impertinent Assistant in the moduling of Government. So
Cromwell had now two Commonwealth contra-divided Factions against him, the old
and the new Parliaments; and therefore it nearly concerned him to make much of
the Anabaptist and Sectary, The Anabaptists and Sectaries favored by the
Protector.
which now succeeded Independency as the Religion maintained and favored above
all other; and Kiffin a great Leader and Teacher was now in great request at
the Court at White Hall, and contrarily Sir Henry Vane jun. was looked on
a-skue, as also Sir Ar. Hazilrig, and Bradshaw, and Scot. And so the
Babel-builders were confounded one amongst another.

The Council appointed by Officers, or taken rather by himself, by whose advice
he was to govern, were 14 at first.

Lord Lambert. Lord Viscount Lisle. General Desbrow. Sir Gilbert Pickering.
Major General Skippon. Sir Anthony Ashly-Cooper. Walter Strickland, Esquire.
Sir Charles Wolsley. His Council.
Colonel Philip Jones. Francis Rous, Esquire. Richard Major, Esquire. John
Lawrence, Esquire. Colonel Edward Montague. Colonel William Sydenham.
By these another Proclamation came out, enabling all Officers, Sheriffs, and
Justices of the Peace to continue in their respective places: The Dutch
Ambassadors have Audience.
and Audience and Conference was given to the Dutch Ambassadors, who besides
their last loss by Fight, had suffered very greatly by the same storm that
endangered our Fleet, as De Wit was returning from the Sound; which made them
ply hard for a Cessation, in order to a speedy Peace: And General Monk was now
riding at St. Hellens-point, by the Isle of Wight, with a considerable Fleet:
Col. Lilburn chief Commander in Scotland.
Colonel Lilburn was likewise ordered to Command in chief the Forces of
Scotland, who had defeated the Earl of Kinoule and his party; and Sir Arthur
Forbes (another Chieftain of the Royal party) was routed near Dumfrieze, He
defeats the Royalists.
and himself desperately wounded, while the main Army Quartered in Murrey-land,
and thence to Elgin; Colonel Morgan being sent to attend their motion.

The Noble Wogan, Col. Wogan slain.
who from France had by the way of Durham and Barwick, and through a Fair in
open day, marched into Scotland, and had joined with those Scotch Royalists,
and done excellent service in beating up of Quarters, and attempting them in
all their marches and advances, came now at last to his End; Providence having
reserved this honorable Destiny for him, that he alone of all the English of
Note, should fall in his Majesty's last Quarrel in the Kingdom of Scotland, the
manner thus. Being abroad with his party of some 60 English, he met with
Captain Elsenore's Lieutenant, ranging upon the same adventure, with some more
than his number, near Drummond and Weems, and fell upon him; and after a very
sharp and stout Conflict (for they were Armed with Back and Breast, and were
Veteran^ Blades, and never fled before) routed them, but was Wounded himself
with a Tuck, whereof not long after he died, and was buried in great State, and
much lamentation, with a Military Funeral in the Church of Kenmore; and Captain
Ker a valiant Scot was killed with him: the said Lieutenant was killed also
upon the place, with 30 of his men, to accompany the fate of this Noble person;
so that he fell not unrevenged. Great indignation there was against Robinson
the Surgeon that Dressed him, for his neglect of him, the Earl of Athol having
threatened to kill him; so dearly was this Hero beloved by that Nation, who
constantly envied the worth and gallantry of ours. And here we must leave him
till some grateful Learned Muse shall sing the Honorable Achievements, and
most laudable high actions of this famous and renowned Captain.

Mortogh O Brian, the only remaining General of the remnant of Irish in Arms,
had lately fallen into the Quarters, and defeated several parties, and took
some small places; but upon the approach of a Body of English, retreated again
to his Fastnesses, where he better bethought himself of his sculking condition;
and therefore sent and obtained the usual Articles of Transportation; Mortogh O
Brian submits, March.
there being reckoned now above 27000 men that had departed that Kingdom within
a year: and the transplantation of most of the rest into Connaught, (a Province
environed on one side by the Sea, and locked up by Rivers and Garrisons on the
other, for the security of the Peace, and enjoyment of English Lands and
Estates in other Counties) had so dispeopled that Kingdom, that the
Commissioners there, and their Commander Fleetwood, sent over Letters, desiring
some Colonies of English to be sent over to them; very good Conditions being
offered such as would Transport themselves: The chief Towns of Limerick,
Galloway, and Waterford, to enjoy the like Privileges with Bristol, etc. and
Cromwell failed not to confirm Mannours and Hereditaments upon his Confiding
Creatures there, who were very industrious to procure Tenants and Inhabitants
to make Rent for them, with the same Expedition as he himself would here have
sold the Forrest-lands, now ready for a Purchase.

The King was yet at Paris, having lately received a considerable sum of Money
from Germany, where the Lord of Rochester continued at the Diet, and promises
from the Emperor of his appearing in his behalf, and of Engaging the other
Princes with him, upon his declaring for his Interest at the same Diet. The
French King was yet very uncertain how to carry himself in that Affair, it
being yet doubtful whether the Spaniard or he should first be Leagued to
Cromwell; and some suspicion there was of his Rupture with him first, as lying
most opportune for his Arms, and most aimed at, because of his Relation to the
King; and therefore underhand he gave the King assurance of his inviolable
respects to him, and labored by all means to stave off the Dutch from an
Agreement, offering them very largely: but by the sagacious policy of Cardinal
Mazarine, Cromwell was inclined to Friendship with the French; and the King
being sensible whereto that would tend, Cromwell inclined to Friendship with the
French.
resolved to depart.

There was notwithstanding a kind of Pyratical War excercised by the French,
and some English and Irish, upon the Western Trade, by some 15 sail of little
Men of War, The Frigates at Breast rove at Sea.
who harbored on the Coast of Britany, in Breast, and thereabouts, and did very
much mischief; the chief and Admiral of whom, was one Captain Beach, in the
Royal James, of 38 Guns, whom at last the Constant Warwick met with. (other
Friga^s plying up and down to free the Channel) and after a long fight forced
to yield. Beach coming aboard demanded his Articles of being set ashore in
France. Captain Potter denied any such; and if he did not like the Terms he had
given, he bid him go abord his own ship again with his men, and right for
better: which Beach seeing the bravery of the man, refused, and was brought
Prisoner to Plymouth, and so that Nest was broken.

Cromwell now supplied the Benches of the Courts at Westminster with the ablest
of the Lawyers, Sergeants at Law made.
whom he had invited to the public service: and Mr. Maynard, Twisden,
Nudigate, Hugh Windham, were made Sergeants, and Mr. Hales one of the Justices
of the Common Pleas, where Saint John yet sat, and of the Cabinet to this
Protector besides; having pre^erred his Man Thurloe (his Secretary at the
Hague) to be his Secretary of State; the Candle or Light of that Dark-Lanthorn,
which Saint John was said to be in these mysterious times to Cromwell, in all
his attempts and designs of consequence and moment. Colonel Mackworth the
Governor of Shrewsbury was called now to the Council, and to partake of the
Cabal of the Usurpation, as a person of fit Interest and principles to
strengthen it: And the Dutch Peace now concluded on by their Ambassadors, and
the Commissioners of the said Council for the Protector, between whom this
private Article was agreed, That the Prince of Aurange should never be restored
to the Dignities, Offices, and Charge his Ancestors held and enjoyed: and this
was urged, for the better Conservation of the peace, which would in his
restitution be endangered, because of his Relation to the King. This was ill
resented by the other six Provinces; but Holland, whose Interest was to have a
Peace, and who paid more than half of the public charge, stood to it,
alleging there could no Peace be made without it: The rest of the Articles,
save the restoring of the Ships and Goods detained by the King of Denmark, or
140000 l. in lieu of them, and taking that King into this Treaty, according as
the Hollander had engaged to the Dane, and paying the damages of the War, and
giving reparation for all private injuries, ( Amboyna-business being an express
Article of it self, and the Massacrers to be punished if living) were usual and
of course; save also that the Right of the Flag was acknowledged and Articled
to be given to the English in all Rencounters; and Mr. Thompson, Mr. Winslow,
and Mr. Russel, and others of this side, were appointed Arbitrators of the said
differences, and about the ships kept by the Dane.

Crom^el was the willinger to conclude this Peace, by reason of his new
settlement in the Throne; and the Dutch Friendship was very necessary for his
establishment; besides, the Money was very welcome: both of them added
reputation to him, though the Wiser sort knew and discoursed that he might have
brought the Dutch to any thing. The Dutch Peace.
The Peace, though now concluded, was not ratified and proclaimed till April,
after the arrival of the Ambassadors Newport and Youngstal, in March, toward
the end of this year, when it was done with great Solemnity; especially the
Dutch here were very magnificent in Treatments, and Fireworks set up in the
nature of Beacons in the Thames near their House.

The Protector Dined in great State upon an Invitation from the Lord Mayor,
etc. at Grocers-Hall, the eighth of February, being Ash Wednesday, a very
unsuitable day for any Festival but his entertainment, who inverted all things,
the streets being railed from Temple Bar thither, the Liveries in their Gowns
in their Gradual standings there: he was met at the said Gate by Alderman Viner
the Lord Mayor, who delivered him the Sword there, and having received it from
him back again, bore it on Horseback before him all the way; through which the
^ame silence was kept, as if a Funeral had been en passant: and no doubt, it
was that muteness which Tacitus mentioned in Tiberius, quale magn^ Ire vel
magni Metus est silentium; no apprecations, or so much as a How do ye, being
given during the whole Cavalcade. The Protector Dines at Grocers-hall, and
Knights Alderman Viner, Feb. 8*
After Dinner, he was served with a Banquet, in the conclusion whereof he
Knighted Alderman Viner, and would have done the same to the Recorder Steel,
for his learned Speech of Government, calculated and measured for him; but he
for some reasons avoided it; the Lord Mayor was forced to carry it home, and
anger his Wife with it, who had real honor both in her Name and Nature. Oliver
at his return had the second course of a Brick-bat, A Brick-bat flung at the
Protectors Coach.
from the top of a House in the Strand by St. Clements, which light upon his
Coach, and almost spoiled his digestion with the daringness of the Affront.
Search was made, but in vain; the person could not be found, and Vengeance was
not yet from Heaven to rain upon him.

General Middleton now landed at Vney-Ferry in the Highlands with two Vessels
from Holland, with the Lord Napier, Sir George Monro, Major General Dalyel,
Colonel Lod^wick Drummond, and some 200 more, in March, with some Arms, with a
Commission to Command in chief all his Majesty's Forces in that Kingdom, who
under the Command of the Earls of Glencarn, Athol, Seaforth, and Kenmore, being
followed and attended by Colonel Morgan, had marched up and down from Eglin
into Ross, and had lately been met withal at Cromar, where they lost after a
short dispute some 140 killed and taken; and presently the Garrison of
Kildrumny the Lord of Athol's house rendered to Morgan, and Colonel Cotterel
was sent to follow the Enemy, whose purpose was to protract the War by running
from place to place, and weary the English out with uncouth and weary marches,
till Middleton came, whose additional strength signifying little, (besides the
Kings Authority in so eminent a person and Office now amongst them) and General
Monk being sent from London to command in chief there for Oliver, Genesis Monk
sent by the Protector to Scotland, to command in chief*
their condition was little better than before; Colonel Brayn being likewise
ordered into the Highlands with 2000 Foot by Sea from Ireland, to surround them
in on all sides, and hem them in to an Engagement.

A Plot.
At home (prevention being Oliver's best State-physick) a Plot was started in
February, and a great many committed to the Tower; the chief whereof were
Colonel Sir Gilbert Gerrard, Col. Gerrard, etc. seized, Feb.
Colonel John Gerrard his Brother, one Jones, and Tudor an Apothecary; and
afterward Somerset Fox, young Mr. Charles Gerrard another Brother; and lastly,
Mr. John and William Ashburnham, Mr. Vowel a Schoolmaster at Islington; the
Earl of Oxford, Mr. Philip Porter, Mr. Finch, Mr. Wiseman, Mr. Bailey, and Sir
Richard Willis, who to keep himself unsuspected of Intelligence, now and ever
after, was sure to make one of the number of those in Custody. The Plot was
said to be, by him that best understood it, to be an Assassinate upon Oliver's
person, though most rationally refuted by those who were tried about it. Tuder
attending his Examination at White Hall, pretending to ease himself, escaped
down the House of Office, and got away; but was afterward retaken in Norfolk
and re-committed, but never Arraigned. The rest of them were kept in custody,
till a High Court of Justice was erected of the old stamp to try them. This was
one of the first acts of Cromwell's Tyranny, with which he exercised the Royal
party throughout his Domination; and most necessary to his security, as a main
principle of Government, according to the policy of such wretched Times.

Cromwell sends his Son Henry into Ireland.
The Protector now sent his Son Henry Cromwell into Ireland, to show himself
there in State against his approaching Viceroy-ship there; whence the Lord
Broghil, and Colonel Rich. Coot were sent with Addresses to him from that
Kingdom, the like about the same time from Coventry, being a most zealous
Complement. General Monk was likewise sent as aforesaid into Scotland; so that
he had made sure of the three Nations: and that no Enemy of his might remain in
any place of Trust, Cromwell ensures himself.
Command, or Judicature, the Chancellorship of the Duchy of Lancashire was
taken from Bradshaw, and by Ordinance transferred to Thomas Fell, and the Seal
likewise given him: yet Richard Bradshaw was graced with the Title of Oliver's
Resident at Hamburgh, as he was before, because there were no Candidates for
the place. The Lord Ambassador Whitlock likewise owned Him to the Queen of
Sweden, Whitlock Ambassador to Sweden owns the Protector.
with the Title of His most Serene Highness my Master; having staid there all
that Winter to conclude that Treaty, which depended upon the Dutch here, and
was made up after, for the Swede would be governed solely by that; the Agent or
Ambassador of the Country of Switzerland, Mine Here Stockhart, to whom the
Umpirage between the Dutch and the English was committed, took leave of his
said Highness, and departed by the way of Holland, where he proffered his
Superiors best endeavor between them both. Monsieur Bordeaux appeared in
March, Monsieur Bordeaux Ambassador in Ordinary to the Protector.
in the quality of an Ambassador in Ordinary to the Protector, and Sir Anthony
Ashly Cooper, Colonel Sydenham, and Mr. Strickland, were appointed
Commissioners to confer with him. In such a fair way was Cromwell already of
fixing his Sovereignty, and being accepted for a Prince abroad and at home; but
as the French insinuated into his Friendship, the Spaniard abated in it, and
Mazarine was the only Privado and confident Friend. An Ordinance passed for
continuance of the Imposition on Sea-coal for the use of the Navy.

The year ends with another Ordinance for the trial and approbation of
Ministers, wherein Philip Nigh, Commissioners, Nigh, etc. for approbation of
Ministers, March.
Goodwyn, Hugh Peter's, Mr. Manton and others, were named Commissioners. The
Question these men put to the Examinants, was not of abilities or Learning, but
Grace in their Hearts; and that with so bold and saucy inquisition, that some
men's Spirits trembled at their interrogatories; they phrasing it so, as if (as
was said of the Council of Trent) they had the Holy Ghost in a Cloak-bag, or
were rather Simon Magus his own Disciples: and certainly there were never such
Simoniacks in the World; not a Living of value, but what a Friend or the best
Purchaser was admitted into, to which Humane Learning (even where a former
Right was) was a good and sufficient Bar; no less to the Ruin than the Scandal
of the Church of England, and the Protestant Religion and professors thereof:
several ignorant bold Laics being inducted into the best Spiritualities, as
best consisted with Oliver's Interest, which depended upon the Sectaries, and
their hideous divisions in Religion.

Anno Dom. 1654.
HAving thus described the Foundation of this Stratocracy or Army-power, we
shall not be obliged to any tedious survey of the superstructure, which was
only for show, and of little duration, supported with temporary shifting Props
in every emergency; for this great one rather inhabited a Labyrinth, than a
Court; which showed much variety of Art, but like a House of Cards was ready to
be whelmed over his Head with every gust of adverse Fortune: a cross Restive
Government he had of it, and was never able to keep it in the right Road, and
true way of policy. And so we proceed in a brief account of State-Occurrences.

The 6 of April came forth an Ordinance settling Commissioners for Probation of
Wills, and Administrations, etc. by want of which power, there having been no
settled Judge of the Prerogative-Court, (whose Name abolished the thing) very
great and many inconveniences had happened to the Nation. Another Ordinance
prohibited Cock-matches, Cock-matches, and Horse-races prohibited, and all such
concourses of people.
and Horse-races, and all such confluxes or meetings of people: for a Plot was
now a hatching at White Hall, and this was the first overt-signe of it. Next,
the Commission of the Great Seal was altered, and Whitlock, Lisle, and Sir
Thomas Widdrington were made Commissioners. A Prohibition by another Ordinance
to the Committee at Salters Hall concerning Prisoners, The Commission of the
Great Seal altered.
which were selling of Estates, though never so barred by Law, to satisfy the
Creditors; which would have made a quick confusion of Propriety: Hannah Trapnel
a Quaking Prophetess secured.
And the Dutch Peace (the charge of the War being now paid by that State,
according to private agreement of the sum) was fully concluded, and in April
Proclaimed. A Quaking Prophetess, named Hannah Trapnel, a forerunner of James
Naylor, now appeared, who reported her Visions and Raptures, and was attended
by several of the Grandees of the male-contented party, as Carew and others:
the most of her delusions she acted in the Counties of Devonshire and Cornwall,
till she was with some of her Partisans secured in Prison.

The Scotch Affairs were reputed finished, as to any War, though the Bustle yet
so held and increased in the Highlands, that the spoils of the Conquest were
now set out, and made accomptable to the Victor. The Lords Estates and
Hereditaments of the Scotch Nobility and Gentry who Invaded England under Duke
Hamilton, and came in with the King to Worcester, and were yet in Arms, Scotch
Estates sold.
were ordered to be sold; and to that purpose were invested in the Trust of Sir
William Hope, Lockhart, Sir Richard Saltonstall, Lieutenant Colonel Wilks, and
others, and were actually seized into their hands; and the rest of them were
Fined in several sums of Money, to be paid within six Months; some 2000 l. some
5000 l. some few 10000 l. but none under 1000 l. amounting to a greater mass of
silver than Scotland was worth in ready Cash* so that those who were compelled
to obey, (though many complemental and humble applications and addresses (as is
customary to that Nation) were made for mitigation) were forced to take up
Money at unreasonable Interest; which rose at last by the like occasions to 30
in the hundred. An Ordinance passed with this, for uniting of Scotland into one
Commonwealth with England, (it seems the Act of Parliament to the same purpose
was not sufficient) and the Arms thereof ordered to be quartered, as were the
Irish, with our Cross and Harp; and Oliver's Lion Sal^ant was placed in the
middle, which is as good Herauldry as this Escutcheon deserves: That Kingdom by
virtue thereof to be charged no otherwise in Assessments and Tax, than
proportionably to England, and to pay no greater Excise, etc. An Ordinance
likewise for mending and repairing Highways and Bridges which the War had
spoiled, and were yet every where unrepaired: a very necessary and good work
for the benefit of the Nation; no Wagon being suffered thereafter to travel
with above five Horses, nor six Oxen and one Horse; and care was taken likewise
about the shodding of the Wheels. General Monk arrives in Scotland, Genesis Monk
proclaims Oliver at Edinburgh.

Arguile sides with the English.


and Proclaims Oliver in great state at Edinburgh; and Arguile plainly and
openly sides with the English, and foments divisions among the Scots; his Son
the Lord Lorn departing in a discontent and quarrel from the Earl of Glencarn,
and returning to the old Fox his Father. The French King Crowned at Rheims,
having been declared Major, and our Sovereign invited to the Solemnity, while
the Intrigues of Mazarine were driving a conclusion of peace with Cromwell.

The Design now appeared, which Oliver had hatched for some while, and had
labored by his treacherous Agents to mature to something: therefore first of
all, a general search is made throughout London for Cavaliers; and thereupon
Colonel John Gerrard, as before, Mr. Vowel, and Somerset Fox, were brought
before the High Court of Justice, A High Court of Justice.
Proclaimed the 13* and sitting the 31 of June: in which interval they had
prepared their business, and provided Witnesses, and drew up the Charge. After
twice or thrice Conventing of the aforesaid Gentlemen, an Accusation was
brought of their intention to assassinate the Protector, with one Major Henshaw
and others fled; to the proof whereof, they produced young Mr. Charles Gerrard
against his Brother, as also one Wiseman, and one Mr. Hudson a blind Minister
(whose Brother was that eminent person who accompanied and guarded the late
King in his flight from Oxford) that had been cherished by Mr. Vowel, against
him; who yet retracted from his Examination, and could not be brought by the
threats of the Court to make it good, and yet they made it valid: Somerset Fox
(as he was instructed before) by promise of Life confessing the Guilt, (thereby
involving the other two innocent Gentlemen) and craving mercy. It availed not
them to deny this Charge, though never so much reason and strength of argument
on their side: Lisle the President summing up the prejudiced suffrages of the
Court, Lisle President thereof.
gave Sentence of Hanging, which was Executed July the 10, on Mr. Vowel at
Charing Cross, where with a Roman Spirit, tempered with Christian Patience, he
suffered his Martyrdom, off from a Stool ^etcht from the Guard, the adjacent
Neighbors refusing to lend any thing to his Death, the Executioner having his
Ladder not in readiness. Col. Gerrard and Vowel Executed, July 10.
Colonel Gerrard was Beheaded on Tower Hill, who expressly denied the intention
of the Fact; and from this reason, because he thought it might be far from the
honor and great mind of the King (whose injunction this was said to be) to
consult any such thing, though by the like practices his Father, lost his Life;
and that he feared he should not die right in his Favor, for being suspected
of such a thing: and then most courageously stooped to the Block.

With him upon the same Scaffold suffered the Portugal Embassador's Brother,
(then Residing with Oliver) by Name Don P^ntaleon-Sa^^ He had a while before
made a Riot in the New-Exchange, upon conceit of an Affront or some scorn cast
upon him there, and killed one Greenway a Gentleman standing quietly at a
Stall, Col. John Gerrard and the Portugal Embassador's Brother Beheaded, July
10.
no opposition being made but by this Colonel Gerrard, who was now fatally
joined with him in Death. The Murder was Committed by a Knight of Maltha, who
escaped; but this Nobleman and four more of the Embassador's Servants, among
whom was an Irish youth, were arraigned before Chief Justice Rolls, Sir Henry
Blunt, and Recorder Steel, Tichburn and others, joined in a Commission of Oyer
and Terminer, and Tried by a party-Jury of English and Forrainers, as of
custom: and though he at first refused to Plead, alleging his Quality, he was
at last Convicted and Condemned. He had made an Escape by the civil industry of
the Lady Philip Mohun, and attempted it again; but was retaken, and now
Beheaded. After the Priests and he had prayed upon the Scaffold, he showed some
little aversion of Death; but whether out of anger or fear, is uncertain; the
people and spectators showing different passions at the fall of both these
Victimes to crafty Tyranny and impartial Justice. This was done upon the King
of Portugal's order, to whom the cause and Execution of Justice in his own
Kingdom was first remitted. The Ambassador soon after the conclusion of a Peace
disconsolately departed. The Irish Youth suffered at Tyburn; the rest were
Reprieved, and afterward Released.

In the same month a ship on Southwark-side took accidental Fire as she lay at
Anchor, Ships blown up near London- Bridge.
which being cut away, the ship (as Providence would have it) was driven by the
flowing Tide upon a Shelf near the Bridge, where she stuck, and blew up her
powder. There were 8 persons killed* one a Draper upon his Leads on the Bridge,
by a Plank of the said ship; and had the blow been any nigher, it would have
broke that famous Pile. Another ship near the same time fired in Fresh-wharf,
near the Bridge likewise: and generally there were many and very sad
Conflagrations that attended this Boutefeu and his Usurpation; and as memorable
unruly accidents ended it, as by the sequel will appear.

We will now cursorily run over the Highland-War of Scotland, A short account
of the Highland War.
where notwithstanding those many divisions and animosities concerning Command
that were between the Commanders in this Scotch Army, the Earl of Glencarn
stomacking the supreme Command to be conferred upon General Middleton, which
was thought the best expedient to unite all Divisions amongst them, the said
Royal Party was yet reinforced to the number of 3 or 4000 men, whom both
General Monk and Colonel Morgan (in distinct Bodies and several ways)
attended: Morgan was about Loughaber and Lo^ghness, in the Western Highlands,
about Arguile's Country, and keeping close at the Heels of them; who ever and
anon took over the Mountains and gave them the slip: for it was by no means
advised to venture an Encounter, but tire their Enemy out; and nothing but
invincible patience and resolution could have endured it: For be^ides the want
of Provisions in that scarce, barren Country, against which the Soldiers were
armed only with Bread and Cheese, which they eat 20 days together, that Nature
could hardly discharge it self: the Ways were most times so abrupt, that hardly
more than one could go abreast; and over the Hills if a Horse-Foot slipped, men
were in danger of breaking their Necks down the Precipices, and Horse and Man
sure to be lost: no Quarter to be had but in the Glens; and great happiness was
it counted to meet with them and fresh Water, near which to pitch Tents; the
General cheerfully undergoing the same necessities. After much Traversing these
difficult ways, which were notwithstanding easy (as usual) to the Highlander,
it was the Fortune of Colonel Morgan to light upon General Middleton near
Badgenoth, at one of those narrow Passes, now proving incommodious to the
Natives themselves; for they could neither well fight nor retreat, so that they
Engaged in no order nor figure; and after a short Medly or Tumult, rather than
Battle, were forced to fly: the General endeavoring what he could to resist
his misfortune, was so near being taken, that he lost his Commission and
Instructions, and one of his rich Coats, with a Sumpter-horse. This happened on
the 19 of July, and was the total defeat and suppression of that War: The Earl
of* Glencarn submits to the English.
For immediately the Earl of Glencarn with 500 men submitted, at Dumbarton; and
though there happened some puny Skirmishes afterward, as the defeating of a
party of the Earl of Athol, Captain Elsmores taking of Sir Arthur Forbes, and
routing of Mac Naughton at Glenlyon, and Captain Lisle with a party from
Colonel Cobbet Governor of Dundee defeated the Earl of Kinoule, and took him
(and the Lord Diddup, and Lieutenant Colonel Mercer) Prisoner, who was returned
now to Edenburgh-Castle, and the young Marquess of Montross routed by
Blair-Castle; yet Submissions and Treaties spent most of the time that the Lord
Middleton with the Earl of Seaforth staid in Scotland, who now with a small
party of the Clans were in Catheness; the Lords Forrester and Kenmore, the Earl
of Athol and Marquess of Montross capitulated, desiring only the Terms (and
mitigation of Fines) the Earl of Glencarn had at his Rendition at
Dumbarton-Castle. Lorn now flew again into Arms, (to color those late
Treacheries and Treasons he now underhand managed for Cromwell) and joined with
Mac Naughton, who had surprised Colonel Brayn and Captain Nichols Governor of
Inner^ra-Castle, as they, thinking themselves secure in the Confines of the
Lowlands, had dismissed their Convoy, and made his Terms by that lucky surprise
to his advantage. Generally the Noble General Monk gave very obliging
Conditions, and so did Twisleton and Morgan, by his order, to those that
capitulated with them, and showed all the favor that could be expected in
point of Fines and Forfeitures; which firmly obliged the Nobles and Gentry to
him for the future; (which no doubt he had then principally in his Eye) and
also invited General Middleton and the Earl of Seaforth to enter into Treaty
with him; which was managed and in a manner concluded by Major General
Drummond; but rescinded by Middleton, as was alleged here, because of the
English insistency upon the former Fines and Security; but judged as proceeding
from a principle of Honor and Right, since this departure of the King's
Lieutenant with Conditions obtained from the Enemy, might be construed a
Cession of that Kingdom to the Usurper, as the Lord Ormond with great Punctilio
given him a very noble Precedent. He departed not till the beginning of the
next year; and Glengary had the honor (for Mac Cloud and Mac Eldow had
Articled some time before) to render the last Arms that were taken up for his
Majesty in that Ki^gdom. The Farewell to the Scotch War.
And so we dismiss that War with this valedictory Elogie to both those
honorable Generals; the one of them just ceased his indefatigable industry for
the Recovery of the Kings Rights, and had a Royal Conge and Writ of Emeri^us
est; and the other like an Altern Luminary, began, or rather renewed his
auspicious aspect upon the Kings Restitution; so that the brightness of the
Majesty of Scotland was never totally obscured; and long may they now shine
together, without diminution to each others luster, in this glorious Firmament
of his Majesty's present and perpetual Empire.

In England, the French Ambassadors prosecuted the Treaty am^in, and with very
great secrecy: but some mistake happening in point of civility and ceremony by
Monsieur de Baas, Bourdeaux's Colleague, he returned into France to meet a
report of his carriage at Paris; from whence upon timely overture of the
proceedings in that affair, our Sovereign withdrew, and departed to the Spaw by
Liege, The King through Liege to the Spaw.
where he was magnificently treated by that City; and so onward in his journey
to meet the Princess of Aurange his Sister, who had left her Son the Prince in
Holland, where the divisions about his being Stadtholder were as high as ever;
and to help them forward, Cromwell writ to the States of Zealand, to persuade
them to the Holland-resolution: which the Towns of Campen and Swol had so far
withstood, as to accept and Swear Prince William of Frizeland to be their
Stadtholder, during the minority of the Prince of Aurange, which was 19 years,
or till he should be capable of the Government. The Duke of York was to have
Commanded as Lieutenant General of the French Army in Italy; but this
unhandsome Peace disobliged his better-deserving and victorious Arms, and
turned them afterward against such thankless and regardless Relations: he
continued yet nevertheless at Paris till after the said Treaty was concluded,
and then took his Farewell of that unkind and politic Court. Prince Rupert was
now at Vienna, where he was highly Complemented and presented by the Emperor,
and from thence came back to Heydelberg.

Prince Cromwell, Cromwell falls from his Coach-box.
who was now wholly out of action, having laid his Scene in the Counties and
Boroughs for Elections to the ensuing Parliament, gave himself and the Town a
little recreation. It happened on a Friday in July, that desirous to divert
himself with driving of his Coach and six Horses in Hide-park, with his
Secretary Thurloe in it, like Mephistophilus and Doctor Faustus careering it in
the Air, to try how he could govern Horses, since Rational Creatures were so
unruly and difficult to be reined; like another Phaeton he fell in the
Experiment from the Coach-box, which was presently posted into the City, and
many ominous and true Conjectures made of his certain Catastro^ph^; one of the
ingenious Songs on the occasion ending in this presagio^^ Rythme.

Every Day and Hour has showed us his power,
But now he has showed us his Art. Mr. Scrugg's Counsellor^

His first Reproach, was a fall from a Coach,
His next will be from a Cart.
According to the late Instrument of Government of 42 Strings or Articles, A
Parliament, and met, Sep. 3.
one whereof was, that a Parliament should be called every three years, the
first the third of September next; He accordingly Issued out his Writs, the
Election to be made one and the same day throughout England: most of the
Boroughs had but one Burgess, and the Shires some of them six or seven Knights;
all of them under sure qualifications of not having been or being of the
Cavalier-party: There were 30 also by the Instrument Elected for Scotland, and
as many for Ireland; all or most of whom were English Commanders. On the third
of September they met, and adjourned from the House to the Abbey, where Mr.
Marshal Preached; and so to the Painted Chamber, where they had a Message from
the Protector to invite them to a Sermon the next day again, when Dr. Goodwyn
Preached; and the Protector came in great State in his Coach; Cleypole the
Master of his Horse, and Strickland the Captain of his Guard, bare-headed on
both sides. At his entrance into the Church, Lambert carried the Sword before
him, and Whitlock the Purse. The Sermon done, to the Painted Chamber again, and
there in a Speech he set forth these Heads: That some few years ago none would
have thought of such a Door of Hope; Cromwell's Speech.
that he knew there were yet many Humors and Interests, and that Humors were
above Interest; that the condition of England was like Israel in the
Wilderness, (of which the Sermon was) that this was a Healing day: there was
neither Nobleman, nor Gentleman, nor Yeoman before known by any distinction; we
had not any that bore Rule or Authority, but a great Contempt of Magistracy and
Christ's Ordinances: That the Fifth-Monarchy was highly cried up by persons who
would Assume the Government, but that desired thing wanted greater
manifestation than appeared for such men to change the Authority by. (And this
directed at the late Parliament.) He desired this Honorable Assembly to remedy
all these Disorders; showed that the Wars with Portugal, French, and Dutch, do
and did eat up the Assessments; that swarms of Jesuits are crept in to make
Divisions, which were grown so wide, that nothing but his Government could
remedy them; and let men say what they will, he could speak it with comfort
before a greater than any of them. Then he showed what he had done during his
Government. First, his endeavor of Reforming the Laws, having joined all
parties to assist in that great Work: Next, his filling the Benches with the
ablest Lawyers: Then, his Regulation of the Court of Chancery, and his
Darling-Ordinance for approbation of Ministers, (which hindered all that list
from invading the Ministry) by men of both persuasions, Presbyterians and
Independents, etc. And lastly, his being Instrumental to call a Free
Parliament, which he valued, and would keep it so above his life.

Then he showed the advantages of the Peace with Dutch, Dane, and Swede, and
the Protestant Interest, which he would have them improve and intend chiefly:
That they were now upon the edge of Canaan: That he spoke not as their Lord,
but their Fellow Servants. And then bad them go and choose their Speak^r; which
they did without presenting of him, his Name William Lenthal, the old
Chairman* and next day fell upon the Instrument, as they had Voted, by Parts
as it lay, and questioned the Power: which Oliver understanding, to put them
out of that Course, which touched his Copyhold, after 9 days he came to the
Painted Chamber, and sending for them, declared and asserted four Fundamentals
in the Instrument, which they were not to meddle with or to alter. 1. The
Government by a Single person and Parliament. 2. The Imperpetuity of
Parliaments, or continued Succession. ^* The Militia, which was his only. And
4. Liberty of Conscience. And that a Free Parliament was but a reciprocation;
for that power which made him a Protector, made them a Parliament; and
therefore was very sorry they should go about to destroy the Settlement; which
to prevent, and cease such Debates, (though he denied any Negative Voice) he
was necessitated to appoint a T^st or Recognition of the Government as it was
established (by every Member) before they sat in the House again.



This bogled at the first three quarters of them, especially the
Commonwealths-men, and those of the late Long Parliament; so that of four
hundred and odd, there appeared but two hundred; but were made up at last three
hundred, for the old ones would not be baulked so, and fell afr^sh upon the
same dispu^es, and ran out all the Articles, resolving to put the whole
judgment of the House upon them into one entire Bill, and so present it; but
in truth to spin out time, and work upon the Protector's occasions for Money,
which was proposed in the House, and coldly and slowly considered.

S^vera* Or^^nances pub^i^hed in P^^^iament.
Just at their sitting down, the Protector published several Ordinances; which
being passed, and bore date before, were to pass as Authentic as Acts by the
Instrument: one for paying the Money into the Trea^^^y that was raised for the
propagation of the Gospel in Wales; another for making Soldiers free of all
Corporations, and to exercise any Trades; another to turn out all honest men
under the notion of scandalous Preachers and Ministers, Common Prayer being
their chiefest imputation; and a fourth to survey Kings Lands, etc. and for
doubling upon Deans and Chapters; which sales those many changes of Power had
much retarded and depretiated. The more occult cause of the publication of
these Ordinances, was to let the Parliament understand that Oliver took his
Instrument to be in a good Case, and sufficiently warranted already.

Amidst these Jars and discords about it, the Serpentine Charms of Cardinal
Mazarine had lulled the Protector in an imaginable Dream of the worlds Wealth,
and rich Empire of America, The design on the West Indies, Sep.
to divert his near designs upon the neighborhood of France; to which War he
was the rather inclined, from the near alliance of this Crown to that, and
having excluded its Interest in Holland, to drive it out of that Kingdom: But
the policy of the Cardinal so outreached that design, that it extended his
thoughts to the other World, giving him the fruition of Great Alexander's Wish.
This complot between them, which of the Spanish and English side very much
conduced to the French, was most pertinaciously secreted to the very time of
public Hostility in those American parts, though it was guessed at, and the
noise of Hispaniola was very rife in discourse about this time. The Protector
began to Arm for the expedition, in November and December, 2000 men, old
Royalists, and reduced necessitated persons making up the gross of the Army; to
which some Red-coats for the more terror and assurance were added, being drawn
by Lot out of the several Regiments. The Command of the Land-service was
conferred upon Colonel, now General Venables, a confident of Cromwels, who very
unmanly carried his Wife with him; and General Pen for Sea, who at the end of
December was ready at Portsmouth, where attended Colonel Hayns Major General of
the Army, and departed first with the Rear-Admiral Blag for Barbados, and was
followed soon after by the whole Fleet, who had on board Commissioners for
managing the Treasure that was expected from the Mountains of Gold; which
Publicans, like Achans in the Camp, were one chief cause of the successlessness
of this Indian War. On the 29 of January following, the whole Fleet arrived,
after a good and speedy passage, at Carlisle-Bay, in the Isle of Barbados, all
except the two Charities, which were driven by Weather into Ireland, putting
out to Sea after the Fleet, and were much wanted, the Horses for the service
being aboard them; and here for a while we leave them.

The Parliament after they had chawed upon the Recognition, and voted it not to
b^ taken as absolute in every point of the Instrument, limited it only to the
Single person, and successive Parliaments; and continued their debates as high
as ever, The Parl. Examine the Cases of the Lord Craven and Sir John Stawel.
resolving themselves into a Grand Committee, to examine every particle of it;
another to hear and examine the Case of the Lord Craven, and Sir John Stawel,
and to give redress to them, (for there were abundance of good Patriots in the
House, and who were resolved to do their Country service.) The Cases were
accordingly heard; Mr. Sergeant Maynard of Counsel with the Lord Craven, and
Latch for the Purchasers; who argued it very hard: but before a Report could be
made, which was in favor of his Lordship, Cromwell terminated his hopes, (and
it was in vain to look for remedy from him, for that would deter all future
Purchasers) and the Parliaments sitting; for he had never heard from them since
their coming thither; telling them after many good morrows, of a design of the
common Enemy, (to whose hands it was then agreed by some of themselves whom he
could discover, to deliver the Cause, and the good people, etc.) and so they
parted. Cromwell spoke not without book; for at that time he held good
intellig^nce with one Manning, one of the Clerks belonging to the Secretary
with the King now at Colen, where he was most amply, and with more than
customary honors welcomed from the Spaw and Aken in Germany. From Colen the
King to convey his Sister into Holland, brought her on her way to Dusseldorp,
to the Duke of Newburgh, where they were no less sumptuously treated; thence
the King journeyed with the Princess as ^ar as Benningen on the way, and
returned to Hunt with the said Duke, The Duke of Gloucester with the King at
Colen.
the King's Cordial and most Noble Friend. At his return to Colen, the Marquess
of Ormond had conducted and brought away the Duke of Gloucester from the
Jesuits College at Paris, who with the Queen Mother (that sent the Marquess of
Praslin, and the Lord Abbot Mountague, to persuade him him to stay, and not to
displease his Mother, but follow her advice, which was to have him trained up
in the Romish Religion) labored to that purpose: but the young Prince
understanding his Brothers pleasure, answered according as his blessed Father
had enjoined him, That he was to obey his Sovereign before his Mother: and so
came away with the Marquess to the King.

General Blake was in the interim set to Sea for the Streights, and it was
given out to intercept the Duke of Guise, who was then going to invade the
Kingdom of Naples; but he was landed 14 days before he came to that Coast,
though he might have prevented him if he had had such Commission; but the
League was certainly struck betwixt the Cardinal and Protector, however they
v^nted such talk to amuse the Spaniard; for every day there was news of a
Rupture and an Embargo in France; and the Cardinals Regiment was in good
^arnest drawn down to the Seaside by Deip, on purpose to countenance these
rumors. Blake from Naples came into Leghorn-road, and demanded 150000 l.
damages, for what we sustained in the Fight with Van Galen; but what
satisfaction he received, is uncertain. From whence he sailed for Algiers,
being met at Sea by De Wit the Dutch Vice Admiral, and saluted with
extraordinary respect, and civilly treated as yet by the Spaniards themselves,
as also at Lisbon by that King. At Naples they would have invited him on shore;
but the wary Commander excused himself by Command from the Protector not to
leave his Charge; Genesis Blake a wary Commander.
in which we shall at present leave him.

Cromwell's Mother dies, and is Buried in State, in Hen. 7th 's Chapel.
On the 18 of November died (the unhappy Parent of this Usurper) His aged
Mother, who lived to see her Son through such a Deluge of Blood swim to a
perplexed Throne, in the best share of whose greatness she was concerned, as to
the Princely accommodation of her maintenance in Life, and burial in Death;
being laid in Henry the seventh's Chapel in great state. On the first of
December following, Mr. John Seldom dies.
died that most Famous and Learned Antiquary Mr. John Seldom, a person of such
worth and Use, that no Learned Eye could refrain a tear upon the consideration
of Death, and its rude indifferencing hand, which mingled the Dust of this
great Restorer, with the putrid Rottenness of her, that was the Womb to this
Destroyer.

Fleetwood made Deputy of Ireland, Steel Lord-Chancellour, and Pepys
Lord-Chief-Iustice.
In Ireland all things continued very quiet, Fleetwood being sworn Lord-Deputy,
Steel made Lord-Chancellour of that Kingdom, and Pepys Lord-Chief-Justice; and
Corbet, Goodwyn, Thomlinson, and Colonel Robert Hammond of the Council: by whom
the Transplantation was so prosecuted, that the first of March was the longest
day of respit, upon very severe penalties. In the mean while this new Deputy
and Council, till the arrival of Steel, diverted themselves in Progress through
the Kingdom. In January arrived at London an Ambassador, the Marquess Hugh
Fiesco, from the State of Genoa, and was splendidly received and dismissed.

The Cavaliers and Fifth-Monarchy-Plot.
The effects of this Parliament-rupture, encouraged two most opposite parties to
conspire against the Protector, the Fifth-Monarchists and Cavaliers; (for as to
the Commonwealth, having once lost their Army, they were miserably
inconsiderable, and the Herd of the Rebellious multitude followed any thing
that could continue it in what form soever.) A Monarchy was sought on by all
hands; the true Royal party (for we must so distinguish it) longed for their
rightful Sovereign Charles the Second; the Fifth-Monarchy expected King Jesus;
the Courtiers and those engaged by them or with them with Cromwell himself,
desired King Oliver: and every of these manifested much impatience* but none o^
them could attain their Wishes; and when Oliver might afterward, he durst not.
The Protector was no way ignorant of this, and therefore he resolved to deal
with the weakest first, which yet by underminings was more dangerous than the
other. The Army was corrupted by that Millenary Principle, and that was to be
purged; so that as Harrison and Rich had been laid aside, and not long after
committed with Carew and Courtney into several remote Castles: Maj. Genesis
Overton, Col. Okey, and other Officers Cashiered: Overton Committed to the
Tower.
so now General Monk had order to seize Major General Overton, and the Majors
Bramston and Holms, and other Officers, and Cashire them, after Fines and good
Security for their Behavior. Overton was sent up to the Tower, and his
Regiment conferred on Colonel Morgan. Colonel Okey's Regiment was likewise
taken from him, and given to the Lord Howard; and so the danger from the Army
was quickly suppressed. Cornet (but since Colonel) Joyce was likewise
malcontent at this change, and signified so much to Cromwell's Face, whom he
upbraided with his own service, and his faithlesness; but escaped any other
Censure than a bidding him be gone; Cromwell well knowing him to be one of those
madmen that would say or do any thing they were bid.

But the Royalists design was of a more potent combination, The Kings design
discovered by Manning.
and had been truly formidable, had it not by Treachery and Treason been
revealed to the Protector, who came by that means to know the rise, progress,
and first appearance of those Arms against him; and this was Manning's perfidy,
which the King too late discovered. All the Gentlemen in- England of that party
were one way or other engaged, or at least were made acquainted with it; but
the snatching of the principal of them up throughout the Kingdom a little
before the Execution of it, frustrated the most probable effects of that Rising.

The Lord Mayor, etc. of the City of London was likewise sent ^or, and informed
of it, and the Militia established; Skippon being made their Major General
there: several persons under the character of dissolute persons were seized by
virtue of a Proclamation to that effect; as also all Horse-races were
forbidden; Counterplots were used, and all sorts of Ammunition were sent down
to several Gentlemen's Houses with Letters unsubscribed, and the said Gentlemen
upon receipt secured, and brought up Prisoners, to bear company with the old
standers of that party; and a Ship-chandler, one Frese, and a Merchant or two
trepan'd this way: Sir Ralph Vernon Imprisoned.
Sir Ralph Vernon of Derby-shire, an old Royalist, was Committed, and Examined
before Oliver, concerning a Trunk of Pistols, and who sent them: Who resolutely
answered, His Self; which so dashed him, that he was without one word more
dismissed, but not from his Imprisonment.

Notwithstanding all these discouragements and warnings to give over, the
Western Association thought themselves in Honor engaged to rise upon the day
which they had agreed upon with one another in the other parts, Western
Insurrection.
and had notified to the King, who was now removed from Colen, and absconded
himself near the Seacoast, upon the first success of the Affair to be ready to
pass over to his Friends. Accordingly on the 11 of March, being Monday, (very
early in the Morning) a party of 100 under the Command of Sir Joseph Wagstaff,
Sir Joseph Wagstaff, Col. Penruddock, and Grove, at Salisbury.
Colonel Penruddock and Grove, entered the City of Salisbury, (at which time the
Judges Rolls and Nichols were there in Circuit) and seized all their Horses;
and having declared the cause of this appearance (without any further injury or
meddling with any Money which lay in the Chambers of Sergeant Maynard and other
Lawyers) departed, promising to return and break their Fast with the Judges
Provisions; which they did, and increased their number to 400; and had they
returned once more, the whole City had risen with them. Thence they marched to
Blandford, where Colonel Penruddock himself Proclaimed the the King in the
Marketplace, The King Proclaimed at Blandford, March.
and so marched Westward; Captain Butler with two Troops of Cromwell's Horse
keeping at a distance in their Rear, to give them opportunity of increasing;
but, by the means aforesaid, very few came in; which made a great many more
slink away from the party, when they saw no hopes of that great number promised
and expected. But the Noble Penruddock resolved yet to try what could be done
in Devonshire and Cornwall: and as to him, it was all one whether he retreated
or went forward, for he was engaged too far already. In this condition some 100
of the most faithful and cordial of the party, Hungry, Sleepy, and Weary,
having staid no where, reached Southmolton in Devonshire, hoping at worst to
get away by Sea; but that night, on the 15 of March, their Quarters were beaten
up by Captain Crook, about ten a clock, Penruddock and Grove taken.
and some Houses forced: but Colonel Penruddock maintained his quarters till he
had Quarter promised, and Articled; which Crook afterward unworthily and
basely denied. There were taken with him Colonel Jones a Kinsman of Cromwell's,
and Colonel Grove an old Royalist, and some 60 other Prisoners, and 120 Horse,
Sir Joseph Wagstaff, Sir Joseph Wagstaff escapes.
Mr. Robert Mason, Esquire Clark, and Mr. Thomas Mompesson escaped beyond Sea;
and so this unhappy effort was suppressed. There were some shadows of the like
at Rufford-Abbey in Nottinghamshire, at Hessen-moor in Yorkshire, near Wrexham
in Montgomery, in Northumberland; for which some were Executed; and a like
rumor of a design upon Shrewsbury, (Sir Henry Slingsby in Custody, and Sir
Richard Maleverer and Mr. Hutton taken, who fled for it, and were retaken at
Chester, from whence they made a final escape) and Sir Thomas Harris and the
Lord Newport secured ther^upon; but all vanished and came to nothing, and those
mighty and pregnant hopes of the King's Restitution, now in every man's Mouth
and Wish proved frustraneous hac vice; and Oliver very prajeant that he could
thus overreach the King in his own Designs.

This Treason came to be discovered to the King in this manner: Some Gentlemen
that were seized upon their coming home, having visited his Majesty at Colen,
who was pleased upon their parting to go to the Stairs head with them, and
expressed some good apprecations of a design, which at their Examination were
verbatim interrogated, if they were not spoken at such a time: Advice hereof
was given to the King, who remembering none but Colonel Tuk^ and this Manning,
who light the Candle, to be present at the parting the same time, declared the
whole matter to the Colonel, who surprised with the news, having protested his
Innocence, by the Kings command went directly to Manning's Chamber, and not
staying the opening of the Door, forced it, and found him a chawing of Papers,
and a Packet by him newly come from Thurloe; but so aghast, that he knew not
what to say: His Father had been slain a Colonel in the Kings Service, as is
before related; he himself had been the Earl of Pembroke's Secretary; and for
these considerations admitted into this Trust, which he so basely abused. At
the instance of the whole Court, the King was prevailed upon to let him be shot
in one of the Castles of the Duke of Newburgh, Manning shot in the Duke of
Newburgh 's Country.
(to terrify all other faithless and disloyal Servants, and to satisfy for
some of that Blood Cromwell had spilt upon the score of his Per^idy) where he
wretchedly and most abjectly died.

Cromwell had drawn 4000 Foot out of Ireland, under Colonel Axtel and Sadler,
and 600 Horse were marching out of Scotland, two Troops whereof came from
Ireland by that short cut of Sea to Air; but upon the quelling of this
Western-rising they all were remanded. In February happened another terrible
Fire in Fleet Street, A terrable fire in Fleet Street London, another at
Abetsoyle in Scotland.
near the Horn-Tavern, which begun in a Grocers house, and consumed eleven
more; the like happened at Aberfoyle in Scotland; but far greater for quantity.
Major Wildman, a great Leveller, was taken near Marleborough inditing
Declarations against the Protector, and was committed to Chepstow; and the Lord
Gray of Grooby was brought Prisoner to Leicester; Major Wildman Committed.
but upon application made to Oliver not long after released. Lockhart (one of
the Scotch Judges) Married Oliver's Niece about this time, and grew famous
thereby in the process of the Rebellion. The regulation of Chancery and
Hackney-Coaches took force now. The Chancery and Hackney-Coaches regulated.
Another horrible Fire in Thredneedle-street, to the loss of 200000 l. and
upwards. One Harris (that was Hanged afterward in 1661. for Counterfeiting the
Lord Chancellor Hide's Hand, and breaking of a house therewith by armed
Soldiers, A great fire in Thredneedle-street London.
and was one of those that carried a Javelin at the Kings Martyrdom) about
this time Cheated one Manton and other Merchants with a counterfeit License,
(as from Cromwell) for Importing some Oils and Whalebone from Holland, Harris a
great Ch^^t.
which were forbidden by the Act, and got near 1000 l. of them.
Commissary-General Reynolds was made a kind of Major General of North Wales;
which Module obtained all over England soon after; but this was the proto-type.

Heresies and Sects.
The insensible and u^regarded growth of all Heresy and Error, in this
licentious Toleration which invaded the Church, among many other most
pernicious Tenets besides, etc. made the Socinian to pass unobserved in this
Chronicle, since it would have been an Augean labor to cleanse the Current of
time from that Sink and Colluvious Filth of those Monstrous Opinions. Upon this
score, the Racovian-Catechism, its divulgation, and the suppression of it by
the Ececutioner's Hands in the Fire, came to be omitted in the year preceding:
As likewise Biddle the famous Seducer and Teacher of those Blasphemous
Principles, Biddle a famous seducer, Publisher of the Racovian Catechism.
who was by this Dumb Parliament (as Oliver called it) committed to the
Gate House, and thence sent to a remote Prison, and his Books Burnt in the same
manner, (besides the Englishing of the Alchoran, and the three Grand Impostors
damned for shame) mist his due observation, The Turkish Alchoran Englished.

The three grand Impostors, a seditious piece.


which therefore are here added in the close of this year.

Anno Dom. 1655.
THe Cabal of Cardinal Mazarine and Cromwell's design was now visible in the
West Indies, and that formidable and amusing Expedition displayed to those
parts of the World: The rich Conceits the Usurper cherished from thence,
appeared in those frequent divertisements he gave himself beyond his usual
reservedness, and from that more than ordinary Pomp and State he arrogated to
himself, like another Grand Seignior: nothing but Golden Smiles to be seen in
his Court, where the solemn Cringe and the parasitical Glaver were as much now
studied, to humor this Greatness, as matriculating and introducing Piety, and
austere Hypocrisy. And never was such a strange mixture in the Arts of any
Courtier as these Times beheld, much like the mysteries of the as strangely
framed and tempered Government. With much impatience did all men indeed await
the issue of this grand Affair; and to be certain, the Hours could not be less
tedious to them, to whom belonged the approaching Golden Age: but Parturiunt
montes, -- The following abstract will admonish the great ones, that Fortune is
not to be over-tempted; and that without the Concurrence of good Deliberation,
Conduct, and Valor, she is not always obliged to her Favorites.

But to proceed: during the abode of the Fleet at Barbados, the Generals,
Colonels, and inferior Officers were not negligent in their several stations.
General Pen caused the Carpenters of each ship to set up those Shallops which
were brought over in quarters out of England; and ordered the Coopers to trim
and fit Water-Casks: Besides, he sent two Frigates to St. Christophers and
Mevis, for raising of Volunteers there. In the mean time, General Venables
formed a new Regiment of Seamen to serve upon occasion at Land; these were put
under the conduct of Vice Admiral Goodson; the rest of the Regiments brought
out of England, were easily completed to a full number; likewise a Troop of
gallant Horse were raised by the Islanders, Hispaniola and Jamaica Expidition.
at their own cost and charges: (the Carcases of which were afterward buried
in the Soldiers Bellies, for want of better food.) But these were not all the
strength; for the Planters Servants understanding that if they would serve the
State, their time should still go on, and that at last (in spite of their
Masters) they should enjoy their Freedoms in as ample a manner as if they had
served them; this spurred them on to become Soldiers of Fortune; and many were
presently listed into several Regiments accordingly. The Fleet was also
augmented by twenty sail of Dutch Vessels, which were made prize for presuming
to traffic with Prohibited Goods, contrary to the Articles of Peace betwixt
the two Nations. The Land-Army being now in readiness, their number was found
to be so great, that every ships share was as many as it could carry. March 31
they set Sail from Barbados, and in six days after came by the Lee under St.
Christophers: Here joined with them about 1300 more, which came off from
several Islands, in hopes to be made for ever: from hence they shaped their
course directly for Hispaniola. On the 13 of April, the whole Navy came fair by
the Island, and plainly discovered the sown of Sancta Domingo: Immediately
hereupon a Council was called, and the Guides consulted withal: here it was
concluded that General Venables should to Land. According to which resolution,
the next day he landed about ten Leagues to the Westward of the Town, with
7000 Foot, a Troop of Horse, and three days Provision of Victuals. No sooner
were they landed, but every man's Tongue was tipped with Gold; nothing could be
thought on, but the plunder of Plate and Jewels; small things could not enter
their minds: as for Hangings, Housholdstuff, etc. they would be cumbersome to
carry; and therefore they resolved to leave such things behind them. In this
ecstasy of joy was the Soldiery; when behold, upon a sudden there appeared a
Proc^amation from the General, commanding, that when they entered the Town of
Sancta Domingo, no man should plunder either Money, Plate, or Jewels, neither
kill any tame Cattle, on pain of Death. This made the Army look Sower on their
imaginary Sweetness; their Golden Hearts were now turned to Leaden Heels; so
that it was indifferent to them, whether they went farther, or tarried there:
yet for all this, on they marched through Woods of incredible thickness,
meeting no Enemy, except the excessive heat of the Sun, which caused an
intolerable drought, that oppressed them sorely, having not had one drop of
Water in many miles march, but what they carried in their own Bladders; so that
Urine was as White Wind to them that could swallow it.

General Pen, after the landing of these men, set ashore three Regiments more,
under the Command of Colonel Buller, in a Bay where a fair Fresh-water-River
disburdened it self; this was within two Leagues of the Town, and appointed to
be the place for conjunction of the whole Army. It was not long before the
General, (according to the appointment) having peaceably past the Woods, came
to the River, and joined himself with Buller's Brigade. Here upon view, the
Army was sound to be 9700 (but few fighting) men. From this River the Army
hasted away to take possession of the Town, which in imagination was already
won: there marched on before the rest, a Forlorn Hope, consisting of 500 men;
afterward followed the main Body of the Army. In this order they marched within
four miles of the Town, when on the sudden, a small party of Spaniards
encountered the Forlorn Hope, A sudd^^ and strange De^eat to the English.
and in an instant forced them in confusion through the next Regiment, which
was also routed: the Body of the Army coming up to their rescue, made the Enemy
to retire to a Fort hard by in the Woods, without any considerable loss at all
to the Spaniards. On the English side was slain Captain Cox, the chief Guide
for the place, and many others.

The General having now seen the imbecility of his men, through want of Water
and many other necessaries, he caused them to march back again to the River,
from whence they came to refresh themselves, in order to a full prosecution of
the design in hand. They Rally.
To which end, Scaling-Ladders were made, and two small Drakes mounted, with a
Morter-piece and Granado-shells, which were landed from the Fleet: these were
conveyed by Water to be set on shore at a convenient place near the Fort.

All things being now in readiness, to try conclusions, the Army once again
dislodged, and were by the Guides promised to be brought upon the Town of St
Domingo by a private way, where they might pass thorough the Woods free from
any Fort. Such a way there certainly was; but these blind Guides taking
another to be it, the whole Army were brought near to the place where before
they had been shamefully repulsed. The Spaniards in the mean time having
certain intelligence by Negroes and Molattoes of the English march, prepared to
entertain them in their passage. April 25, 1655. the whole Army approached near
to a Fort which the Spaniards had in the Wood, built of Brick, in a triangular
form, without Flankers: in it were nine pieces of good Ordnance, and 300
resolute fellows to manage them. The English Army, a little before noon,
approaching near this Fort, were upon the sudden charged by a party of the
Enemy that lay undiscovered among the Trees. These resolute Spaniards, being
about seventy in number, at first fired a round Volley of small shot upon the
Forlorn Hope, and then flew in like madmen with their sharp Steel-Lances upon
the English, (who were already even suffocated with Thirst, and hardly able to
stand, much less to fight) so that in a moment the General's running-Regiment,
And are again Defeated by the Spaniards.
with half the Army, flew back to the Rear, and possessed their fellows there
with such a Pannick fear, that every one began to shift for himself. Mean while
the Spaniards pursued the Victory with the greatest slaughter they were able to
make: for meeting with no resistance, (but what that ever-Renowned Gentleman
Major General Hayns was able to make with twelve men, (whom he engaged by the
honor of their Country) one whereof was Ensign Boys, who died not unrevenged
in the midst of their Enemies) they wreaked their fury at pleasure on these
frighted men; till at last, being overcome with killing, they retreated back in
Triumph with seven English Colors, the evident Trophies of their Victory. The
retreat of the Enemy gave opportunity for the Living to number the Dead. Upon
view, it was found that 600 were slain outright, 300 Wounded, (most in their
backs) and besides 200 more crept into Bushes, and ran away to save themselves;
which afterward were knocked on the head by Negroes and Molattoes.

Upon this sad disaster, the Army that night drew up nearer the Spanish Fort,
as if they intended some mighty matters; and having planted a Morter-piece in a
convenient plot of ground, and all things being ready to do Execution on the
Fort; upon a sudden the Soldiers were ordered to draw off: So the Army without
doing any thing marched away to their old Watering-place in the Bay. To what
intent and purpose this was, could never yet be comprehended.

The Army being come into the Bay, had not that supply of Victuals from the
ships as formerly, but were necessitated by parties to go into the Woods to
catch Cattle, which many times cost them dear: for the Negroes instead of
hunting Cows, would oftentimes change their Game, and breathe them back again
to their Quarters.

These things brought the Army to such distress, that (fearing to fight for
Food abroad) they exercised their Valor at home upon the Troop-horses
belonging to their own Army. Thus did they continue for some days, till a
resolution was taken to Imbarque them, and with all speed to make for Iamaica.
May the third day, (all the remaining part of the Army being shipped without
the least disturbance from the Spaniard) the Fleet set sail for the aforesaid
Island.

This disastrous defeat was rightly imputable to these foregoing causes;
Considerations of this defeat.
but there were others also, as namely the Discipline, or rather the
Licentiousness and Debauchery of those Auxiliary-Islanders; a crew of such
dissolute Fellows, that were fitter to work and slave in the Mines, than to
fight for the Gold. But they did not alone frustrate the assured hopes of
Victory, (for it is supposed they were not listed but for number, and to make
Drudges) but made the defeat far more miserable, by eating up the Provisions
designed for the Army, who were set on shore very weak and feeble, at so
strange and unreasonable distance, when the advice was they should have landed
at the Bay of Domingo, while the Spaniard was in his Cups, and the Town
overflowed with Drink and Gladness for the arrival of their Fleet thither, they
supposing this Armada of ours to be their own about that time expected. There
was such a complication of errors and misfortunes, through the insufficiency
and ill Conduct of the General, to say no worse, and the faintness of the
Soldier, caused by the carelessness of their Friends, who should better have
Provisioned them, and the terror of their Enemies, besides the scorching heat
of the Sand, which made it painful to stand or go, that hardly any Expedition
in History can parallel it; for they were beaten in a manner without a Blow.

Yet these miseries were not at an end; it was not yet easily resolvable what
should be done with this frighted and pestering multitude; for all the Victual
was spent, and it was impossible to turn to Windward with such a company and so
little sustenance: and some thoughts there were of abandoning this impotent
wretched Crew, and return to the Barbados; but it was their kind and
undeserved fate that proposed the Island of Iamaica, whither on the 3 of May
they directed their course, and without any opposition Landed; there being a
resolution made by the Council of War, (to prevent the like Cowardice) that if
any man turned his back to the Enemy, his Bringer-up should kill him. The
Spaniards having no intelligence of the late overthrow at Hispaniola, nor
indeed suspecting any Hostility, fled away at the approach of this formidable
Army, and withdrew their Goods; their pretended Governor staving off the
English with a Treaty, while all was conveyed away into the Woods, whither
parties were sent, to follow and to kill Cattle for the Army, of which they
found very good, and good store, without any fighting: which no doubt was a
great comfort, and gave them time to recover their Spirits; so that afterward
they dreaded not a Molatto, as they lighted upon them in parties in those
Forests of Cedar, and other excellent Physical and useful Trees; where for a
while we leave them.

At home another Portugal Ambassador arrived, and brought a Ratification of the
Treaty; that King having consented to the Damages adjusted in one of the
Articles thereof. A Commission passed under the Seal likewise for the Trial of
those Western Gentlemen taken at Southmolton; two of whom, Colonel Penruddock
and Jones, being brought up from Exeter, were Examined here by Cromwell; but
nothing could be extracted to the prejudice of their Confederates, whose
Estates he aimed at; and so they were re-guarded to their former Custody. James
Duke of Richmond dies.
In the interim whereof, James the noble Duke of Richmond died of a Quartan
Ague, that had held him above a year, contracted as it is supposed from a
continued and Consumptive grief for the King and his Affairs; nor was he ever
in any healthful condition since the Martyrdom of King Charles the first. An
Ordinance now came out, for settling the Revenue of the poor Knights of Windsor;
Windsor- Knights.
and the Trust thereof, formerly in the Dean and Chapter, was now vested in the
Lord-Commissioner Whitlock, Colonel Montague, Sydenham, and others; and the
five Knights Sir Richard Crane and Sir Peter Le Meir had added, were
incorporated with the rest; the Executors being enjoined to make good the said
Testators Wills to this Use: and several of Cromwell's old Trojans were now
Tituladoed with this Pensionary Honor, and none else to be admitted.

The Trial of Penruddock, etc. May.
The Commissioners for the Trial of the Western Insurrectors now fate at
Salisbury, April 12. Judge Windham President, Dove High Sheriff, and the Jury
like him: there were Condemned six, Six Condemned at Salisbury.
viz. John Lucas a Mercer of a very good Estate at Hungerford, who staid in the
Town when he might have escaped, and fatally lost his Head: much ado there was
for a Reprieve, and expected by the Prisoner; but he was basely disappointed.
Mr. Dean, Mr. Kensey, Mr. Thorp, John Laurence, and John Friar, all but Dean
Hanged at the Common place of Execution: Mr. Henry and Edward Zouch and Mr.
Willoughby were acquitted; Mack the Apothecary pleaded Guilty, and was
pardoned. Thence they proceeded to Exeter, where one of Oliver's Knights Sir
John Coppleston was Sheriff, and Condemned 26, 26 at Exeter.
eleven whereof (besides Colonel Penruddock and Grove, that were Beheaded,
where they both Loyally and undauntedly justified their design, and the Kings
indubitable Right) were Hanged, and buried afterward in a very solemn and
decent manner in that City; which generally, to a great number of people,
attended their Corpse, and defrayed the charge thereof; extending the same
civility to them dead, which they afforded liberally to them living, providing
for them in Prison, even to superfluity of the best Provisions; to the regret
and anger of Cromwel^, who was contriving how to diminish this plenty of the
Royal party, or at least to be revenged of them, at and by another RATE. At
Chard in Somersetshire, And sive at Chard.
in their return, they Condemned five, the principal whereof was Major Hunt,
Major Hunt 's handsome escape.
whom his Sisters coming to visit and take their farewell of him overnight of
his Execution, he changed Clothes with one of them, (pretending before to be
indisposed, and to keep his Bed) and with a Handkerchief (as weeping and
sobbing) before his eyes, was let out, while a Guard at door watched his
Sisters sleep that night; who next Morning waking the supposed Major to make
ready for Death, perceived the Stratagem: this incensed Cromwell farther, so
that he commanded all that were in Prison for that Rising should be forthwith
Transported to the Caribbe-Islands; Transportation of Royalists, June.
and some Argier-Merchants, or worse, undertook it, and sold them to the
Barbarous and inhumane Flanters, (worse than ever were the Natives) for
Bondmen and Slaves. Jesuits Exiled.
About the same time all Jesuits and Seminaries were anew Exiled; and all
suspected Catholics to abjure the Pope, Purgatory, Transubstantiation, and all
the Doctrines of that Church, or else all their Estates to be seized. Judges
Thorp and Newdigate, lay down their Commissions.
The Judges Thorp and Nudigate laid down their Commissions in May.

During the War in America, and for all our Fleet lay in those parts, the
Spanish Plate-Fleet, which was thought the main aim of our preparation, and was
therefore much feared for desperate, was now at Sea; and presently the Marquess
De Led, Marquess De Led in England.
who defended Maestricht so bravely some time before against the Prince of
Aurange, was sent Ambassador to the Protector, that the honourableness of his
Person might gratify Cromwell's ambition of Courtship, and sweeten him to the
Friendship and Alliance he had in his Instructions to offer, and more easily to
insinuate into the mystery of this conjunct design. He was nobly attended,
besides a numerous train of Lacqueys in silver and Green Livery, and had
Audience May 5, and continued his Complement and Cabal together the space of
five Weeks, in which time most of the action had passed in America; and
returned unsatisfied, and re infecta, though dismissed with more than ordinary
respects, about the middle of June.

Now happened an occasion, or rather Cromwell made it one, for him to show his
zeal to the Protestant Cause, and to show himself to the World the Champion or
Hector thereof: this was also one secret step and reach to the Crown, by
invading the sacred Title of the Defender of the Faith, due only to the
Hereditary Sovereigns of England. Herein also he aimed, as in the Proverb, to
hit two Birds with one Stone, not doubting but to find another Mine in the
Charitable minds and compassion of this Nation toward the parallel suffering
of the old Waldenses in Piedmont to the Irish Massacres; Cromwell pretends to
compassionate the Waldenses.
which were set out and dressed here with greater skill of Butchery than the
actors could handsomely do it there; and it was said the Copy was drawn from
that Original. Most certain it is, that they were in Rebellion, and that the
Duke of Savoy their Sovereign did chastise them to their Obedience, though the
Marquess Pianella a very zealous Catholic, and the Earl of Quince the French
Kings Lieutenant General of his Italian Armies, then joined with that Dukes,
(and stranger-Souldiers have little regard to any Religion, where they may
ravage without control) might exceed their Commiss^on in inflicting the
extremity of War, which they had brought upon themselves, and were before also
odious, more than enough to their Catholic Neighbors. Whatever the matter
was, Cromwell takes the Massacre for granted, enjoins a Fast, and at the close
of that, a Collection; not limited and terminated in the liberal contributions
in the Church at the Basin, but the Collectors and other Officers of the
Parish, with the Minister, were to go from door to door, and stir up the Richer
sort to a cheerful Contribution; which indeed was very forwardly and charitably
given and intended: and forthwith Mr. (now Sir Samuel) Moreland, one of Mr.
Thurloe's Secretaries, was sent away as Envoy to the Court of Savoy: Mr.
Moreland in Savoy.
Mr. Pell was dispatched to the Protestant Cantons of Switzerland upon the same
account; and Mr. (now Sir George) Downing was sent after Mr. Moreland, by the
way of France, where he began the complaint, and proceeded. All those three met
together at Geneva, to advise with that State how to manage this importance of
Religion: but Mr. Downing never pursued this Project farther, being remanded
hence to go Secretary of the Council newly made for Scotland. Pell was s^nt of
his form^r errand to the Cantons, and Mr. Moreland returned to Turin to the
Duke's Court; where perceiving this fraud of Cromwell, it was no great matter to
bring him over soon after to the Kings service, in which he continued.

Alderman Viner and Pack were made Treasurers for this Money, which amounted to
a very large sum, and reaching the design of the Protector; a small parcel
whereof was now remitted to Geneva, the French King having newly before
accommodated the business, the Duke refusing to admit Cromwell's Mediation. By
this conclusion the truth appeared; for in the very liminary words, they
acknowledged the Rebellion in express terms, and begged pardon of their
gracious Lord his Royal Highness; which was here imputed and charged to the
preva^ication and collusion of the Cantons Mediation, and the three Pastors
their Commissioners in that affair. There was one Artifice of the Protectors to
set this business forward, and to countenance it, omitted, which was, Addresses
from the Army here and abroad, offering their service in this common Cause of
the Protestant Religion, no way doubting but that God in his due time would
confound those Enemies of his People, as he had shown his Salvation by
themselves in the same Controversy to that day. Several Fires yet burst out in
many parts of the Kingdom; one in Barnaby-street in Southwark; and new
diseases were most rife and mortal.

This Easter-Term, one Mr. George Coney a Merchant having been committed by the
Commissioners of the Customs to the Sergeant at Arms, for refusing to obey
their Orders and Fine set, for not paying the dues of some Merchandises,
brought his Habeas Corpus in the King's Bench, where he intended to disprove the
Authority and Legality of his Commitment, and baffle-their Warrant. To this
purpose Sergeant Maynard, Serj. Maynard, etc. to the Tower.
Twisden, and Mr. Wadham Windham were retained of Counsel by him; who pleading
such matters for their Client, as entrenched upon the Protector's pretensions,
and his Publicans Power in that place, (into which profitable Employment they
had scrued themselves, by a pretense of serving the public gratis, and without
any Salary) were instantly committed to the Tower, to consider better of
Cromwell's Prerogative, and to help his Jailer Berkstead the Lieutenant thereof
with the Fees of that chargeable Imprisonment, where no Habeas Corpus would be
allowed, except upon the Knee; their enlargement being granted upon their
Petition and Submission to the Usurper. Those and the like Forces and violences
in the Law, and the fear of infaming the Bench and his own Credit, made
Chief Justice Rolls relinquish his place, and sue for a Quietus est; just as
old Sir Henry Vane deceased, entailing his Estate upon his Grandson, as
divining what his Son (with whom he died in feud) would come to.

General Blake was yet in the Streights, demanding satisfaction of the
Algier-Pirates for the depredations committed on the English, and required the
delivery of the Captives of our Nation, whose number was very great: but
neither of these would be hearkened to; whereupon Blake sent in a threatening
Message; to which they returned in scorn and contempt this Answer: -- Here are
our Castles of Guletto, and Castles of Porta Ferino, do what you can; do ye
think we fear the show of your Fleet? A Council of War being called upon this
daring affront, it was resolved to Burn those ships in Ferino, in defiance of
their Stone-line Forts, and Castles well furnished with Ordinance, and manned
with the whole Country adjacent. Porta Ferino fight, Apr. 4.
On the 4 of April the attempt was made. Blake and the greater ships, with
their seconds, coming within Musket Shot of the Castle and Line, which in two
hours time they rendered defenseless, dismounting all the Great Guns, and
clattering the Stones so about their Ears, that the Enemy abandoned them,
having seen their nine Ships and Frigates burning in the mean time; which was
done by Boats from every ship during this hot service, achieved in this
honorable manner. Blake set sail again to the same place, and renewed his
Demand, and was Answered in another strain, that not Ours, but now Those, were
the Castles and ships of the Grand Seigniour, who would be sure to require an
account of them. In conclusion they came to Treat, and did what they were
beaten to, for else they saw their Thieving Trade would be short.

Nathaniel Fiennes, Nath. Fiennes made Cromwell 's Lord Privy Seal, Steel made
Lord Chief-^aron, Lambert Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, and Glyn made Lord
Chie^-Iustice.
second Son to the Lord Say, and the once-famous Governor of Bristol, was made
Cromwell's Lord Privy Seal; Recorder Steel (a growing Favorite for his
Speeches) Lord Chief-Baron; and Lambert (yet aboveboard) Lord-Warden of the
Cinque Ports; and soon after, Sergeant Glyn was made Lord Chief Justice of
England; Mr. Parker, and Vnton Crook the Father made Sergeants. For Military
Commanders, Colonel Reynolds was ^ow Knighted, and ordered to carry it with him
to grace Henry Cromwell then preparing ^or his journey into Ireland, to be
inaugurated Lord Lieutenant in place of Fleetwood; where he arrived in the
middle of July: and Captain Vnton Crook was rewarded for his late service with
200 l. per annum. The Sco^c^ Council was nominated and dispatched also, Cromwell
gives preserments to several Officers and others.
viz. General Monk, Lord Broughill President, Colonel Howard (now Earl of
Carlisle) Colonel Adrian Scroop, Colonel Cooper, Colonel Wetham, Mr.
Desborough, Colonel Lockhart, Lord Swinton, and Downing Secretary. It was
omitted that Sir Gilbert Pickering was entitled Lord-Chamberlain to Oliver,
and that he had a Guard of Halberdiers in Grey-coats, Welted with Black-Velvet,
in the same manner and custom as the Kings of England used them: but this
Satellitium and Band of Bailiffs, was rather out of fear, Sir Will. Constable
one of the Kings Judges dies, and is buried in Hen. 7 th's Chapel.

A terrible fire at Lambeth.


than in regard to the honor of their Attendance. Sir William Constable (one
of the Kings Judges, Governor of Gloucester, and the last of his Name, which
rots in his dust) died now, and was buried in the Military way in Henry the
7th's Chapel, lighted into his Tomb with a terrible Fire in the opposite Town
of Lambeth.

A new Plot was now started, and most of the Nobility and Gentlemen of England
secured; Sir Geoffrey Palmer, Lord Willoughby of Parham, Lord Lovelace, Earl of
Lindsey, The Nobility and Gentry of England secured.
Lord Newport, and Sir Richard Wingfield, Lords Maynard, Petre Lucas, and
Faulkland, Sir Frederick Cornwallis, etc. and this done by Manning, whose
Villainy was not yet discovered; though to render an entire account of him, his
death was before related. County-Troops were now also established for security
to his Highness, such Trooper 8 l. a year pay, and more in case of service; a
Captain 100 l. and Officers proportionably: and as these new Forces were raised
here, so were other old ones disbanded in Scotland and Ireland; in which last
place, the Disbanded were yet to be the same kind of standing Militia, they
being settled in the Rebel Forfeited Lands, their Tenure being their service; An
Agent from the Prince of Transylvania departs.
and thus that Kingdom was re-peopled. An Agent that had come hither from
Ragotski Prince of Transylvania, now departed; the Conspiracy betwixt whom and
the King of Sweden, and the Swede and Cromwell, was just ripe for Execution.

For the terrible news came, The King of Sweden in Poland.
that Carolus Gustavus with an Army of 20000 Swedes was landed in Pomerania,
and fallen into Poland; and that the Palatinate of Posen had submitted, and the
Vice Chancellor Radzikousky was come in and complied with that King; and little
doubt was made of his overrunning that Kingdom: the like Treachery and other
divisions among the discontented Nobility opening him a way. Cromwell's reach in
this War was to divert the Emperor (who was arming apace in aid of the King of
Spain, and defense of the House of Austria against the French (as foreseeing
also the rupture of the Peace with the Spaniard by Cromwell) in the
Low Countries, and a Peace once by this balance effected, to espouse the
quarrel of our King:) to the same purpose the Transilvanian was engaged, who
like a stormy Cloud hung over the Imperial Dominions; so that no assistance
could be had from this part of the World. This highly disappointed the
Spaniard, and retarded those hopes of our King, in order to his Restitution by
Arms. He was yet at Colen, and caressed by several Princes, who Honored his
Privacy: among many others, the Landtgrave of Hessen gave him an honorable
Visit, and Prince Rupert, returned from the Emperor, gave him his due
attendance, to evidence that the Relation of a King in some such cases may be
without a Kingdom or Subjects.

A Swedish Ambassador.
A Swedish Ambassador Named Christian Bond arrived here near the same time, and
was in great State received, according to the Amplitude of his Highness: and
Rolt a Bed-chamber-man of this Altess was sent recipocrally to the King of
Sweden; but was near quitting the Cost of his Journey by a terrible Storm.
About the time the news came of his getting ashore in safety. Hannum a most
notorious Thief, Hannum the infamous Thief, breaks Prison and escapes.
suspected of the Robbery of the King at Colen, (in which parts he was no
stranger) broke Prison and escaped likewise.

From the noble Exploit of Porta Ferino, Blake sailed to Cadiz and those parts
of Spain, where he found that the Armada of Spain was at Sea, to look after the
arrival of their India-Fleet; and it fell out that the English and Spaniards
met together in those Seas, the Spaniards being 32 ships in all; but no quarrel
happened, for neither had Commission to right. The same indifferent (but more
cowardly) temper at the same instant (in August) made the Iamaica-Fleet
(returning home) suffer the longed-for Plate-Fleet to pass untought, when
discovered in the Gulf of Florida upon their Voyage to Spain; so that none of
the Fates were wanting to make this the most unglorious undertaking of the
English.

Upon a resolution taken by a Council of War at Iamaica, the greatest part of
the Fleet under General Pen set sail for England, and near half way home lost
the Paragon a Navy-ship by fire; none of that company daring to come in to her
relie^, because of her Powder; so that near 140 men were lost by fire and
water; those that could swim escaped, being taken up by Boats after the Blow.
On the 3 of September, Pen returns and Venables, Sept.
General Pen arrived at Portsmouth, and on the ninth Venables (with his Wife)
very sick and much altered, and Quarter-Master-General Rudyard landed at the
same place in the Marston-moore, Command by Rear-Admiral Blag; the Fleet at
Iamaica consisting of some 20 sail, being left under the Command of
Vice Admiral Goodson. Upon their coming to London, (where Venables alleged the
danger and increase of sickness for the cause of his return, Pen the resolution
of the Council of War) they were both Committed to the Tower, to satisfy the
expectation of the people, more than any intention of bringing Venables to an
account for this base and dishonorable Expedition. The Cavils at the Isle of
Rhee's unfortunate business were now regested, and retorted upon those Enemies
and Traducers of the King, whose party was very well pleased with this disgrace
done to Oliver, which carried with it future advantages against the Usurpation,
that had designed this Foreign Exchequer for the perpetual pay of his
everlasting Red-coats. General Blake (as was said before) having met with the
Spanish Fleet under the Command of General Paulo di Contreras, waiting for the
Plate-Fleet about the Southern Cape, and mutually saluted one another, returned
to Victual and recruit in England, and landed at Chattam.

The Mart at Frankfort in Germany was held this September, which with other
affairs invited the King from Colen: King Charles at Frankfort.
He went from Bonne by Water, being Towed in a Pleasure-boat, and two other
necessary Vessels for his dressing Provision and accommodation, and was saluted
by all the Towns near which they passed, with most ample Ceremonies; and where
he entered, with the like presents. In his Company were the Prince of Aurange
and the Duke of Gloucester, attended by the Marquess of Ormond, Earl of
Norwich, Lord Newburgh, Colonel Dan. O Neal, Doctor Frazer, the Lady Stanhop,
and Lord Hemfleit her Husband, and other Domestics* An interview had been
appointed at a Village called Koningsteyn or Kingston, betwixt Queen Christina
of Sweden, then journeying to the Archduke of Inspruck's Country for Italy,
where she was highly Treated by the said Archduke, and there professed her
self a Roman Catholic. The King at this Village (after the public Ceremonies
were over) had private Conference with this Princess the space of an hour, and
then the Duke of Gloucester and Princess of Aurange did the like; which passed,
the Noblemen and near Attendants had reception given them. The Prince Elector
of Heidelburgh, with Prince Rupert, gave her likewise a visit in this Town, and
had the same converse with her: Both the King and She were invited by him to
Heidelburgh, but they took several ways; for his Majesty having continued some
time at Frankfort, where the States and Deputies of the Empire were assembled,
to finish what was left at the Diet, (the Kings business there depending before
that Assembly) and having been splendidly entertained, He is honorably treated
by the Prince Elector of Mentz.
(as in all places of Germany where he came) and there received an honorable
pressing invitation from the Prince Elector of Mentz, by his Earl-Marshal, who
was sent on the Embassy with a Train to conduct him from Frankfort, d^parted
thence with the noise of the Cannon, and the Volleys and Acclamations of the
Citizens, and arrived at Mentz, having been feasted at a magnificent Supper in
a Village by the way; whence next morning in all the State that Prince could
set out or furnish his entrance with, the King departed for Mentz, and was
there entertained two or three days with an Expense befitting his Dignity, and
diverted with all honorable Recreations; and with the same Grandeurs departed
for Colen. Most abominable impudent scandals were Printed in the News-Book here
of the King, and the meanness of those Respects done him; when it is most true,
greater Honors were not done to any Prince in the World; so much did the
injury of his Condition advance these peoples Civility.

While he progressed hereabouts, one Dury a Minister, Dury a Minister one of
Cromwell 's Agents.
sent by Cromwell, was perambulating these parts with Credentials, or Commission
from him, (who would needs be doing in Religious Plots as well as Civil, to
make himself famous) to discourse and Treat with all the Churches of the
Reformed Persuasions, Calvinists, and Lutherans, about an Agreement and Union;
and that the Doctrine might be one and the same; and that his Highness desired
to be Instrumental in such a Pious Work of general Communion: but the main of
his Mission being to set forth Oliver, An Ambassador from Venice complements
Cromwell.
this Will in the Wisp vanished and returned for England; whither an Ambassador
from Venice, that had layn some while here incognito, appeared in that quality,
in the room of Signior Pauluzzi recalled, and did notably complement Cromwell
with his puissance, valor, and prudence, and offered the respects and
Friendships of that Signiory. Arguile comes to kiss his Hands.
And Arguile from Scotland came to kiss his Highness Hands.

On the 24 of October, the French Peace having been some while before
concluded, was solemnly Proclaimed; first in the Court at White Hall, next at
Temple Bar, and so in other places: French peace concluded, October. 24.
and Monsieur De Bourdeaux the French Ambassador next day treated at Dinner by
the Protector. In this Treaty the Royal Family of England, The Royal Family of
England Excluded.
all but the Queen Mother, were totally Excluded, though the Duke of York still
continued at Paris, (till after the arrival of Lockhart Cromwell's Ambassador
thither soon after) when he departed for Brussels, having been complementally
invited to the next Summers Campagnia. Thus Corruption unius est generatio
alterius, the Spanish Peace was all to pieces; for the same day that the French
Peace was Proclaimed, an Embargo was laid upon all Goods in the Canaries, The
Spaniard declare a war with England.
and the Spanish Ambassador Don Alonso de Cardenas departed hence, and by
Gravesend shipped himself for Flanders; and a Trader at Vigo in Spain was taken
and seized; and a Declaration of War published by that King: Whereupon, Cromwell
presently erected a Committee of Trade, of which his Son and Heir apparent,
Richard, was the first named, to consult how to manage and secure it. An
Embargo was likewise soon after laid here upon all ships, and one Mr. Maynard
dispatched to the King of Portugal, to make sure of his Ports, and with some
other intrigues: a Fleet was likewise preparing to set out to Sea, and the
Footing in Iamaica resolved to be kept: Maj. Sedgewick and Colonel Humphries,
with a Squadron of ships, and a Regiment to 1000 fresh men, having touched at
Barbados, being landed there now; where Sedgewick sent to Command in chief,
with Colonel Fortescue of the old, and most of the new comers died of the
Infection that was among them: Humphries with much ado, and danger of Death,
returned home in safety. This Humphries was the Son of him that carried the
Sword before Bradshaw at the High Court.

With the commencement of this Rupture, the Protector began new practices
against the Cavalier-party, whose Interest and Spirit against his Government
was as high as ever. He had foreseen, that by this Peace, the King only
shifted and changed that storm from one quarter to another, and was as yet as
near as ever, and in a more opportune and advantageous posture, for that the
King of Spain and he would certainly concur against him, and so the Low
Countries, his Provinces and Ports, be open and at the service of our
Sovereign; therefore his party was by all all ways, how unjust and Tyrannical
soever, to be crushed and suppressed. The Loyal Clergy suppressed.
It began with the Clergy, who were neither to keep School nor Cure, nor be
Chaplains, except they gave signal Testimony of their Apostasy from the Church:
It next extended to all sorts of men, the reviving Act of 1652. forbidding all
Royalists, or such as meant well to the Peace of the Kingdom in their
subscription to the p^rsonal Treaty in 1648. by a new Proclamation to that
purpose, from giving voices of Electing, or to be Elected themselves, upon
their utmost peril. Then came out a Declaration for Decimating such who were
actually in Arms, and to show the reasons of such proceedings against them.
Cromwell therein taking it for granted, that the whole Mass of them were engaged
in the late d^signe of Penruddock's; and observing their malignity to the
Government, by their refusing to match their Relations but within themselves,
and so to propagate the Quarrel from one generation to another: that they
supplied their King (as they called him) with Money: that their Clergy were as
refractory as ever; and that therefore since by them the Peace so endangered
could not be kept, nor the Cause and the well-affected s^cured but by keeping
up a standing Army by a constant pay; it was requisite the charge should be
born by those who caused it.

^^omwel (...) a new Authority Aut^^^y.
For the better dispatch of this affair, He had erected a new Military
Authority, like the Turkish Bashaws, distributed into several Provinces or
Counties, with an unbounded power; England being now cantoned into this
Hendecarchy, viz. Kent and Surrey under Colonel Kelsey; Sussex, Hampshire, and
Berkshire under Goff; Gloucester-shire, Wilts, Dorset, Somerset, Devon, and
Cornwall, under Colonel Desborough; Oxfordshire, Buckingham, Hartford,
Cambridge, Isle of Ely, Essex, Norfolk and Suffolk under Lieutenant General
Fleetwood; London, under Major General Skippon; Lincolnshire, Nottingham,
Derby, Warwick, and Leicester, under Whaley; Northamptonshire, Bedford,
Rutland, and Huntington, under one Major Butler; Worcestershire, Hereford,
Shropshire, and North Wales, under Colonel Berry; Cheshire, Lancashire, and
Stafford, under Colonel Worsely; Yorkshire, Durham, Cumberland,
Northumberland, and Westmerland, under Lord Lambert; Westminster, and
Middlesex, under Colonel Berkstead. Their Commission was to take a Roll and
account of all suspected persons of the Kings party; and such as were actually
so, to receive security of them, in which they were to be bound to act nothing
against the Government, and to reveal all Plots that should come to their
knowledge: they were to suppress all Horse-races, Cock-matches, and other
concourses of people; to secure the Highways, to take engagement from Royalists
for their Servants and Children; and those that did not so, nor give security,
to commit to prison; and to rate and receive Money rising from this Decimation.
In short, there was nothing which they might not do, nor which they did not;
such an Arbitrary vast power they had from the Protector. To this purpose a
Fast was kept by the charitable Gentlemen, and an Office was erected here in
London, called the Major-Generals-Office, somewhere in Fleet Street, as other
Courts had, where these Recognizances were entered, and all other the like
Affairs, Dependencies, and concerns thereof entered and Recorded. By this means
the Tyrant intended to inform himself of the value and quality of every Estate
and Person, together with the number of that Party in every County throughout
the Kingdom. Most of those Loyal persons formerly secured, were hereupon set at
Liberty; but by another twenty-mile-Proclamation driven into the Country, into
the bounds of the several Major-Generals, who presently took Cognizance of
them, and summoned them to their respective Residences: they sat sometimes
without, other times with some of the old Committees, where they received
accounts of Estates, which were rated to the tenth penny yearly. Some bought off
that Tax and encumbrance by a present Sum, at three years purchase; which was
very acceptable, for Money was the thing the Usurper wanted: others looked for
a nearer Redemption, and to be constrained to that payment. The well-affected
and Godly people still voiced this to be a just and reasonable Imposition; for
when should they be at quiet, and enjoy themselves in the Goods they had got,
free from the interrupting endeavor of this old and restless Enemy? so that
there wanted not Abettors and Assistants to this most Religious work of the
Major-Generals; who had ordered in the first place, that no Royalist should
keep or wear either Arms offensive or defensive, Royalists forbid to wear Arms.
but straightways deliver them; so that they lay at the mercy of whomsoever
they met, and at the discretion and charity of whosoever resorted to their
Houses, for what they had left.

Several persons were apprehended again, for breach of the 20 miles
Proclamation, and other Loyal guilt, and committed to a neglected restraint to
the Marshal at St. James's, which yet continued a Goal; three of whom being
spent almost with the charge and tediousness of their Confinement, endeavored
an escape, having obtained of the Marshal's Wife the liberty of walking in the
Park with a Soldier, who withstanding their endeavor of escape, Mr. Davison,
etc. escapes at St. James's.
(and being hair-brained, resolved to hinder their flight) was by them, after
several warnings of the mischief, if he yet held them, as one of them he did,
shot in the Arm with a Pistol, They kill a Soldier, and are retaken: are
Indicted for Murder, but found guilty only of Manslaughter.
whereof he died. This bustle brought in other Soldiers, who took them again.
They were tried for this Murder (as the Indictment run) at the Upper Bench,
before Chief Justice Glyn, and by a serious Jury found only Guilty of
Manslaughter; at which the Court seemed much incensed, and Chief Justice Glyn
in a seeming anger discharged the honest Foreman of the Jury, one Mr. William
Sanderson of Shoreditch, from all Service thereafter. It madded Cromwell the
rather, because Mr. Davison (the other two were Mr. Henry Holder, and Mr.
Robert Thorold) was highly suspected of Colonel Rainsborough's Death.

Cromwell was resolved to have Money one way or other, and therefore besides the
late rapine of Decimation, and the Piedmont-Sacriledge, (for the speedier
bringing in of which Money, he had appointed a great and numerous Committee,
who were to credit the receipt) now he would venture upon a greater impiety, to
the derogation of the Savior of the World: that nothing might be wanting to
fill up the measure of his Wickedness, he had dealt underhand with some Agents
from the Nation of the Jews, Cromwell and the Jews treat about a Toleration.
Manasseh Ben Israel their Agent.
who had proposed a Toleration, their own Judges, their Burying-places, the
revocation of all Laws and Statutes against them, protection from, the fealty
to him; and had strengthened the reason of this with a round sum of Money.
Cromwell wanted not plausible Arguments of his own, from the hopeful juncture of
time of making the flock of Christ but one Fold; and others cited places of
Scripture: several Conferences were held about it before him, Note that it cost
the people of England a whole fifteenth to get them expelled, in Ed. r.
with the Judges, as Steel, etc. and Ministers, as Ienkins, Manton, etc. who
being not satisfied with what appeared from the arguments of Manasseh Ben
Israel the Jewish Agent, the public admission of them was laid aside, and the
Jews gulled of their Money they had upon that account already paid.

The Ships at Iamaica had been roving abroad, and burnt St. Martha, and took
some spoil, while Doyley the Commander in chief by Land had made some Inroads
into the Country under Colonel Wood, and was building or planting a new Town at
Cagway-Point. In Scotland, new Commissioners were added for the sale of
Delinquents Lands; and to prevent their frauds in the purchasing thereof, a New
great and Privy Seal and Signet was likewise sent down thither from England,
and the Protestors and Resolution-men continued at the same distance. A
Proclamation there to stop all Comers to that Kingdom, upon pretense of
Infection in Holland, and of all going out without License. The Earl of
Glencarn, upon suspicion of a Plot, being taken and secured by General Monk in
Edenburgh-Castle. Earl of Glencarn Prisoner in Edenborough.
In England, to affront the Spanish Imbargo, (which now turned to seizure) the
price of Canary-Wines, which were feared to rise by the War, were now by
Proclamation abated to nine pence a pint, having continued at twelve some years
before. The Princess of Aurange departed by the way of Antwerp, and Peronne in
France, in January, to visit her Mother at Paris: and the King preparing
according to invitation to go into Flanders, where near Lovain, in February, he
privately conferred with the Earl of Fuensaldagne near Lovain; the Archduke of
Leopold being upon his departure for Germany, and Don John of Austria to
succeed in that Government for the King of Spain. From hence his Majesty, the
War betwixt Spain and us being public, came to the Royal Mansion of Treveur
near Brussels, in order to a nearer conjunction of Counsels: and Odwyr newly
returned, and concealing himself in Ireland, gave suspicion here of some new
design upon Ireland; and thereupon all Papists and Irish were again disarmed,
and commanded to keep at home within their Limits. The King's Family yet
continued at Colen; but upon his remaining settling in Brugis, where soon after
he was received in State, it removed thither also; so the Spaniards embraced
and shook hands with his Interest, as their own affairs governed them.

In England many sad accidents happened together: the Abbey of Spalding being
let out into Chambers, in one of them as the folks were profaning by Dancing
and making merry therein, 23 persons killed by the fall of Spalding Abbey.

Sir Tho: Ashcock cut his Throat.


the Roof fell, and was the Death of 23 persons, January 22. Sir Thomas Ashcock
cut his Throat, a Paper being found in his Chamber, where he had reckoned
twenty several preservations before; and yet God gave him up to this
Temptation. Mr. Skipwith a young Gentleman who had had a grudge against Sir
Thomas Wortley, for keeping his Sister Company, Sir Thomas Wortley killed.
met with the said Sir Thomas; whereupon both drew their Pistols, but Skipwith
killed him dead, though Wounded himself. A Stationer's Servant in Fleet Street,
being taken in Bed with his fellow-serving-maid, got an opportunity and
presently Hanged himself. A Stationers Servant in Fleet Street hangs himself.

Colonel Granthamson killed.

The Bp. of Armagh dies.


Mr. Chamberlain of Oxfordshire killed Colonel Granthamson at
Southampton-buildings in a single Duel. The most Reverend the Archbishop of
Armagh died March 21, a Prelate of great and incomparable Learning and Piety,
as his Works do sufficiently declare; a person challenged as Indifferent to the
Church Government by Bishops, but no doubt falsely; however, it gave the
Protector a fine occasion of personating a love to Learning and good men, in
the expense of his decent and fitting Interment, Cromwell allows 200 l. toward
his Funeral.
200 l. being allowed thereunto, out of the public Money; the best and justest
of all those sums he squandered upon his dying and perishing Ambition. He was
not buried till the 17 of April ensuing, being then brought from the Countess
of Peterburgh's, His great Patroness at Rygate, to St. George's, so to
Somerset House, Thames Ebb and flow twice in two hours.

Sir George Sonds his two unfortunate Sons, the one ^illing the other, and ^s
(...) for it.


and thence to the Abbey at Westminster. Mr. Bourdeaux Ambassador returned for
England, and Lockhart, as was said, dispatched for France. The River of Thames
Ebbed and Flowed twice in two hours, this Year; and the last twelve Years there
was much alteration in them. Freeman Sonds, the younger Son of Sir George
Sonds, killed his only Brother in Bed, and was Hanged for it: which sad and
strange story had almost past observation.

Anno Dom. 1656.
GEneral Blake and Montague began this year with their Fleet of War sailing for
the Coast of Spain, having touched at Tangier, and directed thence their course
to Cadiz-bay; and the removing of the English-staple at Roterdam by
Proclamation to Dort; and the arrival of Mr. Lockhart in France, as touched
before; together with a rencounter at Sea, of the Advice, President, and Drake,
A rencounter at Sea.
English Frigates, with the Maria of Ostend, one Erasmus Bruer a Fleming
Captain, off the Coast of Scarborough. It was stoutly managed by the Enemy from
Morning till Night, when being totally disabled and overpowered, he yielded,
nothing but himself and Mariners remaining of the Conquest, and not many sound
ones of those; for the ship sunk presently: she was the Admiral of that place.
Maj. General Worsley dies, and is buried in Hen. 7 th's Chapel.
Worsley the Major General died before he could be good in his Office, and was
buried with the Dirges of Bell Book and Candle, and the Peals of Muskets, in
no less a repository than Henry 7th's Chapel, as became a Prince of the Modern
Erection, and Oliver's great and rising Favorite.

With him went down the Wrestling in Moor-fields, an exercise used time out of
mind in that place, Wrestling in Moor-fields forbid.
before the War, and now resumed again; together also with pitching of the Bar,
and generally all pastime and sort of sports was damned: and to make his Exit
the more remarkable, Hannam the most notorious private Thief in England, Hannam
the great Thief Hanged.
to expiate his sad villainy at Colen, (having promised Cromwell some Papers
taken at that time) was retaken in another Robbery in London, and had his due
by being hanged.

Forces under Colonel Brayn, who was to Command in chief in Iamaica, were now
shipped from Port Patrick in Scotland, (where the Citadel of St. Iohnstones was
fired and almost consumed, A great fire at St. Johnstons in Scotland.
but Provisions saved) with 1000 stout Fellows: but Fate so crossed Oliver, that
no Governor of his sending and nomination survived long after their arrival;
and Colonel Doyley was a kind of an old Royalist, as were many or the most of
the remaining Officers, whom he had made it his Religion not to trust. He had
in England appointed at this time a Committee for inspecting of Charters; A
Committee appointed for inspection of Charters.
and some forward pragmatical Country-Burgesses were very busy to supplicate a
renewal of some, augmenting of and granting others de novo; of this Committee
Mr. Gabriel Beck his Highness's Solicitor was chief, who were to report their
Consults to the Council. Gloucester Cathedral was now very ruinous; Gloucester
Cathedral a School-house and Church.
and the Citizens begged it for a School-house, and afterward had it for a
Church, in some part according to its first pious institution.

The Spanish War was like to prove too chargeable for Oliver's Purse, for all
his devices of Decimation, Piedmont, and Jews; and therefore resolved to call
another Parliament, Cromwell 's design in setting up the Maj. Generals first to
awe Elections.
hoping so to awe the Elections, (having had time to improve that power he had
assumed to himself) together with the disappointment the late Parliament had
met with, and the desire of Settlement (which the new acquired Wealth and
Estates, by the vast purchases of Crown and other Lands vehemently enforced;
together with the severe penalties on Royalists Electing and Elected, and the
flagging wearied opposition of striving thus in vain against his uncontrollable
will) would so propitiate his designs in this Convention, that under the
pretense of the said Settlement, he might establish himself, and obtain
supplies for carrying on the said War. He set up the Major-Generals, to force
themselves into the peoples trust and abhorence together: for as the mad
actions of the Little Parliament were on purpose suffered and dictated to them,
to make the people choose any Government rather, and submit to a Single Person
upon his own score: So these Major-Generals tyrannical proceedings by virtue of
his unknown unlimited Authority, would incline men to seek for a Government
established by Law, to which he and his Officers under him might be thought at
least, and deemed accountable; and he was in a fair way to a Monarchical Form,
and nothing wanting but a good Title, or the peoples Assent.

These were his aims upon this Convention; for suffrages wherein, his party,
and all that he could make to his side, were no less sedulous and industrious;
and if they failed in the major voice, he could but use the same trick of
Seclusion. The Major-Generals had pretty well prepared the way, by aspersing
many, seizing others, and threatening the rest of the Gentry; by displacing
Burgesses, and disfranchising one sort, and admitting another to Freedoms; and
at the day of Election, The awe of Elections to Parliament.
which was the 20 of August, attending at the places with Foot and Horse, and
got themselves returned by this means, with others of their nomination. Thus
Berkstead got himself, with Kiffin the Anabaptist, returned Knights for
Middlesex. And when such persons were chosen in the very face of the Kingdom,
little other choice could be expected in obscure and remoter parts. A rout was
brought down for Kiffin, who together with Red-coats (that were only the good
people, and had most right to choose) bawled, scuffled, and jugled away the fair
Election of young Mr. Chute, his Father difficultly carrying it. And worse
Juggling there was in Scotland and Ireland, of which 60 there could not be said
to be any choice at all, further than the nomination of the respective Councils
of both Kingdoms. To facilitate the effect of this project, Sir Henry Vane and
Feak, upon the Commonwealth and Little Parliaments account; and Colonel Russel
and other Royalists, upon the Cavalier-account, were seized and sent to Prison,
and a Proclamation of 20 miles again the 12 of September. During this Cabal,
and the serious carrying of it on, a Freak or Crotchet took Mr. Robert Villiers
(next related to the Lord Purbeck) in the Head, Mr. Villiers changes his Name
by patent to Danvers.
of changing his Name, by Patent of Cromwell, to Danvers, having Married the
Daughter of Sir John Danvers, (Brother to the Earl of Danby) the last of that
Family, being another of the Kings Judges, as was observed in Sir William
Constable. The reason he alleged was, the many disservices his Name had done
the Commonwealth, and he intended to become a probationer for a Parliament-mans
place, and a Protectorian-Consider: but it was said some Natural, not
Political, reasons induced him to this alteration.

The Parliament met.
On the 17 of September the Members met at the Abbey-Church in Westminster,
whither came Cromwell with his Guard and Gentlemen, and heard a Sermon Preached
by Dr. Owen, Dr. Owen Preaches before the Protector.
Dean of Christ-Church, upon these words in Isaiah, What shall one then answer
to the Messengers of the Land? That the Lord has founded Zion, and the poor of
his people shall rejoice. (A Sermon calculated to the device of the Settlement;
and for which, next day, by Sir John Berkstead (Knighted a little before) and
Mr. Maidstone the Protector's Steward of his house, he had the Thanks of the
Parliament.) At the entrance whereunto, after this Preachment, Exclusion of
Memb^rs thr^ Parliament.
the Members found a Guard, and an Officer standing with a List in his Hand,
and demanding the Names of every of them; and such as were marked for
non-admittance were turned back: for notwithstanding all this diligence and
foul play, far the major part of the House were against the Single Person,
especially against Oliver, whom the Republicans hated more than ever they did
the Kingship in our Sovereign: those within nevertheless stood not to ask what
was become of their Fellows without, but proceeded, and appointed a Fast; and
to prevent application of the Secluded to them, as of right, they turned them
over by an Order to the Protector's Council for approbation; which most of the
Country-Gentlemen disdaining, quickly departed home; which others seeing that
were admitted, not thinking the most of this remnant fit company for men of
honesty or fashion, they also absented themselves, that their Names might not
be abused by continuing with them to countenance their proceedings. Cromwell saw
the Test of a Recognition would not serve turn; for they had learnt his own Art
of time-serving Engagements, and therefore went this illegal bold way to work,
contenting himself with this picked Juncto, which made a show of a Parliament;
Sir Thomas Widdrington chosen Speaker.
but quota portio faecis Achaeae? Sir Thomas Widdrington was chosen Speaker.

These fell to his business, and first of all to make room for the Olivarian
Title, The King's Title to the Crown annuled.

A Bill for the Protector's safety. The Pa^l. promise to assist him against the
Spaniards.


a Bill was brought in for annulling the pretended Title of the King, by the
Name of Charles Stuart; another ^or the Security of the Protector's (his
Highnesses) Person, pursued with a Vote, that the Parliament declared the War
against the Spaniard to be undertaken upon just grounds, and that they will
assist h^s Highness therein; and Voted the manner of the supply to be taken
into consideration with all speed.

And for their better encouragement, the first news they had since their
Sitting, was of a success of the English Fleet lying upon the Coast of Spain,
in expectation of the Plate-flee^ coming in, or their Convoy of 40 Men of War
going out from Cadiz, (one of which the Spaniard feared in earnest, and the
other he threatened in a Bravado.) It happened thus: the Generals Blake and
Montague being gone to the Bay of Wyers to take in fresh Water, le^t
Rear-Admiral Stayner with 7 Frigates to ply before that Port; who about the
middle of September descryed at Sea eight sail, (as it proved from the West
Indies) who having met and taken a Portugal Prize, and informed by them that
the English were gone off the Coast, The Plate-ships taken by Capt. Stayner,
Sep.
made securely to Cadiz, where Captain Stayner and his Squadron (but two
whereof engaged with him in the Speaker, viz. the Bridgewater and Plymouth,
taken by them at first for Fishermen, by reason of their lying so low in the
Water) assailed them, and after a fierce fight (the Spaniard being loath to part
with his Treasure) overcame them. There were two Sunk, two escaped, two run
aground, and two taken by the Speaker-Frigat. In one of them was the Marquess
of Badajox, Marq. of Badajox one of the King of Spain 's Governors killed.
of the Family of Lopez, who had been Governor for the King of Spain's Peru,
who was killed in the Fight, with his Wife and a Daughter; the Eldest Son and
his Brother were saved, and brought safe to the Generals with this Prize,
wherein were two millions of Pieces of eight, and as much there was in one of
them that was Sunk. The Admiral who carried the Flag (for concealing of the
chiefest ship) with the Portugal prize, recovered the Shore. Soon after General
Montague with the young Marquess and part of the Fleet to convoy the Silver,
returned into England, and delivered the Bullion into the Mint; and the young
Marquess was set at liberty. For this a Thanksgiving, with a Narrative to be
read thereon, was appointed by the Parliament, The Parliament appoint a day of
Thanksgiving.
who emitted their Declaration of War against Spain. About the same time Five
Frigates returned also from Iamaica.

According to the 34th Article of the Instrument, which this Juncto roundly
danced to, Cromwell having Named Fiennes and Lisle to be Lord-Commissioners of
the Great Seal, and Sergeant Glyn to be Lord Chief Justice of England, he now
proposed them to the House for their approbation; which they did with Glee, and
confirmed them in their places: and to reciprocate his officious comportment,
they of their part opened the intercourse betwixt him and the Parliament, by
presenting him several Bills to Sign and Ratify as Acts; the chief whereof
were the Annulling the Title of the King, for security of his Person, taking
away Wards and Liveries, and that the Passing those Acts should not determine
the Session: these were firmed in the Painted-Chamber, in ample manner and
form, by this new-fangled-Legislator, Nov. 27.

At the latter end of October died John the 4th King of Portugal, The King of
Portugal dies.
who had so sucessfully wrested the Kingdom of Portugal from the unjust
possession of the Spanish Monarchy, after almost 100 years Usurpation of it, in
the remarkable year of 1640. He died of the Stone in his Kidneys in the fifty
and odd year of his Age, leaving behind him by his Queen, the Sister of the
Duke of Medina Sidonia in Spain, his Son Alphonso the sixth King of Portugal,
and Donna Catharina the Illustrious Infanta of the same, since Married to our
Gracious Sovereign King Charles the second.

The Sect of Quakers was grown to such a height of Impudence, by the
presumptions and deceitful Revelations of the Light within, that there was
scarce any Blasphemy which they would not say and act; and yet very many were
bewitched with it. The Divinity of Christ had been oppugned by Biddle the
Socinian, and now it was Personated (with reverence be it spoken) by one James
Naylor a Quaker, James Naylor the Quaker appears. He p^^sonates our Savior.
who resembling in his Proportions and Complexion the picture of Christ, had,
in all other things, as the setting of the Beard and Lo^ks in the same fashion,
^ar^d to counterfeit our Blessed Lord. To this purpose he had Disciples and
Women ministering to him, whose Blasphemous Expressions, and a^^^ications of
several Scriptures relating properly to the loveliness and Transce^^^^nt
Excellency of Christ ((...)) to this Impostor, will (if repeated) move Horror
and Trembling in every Christian. His first appearance in this manner was at
Bristol, where a man leading his Horse Bare-headed, and one Dorcas Erbury and
Martha Symmonds going up to the Knees in Mire by his Horse-side, sung aloud,
Holy, Holy, Holy* Hosanna, etc. For this they were seized by the Magistrates,
and being complained of to the Parliament, were brought up to Town, into which
(as in all places) they entered singing the same Blasphemies. At the Bar of the
House (a Committee having reported their opinion concerning his punishment) he
was Sentenced in December to be set in the Pillory twice, He is sentenced to
stand twice in the Pillory, to be twice whipped, to be Stigmatized, and to be
Bored through the Tongue.
and Whipped twice, and his Forehead to be Stigmatized with the letter B. for
Blasphemer, and Bored through the Tongue, with which he used to answer to any
Question, Thou have said it, and the like. He was likewise Whipped at Bristol,
and thence returned to Bridewel, to be kept close, and to eat no more than what
he earned. In Newgate (after his punishment) the Impostor continued: one Mr.
Rich (a Merchant of credit) that held him by the Hand while he was in the
Pillories, with diverse others, licked his Wounds: the Women were observed some
to lay their Head in his Lap, lying against his Feet; others to lean it upon
his Shouldiers: and questionless the Quakers would have persisted in this
delusion, and set up, and made something of this Idol, if he had not been kept
from them (for as soon as ever any came into his Company, they would first take
him by the Hand, and in a strange note say, Holy, etc.) But being thus removed,
after three days wilful abstinence, having weakened himself even unto Death, he
begged some Victuals, and then was set to work, which he performed, and came by
degrees to himself, and to reduction. At the return of the Rump he got his
liberty, but survived it not; his additional pretended Divinity having
attenuated and wasted his Humanity; and that Body sublimed and prepared for
Miracles, went the way of all Flesh. It is to be noted, Lambert appears in his
behalf.
that Lambert stickled much to have saved him from Sentence and punishment, he
being his Soldier: but the truth was, Lambert perceived what Cromwell was
driving at, to engross the Sovereignty to himself and Family; and it was high
time therefore to ingratiate with all parties, the better to be able to oppose
him: and henceforth sprung and appeared the feud betwixt these two
Army-Potentates.

The King at Bruges.
The King kept his Court at Bruges, some eight Leagues from the Court at
Brussels, where Don John was now Governor for the King of Spain, and had had
several consultations together about the carrying on of the War, and many fair
overtures made. The Duke of York was newly arrived, as also the Princess of
Aurange; so that all the Royal Family, except the youngest Daughter and Mother,
were present together. He had newly listed some Regiments of his three Nations
into his service and pay, which were now quartered about Flanders. Several
Prisoners released.
Several Prisoners of both sorts were now released, as Sir Henry Vane, Mr.
Feak, Mr. Rogers, Judge Ienkins Esquire; as little time before, one Mrs Lucy
Barlow committed, upon the score of some Letters of the King's found about her.

Sindercomb 's Plot.
A most formidable Plot was again whispered to be discovered, that tended to the
destruction of the Nation; and most terrible expectations there were. What more
monstrous wickedness could be practiced, than what the Nation had already seen
perpetrated. -- The Fox had a Wound he could not tell where, -- The Drudgery of
Mr. Thurloe, ( Cromwell's Second in the Plot) had most laboriously undermined a
sap-headed fellow, one Miles Syndercombe a Leveller, Cas^iered in Scotland
about Overton's business, to design the Life of his most Serene Highness. This
was effected by the hired combination of one Cecil, and one Toop of Cromwell's
Lifeguard, who drew in this malcontent. There was another vizarded or
disguised person, said to be a Priest sent from Don Alonso the Spanish
Ambassador in Flanders, who was engaged as principal. Several opportune Houses
taken to Shoot him, with Engines, Calivers, Blunderbusses, at his going to the
Parliament, to Hampton Court, at a convenience in Hammersmith, in Hide-Park,
the Gates whereof were unhinged: and lastly, by firing the Chapel at
White Hall, with a strange combustible matter. Those horrible circumstances
Master Secretary delivered in such anxious, and the discovery of it in such
grave words, that the House was resolved into a joyful wonderment of this good
Providence, The Parliament congratulates Cromwell 's deliverance.
for which they first ordered a Thanksgiving, and a Narrative of the Plot, and
the House to come and congratulate his Highness upon this deliverance at a day
he should appoint; which was the 23 of January, when the House with their
Speaker went to the Banqueting House, and met their live-like Protector with a
Sospital Oration (consisting of these Heads) by the Mouth of Sir Thomas
Widdrington.

First, The Contents of the Speaker's Speech.
the danger and Ruin of the Reformed Churches abroad, and three Nations at
home, who were struck at in this Blow. 2. Then the cunning secrecy of it, no
more than two to know the whole design. 3. The extensiveness of it, if they
failed in one place, resolved to do in another; that if Cicero were living, he
would want expression to set out the Danger or the Mercy, and that being so
unparalleled unprecedented a Mercy, the Parliaments Hymn was, O cantemus
canticum novum, O come let us sing a new Song, etc.

This Speech (like the Plot) had neither Head nor Tail, yet was well enough
taken by the Swordmen, who had no other acuteness than what was in their
Scabbards: but the disaster that was the preface to this Lame Story, was taken
in dudgeon. As the Members were ascending the Stairs of the Banqueting House,
a press of people crowding with them, the Stairs broke under them, and spoiled
the Cringes and Obeysances of many of these Parliament-gratulators,
particularly Mr. Ellis (afterward Knighted by Cromwell) his Sollicitor-General
broke his Leg, and lost the Fees of a whole Term for a Complement. Cromwell's
Son Richard was much bruised, and lay in.

Syndercombe was the same Term for this Treason prosecuted by direction from
the Parliament at the King's Bench, Syndercombe Condemned at the King's Bench, by
Justice Glyn.
before Chief Justice Glyn and Warburton, and by Cecil's and Toop's Evidence
(who discovered, etc. and craved mercy) Convicted: He resolutely denied and
retorted the Plot, and interrogated the Court about it; but it availed not,
Justice Glyn condemning him, when he declared that the Statute 25 Edw. 3. was
declaratory of the Common Law provided in that Case before, and that by King
was understood any Chief-Magistrate. He was carried thence to the Tower, He is
sent to the Tower, and the night before his Execution found dead. He is buried
under the Scaffold at Tower Hill, a Stake being driven through his Body.
where the night before his Execution, it was supposed (and so the Coroners
Jury gave their Verdict) that he Poisoned himself: He went well into his Bed,
desiring a while before a space of half an hours privacy for his Prayers; which
time elapsed, he opened the Door, and rubbing his Hands together, and his Nose
with them, cheerfully bid his Guard goodnight. His Body afterward was tied
with his Head forwards to a Horses Tail, and drawn Naked to the Scaffold at
Tower Hill, and under that Buried, and a great Stake driven through him, which
was covered with Iron at top.

At the Thanksgiving-day, February 20, Gillespy the Scotch Presbyter preached
the Sermon at St. Margarets, and thence they marched to the same
Banqueting House to Dinner with the Protector their Host, The Parliament dine
with the Protector, Jan.
where they were gaudily entertained, in respect of the Fast they had kept
within their own Walls on the 12 of January, to conjure for the Plot, six days
before Thurloe (his spirit) brought them the intelligence, which was on the 18.
Kindnesses follow one upon the neck of another.

Alderman Pack motions Cromwell for King.
For the next day Alderman Pack (a great Excise-Commissioner, and in greater
arrears for it, to 30000 l. and deep in the Piedmont-account) from the
advantage of this Royal Treat, suddenly started a motion like a Puppet jerkt
with a Wire, That in regard of the strange unsettlement and discomposure of the
Nation, and the minds of men, and the ill aspect it had upon Foreign Princes,
and all Trade; that therefore the Protector might be desired to assume the
Style of King, as the most known and most agreeable Government. And presently
Tooth and Nail the Court-party were at it; and after sundry Consultations,
passed a Resolution in order to his being King'd, by the second part of the
Instrument, called the Humble Petition and Ad^ice of the Parliament; which
being now in debate, we must leave to the ensuing Year.

The Peace with Portugal Proclaimed.
The Year ends with a Proclamation of the Portugal Peace, which had been
ratified so long before: and a fright given Lockhart by a pretended Quarrel
between some Ambassadors Lacqueys, at his stately going to Audience to the
French King at Paris, where notwithstanding his Guards, he very seldom as yet,
but upon public occasions, appeared abroad.

Anno Dom. 1657.
THe suitable political talk of the party of the Usurper, was now engaged in
strained arguments for a Monarchy in the person of this their Ringleader; and
this Maxim was broacht in the News-book, That there was no everlasting
principle in Government as to any particular Form; That Government is but a
temporary expedient; that it is like Vltima tabula post naufragium, in the
hazard of the Commonwealth, the next shift may be made use of. The same was the
inspired reason into the Humble Petition and Advice; which after several
Debates and Resolutions, was drawn into that Consistency; the main whereof, was
to desire the Protector to change that Title for the other of King. On the 9 of
April, the Parliament having desired a meeting with him, came to the
Banqueting House in White Hall, where Sir Thomas Widdrington in a Speech
commended the Title and Office of a King, Sir Thomas Widdrington commends the
Title and Office of a King.
as settled here with Christianity, approved by our Ancestors, consisting with
our Laws and Temper of the people: and then presented him with the Module of
the Humble Petition, etc. To this tender, Cromwell in a fit of Devotion
answered, That it was a weighty matter, and therefore desired space to seek
God: that the Charge laid upon him was too great for him to bear without His
assistance: that the English were the best people in the World, and required
therefore all tenderness and consideration of their Liberties, etc.

Cromwell courted to accept it.
The next day a Committee was appointed to attend him, and receive his Answer;
which being insignificant, but that the Protector desired satisfaction, they
upon report thereof resolved to adhere to their Petition, and appointed a
Committee of above half the House to attend him, to receive from him his doubts
and scruples touching any of the particulars contained in the, etc. and to
offer Reasons for his satisfaction, for the maintenance of the Resolution of
the House; and wherein they cannot satisfy, to report. The chief of this
Committee were, Whitlock, Lord Chief Justice Glyn, Lord Broghall, Lenthall,
Lisle, Philip Jones, Fines, Strickland, Thurloe, Sir Richard Onsl^w, Sir
Charles Woolsley, etc. These wanted not arguments from the Law, from the Safety
and Honor of the people to have a King; under which Government it had
flourished so many hundred years, and from the safety and honor of his own
person: to all which they were answered from a mixed result of ambition and
anger, till the deliberated certainty of the latter had crushed the Airy conceit
of the other. The danger and his scruples consisted in these Objections.

First, That the Title of King is a name of Office, which any name that may
imply the Supreme Magistrate has the same signification, and therefore no
necessity of change. Answer, that the Name of a King is only adequate to, and
comprehensive of the Office of the Supreme Magistrate. It is a Rule, that the
Kings of England cannot alter the Laws, by reason of their Name; and that there
is no obligation upon any other. That the very Title was declared necessary in
9 Edw. 4. in the controversy betwixt him and Hen. 7. every action done by the
King in possession was valid, for it was his Jurisdiction Royal: so in Hen. 7.
the same of a King de Facto. That there is a prius a former, and primum a
first; the Name King had beginning with our Laws: that for Protector there must
be a new Law introductive of such a Title.

The other Objections of danger, namely, The difficulty in altering the same
Government to a Commonwealth, and the refusal of some Judges, and actings of
others upon that ground; that another Parliament might change those
Resolutions; the dislike of the good people, and the bent of the Army; that
Providence had laid aside this Title of the King after seven years War, and
many of the chief of those instruments dissatisfied (of which presently) were
answered with his own Logic of Providence, which would (was bound, they would
have said) to wait upon these beloved and glorious necessities: and that as to
Dissatisfied Persons, there never was any the most just and happy Government
free from them. But because the most material part and effect of our Civil-War
came to Entitle it self to this grand Event, it will be very just and equal to
show it in its full proportion, and in its genuine sense, from the Mouths of
the then Lord Whitlock and Cromwell himself. I omit to acquaint the Reader at
large with the Protector's Jealousy, that they would fortify his Title, and
dis-enable his Revenue; for he demanded no less security to his Greatness, than
190000 l. a year, and the charge of the Spanish War besides.

The Lord Whitlock's Speech, the 26 of April.
SIR,

I Have very little to trouble your Highness with; The Ld. Whitlock's Speech to
the Protector.
so much has been already spoken, and so well, that it will be hard for me or
any other to undertake to add to it: only the duty of my Employment, and
something due to your Highness, occasions me to speak a few words, to
acknowledge with very humble thanks the Honor and Right which you have done
this Committee, by the clear and free Discourses and Conferences which they
have had with your Highness; and for your frequent Expressions and Testimonies
of affection and respect to the Parliament, whose sense in this I may presume
to speak, that never any persons met their Supreme Magistrate with more Love,
Duty, and Honor, than the Parliament have met your Highness with, in their
present Addresses; which argument of love deserves the esteem and force, which
I doubt not but your Highness will put upon it. I am fearful to be too tedious
at any time, especially at so late an hour, and therefore shall speak but
short, to some things which I remember not to have been mentioned. Your
Highness was pleased at the last meeting, to say, that the Original Institution
of the Title King, was by common consent, and that the same common consent
might institute any other Title, and make it as effectual as that of King. This
must be acknowledged; but withal you may be pleased to observe, that the Title
of King is not only by an Original common consent, but that consent also
approved and confirmed, and the Law fitted thereunto, and that fitted to the
Laws, by the experience and industry of many ages, and many hundreds of years
together; whereas any other Title will be only by present common consent,
without that experience and approbation: for that experience which your
Highness mentioned to have been of other Titles, and the due administration of
Justice under them: this experience is far short of the other; and for the
course of Justice, we have cause to thank that care which placed so good Judges
and Officers over us; yet give me leave to say, that in private Causes between
party and party; and in public matters in nominal causes, it was not easy to
find justice to be done by some Jurors: and many questions have risen upon the
occasion of those new Titles, concerning that tender point of good men's
satisfaction. I think it requires a very great regard from us, and I doubt not
but those good People will be fully satisfied, if they consider the Covenants,
Promises, and Precepts, which in the Scriptures are annexed to the Name of
King: and although some have alleged, that they belong to any chief Magistrate
as well as to King; yet no man did ever read the Original word translated
otherwise than King, neither do I find the present Title once mentioned in the
Holy Text. If the present Authority be a lawful Authority, which I hope none of
us will deny; surely those good men, who are so well-principled in Godliness,
will not forget that precept of submission to Authority, and to be satisfied
with that which Lawful Authority shall ordain. Their Rights and Liberties are
the same with ours, and the Parliament cannot advise any thing for the
preservation of the Peoples Rights, but these good men are included; which I
hope will be no dissatisfaction to them. In all the changes which we have seen,
there has been a dissatisfaction to some; yet still the Blessing of God has
gone along through all these Changes, with those who carried on his interest;
and the Cause being the same, the same Mercies have been continued: And I doubt
not but if the intended Change, or rather Restitution be made, (as I hope it
will) the same God will continue his Blessings to that Good Old Cause wherein
we are engaged; and that good men will receive satisfaction by it. Your
Highness has been told, that the Title of King is upon the Foundation of Law,
and that a new Title must have a constitution to make the Laws relate unto it,
and that unto the Laws. I shall only add this, that a Title by relation is
not so certain and safe, as a Title upon the old Foundation of the Law; and
that a Title upon a present single Constitution (as any new Title must be)
cannot be so firm, as a Title both upon the present Constitution, and upon the
old Foundation of the Law likewise, which the Title of King will be. If any
inconvenience should ensue upon your acceptance of this Title which the
Parliament advises, your Highness satisfaction will be, that they did advise
it.

On the contrary part, if any inconvenience should arise upon your Highness
refusal of this Title which the Parliament has advised, your burden will be
the greater. And therefore whatsoever may fall out, will be better answered by
your Highness complying with your Parliament, than otherwise. This question is
not altogether new; some instances have been given of the like, to which I
shall add two or three. The Title of the Kings of England in the Realm of
Ireland, was Lord of Ireland; and the Parliament in the 33 year of Hen. 8.
reciting, that inconveniences did arise there by reason of that Title, did
Enact that Hen. 8. should assume the Style and Title of King of Ireland, which
in the Judgment of this Parliament was preferred before the other. In the
State of Rome, new Titles proved fatal to their Liberties.

Their case was not much unlike ours; they were wearied with a Civil War, and
coming to a Settlement, Cuncta discordiis civilibus ^^ssa, nomine principis sub
imperium accepit; some would not admit the Title Rex to be used, but were
contented to give the Titles of Caesar, perpetuus Dictator, Princeps, Senatus,
Imperator. Non sum R^x, sed Caesar, came at last to this, Voluntas Caesaris pro
lege habebatur. The Northern people were more happy amongst themselves; a
private Gentleman of a Noble Family took up Arms with his Countrymen against a
Tyrant, and by the blessing of God rescued their Native Liberties, and Rights
of their Country, from the oppression of that Tyrant. This Gentleman had the
Title of Marshal given unto him, which continued for some years: Afterward
their Parliament (judging it best to resume the old Title) Elected this
Gentleman King, and with him was brought in the liberty of Protestant Religion,
and the establishment of the Civil Rights of that people, which have continued
in a prosperous condition ever since unto this day. Sir, I shall make no other
application, but in my prayers to God, to direct your Highness and the
Parliament (as I hope be will) to do that which will be most for his honor and
the good of his people.

Cromwell's Speech to the Parliament in the Banqueting House at White Hall, the
8 of May.
Mr. Speaker,

I Come hither to answer that that was in your last Paper to your Committee you
sent to me, The Protector's Speech to the Parliament concerning the Title of
King.
which was in relation to the desires which were offered to me by the House, in
that they called their Petition. I confess that business has put the House,
the Parliament, to a great deal of trouble, and spent much time: I am very
sorry that it has cost me some, and some thoughts; and because I have been the
unhappy occasion of the expense of so much time, I shall spend little of it
now: I have the best I can revolved the whole business in my thoughts * and I
have said so much already in testimony of the whole, that I think I shall not
need to repeat any thing that I have said. I think it is a Government, that the
aims of it seek much a settling the Nation on a good foot in relation to Civil
Rights and Liberties, which are the Rights of the Nation; and I hope I shall
never be found to be of them that shall go about to Rob the Nation of these
Rights, but to serve them what I can to the attaining of them. It has also
exceeding well provided for the safety and security of honest men, in that
great Natural and Religious Liberty, which is Liberty of Conscience: These are
great Fundamentals, and I must bear my testimony to them, (as I have and shall
do still, so long as God lets me live in this World) that the intentions of the
things are very honorable and honest, and the Product worthy of a Parliament.
I have only had the unhappiness both in my Conferences with your Committees,
and in the best thoughts I could take to my self, not to be convicted of the
necessity of that thing, that has been so often insisted upon by you, to wit,
the Title of King, as in it self so necessary, as it seems to be apprehended by
your selves: and I do with all honor and respect to the judgment of the
Parliament, testify, that ( caeteris patibus) no private judgment is to lie
in the Balance with the judgment of a Parliament; but in things that respect
particular persons, every man that is to give an account to God of his actions,
he must in some measure be able to prove his own Work, that is, to have an
approbation in his own Conscience of that he is to do or forbear; and whilst
you are granting others Liberties, surely you will not deny me this, it being
not only a liberty, but a duty (and such a duty as I cannot without sinning
forbear) to examine my own Heart, and thoughts, and judgment, in every work
which I am to set mine Hand to, or to appear in or for.

I must confess therefore, that though I do acknowledge all the other, yet I
must be a little confident in this, that what with the circumstances that
accompany Humane Actions, whether they be circumstances of time or persons,
whether circumstances that relate to the whole, or private or particular
circumstances, that compass any person that is to render an account of his own
actions: I have truly thought, and do still think, that if I should (at the
best) do any thing on this account to answer your expectation, it would be at
the best doubtingly; and certainly what is so, is not of faith; whatsoever is
not of faith, is sin to him that does it, whether it be with relation to the
substance of the action about which the consideration is conversant, or whether
to circumstances about it, which make all indifferent actions good or evil to
him that does it. I lying under this consideration, think it my duty; only I
could have wished I had done it sooner, for the sake of the House, who have
laid so infinite obligations on me: I wish also I had done it sooner for your
sake, for saving time and trouble; and indeed for the Committees sake, to whom
I must acknowledge publicly, I have been unseasonably troublesome: I say, I
could have wished I had given it sooner; but truly this is my Answer, that
although I think the Government does consist of very excellent parts in all,
but in that one thing the Title: as to me, I should not be an honest man, if I
should not tell you, that I cannot accept of the Government, nor undertake the
trouble and charge of it, which I have a little more experimented than every
man, as to what troubles and difficulties do befall men under such Trusts, and
in such undertakings; I say, I am persuaded to return this Answer to you, That
I cannot undertake this Government with the Title of a King; and that is mine
Answer to this great and weighty business.

A rumor was spread during this juncture, which is too pertinent to be
omitted, that the King was sickly and languishing, and of a melancholy lost
spirit; That his Brothers were Papists, and professed ones: which with the Act
of annulling, etc. plainly showed Cromwell's first Ambitious intentions; but the
truth was, he had consulted the Oracle of the Army, whom he had first
Disciplined with Mutiny against the Civil Authority, or any coercive
Jurisdiction whatsoever, and was therefore the best acquainted with their
constitution: and they were at such a pitch, lately Sult^ning of it in the
powers of their Major-Generals, that it was impossible or improbable to bring
them to the Yoke of the Laws, which he must by this Title undergo himself; and
Lambert was so stiff hereupon, perceiving how Cromwell prevaricated from the
Contract between them of his succeeding to this Lawless Protectorship after, as
to brave him with the Army-Interest, to brandish the same Sword, and to dispute
the business in public. A whispering there was, that his Lady was more
familiar with Cromwell than suited with her Relation, and that she discovered his
secrets as well as her own; insomuch that it became a Court-jest, that Oliver's
Instrument was found in my Lady Lamberts Petticoat: but he was open enough of
himself, and of too pregnant and forward a Spirit to conceal his disgust. It
was time therefore, as the Protector had served Major General Harrison before,
to deal with Lambert, Lambert turned off.
and to dismiss him from Council and all Command; but for fear of displeasing
the Army, not securing him: which kind of usage in the throwing off an old,
but disgusted Friend, was credited into a byword of Lambertizing. Thus Oliver
chose the better part, betaking himself to the Interest of the Army, in this
Title of their own making and forming; confiding more in the Arms and Embraces
of the Soldiery, than in the Legs and Complements of the Parliament, and that
a Cripple also.

Fifth-Monarchy Plot.
In the midst of this Regal Scene, appeared other Actors: the Fifth-Monarchy-men
were contriving an Insurrection, and had had several Meetings in a house at
Shoreditch, where they were all along betrayed, and seized, and at last some
Arms and Ammunition taken with them, with a Standard of a Lion Couchant (of the
Tribe of Judah) with this Motto, Who shall rouse him up? The fellows taken,
were Thomas Venner, with their Scribe (as they named their Secretary) Gray,
Gowlet, Hopkins, and Ashton, with others, (these named owe another more
desperate and Traiterous account to this Chronicle.) About them was found a
Declaration in Print, with this Title, The Principle of the Remnant, etc.

One Machlin (...) in his Age.
A Miracle seconded this Millenary Fantasy: one Machlin a Scotch Minister, but
Beneficed in Northumberland, aged one hundred and sixteen years, was restored
by a wonderful reviviscency beyond all Poetical Fiction, to his Teeth, Hair,
and Eyesight, so that he was as able in his Body as he was at the age of
fifty. Several conjectures were made and applied to the Government of our
Kings, and the issue credited them. Nor was the right of the King at any time
so hopeful as now, not only from these unpracticable Counsels at home, against
his Crown and unextinguishable Authority, but also from those Aids and Forces
he had abroad, and the assurance of a plenary conjuncture with the Spaniard to
this purpose. The Marquess of Ormond, the Lord Wilmot, the Lords Gerrard and
Wentworth, the Lord Taaf and General Middleton had their several Regiments
Quartered up and down the Seacoasts; and the Dukes of York and Gloucester had
Commands likewise in Flanders.

To oppose this growing strength, The King ^^tertains Forces in Flanders.
and to reinforce the French, who had been worsted last Summer at
Valenchienne, and lost other places, Cromwell sent over 6000 men under the
Command of Colonel John Reynolds, the Commissary-General in Ireland, Cromwell
assists the French with 6000
having trained and drilled most of them as Recruits to Colonel Berkstead's
Regiment of the Tower, and the like service, and then drew them out for this
Foreign expedition. They Rendezvouzed at Black Heath, where Hugh Peter's gave
them a Sermon for encouragement, and were shipped with a Months pay in hand at
Dover, by the care of Major General Kelsey, and landed at St. John's Bay, within
seven miles of Bulloyn, whither Reynolds and their Major General Morgan
followed them toward the end of May: they had new Red-coats given them, for
the terrible Name thereof.

Of all the desperate attempts that ever were made in the World against an
Enemy by Sea, Ge^. Blake: desperate attempt on the Spaniard.
this of Noble Blake's is not inferior to any. He lying upon the Spanish
Coast, had intelligence given him that the West-India-Fleet were arrived at the
Canary-Islands, and put into the Bay of Sancta Cruz, on the Island of Teneriff.
Upon this the Fleet weighed Anchor on the 13 of April 1657. and by the 20 of
the same Month, were fair in the Offing of Sancta Cruz, where they discovered
how bravely the Spanish ships (sixteen in number) were barricado'd in this Bay,
where they lay in a manner Semi-circular. Near to the Mouth of this Haven,
stands a Castle sufficiently furnished with great Ordnance, which threatened
destruction to any that durst enter without its leave into the Harbor: besides
this, there stood seven Forts more round about the Bay, with six, four, and
three great Guns apiece; and united together by a Line of Communication from
one Fort to another, which was manned with Musketeers. To make all safe, Don
Diego Diagues General of the Spanish Fleet was not idle in making Provision for
the best defense of his Armado: he caused all the smaller ships to be mored
close along the shore, and the six Great Galleons stood farther out at Anchor,
with their Broad-sides toward the Sea. It happened at this time, there was a
Dutch Merchants ship in the Bay; the Master whereof seeing the English ready to
enter, and that a Combat would presently be commenced, it made him fear that
among all the Blows that would be given, he could not avoid some knocks;
therefore to save himself, he went to Don Diego, and desired his leave to
depart the Harbor: For (said he) I am very sure Blake will presently be
amongst you. To this, the resolute Don made no other reply, but, Get you gone
if you will, and let Blake come if he dares.

They that knew Blake's Courage, could not but know it needless to dare him to
an Engagement. All things being ordered for fight, a Squadron of ships was
drawn out of the whole Fleet to make the first onset; these were Commanded by
Captain Stainer in the Speaker-Frigat, who no sooner had received Orders, but
immediately he flew into the Bay with his Canvas Wings, and by eight in the
Morning fell pell-mell upon the Spanish Fleet, Sancta Cruz fight, Apr. 20.
without the least regard to the Forts, that spent their shot prodigally upon
him. No sooner were these entered into the Bay, but Blake following after,
placed certain ships to pour Broad-sides into the Castle and Forts: these
played their parts so well, that after some time the Spaniards found their
Forts too hot to be held. In the mean time Blake strikes in with Stainer, and
bravely fought the Spanish ships, which were not much inferior in number to
the English, but in Men they were far the superior. Here we see a resolute
bravery many times may carry the day, and make number lie by the Lee: this was
manifest; for by two of the clock in the afternoon, the English had beaten
their Enemies out of their ships.

Now Blake seeing an impossibility of carrying them away, The Spanish Fleet
fired.
he ordered his men to fire their Prizes; which was done so effectually, that
all the Spanish Fleet were reduced to Ashes, except two ships that sunk
downright, nothing remaining of them above water but some part of their Masts.

The English having now got a complete Victory, The English in danger, but
delivered by a Miracle.
were put to another difficulty by the Wind, which blew so strong into the Bay,
that many despaired of getting out again. But Gods Providence was miraculously
seen, in causing the Wind upon the sudden to Vere about to the South-West, (a
thing not known in many years before) which brought Blake and his Fleet safe to
Sea again, notwithstanding the Spaniards from the Castle played their Great
Guns perpetually upon them as they passed by. The Wind, as it proved a Friend
to bring the English forth, so it continued to carry them back again to their
former station near to Cadiz.

This noble Service made Blake as terrible as Drake to the Spaniard; there
being less difference betwixt the Fame and report of their Actions and
Exploits, than in the sound of their Names; and it was accordingly resented
here by all parties. Cromwell (whom it most concerned) sent his Secretary to
acquaint the House with the particulars, The Part. appoint a Thanksgiving, and
present their General Blake with 500 l.
who ordered a Thanksgiving, and 500 l. to buy the General a Jewel, as a
testimony of his Countries Gratitude, and the honor they bore him; One hundred
pound to the Captain that brought the Tidings, and Thanks to all the Officers
and Soldiers: and shortly after the Speaker returning home, (being so bruised
and torn in the late Engagement, that she was unfit for further service till
repaired) the Captain of her ( Richard Stainer) was Knighted, who indeed
deserved that Honor from a better Hand; nor did his merit miss of it. Capt.
Stainer Knighted.
This was achieved on Monday the 20th of April.

The Protector having refused the Title of King, (awaiting a more opportune
time and advantage to reach that top and height of his Ambition which inwardly
tormented him) was now by the Parliament to be confirmed in his former Dignity;
and a Committee called of the Settlement was ordered to prepare an Explanatory
part to the Humble Petition and Advice, in respect of the Protector's Oath, his
Councils, the Members of Parliament, the other House, which was to consist of
sixty and odd Lords of Cromwell's Election, of which in their place we shall
give an account: all which being prepared and finished, the Lord Craven thought
it a fit time for him to offer his Case to the Parliament, The Lord Craven 's
Case offered to the Parl. but deferred by the Protector.
by whom a day was no sooner set for Hearing, and the Protector's Council
ordered to attend; but he sends a Letter, directed to Our Trusty and
Well-beloved Sir Thomas Widdrington, Speaker of the Parliament, to Adjourn: but
understanding the main business of the Assessment was not yet finished, he sent
another to forbid his former; but desired them to make it their sole Affair.
Whereupon the Lord Craven was referred to the first day of their Access after
the Adjournment.

Cromwell Signs Acts.
When all the Acts were ready for Signing, the Protector came to the
Painted-Chamber and sent for the Parliament, where the Speaker tendered him
these Acts of State, besides others relating to Trade, etc. 1. An Act for
Assessment of 60000 l. a Month, for three Months from March, for the three
Kingdoms. Another Money-Act for 50000 l. for three years, at 35000 l. for
England, 6000 l. for Scotland, and 9000 l. for Ireland. An Act for preventing
multiplicity of Buildings in and about the Suburbs of London, and within ten
miles thereof: and a whole years Revenue to be paid for every Dwelling or House
built upon any new Foundation since 1620. (and this was the reason and soul of
that Law.) An Act for punishing such as live at High Rates, and have no visible
Estates. And lastly, for the observation of the Lords day. There was a Bill
brought in for ascertaining and satisfying the Public Faith, that these
Patriots might seem to intend the ease of the people; but it was but once read
and committed, and resumed afterward to as much purpose very briskly by the
Council of this Protector. At the signing of these, Cromwell made this short
Speech.

His Speech.
I perceive, that among these many Acts of Parliament, there has been a very
great care had by the Parliament, to provide for the just and necessary support
of the Commonwealth, by these Bills for Levying of Money now brought to me,
which I have given my consent unto; and understanding it has been the practice
of those who have been chief Governors, to acknowledge with thanks to the
Commons, their care and regard of the Public, I do very heartily and
thankfully acknowledge their kindeness herein.

The principal substance of the Humble Petition, etc. was this.
1. That his Highness under the Title of Lord Protector, The Humble Petition
and Advice.
would be pleased to exercise the Office of Chief Magistrate over England, etc.
and to Govern according to all things in this Petition and Advice; also, that
in his Lifetime he would appoint the person that should Succeed in the
Government after his Death. 2. That he would call Parliaments, consisting of
two Houses, once in three years at farthest. 3. That those persons who are
Legally chosen by a Free Election of the people to serve in Parliament, may not
be excluded from doing their Duties, but by consent of that House whereof they
are Members. 4. In the fourth, was shown the qualifications of
Parliament-Members. 5. In the fifth, the power of the other House. 6. That the
Laws and Statutes of the Land be observed and kept, and no Laws altered,
Suspended, Abrogated, Repealed, or new Laws made, but by Act of Parliament. 7.
For a constant yearly Revenue, ten hundred thousand pounds to be settled for
maintenance of the Navy and Army, and three hundred thousand pounds for support
of the Government, besides other Temporary supplies, as the Commons in
Parliament shall see the necessities of the Nations to require. 8. That the
number of the Protector's Council shall not be above one and twenty; whereof
the Quorum to be seven, and not under. 9. The Chief Officers of State, as
Chancellors, Keepers of the Great Seal, etc. to be approved of by Parliament.
10. That his Highness would encourage a Godly Ministry in these Nations; and
that such as do revile or disturb them in the Worship of God, may be punished
according to Law; and where the Laws are defective, new ones to be made in that
behalf. 11. That the Protestant Christian Religion, as it is contained in the
Old and New Testaments, be asserted and held forth for the public profession
of these Nations, and no other* and that a Confession of Faith be agreed upon
and recommended to the People of these Nations; and none be permitted by Words
or Writings to revile or reproach the said Confession of Faith, etc.

Which he having Signed, declared his acceptance in these Words.

That he came thither that day, Cromwell's Speech at his acceptance thereof.
not as to a Triumph, but with the most serious thoughts that ever he had in
all his life, being to undertake one of the greatest Burdens that ever was
laid upon the back of any Humane Creature, so that without the support of the
Almighty, he must sink under the weight of it, to the damage and prejudice of
these Nations. This being so, he must ask help of the Parliament, and of those
that fear God, that by their Prayers he might re^^ive assistance from God: For
nothing else could enable him to the discharge of so great a Duty and Trust.

That seeing this is but an Introduction to the carrying on of the Government
of these Nations, and there being many things which cannot be supplied without
the assistance of the Parliament, it was his duty to ask their help in them;
not that he doubted: for the same Spirit that had led the Parliament to this,
would easily suggest the same to them. For his part, nothing would have induced
him to take this unsupportable Burden to Flesh and Blood, but that he had seen
in the Parliament a great care in doing those things which might really answer
the ends that were engaged for, and make clearly for the Liberty of the
Nations, and for the Interest and Preservation of all such as fear God under
various Forms. And if these Nations be not thankful to them for their care
therein, it will fall as a Sin on their Heads.

Yet there are some things wanting that tend to Reformation, to the
discountenancing Vice, and encouragement of Virtue; but he spoke not this as in
the least doubting their progress, but as one that does heartily desire, to the
end God may Crown their Work, that in their own time, and with what speed they
judge fit, these things may be provided for.

There remained only the solemnity of the Inauguration or Investiture; which
being agreed upon by the Committee and the Protector, was by the Parliament
appointed to be performed in Westminster Hall; His Investiture.
where at the upper end thereof, there was an ascent raised, where a Chair and
Canopy of State was set, and a Table with another Chair for the Speaker, with
Seats built Scaffoldwise for the Parliament on both sides, and places below for
the Aldermen of London, and the like: All which being in a readiness, the
Protector came out of a Room adjoining to the Lords House, and in this order
proceeded into the Hall. First went his Gentlemen, then a Herald; next the
Aldermen, another Herald, the Attorney General, then the Judges, (of whom
Sergeant Hill was one, being made a Baron of the Exchequer June 16.) then
Norroy, the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury, and the Seal carried by
Commissioner Fiennes; then Garter, and after him the Earl of Warwick with the
Sword born before the Protector Bare-headed, the Lord Mayor Titchborn carrying
the City-Sword (by the special Coaks of the Protector) by his left Hand. Being
seated in his Chair, on the left hand thereof stood the said Titchborn and the
Dutch Ambassador, the French Ambassador and the Earl of Warwick on the Right;
next behind him stood his Son Richard, Fleetwood, Claypool, and the Privy
Council; upon a lower descent stood the Lord Viscount Lisle, Lords Montague and
Whitlock, with drawn Swords.

The Protector installed, etc.
Then the Speaker (Sir Thomas Widdrington) in the Name of the Parliament,
presented to him a Robe of Purple-Velvet, a Bible, a Sword, and a Scepter; (all
which were precious Tokens of the Parliaments favor.) At the delivery of these
things, the Speaker made a short Comment upon them to the Protector, which he
divided into four parts, as follows.

The Speaker's Comment on the Ceremonies thereof.
1. The Robe of Purple, this is an Emblem of Magistracy and imports
Righteousness and Justice. When you have put on this Vestment, I may say you
are a Gownman. This Robe is of a mixed color, to show the mixture of Justice
and Mercy. Indeed, a Magistrate must have two bands, Plectentem and
amplectentem, to cherish and to punish. 2. The Bible is a Book that contains
the Holy Scriptures, in which you have the happiness to be well versed. This
Book of Life consists of two Testaments, the Old and New: the first shows
Christum Velatum, the second Christum Revelatum; Christ Veiled and Revealed: it
is a Book of Books, and does contain both Precepts and Examples for good
Government. 3. Here is a Scepter, not unlike a Staff; for you are to be a Staff
to the Weak and Poor: it is of ancient use in this kind. It Is said in
Scripture, that the Scepter shall not depart from Judah. It was of the like use
in other Kingdoms; Homer the Greek Poet calls Kings and Princes
Scepter-bearers. 4. The last thing is a Sword, not a Military but Civil Sword,
it is a Sword rather of defense than offense; not to defend your self only,
but your People also. If I might presume to fix a Motto upon this Sword, as the
Valiant Lord Talbot had upon his, it should be this, Ego sum Domini
Protectoris, ad protegendum populum meum, I am the Protector, to protect my
People.
This Speech being ended, the Speaker took the Bible and gave the Protector his
Oath: afterward Mr. Manton made a Prayer, wherein he recommended the
Protector, Parliament, Council, the Forces by Land and Sea, Government, and
People of the three Nations, to the protection of God. Which being ended, the
Heralds by sound of Trumpet Proclaimed his Highness Protector of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging; requiring all
persons to yield him due obedience. At the end of all, the Protector, with his
Train carried up by the Lord Sherard, Warwick's Nephew, and the Lord Roberts
his Eldest son, returned in the same posture, the Earl of Warwick sitting at
one end of the Coach against him; Richard his son and Whitlock in one, and Lord
Lisle and Montague in the other Boot, with swords drawn, and the Lord Claypool
Master of the Horse led the Horse of Honor in rich Caparisons to White Hall.
The Members to the Parliament House, where they Prorogued their sitting to the
twentieth of January.

Great Rhodomontadoes of Proclaimings, and little less than Blasphemy in the
several Addresses in and from all parts of the three Kingdoms, were the
vapouring and ranting conclusions of this story* which reduces to memory
another terrible occurrence to the Protector, amidst those ambages and suspense
of a Crown, namely a Book published under the Title of Killing no Murder, A
Book called Killing no Murder published now.
by which it was proved, and that most evidently, that it was not only Lawful
but Honorable to slay this Tyrant: It was a very ingenious and Learned Piece,
and frighted Oliver exceedingly, who searched for it as Herod did in another
case; but it could not be discovered: whoever the Author was, his Book and he
deserves everlasting memory. It was also attended like the preceding part of
his Usurpation, with a most terrible blow of Gunpowder, A terrible Blow of
Gunpowder near Wapping.
out of a Mill near Wapping, which ruined and destroyed several Houses, and
killed several persons, and answered with its crack and vicine Echo the but
just-ceased Guns from the Tower of London upon that occasion; or as others
said, it was an Introduction or Warning-blow of the intended mischief by the
Committee for New Buildings, who now began their work in all earnestness,
sitting in Salisbury-Court at Mr. Sadler's the Town Clerk of Lon^^n. This was
seconded with as remarkable an Earthquake at Bickly in Cheshire, An Earthquake
in Cheshire.
on the eighth of July, where some twenty yards of Ground, with three great
Oaks and other Trees, fell as with the noise of a Cannon (the same tenor of
alluding Fate in its portents against this Governour-General) thirty yards deep
in the ground, Several Murders and other accidents, etc.
where nothing but Water could be discovered. Other accidents of Murder and
Slaughter there were: one Butler, a Comrade and Companion of one Knight's,
Servant to one Worth a Silk-man, then upon his affairs at Bristol, being
tempted with the sight of the Money, which lying with this Knight in his
Masters absence he had opportunity to observe, cut his Friends Throat after
some struggling, and escaped with the Money; but was most providentially
discovered. One Parsons Lieutenant Colonel to Pride, being set upon in the
Highway for his Purse, and making resistance, was shot, for all the care of his
Comrades the Major-Generals, whose Authority now began to wain. But that which
is most remarkable of these occurrences and casualties, was the Execution of
Captain Bernard, for Robbing the House of his Colonel Winthrop, Colonel in
Harrison's place and Regiment, Bernards that betrayed Col. Andrews Hanged for
Robbery.
wherein, this Bernard, for betraying his former Colonel the Noble Eusebius
Andrews, as before, had a Troop given him by the Long Parliament; so
commensurate was the Divine Justice to his sin, punishing his Treachery against
the one, by his crime of Burglary against his other Colonel. He made
applications to Cromwell, and alleged his past, and proffered great future
service for a Reprieve; but even Cromwell himself thought not such a fellow fit
to live; besides, he was infamous, and too well known; and he had new ones of
greater abilities retained to that purpose, no way in the world suspicable of
such practices, namely one Corker a Minister formerly in Yorkshire, but a
violent and Active Royalist in the War, and one that had a hand in that Exploit
of killing of Rainsborough; and a Knight formerly Governor of Newark, far more
eminent in the Royal service; of which presently.

The Foreign adjunct transactions, were first the Danish War with the Swede,
then engaged in a far distant War with the almost-subdued Pole. The reason of
this sudden Rupture, was the like Invasion made by the Swede some thirteen
years before, and wresting by his Arms some Provinces from that Kingdom, of
which now this occasion offered them the recovery; however it answered not its
promising beginnings.

The Duke of York, who Commanded a part of the Spanish Army, was marching to
join with other Forces to the Relief of Montmedy-Castle in Lorrain, besieged by
the French Marshal de Ferte. While the English Forces joined with four
Regiments of Horse; were advancing from Vervins, part of them, to the number of
300, quartered in a Castle something distant from the Body, the Duke with a
Brigade attaqued, and thereupon they presently yielded and, took up Arms with
him: notwithstanding this inauspicious entrance, they marched and joined with
Turenne, then at the siege of St. Venant, St. Venant taken by the United Forces.
where Colonel Morgan in an attempt made by his men, (who seeing some of their
fellows in danger, bravely forsook their Trenches) took a Hal^-Moon, and lodged
themselves under the Counterscarp, (the custom of taking Towns there being by
slower progressions) which mainly conduced to the speedy surrender of that
place. Colonel Morgan received a Wound in his Arm at this siege. From thence
the United Forces marched toward Dunkirk, having gained and secured the Passes
upon the Colne, that they might march either to Gravelin or Dunkirk; but the
latter being aimed at, they took up their first quarters at Bourbrock,
designing upon Mardike-Fort: some of the English quartered at Watton, where
there is a College of English Jesuits, and where there was between them a
reciprocation of civil usage. Mr. Talon Was dispatched by Turenne for more
supplies, and Colonel Reynolds followed him to London, and in the mean while,
about the middle of September, the Armies sat down before Mardike, and put
themselves between it and Dunkirk, General Montague riding before the Splinter
with a Fleet of War: it w^^ not long before a continual Battery had made the
Besieged quit the Wood^ Fort; which so incommodated them, being seized by the
Enemy, that they were forced to yield to Mercy, Sept. 23. Mardike taken Sep.
23. and put into English hands.
Turenne not allowing better, because they had refused his first offers: the
Fort was immediately put into the possession of the English, a party of French
being added to them, under Colonel Morgan; and the rest of the Army (it being
thought unadviseable to attempt a Siege against Dunkirk, the Winter growing so
hard upon them) returned to Bourbrock where the English took up their
Winter Quarters to be near Mardike, and the French at Ardres. Afterward it was
resolved that two Regiments, to wit, Colonel Reynold's and Alsop's, should
march into French quarters, and relieve (and be relieved) every two Months
their fellows hereabouts; to the strengthening of which place, and while the
Fortifications were finished, Marshal Turenne staid some time with his Army.

The taking of Mardike was very grievous to the Dunkirkers and Spanishside, and
therefore it was resolved by Don John to hazard a Scalado and Assault by night:
The illustrious Duke of York and the Marquess of Caracene ordered and were
present in the business; and the King our Sovereign, and the Duke of
Gloucester, had conveyed themselves to Dunkirk, to see the management of this
attempt. On the 22 of October at night, some 4000 English, Scotch and Irish,
Mardike Stormed by night, Octo. 22.
and some Spaniards, about ten a clock at night began the Storm with
Hand-Granadoes, and all sorts of Assaulting Engines, and were got into the
Trenches, and mounted their Scaling-ladders; but the English within being in a
readiness, and Reynolds, Morgan, and Lillingstone, being at that same time
there, the Assailants were with great slaughter repelled and beaten down; the
Great Guns from the English Fleet (riding at the Splinter) firing their
Broadsides, being directed by four great Links (set up in the Corners of the
Fort) how to miss it: nevertheless, about four a clock the Duke commanded the
Assault to be renewed again; which was done with greater fury, but to as little
advantage; which event with the approaching daylight caused a retreat, the
Dead being most of them carried off in Wagons. There were some hundreds
guessed to be slain, but the number is uncertain.

This was a rude accost and greeting of Countrymen, which used to be the most
obliging in Foreign Countries; but Rebellion is a Witch (as they are compared
with a pejoration of the former in Scripture) that had transformed the Military
part of the Nation. Often have we fought on both sides, but were never opposed
in any Battle one against another, much less to fight an homebred quarrel of
our own in Outlandish ground. The Noble Duke therefore thinking the Hearts of
the Leaders of this Garrison, if they had any true English Worth or Honor
suitable to their Commands, might be touched with the unnaturalness of the
Fact, and a sense of their Allegiance, and respect to their Rightful Sovereign,
and himself the next Prince of the Blood, (against whom they indirectly and
collaterally militated) as being now out of the Reach, Influence, and Awe of
the Usurper, sought therefore by fair means to win this Party, which would
highly and sufficiently conduce to his Majesty's Service, to their obedience.
In order to this, by the means of a Scotch Knight (whose Name slips our present
use) well acquainted with Colonel Reynolds, he was prevailed upon to give the
Duke a meeting in the midway betwixt Dunkirk and Mardike, which are distant
about two miles, with a party of Horse on either side. Reynolds at the approach
of the Duke did the reverence which was redevable to his Highness, and showed
himself in all respects as became him toward such an Illustrious Personage,
and with the same handsome demeanor departed to the Fort. What conference they
had was never perfectly related, for it was private; but the very news of the
meeting in that amicable respectful manner, being conveyed with speed to
Cromwell, caused in him such jealousies and distrusts, that inflamed with anger
at this his great Confident and Favorite, he presently dispatched away a
Messenger to Command him for London; which he, and Colonel White, with one Mr.
Devaux the Secretary to Reynolds, readily obeying, and taking the first ship
was ready, and that would venture to go off; (which was a Dutch Pink of 10
Guns, in a stormy night the 12 of December, a Frigate offering to wait on him
next Morning) he was cast away the same night on the back of the Goodwyn-sands,
Col. Reynolds, etc. cast away on the Goodwyn-sands.
his Chest, Sword and Belt being found thereabouts, and thereby saved the
ungrateful excuse of his duty, and prevented the prejudiced revenge of his
Master Oliver. Morgan Commanded in his place till the arrival of Marshal D'
Aumont, (who brought with him Monsieur Mancini the Cardinal's Nephew, desirous
out of curiosity to see this vicissitudinary Fortress) who had the supreme
Command, but devolved the exercise and trust thereof to the same hand as
before. Here Marshal D' Aumont was furnished with some ships of ours for a
design upon Ostend, which he had thought he had surely purchased: but of this
hereafter.

As to other Foreign News, there was great discourse about the right to the
Vicariat or Vicarship of the Empire, which now happened by the Death of the
Emperor Ferdinand the 4 of Austria, his Son the King of the Romans being dead
some while before. It did indisputably belong to the Prince Elector Palatine;
but upon the quarrel for the Crown of Bohemia, he was proscribed and degraded,
and the Duke of Bavaria (a descendant of the younger House) did now assert and
maintain that right, as lately confirmed on him by the Emperor against the
Palatine; and so it remained sub judice.

The Protector (the War growing hot betwixt the two Northern Kings, the Dane
having attaqued Bremerwarden, a very strong place, and soon after Mastered it)
dispatched away two Envoys Extraordinary, Sir Philip Medows the Protector's
Envoy to Denmark, Colonel Jephson to Sweden.
viz. Sir Philip Medows Knighted by himself (afterward by that King with the
Order of the Elephant) to the King of Denmark, and since by our Sovereign;
being the same Gentleman that was employed before to the King of Portugal: and
Colonel Iephson to the King of Sweden, then journeying Post out of Poland to
encounter this new Enemy. They were both well received, the first at
Copenhagen, the other (by the way of Lubeck) at Wismar, whither the Swede was
arrived: to whom, during this offered Mediation betwixt both, Cromwell sent
supplies of 2000 Men and Arms from London, Yarmouth, and Hull, in several
ships; so radicated was his Hate against the most offenceless and distant
Allies and Relations of the Crown, as the Dane was; which he took all
occasions, how villainous and base soever, to render of feared and damnifying
consequence, and dangerous prejudices to all the neighboring States and
Princes. A Declaration of another Massacre of the Protestants in Poland, upon
the return of that King into those hinder parts of the Kingdom which had
submitted to the Swede, and were now by him deserted; but the design of the
other of Piedmont was yet recent and rank, and so it took not.

Cromwell Swears his Privy Council. The Earl of Mulgrave made on^, Rich. Cromwell
another Lord of the Council, and Chancellor of Oxford.
At home, Cromwell was now Swearing his Privy Council over, according to one of
the Articles of the Humble Petition and Advice, and the Earl of Mulgrave was
made one of them; and because the Parliament had declared the next succession
into his Dignity should be at the appointment of himself by Act or public
Declaration, he thought it time to produce his Son Richard, and to train him in
the Government. He was therefore made another Lord of the Council, and the
Chancellorship of Oxford (which the Protector had resigned) was bestowed on
him, and a solemn Instalment of him by Dr. Owen the Vice Chancellor was acted
with all the Formalities at White Hall. The course of his life before this
calling to the State, spent it self in the pleasures and divertisements of the
Country, where he appeared in a medium of privacy and greatness, tempering one
another to the estimate of a civil and noble disposition, manifested in several
kindnesses obtained at his Fathers hands for the Loyal Gentry, to whose
Converse and Familiarity he was out of policy addressed, to the captating their
good will and favor, toward the easier ascent to his designed Sovereignty.
Cromwell's other Son Henry was also in Progress in Ireland, showing himself to
the Army and People these, Cromwell 's advancement of his Sons.
upon the same account, that Kingdom being allotted to him for his Inheritance,
to hold it or this in Fee. Fleetwood was intended for Scotland in the same
capacity and Command, but Hic labor hoc opus, General Monk was not easily
removed thence; fair means were not effectual nor practicable as things stood,
and a Rupture or Revolt of that Kingdom was not to be ventured on by any open
force or declared War against him. His third Daughter Mary was likewise
promoted to an honorable Match, being Married to the Lord-Viscount
Faulconbridge on the 18 of November, His Daughter Mary Married to the Lord
Faulconbridge.
with a great do of State at Hampton Court, (the recess and delight of the
Usurper, whither he went and came always in an hurry and post; nor did he dare
to be further off from the City of London.) This Title was conferred on the
Family of Bellasis by the King in the War, His Daughter Francis Married to the
E. of Warwick 's Grandson
and was taken for valid upon this Wedding. His youngest Daughter Francis was
soon after Married to Mr. Rich the Earl of Warwick's Grandson. A new Charter,
constituting a new East-India-Company, (which Trade had lain in Common for some
years) now passed the Seal, A new East India- Company constituted. Mr. Downing
Cromwell 's Envoy into Holland.
Cromwell being one of them, and putting in a Stock: which turned to the account
of his Majesty (as of due) some time afterward. Mr. Downing was sent his Envoy
into Holland. One Colonel Saxby taken at Gravesend on shipboard, (of
Syndercombe's Counsel) being a Leveller, died (as was supposed of Poison) in
the Tower of London; which rendered Syndercombe's end more plainly suspected.

The solemnizations of Christmas forbidden, etc.
The Festival of Christmas, which had been abrogated by several Lawless
Ordinances, and endeavored to be suppressed, revived its head, and began to
recover its pristine veneration. This greatly offended the Usurper, who
perceived that notwithstanding all his Edicts and Interminations against the
Church and her Protestant-Professors, Dr. Gunning 's Congregation seized and
Plundered.
the true Religion prevailed against him, and with that infallibly the Kings
Interest would jointly rise, the thought of which was most grievous, and not
endurable. Notice being given him now of a private Assembly solemnizing the
mercy and memory of that day, at Dr. Gunning's at Exeter-house in the Strand;
he sent a Band of Red-coats to seize them, who over-and-above Plundered and
Stripped many of them, and carried some away Prisoners to answer this contempt
against his Injunction.

And so without any Blood (which was taken for a wonder) in this interval, we
are arrived to the return of the Parliament after the expiration of the
Adjournment, when according to the 4th Article of the Petition and Advice,
which provided for the freedom of Parliaments, and another for Another House,
as 'twas called ( Cromwell giving it that Nickname or Mid-word, as bordering
upon an Upper-House of Parliament, and of the same new coining as
Protectorship, which entrencht upon the Sovereignty: ut Canis, sit Catuli.)
They met together in two Houses, that of the Commons to their full number of
Elections, that of the What do ye call um's in the House of Lords, in and
according to the usual customs of the Peers. These conscious of their own
worthlessness, and their inconsistency with the English honor, like the basest
of Upstarts, bewrayed their meanness by all manner of abject compliance, The
Other House as instructed fawn upon the lower*
and fawning upon the Commons their half-Parent, who being rightly constituted,
disowned the spurious Brat, as a by-blow of the former Convention; and with
such scorn and derision did they receive the notice of their meeting there,
besides the neglect of it, as if they had been the most ridiculous fellows in
the World, a may game, spleen-moving spectacle; with What did they there? who
sent for them? what was their business? like intruding Fiddlers to serious
Company. Notwithstanding, these Imps of the Usurpers Prerogative, as
instructed, persisted in their Courtships and Blandiments of the Commons as
aforesaid. (It should have been mentioned, that Oliver in his Speech to them
did highly magnify the Settlement, as beyond all expectation that ever such
brave things would have been done for England, and hinted much of the
establishment of Religion, (the Neck whereof was just then broken, as we may
say) and that if they persevered in that hopeful beginning, the Generations to
come should call them Blessed.)

That posterity may be fully informed of the Institution, Number, and Names of
the aforesaid fellows of the other House, in brief take this account. The
Parliament left the choice of them to Cromwell by the Humble Petition, and he
graced with this Dignity most of his superior Officers, some
Grandee-Comnonwealths-men, some Presbyterians, some of the Nobility, as the
Earl of Manchester, Lord Wharton, Lord Mulgrave, all of his Privy Council and
Relations, and one or two private Gentlemen, of which Mr. Hambden was one: The
Nobility prudentially forbore sitting with that riff-raff, the Presbyterians
with much scruple, but Sir Arthur Haslerig utterly abominated it, and kept his
station with the Commons, as so contra-distinguished. The whole number named
was 62, of which some ten were the worst of Mechanics, such as Pride, Hewson,
Kelsey, Cooper, Goffe, Berry, etc. whom we refer to the ensuing Catalogue, to
which the Names of the Judges and Sergeants are added.

The Members of the other House, alias House of Lords.
Lord Richard Cromwell. The Names of Cromwell 's Other Houses.
Lord Henry Cromwell Deputy of Ireland. Nath. Fiennes Commis. of the Great Seal.
John Lisle. Commis. of the Great Seal. Hen. Lawrence, President of the Council.
Charles Fleetwood Lieut. Genesis of the Army. Robert Earl of Warwick. Edmund Earl
of Mulgrave. Edward Earl of Manchester. Will. Ld. Viscount Say and Seal. Philip
Lord Viscount Lisle. Charles Lord Viscount Howard. Philip Lord Wharton. Thomas
Lord Faulconbridge. George Lord Evers. John Cleypole, Esquire. John Desbrow,
Generals at Sea. Edw. Montague. Generals at Sea. Bulst. Whitlock* Commis. of
the Treasury. Will. Sydenham. Commis. of the Treasury. Sir Charles Wolsley. Sir
Gilbert Pickering. Walter Strickland, Esquire. Philip Skippon, Esquire. Francis Rous,
Esquire. John Jones, Esquire. Sir William Strickland. John Fiennes, Esquire. Sir Francis
Russel. Sir Thomas Honywood. Sir Arthur Haslerig. Sir John Hobart. Sir Richard
Onslow. Sir Gilbert Gerrard. Sir William Roberts. Glyn, Chief Justices of both
Benches. Oli. St. John. Chief Justices of both Benches. William Pierrepoint,
Esquire. John Crew, Esquire. Alexander Popham, Esquire. Philip Jones, Esquire. Sir Christopher
Pack. Sir Robert Titchborn. Edward Whaley* Commis. Genesis Sir John Berkstead,
Lieutenant of the Tower. Sir Thomas Pride. Sir George Fleetwood. Sir John
Huson. Richard Ingoldsby, Esquire. James Berry, Esquire. William Goff, Esquire. Thomas
Cooper, Esquire. George Monk, Genesis in Scotland. David Earl of Cassils. Sir William
Lockhart. Archibald Johnson of Wareston. William Steel Chancellor of Ireland.
Roger Lord Broghil. Sir Matthew Thomlinson. William Lenthal, Master of the
Rolls. Richard Hampden, Esquire.
Commissioners of the Great Seal, and their Officers.
Nathaniel Fiennes. John Lisle. William Lenthal, Master of the Rolls.
Officers Attending.
Henry Middleton, Sergeant at Arms. Mr. Brown. Mr. Dove.
Judges of both Benches.
The Names of the Judges of both Benches,
John Glyn, Lord Chief Justice. Pet. Warburton, Justices of the Upper-Bench.
Rich. Nudigate. Justices of the Upper-Bench. Oliver St. John, L. Chief Justice*
Edward Atkins, Justices of the Com. Bench. Matthew Hale, Justices of the Com.
Bench. Hugh Windham, Justices of the Com. Bench.
with the Barons of the Exchequer,
His Barons of the Exchequer.
Robert Nicholas, John Parker, and Roger Hill. Sergeant at Law, Erasmus Earl.
Atturney-General, Edmund Prideaux. Solicitor, William Ellis.
Sergeants at Law called by Him to the Bar.
and Sergeants at Law.
Richard Pepys, 25 Jan. 1653. Thomas Fletcher, 25 Jan. 1653. Matthew Hale, 25
Jan. 1653. William Steel, 9 Febr. 1653. John Maynard, 9 Febr. 1653. Rich.
Nudigate, 9 Febr. 1653. Tho. Twisden, 9 Febr. 1653. Hugh Windham, 9 Febr. 1653.
Vnton Crook, 21 June 1654. John Parker, 21 June 1654. Roger Hill, 28 June 1655.
William Shepard, 25 Oct. 1656. John Fountain, 27 Nov. 1656. Evan Sith.
But to proceed: after Cromwell had made that fair Speech, Fiennes the
Lord-Commissioner of the Seal resumed (by his order) the discourse, which was
to beg more Money: for Cromwell's Heart could not stoop to such Humble Oratory;
declaring, That the Money granted (though thought sufficient) fell much beneath
the expense and necessity of the State, especially that Tax of the new
Buildings failed altogether of what was expected and intended by it; and so
recommended the whole affair to their consideration. Being sat in the Houses
(as aforesaid) the other House sent to the Commons (by two of their number) a
Message for a day of Humiliation, A Humiliation day appointed
but were returned with this Answer, The House would consider of it; and then
they fell upon a Vote for two Months time to exhibit any Petitions against
undue Elections, and assented to a Humiliation, which was kept within the Walls
of both Houses, by Dr. Reynolds, and Mr. Caryl, Mr. Calamy, and Mr. Griffith,
half Presbyterian, half Independent, as was the temper and constitution of this
Assembly.

This past, they fell a questioning the Frame of the Government, which their
Fellow Members had erected during their Seclusion; which yet notwithstanding
was carried but by two Voices in the Affirmative: and in a resolution of
unravelling it all again they proceeded very fiercely; which being told at
White Hall, allarmed on the other ear with danger from abroad, and that the
design had already footing in some of the adjacent Counties; Cromwell dallied
not with this two-handed necessity, but to rid himself of the nearest first,
accompanied with his Guards, he by Water came to the other House, and sent for
the the other; and having ranted away a quarter of an hour out of the old Bias,
(for now he plainly perceived the old stales would not serve, and that his Life
and Greatness lay at the same stake;) to break them up, he broke forth into
very rash and choleric Language, to which, as a pertinent resolution,
corolla^y and period, he added an adjuration to the stain of his larved
sanctity, in these or such Words, The Parliament dissolved.
-- By the Living God I must and do dissolve you.

As to the Royal Enterprise, it was begun ever since the Investiture of Oliver,
who suspecting such practices, had with Money debauched the Fidelity o^ Sir
Richard Willis, and one Corker a Parson as aforesaid, that now professed
Physic, and made always one at any Match or Horse-race whatsoever; and being a
noted Royalist, scrued himself into all Royalists Company and Discourse. The
Treachery of these men was employed, and now manifested in this affair, and
thereby Cromwell was certified, that the Marquess of Ormond personally labored
in t^^ Intrigue, and for that purpose was arrived in England, to lead the
Forces of the Loyal Combination, which were instantly to be seconded with an
Army out of Flanders: Cavalier-Plot discovered, and Marq. of Ormond hardly
escapes.
Just therefore as the design was ripe, he emitted out a Proclamation of
twenty miles, and seized diverse eminent Royalists, and among them Sir Richard
Will^s; and Feak the frantic roarer of Sermons was sent to bear them company,
but soon after (when this danger from the Kings party was more compert)
released. The Marquess of Ormond latitating somewhere in Sussex, very
difficultly, by the assistance of one Mr. Graves a Gentleman of that County,
got away in a small Boat, and escaped seizure; so near was he set, and the
design so particularly discovered.

While those were the private close Intrigues at White Hall, more public ones
were agitating in the Army, in the three Kingdoms; from every Regiment whereof
Addresses were signed and sent to the Protector, wherein they glanced upon the
late Parliament, and offered themselves, and more than they were worth, to the
defense of his Highness's Person and Government, against the Common and Secret
Enemy: the like came from Mardike; (who joined with some French, had made an
excursion toward Graveling, and surprised and taken two out-Forts, and so
returned:) the same Complement came also from the County-Troops, and their
Officers, who attended the Sheriffs, and succeeded in the room of the
Major-Generals, (now (for their Exorbitances and dangerous power even to their
Author, and because the work for which they were called was over) laid aside)
in place of Liveries, to lessen (as was pretended) the charge of that place;
but in truth the Protector knowing he could not be served ^aithfully by the
Gentry, Sheriffs discharged of expense at Assizes.
would name such, no matter whom, as he could confide in; and the expense of
retinue and treating the Judges being taken off, a Yeoman or Tradesman of the
well-affected might serve turn, and make profit of his place, as in all other
Offices of the Commonwealth; and in this very prick for the year coming of 58,
Cromwell observed the Rule he had given, which was in its place omitted.

The Victorious Blake returning into England from the Coast of Spain, having
awed all the Ports and Harbors thereof, fell sick by the way of a Disease his
Seafaring had brought upon him, Blake dies returning home.
the Scurvy and Dropsy, and died just as the Fleet was entering into
Plymouth-Sound, where he passionately enquired for the Land. His Character.
A man of eminent Fortitude, both active and passive. A master of as many
Successes and Achievements, as any person except Cromwell, being never Worsted
but once in his whole Warfare, and that was in the Downs by Van Trump, and had
merited exceedingly of his Country, had he been as tender of its Homebred as
Foreign Honor, of which he was jealously observant, it serving for his
argument to keep the Fleet free from any Divisions of Factions upon the news of
the several changes in England. He was buried with a handsome Funeral, just in
the same manner as General Dean was from Greenwich; but especial notice was
taken of Colonel Lambert's (then in disgrace) attendance on his Horse, between
whom there was it seems a more intimate correspondence. He was Interred in Hen.
7th's Chapel, as other of the Grandees that died in the Usurpation usually
were, without any other Monument than that of his Indelible Renown for pure
Valor.

Anno Dom. 1658.
NOw did the Usurper feel the Thorns of his unjust Acquists in the restless
Fears and Disquiets, which measured every moment of his time, his sleeps being
disturbed with the apprehensions of those dangers the day presented unto him in
the approaches of any strange Face, whose motion he would most fixedly attend.
Above all, he very carefully observed such whose mind or aspect were featured
with any cheerful and debonair Lineaments; for such he boded were they that
would dispatch him: to that purpose he always went secretly Armed, Cromwell 's
Fears and perplexed condition.
both offensive and defensive, and never stirred without a great Guard. In his
usual Journey between White Hall and Hampton Court, by several Roads, he drove
full-speed in the Summertime, making such a dust with his Lifeguard, part
before, and part behind, at a convenient distance, for fear of choking him
with it, that one could hardly see for a quarter of an hour together, and
always came in some private way or other: he likewise never Lodged above twice
or thrice in a Room, to which there was no passage but by twenty several Locks.
Sometimes he would pretend to be merry, and invite persons of whom he had some
suspicion to his Cups, and then drill out of their opened Hearts such secrets
as he fisht for. He had freaks also to divert the vexations of his misgiving
thoughts, calling in by the beat of Drum his Foot-guards, like a Kennel of
Hounds to snatch away the scraps and relics of his Table. He saw every man's
hand was against him, and that he ran daily into farther perplexities, out of
which it was impossible to extricate, or secure himself therein, without
running into further danger, so that he began to alter much in the tenor of
his former converse, and to run and transform into the manners of the ancient
Tyrants, thinking to please and mitigate his own Tortures with the sufferings
of others.

Royalists ordered to depart from London.
Thus began the year with a Proclamation of the old relish, for Royalists to
depart London twenty miles, etc. and instantly Colonel Russel, Sir William
Compton, Sir William Clayton, and other old Prison-guests of that party were
Committed to the Tower; but many of those against whom the information from the
two aforesaid intelligencers was given, were Gentlemen and Citizens not in any
service or design before; A Plot discovered, and the persons engaged in it
secured.
whether out of some reluctance of conscience they would not ruin their old
Comrades, or for fear of discovering of his Spies, of which he should have
perpetual need, Cromwell thought not fit to engage and set them upon such face
to face, they being not otherwise to be decoyed. These fresh-men were some of
them Citizens of London; as Mr. Manly a Merchant, Mr. Carent, Mr. Iackson, and
Mr. Sumner: the other principals, etc. were Mr. Mordant the Earl of
Peterburgh's Brother, and Dr. John Hewet Preacher then at St. Gregory's by
Paul's; Mr. (after Sir Thomas) Woodcock, Mr. Maunsel, both engaged in the Kings
escape and shipping out of Sussex from Worcester; Mr. Mallory, Mr. Stapely, Mr.
Hartgil Baron, and others: most of these were taken and kept close Prisoners,
till such time as some were wrought upon to witness against their fellows, and
then set at liberty. The Design was laid in Kent, Essex, Surry, and Sussex;
the King being ready to have passed over, The King in readiness with Forces
under General Marsin.
(as before) with an Army under the Conduct of the Count of Marsin, the Prince
of Conde's General, newly honored with the Order of the Garter: but this
Treachery frustrated the Design.

Which being so well known to Cromwell, and that other places, as Portsmouth,
Hull, and such Maritime Fortresses were treated for and reckoned into the
bargain; he set afoot the like practices by his own Emissaries and Trepans,
viz. upon Sir Henry Slingsby a Prisoner off and on ever since Worcester-fight
in Hull, some of the Officers whereof insinuating into his acquaintance, and
casting out some disgustful words against the Protector, and mixing some
overtures of their good will to the King; withal intimating that if he could
procure a Commission from his Majesty for them, Sir Henry Slingsby decoyed.
the Town was at his service. The old Loyal Gentleman gladly embracing a
proffer of such concernment, made use of an old Commission he had by him; which
being the length of their Line, these Officers hooked him, and sent him up to
the same Condemnation a Prisoner in the Tower. The Names of these Officers were
Major Waterhouse, Captain Overton, and one Lieutenant Thompson.

The chief Actors being thus secured, Cromwell, to Collogue with the City, sent
for the Mayor and Aldermen, and communicated to them the Plot, naming several
persons and particulars, many of which he accommodated to the danger of the
City, and dressed them for their horror and resentment, telling them that the
danger was not over, though so happily foreseen; taking hereby the advantage of
having a new Militia chosen of the most desperate Phanaticks, and his party in
London, etc. A general Train was soon after made in Finsbury-fields, and
Addresses by the Officers, testifying their resolutions to adhere to the
Protector, delivered in very express and humouring Language. When he had thus
raised the expectation of the story, (though the chief in the business
understanding they were detected, and many of their associates in Prison, had
defisted from any further Attempt) on the 16 of May he doubled his Guards, The
City Alarmed with a pretended Plot, May 16.
and sent an Alarm to the City, that that night the Royalists had appointed for
their rising and firing the Town; and forthwith marched several Forces of Horse
and Foot into the Liberties; the Drums of the Trained-bands likewise beat, and
all the 6 Regiments appeared presently, and kept Guard that night, being
employed for the most part in seizing some of those Citizens aforementioned,
with diverse others, as Mr. Southcot, Mr. Hern, and some young men and
Apprentices whom his Drags had Trepan'd. These made work for a High Court of
Justice, now founded and erected upon a Law of the late Parliament, the Act for
security of his Highness's person; who restrained the power thereby given with
this clause, that they should Try none but such as should be named to them by
him or his Council; for it might be by the same Sophistry as the Parliament
fought against the King for the preservation of his Person, they might try the
Usurper for the security of his Highness. Such a strange Judicature was this
High Court of Justice, that they that advised, framed, and established it,
could not tell how to bind or tie up the Mastiff from tearing his Masters
Throat: -- Nec Lex est Iustior ulla, Quam necis artifices art perire sua. --
Certainly haunted the mind of this Tormenter; most of the Lords of the other
House were Commissioners herein, the Earl of Salisbury being named among them.

A High Court of Justice. The Trial of Sir Henry Slingsby, and Dr. John Hewit.
Before these, Sir Henry Slingsby and Dr. Hewet were first brought, and Sir
Henry charged that he and one Gardener (never heard of, but such another as
John Do) did Traitorously Conspire against the Life and Dignity, etc. and the
said Trepans brought as Evidence to prove it. He defended himself by allegation
that that which was said by him was but in jest and discourse, and that the
Action was altogether impossible, he being but a single person. Dr. Hewit would
not acknowledge the Court, but pleaded several Cases against it, and was taken
or surprised for a Mute. Had he pleaded, it is thought he might have escaped;
for Mallory (the main Witness against him) was fled for the present. Mr. John
Mordant tried and acquitted.
Next, Mr. John Mordant was set to the Bar, who argued his Case so warily and
pliantly, after a Demurrer to the Court, taking Notes of the Witnesses
Evidence, that he alone of the three was quitted but by one Voice; Colonel
Pride (his undoubted Fate, troubled with the Stone, and being long at Urine)
withdrawing himself on that occasion, while in the mean time the Court by one
suffrage agreed upon his acquittal; so that he may well be said Evasisse
Calculis, it being the custom of the Court to give Sentence by plurality of
Voices. Mr. Mallory being retaken, together with Sir Humphry Bennet and Mr.
Woodcock, were charged next with the said Designs. Mallory pleaded Guilty, and
was respited and saved. Sir Humphry Bennet's Cause was not then determined. Mr.
Woodcock so handsomely and bravely defended himself, that they could not fasten
the Charge. In the mean while, on the 8 of June, Sir Henry Slingsbury and Dr.
Hewit were beheaded on Tower Hill; Sir Henry Slingsby and Dr. Hewit Beheaded on
Tower Hill, June 8.
Sir Henry suffering very readily and with submission; the Doctor most devoutly
and courageously, with prayers for the King. The Tyrant not satisfied with
this, brought in more, viz. Mr. Carent, (in whose Warehouse Arms were found)
and John Summers, Edward Stacy, John Bettely, Edward Ashton, Oliver Allen, and
Friar to the same Bar, where they were all but Mr. Carent Condemned, who
escaped by the noble refusal of one Mr. Pits of the same party (whose
Examination they relied upon) to give Evidence against his Friends, and chose
rather to suffer Imprisonment, and a Fine of 500 l. to be laid on him, than to
be branded with the note of Treachery, how fairly soever to be excused. Three
of the other, Ashton Bettely and Stacy hanged, etc.
viz. Ashton (as before, and at the time of his seizure, a Prisoner to Newgate)
and John Bettely, were Executed at Tower-street and Cheap Side by Hanging and
Quartering, both protesting their Innocence: Bettely after he had hung almost a
quarter of an hour, pulled off his Cap with his Hands. Stacy two days after was
Hanged against the Exchange in Cornhil. None of them but were worthy of far
better ends; which made the Tyrant most Execrably Odious.

Earl of Warwick dies.
The old Earl of Warwick (presently after the Espousals of his Grandson young
Mr. Rich, with Frances the youngest Daughter of the Protector) died April 18.
to whom, his late honorary services, and dishonorable Relations to this
Protector, were none of the least unhappinesses. At the end of May the Lord
Faulconbridge the other son (for Fleetwood nor Claypole had either Manners or
Worth to be employed in the Complement) was sent away with a great Train to
Salute and Gratulate the French King, now at Calis, upon the opening of the
Campania, and was received very splendidly, in the mean while that his Uncle
Sir Henry Slingsby was adjudged to Death: and though he returned on the fifth
of June, three days before Execution, and did what he could to save him; yet
all proved in vain: for since Mr. Mordant and Mr. Woodcock had escaped, there
was no room for his life. Soon after, Monsieur Mancini, Mazarine's Nephew, and
the Duke of Crequi, came hither with the return of the Complement, and were
entertained highly at Brook-house and at Hampton Court, with Feasting and
Hunting, and presently returned; and that I may have done with this wretched
Family of Cromwell, The Lady Claypole dies.
the Lady Claypole died at Hampton Court August 6, of a disease in her Inwards;
and being taken Frantic with the stopping of her Terms, raved much against the
bloody cruelties of her Father, and about the death of Dr. Hewit, for whom (to
give her her due) it is said she interceded. She was brought by Water to the
Painted-chamber, and in State buried in Hen. 7th's Chapel; her Aunt Wilkins
being Mourner, etc. The Earl of Mulgrave died coming up to London, Earl of
Mulgrave dies. A great ^^hale at Greenwich.
August 21. and though misplaced, I must remember the great Whale 60 foot long,
that (...) up as far as Greenwich, June the 2, to the wonder of all people, and
the dange^ous pastime and sport of such, who hunted him with Guns and other
Weapons; thousands of people went down to see it upon the Sand. Sir Tho:
Widdrington made Lord Chief-Baron.
Sir Thomas Widdrington was made Lord Chief-Baron, and the High Court of
Justice Adjourned till November. And so we pass to the Flandrian-Coast, to take
an entire view of the joint Forces and actions in those parts against the
Spaniard and our Sovereign, then concerned in that War.

A formidable Si^ge was framed before Dunkirk, Dunkirk Besieged by English and
French Forces.
by the joint Forces of English and French, w^^ch hotly Alarmed the Spaniards
in all their quarters: hereupon Don John of Austria takes these two things into
serious consideration: first, the Importance of the place; ^or its Situation,
it was a Key to Flanders, a Frontier to France, (next after Graveling) and a
certain supply of Moneys, by continual Booties brought in thither by his Men of
War. On the other side, should he l^se Dunkirk, the English (in whose
possession it would be put) had a Door opened, and fit opportunity to bid fair
for all Flanders: Here might an Army be landed from England, and from hence
incursions made into the heart of the Country. In the mean time, the Spanish
Ports, Newport and Ostend, could expect no less than to be perpetually infested
by Men of War; which would utterly spoil their Trade, Don John of Austria
designs to relieve Dunkirk.
and ruin the Inhabitants. These and suchlike considerations, mounted Don John
upon fixed resolutions to undertake the Relief of Dunkirk, though it were to the
hazard of his whole Army.

In the mean while, the Confederate Forces Beleaguering this strong place, did
in a small time (working like Moles) run their Trenches to the Spanish
Counterscarp; and still encroaching upon the Wall, they promised fair to a
speedy accomplishment of their Design. These things were well known to the
Spanish Army, who now saw the Relief of Dunkirk would admit of no delay; for
were it not speedily accomplished, the Town of necessity must lie prostrate to
the Enemies mercy. The better to effect which therefore, Don John the Spanish
General, having drained his Garrisons to fill up his Army, suddenly advanced
with 15000 men to the relief of his distressed Friends; these by a swift march
through Fuernes, quickly seated themselves upon some sandy Hills, within an
English mile and a half of Turenne the French General's Camp.

The report of the Enemies near advance, made both the French and English
Officers consult upon the best course that could be taken to repel the Force
that now sat upon their Skirts, and endeavored to frustrate their labors in
the present Siege, if no worse success. Time for consultation being short, (for
it was on the overnight) they agreed unamimously to give the Spaniards the
next morning a warm Breakfast. All this night the Officers of both Nations were
very busy to provide for the ensuing action; the Army being found sufficient
to fight a Field-battle, and at the same time to keep the Besieged from ranging
abroad. For this service most of the English were drawn from their
Entrenchment; and being joined to the French Horse, they marched against the
Enemy. In the morning (both Armies being come near together) it was perceived,
the Spaniards posture was rather Defensive than Offensive; but the English
Commanders knowing it was no time to dally, and being desirous withal to show
the Discipline of their own Country, (which is to make seeing and fighting all
one) did presently mount the Sand-hills, with a Forlorn of 300 Musqueriers,
Dunkirk Battle.
Commanded by Captain Devaux; after these followed the newly-made General
Lockhart's Regiment, and others successively. The Spaniards perceiving that the
resolution of these men was furiously to fall on at But-end, as highly resolved
to keep them off at the Arms-end, by pouring down perpetually Volleys of Great
and Small shot.

General Lockhart (newly preferred to that Command, and Ambassador nevertheless
to the French King) seeing the French unwilling to enter, now the English had
opened the gap; and on the other side, seeing the gallantry of his own
Regiment, who although they could no longer gain ground, yet still kept their
station, notwithstanding they were exposed to the Enemies Assaults; caused a
considerable Brigade of fresh men to reinforce those that had first born the
brunt of the Battle. This Reserve (through General Lockhart's care) coming in
time to the relief of their tired fellows, made no long delay, but fell into
the Spanish Foot with the But-ends of their Muskets, who not being able to
withstand their courage, The Spanish Army routed.
left the Field, and fled toward Fuernes. The French Horse seeing the good
success of the English Foot, did likewise make a Charge upon the Spanish
Cavalry, who being disheartened with the routing of their Infantry, thought it
their safest course to run after them. But the French showed excellent valor
in Pursuit: for the day being won, none durst stand in their way; the poor
Spaniards were sadly handled by them, and hewed down on all sides; and being
extremely scattered in their flight, both the English and French were put to
the trouble of gleaning for Prisoners; the custody and benefit of whom
redounded only to the French, the English being merely Auxiliary in this Field,
and were to be recompensed by the Siege of Dunkirk, whither in Triumph they
returned, and possessed themselves of their former Posts.

The Duke of York 's Conduct and Valor in this service.
This Fight was managed chiefly on the Spanish side, by the noble Duke of York,
(accompanied with his Brother the Duke of Gloucester) the Military Renown of
whose actions very early raised it self in the French service, (as before) and
was brighter far, and more eminent in the glories of this day, which suffering
an envious Eclipse, drew greater admiration upon him: he did not only maintain
the Fight till the irresistible daring gallantry of the Honourseeking Red-coats
made the Spaniard abandon his Punctilio's, and mend his retreating pace, but
sustained the impression upon the flight, and at least saved the day. Colonel
Blague, who Commanded the Kings Regiment there of Foot, did very nobly
likewise. Of that side were slain 1000 and odd, and 1500 taken Prisoners, with
all the Artillery, Bag and Baggage, besides 800 Officers, (upon which account
the French refused Ransom or Exchange, because Don John should be straightned
for Commanders to his new Levies.) Of the slain were the Counts of Motene and
Mill, the Sieurs of Coligni and Bo^teville. On the French side were slain, the
Marquess of Biragne Captain of the Cardinal's Guard, the Sieur Berbezet
Lieutenant Colonel to Turenne, with some Captains; the Marquess of Castelnau
was mortally wounded through the Body, of which he died during the siege of
Graveling (which was next besieged by the French alone under Le Ferte, where
the Marquess of Vxelles, the Counts of Varennes and Moret were killed by one
shot) the Marshals Staff of France being given him for a Cordial upon his
Deathbed. On the English side were slain Lieutenant Colonel Fenwick in
ascending the Hill, who died of his Wounds; and one Colonel Drummond a Scotch
Voluntier: Capt. Jones, who Commanded the Horse in Hispaniola, did venturously
and gallantly here; but was taken Prisoner, and recovered again, and Knighted
after by Cromwell. Some 200 Red-coats were slain in the Battle: after which, the
resolute Governor of Dunkirk the Marquess De Led (in a Salley he made) was
shot with a Bullet by the English; The Governor Marquess De Led killed.
which Fate he owed more to his Honor than his Reason.

He being dead, a cold damp seized upon the Dunkirkers, The Dunkirkers treat,
June 22.
who seeing what prodigous Balls of fire were flung out of the English
Morter-pieces into the Town, were sorely terrified thereby; and so much the
more, in regard of their not being accustomed to such Engines, his Holiness the
Pope having prohibited the use of Grenades amongst his Catholics, to prevent
burning of Churches. Considering therefore that the longer they stood out, the
harder would be their Terms; and seeing all hope of Relief by Land was lost,
the Sea secured against them, and daily discouragements arising every way;
therefore, to prevent further inconveniences, the Spaniards offered
Capitulation; which being easily granted, And ^urrendered upon Articles.
it was agreed that the Town should be surrendered upon these following
Articles.

1. That the Town should be yielded up with all the great Guns, their stores of
Victuals, Magazine of Arms and Ammunition, without any Imbezlement. 2. The
Officers and Soldiers to march out with Drums beating, Colors flying, two
pieces of Ordnance, and their Baggage. 3. That they should have the liberty to
march with a Convoy to conduct them to St. Omers. 4. The Inhabitants to remain
indemnified in their persons, and to enjoy their former Customs and
Privileges for two years, and not to be molested touching the Exercise of
their Religion.

These Articles being ratified by the King of France, this strong Town of
Dunkirk was delivered up into the hands of the English, The English possess
Dunkirk.
by the King of France and Cardinal in person, upon Tuesday June the 25, 1658.
The Spaniards at the same time quitting it. Here marched out 1000 Horse and
Foot, and 700 more (that had been Wounded in the Siege) followed after, as
their strength gave them leave. The English having possession of the Town,
found in it 140 Guns, all Brass except eight, with Ammunition and Provision
sufficient to maintain it for a great while longer than it was kept.

Dunkirk thus possessed by the English, the Inhabitants were sworn to Fealty
and Allegiance to the Protector, and a Regiment of Foot, and (...) Troop of
Horse were commodated to the French under Marshal Turenne, yet keeping the
Field, while La Ferte carried on the Siege at Graveling, and the Cardinal at
Dunkirk diverted himself with the delightful Wonder the Naseby, as he at his
treatment on board the same by General Montague expressed himself.

The Fortune of this Usurper, by its constancy and confluence of success in so
many desperate hazards and adventures, in which his ambition had engaged him,
made the Nation give him over for impatible, and as one exempted from those
Conditions to which other Mortals were obliged, and with a settled Terror to
expect the Extremity of all mischief, and that it would come at last to that
Calamity and Tragical Slavery, of delivering our Children and Posierity
Tributaries and Vassals to the Lust and Dominion of his newfound Family.
Nothing was more certainly concluded on, than this, that before we should
arrive at our Liberty, and our Fundamental Rights and Laws, we were to pass
through another Red Sea, and its like colored Element of Fire. Such his
untractable obstinacy and fixed resolution of uncontrollable Empire or vast
Ruin, that Nero's Jambick would better and more amply have fitted Oliver.

(...).
Blend Fire and Earth together when I die.
Nor had ever any that confidence in any presages or Fortuning-accidents, as to
suppose them of any manner of concernment or portent to him? no, though the
loud voice of Heaven had Proclaimed it in a most mighty and terrible Wind: for
as to that of the Whale, and the approaches of Death to him, in his Family by
the decease of Mrs. Claypole; it was thought a foolish curiosity and a wresting
of Providence, (so much his Friend and familiar Favorite) to apply their
Prognostics to his departure; and I may safely say, that had it been Treason
to Imagine the Death of this Protector, very few but his Doctors would have
been guilty of it; and one reason was, the verdure of his Laurel and
yet-flourishing Triumphs, whose blooming Glories computed him very young and
vigorous, (for Fortune is seldom seen a friend to Old Age) which his trim and
dress did help to personate. In short, his own Domestics and those best
acquainted with him, nay even himself, were presumptuously confirmed against
any thoughts of his death, in the very desperation of his life, as will
presently appear.

For it pleased Heaven, that had given us so many bitter Cups to drink, now to
throw away the dregs of them in the Carcass of this Usurper, and empty this
Vessel of his Wrath, which was as the 7th Vial, justly taking the forfeiture of
all his Trophies and Victories, by his surrender on the appointed signal day of
the 3d of September, Cromwell dies Sep. 3.
that he might not die in debt to the exhausted credit of Prodigal Success. And
who knows but he might decease on that his Rubric day, which he annually
celebrated with a Thanksgiving, to give the Nation a most just and solemn cause
of gratitude? not to be so uncharitable as to say, that he descended with the
train and tincture of that days slaughter, as the further commaculation of his
unrepented Parricide.

He was taken sick at Hampton Court, having not been well in Mind sometime
before (troubled with the last frantic words of his beloved Daughter Claypole,
who threatened Judgment like another mad Cassandra, and with the insinuations
and encroachments of the Republicans party into the Army; nor were some of his
Relations taint-free of those principles, but were winding toward them.) The
Disease was a bastard Tertian, which appeared not at first of any danger; but
after a weeks time it began to show very desperate Symptoms; wherefore he was
removed to White Hall, where his Chaplains, and others of that pious Family,
kept private meetings and Fastings for his recovery; of which they were so
vainly confident (as before) that they obtruded their unseasonable thanks to
God for the certainty of it, and with the same unseasonable flattery and
pickthank with the Protector, deluded him into the like persuasion, so that he
told his Physicians, He should not die this bout; but the Fits proving worse
and worse, Cromwell senseless before his death.
and causing him to talk Idlery, and to ^aint often, they in Council concluded,
he could scarce survive another Paroxysm: at which the Privy Council being
astonished, they immediately repaired to him about his fetling a Successor,
whom by the Petition he was to declare in his Lifetime; but he was then scarce
himself; which they perceiving, interrogated him, if he appointed not his Son
Richard? whereunto he answered in the Affirmative. It was thought that he had
designed Fleetwood in his ultimate thoughts; but the distraction of the choice
betwixt his Son and Son-in-law, had made him leave it undetermined: (a private
Will relating to his Family he made at his first sickning at Hampton Court.)
Continuing in this condition, he died on Friday the 3d of September, at three
of the clock in the afternoon, though diverse rumors were spread, that he was
carried away in the Tempest the day before. His Body being opened and Embalmed,
his Milt was found full of Corruption and Filth; which was so strong and
stinking, that after the Corpse were Embalmed and filled with Aromatic Odours,
and wrapped in Cerecloath six double, in an inner-sheet of Lead, and a strong
Wooden-coffin; yet the Filth broke through them all, and raised such a noisome
stink, that they were forced to bury him out of hand: but his Name and Memory
stinks worse.

His Character.
As to his Character, little can be added more, than what has been said in the
progress of this Chronicle: This various shifting Politician, best showing
himself in his Contaction, nearness and present relation to the several
Changes, and diversities of Affairs, Counsels, and Governments he passed; as
the Chamelion appears in that color that is next to it, and cannot otherwise
be described. He was alter Ego, or with the Comedian, he might have given this
devise, Egomet ipse non sum Ego; and certainly the first of his designs were
Enthusiasted, and he acted beyond himself, as prevailing in many things beyond
the power of Reason or Strength, and indeed all imagination; such was the
subversion of the Government, a thing not to be thought possible to be
projected by one of such (every way) Insufficiencies. He was as feat a Priest
as a Prince, yet acted them both very well, according to the humor of the
times, which are the Standard of Government. Sometimes Alloy is as current as
pure Metal; and he could never have Princed it, but through the distempers and
misrules that reigned before him; and his Preaching was none of the
unserviceablest Functions to the preceding Anarchy and his own Usurpation:
which made him never quit it to the last. The Turkish Emperors have always a
Trade; and Oliver's was this Knack, with which he was so much in love, that
when in the Humble Petition there was inserted an Article against public
Preachers being Members of Parliament, he excepted against it disertly and
expressly, Because he (he said) was one, and diverse Officers of the Army, by
whom much good had been done, and those things brought about; and therefore
desired they would explain the said Article. But I am engaged far beyond my
bounds. -- He was, in sum, fit to have made a Prince of Tartars, or some other
Cannibal Barbarous and Perfidious people; or had he been a Hun or a Vandal, we
should have read him big and Famous in History. His Court-friends did so far
extol him, that after his Death Sterry, one of his Sycophant Chaplains, was
heard to preach, That he was certain, that that blessed Person (meaning
Cromwell) was now sitting at the Right Hand of God making Intercession, etc.
which was more than any mere Humane Glory could reach unto: and his Funerals
were set out to such a pomp and ostentation, to vouch that value which by such
people was set upon him.

Here should have been inserted the Honor he arrogated to himself by bestowing
of Dignities: but there being but one Viscount seigned by him, and he the right
Noble now Earl of Carlisle, and some Baronets and Knights that are weary of
their Titles; I will not further weary the Reader.

RICHARD'S SHORT Usurpation.
THE Protectorian Government, like a Hybrida or Mungrii-Monster begot of two
different Species, the Army the Sire, and the Commonwealth the Dam, could not
be imagined in Reason propagable; however Fortune, that sports her self in
strange productions, prevailed against the course of Nature in her Political
principles, for this one Experiment or Curiosity, merely to demonstrate the
power of her proud and most scornful inconstancy. This miserable Person (as far
as she could make him such) Richard the Son and Successor of Oliver, being
merely set up as the But and Object of all her disgraceful and contemptuous
injuries, with which she Implacably exercised the deposed Estate of this
Impotent Usurper.

The Vulture died, and out of his Ashes rose a Titmouse, who with the Frog in
the Fable, being swollen up with the flatteries and fond advice of his
Counselors, Richard 's Advi^^ and Co^^sellors.
durst vie his greatness with the Regal right, till the tumid Bubble burst and
vanished into nothing. His great encouragers to his assuming the Title, were
Fleetwood himself, Desborough his Uncle, Sydenham the two Iones's, and Thurloe,
who with other of the Council, (some of whom from this time provided themselves
of a surer interest in the Crown) upon notice of the death of his Father,
immediately in a body attended him in his Lodgings, and declared to him his
Fathers appointment of him for his Successor; which they did most obediently
acknowledge to him, as their Rightful and most Indubitable Prince and
Governor; and the next morning, being Saturday, Proclaimed him in great State,
(the said Lords, and most of the Superior Army Officers attending the
solemnity) at the usual places in London; the tenor of which was, Richard
Proclaimed,
That whereas it had pleased God by his providence to take away the most Serene
and most Illustrious Oliver Lord-Protector, who according to the Petition and
Advice, in his lifetime had declared the most Noble and Illustrious, his Son
the Lord Richard Cromwell to be his Successor: the Council, the Lord Mayor, the
Officers of the Army therefore do heartily and unanimously acknowledge the said
Lord Richard as rightful ^rotector and Chief Magistrate, and do require all
persons to yield obedience; beseeching God, by whom Princes Reign, to bless him
with long life, and the Nations under him with peace and happiness.

This being over, the Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London, according to
Order from the Council, that Saturday in the afternoon came down to White Hall,
and Condoled and Congratulated Richard at once; and in their sight Fiennes the
Lord-Commissioner gave him his Oath, (...) Sworn.
which was sufficient inauguration to the Protectorate, according to the said
Humble Petition; and Mr. Manton the peculiar Chaplain to this Dignity, as
Prelate of the Protectorship, said Prayers, and Blessed him, his Council,
Armies, and People: and so the Scene ended.

Notice was also given by Sir Oliver Fleming to all Foreign Ministers and
Ambassadors of the Decease of the Father, and the setting up of the Son; who
all came and Condoled, and then Congratulated him in very ample manner,
especially the French; though the Cardinal then at Paris, immediately upon the
news that Cromwell was Dead, French Cardinal ^oys the Queen Mother with Cromwell
's death.
hastened to our Queen Mother, and congratulated her in a ^incerer and more
effectual manner, telling her, that the grand Enem^ of her and her Family was
no^ removed, and that most certainly and infallibly the Restoration of the
King our Sovereign was at hand; as indeed it was concluded, and I will add,
resolved on here by all his Friends, and some of his former Enemies: and from
this very time the groundwork of his Restoration was most artfully laid.

But these Aerie Complements were nothing comparable to the Domestic Addresses
which fl^w^^ flocks from all parts of the three Nations of White Hall, to
salute and (...) his assumption to the Sovereignty: he was celebrated there for
the excellence of his Wisdom and nobleness of Mind; even in some, for the
lovely composition of his Body, as if he had been another Titus, Deliciae
Gentis and Dominii Britannici. Nay some drops of this Court Holy Water stilled
upon his Wife, his Father-in-law and Relations: his dead Father was styled and
compared to Moses, Addresses to Richard full of Blasphemous expressions of
Oliver.
to Zerubbabel, to Joshua, to Gideon, to Elijah, to the Chariots and Horsemen of
Israel, to David, to Solomon, to Hezekiah, to Constantine, to all that was
either good or great in Holy or Humane writ; and in most, their parallels were
nearer to Blasphemy than any of his qualities: he was lamented as the Father of
his Country, (but 'twas in that sense no doubt in which he was caressed by that
Book of Killing no Murder; for as long as he lived the people should never
enjoy their inheritance:) the restorer of pleasant Paths to dwell in; of whom
we were not worthy, and what not? every one striving to exceed the other in
this monstrous and most absurd vanity; of which the Independent Churches were
also most foully guilty, their Addresses being drawn by their Metropolitans,
Goodwyn and Nigh. These were ordered here first, and Instructions sent down
where any of the Council had interest, to get the ablest Pens they could to
indite and discant upon this solemn occasion. But the Army for powerful words
and number outdid all the other; not a sneaking Garrison but hired a Scribe to
write their mind to their young Master Richard.

These Flies tainted the contented and private mind of the unhappy man, who
having Married one Major's Daughter of Southampton, with whom he had a very
competent Fortune, aimed at no great things, till the Grandeurs done to him had
insinuated Pride, and that inveagled his judgment to a persistency upon the
ticklish point of the Supreme Power. He was learned and instructed now to keep
State; and for the Government, his Council would take care: from whom, in his
name, came first out a Proclamation, continuing all Officers and Justices of
the Peace in the life of his dear Father, of most renowned and blessed Memory,
as the style run; whose Funerals were under consultation, to be made and
solemnized suitable to the Glory and greatness in which he had left this his
Successor.

No less therefore than 60 thousand pounds was alloted to defray the expense
thereof; 60000 l. allotted for the Expense.
more by one half than was ever used to any King or Queen of England: Some said
it was advised by none of his Friends, the design being thereby to bring him
into debt, and so ruin him, which in effect it did, and those that trusted him
with Blacks and other Funeral-Accommodation; especially one Walton a Draper,
who in his failure spoiled several Clothiers, whose Goods he had upon his
Credit, notwithstanding that Colonel (after Lord) Pride was lately become his
Father-in-law, and he himself moreover of Kin to the Protector. The Funeral
(because of the great concourse it drew of spectators) is here fully described,
it being one of the chiefest remarques of this short-lived Government, whose
Exequies soon after followed.

The Corpse (presently after his expiration) being buried by reason of the
stench thereof, Cromwell 's Funeral.
a Coffin was on the 26 of September, about ten at night, privately removed
from White Hall in a Mourning-herse, attended by his Domestic Servants, to
Somerset House, where it remained in private for some days, till all things
were in readiness for public view; which being accomplished, his Effigies was
with great state and magnificence exposed openly, multitudes daily flocking to
see the sight, which appeared in this order.

The first Room where the Spectators entered, was wholly hung with Black; at
the upper-end whereof, was placed a Cloth and Chair of State. In the like
manner was the second and third, all having Scutcheons very thick upon the
Walls, and Guards of Partisans placed in each Room for people to pass through.
The fourth Room was completely hung with Black-velvet, the Cieling being of the
same; here lay the Effigies, with a large Canopy of Black-Velvet Fringed, which
hung over it. The Waxen-Picture lying upon its Back, was Apparrell'd in a rich
Suit of Velvet, robed in a little Robe of Purple-Velvet, laced with a rich
Gold-lace, Furred with Ermins: upon the Kirtle was a large Robe of
Purple-Velvet, laced and furred as the former, with rich Strings and Tassels of
Gold. The Kirtle was girt with a rich embroidered Belt, wherein was a Sword
bravely guilt and hatched with Gold, which hung by the side of this Fine thing.
In the Right hand was a Scepter, in the Left a Globe: upon his Head was placed
a Purple-Velvet-Cap furred with Ermins suitable to the Robes. Behind the Head
was placed a rich Chair of Tissued Gold, whereon was placed an Imperial Crown,
which lay high, that the people might behold it. The Bed of State whereon he
lay, was covered with a large Pall of Black-Velvet, under which was a
Holland-sheet born up by six Stools covered with Cloth of Gold. About the Bed
was placed a complete suit of Arms, and at the Feet of the Effigies stood his
Crest. This Bed had fixed about it an ascent of two steps; a little from thence
stood eight silver Candlesticks about five foot high, with white Wax-tapers
standing in them, of three foot long. All these things were environed with
Rails and Ballasters apiece, covered with Velvet; at each corner whereof
there was erected an upright Pillar, which bore on their tops Lions and
Dragons, who held in their Paws Streamers Crowned. On both sides of the Bed
were set up in Sockets four great Standards of the Protector's Arms, with
Banners and Banrols in War, painted upon Taffaty. About the Bed stood men in
Mourning bare-headed; and without the Rails, others to receive people in, and
turn them out again.

When this Show had been seen for many weeks together, the Scene was then
altered; the Effigies being removed into another Room, it was there set up,
standing upon an Ascent under a Cloth of State, being vested as it was before,
lying; only now his Purple-Velvet was changed for a Crown. In the same manner
(as formerly) were men waiting upon him bare-headed. In this manner he
continued until the 23 of November, which day was appointed to carry him with
all solemnity to Westminster-abbey.

This great Funeral was performed with very great Majesty, in this manner
following. All things being in readiness, the Waxen Picture of the Protector
(with a Crown on his Head, a Sword by his Side, a Globe and Scepter in his
Hands) was taken down from his standing, and laid in an open Chariot, covered
all over with Black-Velvet, adorned with Plumes and Scutcheons, and drawn by
six horses in Black-Velvet. The Streets from Somerset House to
Westminster-abbey, were guarded by Soldiers in new Red*coats and
Black-buttons, with their Ensigns wrapped in Cypres; which made a lane to keep
off Spectators from crowding the Actors.

The Procession.
In the first place went a Marshal attended by his Deputy, and 13 more on
Horseback to clear the way; after him followed the Poor of Westminster by two
and two in Mourning Gowns and Hoods; next to them, the Servants of those
persons of Quality that attended the Funeral. These were followed by the
Protector's late Domestic Servants, and his Barge-men and Watermen. Then came
the Servants of the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs of London. Following them, were
Gentlemen Attendants on Foreign Ambassadors and public Ministers. After
marched the poor Knights of Windsor in Gowns and Hoods: then the Clerks,
Secretaries, and Officers of the Army, Admiralty, Treasury, Navy, and
Exchequer: Next, the Commissioners of the Excise, of the Army, and Committee of
the Navy. Then the Commissioners for approbation of Preachers: behind these
followed all the Officers, Messengers, and Clerks belonging to the
Privy Council, and both Houses of Parliament. Next in order followed his
Physicians, the head-Officers of the Army, the Officers and Aldermen of London.
The Masters of Chancery, and his Highness's Council at Law. The Judges of
Admiralty, Judges of both Benches, and Lord Mayor of London. The persons Allied
in Blood to the Protector, and the Members of the other House. The public
Ministers of Foreign Princes. The Holland-Embassador alone, having his Train
held up by four Gentlemen. Then the Portugal Ambassador, and the French
Ambassador, in the like manner. The Commissioners of the Great Seal. The
Commissioners of the Treasury. The Members of his Privy Council. All the
Grandees in close Mourning, (but it was once advised otherways, for fear of a
surprise in the Streets) the rest but in ordinary.

The whole Assembly passing along in divisions, were distinguished by Drums,
Trumpets, Banners, and Horses, whereof there were eleven in all, four being
covered with Black-Cloath, and seven in Velvet. These passing in fine order, at
length came the Chariot with the Effigies, on each side of which were six
Banner-Rolls, (twelve in all) born by several persons; and likewise several
pieces of the Protector's Arms carried by eight Officers of the Army, attended
by the Heralds. Next went Garter principal King of Arms, attended by a
Gentleman on each hand bare-headed. Next came the chief Mourner. And to
conclude all, came the Horse of Honor, in very rich Trappings embroidered on
Crimson-Velvet, and adorned with White, Red, and Yellow plumes of Feathers,
being led by the Master of the Horse. The Rear of this brave Show was brought
up by the Protector's Guard of Halberdiers, the Warders of the Tower, and a
Troop of Horse.

The Effigies in this manner being brought to the West-gate of the Abbey-Church
of Westminster, it was taken from the Chariot by ten Gentlemen, who carried it
to the East End of the Church, and there placed the Picture in a most
magnificent Structure, built in the same form as one before had been (on the
like occasion) for King James, but much more stately.

There had been a Convention or Synod of the Independent Ministers resolved
upon, Independent Synod at the Savoy.
and called by Oliver in his Lifetime, to make out a Declaration and
Confession of their Faith, and to make a kind of Canon or System of their
Tenets and Doctrine; he of all Religions most favoring this: for by their
means he began and carried on his Designs. (Sometimes he would offer to make
an Agreement and reconcile and unite the Presbyters and them; but when any such
thing came in agitation, he would be sure to divide them further than ever.)
This Synod or Assembly met now at the Savoy, and Prince Richard had the honor
to have his Reign ennobled with a discovery of what Independency was, and its
consistency, which the World never heard of before, nor was it the wiser or
better satisfied now it was fully informed. There was another as notable a
passage, and as memorable: Richard still followed his old Game of Hawking;
Richard outruns his guards, and endangered at hawking.
and being one day with his Horse-guard engaged in a flight, the eagerness of
the sport carried him out of their sight; and his Horse Floundring or Leaping
short, threw him into a Ditch, where by the help of a Countryman he was taken
out and preserved: he had carried himself very quietly thitherto to all about
him; this disaster and accident made him angry, and to charge them roughly with
this neglect, telling them, he expected more service and respect, and would
have it from them. He began also to be weary of his Old Cavalier-Friends, and
to require their absence from his Court, where now the Army beginning to swerve
from their loving Addresses, the Republicans and Lambert secretly tampering
with them, and undermining their Fidelity and Zeal to Oliver's house, (as it
was timely enough discovered) a resolution was taken to call a Parliament to
meet the 27 of January next, Richard 's Parliament meet, Jan. 27.
and (by pretense of restoring the people to their ancient way of Elections,
but really) that the Court might command the more Votes, the Buroughs had
Writs also sent to them, and the Elections were all made in the ancient way;
only thirty Members were called by Writs from Scotland, and as many from
Ireland, according to the late Combination of the three Nations into one
Commonwealth.

This new kind of Parliament being met at the time and place appointed,
(having heard a Sermon of course at Westminster Abbey, the young Protector also
in State coming to the other House, and making a Speech, which was seconded by
Fiennes, who began with a gross ridiculous flattery (though designed) What can
a man say after the King? a quotation borrowed from the Proverbs) God had so
well ordered the Elections, notwithstanding the practices of men, that their
English spirit quickly appeared both against Impositions from Court and Army.
And though their Counsels were at first interrupted with an Act of Recognition
of the Protector, prepared and brought in by the Court, which took up the first
fortnight of their time upon the very point of Recognition; yet they were at
length extricated from that difficulty by the Expedient of an honest Gentleman,
in passing these Votes on Monday the 14 of February 1658. without any division
or Negative.

Resolved, That it be part of this Bill to Recognize and declare his Highness
Richard Lord Protector, and Chief Magistrate of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging.
And 2. That before this Bill be committed, the House do declare such additional
clauses to be part of this Bill, as may bound the power of the Chief
Magistrate, and fully secure the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, and the
Liberties and Rights of the people: And that neither this, nor any other
previous Vote that is or shall be passed in order to this Bill, shall be of
force, or binding to the people, until the whole Bill passed.

Their next work was to appoint a Committee for inspection into the Accounts
and Revenue of the Commonwealth, which had been lamentably squandered and
wasted ever since 1648. and twelve Members versed in matters of account,
whereof Mr. Scowen was in the Chair, were selected for this work, and fully
empowered for the work they had in hand, in order to the retrenching and
lessening the charge of the Commonwealth.

On Saturday the 19 of February, they proceeded in the Act of Recognition, and
resolved, That it shall be part of this Bill to declare the Parliament to
consist of two Houses.

An Expedient in Recognizing Richard,
And had afterward several days debate by order, concerning the bounding of the
Chief Magistrate's power, and the Bounds and powers of another House, in
relation to the former Votes; but could come to no resolution thereupon; the
Court-party stickling hard for the Powers given them by the Petition and
Advice, and the honest Patriots of the House (whose weighty Reasons then
convinced the Commonwealth-party to go along with them) denying it to be a Law,
being obtained by force and Exclusion of above a hundred Members in the year
1656. by which force also the Purse was taken from the Commons, by settling a
Revenue of 1300000 l. a year, in perpetuity of the Command of the Single
person; and the ruling Members of the other House being most of them Officers
of the Army and Courtiers; which being allowed for Law, the people would have
been absolute Slaves to their power, the Purse being stolen from the Commons as
aforesaid.

Whilst the Temper of the House was thus tried, and they appeared sufficiently
to be English men, diverse of the Members of Scotland and Ireland joining with
them in the same resolutions. By the joint advice of the Court and Army-party,
the question of Transacting with the persons sitting in the Other House, as an
House of Parliament, was set before them, upon pretended grounds of Law and
Necessity, and by Arguments of Force and Interposition from the Army, and of
impossibility to proceed in any thing without the said Other House. This
attempt was as stoutly opposed for fourteen days by the moderate honest
Patriots of the House, as the former; the undoubted right of the ancient Peers
asserted, and all the said grounds and Arguments confuted, except that of
Force; which was not to take place with any thing like a Free-Parliament of
Englishmen. But in the close of the fourteen days debate, wherein much of the
Honesty, Ingenuity, and Courage of the English Nation did appear, (seeing all
Affairs at a stand till something were resolved in this point) they came in a
very full House to this well-qualified Resolution:

and the other House not Excluding the ancient Peers.
Resolved, That this House will transact with the persons now sitting in the
Other House, as an House of Parliament, during this present Parliament: And
that it is not hereby intended to Exclude such Peers as have been faithful to
the Parliament from their privilege of being duly summoned to be Members of
that House.

The House of Commons (between the Protector, the Other House, and the General
Council of Officers now summoned to meet at Wallingford-house) may well be
conceived at this time to have had a Wolf by the Ears, and (having showed
themselves Englishmen and not Slaves) had reason to entertain wary Counsels,
having some of their own Members undermining them without doors; and foreseeing
a Dissolution, though not knowing whether they should die a Violent or Natural
death, or have a mixed kind of Disease, as it fell out afterward. And
therefore they resolved not to own them in the Other House as Lords, but called
them, The persons now sitting in the Other House of Parliament; neither would
they treat and confer with them in the usual way, as with the House of Peers,
and therefore found out the new word of Transacting; and not intending to have
to do with them, but for a trial, they limited the time to be during this
present Parliament, which they foresaw would not be long: and to Muzzle the new
inconsiderable Upstarts sufficiently, (if they should take too much upon them)
they asserted the privilege of the ancient Peers as a good reserve, if the
Parliament should by the Protector and Army be suffered upon second thoughts to
sit longer than was first intended. And resolved also, That they would receive
no Message from those persons sitting in the Other House, but by some of their
own number.

The House of Commons by this time had also by a Saving Vote concerning the
Fleet, asserted their interess in the Militia; and had under consideration an
Act for taking away all Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances concerning the Excise
and new Impost, and concerning Customs, Tunnage and Poundage, after three
years. And had vindicated the peoples Liberties, by setting Major General
Overton and Mr. Portman, and diverse others (illegally committed by the late
Protector) at Liberty without paying Fees, and declaring their Imprisonment and
Detention illegal and unjust; and had their Lord-Jaylor Berkstead, and others
at their Bar under question for the same (who was also Arrested upon the
Exchange in London, The notable proceedings of the Parliament.
at the Suit of the said Overton, for false Imprisonment.) And had also a high
resentment of the illegal sending Freeborn Englishmen against their wills to
the Barbados, and other Foreign Plantations, and to the Isles of Guernsey and
Iersey, out of the reach of the Writ of Habeas Corpus; and had appointed a
strict Bill to be prepared for remedy thereof. And had Examined and discovered
many other Grievances brought upon the people by the Officers and Farmers of
the Excise, and others; and by Major-Generals, amongst which Butler was for his
insolent actings and high affronts to the Law and Courts of Justice, put out of
the Commission of the Peace, and a Committee appointed to draw up an
Impeachment against him. The Committee also for Inspection (beforementioned)
had brought in and reported to the House the state of the public Accounts, and
of the Martial and Civil Lists in the three Nations, by which it did appear,
That the yearly Incomes of England, Scotland, and Ireland, came to Eighteen
hundred sixty eight thousand seven hundred and seventeen pounds: The Revenue
and charges of the Kingdom.
And the yearly Expenses to Two Millions two hundred and one thousand five
hundred and forty pounds: So that Three hundred thirty two thousand eight
hundred twenty three pounds of Debt incurred yearly by the ill management of
double the Revenue that ever King of England enjoyed. And to maintain the
unjust Conquest of Scotland, cost us yearly One hundred sixty three thousand
six hundred and nineteen pounds more than the Revenue it yielded.

Many other particulars were under their consideration, as to the Religion and
Civil Rights of the people, too long now to be mentioned: but in short, to give
them their due, they did some good whilst they sat, both to the public and
particulars, and intended much more; and did no hurt, gave no Offices nor
Gratuities to themselves out of the public Treasure, nor granted any money
from the people; which is more than can be said of any Parliament in our memory.

Proceeding thus successfully and hopefully to the general satisfaction of the
people in the three Nations who chose them, the Protector and chief Officers of
the Army, who were jealous of one another before* and Competitors for
Government, grew now jealous of the House of Commons also, who being the
Representatives of the people, were become also their Minions and Favorites.
It was therefore now thought seasonable to contend among themselves for the
power, The Army and Protector jar.
before the people should recover it from them both. In order to which, the
General Council of Officers kept their constant Meetings at Wallingford-house,
and the Protector with his party countermined them at White Hall. but we must
interrupt the thread of this story, to i^tromit the year 1659. which began with
the Voyage into the Sound.

Anno Dom. 1659.
THe former respects and mutual designs betwixt the King of Sweden and
Cromwell, which had been promoted so far as to a Treaty concerning places of
caution for our Engagement and Expense in the Danish War, ( Elsenore-Castle
newly taken by the Swede, Gottenburgh in his own Province being demanded, and
Gluckstad and another place offered in lieu thereof) though without any
conclusion by the Death of Cromwell, obliged his son Richard and the Council,
upon the request of the Swede, to send a Fleet into the Baltick-sea; and in the
mean time Sea-Officers and Seamen were taken into his Service (who set to Sea
in December before, but by stormy and cold weather were forced back again,
diverse of them by the hardship of the Voyage dying at their return) under the
Command of Sir George Ayscue, who was upon his arrival to be Commissioned
High-Admiral of Sweden, to mate the Dutch, who then openly sided with the Dane,
and had a Fleet of War ranging thereabouts. The Parliament likewise, to secure
the Commerce and Trade of those parts, condescended to the Expedition, with the
Conditions and Limitations aforesaid. At the end of March General Montague was
Commissioned by Richard, with a Fleet of 40 sail of the best ships, and manned
accordingly; who in ten days time from Yarmouth arrived at the Scaw, G^^.
Montague with a Fleet to the Sound, Mar. 30.
and so to Elsenore, where the King of Sweden was, before the Dutch
Vice Admiral de Ruyter, who was coming with another Fleet out of Holland to
reinforce his Admiral Opdam, then at Copenhagen. The General here met with
Instructions from his Majesty, to whose Cause he had upon the disposition of
affairs betwixt the Army and Protector devoted himself; and instead of aiding
the Swede, stood more than neutral upon the Danes side, having received the
like civilities from that King, to the murmur of the Swedes; and several
intercourses of intelligence and friendship, and other intrigues betwixt the
Dutch Admiral and himself frequently passed. But to return to the Parliament.

Now the Game began; out came a Remonstrance from the Army to Richard, setting
forth in what danger the Good Old Cause was, (by which term it was cognized
ever after: The Armies Remonstrance to Richard.
) That the asserters of it were every where Vilified, the great Patriots and
Patrons of it (the Judges of the King) put into Printed Lists, and marked for
destruction, with the ruin of all the Godly and the Cause together: the Army
was purposely kept from Pay that they might Mutiny* and therefore desired be
would signify as much to the Parliament, for some speedy redress. And in the
mean while, the Soldiers that kept Guard made bold with his Victuals, and
would stop it from his Table. This Remonstrance was Lambert's and the
Republicans project, who never left haunting of Fleetwood's house upon pious
and Religious pretenses, soothing him with the complements of his Gifts and
Graces, and what happiness it were for the Nation if the Government were laid
upon his Shoulders, as no doubt (they urged) it was intended by his
Father-in-law. In the heat of this business died Mr. Chaloner Ch^^e, on the 15
of April, their Speaker; a man fit in every respect for the Chair, and of a
judgment and resolution as cross to the sway of the Times, which he was
designed in this place to oppose. The Speaker Mr. Chaloner Chute dies.


In pursuance of this Remonstrance, Alderman Titchborne, being set at work by
the same hands that molded Fleetwood, engaged Oliver's Militia-Officers of the
last Establishment to make an Address to Fleetwood and the Army, whom they
promised to stand by, in their defense of the same Good Old Cause; so that
being now backed with these seconds of the City, they resolved on the project
of Ruining the Protector (though when too late, the Officers, hurled into such
confusions that they could neither help themselves nor him (by the implacable
ambition and revenge of Lambert, who had scrued and recovered his interest in
the Officers) would have made him a kind of Duke of Venice, with a Title and a
Pension) and Parliament together. Richard offered terms by the Danish
Ambassador.
Several advices were given Richard all this while by his Friends Col.
Ingoldsby, Goffe, and Col. Charles Howard, made a Viscount by Oliver; and he
urged by them to seize upon the chief of those Army-Conspirators, and dispatch
them, as the only sure way to be rid of their Interest in the Army: he was
likewise solicited by other hands to embrace the Kings Title, and close with
his party; and there was a report that the Danish Ambassador (then Resident
here) had Instructions to treat with him about it, to offer him most honorable
Terms, and to engage his Masters Word for the performance: which has since
been confirmed to be true. As to the Counsel about seizing the Officers, Col.
Ingoldsby his Cosen undertook it upon his own score, and engaged at his own
peril with his order to effect it: The wretched suspense of Richard.
but such the suspense and pusillanimity that possessed Richard, (his near
Relation to Fleetwood and Desborough prompting him to expect nor dread any harm
from that party, where they were chief; and he thought himself well enough if
he saved his Skin) that he could be brought to no resolution; and so the fair
occasion of crushing that Cockatrice of the Rump, which was hatching at
Wallingford-house, where Fleetwood dwelt, and by which House that party was
distinguished, was totally lo^t. The Protector at last beginning, when it was
too late, and but then thinking of securing himself from being surprised with
their Complements, and stood upon his Guard. But the Commons-House, as became
Englishmen, wisely and courageously resolved to let the Officers know, that
they took them still to be their Servants, though they had for too many years
ill deserved their Wages, Rebelling and Usurping the Government at their
pleasure: and intending to try what they meant by the Good Old Cause; which, as
they seemed to represent it, smelt of Gunpowder and Ball; and whether the
Repentance held forth in their said Representation, were real or Military,
passed these Votes on Monday April 18.

Resolved, Resolves of Parliament against Meeting of the Army Officers.
That during the Sitting of the Parliament, there shall be no General Council,
or Meeting of the Officers of the Army, without direction and Authority of his
Highness the Lord Protector, and both Houses of Parliament.

And secondly, That no person shall have or continue any Command or Trust in
any of the Armies or Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland, or any the
Dominions and Territories thereto belonging, who shall refuse to subscribe,
That he will not disturb or interrupt the free-meetings in Parliament of any
the Members of either House of Parliament, or their freedom in their Debates
and Counsels.

And the same time, to show their care of the Army, and to prevent jealousies,
they passed these following Votes.

Resolved, That the House do presently take into consideration the ways and
means for satisfaction of the Arrears of the Armies, and providing present pay
for them.

And secondly, That Sergeant Maynard, the Attorney General and
Sollicitor-General, do forthwith prepare an Act of Indemnity for all such as
have acted under the Parliament and Commonwealth.

While the House spent the rest of their time in considering how to provide
Money without laying new Burdens on the people, great contests grew between
the Protector and the opposite Officers of the Army, both sides keeping Guards
night and day againct one another; the Protector having, in pursuance of the
Votes of the House, forbidden the meetings of the Officers.

In this divided posture, affairs continued till Friday the 22 of April, on
which Morning early, Fleetwood the Protector's Brother, Desborough his Uncle,
and the rest of the mutinous Officers, carrying the greater part of the Army
after them, and the Protector's party flinching, the Conquest was made without
one drop of Blood, (which was strange in so Ancient, Hereditary, just, and
undoubted a Title) and the Protector^forced to consent to a Commission and
Proclamation ready prepared, giving Desborough and others power to Dissolve the
Parliament, contrary to the best advice, and his own Interest and promise. And
accordingly the same day, the Black Rod was sent twice to the House of Commons,
(from Fiennes Speaker of the Other House) for them to come thither; but they
admitted him not in, and much scorned the motion, having ever looked upon that
Mushroom-house as the Lower House, and their own creature; the language being
to send down to the Other House, when they sent the Declaration for a Fast, for
a trial of transacting with them. And therefore understanding there were Guards
of Horse and Foot in the Palace-yard, after some motion made by Mr. Knightly,
Sir Arthur Haselrig and others, wherein Sir Arthur exceeded, That the House
should first declare it Treason for any person whatsoever to put force upon any
Members of the House: And next, that all Votes, Acts, and Resolutions, passed
by any Members of Parliament, when the rest were detained from, or taken out of
the House, should be null and void; and other motions becoming Englishmen to
that end, judging themselves under a force, and finding they were very
unanimous, though near 400 in the House. In the things proposed they resolved
no question, but adjourned till Munday-morning the 25 of April, and attended
the Speaker in order through Westminster Hall to his Coach in the face of the
Soldiery.

Now the Court (according to the guise of the World in like accidents) shrunk
out of White Hall into Wallingford-house; and Fleetwood, Desborough, and the
rest of the Officers, great and small; took the Government into their own
hands, Richard thrown aside, and in danger^ of Arrests, and dares not appear.
and discarded their Idol the Protector, whom they had Worshipped and Deified
in their Addresses; the Milksop not so much as muttering at these Affronts and
Indignities: a fine^ worthy Fellow^ and becoming the greatness of his House,
out of which God wonderfully rescued the Majesty Royal and Honor of the Crown
of England, from being sullied with such base and sordid wearing (and great
talk there once was of such a thing as Richard the 4th.) Within two or three
Mornings after this cast out of his Office, instead of his Guards, poor Richard
was beset with all the Bailiffs of Middlesex, who had a Writ against him (for a
Debt of the late Funeral-Expences) by the Name of Richard Cromwell, Esquire.

-- Is curre per ALPS
Vt pueris placeas and Declamatio Fias.
The House of Commons was also shut up, and entrance denied to the Members when
they came on Monday (even to Sir Henry Vane and Sir Arthur Haselrig themselves)
according to Adjournment; the Court of Requests and all Avenues being full of
Soldiers, who told the Members that they must Sit no more.

THE RUMP.
AFTER the new Officers had moduled themselves, Cashiering Whaley, Ingoldsby,
Goffe, and diverse others of the Protector's party, and restoring Lambert,
Haslerig, Okey, and others displaced by Protector Oliver, and played with the
Government for a few days, and grew weary of it, (the inferior Officers and
the Pamphlets, that now flew about daily without control) carrying things
beyond the intention of the Chief Officers; they sent to some of their old
^lackney Drudges of the Long Parliament then in London, who they knew would do
any thing so they might be suffered to Sit, and on the fifth and sixth days of
May had conference with them; the last of which was at their never-failing
Speaker the Master of the Rolls's House in Chancery Lane, where both Officers,
viz. Lambert, who had already gotten his old place, and others with him, and
Members, viz. Sir Henry Vane, Sir Arthur Haslerig, Ludlow, John Jones, Mr.
Chaloner, Mr. Scot, and others, to the number of twenty, solicited William
Lenthal Esquire to sit Speaker again: but he objected scruples in Judgment and
Conscience, and the uncertain state of Commonwealth and Army; nevertheless
fifteen Articles between the Officers and some of the Members (who it seems
over-confidently undertook for the rest) being agreed on at some of their
Meetings, they resolved to meet in the House on Saturday the 7 of May; yet that
they might do it by surprise, they gave out that they would not sit till
Tuesday the 10th of May: But the Itch of Ambition and Lording it over the
people giving them no quiet, on Saturday the 7th of May early they met in the
Painted-Chamber at Westminster; and to make up their number, sent for the two
chaste Cock-Sparrows, the Lord Munson, and Mr. Henry Martin, out of Prison,
where they were in Execution for Debt; and Mr. Whitlock and Lisle off the
Chancery-Bench: and with this addition, being two and forty in number, the
Chancery-Mace for have being carried before them, (whose Names from a Noble
Hand, with this Account, I have Transcribed.) viz. William Lenthal. The Names
of the Rump-Parliament-Members.
Lord Munson. Henry Martin. Mr. Whitlock. Mr. Lisle. Mr. Chaloner. Alderman
Atkins. Alderman Pennington. Thomas Scot. Cornelius Holland. Henry Vane.
Prideaux, Attorney General. Sir James Harrington. Ludlow. Oldsworth. Sir Arthur
Haslerig. John Jones. Purefoy. Colonel White. Henry Nevil. Mr. Say. Mr.
Blagrave. Colonel Bennet. Mr. Brewster. Sergeant Wild. John Goodwin. Mr.
Lechmore. Augustine Skinner. Mr. Downs. Mr. Dove. Mr. John Lenthal. Mr.
Saloway. Mr. John Corbet. Mr. Walton. Gilbert Millington. Mr. Gould. Colonel
Sydenham. Colonel Bingham. Colonel Air. Mr. Smith. Colonel Ingoldsby.
Fleetwood.
stole on a sudden into the House: the Invitation of the Army for the sitting
of the Long Parliament, (as they call it) being first published in
Westminster Hall; wherein, at the conclusion they added, that calling to mind
that Gods presence and his Blessing was visible among the late Members of the
Long Parliament, who sat till April 23. 1653. they did invite them to their
Trust: and they answer this with a like Declaration, (not dashing at the least
upon the Army) setting forth that they are resolved to apply themselves to the
discharge of their Trust, and to endeavor a Settlement upon such a Foundation
as might best secure all Christian and civil Interest, Liberty, and Propriety,
without King, Single person, or House of Peers; and shall endeavor the work of
Reformation, Rumps Declaration.
so much desired, and often declared for; and a Godly and Faithful Ministry, to
the glory and praise of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the reviving and making
glad the Hearts of the Upright in the Land.

Upon Notice of their sitting, there being double their number Members of the
same Parliament in Town, and many of them in the Hall; to prevent the mischiefs
of a surreptitious packed Parliament, they agreed among themselves in the Hall,
(though they were doubtful that Parliament was dissolved) that about a dozen or
fourteen of them should immediately go to the House: Secluded Members offer to
sit with the Rump.
and the persons that did so were these, viz. Mr. Ansley, since Earl of
Anglesey, my (right Noble) Author. Sir George Booth. Mr. Pryn. Mr. George
Montague. Sir John Eveling. Mr. Gowen. Mr. Eveling. Mr. Knightly. Mr. Clive.
Mr. Hungerford. Mr. Harley. Mr. Peck.


Who though with much ado they got into the Lobby, (where they found Mr. James,
and Mr. John Herbert) they were not suffered, by the Officers of the Army, to
go into the House, though they disputed their privilege of Sitting, (if the
Parliament were yet in being:) but Reason as well as the Laws must be silent
among men of War: and therefore after they had fairly made their claim, and
found the House under force, they retired, and resolved by Letter to acquaint
the Speaker, and those Gentlemen assembled with him, what usage they had
received.

And accordingly on Monday the 9 of May, they went to Westminster, where
understanding that there were no Guards upon the House, Mr. Ansley, Mr. Pryn,
and Mr. Hungerford went up to the House, and had free admittance, receiving the
Declaration of the 7th of May at the Door, which was published the same day;
but Mr. Ansley walking afterward into the Hall (the House not being ready to
sit) to let the Members know, that though they were repulsed by force on
Saturday, the House was open for honest men this day: at his return, Captain
Lewson of Goff's Regiment (as he confessed himself) and other Officers, denied
him entrance: he asking them, whether they were a Committee to judge of Members
without doors? they said, No, but they were Commanded by their superior
Officers to let none in that had not sat till April 1653. After some reasoning
the case with them, the Captain told Mr. Ansley, that if he would give his
Parol to return without sitting, he might go in and speak with whom he pleased;
so upon his Parol passed to the Captain, he was permitted to go in the second
time, and soon after returned, telling the Captain as he came out, that he had
kept his Parol, and wished he and the Soldiers would do the like. Mr. Pryn
continued still there, and resolved so to do, since he saw there was Force
again upon the House; and had some discourse within doors, and made them lose
that Morning, and adjourn by reason of his presence, without the Speakers
taking the Chair: he attempted to sit again in the Afternoon, but found there a
Troop of Horse, and two Companies of Red-coats, Keepers of the Liberties of
England, and so bid them farewell: immediately after which, to prevent further
interruption in their works of Darkness from Honest men, they barred the Door
against three parts of four of the Members of the House, by the following Vote.

The Rump Exclude the former secluded Members.
Ordered, That such persons heretofore Members of this Parliament, as have not
sat in this Parliament since the year 1648. and have not subscribed the
Engagement in the Roll of Engagement of this House, shall not sit in this House
till further order of the Parliament.

Whereupon, Sir George Booth, Mr. Ansley, Mr. Knightly, Mr. Pryn, and the rest,
who had agreed on a Letter to be sent to them, finding them in their old temper
of trampling the privileges of Parliament under foot, and Judging without
Hearing, resolved to make no application to them.

Thus we saw (to the vexation of the Kingdom) the same pretended Parliament as
was sitting in 1653. (till the Protector Oliver by the best act of his life
pulled them out of the House) sitting again upon a Declaration of the Army
(whose Slaves they were) to do what they please, as time discovered. And that
we might see they could trust few but themselves, and were not changed, (for
all their fained repentance) they were already returned to the Good Old Cause
of preferring one another and their Friends into good Offices and Commands, and
Counselors places, Qualifications of the 9 of May
as appeared by their Vote of the 9th of May, viz.

The Parliament does declare, That all such as shall be employed in any place
of Trust or Power in the Commonwealth, be able for the discharge of such Trust;
and that they be persons fearing God, and that have given testimony to all the
people of God, and of their faithfulness to this Commonwealth, according to the
Declaration of Parliament of the 7 th of May 1659.

And such their proceedings thereupon, A Council of State chosen.
that forthwith they chose of their own Members for a Council of State, 21.
viz. Sir Arthur Haslerig, or the Bishop of Durham. Sir Henry Vane. Ludlow. Io.
Jones. Sydenham. Scot. Saloway. Fleetwood. Sir James Harrington. Col. Walton.
Nevil. Chaloner. Downs. Whitlock. Herb. Morley. Sidney. Col. Thompson. Col.
Dixwel. Mr. Reynolds. Oliver St. John. Mr. Wallop.
Of Persons without the House, 10. viz.
Bradshaw. Lambert. Desborough. Lord Fairfax. Berry. Sir Tho. Honeywood. Sir
Archi. Johnson. Josiah Berners. Sir Anth. Ashley Cooper, a Gentleman too wise
and honest to sit in such company. Sir Hor. Townsend, a Gent. of too good an
Estate to be hazarded with such a crew.


Next they discontinued the Term, The Term discontinued.
(to the great damage and discontent of the people) because many Suits were
depending against Vane and Haslerig. In fine, what they were like to prove, or
what good, rather what evil was dreaded and expected from them, to an utter
despair and enragement of the whole Nation, did sufficiently appear from the
esteem the people had of them, in the Elections to the last Parliament;
wherein, though none but persons well-affected to Parliaments had Votes, and
the persons now sitting labored hard to be chosen, very few of them were
Elected, the people generally looking upon them as apostates from the Good Old
Cause; and therefore no wonder they would have that Parliament to which only
they were chosen, never dissolved. Going about (by the example of the Army,
whose Apes they were) to cozen the people of their Religion, Laws, Liberties,
Parliaments and Money, with a Rattle, called the Good Old Cause, which was a
Cheat greater than any of the former.

Being thus reseated, and having entered for quality (though not for number)
worse, if worse could be, than when they were turned out before, they fell as
readily as if there had been no disaster on their power, upon selling the
remainder of the King's Lands, Note, Richard was to have 20000 l. in all per
annum, and his Mother 8000 l. more.
as Hampton Court, Somerset House, Greenwich, etc. All persons were commanded
to quit White Hall, whence the miserable Richard (for whom the Army had
conditioned for ten thousand per annum for his life, etc. in fear of Arrests,
had withdrawn himself into the Country.) Thither these his Masters sent to him
a Committee, for his submission and resignation; to which they sweetened him,
with a kind demand of his Debts, of which by their Conditions they were tied
to discharge him: He at first answered not home to the Resignation; but being
urged (for they knew his Title was as good as theirs) to do it, he in express
terms added, He had learnt not to be unquiet under Gods hand, and should cause
all persons relating to him to behave themselves peaceably under the
Government, from whom he expected Protection, May 25. Then he gave them a
Transcript of his Debts, by the hands of his Steward; and they thereupon took
him off a debt of 29640 l. and gave him a Protection for six Months, and
together his dismission, having taken and seized all the Plate, Hoshould-stuff,
and other Utensils whatsoever in White Hall, together with what Jewels they
could find, into their possession; and so exit Richard in such a pitiful
regardless condition, but by his Creditors, that we shall hear but little of
him further in this Chronicle.

They were next saluted with an Address from the Army in Scotland, wherein they
confessed and lamented their former miscarriages toward them; but at the end
thereof there was a hard word subjoyned, That the defection was fomented and
caused by some of themselves: and this was afterward construed as a bone of
Contention and Jealousy thrown in amongst them. Benches supplied.
At home the Judges Commissions being expired, they appointed Sergeant Nudigate
for the King's Bench, Sergeant Atkins and Archer for the Common Pleas, and
Sergeant Parker for the Exchequer, where Wild and Hill were afterward placed;
and Voted the Courts and the Term to be in as full force as if the Benches were
full; afterward they anew constituted all those Sergeants in Oliver's time;
and Bradshaw, Sergeant Terril, (a Buckingham-shire-Gentleman, and one formerly
of their party, but never in such public Office before, and now making use of
it to good purposes) and Sergeant Fountain (an eminent Royalist formerly at
Oxford) were made Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal. Bradshaw was sick, the
other two received it at the Hands of the Speaker, at the Clerk ( Thomas St.
Nicholas in stead of Scobel) his Table, and took the old Engagement; whither
came now a Petition or Address from the Army, Armies Address.
in prosecution of their condition of dividing the Judicative and Executive
power; and to that purpose they had couched herein a project of a coordinate
or select Senate, the product of Sir Henry Vane's Wisdom, and conveyed into
their Heads by Lambert who was Dominus fac totum. This was promised to be
forthwith considered, and the presenters had the Thanks of the House, who
resolved to new Commissionate the Officers; which was done in the same manner
as before, the Speaker in few words declaring, That the Parliament in
confidence of their Ability and Fidelity did confer, etc. and this went
throughout the Army one Regiment after another. Fleetwood, who (by another of
those) by 15 Conditions was to be Commander in Chief by Land and Sea, was made
Lieutenant General with the said express Command; the Transcript of an Act so
Entitled (it being so agreed) being presented, and read, and delivered to him
at the Clerks Table aforesaid, as his Commission. Captain Lawson was made
Vice Admiral, and to Command the Fleet for the Narrow Seas this Summer: This
disposal laying aside General Montague, who was expected shortly from the
Sound, as one in whom they had no confidence, nor any Interest. Addresses
likewise came from the Independent and Anabaptist Churches, some of whom kept a
Thanksgiving, and invited all the other Congregations of that Sect to join with
them in that Voluntary Solemnization of this good providence; the chief of
these were one Iessey's and Canne's Disciples, the prime favorites of this
RUMP; which Name it now universally obtained.

And it will not be impertinent to the design of this Chronicle to give an
account of it, since it was the frequentest word or byword of the times. This
Term was first given them by one Mr. Walker, The derivation of Rump.
who writ the History of Independency, upon their secluding and debarring the
House to their Fellow Members in 1648. when there remained a Fag-end or Tail;
but was almost abolished by the height and violence of their prosperity, nor
was heard of again until Richard's Parliament, when Major General Brown,
repeating the many injuries he had received from that party or Juncto, in a
scornful Apostrophe, branded it with this Note of Infamy, The RVMP, which now
upon their readmission again, was their only appellation, except among their
own party.

To court and oblige the Soldiery about Town, and who as their Guards attended
them, they raised the Foot's Pay a penny, and the Horse three pence a day.
Colonel Alured and Overton were taken into favor; the last made Governor of
Hull, the other Captain of their Lifeguard, which now they had established,
Addresses from Foreign Princes.
Sir Henry Vane's son being their Cornet. Lockhart was also confirmed Governor
of Dunkirk, from which place they had received Addresses, as also an Ambassador
from France, another from the States General, from the King of Poland, an Evoy
from Sweden, the like from the Hans Towns, from Genoa and Portugal; so far had
the dread of those inconsiderable persons, by their former successes, possessed
most of the Princes of Europe. Spain's friendship they made themselves sure of,
with whom at their breaking up they were in most perfect friendship and
correspondence.

They had an eye also to Ireland, and by Dispatches thither had frighted the
Illustrious Lord Harry to a tame surrender of that Government into the hands of
the Lord Chancellor Steel, Henry Cromwell ordered to surrender the Government of
Ireland.
and Miles Corbet the Chief-Baron of that Exchequer, upon the very first notice
of such Orders coming; which to oblige them the more, he signified by an
Express, and that he was preparing to follow with all speed to give them an
account of that Kingdom, which he left in a very good condition, and hoped his
Successors might reap more content in the Government than he had found. He
arrived post-hast immediately after; and having given his account to the
Council of State, had liberty granted him of going into the Country, or whither
he pleased, as his Order expressly and indulgently declared.

To perform on their part with the Army, An Act of Indemnity published.
now came out the new Act of Indemnity to all such as had been any way
instrumental or active, or concerned in the late Mutations of Government, from
the date of the 22 of April, to the 7th of May 1659. with a Proviso of their
taking the Engagement. Just in the publication of which, happened a Fray or
skirmish at Enfield forest; A Skirmish at Enfield- chase.
the Country who had right of Commons, being deprived thereof by certain
Enclosures to new-erected Buildings, by some Officers of the Army, who had
purchased the Kings Lands there, and kept Guards there to secure this their
Trespass and violence; but the Country People mastered them, killing one or
two, and wounded a Sergeant, took the rest, and got them committed to Newgate,
(for assaulting them as they were throwing down the Ditches and Hedges) whence
their good Masters ordered them soon after to be bayled, being nine in number.

To the old trade they fell next against the Royal party, Priests and Jesuits
being joined with them in the same Condemnation; which was, that all such as
had not compounded, or compounded and not paid their Fines, should first depart
twenty miles, Royalists, Priests and Jesuits banished.
and before the first of August leave the Kingdom, or else suffer as Traitors:
notwithstanding the Council of State was empowered, upon subscription and
security to do as they should see cause in that matter; for besides the old
grudge, they had now information of a Cavalier-plot, A new Cavalier-Plot
generally laid, and discovered by indiscretion and Treachery, etc.
laid some time before, (by the same hands that betrayed the last to Cromwell,
who fearing the quick reward of their Treachery, did the same Offices to this
Rump.) Hereupon they began to settle their respective Militia's; and being
fully satisfied concerning Mr. Mordant's actings for, and correspondence with
the King, they required him by Proclamation to appear before the 17 of August,
or else his offenses should be taken pro confesso; the design still opening by
the unwary discourses of the Lady Howard, Daughter to the Earl of Berk-shire,
and the indiscreet conveyance of some Letters: whereupon she, and Mr. Ernestus
Byron, and Mrs. Sumner, were committed to the Tower; as also Mr. Harlow for
some reports and stories of their base actions, by the Council of State, in
order to Trial. The Duke of Buckingham, who had some while before Married the
Lord Fairfax's Daughter, and was therefore spighted by Cromwell, who had
designed one of his Daughters for him, and had been lately released by
Richard's Parliament out of Windsor-castle, came in now, and gave security for
his peaceable demeanor. Arms were every where privately bought up; and on the
other side, Ireton the then Lord Mayor, a very active person, Brother to Ireton
deceased, raised a Regiment of City-Horse, though the City Petitioned against
it; and the separated Churches raised three Regiments of their Members, under
Sir Henry Vane, Colonel White, and Skippon, who being through-paced for the
Good Old Cause, was by them made Major General of the City, and all Horses
secured therein,

Posts came now from several parts of the Kingdom, of Stirs and Insurrections;
the two first whereof were at Tunbridge; Tunbridg and Red-hill Risings
suppressed.
but a party of Horse (the Council of State having right and punctual
Information) were soon at the appointed place of Rendezvouze, so that those
that would have met there dispersed themselves; some few being taken Prisoners.
The other at Red-hill in Surrey, where appeared some 100, under the Command of
the Earl of Litchfield, since Duke of Richmond, who upon notice of the Armies
Horse advancing, got timely away; young Mr. Sackvile Crow, Mr. Penruddock, and
some others of note, among whom was one Captain Elsemere, formerly a Captain in
Ingoldsby's Regiment, being taken, and some former Troopers of the same, who
were afterward Sentenced. Massey likewise in Gloucester-shire.
Colonel Massey appeared likewise in Gloucester-shire; but by the same perfect
intelligence at White Hall, he was no sooner up, but he was seized and taken by
some of their Horse, and being put behind one of the Troopers to bring him
away, as they were marching down a Hill the Horse fell, and gave the Colonel an
opportunity to shove the Trooper forwards, and to make his escape into an
adjoining Wood; which was the fourth he made during these troubles. Hertford
shire and Essex were associated likewise in the same design now forming and
acting; but the like discovery prevented it; Sir Thomas Leventhorpe and Mr.
Thomas Fanshaw hardly escaping a surprise and seizure. Major General Brown was
not idle all the while in London; several Lists being filled with undertakers
of the Kings Quarrel: but such was the vigilance of the Council of State who
sat day and night, and so many defeats and disappointments, and so many
Prisoners evey day brought in, that nothing was done here. Lambeth Gate House
was made a Goal, and Sir Francis Vincent, and Colonel Brown of Surrey,
concerned in the Earl of Litchfield's attempt, were Committed thither.

Sir George Booth 's rising in Cheshire, Aug.
But that which looked indeed formidable, was the rising of Sir George Booth in
Cheshire, who was a secluded Member of the Parliament; with him appeared the
Lord Kilmorry, Mr. Needham Brother to the said Lord, Mr. Henry and Mr. Peter
Brook a Member likewise; Sir William Neil, Major General Randal Egerton an
eminent constant Royalist, who brought his former Valor upon this Stage, and
Colonel Robert Werden of the same party, (which last two were put into that
Proclamation, wherein Sir George Booth, Sir Thomas Middleton, with their
adherents were Proclaimed Traitors) the same Sir Thomas Middleton and his sons
who Garrisoned Chirk and Harding Castles, the last belonging of Justice Glyn:
there joined also with him, the Earl of Derby (whose Family Interest in that
Country, with the same magnanimous Loyalty this young Nobleman essayed to
resuscitate, and gave great demonstration of his personal worth and Gallantry
in the ensuing Engagement: but I may not be (as I ought) copious in his praise.

Nec Deus intersit nisi dignus vindice nodus.)
Colonel Gilbert Ireland, who seized Liverpole, Mr. Warburton, and Mr. Leigh,
the Lord Cholmondley, Mr. Marbury, Mr. (since Sir) Ieoffery Shackerly, and
others: these Rendezvouzed at Routon heath, and appeared to the number of 3000
and upwards, where a Declaration was read and published, showing that they took
up Arms for a Free-Parliament, and to unyoak the Nation from the slavery of
those men at Westminster. To second this, the noble Lord Byron with Colonel
Charles White, with a party from Nottingham, Rendezvouzed at Sherwood-forrest,
with a design on Belvoyr-castle, but were frustrated; and so onward to Derby,
where they published Sir George's Declaration, which the Townsmen very well
approved of; but Forces under Colonel Sanders being on their way thither, they
were forced to sit still, and cry peccavi; Colonel White was taken Prisoner.
Another appearance there was about Shrewsbury, but all came to nothing; the
Lady Littletons's Sons, and the Whittingtons were herein engaged.

As soon as the news of this Sir George Booth's rising was public, a Petition
was presented to the Parliament from some pretended Cheshire-men, wherein they
set forth, that to prevent the like Rebellious Insurrections, the Parliament
should discharge all Tenants of their Tenures from Delinquent Landlords, and
that they should hold their Lands thenceforth of the Commonwealth at the same
time; and straight a Committee was ordered to withdraw, and bring in a draught
of this devi^e: Lambert sen^ to reduce Sir Geo: Booth.
and Major General Lambert was Commissioned to march with three Regiments of
Horse and three of Foot, and some Dragoons, (Militia-forces being to join with
him in his march) and some Forces out of Ireland under Colonel Zanchy and
Ax^el^ to the reduction of Sir George and his Forces. Colonel Desb rough was
likewise sent with the same Command, and some Forces into the West.
Proclamati^n came out at this time against Mr. Mordant, the Earl of Litchfield
^^jor-Gen^ral Brown, Sir William Compton, Sir Thomas Leventhorpe, Several
Noblemen Prisoner^.
and Mr. Fa^shaw; the three last of whom rendered themselves within the time;
the two first fled; and the Major General awaiting another opportunity,
absconded himself at Stationers' Hall, by the faithful secrecy of Captain
Burrough^. The Earl of Stamford, who was likewise engaged in this business, was
taken at his House in Arms, and carried Prisoner to Leicester, which was the
condition of many other Gentlemen; the Earl of Oxford Prisoner to the Sergeant
at Arms, the Lords Faulkland and Delaware to the Tower, whither not long after
was brought the Lord Viscount Falconbridge, the Lord Bellasis, and Earl of
Chesterfield, Lord Charles Howard, and Lord Castleton. Lambert with no great
have marched to the Confines of Chester, desirous to make a War of it, and to
settle himself in the Soldiers affections; but such course had been taken by
his Masters, that very few accessions of strength came in to Sir George more
than what were first numbered, who nevertheless resolved to abide the fortune
of Battle, and drew up near Norwich (whither Lambert was advancing) in the
Meadows adjoining, having the Rivers before them, and the Bridges guarded; but
Lambert's Horse and Foot resolutely fal^^^g on together at the Bridge, Sir
George Booth defeated, Aug. 19*
the Fight was soon over, all the defense being made by one Morgan a gallant
Gentleman, and some Horse of his Troop, who presently died of his Wounds. There
were not above 30 killed in all, and some 500 taken Prisoners, and most of the
Gentlemen and Officers. This was August 16. and presently the Army advanced to
Chester, (where Colonel Croxton yet held out the Castle) and had it presently
delivered; from thence to Leverpool, which was yielded likewise by Colonel
Ireland, while in the mean time Colonel Zanchy and Axtel took in Chirk-castle,
delivered by young Mr. Middleton upon terms of having two Months time to make
Addresses to the Parliament; the rest were to be Prisoners of War, and among
them was Colonel (since Sir) Edward Broughton. Harding-Castle was yielded
likewise upon the like Capitulations.

Sir George Booth had made his escape out of the Field, and got away,
accompanied with four of his Servants, Sir George Booth taken at Newport-pagnel.
in a Woman's Disguise; but at his Inn in Newport-pagnel was discovered; and
being guarded and secured, one Gibbons a Minister posted to give the Parliament
account of it, and was rewarded by them, as were no less than three several
Messengers sent before from Lambert, with the particulars of the
Cheshire-defeat. Upon his bringing to London, Fleetwood was ordered to send a
Guard and meet him at Highgate, and secure him to the Tower, whither the next
day Sir Henry Vane and Sir Arthur Haslerig were sent to Examine him. It has
since been plainly confirmed, that General Monk was engaged with him in the
same design, under pretense of a Free-Parliament* (and that the Marquess of
Ormond, in the Habit of a Pedlar, was seen ab^^^ his House at Dalkeith) but it
was so secretly carried, that nothing appeared at this time; nor would Sir
George be drawn to accuse any man.

Most certain it is, the Kings Restitution was the bottom of this Design: for
before the appearance of it, he had withdrawn privately from Brussels, and lay
ready upon the Coast of Britany about St. Malo's and those places, The King
about St. Malos and Coast of Britany.
to take shipping for England upon the first good event of those his Loyal
Friends and Subjects; but Kent or Sussex was the place intended for his
Landing, Turenne the French General having engaged to wait upon him if he would
oblige it. But this unhappy account reaching him there, he resolved to give
over the prosecution of his right by the Sword at present, (seeing the
almost-impossibility of recovering it by his English Subjects against these
standing Armies) and pass to St. Iean de Luz, At St. Jean de Luz.
where the Treaty betwixt the two Crowns was then begun, and whither Lockhart
(upon the arrival of a French Ambassador hither) was ordered to Travel; where
after several affronts done him (while the Ministers of the King (not to
mention the Grandeurs of the Honors done to himself by the Cardinal and Don
Lewis de Haro, and during his short stay in the Realm of Spain) who were first
the Lord Iermyn his Plenipotentiary at that Treaty, the Earl of Bristol, the
Lord Chancellor, Sir Henry Bennet the Kings Resident at the Court of Spain,
after Secretary of State, and others) he was better advised to return, and be
gone with more have than he came; His Master's Concerns being wholly rejected,
and his Majesty's most affectionately undertaken by both those Potentates, in
private distinct Articles agreed between them.

As those Iuncto-men or Rumpers would have been taken into this affair of the
Peace between France and Spain, so they thrust themselves into the difference
between the two Northern Kingdoms of Denmark and Sweden, sending Mr. Sidney and
Sir Thomas Honeywood (Sir Henry Vane's Brother-in-law) their Plenipotentiaries
to those Crowns; The Rumps Plenipotentaries into the Sound
who having s^aid there to no purpose, returned some time after to as much;
their Masters at home being lurcht before: they had order to proceed in the
same method, and as far as the French or Dutch, whose project of the Peace
framed at the Hague being humbly tendered here by their Ambassador, was
approved, and these Commissioners to act according to that Module.

General Montague returned September the 24, about their coming thither; and
having given an account (not of all he knew or did there) concerning the War
there to the Council of State, was dismissed, having given the King very good
assurance of his readiness and affection to his service. --

The Parliament now were consulting what more standing Forces to keep in the
Kingdom; and to keep in with the Sects and Quakers, now numerous, they repealed
the Act of John Lilburn's Banishment, and released James Naylor (as aforesaid)
out of Bridewel; The Act for Lilburn 's Banishment repealed.

James Naylor released.


then against the last Royalists, caused a new Sequestration-Act to be
presently passed, and Commissioners Names expedited. Thus brisk they were
always upon the Achievement and accomplishment of every success; which when it
tickled them to arrogance and confidence, scratched them soon after to their
trouble and vexation: for Lambert having done the Feat for them, was now upon
his progress in the Country to his own House at Craven in Yorkshire, caressing
the people, having used his Victory very civilly; although he was heard to say
upon his setting forth, (questionless to make him more acceptable and less
suspect to the Rump) That he would not leave a Cavalier to Piss against the
Wall, or words to that effect. Especially he made much of his Officers, having
invited them to his House aforesaid, where their entertainment was concluded
with a Draught of another Advice, styled, A Petition to the Parliament. The
General's policy in securing the Scotch Nobility.
General Monk in the mean time (the better to conceal his affection to the
King) caused most of the Scotch Nobility to be seized on a sudden, and upon the
refusal of the Engagement secured them in Castles. Very many, yea most of them
refused, besides the Earl of Glencarn, the General's Confident and Privado, as
appeared not long after.

Lambert was Voted a Jewel of 1000 l. for a gratuity from the Parliament for
his Cheshire-service: but his ambition aimed at a higher Gem; he therefore
desired the Parliament that they would think of paying off the Militia, who had
deserved well, as also the Irish Brigades, and the Widows and relicts of such
whose Husbands were drowned passing from thence to their assistance: which they
readily promised, sitting brooding continually upon Acts of Sale and
Forfeitures of such Estates whose last moities upon purchase had not been paid;
as also in sifting out all the persons engaged with Sir George; and had traced
it so close by their Beagles, Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper questioned by the Rump.
as to bring Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper (one of their Council of State) into
suspicion; (as really he was a principal in the Plot, having been of the Cabal,
and had kept intelligence with Sir George, and had a party in Dorset shire,
which timely dispersed themselves) but the great opinion they had of him,
stopped the mouth of his Accusers; and he knew well enough how to defend himself
at their Bar. They had likewise got one of the King's Letters, dated the 16 of
May, and other Papers, which with the several Examinations were read in the
House, and a Thanksgiving-day thereupon appointed, for this their great
preservation. They likewise Voted the Charter of the City of Chester void, and
that it should be no longer a County of it self, Chester- Corporation and
Charter taken away.
but lie in Common; as also the Ejection of the whole Ministry as Malignant;
and received soon after an Address from the Leichestershire Levites of
gratulation upon this their success, and a disclaiming and renouncing of any
hand in that business, (which was feared would prove most Fatal to the whole
Presbytery, whose design this was vogued to be by the insulting Sectary, who
could not endure to hear of Tithes, which the Rump in policy had lately Voted
pro tempore.)

But Lambert's ambition interposed betwixt them and danger; for a Paper (sent
to Colonel Ashfield, Cobbet, and Lieutenant Colonel Duckenfield, from other of
Lambert's Officers) coming to the notice of the Rump, they sent to demand it;
and having it delivered, presently understood the device of it, and after a
quick debate of this Petition, Address, and Proposals, angrily Voted, -- That
to have any more General Officers in the Army, than are already settled by the
Parliament, was unnecessary, burdensome, and dangerous to the Commonwealth.
Notwithstanding the Officers met in solemn Council about it, Lambert being come
to Town, and sitting there in person, and acting his own design among them,
and bidding fair for it among the Rump, the ablest of whom he had made sure to
himself, and What need was there of the other? Haslerig who was the most
formidable, being known to dare and say more than he would do, as Cromwell's
carriage toward him had sufficiently evidenced.

At this Council the Petition was concluded on, and ordered to be presented to
the Parliament on the 4 of October, by Major General Desborough; which he
accordingly delivered to the Speaker as the sense of the Army: which coming in
such attendance, and the countenance and awe of their Masters, made them put on
another face, and very fairly answer the Sword-Grandee, with a Complement of
taking it into their first Consideration, nothing to intervene, save the Dinner
the City gave them (both Parliament and Army Officers) after a Sermon preached
at Christ-Church upon their Thanksgiving October the sixth, at Grocers-Hall,
for the Cheshire-Victory; where they eat in spite, and would have better become
a Fray than a Feast, though the Army-friends in London designed this Treat to
conciliate the Rump by their surfeiting on the Memory of this day, which they
owed to Lambert, as he that freed them from a worser danger, than his
whatsoever designements: but the result was, they fed heartily, and thanked the
City next day heartily by Members, whereof Atkins was one, sent to take the
other repast and Bottle of this high Entertainment; and withal the City
obtained the favor of having liberty to choose a new Lord Mayor, which was Sir
Thomas Alleyn, (which had been before denied, and Ireton Voted to continue it
again) so that the City-Cost was well expended. An Answer was now again
required to be given to this Representation, as it was now called; and
thereupon the Members (who had had under their consideration an Act for
Assessment of 120000 l. per mensem, which they had perfected some while before,
and let it rest, as being informed of this device of Lambert,
Army-Representation debated.
on purpose to leave him Moneyless, and without any support to his Ambition)
very closely and as cunningly applied themselves to the debate of the
Representation, which consisting of seven or eight immaterial desires
concerning maimed Soldiers, Widows, the Militia-pay, Lambert's Officers
rewards, and such like, had this only substantial Article, that the Parliament
would Commission a General, whom they named, viz. Charles Fleetwood. The Rump
answered readily in the affirmative to the rest; but to this Choakpear they by
Resolve stoutly declared, That the Army, as other Freemen, have right to
Petition, but must take care both in the manner and matter of it; and that the
Wisdom of the Parliament is to be referred to in all matters, and what they had
or should decree: and this for answer to their demand of a General; and withal
Voted hereupon, (as knowing they were betrayed by some of their own selves)
That it is the duty of every Member to inform to his knowledge of any thing
that concerns the public safety: and foreseeing the imminent danger of a
force, ordered the Council of State to seize all public Papers whatsoever; and
at the same instant passed an Act which did the feat, that it should be Treason
for any person or persons to levy Money without the consent of Parliament.

Published by Lambert before answered.
Before the whole answer could be framed, Lambert not liking a word of that
about the General, which was the main, caused his Representation to be Printed,
that the equity and justice of it might be public, and justify his future
Actions, (for though Fleetwood was mentioned to that Supreme Command, it was
resolved as easy a thing to supplant him as Richard, if the Rump had consented
to the Proposals.) This no sooner appeared, together with a Letter delivered by
Okey, a friend to his fellow-Regicides, to the House, that was sent him from
some Officers of the Army to the same purpose, but the Rump Voted October the
12, that the several Commissions of Colonels John Lambert, John Desborough,
Rump Resolute, and void the Commissions of Lambert, etc.
James Berry, Thomas Kelsey, Richard Ashfield, Ralph Cobbet, William Packer,
Robert Barrow, and Major Richard Creed, who subscribed the same Letter, should
be vacated. Resolved also, that the Government of the Army should be managed by
Commissioners: That an Act be brought in for repealing the Act whereby
Fleetwood was constituted Lieutenant General and Commander in chief; and that
Fleetwood, Ludlow, General Monk, Haslerig, Walton, Morly, and Overton do
execute the powers granted to Fleetwood until the 12 of February, four months
from the date of this Resolve, as also the next Officers in the respective
Regiments of these Colonels do succeed in their places, Lieutenant Colonel
Campfield to Lambert, and so in the rest; and the Sergeant at Arms was ordered
to attend these Cashiered Officers with these Orders and Resolutions.

In the mean while Haslerig in a great heat, and Herbert Morley his Son-in-law,
and other the Commissioners then present for the Army, by Order sare up all
night in the Speakers Chamber adjoining to the House, and issued out several
Commands to such Forces and Commanders as they thought would stand by them,
resolving to oppose Force to Force, and be baffled no more, with this Legionary
Spirit, that had haunted and plagued them so often. But Lambert was awake also,
and at the same time marched several Regiments into King Street Westminster,
and possessed himself of all the avenues to the Palace; such Forces as these
Commissioners had got to their side being forced to march round St. James Wall
in the night time, and so through Tuttle-street into the Abbey, and St.
Margarets Westminster Churchyard, both parties standing upon their Guard till
the Morning, The Speaker stopped, and a Fray expected.
October 13. at which time about eleven a Clock, the Speaker coming to the
House in his Coach, was stopped near the Gate that leads into the Palace, by
Lieutenant Col. Duckenfield, and his Coach turned and sent back: Lambert on
Horseback then faced the Regiment of Morley and Moss in the said Churchyard;
and much stiffness, and ill looks there passed between the Officers, and some
words, but never a blow, for the Soldiers were resolved not to Fight one
against the other for the best Parliament or the best Cause that ever was in
England. In this posture they continued till Night, when the Council of State,
Lambert prevailed against the Rump.
who umpired the difference between the Red-Coats, commanded and ordered them
to their several Quarters, as good friends as ever. It must be remembered, that
the Rump suspecting of this Juncto of State, had privately named another to
Act, if a dissolution should happen. The Army Officers the next day after this
Conquest, met at Whitehal, and declared Fleetwood for their General.

They appointed also a select number of the Council of State to consider of fit
ways to carry on the Affairs of the Commonwealth, and suspended all those
Officers that were active on the other side, and referred them to a Court
Martial for remedy; Army new moduled.
giving power to Fleetwood, Ludlow, Desborough, Lambert, Sir Henry Vane, and
Berry, to nominate all Officers; and appointed the reviving of the old Laws of
Military Discipline, and that Fleetwood, as before, should be owned for
General, and Lambert and Desborough as Major and Commissary General; the latter
in England and Scotland too; not a syllable mentioned of General Moncks consent
to the bargain, save that Colonel Cobbet was dispatched thither to inform him
of the Passages; as Colonel Barrough was sent upon the same errand to Ireland.

That Committee just before mentioned, City invite Parl. and Army to a Dinner,
on thanksgiving day, Oct. 6.
of which Vane, Whitlock, Lambert and Berry were chief; ( Fleetwood and
Desborough must needs be in) begot or gigged themselves into another Committee
called a Committee of Safety, some few more being added from the City, who were
to consider of a form of Government; and if they thought fit, to advise with
the General Council of Officers, The Committee of Safety.
and to bring in a Draught within six weeks, their power the same with the
former Council of State; to which this was added, they were to call Delinquets
to Trial, and to give Indemnity to all that had acted for the Parliament since
1641. to suppress Rebellious Insurrections, to Treat with Foreign Princes, to
confer Offices, and to state the Sales and Compositions of those late
Delinquents; their Names were as follow, viz. Fleetwood, Lambert, Desborough,
Steel, Whitlock, Vane, Ludlow, Sydenham, Salloway, Strickland, (Seven last
Members of the Rump) Berry, Laurence Olivers's President of his Council, Sir
James Harrington another Rumper, Warreston a Scotch-man, and Henry Brandrith a
Cloath-drawer Citizen, Cornelius Holland a Member, Hewson, Clark, Bennet, and
Lilbourn, Colonels of the Army.

These by Letters of Invitation being brought together to consider of a
Government (which Vane had already Projected, the Cement whereof was an
intended Marriage betwixt Lamberts's Son, and his Daughter;) the Council of
Officers emitted a Declaration, The Army Declaration upon this change.
showing the reasons of the late Change, and do thereby disanul the pretended
Act of Treason, October. 10. to Levy Money without consent in Parliament, as done
precipitantly and unduly, and not according to the Custom of Parliament;
declare for Ministry, and the maintenance of it, by a less vexatious way than
Tithes; for Liberty; and that the Army will not meddle in Civil Affairs, but
refer the Civil and Executive Power to the Council of State, or Safety, to
provide for the Government, and to set up a free State without King, single
Person, or House of Lords: And for Conclusion, desire the Prayers of the Godly.

The Judges were nevertheless (in this mad state of Affairs) persuaded to sit
in the several Courts, Whitlock officiating the Chancery; Sir Thomas Alleyn the
Lord Mayor of London was likewise sworn before the Barons of the Exchequer. Sir
William Waller and others that had been snapt up by the Rump, took advantage of
it, and brought their Habeas Corpus to the Kings Bench. Sir William got his
liberty; and shortly after the Earl of Northampton, Lord Bellasis,
Faulconbridge, Faulkland, Castelton, Lord Herbert of Ragland, Lord Charles
Howard, were all released upon bail.

Bradshaw the President dies. November.
That wretch Bradshaw died, at the Lodgings given him in the Deans-house at
Westminster, the beginning of this Month of November. in the same desperate
impenitence in which since the Fact he lived, saying to a Gentleman on his
Deathbed, that charitably advised him to examine himself about the matter of
the Kings Death, That if it were to do again, he would be the first man that
should do it. He was freed by this his Disease (which was occasioned by an
Ague, as Cromwell's) from the terror and fear of the ensuing Change, the
apprehensions whereof settled in him, ever since his Country the Cheshire
Design. He was grown publicly confident, and had left off his Guards he first
kept about him; but his privacy was more than usually, and all his actions and
gestures more reserved: He was carried out with a great Funeral, and much
attendance of the Men of those Times, and Interred in the Abbey, and his Crime
published for his Commendation. A little before died Edmund Prideaux, Aturney
Gen-Prideaux dies.
the Attorney General throughout the Usurpation, by which he got a very vast
Estate, leaving Sixty Thousand pounds in Gold (as credible report went) in his
Coffers, besides Lands of very great demesnes.

This Change (like a nine days wonder) was quite over, and the Army and Lambert
here very brisk and slighting the Rump, and all it could do; when a Cooling
Card came from the North, in a Letter from General Monk, declaring his
unsatisfiedness with those proceedings of the Army: which hugely deceived their
Expectations, because he had so readily concurred with their former mutation,
and the Officers there were many of them Phanaticks; but the Case was altered,
G. Monk declares his unsatisfiedness with the Army proceedings, the the manner
how, Oct. 18.
he resolved to assert the Parliamentary Interest; and when Cobbet (sent hence)
came to Berwick, he had him secured there, and sent with a Guard Prisoner to
Edinborough Castle. The manner of his declaring for the Parliament, was thus:
On the Eighteenth of October being at Dalkeith, he sent for Col. Wilks
Governor of Leith, Lieutenant-Col. Emerson, Captain Ethelbert Morgan now made
his Lieutenant Colonel, Lieutenant-Col. Hubberthorne, Cloberry, and Miller, to
come to him, whom he acquainted with his Resolution; and they engaged to stand
by him, against the Factious part of the Army; as he characterized them. On the
Nineteenth he come to Edinburgh, where his own, and Col. Talbot's Regiment with
lighted Matches and Ball received him; to whom he declared the same, and
promised them their Arrears, at which they loudly shouted: then he went to
Leith, where he was entertained in the like manner; and at his departure had
Seventeen Guns given him from the Citadel, and Volleys from the Regiment:
Secures Anabaptist Officers.
Then he turned all the Anabaptist-Officers out of the Regiments, and secured
them in Timptallon-Castle. At the same time, upon pretenses of consulting with
Lieutenant-Col. Young of Cobbets Regiment, Lieutenant-Col. Keyn, and Major
Kelke of Pearsons Regiment, he sent for them to him; and upon their coming
clapped them up, but released Keyn upon his promise of adherence. Together with
them, he had advertisement that Col. Read's and Col. Fairfax's Regiments were
at his service. On the Twenty first he marched to Lithgow with some Horse and
Foot, intending for Air; but understanding that his own Lieutenant-Col. Holms
was got there before him, who was an Anabaptist, being loath to receive any
opposition in the beginning of his Enterprise, he returned, and under his own
Hand and Seal constituted and commissioned several Officers in the room of
those he had secured; and forthwith sent away for Fairfax's, Read's, and
Cobbet's Regiments to March and join with him, leaving Captain Winter with Two
hundred men to keep the Citadel of Saint Iohnstons; which like number, and no
more, he left in the other Three, upon his departure for England; and
Rendezvouz'd his other Forces the last of October, and dispatched away Letters
to the Speaker, The Genesis sends Letters.
Fleetwood, Lambert; as also to Hull, where Overton was now Governor, by the
Pearl-Frigot: and lastly, a Letter to the gathered Churches; for he was to
fight with these Hypocrites at their own Weapons.

Colonel Pearson (one of General Monks Officers in Scotland) was by order
hence sent down as to his Charge there, but secretly to corrupt and incline the
Army to Lambert: but arriving at Newcastle, and understanding by several
transfuges from Scotland of the Anabaptist Persuasion, what course G. Monk had
taken, he staid there, his Field-Officers being in custody already, except
Lieutenant-Col. Keyn newly released: during his stay here, Letters were by his
means intercepted as they were carrying to Exeter and Devonshire, And maintains
correspondence, etc,
sowed up in a man's Doublet, without any direction, but Signed with his own
Hand, and Written by Master (after Sir) William Clark; wherein he gave his
Friends notice to stand upon their Guard, and that as soon as the Army was
drawn from London, the City would declare with him, as he expected likewise
they would, etc. Pearson at the sending up of these Letters (a Treaty being
then mentioned betwixt both parties, and to which end the discarded Officers,
as Whally and Goffe, Mr. Caryl and Mr. Barker Independent Ministers, went in
the way of Brotherly-love to move and persuade him) gave this Comment of them,
as one well acquainted with his General, That what ever he pretended, he
scorned all their messages and overtures, merely winning time by them; and that
nothing but force could reduce him. Col. (after Major General) Morgan upon the
same pretenses, with Col. Whally, etc. went out of Yorkshire to Scotland, and
joined with the General, as he had received an invitation from him by a private
Messenger, and did mainly assist in this groundwork, to the conclusion and
perfection thereof.

In the mean while it was resolved by the Officers here, for fear of the worst,
and to be ready against all accidents, if no good could be done by this fair
way of Message, to send down Lambert with most of the Army Northwards, and
there in that posture to expect the issue; and he very willingly (it being his
own advice) undertook it, having refused and declined those tenders and offers,
which particularly my Lord Hatton made to him in the name of the King; Lambert
offered Terms from the King by the Lord Hatton.
If he would now at last mind his own good, and the Kingdoms, in returning to
his Allegiance; and convert his designs for himself, to the service of his
Sovereign in his Restitution: the said Lord further assuring him, that if he
did it not, it would be presently done without him, beyond his power of
remedying it; and that therefore he should not let slip such an opportunity of
raising himself and his posterity. But he replying upon the Army-Interest
(which if it could have been cemented with money, would have caused a hazardous
opposition to any other) and the Anabaptist-party (now very numerous,
Anabaptist like Presbytery has its turn.
and at this time uppermost) for that had its turn too as well as Presbytery
and Independency, but swayed not so long (all the other Sects centring here;
for now was the time of the fullness, and visible power of Sion, as it was
counted by these People) resolved to proceed on this Expedition; and if fortune
favored him there, he feared no other Enemy to his ambition. On the Third of
November, a very ominous day, as it was observed, by reason the Long-Parliament
sat down that day in One thousand six hundred and forty, he departed from
London by Ware-road, and hastened to New Castle, just as Col. Barrow was
returned from Ireland, with the supposed acquiescence of that Kingdom in this
change; Tomlinson, John Jones and Corbet, who were then the Governors and
Commissioners declaring as much, but Sir Charles Coot, Sir Hardress Waller upon
different grounds, and his party combined against it. There was a project to
get the City to write to General Monk for a good Understanding, Sir William
Wild chose Recorder of London.
where Master (now Sir) William Wild very opportunely for the Times, he being a
most knowing and upright Gentleman, was chosen Recorder in place of young
Master Green deceased.

General Monk removed the Officers he had secured in Timptallon-Castle to the
Basse-Island, out of all way of Communication, and sent Major Knight (of his
own Regiment of Horse) with five Troops as far as Morpeth in Northumberland;
and upon notice of the readiness of Lambert, drew out more Southwards for a
Bravado, to let them see how resolved and prepared their General was, and
departed.

Doctor Clargis sent to the Genesis in Scotland, November.
In the same instant Col. Talbot and Mr. Thomas Clargis his Excellencies
Brother-in-law were sent with another Complement from hence to ingratiate with
the General: and now he is pleased (though he had refused Goff and Whally
(Regicides) and Caryl their Priest, whose person he yet outwardly liked) to
accept of a Treaty; and Col. Wilks, Lieutenant-Col. Clobery, and Major Knight
were appointed his Commissiomers to go for London to Treat with Three more; and
in the mean while his Forces should not stir further Southwards. These upon
their journey Lambert met with; and hoping their Errand would end in an
acquiescence as they promised, did acquisce himself, and await the Issue, which
upon the arrival of them at London came to a speedy result (though Three
Kingdoms were the subject of this Treaty) betwixt Six unlearned men; and like a
happy Revelation was cried about the Streets the next morning: the Heads were
these.

Moncks Commi^sioners agree, to no purpose, November.
November. 16. They were proposed, the Seventeenth concluded, viz. The Family of
the King utterly to be excluded, a Free State Settled, the Ministry and
Universities encouraged, the Generals Officers imprisoned to be released, and a
general Indemnity of the Parliament-party, and the Armies to retire presently
into Quarters, and Three Army Officers of each Kingdom, and a general Council
of them, with ten Sea-Off^cers, and I know not what Embryo, to meet on the
Sixth of December at Whitehall, and to conclude as Vane had codled it: about
which time Captain Robinsons's and Captain Deans's Troops deserted him,
Robinson bringing his Troop away with him, his Brother being then Clerk of the
Committee of Safety, and allied, by Marriage of a Daughter, to Sir Nicholas
Crispe.

But the General was intent upon another more taking Assembly at home, having
issued out Writs by his own Precept and Authority for convening some of the
Nobles, and two for every County of Scotland (while as yet he lay in the
Confines of England with some part of his Army, from which parts he sent away a
Letter by Col. Markham and Atkins to the City of London, of the Tenor of the
former intercepted to Devonshire, which being read at a Common Hall, was by all
means endeavored to be blasted as fictitious, and the Messengers imprisoned.

General Monk calls a Scotch Convention, and obtains his demands.
The Scotch Convention met the General according to his Summons, at Edinburgh,
where he propounded to them; First, The security of the Peace in his absence;
which, he said, He was constrained to, in defense of the Parliament, and our
Laws (in general terms.) Secondly, That they would Assist him if any Troubles
should arise. And Thirdly, That they would raise him some money. To this they
readily answered, (being Oracled,) That as to the first, they had no Arms, and
therefore were in no condition nor capacity to provide against any
Insurrections, but would endeavor. Secondly, That it could not be expected,
nor were it reasonable for them to interest themselves in a War, which if
prosperous, had no assurance of advantage; if unhappy, would be farther ruinous
to them. Thirdly, That as to moneys, they were exhausted already; but yet
confiding in his Noble and Honorable design, they would raise him a Twelve
Months Assessement, which amounted to Sixty thousand pounds; and the Revenues
of the Excise and Customs besides.

The Earl of Glencarn Chairman to that Convention.
The Earl of Glencarn had the Chair here, one of the General's Privadoes, a
former Eminent Royallist, and at present deemed a moderate man; having in all
things complied with the General's Orders. -- This is one of the
Curtain-stories which cannot be pryed into as yet, as are the other abstruse
contrivances of the Kings Restitution; it is sufficient to mind the Reader,
that some great Providence was at hand, when a revengeful and most desperate
Enemy gratified his Conqueror by the opening of his Heart and his Hands,
instead of striving with this advantage, and arming himself to the recovery of
that Peoples Liberty.

The Committee of Safety (for all Vane's curious Modules) liked not themselves
in this their Government; but to free themselves by a Proclamation, declared
their resolution for another Parliament, and that they were upon
qualifications, and summoning one speedily. One Barret sent out of Ireland with
a Letter to Genesis Monk from the Army-party there, was likewise imprisoned: all
the whole Force in Scotland were now together; to wit, the Generals Regiments,
Wilks's, Talbot's, Fairfax's, Pearson's, Read's, Smith's, and Sawrey's of Foot;
and His own Col. Twisleton's Morgan's, and Saunders's of Horse (the latter of
whom was detained in a kind of restraint of Coventry) nevertheless the General
pretended still to an Agreement, and therefore declaring not himself fully
satisfied, desired the addition of two more Commissioners to treat with his
other three at Newcastle, with five more of Wallingford-house; the chief of
whom was Col. Clerk, who came post to Newcastle; where having conferred, the
General sends for his Commissioners, to be fully informed of the transaction
before he ratified it, because of the late mistake of his Commissioners at
London; and upon their arrival, clapped up Col. Wilks for exceeding his
Instructions. The General was now at Berwick, whence he sent Letters to
Fleetwood, assuring him, that in all this difference there, he had no personal
quarrel against him, but could return into a most firm friendship with him.

But now his temporizing came to an end: for Hazelrig, Portsmouth seized by
Hazelrig, December 4.
Morley, Walton, (Col. Norton was then also present) got into Portsmouth; and
Whetham the Governor (formerly of the Generals Council in Scotland) siding
with them, they presently seized upon such Officers as were thought to favor
the Wallingfordians, of which were Captain Brown, and Captain Peacock, and
declared for the Parliament; which coming to the Ears of the Council of
Officers, they presently ordered Major Cadwel with a Party of Horse to block
them up, who accordingly came to Gospur on the other side the water; and Riches
and Berries Troops were sent to join with him; who instead thereof, being
inveagled by Col. Vnton Crook and Major Bremen, marched into Portsmouth, and
joined with Hazelrig.

Then began the Tumults in London, Tumults in London about a Free-Parliament,
December. throughout.
and instant applications were made to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen to declare
against both Army and Rump, the last of whom was most abhorred, and cried out
against with the general voice, of No Rump; and a Petition for a
Free-Parliament, as the only way to preserve the City and Kingdom, was
preferred for Hands; which the Committee of Safety under high Penalties forbid:
but no regard being had to them, nor no application of any person to them, but
their own Army-folk (save that Sir George Booth obtained his Liberty upon Bail,
from them, because of indisposition, and for recovery of his health in better
Air) the said Petitions were carried on, and high things resolved on; Shops
being shut up, and the Public only minded, people running in clusters in the
middle of the Street, and hearing and telling of News, an threatening or
expecting (as news came) nothing but Destruction.

These things being posted to Wallingford-house, Hewson Marches with Terror
into London.
Colonel Hewson with his Regiment was ordered to march into the City, and quell
these Tumults and Uproars; who accordingly came strutting in, and seeing some
gatherings of Apprentices and others, having commanded them to be gone, bid his
Musketeers fire, who killed two men about the Exchange: Horse and Foot were
also quartered in the Streets, and round about the City.

Lambert seeing no good was to be expected by this Treaty, Lambert would Fight.
his Messenger Col. Zanchy being secured at Berwick, advanced to Perith, having
almost spoiled and wasted the Country about Newcastle, with his numerous (and
indeed gallant) Army; for he had the flower of it with him, both for Horse and
Men: money was wanting, and could not be had; so that free quarter, on which he
was forced to subsist (having almost undone himself, to supply his incident
necessities of the Expedition,) made him not only odious, but disheartened his
men; which to remedy, he concluded to March forward; and so came to Perith,
intending to Fight.

Nothing in the interim, but fears, rage, desperation, revenge, private and
public consultations about the redress of these mischiefs, filled the City of
London; and nothing but a Free-Parliament could be thought of as a fit
expedient: which, the Committee of Safety found it high time to personate;
being already certain, that Portsmouth-story would spoil all: and therefore to
prevent the Rump, A Free-Parliament noised as the only expedient.
Proclaimed, December 15. a Free-Parliament to sit down the Twenty fourth of
January, upon sundry qualifications, which were to be formed out of these Seven
Fundamentals: 1. No King. 2. No single Person. 3. The Army to be continued. 4.
Liberty of Conscience. 5. No House of Peers. 6. Legislative and Executive Power
distinct. 7. Both Assemblies of the Parliament and Council of State to be
chosen by the People; which was the Coordinate Senate of Sir Henry Vane's
Fiction, of which he was desperate in love, with Narcissus, unto his death.

These made the Commonalty worse mad than before, and made them more the scorn,
than the fear of the People; which to lessen also, Lawson declares for the
Parliament, and came up with his Fleet into the River; and the
Portsmouth-blades began to stir; so that Wallingford-house began to look thin.
Sir Henry Vane and Salway howsoever undertook to cajole Lawson; but Mr. Scot
met them on Board the said Vice Admiral (where the righteousness of these
Actions was disputed) and spoiled their Game. Another Cavalier-Plot was
discovered; which was the likeliest of all to take, Major General Brown in a
new Design.
being laid in the City, and under the Conduct of Major General Brown; some
part of the Forces being in Arms the Night appointed; but it was discovered,
and diverse Gentlemen and Horse taken at the White-Horse by More-gate. I should
mention also a Plot upon the Tower, by Scot and Okey for the Rump, etc. but it
taking no effect, I pass it. But the Reader will be weary of these traverses,
and therefore to the event.

Wallingford-House broke up, and Army submit.
Things being thus brought about by the activity of some Rumpers, and the Army
not likely to receive a penny pay more, as full information was given the
Soldiery, the Wallingford people broke up House; and the Officers and Army in
Town presently submitted to the Speaker; Rendezvouzing first in
Lincolns-inne-fields, where they were headed by Col. Okey and Col. Alured; and
thence they Marched down Chancery Lane through Holborn, where the Speaker was
come down to the door of the Rolls, and there the Officers made their
obeisance, and expressed their joy, and cheerfully returned to their duty;
which done, the Speaker with Sir Anthony Ashly Cooper, etc. took Coach and went
to the Tower, where they were likewise admitted, and had the Keys delivered by
Lieutenant Colonel Miller; and the said Sir Anthony, Mr. Weaver, and Josiah
Berners left by the said Speaker as Lieutenant-Commissioners in that place:
This happened on the 24 of December.

Lord Fairfax Arms against Lambert.
Desborough's Regiment of Horse (sent out of the North to assist against
Portsmouth, and to countenance the Wallingfordians) stayed at Saint Albans, and
concluded on submission, as did their Clown or Colonel, while in the mean time
Col. Salmon was sent away by the Officers here, to give Lambert an account of
this turn, upon whose back the County of York was risen; the Lord Fairfax with
a great party of Horse being then in York, whither Col. Lilburn came and joined
with him: the Irish Brigades also marched off in discontent, so that there
needed not any Order of Parliament for Lambert to lay down, his Arms and be
quiet; Lambert deserted.
for as soon as Salmon came, the mighty design was crawled into an Inn, and a
Pot-Consulatation held how to come off, not with Honor, but with Safety; and
the next News heard of him, was, that he was seen at Northallerton, with about
Fifty Horse, and no more, of all his great Army. And thus was Richard Cromwell's
deposition revenged by Lambert's just desertion; and the Rump victorious,
returned again to their old House at Westminster, with such proud surly looks,
as made the Red-coats themselves to quake.

The 26. of December. at Night, The Rump reseated. Dec. 26.
they got Possession again; and Voted several Orders, especially about the
Soldiery: and because Sir Arthur and Morley, the former Commissioners, were
not present, they Constituted new ones, viz. Mr. Alexander Popham, Sir Anthony
Ashley Cooper, Scot, Okey, Thompson, Markham, and Allured; giving them power to
suppress Insurrections, of which they were much in danger. However, the Lord
Mayor and Court of Aldermen had stilled the clamours and Petitions for a
Free-Parliament (for they scorned to ask the Rump's consent) with a promise it
should be effected: for nothwithstanding the Rump sat, which was thought by
the Vulgar the only thing intended after all this stir (for they did prank it
like the Fly on the Wheel (in the Fable) who gloried that he raised the dust)
the Mayor and Court of Aldermen sent away their Sword Bearer to the General
with Letters of Cachet, The City sent their Sword Bearer to the Genesis
which came safe to his Hands, and were with all affection and civility
received, and answered in time to the purpose. In Ireland, Sir Theophilus Jones
and Col. Warren seize Dublin-castle; and after, Ludlow, Corbet, Tomlinson, and
John Jones were summoned into England, to answer an Impeachment of Sir Charles
Coot against them. A new Council of State was appointed; and all what General
Monck had done in displacing Officers, and carrying on the Service, was
approved of, and thanks ordered him; and Hazelrig being come to Town, Hazelrig
thanked, etc.
and lighting at the Palace-yard in Triumph, at the Head of Thirty Troops of
Horse, was thanked likewise most solemnly, as was Rich also in the House; and
as much had Col. Henry Ingoldsby for his Relation of the taking of
Windsor-castle.

The next work was, to make sure of the City of London, and so to borrow some
money, (for all the revenues of the Good Old Cause were not worth one farthing,
besides Excise and Customs;) and therefore a Conference was held at Whitehall,
Sir Arthur being the chief of the Committee of the Rump: but the one would not
endure to hear of lending of money to pay their Enemies; nor would the other
hear of a Free-Parliament. In the mean time, the General signified to the
House, that because he supposed them not yet free enough, he would with his
Army come to London: (his Soldiers were then very full of money by the Scotch
advance, and some Thousands of pounds from London; which made them willing to
undergo that hard duty (the necessity of guarding themselves from surprise and
treachery had put them upon.) Upon Receipt of this Letter, General Monk
signifies his intentions of coming to London.
they Vote him a Thousand pounds a year; and that he be desired to come to
London; and a hundred thanks again: and this News kept them from proceeding
severely against Lambert; upon whom they had an eye, to oppose him against the
General, if he should Army-master them: they discharged Sir Henry Vane of his
Membership; as likewise they did Saloway, and committed him to the Tower, for
their Committee of Safety project. All the Officers in Lamberts Combination,
were commanded to their respective Houses in the Country; and Vane to his a
Raby, in Durham Bishopric; and Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper constituted a Col. of
Horse -- in very good time! Sir Henry Vanes's Phanaticks of the Three Regiments
were disarmed, and their Arms ordered to be carried into the Tower; and new
Commissions to the Officers in England; when news came of several stirs and
commotions in Gloucestershire, Devonshire, and Cornwall, about a
Free-Parliament. I ommitted, that the Officers here in London submitted, upon a
promise of Indemnity, which was Passed by a Vote, Robinson and Scot sent to
meet him.
with this condition, That they return to their duty by the ninth of January;
and Captain Chillingham was sent with this Order to Lambert. But because of the
frequency of these Commotions, and that matter of Fact will sufficiently show
this Transaction of the General with the several Counties, and the
Commissioners of the Rump, Scot and Robinson, appointed to wait on him, merely
to sift out, and discover his intentions: I will give the Reader a bare Journal
of the Affairs as they passed.

But before I proceed, the Reader is to take notice, That our Sovereign having
been highly treated at his return from St. Iean de Luz, at Paris, by the Duke
of Orleans, The King returns in State, and with great Reception to Brussels
and regarded now as the Monarch of great Britain, (such assured confidence
there was of his Restitution;) passed in great State publicly to Brussels,
where His return was no less magnificently welcomed, and there abode till the
dissolution of this Parliament, the Rump, which now, as their last Engine (and
dying Efforts are most vigorous) against Monarchy, and its fortress of Loyalty,
had under their consideration an Act for Renuntiation and Abjuration of the
Title and Right of the King, and the whole Line of King James. Abjuration of
the King intended by the Rump.
Oliver had proceeded to the disanulling it; this, to the damning of the
Nation, who had sworn to maintain it. But rather than sink, as they plainly saw
the King would at last be too hard for them, by the late Commotions and
Insurrections in his behalf; therefore they bethought themselves of this
Italian revenge, to ruin the Bodies and Souls together of their Enemies: this
was afterward prosecuted while the General was among them; and a Petition
delivered by Barebones, and other Good-Old-Cause-men, and Fanatics, and they
most abominably thanked for this their love and care of the Commonwealth. At
the same time Sir John Roll, and other Devonshire Gentlemen, listed and engaged
all that Country upon the account of a Free-Parliament; according to the Cabal
betwixt the General and him, Mr. Morris now Secretary, and others. And this
strength the General relied on, upon all events, as his own Countrymen; and
doubtless this resolution of that County was of very great influence in the
ensuing Affairs.

Scot and Robinson were sent to cajole the General with another Letter of
thanks to him; as also another was sent to Major General Morgan; Col. Sydenham
a Member of the Committee of Safety, and of Oliver Cromwels's Council,
discharged the House. A tumult at Exeter about a Free-Parliament; Commissioners
and Judges appointed for the several Courts. Alderman Fouk* Vincent, and
Colonel Bromfield* ordered by the City to meet and congratulate the General.
The General at Nottingham, came our a Declaration of the Parliament against
Kingship, but not a word of D^ssolving themselves, or filling up the House. Sir
Robert Pie and Major Fincher, for tendering a Declaration of the County of
Berk-shire for a Free-Parliament, were committed to the Tower; which fored a
Vote for Qualifications, etc. The Lady Monck arrived at White Hall, Lady Monck
ar^ives at White Hall.
the Minerva and great Patroness of this grand design.

General Monck arrived at Leicester, and was met there by Scot and Robinson,
who sent the Parliament a copy of his Letter to the Devonshire Gentlemen: great
seeming kindness past between them. An Act passed the House, being a Bill of
Assessment of One hundred thousand pounds a Month, for six Months, throughout
England, The brief relation of the turn and change by Genesis Monck, in i^s series
and compendious view.
Scotland, and Ireland: they had made it at first for Twelve; but it passed at
last for Six. At Harborough the General was met with the London-Commissioners,
to whom he speaks fair: the High Sheriff of Northamptonshire, and the Major of
the Town, congratulate him; The Lord Falkland came thither also with the
Oxfordshire Address for a Free-Parliament, attended by the Gentry of that
County, and had a fair reception: at Stony Stratford the Gentlemen of Bucks:
the like at Dunstable; and at St. Albans he received more of the same nature
from the County of Norfolk, by the hands of the Lord Richardson, and Sir
Horatio Townsend; and other places: to which he answered ambiguously and
fairly, giving them all civil and most obliging Reception, even to the
Apprentices of London, who came thither with a Petition of the same nature; the
General parting with the expressions of his care and endeavor for their and
the Cities good, and was uncovered all the while. Thence he desired the
Parliament, that the Army in Town, for fear of Infection, be distributed into
the Country, to make room for his own Forces: about which, Tumults arose in the
Guards at St. Paul's; and more pertinaciously at Somerset House; which caused
the General, being invited also by the Rump, to make extraordinary have
thither. Several Reports made to the House, concerning Qualifications and
Elections. On the second of February he Rendezvouzed that morning at
Finchly-heath, where he drew up his Army, having marched from Barnet; Genesis
Monck at London.
and by St. Iohns-street and Holborn, down Chancery Lane, came with his Army
into the Strand, where at Somerset House he was met by the Speaker. They
saluted each other with the Title of Lord-General: The General afterward
waited on him to his Coach, and then to refresh; but he refused White Hall for
his Quarters. Next day after he was conducted to his audience at the House,
where he had a Speech made to him by the Speaker, being a thankful
Commemoration of his services; to which he modestly replied, refusing to sit in
the Chair placed for him by their order, declining all the praises given him
(as he never intended any service for them) but desiring them to be very tender
of the Gentry of this Kingdom, (which would prove their Interest) and of Oaths
and Engagements, etc. so was with great respects reconducted and attended to
his Lodging, where he continued in good intelligence with them, till their
politic Revenge put him upon this Adventure to make a Feud between him and the
City: for the City refusing to pay the money assessed upon them by the late Act
of 100000 l. per mensem, the Rump order the Gates and Portcullices to be pulled
down by the General, Gates and Portcullices pulled down, Feb. 9.
and several Citizens to be apprehended, viz. Sir William Vincent, Sir Thomas
Bludworth, Sir Laurence Bromfield, Sir Richard Ford, Major Cox, Mr. Penning
Lieutenant Colonel Iackson, Mr. Spencer, Major Chamberlain, and Mr. Brown a
Grocer in Wood-street, and sent to the Tower; which the General performed. They
likewise ordered the discontinuance of the Common Council for that year, and
proceeded to nominate another, and to settle a new Militia. The Gates were
accordingly pulled down, the thumps of the Hammers even piercing the hearts of
the Citizens. Such an affront and revenge never any of our Princes in his
greatest rage did to this place, where likewise the Army was perforce Quartered.

But after the pulling down of the Gates, the General sent a Letter to the
Parliament, acquainting them how grievous and distastful the action was to his
nature, intimating also the great Merit of the City toward them throughout the
War; and on Friday, after several Conferences managed before him by some of the
secluded Members and City, and others of the Rump, (He pretending his desire of
satisfaction for their Exclusion, of the evidence of danger of their
readmission, which the Rump were now unarmed to dispute, (his Commission from
them as Commissioner for governing the Army being then also expired) (and the
publication of a Petition subscribed by Barebone's and others to abjure the
King) as afterward with the Mayor and Court of Aldermen at Guild hall, who
used their endeavors with him in the business; he marched out of the City with
his Army to their Quarters; and on Saturday sent another Letter to the
Parliament, wherein he laid open the dangerous designs countenanced by
themselves in conniving at Lambert, particularly the business of Barebone's
Petition, setting forth that there had been Oaths too many already; The General
rendezvoused in Finsbury-fields, and declares for a free Parliament and City,
Feb. 9. Bonfires and Rumps roasted that night.
(and as before) in the afternoon he Rendezvoused in Finsbury-fields, and from
thence marched into London, where he and his Army were joyfully entertained,
declaring himself for the City and a free Parliament. Toward evening, the City
rung every where with the news of it, with such Acclamations, and shone with so
many Bonfires, (where they burnt and roasted all manner of Rumps in detestation
of the Juncto then sitting) that it seemed a Theater of mad and extasied
people; nor is it possible any expressions of it should reach the sense and
belief of Posterity; Money being thrown among the Soldiers, as if now there
would be no more occasion for it, but that the Golden Age swiftly approached:
The Speaker at his return from the House being in danger of his life.
Innumerable the Ballads and Ribaldry made of this Rump.

The General continued in London, and disarmed most of those Phanatick persons
who had been listed by the Committee of Safety; and notwithstanding the Order
of the Rump, yet kept their Arms. The aforesaid Conferences were yet held, and
the General assisted at the debates between some of the Members sitting, and
those that were excluded in 1648, in order to some composure; having promised
to stand by the City in the attainment of such a settlement as should secure
the Nation. These conferences coming to no Issue, and the Rump having at last
finished their Qualifications, so rigid and unreasonable, that no good or fair
meaning appeared in them, as he modestly and fairly told them; He came with his
Army into Westminster, and parts adjacent; and having that morning convened the
aforesaid secluded Members at White Hall, went with them to the House of
Commons, and see them safely sit in Parliament; who presently vacated many
Orders made by the aforesaid Remnant in 1648, in reference to the Death of the
King, and their own forcible seclusion; Secluded Members restored, Feb. 21.
as also all Votes lately made by them, touching new Members to be elected to
sit and serve in Parliament: also all Orders referring to Sir George Booth's
business, and all Imprisonments, and Sequestrations thereupon. Next, they
constituted the General, Captain and Commander in chief of all the Forces of
England, Scotland, and Ireland; discharged all Prisoners upon the account of a
Free Parliament, and suspended the Power of the Council of State, till they had
erected a new one, of which the General was made one.

They likewise ordered the Gates and Portcullises of the City of London to be
repaired and set up at the public charge; more especially, care was taken by
them for securing the Militia into honest and faithful hands, both in London
and the respective Counties. The dispatch of the aforesaid Assessment was also
recommended to the Commissioners, and a great advance of money lent by the City
for the present occasions; their promptness now, overmatching the Force before.

Sir Charles Coot wonderfully reduces Ireland.
Sir Charles Coot declares for a Free-Parliament, by the readmission of the
secluded Members, and thereupon possessed himself of Dublin-castle, (having
first of all surprised Galloway from Colonel Sadler in this manner: He invited
him and his Officers, all Anabaptists, to his house over the water, to be
merry; which doing, Sir Charles pretended a desire of drinking a glass of Wine
in Galloway privately with Sadler: so they two secretly took Boat, with each a
servant; and being on the other shore, Sir Charles said, Colonel Sadler, I am
resolved for a Free-Parliament, and to have this Garrison: you have a Sword
about you; draw and fight, or else engage your honor will make no disturbance
in the Town upon our admission, and my Declaration: to which, Sadler amazed and
troubled, answered, He would acquiesce. Whereupon he caused the Gate to be
opened; and Sir Charles having declared himself, the Soldiers cried out, A
Coot, a Coot, and a Free-Parliament: Whereupon, nevertheless, he secured and
kept him prisoner, as he did Sir Hardr. Waller at Dublin aforesaid: and
immediately all Ireland declared themselves satisfied in this most happy
Change, offering their lives and fortunes in the maintenance and defense of the
Parliament to be now assembled.

Rich his Regiment mutiny.
Some Phanatick Troops of Rich's Horse rendezvoused at Bury in Suffolk, where
they began to mutiny: but Colonel Ingoldsby and Captain Philip Howard (Captain
of the Lifeguard) being sent against them, they presently were quieted, and
received their old Colonel Ingoldsby for their Commander: whereupon a
Proclamation issued for the better regulating the Army, and keeping it in
obedience; requiring all Officers and Soldiers immediately to depart to their
several Quarters, and not remove without the Generals order or license in that
behalf.

This made the Army sensible of that duty the Parliament expected from them:
whereupon they, (one Regiment after another) presented their Addresses to the
General, owning and congratulating his happy management of the Affairs of the
Kingdom. The City Feast the General.
Nor indeed was ever any man so deservedly courted: but especially the City
showed themselves most affectionate admirers of those great Services he had
done his Country; most of the Twelve Companies having invited him successively
to their Halls, where he was feasted with all sumptuous Magnificence, love or
charge could show and afford.

The Parliament had no less resentments of his glorious undertakings: for
besides the Generalate they settled upon him the Stewardship of the Manor of
Hampton Court, to preserve, not Usurp and possess that Royal Mansion. Several
Prisoners of the Phanatique-Party, nothing being charged against them, were
freed by the General, who was now also constituted one of the Generals at Sea;
Made Genesis at Sea with Montague.
and Col. Montague now Earl of Sandwich the other. The Scotch Lords who were
taken Prisoners at Worcester, and had been long secured in Windsor-Castle, were
now, by order of Parliament released; that Nation under Major General Morgan
quietly awaiting the issue of the Affairs in England.

The Presbyterian-party were now very busy to have their Profession
Established by Act of Parliament; Presbytery tendering an Establishment.
and therefore a Confession of Faith was tendered to the House, which having
been seven times read, was passed, and ordered to be Printed; and likewise the
Solemn League and Covenant was also ordered to be reprinted, and read in all
Churches once in every year, and to be set up in the Parliament House* but it
soon after found a different entertainment. The Parliament resolved during
their Session, which should continue no longer than the end of March, to
proceed only with matters of Religion, the Militia, Qualifications and Writs
for Elections; and in the interim, endeavors were used, more especially at
Hull by Major Genesis Overton, to debauch part of the Army at York; and the same
tricks also at Chester with the Irish Brigades, but were Defeated, and came to
nothing. Therefore Col. Lambert refusing to put in security of Twenty thousand
pounds, was now at last Committed to the Tower, to prevent any future danger
from the unsatisfied part of the Soldiery. About this time died Carolus
Gustavus King of Sweden.

The Engagement made by the remnant of the Parliament, The Engagement annulled*
Viz. I do declare and promise, that I will be true and faithful, etc. was now
ordered to be expunged out of the Journal Book of the House of Commons: which
made the Phanaticks begin to fear their unjust Possessions. Hull was now
delivered to Col. Fairfax, according to the Generals Order. The Inscription
under the Statue of King Charles the first, in the Exchange London, Exit
Tyrannus, was expunged and blotted out by a private hand.

According to, Writs for a Free-Parliament.
the Parliament resolves to Dissolve themselves; and being pressed by the
General, whose well-governed impatience of the Kings return permitted not the
least delay in that dangerous place; Writs were ordered to be issued out for
the Election of Members in the ensuing Parliament, in the name of The Keepers
of the Liberty of England, The Long-Parliament Dissolved, Marc. 23.
by Authority of Parliament; and the Bill of their Dissolution being read and
passed, leaving a power in the Council of State, in the interval of Parliament,
to govern the Nations, they broke up: and so this long-lasting Parliament,
which has done and suffered so many strange things, came with fair
expectations to a peaceable conclusion; but shall never want the Elegies, and
the doleful complaints of the three Kingdoms.

The Parliament being thus Dissolved, Agitating forbid.
the first thing the Council of State acted, was the emitting of a
Proclamation, forbidding all Persons whatsoever to make applications to any of
the Officers and Soldiers in the Army, in the way of Agitating; declaring that
pernicious course was the ruin of the King and Kingdom, in the years 1647,
and 48. This actuated with a diligent eye upon some suspected persons, and
securing of others, happily retained the Army in their duty and obedience, to
the bringing about his Majesty's Restitution; which was every day more visible.

The Council of State were hammering a Proclamation, requiring such
qualifications as were intended by Parliament for the Election of Members to be
strictly observed, whereby Cavaliers were to be excluded; but there were enough
Royallists besides, to do that great and happy work, which was soon after
accomplished; and yet in the mean while made Addresses to the King, some Letters
passing from them to him, being unhappily delayed by the death of Mr. Annesley,
Brother to the now Earl of Anglesey, who was drowned as he was taking Boat to
proceed in his Voyage for the delivery of them to the King. Mr. Barebone and
Mr. Scot signed an Engagement, wherein they promised to live peaceably; but
diverse others of that Faction, for agitating, and other misdemeanors, were
secured, and committed to prison: the Elections in the interim went hopefully
on, and the Militia was every where well established.

A Letter was sent by the Council to the Bassa of Algier, for releasing the
Lord Inchequeen and his Son, who were lately taken by a Turkish Pirate near the
Port of Lisbon, and carried to Algier. Colonel Massey appeared in
Gloucestershire with an intention to stand for an Election there: Elections for
the Free-Parliament.
he was ordered to appear before the Council; which he did, and was afterward
unanimously chosen one of the Burgesses for that City; as Major General Brown,
who sat with the secluded Members before, with the Recorder Sir William Wild,
and Sir John Robinson, (with whom the General constantly conversed in the
suspense of his declaring himself, but was riddled to the Royallists by the
Company he kept) were Elected for London: both these eminent Captains were very
active and instrumental in the King's Restoration.

The City of London emitted a Declaration, wherein they clear themselves of the
Guilt of the King's Death, and the Crimes of the Usurpation; their Counsels
being under a force of a desperate Juncto put upon them: and as a signet of the
Revolution ensuing, suffered the same Tumults to the Restitution, which it had
fomented and cherished in the beginning of the Wars, to the ruin and overthrow
of the Kingdoms.

Anno Dom. 1660.
WE begin this mirabilis Annus, the wonderful year of 1660, (which by the old
Philosophical Axiom of twenty years revolution was to return all things in
statu quo, to wit, the same condition) with an occurrence of no seeming
tendencie or aspect to the product thereof, viz. The Proclamation from the
Council of State, against Election of any to this Parliament that had served
his Majesty in the late Wars: which proceeded from the unreconciled Results of
those secluded Members, who yet retained some grudge of their first Quarrel,
and would fain do away the imputation of their unjust Arming themselves and the
people against their Sovereign, by a Vote passed this last sitting, wherein
they again declared, That the late King began the War with the two Houses; and
this was now for a subsequent confirmation of that fallacious Maxim of the
Rebellion. Mr. Saint John that was of this Council of State, St. John stickles
in the Council of State for Propositions and Terms with the King.
now opened and discovered himself in the solution of his former actions, by
his suspicions and fears of the approaching Revolution. He stickled first for
the Qualifications which the Parliament, through the General's designed
importunity, had left unestablished and undetermined; and that being thus
decreed (though the Gentry found means to Elude this Paper-scare-crow)
foreseeing the necessity and absolute combination of all things to the King's
Return, he labored to clog that also with limitations and conditions; but to
less purpose than he had straightned this Free Convention ensuing, which was
very unlike to prove so, if such designs had taken effect. For to the Honor
and everlasting entire Felicity of this unparallelled Rovolution, and the noble
General's Loyal, and most generous, and obliging Prudence (beyond all
Parliamentory Engagements and Terms whatsoever) his Majesty's Rights and
undoubted Prerogative were left and returned to him most free and inviolate.

A Convention in Ireland.
A Convention was held in Ireland, in nature of a Parliament, till such time as
one might be conveniently and rightly called, for to provide for the Peace and
Safety of that Kingdom; from whence the L. Shannon, Sir John Clothworthy, and
Major Aston were sent as Commissioners to the Council.

During the Election of Members, it was wonderful to see the general
cheerfulness that possessed the minds and looks of all men, and the no less
stupid consternation of the Phanatick party (which term they likewise obtained,
from a Letter of the General's from Scotland a little while before) so that it
was plainly seen, God had disarmed their spirits of that violence that had so
^ong possessed them, even to their personating a concurrent Contentment in this
strange mutation of affairs. Only the vexed Rump, and furious Sir Arthur
Hazelrig, were most outragiously disturbed, by finding themselves so
outwitted, and to have made all this stir with Lambert, for no other purpose
but to undo themselves: they recollected now, A Letter sent to the Rump by the
King.
what Idiots and desperate Fools they were, in rejecting a Letter from the
King, which was presented by Henry Nevil, as casually put into his hand (and
their Voting of it not to be read or opened in the House) full of all Princely
tenderness to their monstrous Crimes and Treasons, which being now on their
part in exorable and unexpiable, but in their deserved punishment, they
resolved on another Essay and device, like the Foxes tied by the Tayls with
fire at them, to offer at another attempt, which though it would not revenge
them, would if it succeeded indempnate and impunifie them.

For while all things thus seemed to forward and further his Majesty's Return
into these Kingdoms, an Address being signed by the whole Army, wherein they
vehemently testified their acquiescence in whatever the Counsels of the ensuing
Parliament should produce, and their abhorrence of former practices by
intruding into the Government, and interposing themselves against all Reason
and Duty in civil Matters; Lambert escapes from the the Tower, April 11.
Colonel Lambert (as the last dying effort of those monstrous Violences which
had so long prevailed against the bars of Law and Authority) broke out from his
imprisonment in the Tower; notice whereof being given, a Proclamation was sent
after him, requiring him to render himself within 24 hours at his utmost Peril,
and prohibiting any to conceal him; declaring likewise, that whosoever should
take him should have 100 l. for his pains. This Escape was thought to have been
effected by the connivence or permission of Colonel Morley Lieutenant of the
Tower: whereupon the General sent four Companies of Foot, under Major Nicholas,
of whose faith he had experience, to command there; and presently gave order
for Forces to march, in order to the reducing and re-taking of the said Colonel
Lambert; to which service, most of the Gentry and Nobility in Town presently
offered themselves, as also in the Country, especially in Warwickshire under
the Lords Brook, Defeated and taken, Apr. 22.
and Conway, where the first intelligence of him was had. He appeared first
about Tocester, with a small company of Horse; from thence to Naseby, where
Major Creed joined with one hundred more, intending for Edgehill; but within
two miles of Daventry, Colonel Ingoldsby met him augmented to four Troops, and
some Foot, making near seven hundred; (but if he had stood two or three days,
would have increased to a formidable power, the Phanaticks of the Army marching
from all parts of the Kingdom to this Rendezvouze) one whereof was Captain
Haselrig's, who being surprised by Ingoldsby's Forlorn, promised upon his
Liberty to bring over his Troop; which accordingly was done. Upon this, Lambert
desired a Parley, Lambert proposes the restoring of Rich. Protector.
thinking so to work upon the Soldiery; and there offered as a security to all
Interests, the readmission of Richard to be Protector: this being waived as a
stale device, and Lambert seeing Colonel Ingoldsby ready to fall on, Lambert
dismayed and taken, Apr. 22.
and that another Troop was revolted from him, he presently betook himself to
flight, losing there the name of that Valor (especially among his enraged
Phanaticks) which he had purchased throughout the War; crying out twice, Pray
my Lord let me escape; what good will my life or perpetual imprisonment do you?
(he divined well) which, though mounted on a Barb, being on Plow-lands, he
could not effect, but was taken by Colonel Ingoldsby's own hands: Creed, Axtel,
and Cobbet escaped, though pursued some miles. Being thus secured, he was sent
up in a Coach to the Tower, and came by Hide-park on Tuesday, April the 24, the
day before the opening of the Parliament, when the City-forces, exceeding for
gallantry and number all former shows, Mustred there before the General, and
the Council of State: the field resounding with the cry of King Charles the
second.

A Free-Parliament.
Now at last, our Right and desires, so long contended for, prevailed: for,
April the 25. the Free-Parliament sat down in two Houses; they met first at
Saint Margare^s Church, April 22.
Westminster, where Doctor Reynolds Preached before them. The Lords chose the
Earl of Manchester for their Speaker; and the House of Commons Sir Harbottle
Grimston: Mr. Brown Clerk to the former; Mr. Iessop to the latter. I may not
omit, that the Lord General was chosen Knight of his own County of Devon, and
also by the University of Cambridge; and not above four Rumpers were returned.
Scot made a bustle for his new Election at Wickham, against Major-Gen. Brown's
Eldest Son, but stood not to it; for he fled to Bruxels, where he was known,
though he relied on the Protection of the Spanish-Ambassador here formerly; and
was taken, and sent hither back again not long after.

The first thing of note done by the Parliament, was an appointment of a
Thanksgiving-day to God, for raising up his Excellency, and other eminent
persons, and making them instrumental in delivering the Kingdom from Thraldom
and Misery; and ordered, that the said General should have the acknowledgment
and hearty thanks of the Parliament, for the eminent and unparalled Services
done these Nations, in freeing them from Slavery; which was accordingly
performed: Thanks also were given afterward to Col. Ingoldsby, for his
retaking of Lambert.

Several persons, Officers of the Army, and other ill-affected people, were
apprehended, and secured in several places, for the strengthening and
establishing the peace and happiness of the Kingdom, so forwardly and so
happily begun and advanced; for now at last we were arrived at the brink, and
to the prospect of our ancient Government, and to the hopeful confirmation of
our Peace, after which we had so long labored in vain; and here our Troubles
cease, to whom in this alluding rapture we bid farewell.

Hunc Finem Belli quod res commiscuit omnes,
Non Gladii, non Saxa dabant, non tela, sed ille
Perfidiae vindex and tanti sanguinis Ultor,
MONKIUS -- Hic murus abeneus esto.
Thus ends the War which overwhelmed the State,
Suffering a weaponless and bloodless Fate.
MONK'S conquering Prudence did Revenge and cease
Murder and Treason; HE, our Wall of Peace.
A CHRONICLE OF THE CIVIL WARS OF ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND. THE FOURTH
PART: BEING The Restitution.
THE suspense and stilness which ensued so many tempestuous Agitations, was so
far from becalming the Passions of Men, and entertaining the Nation in the
present felicity and acquiscence of things, as is usual in the complacency of
such unexpected and impatienced blessings, that it transported them at the same
instant to more vigorous and active Resolutions in pursuance of that happy
Auspicium which so faitly directed to a plenary and complete Establishment.

It was enviously fresh in the minds of all Loyal and good men, with what scorn
and contemptuous derision, the Enemies of the Kingdoms peace, and the brood of
the Usurpation, had mocked at this Revolution, as a most ridiculous and
impossible thing: withal, it ocurred, how insolently they had upbraided, and
how impiously charactered all former endeavors that way; which the Wisdom of
God (whose own time is best) was pleased to disappoint, (although he thereby
made the folly of those wretches the more desperately hardened, and the more
calamitous) and to appear at last himself, beyond their contradiction, and the
bold Sophistry of those Gainsayers.

The same divine Wisdom had taught the afflicted to humble themselves, and to
rely more immediately upon his Justice, than that of their Cause; and to wait
his retribution, whose Nature and Essence it is to vindicate Right, and deliver
the injured and oppressed: and therefore now was the acceptable time, by this
prepared reception of the Mercy, wherein the sole Glory of the Miracle was
visibly ascribable to himself; as to himself it mainly and chiefly belonged, to
rescue his own Honor and Veracity from the impudent Blasphemies of wicked men.

The Triumphs of Atheists had almost prevailed unto Victory, and braved Heaven
with their success, as if it were unconcerned below, and those Affairs were
only at their disposal, which through so many shifts and variations had still
reverted into the first hand, and seemed in mere fondness and play to have but
hided from them: but they were now to be convinced, that the Power they had
seized and wrested, could never be aliened from the Crown of England, to whose
Restitution so many Enforcements, both Divine and Humane, were obliged to
concur, in this most happy and present Juncture of the Almighty's own
appointment.

Indeed the former Disappointments, Defeats, and Disasters, which by
irresistible Force and undiscoverable Treachery had hitherto all along
exercised the Heroical patience of our Sovereign, had most severely afflicted
the Loyalty of many of his Subjects in their Lives and Estates, and seemed to
threaten the Constancy of the rest with the like Fate (the power circulating,
like an ill wind, into the same corner whence our Tempest first arose, which
by vulgar conjecture portended its boisterous duration there,) had so far
indisposed the minds of men to desire or hope for any thing but a lingering
death of the English Honor, Freedom and Laws, that it was a preceding Miracle
to their Restoration, that there was virtue enough left among our selves, to
resume and re-engage in that calamitous and destructive Enterprise, or that any
should be of that unshaken and noble confidence as to put himself upon those
Rocks by which so many had already perished.

The Restitution of the King and Kingdom.
But (as in the Jewish servitude and slavery to the Philistines, and at the
expiration of their Babylonish Captivity, God raised up men to be his great and
glorious Instruments, in bringing about those his gracious purposes) so did he
inspire and animate some eminent persons of this Nation, now his displeasure
was almost ceased, with Courage and Conduct suitable to the Achievement of our
Redemption. Indeed it may be said, that he caused the whole Chain and Series of
his Providence to conspire and combine against this arrogant and most
Rebellious Usurpation; who forgetting that they were the Scourge in Gods hands
to chastise us, would have his Omnipotence the Sword in theirs to consume us;
as they had all along entitled him to their actions and successes.

To this purpose did he so often remove and change their Modules of Government,
and some of those Leaders and Rulers themselves, never suffering them to come
to any consistency; but in the fairest hopes of it, like the Apples of Sodom,
caused it to moulder and perish: By this means at last exasperating and
clashing them one against the other, while with impatience and mutual hate,
they pursued their Prey, the Estates of King and Kingdom; which the one having
seized, the other never left snarling and baying at his fellow, while the Owner
came in and recovered his right from them both.

Nor were their Divisions much more favorable to this happy Juncture, than was
the Reconciliation and firm Accord made between the two Crowns of France and
Spain, at the same time prop^tious and promising. The Kings Affairs, as was
touched before, being taken into the concern of the General Peace, and this the
quarrelling Grandees here very well knew; but their fewds were so far advanced,
and the blows of their Ruin fell so thick one upon the neck of another, that
they durst not take off their eye to bestow a glance, to the foreseeing the
consequences of that auspicious Intrigue.

However, it pleased the Divine Wisdom to free us at once from the kindness and
danger of Foreign assistance, and to put this his great Work into the hands of
true English men, who alone did operate in this wonderful change; that it might
not be imputed to us the most famous Islanders in the World, The renowned
General, the happy instrument of the Restitution.
that we stood in need of any thing from abroad; and ordered it so by the
management of such an English man, the great Captain, the for-ever-renowned
Monck that the beginners of our Troubles might see and be confounded, that as
they raised Arms against their Sovereign, by the Popularity and Fame of their
first General; so their last (but far more dear and beloved than be in the
height of the peoples Lovesick madness) should turn them against their own
selves, and effect that judgment and vengeance which had been acted, and
thought accomplished by Cromwell; and was in the like intentions of Lambert. A
Fate they always feared from so many Experiences, yet was it not in their power
to avoid, for so was their final overthrow most justly decreed. The Noble Duke
of Ormond, The Duke of Ormond the next.
who was likewise another principally concerned in this blessed Affair, cannot
be denied to be an English man; however originally descended of a most
honorable Irish Family, both of them Heroes extracted from the Loins of
Princes, of the latter, this shall suffice, the other like a Tutelary Angel,
occurs in every word and line I write.

Prosenteni reddit Linea cuncta Ducem.
The King the great Agent.
Nor was the superior Orb or Primum mobile of this great Affair at rest; the
King contributed as much as any person to his Return to his people, by his
extraordinary diligence and wisdom, which improved all advantages and
opportunities to the accomplishing of it. He courted the very worst of his
Enemies, in the worst of their condition, to be good, and be tender of
themselves; and to prevent his justice by his Clemency and super-added
Munificence, even when he was as good as sure to effect his Restitution by
insuperable means, and unconquerable hands. To the best and Loyalist of his
Subjects, he spared no promises nor encouragements: and though the great
unalterable constancy of his life and word was as firm and valid Caution as
could be of any thing under the Sun, yet did He strengthen them with most
obliging, and kindest assurances. Nor did he omit any just ways or means from
abroad, letting his Subjects see that he had a hand ready to strike and inflict
the punishment of the Rebellion, if they delayed his embraces. In fine, it was
an Affair, in which all the faculties and passions of the Soul, (Love, Fear,
Hope, and Joy) were tempered together to a MIRACLE, by his skilful hand, and
art of Government; and wherein Reason and Necessity jumpt together, and to
which the whole frame of Policy officiously humbled and submitted it self, at
this his Majesty's most absolute and uncontrollable disposal of his Empire.

-- Tibi numine ab omni
Cedetur, jurisque tui Natura relinquet:
Quis Deus esse velis ubi reg^um ponere mundo?
-- All the Heavenly powers yield,
And Nature as thy right and choice does leave:
Where thou will reign, what Realms shall thee receive?
But besides those of the first Magnitude, All the Loyal Nobility and Gentry,
there were Illustrious persons, and others that rendered themselves conspicuous
by their conjunction in this Revolution: such were the Lord Chancellor, the
Earls of Southampton, Oxford, Bristol, S. Albans, and the two Secretaries of
State, the old Earl of Norwich Ld. Goring (a person whose memory is highly
ennobled by such grand Events and Occurrences of State, as the Spanish Peace
with the Low Countries, which owes it self to his Transaction and
Accommodation) the Earl of Manchester, the noble Earl of Sandwich, whose hand
was engaged with his head, and was the excellent General's second in this
Affair; the faithful and courageous Lord Ashly Cooper, who intrepidly engaged
himself among the Usurpers, and dreaded not their spies and quicksighted
sagacious discovery of designs and intelligence against them, which he
constantly managed; the Lord Annesly, now Earl of Anglesey; Lord Hollis; Lord
Booth of Delamere, who broke the Ice, and endangered his Life and Fortunes in
the Attempt, but was bravely rescued by his Reserve, the General, who came time
enough to preserve him: And of some formerly engaged against it.
not to omit the Dii minores, persons of lesser Rank, but Eminent in their
Qualities; Sir Samuel Moreland, Thurlo's Secretary, and Cromwell's Resident in
Savoy, where he was set as Intelligencer, which he proved most punctually to
his Majesty, and countermined all the designs of his Masters; and by which
means the King came to have intelligence of those disloyal, treacherous, and
ingrate persons formerly of his side, whom we have mentioned: (He came to the
King at Breda, where his Majesty Knighted him, and made him a Baronet, and gave
him this Testimony, That he had done him very signal Services for some years
last passed.) Neither was Sir George Downing unserviceable to the same design,
in his station, in Holland, as his Majesty's Respects to him at his coming to
the Hague (with recommendation from the General) did sufficiently declare. To
conclude, the whole Mass of the people had a hand (at the least) in it,
conspiring the same purposes in their wishes and affections; with the effect
whereof, in a compendious Narrative, (for the Subject grows upon me to a bulk)
I am next to indulge and pleasure the Reader.

The King was yet at Brussels, in a settled quiet expectation of the sitting
down of the Parliament; the results of whose Counsels were not thought so quick
by the deliberating and slow Spaniard, (who had allowed the King yearly the sum
of 9000 l. besides the pay of his Forces which his Majesty kept there; which
money was since repayed by the King, soon after his return) and therefore, upon
the King's departure from Breda, The King departs to Breda, from Brussels;
Complemented upon his departure.
(upon assurance that the Parliament would not fail of sitting down at the
appointed time) he having traversed to and fro, back and again to Antwerp, the
civil Governor of these Countries gave the King his Complement of departure,
and honorably conveyed him on his way to the City of Antwerp, the Road to
Breda aforesaid; when it was feared by very many, that the slye Spaniard would
have put some demur or stay upon him, in his Dominions: He afterward indeed
sent a Complement to him, by an Envoy well attended, entreating him to return
that way, and to take shipping at one of the Ports of Flanders, for England;
and acquainted him, that for his greater honor and satisfaction, he should see
his Soldiers paid as he passed: but the King civilly refused that kind
proffer.

The King was no sooner come to Breda, the Town and Castle whereof belonged to
his Nephew the Prince of Aurange, Dispatches the L. Mordaunt and Sir John
Greenvil from Breda.
but having notice the Parliament was ready to sit, he dispatched away his
Letters by Mr. (now made Lord Viscount) Mordant, (the Lord Goring having been
sent before to the Council of State and General) and Sir John Greenvil, now
Earl of Bath, with his Letters to the Parliament in both Houses respectively;
to the Lord-General and City: which were speedily made public, and the Town in
a kind of ecstasy for two days together, the Press never ceasing to print them,
His Majesty's Letter: and Declaration was brought.
and all persons having no other thing to do but to read them; the substance of
which Message, with the like Declaration to the House of Commons, and his
gracious Letters enclosed to his Excellency the Lord General, to be
communicated to the Officers of the Army; with a Letter likewise and
Declaration to the Lord Mayor, Contents of the Declaration;
Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London, was this: His Majesty
granted a free and general Pardon to all his Subjects whatsoever, that shall
within forty days after publication thereof, lay hold upon that grace, and by
any public Act declare their doing so, such only accepted as the Parliament
shall think fit to be excepted; which he will confirm upon the word of a King.
And as to tender Consciences, none shall be called in question for differences
in opinion, which disturb not the peace of the Kingdom. For Sales and
Purchases, he will refer himself in all matters to the determination of
Parliament; that he will consent to an Act or Acts of Parliament for paying off
and satisfying the Arrears of the Army and Navy; and that they shall be
received into his Majesty's service upon as good Pay and Conditions as they
then enjoyed.

Received most ho^ourably by the Parliament
This gracious Message, with the Letter to his Excellency, and the Declaration,
were read in the House of Commons, with most extraordinary Ceremony and
Reverence, as if some strange awe had seized upon the minds of the Parliament;
every man at the Speakers naming of the King rising up and uncovering himself,
desiring the Letters might be forthwith read; the like also was done in the
House of Lords: In the House of Commons, remarkable was that of Mr. Luke
Robinson, who being a great Commonwealths-man, first of all spoke to the
Letters, and acknowledged his conviction.

Nor was this Declaration less acceptable to all the people, who were overjoyed
with the news, and the infallible hopes of having their gracious Prince and
Sovereign restored to them in Peace and Honor. The Parliament resolved,
Parliament resolves thereupon.
That they do own and declare, that according to the Ancient and Fundamental
Laws of this Kingdom, the Government is, and ought to be, by King, Lords, and
Commons. And having a deep sense of the Miseries and Distractions in which this
Kingdom has been involved since the violent attempts to dissolve the
Established Government; the best way to make up those breaches, is by all means
to obtain the Restoration of the King to his people; and that in order
thereunto, a Letter from both Houses, (drawn up by a Committee) shall be sent
to the King, giving him thanks for his gracious Offers, Sir John Greenvil
rewarded with a 500 l. Jewel.
and professing their duty and loyalty to him; and that Sir John Greenvil have
the thanks of the House, and 500 l. bestowed on him by the Commons, to buy him
a Jewel, as a Testimony of the respects of the House to him; and a badge of
Honor, which they thought fit to place upon him: all which was with great
solemnity and punctuality performed.

Moreover, to testify their hearty obedience to his Majesty, they ordered the
sum of 50000 l. as a Present for him; which was instantly borrowed, with 50000
l. more, of the City of London, The City of London express the like.
who having desired leave of the Parliament, returned a like dutiful Answer,
with a Present also to his Majesty, and his two Brothers; having honorably
received the Lord Viscount Mordant, and the said Sir John Greenvil, who brought
them his Majesty's Letters, who also acknowledged their Quality and good
Offices, by 300 l. given them to buy them Rings.

The Army the same.
Nor were the Soldiery wanting to this concourse and stream of general
Affection and Loyalty to his Majesty; for upon communication of his Majesty's
Letters and Declaration, they quickly drew up an Address to the General,
wherein they showed their willing and ready submission, as formerly in all
Transactions to him their General, so in this their perfect Duty to the King:
To whom they doubted not to evince, that his Excellency, and the Army under
his Command, and those engaged in the Parliaments Cause, had complied with the
Obligations for which they were raised: The Preservation of the Protestant
Religion, the Honor and Happiness of the King, the Privileges of Parliament,
the Liberty and Proprieties of the Subject, and the Fundamental Laws of the
Land.

The Fleet also, and Dunkirk.
This was seconded by the Navy under the General Montague, now Earl of Sandwich,
to whom (and the Fleet under him) the King had sent the like Letters and
Declaration; the Sea ringing with the peals of Ordnance, upon the communication
of the said Papers: and lastly, the Governor Colonel Harlow, and Garrison of
Dunkirk, did the same by an Address to his Excellency.

A Committee was appointed to consider the manner of his Majesty's Return, and
to prepare all things necessary for his Reception: they likewise ordered his
Majesty's Arms to be set up in all Churches, The Rump's Arms defaced.
and the Commonwealths to be taken down, and that all Proceedings be in the
Kings Majesty's name; and that the present Great Seal be made use of till
further order, that there might be no hindrance or stop in the proceeding of
Justice. Easter-Term was likewise prorogued, that no business might interfere
with this grand and expected Affair of the Settlement of the Kingdom. All
Officers (as Sheriffs, Justices) that were in commission the 25 of April, to
continue and exercise the respective Offices in the King's Name. It was
Resolved further, Parliament Resolves toward the King's Restitution.
That the King's Majesty be desired to make a speedy return to his Parliament,
and to the exercise of his Kingly-Office; and that in order thereunto, several
Commissioners from both Houses be sent to the King at Breda, with their Letters
to his Majesty (Doctor Clargys (now Sir Thomas) the General's Brother, having
been before sent with his to the King) and to acquaint him with the said
Desires and Votes of the Houses. To these Commissioners, others were added from
the City of London; the Names of them all are as follows.

For the House of Lords: Earl of Oxford, Earl of Warwick, (staid at London sick
of the Gout) Earl of Middlesex, Lord Viscount Hereford, Lord Berckley, Lord
Brook. For the House of Commons: The Lord Fairfax, Lord Bruce, Lord Falkland,
Lord Castleton, Lord Herbert, Lord Mandevil, Sir Horatio (now Lord) Townsend,
Sir Anthony (now Lord) Ashly Cooper, Sir George Booth, (now Lord De la mere,)
Denzill (now Lord) Hollis, Sir Henry Holland, Sir John Cholmley. For the City
of London: Sir James Bunce Baronet, Alderman Langham, Alderman Reynardson,
Alderman Sir Richard Brown, Sir Nicholas Crisp, Alderman Tompson, Alderman
Frederick, Alderman Adams, Sir William Wild Recorder, Sir John Robinson,
Alderman Sir Anthony Bateman, Sir William Wale, Sir Theophilus Biddulph, Sir
Richard Ford, Sir William Vincent, Sir Thomas Bludworth, Sir William Bateman,
Sir John Lewis, Master Chamberlain, and Sir Laurence Bromfield; all of them
(not Knighted before) Knighted by the King at the Hague upon their arrival, the
King being removed thither from Breda, as nearer, and more convenient for his
shipping; the disposal whereof, and of the whole Fleet, was remitted to his
Majesty's pleasure; the General Montague having received Orders to obey his
Majesty's Commands and Directions therein.
The Instructions being delivered to the Commissioners, they set Sail in
several Frigots appointed to attend them; and with some foul Weather Landed in
Holland, Commissioners arrived at the Hague.
where they were graciously and favorably received by his Majesty at the
Hague: (I may not omit, that the reception of Sir Thomas Clergys from the
General, was as an Ambassador from a Prince; the Lord Gerard with many Coaches
being sent to conduct him to Audience) where Mr. Hollis, into whose hands the
Letters were entrusted for the delivery, spoke for the House of Commons; the
Earl of Oxford for the Lords; and Sir William Wild for the City. Those that
were there at their Audience, agreed in Opinion, that never person spoke with
more affection, or in better terms, than Master Hollis. He insisted chiefly
upon the Miseries the Kingdoms had groaned under by the tyranny of the
pretended Parliament and Cromwell; which should now be exchanged into their
repose, quiet, and lawful liberty: beseeching his Majesty in the name of his
people to return and resume the Scepter, etc. and assured him he should be
infinitely welcome without any terms: a thing so much stomacked by the
Phanaticks; but most just and honorable.

After several Treatments given the King by the Dutch, which he shortened as
much as he could, The King prepares to d^part.
and other Complements by Foreign Ministers, to whom he gave public Audience,
the Portugal only excepted, and Spaniard; having notice of the Fleets arrival,
which consisted of near Forty Sail of great Men of War, he prepared to depart:
At this time came also to his hands the Proclamation made in London, as a
little before returned Sir John Greenvil with the happy news of his peoples
love and entire affection. The Proclamation follows, being very fit to be
recorded; that which we mentioned in the second Part, being but an earnest of
this.

ALthough it can no way be doubted, King Charles the Second Solemnly Proclaimed.
but that his Majesty's Right and Title to these Crowns and Kingdoms, is and
was every way complete by the Death of his most Royal Father of Glorious
Memory, without the Ceremony or Solemnity of a Proclamation: Yet since
Proclamations in such cases have been always used, to the end that all good
Subjects might upon this occasion testify their Duty and Respect. And since
the Armed Uiolence, and other the Calamities of many years last past, have
hitherto deprived us of any opportunity, wherein we might express our Loyalty
and Allegiance to his Majesty: We therefore, the Lords and Commons now
assembled in Parliament, together with the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Common Council of the City of London, and other Freemen of this Kingdom now
present, do according to our Duty and Allegiance, heartily, joyfully, and
unanimously, Acknowledge and Proclaim, That immediately upon the decease of our
late Sovereign King CHARLES the First, the Imperial Crown of the Realm of
England, and of all the Kingdoms, Dominions, and Rights belonging to the same,
did by Inherent Birthright, and lawful undoubted Succession, descend, and come
to his Most Excellent Majesty King CHARLES the Second, as being lineally,
justly, and lawfully next Heir of the Blood Royal of this Realm; and that by
the goodness and providence of Almighty God, He is of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, the most Potent, Mighty, and Undoubted King. And thereunto We most
humbly, and faithfully do submit, and oblige our Selves, our Heirs, and
Posterities for ever.

This was Solemnized with the greatest Magnificence and joy possible, the Lords
and Commons, and Lord Mayor attending it: the shouts and acclamations at the
reading of it in Cheap Side were so loud and great, that Bow-bells, or any
other Bells in the Town (though all then Ringing) could not be heard. All was
concluded with unspeakable mirth, and numerous Bonefires at night, which
yielded not their flames but to the rising Sun.

I shall not intrude other matters at home into this grand Affair; but reserve
them until ^hereafter, and proceed. The Dutch also (as knowing it would please
the King) enlarged their Civilities and respects to the Commissioners of the
Parliament and City; who received them from their Deputies with much
satisfaction: likewise, several Provisions were sent aboard the Fleet, and the
General: He also complemented with the Kings Restitution.

The Dutch magnificent Treatment of the King.
For a Conclusion of those great Magnificences with which they had entertained
his Majesty a Fortnight, they resolved to give him a Farewel-Treatment, with
all the sumptuousness expressible; which they performed; and in the end,
presented him with the richest Bed and Furniture, with Tapestry for Hangings,
imbossed with Gold and Silver, and adorned with Pictures, as could be had: the
Bed was made at Paris for the Princess of Orange; but her Husband dying Eight
days before she was delivered, it was never used. A little before this time,
Sir Samuel Moreland, Sir Samuel Moreland, and
Thurloe's Agent for Oliver at the Court of Savoy, came to the King, where he
was kindly received, (having done the King several good Offices) and discovered
the intrigues of Oliver and the Rump, and was Knighted; he revealed also
several eminent Royalists, as Sir Richard Willis, Colonel Bamfield, and others,
who betrayed the King's Affairs and Friends to Oliver. Hither also about the
same time came Sir George Downing, Sir George Downing.
who was also graciously received, who had done the like good services for his
Majesty, and was likewise Knighted, and continued his Majesty's Resident with
the States.

On Sunday the 20 th of May, Duke of York aboard the Fleet.
the King heard Doctor Hardy (after Dean of Rochester) Preach before him: the
place intended was the French-Church, after their Sermon; but they knowing of
it, being greedy to see the King, would not come out of their Seats; so that it
was done in the Princesses Lodgings. Here the King touched many of the Evil. In
the mean while, the Duke of York took the Oath of Allegiance of the Fleet,
having gone aboard the Naseby, where the General treated him; which Ship, at
his departure, when the shore resounded with the Artillery, he called the
Charles: as afterward the whole Fleet was new Christened in their way
homewards.

The King having thanked the States General and of Holland in their Public
Assemblies, whither he went on foot, took his leave of them; recommending to
them the interest of his Sister, and Nephew the Prince of Orange; and was
re-saluted by them upon the same, as also by the several Ministers of the
several Princes, one whereof, the Count of Oldenham, sent an Ambassador with
Credentials to the King just before his departure, being the sole Minister so
qualified while his Majesty staid at the Hague.

On Wednesday the 22 of May, Stilo veteri, the King departed; The King departs
for England.
and it may be said, there was no night between Tuesday and that; particularly
for those who found no place to put their heads in, the houses not being able
to lodge the crowd of people that ran there from all the neighboring Towns,
the most part whereof were constrained to walk the streets, though the wiser
sort took up their Quarters for their advantage of seeing the King's departure
on Downs and Sand-hills which bordered all along the Seacoast, where they
might see the Fleet and the King Embarquing; so that it is a question, whether
the Hollander more wondered, or we more joyed. The Speech spoken by the States
of Holland, at his Farewell, for the notableness thereof, is here inserted.

IF one may judge of the content which we have to see your Majesty depart from
our Province, The Speech of the States thereupon.
by the satisfaction we had to possess you, we shall have no great trouble to
make it known to you. Your Majesty might have observed in the Countenance of
all our people, the joy they had in their hearts, to see a Prince cherished of
God, a Prince wholly miraculous, and a Prince that is probably to make a part
of their Quietness and Felicity. Your Majesty shall see presently all the
streets filled, all the ways covered, and all the hills laden with people
which will follow you even to the place of your Embarquement, and would not
leave you, if they had wherewith to pass them to your Kingdom. Our joy is
common unto us with that of our Subjects: but as we know better than they the
inestimable value of the Treasure we possess, so are we more sensible of this
sad separation. It would be insupportable to us, Sir, if we re-entred not into
our selves, and considered not that it is the thing of the world we most
desired, and the greatest advantage also that we could wish to your Majesty. We
acquiesce therein, because we know that this removal is no less necessary for
us, than glorious to your Majesty; and that it is in your Kingdom that we must
find the accomplishment of the prayers we have made, and make still for you
and us: so shall we not fail to profit thence, as well as from the assurances
which it has pleased you to give us of an immutable affection toward this
Republic. We render most humble thanks unto your Majesty for them, and
particularly for the illustrious proof which it has pleased you to give us
thereof, by the glorious Visit wherewith you honored our Assembly. We shall
conserve the memory of it most dearly, and make the marks of that goodness to
pass to our last Posterity, to the end they may acknowledge it with the same
respect with which we have received it. The appointment wherein we see your
Majesty ready to take horse for the pursuit of your Journey, forbids us to
enlarge our selves upon a Subject which would never weary us, if we had words
conformable to our respectful sentiments. But we have no mind to increase the
just impatience which your Majesty shall have to see your self returned into
your Kingdom. We pray God, Sir, that it be quiet and happy; and that as he has
disposed the hearts and affections of your Subjects to acknowledge their
Sovereign and lawful Prince, it will please him also to command the Winds and
Seas to expedite your Voyage; and that after you have received on your own
Coast the same Prayers which we shall reiterate, you may enjoy in your Royal
Person, and in your Posterity for ever, all the Felicity and Prosperity which
your humble Servants wish unto your Majesty.

It Is certain that their entertainment of the King, and their Presents, cost
the Dutch above 100000 l.

The King departs, and embarques.
The King departed (as before is mentioned) accompanied with Prince William of
Nassau, and the Admiral of Holland, having the Prince of Orange before him,
being in the midst of his two Brothers the Dukes of York and Gloucester on
horseback, the Ladies attending on him in their Coaches all along the way,
where the Citizens, the Horse, and the Regiment of the Guards stood in
Battalia; the Cannon thundered, being answered with peals of Music, which
conveyed the like Mirth to the English Fleet Riding at Scheveling.

The King, with his Aunt, his Sister, and some other Illustrious Persons
(having taken his last leave of the States) went first on board a Barge
prepared by the Dutch, whose Streamers and Flags had this impress, Quo fas and
fata, alluding to Dieu and mon Droit; but upon the approach of a Brigandine
from General Montague, The King Embarques for England, May 23.
he entered therein, and came on board the Charles; the Seamen seeming to be in
an ecstasy, being possessed of their beloved Prince. Soon after he came up to
the Poop to behold again that multitude on the Downs of Scheveling, saying,
That he thought his own Subjects could scarce have more tenderness for him than
those people, on whose Affections he saw he reigned no less than he was going
to reign on the Wills of the English.

Much ado there was to part the Princess of Orange from him, whom many other
considerations as strong as Birth had rendered most dear to him, till at last
the General, who with all possible demonstrations of Loyalty had received the
King, having all the Retinue shipped, caused the Anchors to be weighed, and the
Sails to be spread; and then with Tears and Embraces she left him, and was
rowed back again with the same company to the Holland-shore, which lost fight
of the Fleet about the evening.

No sooner was the Fleet under sail, but the Cannon began to roar, giving
notice that the Lord of the Sea was in his rightful possession; which Thundering
continued till night: Next day they had little wind, but so much, as on
Friday-morning they came within sight of Dover; whereupon an Express was sent
to the General (then at Canterbury) to hasten to Dover; which he did
accordingly, and about one of the clock with a gallant Train came thither:
About three of the clock in the afternoon, Lands at Dover, May 25.
his Majesty landed at the Beach near the Peer of Dover, with the Dukes and his
Nobles. Every man now put themselves into a posture to observe the meeting of
the best of Kings, and best-deserving (without flattery is it spoken) of
Subjects.

The General meets him at his arrival.
This solemn and unexampled meeting, did with the joy thereof infuse a suspense
of fear, that the Congress of the King and the General would of one part or
other fail in Affection or Ceremony; but this Interview dispensed with all
punctilio, other than that the General kneeled, and the King kissed and
embraced him, to the most pleasing satisfaction of Nobility and People.

His Majesty then walked up with the General under a Canopy, a Chair of State
being carried by his Coach-side. In the way, the Mayor and Aldermen of Dover,
with the Minister, met his Majesty; who after a short Speech, presented him a
Bible with Gold-clasps (the ordinary Present of the Presbyterian Ministers.)
Then his Majesty took Coach, he and the Duke of York at one end, and the Duke
of Gloucester and his Exellencie at the other, the Duke of Buckingham in the
Boot. The King rides to Canterbury.
About two miles from Dover the King took horse, the Dukes on the right hand of
the King, the General on the left, bare; followed by the Duke of Buckingham,
The King rides to Canterbury
and the rest of the Nobility and Gentry, uncovered, and came to Canterbury,
where he was met and complemented by the Mayor and Aldermen, and Recorder of
that City, and presented with a Golden Tankard, and so conducted to the Palace.
Here he made the General Knight of the Honorable Order of the Garter; the Duke
of York putting the Order about his Neck. Saturday and Sunday he staid here,
and on Munday-morning departed for Rochester, whither that evening he arrived,
and went from his Lodging to Chattam, to see the Sovereign, and other Ships of
the Royal Navy, and at night returned to his Lodgings at Colonel Gibbon's, To
Rochester at Col. Gibbons.
where he was welcomed by an Address from the Regiment of the said Colonel,
delivered by himself; which his Majesty graciously accepted.

Betwixt four and five on Tuesday-morning, being the most happy and auspicious
29 th of May, his Majesty's Birthday, he departed from Rochester, the
Militia-Forces of Kent lining the ways, and the Maidens strowing Herbs and
Flowers; the Towns through which he passed, hanging out White sheets. Being
come to Dartford, To Dartford, receives the Declaration of the Army.
the Officers of the Regiments of Horse presented an humble Address to him,
wherein they declared their readiness to sacrifice their lives in defense of
his Majesty's Person and Government.

At Black Heath the Army was drawn up, where his Majesty viewed them, using
many gracious Expressions toward them; which were answered by loud
acclamations. The several Regiments being there placed in order, His Majesty
advanced toward London, and about one a Clock came to Saint George's Fields,
where the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen were in a Tent ready to receive him. The
Sword being there delivered him, he re-delivered it, and Knighted Sir Thomas
Alleyn. After a short repast, the King proceeded into London by Southwarke:
from the Bridge to Temple Bar, the Streets were railed on the one fide, with
standings for the Liveries; and lined on the other with the Trained Bands: to
which were added some Gentlemen-Volunteers all in white Doublets, under Sir
John Stawel. The manner of His Majesty's entrance into London.
The manner of his Majesty's Triumphal and Magnificent Passage through this
orderly ranking, was thus: First marched a Troop of Gentlemen, led by
Major General Brown brandishing their Swords, in Cloth of Silver-doublets,
being about Three hundred, besides Servants. Then another Troop of about Two
hundred in Velvet-Coats; the Footmen and Liveries in Purple. Next, a Troop
under Colonel Sir John Robinson, with Buff-coats, Cloth of Silver-sleeves, and
Green-scarves. After this, a Troop in Blew Liveries and Silver-lace, Colors
red fringed with Silver, about Two hundred. Next, another Troop with six
Trumpets, seven Footmen in Seagreen and Silver, their Colors Pink Fringed
with Silver. Then a Troop with their Liveries Gray and Blew, Thirty Footmen,
Four Trumpets, about Two hundred and twenty, their Colors Sky, Fringed with
Silver, under the Earl of Northampton. Another of Gray Liveries, Six Trumpets,
Colors Sky and Silver, about One hundred and five, led by the Lord Goring.
Another of Seventy. Another Troop led by the Lord Cleveland, of about Three
hundred. Noblemen and Gentry, another Troop of about One hundred, black
Colors. One more Troop of Three hundred Horse, led by the Lord Mordant.

After these, came Two Trumpets, with his Majesty's Arms, the Sheriffs-men in
Red-cloaks and Silver-lace with Half-pikes, Seventy two in number. Then
followed the Gentlemen that rid out of the several Companies of London, with
their respective Streamers, all in Velvet Coats with Gold Chains; every Company
having its Footmen with different Liveries. After these, a Kettle-drum, and
five Trumpets; The Citizens being in number about Six hundred. After these,
Twelve Ministers; then his Majesty's Lifeguard led by Sir Gilbert Gerrard and
Major Roscarrock. The City-Marshal with eight Footmen, with the City-Waits and
Officers in order: then the two Sheriffs, and all the Aldermen of London (among
whom, much wondering there was at Aldermen Ireton) in their Scarlet Gowns and
rich Trappings, with Footmen in Liveries, Red-coats laced with Silver and
Cloth of Gold. The Maces and Heralds in their Rich coats, the Lord Mayor bare
carrying the Sword, his Excellency and Duke of Buckingham bare also; and then,
as the luster to all this splendid Triumph, rode the King himself between his
two Royal Brothers; which order he had all along ever since the overture of his
return observed. After them came a Troop bare with White Colors; then the
General's Lifeguard, and another Troop of Gentry. Last of all, Five Regiments
of the Army-Horse, with Back, Breast, and Headpiece, which diversified the Show
with delight and Terror. Thus have you in a view all that pleased and
gratified the Eye; but no Pen or Tongue is able to express those ravishing and
loud musical notes of Acclamations and Vive le Roy's, which charmed the Ears of
all Loyal Subjects, even to Ecstasy and Transportation, and with which his
Majesty himself (who endured the din of it all that day) was so pleasingly
affected.

With these joyful accents he was brought to his Palace of White Hall; where
after the Lord Mayor had took his leave, his Majesty went up to the Lords,
where a Speech was made to him in the Banqueting House, (where both Lords and
Commons awaited him) by the Earl of Manchester Speaker of the House of Lords;
by which, that Posterity may know the sense of the Kingdom upon this
Miraculous Change, it is here Recorded.

The Earl of Manchester's Speech to the King.
THat this day may prove happy to your Majesty, is the hope, the Expectation,
and the earnest desire of my Lords the Peers, whose Commands are upon me to
make this humble Tender to your Majesty of their Loyal joy for your Majesty's
safe Return to your Native Kingdom, and for this happy Restoration of your
Majesty to your Crown and Dignity, after so long, and so severe a Supression of
your just Right and Title.

I shall not reflect upon your Majesty's Sufferings, which have been your
Peoples Miseries; yet I cannot omit to say, That as the Nation in general, so
the Peers with a more personal and particular sense have felt the stroke that
cut the Gordian Knot which fastened your Majesty to your Kingdom, and your
Kingdom to your Majesty.

For since those strange and various Fluctuations and Discomposu^es in
Government, since those horrid and unparalled Violations of all Order and
Justice, Strangers have Ruled over us, even with a Rod of Iron: But now, with
satisfaction of heart, we own and see your Majesty, our Native King, and Son of
the wise; a Son of the ancient Kings, whose hand holds forth a Golden Scepter.

Great King! Give me leave to speak the Confidence, as well as the Desires, of
the Peers of England: Be you the Powerful Defender of the true Protestant
Faith; the Just Assertor and Maintainer of the Laws and Liberties of your
Subjects: so shall Judgment run down like a River, and Justice like a mighty
stream; and God, the God of your Mercy, who has so miraculously preserved you,
will establish your Throne in Righteousness and in Peace.

Dread Sovereign! I offer no flattering Titles, but speak the Words of Truth:
you are the desire of Three Kingdoms, the Strength and the Stay of the Tribes
of the People; for the moderating of Extremities, the reconciling of
differences, the satisfying of all interests, and for the restoring of the
collapsed Honor of these Nations. Their Eyes are toward your Majesty; their
Tongues with loud Acclamations of Joy, speak the thoughts and Loyal intentions
of their Hearts; their Hands are lift up to Heaven with Prayers and Praises:
and what Oral Triumph can equal this your Pomp and Glory?

Long may your Majesty Live and Reign; a Support to your Friends, a Terror to
your Enemies, an Honor to your Nation, and an Example to Kings, of Piety,
Justice, Prudence and Power; that this Prophetic Expression may be verified in
your Majesty, King Charles the Second shall be greater than ever was the
greatest of that Name.

His Majesty's Gracious Answer to the Earl of Manchester's Speech.
My Lord,

I Am so disordered by my Journey, and with the Noise still sounding in my
Ears, (which I confess was pleasing to me, because it expressed the Affections
of my People) as I am unfit at the present to make such a Reply as I desire;
yet thus much I shall say unto you, That I take no greater Satisfaction to my
Self in this my Change, than that I find my Heart really set to endeavor by
all means for the Restoring of this Nation to their Freedom and Happiness; And
I hope, by the advice of my Parliament, to effect it. Of this also you may be
confident, That next to the Honor of God, from whom principally I shall ever
own this Restoration to my Crown, I shall study the Welfare of my People; And
shall not only be a True Defender of the Faith, But a Just Assertor of the Laws
and Liberties of my Subjects.

This passed, the King retired to Supper, and soon after to his rest, where it
was time he should find it, after so many difficulties and turmoils in the
World for Twenty whole years together.

But the Citizens were not so weary of their Joy and Triumph; The joy of the
City.
for as soon as Night came, an Artificial day was begun again, the whole City
seeming to be one great Light, as indeed properly it was a Luminary of Loyalty;
the Bonfires continuing till daybreak, fed by a constant supply of Wood, and
maintained with an equal excess of gladness and fuel.

Thus far this memorable and miraculous Affair has carried me: not willing to
break off the gladsome speculation and review of his glory and happy
Influences, I must now a little retrospect to what passed at home in the
Parliament and Kingdom.

Several Acts were in agitation; Affairs (...) home.
one for removing and preventing all questions and disputes concerning the
Sitting and Assembling of this present Parliament; as also, that of Oblivion
and Indemnity; and another for Sales and Purchases: and in the mean while, it
was ordered by the Lords, That a stop be put to the demolishing, defacing, or
committing wast in any Houses or Lands belonging to his Majesty; and that no
Wood nor Timber should be felled: and the like done in the Lands belonging to
the Duke of Buckingham, the Lord Craven, and Sir John Stawel. The Commons
ordered Ten thousand pounds to be sent as a present to the Duke of York; also
that the Scotch Colors taken at Preston, Dunbar, and Worcester, and hung up in
Westminster Hall, should be taken down: which was accordingly executed, and the
Kings Arms placed in the Courts of Judicature.

Col. Harrison (one of the Kings most malicious Judges) was apprehended in
Staffordshire, and brought up to London; and by his Excellencies Order
Committed to the Tower, while Whitehall was then a preparing for his Majesty.

The House of Commons taking into consideration the business of the
Piedmont-Collection-money, declared their detestation and abhorrence of the
diversion of the said Money from the charitable uses to which pretendedly it
was designed.

The King was Proclaimed with great joy throughout the Nation; while diverse of
the Kings Judges (out of consciousness of their guilt) escaped beyond Sea.

And in Ireland.
In Ireland also the King was by the Convention there Assembled, Proclaimed with
the usual Ceremonies. Several of the eminentest of that Nation were also
ordered to be sent to his Majesty, in the name of that Kingdom, with a present
of Four thousand pound to the Duke of York; so sympathetically did the Irish
Harp move with the same touches on the English.

The King and the Dukes to the House of Lords.
The most Illustrious Princes the Dukes of York and Gloucester went to the House
of Lords, and there took their places; whither the next day came the King
himself by Water in the Brigandine which brought him aboard the Charles from
Holland; the Yeomen of the Guard making a lane, the Heralds at Arms in their
rich Coats, The King comes to the Parliament, and passes several Acts.
the Maces, and the Lord General Bare-headed before him: being seated, the
Commons were called; to whom the King in a Speech pressed very much the Act of
Oblivion; and Signed some Bills, viz. One for Confirmation of the Parliament.
Another for the Tax of Seventy thousand pounds per Mensem, for three Months,
from the 24 of June. A third for continuance of Process, and Judicial
Proceedings: and then returned to Whitehall, where he chose the Lords of his
Privy Council; among whom, were several of the Long Parliament. His Majesty
also graciously and judiciously provided for the Benches and Courts of
Judicature: for the Chancery the Lord Chancellor Hide; for the Rolls, the Lord
Culpepper (who soon after dyed, and the place was by the Kings favor bestowed
on Sir Harbottle Grimstone;) for the Kings Bench, Sir Robert Foster, Justice
Mallet, and Sir Thomas Twisden; in the Common Pleas, Justice Atkins; and in the
Exchequer, Sir Orlando Bridgeman; Sir Ieoffry Palmer Attorney, and Sir Heneage
Finch Sollicitor-General; Mr. John Heath, son of Sir Robert, Attorney to the
Duchy. But of this a fuller account.

A Proclamation for the King's Judges to render themselves.
Several Persons guilty of the Murder of King Charles the First, making their
escapes beyond Sea, a Proclamation drawn up by the Parliament was published by
his Majesty, summoning the persons therein named, who sat, gave Judgment, and
Assisted in that horrid and detestable Fact, to render themselves within
Fourteen days after the Publication of that His Majesty's Royal Proclamation,
to the Speaker, or Speakers of the Parliament, or to the Lord Mayor of London,
or to the respective Sheriffs of the Counties of England and Wales; and that no
person should presume to conceal or harbor them, under misprision of Treason:
whereupon diverse came in, and submitted, and were secured in the Tower.

Several Addresses were made to the King from the Nobility and Gentry of all
the Counties, congratulating his Majesty's Restitution to his Throne and
Kingdoms, and testifying their exceeding joy and willingness to maintain his
Majesty's Royal Person and Authority. Diverse eminent persons for their service
and affection to his Majesty, were honored with Knighthood.

The House of Commons ordered, that others, besides the Actual Judges of the
King, Other persons excepted out of the Act of Oblivion. Hutchinson and Lassels
crave Pardon.
should be excepted out of the Act of Oblivion (which was now very far
proceeded in) as namely, Andrew Broughton, Phelps, John Cook, Hugh Peter's, and
Edward Denby. This so affrighted others who had a hand in that execrable
business, that Colonel John Hutchinson a Member in this Parliament, and Colonel
Francis Lassells Petitioned the House, confessing their guilt, and withal the
Artifices that were used to draw them in; and by this submission obtained
Pardon, upon some forfeitures. Hugh Peter's was taken about this time in
Southwarke: at first he denied his Name, but being brought before Sir John
Robinson, then made Lieutenant of the Tower, he was known, and acknowledged
himself, Parliament lay hold on his Majesty's Declaration from Breda.
and was there secured.

The Parliament thought not themselves nor the people of England freed from
that guilt and punishment which our unhappy times had contracted, unless they
laid hold on his Majesty's Grace, mentioned in his Declaration from Breda; and
therefore Resolved, That the House does declare, that they do in the Name of
themselves, and all the Commons of England, lay hold on his Majesty's gracious
Pardon mentioned in his Declaration, with reference to the excepting of such as
shall be excepted in an Act of Pardon: and accordingly a Declaration was made,
and presented to the King by Master Denzill Hellis.

His Majesty was graciously pleased to signify his readiness and willingness
to comply with that his Royal Word, and gave direction for a Proclamation to
that purpose: In the mean while, several of the eminentest in Offices under the
Usurpation, to make sure of this Grace offered from Breda, got their particular
Pardons exemplified under the Great Seal of England, as they were well advised
by the notoriety of their Guilt, and their distrustful Consciences: to secure
and discharge which trouble, the King was more than ordinary pressing for a
speedy Passing of the Act of Oblivion; as on the other side his Sentiments of
those services to his Restitution, gave him the immediate resolutions of
dignifying those Illustrious Personages, who most instrumentally and
principally did accomplish it.

And therefore, on the 12 of July, The General dignified with the Title of D.
of Albemarle.
he honored the most noble General Monck with the Titles of Duke of Albemarle
(which Duchy formerly was appropriate to the Blood Royal, and was extinct in
the Reign of Henry the Fourth, the Demeasnes and Jurisdiction whereof lay in
the Duchy of Normandy in France, under the English Soveraginty) and Earl of
Torrington in his own native County of Devon, and Baron of Potheridge (his own
Patrimony) Beauchamp and Teyes; by which he has right of Peerage in the three
Kingdoms, whose equal Felicity and Honor he advanced and raised before
himself, and now most deservingly shared with them by his Investiture in these
Dignities, which were completed July the 13, by his taking his place in the
House of Lords, attended by the House of Commons, and introduced by the Duke of
Buckingham. In the same month General Montague was created Earl of Sandwich,
Viscount Hinchingbrooke his famous Manor in Huntingtonshire, and Baron of St.
Neots in the same County; and on the 16 of July took likewise his place in the
House of Peers, where they both shine with that degree of splendour, by which
the Duke reduced, and the Earl dawned at, the day of Englands Glory and
Liberty. Several Dignities and Offices conferred.
The Duke of Ormond was likewise made Earl of Brecknock, and took his place
among the Peers of England: he was also made Lord Steward of his Majesty's
Household, as the Earl of Lindsey was made Lord High-Chamberlain, the Earl of
Manchester Lord Chamberlain of his Majesty's Household, and the Earl of
Southampton Lord High-Treasurer of England: Sir Frederick Cornwallis was made
Treasurer of the Kings Household by an old Grant, and Sir John Berkley
Comptroller; and other Royalists were made Officers therein. Several presents
were made to the King from the several Cities and Boroughs of the Kingdom, in
Gold and Plate, Fee-farm rents resigned.
and resignation of Fee-farm-rents purchased from the Usurpers; among the rest,
the City of London (with a Complement of their good Stewardship, by the mouth
of their Recorder Sir William Wild) rendered their like Grant of New Park in
Surrey. All the Rents accruing at Michaelmas-day were now secured from the late
Purchasers of Kings, Queens, Bishops, Dean and Chapters lands, for the use of
the right and unquestionable Proprietors; to the defeating the miserable and
unjust covetousness of such undue and unwarrantable penniworths.

A splendid Embassy came this Month of August from Denmark, to congratulate his
Majesty's most happy Restitution; as a little before, the Lord Iermyn, Lord
Jermyn Earl of St. Albans Ambassador into France.

Prince de Ligne.


newly made Earl of Saint Albans (the Title last failing in the renowned
Marquess of Clanrickard Vlick de Burgh, who had so eminently asserted his
Majesty's Rights in Ireland, and after the reduction thereof came into England,
and died in London in some distress, far unfitting his nobleness of mind, as
well as former most honorable Estate, a while before the Kings Return) was
sent to France in the quality of Lord Ambassador Extraordinary to that Crown.
Soon after, the Prince de Ligne, with a right Princely Train and retinue
becoming the grandeur of the Affair, (he was sent to Congratulate from his
Majesty of Spain, betwixt whom and this Kingdom a Peace after a six years War
was lately Proclaimed) was with great state received, and had solemn Audience
by the King, and departed; and was succeeded by the Baron of Battevile to be
Resident and Ambassador in Ordinary at this Court. From the French King soon
after came another Illustrious and grand Personage upon the same account, by
name the Count of Soissons, Count de Soissons Ambassador hither.
who had married the Cardinal's Niece, and entered and was entertained here with
all sumptuous and extraordinary Magnificence. In sum, there was no Prince nor
State in Europe who sent not, or were not a sending their Ambassador upon this
wonderful occasion.

The Parliament, after many debates and disputes, alterations and insertions,
at last finished the Act of Oblivion; which was extraordinary comprehensive and
indulgent, Act o^ Oblivion passed.
to the regret of many injured Royalists, who found no better persuasive to
their acquiescence in it, but their unalterable duty to the King, whose special
Act this was. Out of this were only excepted the Regicides and Murderers of
their late Sovereign, as to Life and Estate; besides Colonel Lambert, and Sir
Henry Vane, and Twenty others, reserved to such Forfeitures as should by
Parliament be declared: the principal of these were Sir Arthur Haselrig, Oliver
Saint John, William Lenthal the Speaker, Mr. Ny the Independent Minister,
Burton of Yarmouth; and some Sequestrators, Officers, and Major-Generals of the
Army; amongst whom was Desborough, Pine, Butler, Ireton, etc. They passed
likewise an Act for a perpetual Anniversary Thanksgiving on the 29 of May, the
day of his Majesty's Birth and Restoration; a day indeed memorable, and the
most auspicious in our English Calendar, and worthy of a Parliaments
Canonization: Both which his Majesty gave his Royal Assent to, as at the
Adjournment to another for Disbanding of the Army (and paying off the Navy)
which once looked upon us with the same feared perpetual danger, as the
Mamalukes or Ianizaries; but by this happy conjuncture of his Majesty's Fortune
with his Wisdom and Goodness, yielded (after many Modules) to its last
Dissolution. Great sums by Pole Money and other Assessments were imposed, and
speedily and cheerfully levied and paid, to finish this desired work, which had
before wasted so many Millions of Treasure. Mr. Scowen, Mr. Pryn, Col. King,
and Sir Charles Doyley, were appointed Commissioners to disband them; to which
the Soldiery very willingly and with thanks to the King submitted; the King
giving them a Weeks pay as a Donative and Largess. The Parliament adjourned
till the 6 of November.

These Felicities of the King we have hitherto insisted on, as the course of
all worldly things is guided, were abated and allayed by the immature and most
lamented Death of the right Excellent Prince Henry Duke of Gloucester, his
Majesty's youngest Brother; a Prince of very extraordinary hopes. Silence will
best become our lamentation: for his virtues, and our loss of them, transcend
expression. Duke of Gloucester dies, Sept. 13. Princess of Orange arrives, Sept.
He died of the Smallpox, Aged Twenty years and two months, after much
Blood-letting, and was Interred with a private Funeral in Henry the Seventh's
Chapel at Westminster, just before the arrival of his Sister the Princess of
Orange, who came to joy and felicitate her Brothers in their happy Restitution.

With the King and Monarchy, the Ecclesiastical Regiment by Bishops recovered
it self, Episcopacy reestablished.
by his Majesty's Piety and Prudence; that Aphorism being most sadly verified,
No Bishop, No King; and therefore, on the 20 of September, Dr. Iuxon Bishop of
London, that ancient and excellent Prelate, was by the King translated from
that See to the Archbishopric of Canterbury; which was performed with great
Solemnity: and not long after, several new Bishops (persons the most eminent
and valiant assertors of the Church and Laws of England) were Consecrated in
the Abbey at Westminster, and all the Diocesses filled; of which together
presently, in an ensuing Catalogue.

The Kings Judges brought to Trial, Oct. 9.
Divine Vengeance had with a slow foot traced the murderers of our Martyred
Sovereign, and through several Mazes at last overtook them; the iron hand of
Justice delivering them to the punishment due to that grand impiety: nor was it
the least of his present Majesty's Felicities in his Restitution, that he
should parentate, in this solemn manner, to His most vilely and rebelliously
abused Father; That his justice might appear equally as resplendent as his
clemency to the lesser guilt of his undutiful people, in not suffering his
innate goodness to be wrought upon so far, that this unexampled parricide
should pass with an unexampled impunity; since the Parliament in detestation,
and to wipe away the stain of that perpetration, had given up these persons
following, as Sacrifices to the Law, and the Honor of their Country.

On the Ninth of October, The Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer met at Hicks's
Hall, of whom were several of the chief Nobility; the Lord Mayor and the
Judges; Sir Orlando Bridgman, Lord chief Baron, sitting in chief: the Counsel
were Sir Ieffery Palmer the King's Attorney, Sir Heneage Finch
Solicitor-General, Sir Edward Turnor the Duke of York's Attorney, and Sergeant
Keeling, Windham, etc. The Grand Jury being Sworn, Sir William Darcy Baronet
their Foreman, Sir Orlando gave them the Charge, declaring the purport of their
Commission, to Try those excepted persons out of the Act, for their Treason in
Murdering the late King of blessed memory, upon the Statute 25 Edw. 3 d. by
which it was made Treason, to compass and imagine the death of the King: which
he largely, learnedly, and eloquently opened, the Statute being but declarative
of the Common Law. Which ended, Thomas Lee of the Middle Temple Gentleman, was
called to give the names of the Witnesses, forty two in number; the chief of
whom was Sir William Clerk, the Duke of Albemarle's Secretary, who took the
Proceedings of the High Court in shorthand; Mr. Masterson Minister at St.
Clements Danes, then of that Party; Col. Hun^ks, Griffith Bodurdo Esquire Stephen
Kirk, Col. Matthew Tomlinson, John Rushworth Esquire Sir Purbeck Temple, William
Iessop Esquire Mr. Coitmore, and Anthony Mildmay, Brother to Sir Henry, one of
those Criminals.

Next day, the 10 of October, the Court by Adjournment sat in Justice-Hall in
the Sessions House in the Old-bayly; and the Prisoners having been brought the
same day from the Tower to the Gaol of Newgate, the Keeper was commanded to
bring down Sir Hardress Waller, William Heveningham, and Colonel Harrison, and
set them to the Bar, where they were commanded to hold up their hands:
Harrison, Waller, Heveningham, with Adrian, Scroop, etc.
but Harrison desiring to be heard first, answered, I am here; he at last held
up his hand: then the Indictment was read in these words: That he, together
with others, not having the fear of God before their eyes, and being instigated
of the Devil, did maliciously, treasonably, and feloniously, contrary to his
due Allegiance and bounden Duty, sit upon and condemn our late Sovereign Lord
King Charles the First, of ever-blessed Memory; and also did, upon the
Thirtieth day of January 1648, sign and seal a Warrant for the Execution of
his Sacred Majesty, where also, etc. To which Waller after some debate, pleaded
guilty; Heveningham and Harrison, Not guilty: Then Isaac Pennington, Henry
Marten, Gilbert Millingham, Robert Tichburn, Owen Roe, and Robert Lilburn,
after the said Indictment read, were bid to plead, who did; except Henry
Marten, who said, he was not excepted out of the Act of Indemnity, the person
there being Henry Martin, not Marten: but the Court answered, A misname would
not be pleadable, Mr. Solicitor citing a Case in the difference of names
betwixt Bagster and Baxter. All of them insisted for Counsel. Then Adrian
Scroop, John Carew, John Jones, Thomas Scot, Gregory Clement, and John Cook
were likewise set to the Bar; where seeing the Court insist upon a present
Plea, as the rule of the Law, or else Judgment, pleaded to the Indictment Not
guilty; Carew making this salvo, Saving to our Lord Jesus Christ his Right to
the Government of these Nations. Next, Edmund Harvey, Henry Smith, John Downs,
Vincent Potter, and Augustine Garland; and after them George Fleetwood, Simon
Meyn, James Temple, Peter Temple, Thomas Wait, Hugh Peter's, Francis Hacker,
Daniel Axtel, who all but the last presently pleaded, and would be tried by God
and their Country: Peter's would be tried, at first, by the Law of God, having
pleaded Not guilty, no not for a thousand worlds; but the people laughed him out
of it. Axtel, not till informed of the danger of a mute, and that no man can
justify Treason; if the matter which he had to say be justifiable, it is not
Treason; if Treason, it is not justifiable: and therefore he must go to the
ordinary way of guilty, or not guilty.

Harrison tried, Oct. 11.
Harrison was the next day set to the Bar, with Scroop and ^our more; but they
severally challenging the Judges, the Court ordered to try them singly; and
proceeded with Harrison, who excepted his full number thirty five of the Jury;
and the other twelve being sworn, Mr. Sollicitor-General much Rhetorically laid
forth the nature and atrocity of the Fact: That the very thoughts of such
attempts were in all Ages, Sir Heneage Finch opens the Indictment.
and among all people, counted an unpardonable Treason, as the story of the two
Eunuchs against Ahasuerus; Voluerunt insurgere, they only had a Will to rise up
against him: and the testimony of Tacitus, qui deliberant desciverant; who
consult of this Fact, are Rebels already. That it is not the sole interest of
one Royal Person concerned in this parricide, but all of the Nation. That Sir
Edward Cook has a Notion, that to the perfection of this Law of the 25 Edw.
3. a time to be limited to the accuser was requisite; but how great a mistake
that was, would appear by this, That this Treason had so long out-faced the
Law, and the Justice of the Kingdom, that if there had been a time of
limitation, there would have been no time nor place left to punishment; and so
the guilt would have stuck upon the Kingdom, and this wickedness grown up into
an impunity. That the scope of the Indictment was, for the compassing of the
King's death; the rest, as usurping power over the King's person, the
Assembling, Sitting, and Judging, are but as so many overt Acts to prove the
intentions of the heart; all which are not necessary to be proved against every
particular person. That every other overt Act, besides what is laid in the
Indictment, as encouraging of the Soldiers to cry Justice and Execution, or
preaching up the Work as godly, may be given in evidence against the guilty
persons, whose Crime was of that unmeasurable impiety, that it could neither be
heightened by any aggravation, or lessened by any excuse. Then he traced the
steps and gradations to this Villainy from the Treaty in 1648, and showed the
wicked Circumstances and Formalities thereof; particularly he declared this
person of those living (twenty six being already deceased, and six or seven
reserved to other penalties, and a sorrowful repentance; and twenty nine more
before their Lordships) to be the only chief Leader, Captain, and Conductour
in this horrible Treason: and hinted at his saucy demeanor to the King in his
bringing him to his Trial; his irreverend speeches and carriages then toward
the King; at his malicious design of blacking him to the people. Sir Edward
Turner used the like harangue; and then the Witnesses were sworn; and after
evidence given, Mr. Windham closed it with this Speech: That the Indictment was
for compassing the King's death; there lay the Treason: for there is not one
word in that Statute of killing the King; insomuch that if after that sitting
upon the King, they had acquitted him, yet would it have been Treason still:
that this imagination of Harrison's was plainly proved, and the more confirmed
by his mention of blacking the King: that he had confessed he sat, and signed,
and therefore there was no difficulty in the Verdict.

This saying of his, of blacking the King, was proved by one Mr. Nutly, who
having got admittance into the Committee that drew up the Charge against the
King, overheard him say those words upon a dispute of contracting the said
Charge; which Harrison rejected, for this Reason, as knowing [ calumniare
fortiter, aliquid haerebit] of a multitude of imputations, some of them would
stick. It will be a trouble, cumberance, and labor to the Reader, to
particularize any more Speeches of the King's Counsel, or their showing the
Record of the Warrant for Execution, etc. to every one of the Prisoners; or the
Courts denying the Prisoners Counsel, because it is very near the same
throughout; and therefore there is here subjoyned only a breviate of each
persons defense, referring the more unsatisfied and curious to the Original and
entire Copy of them.

Harrison began his by a strange argumentation, from the notoriety of the Fact,
that it was not done in a corner; that he believed God was with his servants in
those days, (however it seemed good to him to suffer this turn to come upon
them:) that he had desired to know the mind of God in it; but he had received
no conviction of the evil of it, but rather assurance; professed the
harmlesness of his Nature to Man, Woman, and Child; that he followed not his
own judgment, but his Conscience to the Lord; that he had suffered
imprisonment, because he would not turn aside from the Cause to Oliver, and
refused his temptation of sitting at his right hand: That what he had done in
this matter, was by authority of Parliament; and that this, nor any other
inferior Court, has any Cognizance or Jurisdiction on that: and therefore,
they could not question him that acted in obedience to that Authority; and that
he did act in the fear of God.

Hereat the Court and Auditory were aghast, and cried, Away with him, for he
made God the Author of his wickedness: and as to the pretended Authority, and
his Actions he warranted thereby, It was answered, that if the Lords and
Commons in full Houses had then taken upon them such Authority, it had yet been
Treason: For the Lords and Commons do not, nor never did, constitute a
Parliament, without the King; but that there was not an eighth part of the
House of Commons that contrived and ordered this Treason. And to this purpose
spoke Mr. Annesly, now Earl of Anglesey, and Mr. (now Lord) Hollis, ripping up
the violence and insolence of this Prisoner and his Associates in forcing the
House of Commons, and secluding them and other Members thereof in December
1648. That this discourse was to infect the people; and Sir Edward Turner
added, that he had the Plague all over him: and the whole Court unanimously,
and severally, rejected that treasonable Tenet of an Authority in both or
either Houses without the King; and overruled that Plea. To which Harrison was
instant for Counsel to assist him. After some interlocurions, he began a
discourse of the War; the Kings setting up his Standard against the people (and
that God is no respecter of persons) and shedding of innocent blood: and being
interrupted there, avouching the same Authority again, he professed his
abhorrence of blacking the King; aequivocated with his bringing the King to his
Trial from Hurst-castle; for he was commanded to do it from the General: At
last he urged his impreparation for his Trial, being six months a close
Prisoner; but that he had some Acts of the Parliament ready to produce to his
justification: and here he concluded. And Judgment being demanded, the Jury
gave in their Verdict, (which they did without stirring from the place) and
Sentence was past upon him, The Sentence.
in these words: You are to be led back to the place from whence you came, and
from thence to be drawn on a Hurdle to the place of Execution, and there you
shall be hanged by the Neck; and being alive shall be cut down, your privy
Members to be cut off, your Entrails to be taken out of your Body, and you
living, the same to be burnt before your eyes; and your Head to be cut off,
your Body to be divided into four parts, and your Head and Quarters to be
disposed at the pleasure of the Kings Majesty. And so he was returned to
Newgate, in order to Execution.

Colonel Adrian Scroop was next set to the Bar; Col. Adrian Scroop.
and after some challenge of the Jury, which (as Harrison did before, and all
the rest after) was to pick out the meanest of them, afraid of the Gentry, over
whom they had tyrannously and insolently Lorded; and convicted by the same
evidence of sitting in the High Court, and subscribing the Warrant, etc. As
also by the testimony of Sir Richard Brown, the Lord Mayor Elect for the next
year, who witnessed that since the Return of the King, in some accidental
conference, he seemed to allow and approve of the Fact, by saying, Many people
did not think it such a heinous matter; or that some be of one mind, and some
of another: which he denied now to have expressly said; but bewailed the
misfortune of that Encounter with Sir Richard; for whereas before he was not
excepted out of the Act of Indemnity, the very last day it passed he was by
that means even then excepted. He justified that Authority, and the Fact
committed by that Authority, but not the person; protested he had no malice
against the King, and that it was an error of Judgment, not of his Will: that
he took the Parliament's Authority for valid, (but overruled by a precedent
Trial) acquainted the Jury that he lay under a great prejudice by the Fact, and
desired them to consider his Case as they would their own; and hinted at the
benefit of the Proclamation: he was found likewise guilty, and sentenced.

Carew tried.
John Carew was next set to the Bar, who rambled into the discourse of
Harrison; talked of the Fear of God, and the Authority of the Parliament by
which he acted: that he declined it at first, but being put in the Act for
Trial, could not disobey the Lord nor the Parliament; acknowledged his sitting
and signing, but not his guilt therein, but highly vindicated the Parliament
and their Power to the Jury; but was sentenced as the rest.

Scot tried, October. 12.
To Thomas Scot the same Witnesses were produced in all things as the former;
only he added, that the Authority of the remaining Members might be as good as
the Parliament was when the Bishops were excluded; and if two Estates may take
away a third, if the second do not continue to Execute their Trust, he that is
in occupancie may have a title to the whole: by which Argument, he affirmed the
Parliaments Authority. To this was answered, that the Bishops were taken away
by an Act, with the consent of the King, Lords, and Commons; and that the
Justification of this blasphemous principle (as the Lord Finch termed it, as
also Lord Annesly and the whole Court) was unsufferable, and High Treason. Mr.
William Lenthall, Mr. Theophilus Biddulph, and Lord Mayor Elect, were sworn to
prove, that he said he would have it written on his Grave, That Here lies
Thomas Scot, one that adjudged the King to Death. And to this purpose,
afterward in the House, upon the Dissolution of the Parliament, he was heard
to have added, Since it is your pleasure to Dissolve the House, I know not how
to hinder; but when that is done, I know not where to hide my hated head.
Gregory Clement waved his Plea, Gregory Clement.
and confessed his Crime, and delivered a Petition, as Waller had done before.
And Colonel Jones made little defense, Colonel Jones
but acquiesced upon the proof of his sitting and signing; and so they all had
Sentence as before.

Cook, October ^3.
The Sollicitour John Cook was next Arraigned, for Assuming a Power over the
King's Life; for drawing and exhibiting the Charge; for demanding Judgment; for
pressing the Charge to be taken pro Confesso; in sum, for being instrumental in
the Kings Death. To this he Answered very acutely, to the glory of his parts,
and infamy of his practice, and to set up his Law above the Gospel, from whence
he borrowed St. Paul's elegant Defense, Neither against the Law, nor against
Caesar have I, I hope, offended. He alleged, he was but Counsel, and acted in
his Sphere for his Fee: in that his Crime was avaritiae, of covetousness; not
malitiae, nor falsely nor Treasonably, in advising the Charge: that he was no
Sword-man: that he executed no Power over the King: that in drawing the Charge,
he discharged rather the part of a good Subject; for the King being Prisoner,
to accelerate his Trial was a Courtesy; that he had retrencht the prolixity of
it to that purpose: he denied the examining of any Witnesses against the King:
that in demanding Judgment, he did not mean Judgment against the King of
Condemnation, but of Absolution. He observed, that the word Instrumental in the
exception of the Act, was insignificant, or otherwise incomprehensive of him:
that by the Kings gracious Letter, a Free Parliament was to declare the
excepted persons; which this could not be, not being called by his Majesty's
Writ. All which were fully Answered by Sir Heneage Finch; but for fear I may
pervert or miss the sinewy strength of that Reply, this shall suffice to be the
reduction; That his entering the Charge, and a protestation in the Conclusion of
Liberty to put in a new one, and desiring that the King as a Traitor may be
brought to Justice, was no such demand as could be imagined to end in
acquittal: that to the Act of Indemnity, the Parliament having made a special
proviso, and inserted him by name therein, the Words concluding him, it is not
material what the subsequent Reasons are; so that though he might say, the
Parliament was mistaken in their Reason, yet not in their Conclusion.

As to the Kings Letter from Breda referring all Crimes and Offenses soever to
a Free Parliament (that the Honor of the King might be for ever Sacred) he
said, that in case the Parliament, was not a right Parliament, that Letter in
it self is no Pardon, until it had been under the Broad Seal, and in more
express terms, as in the Case of Sir Walter Raleigh: but as to the Parliament,
it is plain the King meant this Parliament, the Letter being directed to the
Speaker of our House of Commons; to them it was left to provide for security
and indemnity, and to expiate this crying Sin; and to dispense his Mercy and
Justice in this particular: they then Address themselves to his Majesty's
Clemency for the whole Nation, and the Kings Proclamation grants a Pardon; so
that this must needs be the Parliament, though as the times were, it were not
so duly Constituted, but since Confirmed by his Majesty. It was added by Mr.
Windham, that words and advice, when the Act follows, will make any Counselor
guilty: as if a Counselor should advise one man to kill another, and he does
it. All was sum'd up in an accurate repetition of it, with Evidence and
Defense, by Sir Orlando Bridgman; and he thereupon found guilty. The Court used
him very civilly, and he showed very much respect and reverence to the Court,
behaving himself to the removing of that prejudice which the generality had of
him, as of a Monster. But see what a narrow Fortune, and the streights of Debt,
and the Devils wide World, and vast Preferments can tempt man to, since his
first Delusions bewitched our understanding!

Hugh Peter's came to the Bar. Peter's, October. 13.
He was charged with contriving the Kings Death at Ware with Oliver Cromwell, at
Windsor, at Coleman-street, at the Painted Chamber, Bradshaw's House; that in a
Sermon he had compared the King to Barabbas: that in another, the Text whereof
was to bind Kings in Chains, etc. he had declared, that there was an Act of
Gods own making, that they that spilt man's blood, by man should his blood be
spilt; and that out of that Law neither the King, nor Prince, or Prince Rupert,
nor none of that rabble are excepted: that on the Twenty seventh of January he
had Preached before the High Court of Justice, at Westminster, on the 14 of
Isaiah, 18, 19. verses; All the Kings of the Earth, etc. All he said to this,
was to cavil at the Witnesses: he declared his course of Life, and his Orthodox
perseverance; but, as to the purpose, he said he was sorry to hear of his
carriage toward the King, but he had no malice toward him, but was merely
engaged in he Army. He was also upon suspicion of being the Executioner, but he
proved he was sick a bed that day; so Cook and he were Sentenced together.
Dani^l Axtel.
Daniel Axtel was next set to the Bar, (He had escaped as he thought the
exception in the Act, being lately added to this miserable number, for there
was other blood barbarously shed by him, that lay upon him) and charged with
imagining and compassing the Kings Death; the overt Act whereof was commanding
the Guard at his Trial; his beating the Soldiers for not crying out Justice
and Execution; for bidding them to do it, and to shoot at a Lady, supposed the
Lady Fairfax, whom he there termed Whore, for saying that Cromwell was a Rogue,
and that the twentieth part of the People never consented to the Trial of the
King. For defense he said, that he was Commanded thither by his General, whom
the Lords and Commons had Commissioned: that they had declared themselves to be
the Interpreters of the Law; and if he had not obeyed his Generals Command, he
was then liable to the Punishment: that that Statute of 25 Edward the 3. did
not extend to private persons in that Case: that Iermyn, Nichols, and Thorpe
Judges, had declared, that it was lawful and justifiable to obey the
Parliament: that if the Collected body in Parliament be guilty of Treason,
where will they find a Jury to try him in the distributed part of the People?
(Here he was charged for being one of those that actually and in person put the
force upon the House, by Mr. Annesly, and made the Parliament a Juncto.) To
this he answered, That he was not to Justify that fault; for being no
Statesman, he did as commanded: produced his Commission; said, that Fairfax,
nay General Monk were guilty for acting by the same Commission: that it was no
Treason to silence a Lady that spoke impertinently: and being charged with
smiling at the same time, he said that was no Treason; that he was set there to
keep the Peace: that the People and Soldiers did cry Justice, Justice; and to
quiet the Soldiers, he might beat them; and say, I Will Justice you, I Will
Execution you. That at the worst, Justice being an Attribute of God, it were no
Treason to require it; and that the execution of it is no more. He took much
advantage of a Witness against him, who said he had been imprisoned by him: his
Evidence was about hiring the Executioner; to which one Nelson likewise, and
Hewlet was named. That, as Cook said before, he neither Sentenced, Signed,
Sealed, nor Sat: that Throgmorton in Queen Mary's days was acquitted for
Words: that Words may make a Heretic, not a Traitor; and cited Sir Edward
Coke, urged also the Statute of Hen. 7. ayding the King de facto. He was
answered to all, that there are no excuses for Treason: That the Parliament
could never give any Authority to Murder the King, nor the General; nor was it
in his Commission to Guard the Court of Justice at Westminster Hall, nor to cry
for Execution: that any of those things was an Overt Act of his imagination,
and Proved sufficiently, that Justice and Execution was the intent of
Murdering the King; and his wrathful Speech to the Lady discovered it. After a
little Consultation, the Jury brought him in guilty; to whom he had pleaded his
Family and small Children.

Colonel Hacker
Colonel Francis Hacker was the next. He was Charged with Guarding the King at
the High Court of Justice; of taking him from Colonel Tomlinson the day of
Execution; for Signing of the Warrant of Execution to him that did it, (writ by
Cromwell; but who the man was named in it, his memory could not tell, or he
would not, upon much inquisition:) that he was on the Scaffold, and brought the
King thither. He Pleaded little, and said, he was under Authority; and that he
did not read the Warrant that Cromwell writ, and so could not inform the Court
concerning the same. He was also found guilty, His being the most Overt Act in
compassing the Kings Death.

William Hewlet.
William Hewlet, a Sergeant of Colonel Hewson's Regiment, was Indicted for
being the man that was in the Frock, and cut off the Kings Head: it was averred
from his own Confession, by three several witnesses; and as many attested it
was Brandon the Common Executioner: that he, viz. the Executioner, was put into
a Boat, and trembled (after it was done) every joint of him: that he affirmed
as much to the Lord Capel at his Suffering by the same Axe, of which the
Executioner assured him. He said, that he could make it appear he was not upon
the Scaffold that day, nor near it, for that he and other Sergeants were
secured that day, for refusing to be there; but the other Witnesses Evidence
being express, He was found guilty. The Court gave him all the advantage that
could be, and reprieved him, so that he Suffered not.

Daniel Harvey
The other of the Judges that rendered themselves upon the Proclamation were
called. Mr. Daniel Harvey was called first, who pleaded his ignorance, and no
malice, for that he Signed not, though he was present at Sentence: then he
proved by witness his Reluctance of Conscience, his endeavors with few others
to adjourn the Court upon the Kings motion; that he resolved to have no more to
do with them; and that he endeavored to save his Life.

Isaac Pennington.
Isaac Pennington next, Pleaded his ignorance, and no malice, and utterly
refused to Sign the Warrant.

Henry Marten
Henry Marten, against whom the Sitting, Signing, and Sealing were proved, and
also that at the meeting of the High Court of Justice, before they went into
Westminster Hall, being in the Painted Chamber, and upon the Landing of the
King from White Hall to Sir Robert Cotton's House; Cromwell upon sight thereof,
asking them this question, The first thing the King will demand of us, will be,
by what Authority we bring him before us; what shall we say, by whose
Authority? After a little pause, Marten replied, In the Name and Authority of
the Commons in Parliament Assembled, and the good People of England. To this he
answered, that he had no malice to the King. It was replied, It is evident he
had against the Government. Further he said, that the Commission ran in the
name of the good people, and so it was no great matter for him to repeat it.
Here Sir Heneage Finch took hold, and gave notice to the Jury of the entituling
the good people to it, and hoped they would be none of them; and observed the
impenitence of the Man: then he justified the Parliament; and though it were
but a remnant of Parliament, yet in the case of Commons to a Cottage, if a
stick be but left, the Commons appertained to that Cottage. He added
conclusively, his acquiescing in the Royal Government, since the King was
called in by the People in Parliament, which he intimated as the Kings best
right, and so added to his greater Condemnation.

Gilbert Millington Confessed the Fact, Gilbert Millington.
and the guilt of it; and was favored with an acceptance of it from the Court.

Alderman Tichburn did the same, Alderman Tichburn.
with much candidness declaring his sin, and ignorance of the atrocity of the
Crime; protested his inability of Contrivance, his raw years, his unskilfulness
in the Laws; said he would have rather gone into a hot Oven than into this
business, if he had known it; instanced that Paul was a Persecutor, and found
Mercy; and had rendered himself, with the three before, upon the Proclamation.

Owen Roe pleaded the same, Owen Roe.
and his reluctance to the Kings Sentence, and the Proclamation.

Colonel Robert Lilburn did the same; Robert Lilburn.
mentioned his endeavor for withdrawing the Court of Justice, as Mr. Harvey
said before: that he wept and mourned the day of the Kings Death.

Mr. Smith pleaded the same, Mr. Smith.
and desired the Courts mediation.

John Downs, Vincent Potter, Augustine Garland, Downs, Potter, Garland, etc.
Simon Meyne, James Temple, Peter Temple, Thomas Wayt, and William Heveningham,
set (again) at the Bar. Something extraordinary must be said of Downs, because
he obliged the Court to hear him, in these words, (and they are worthy of man's
memory) which he expressed in that abominable Judicature, upon the Kings
request of hearing in Parliament, as he sat between Colonel Wauton, and Mr.
Cawley, and Oliver Cromwell [said I, Have we hearts of stone, or are we men?
They labored to appease me; they told me I would ruin both my self and them.
Said I, If I dye for it, I must do it. Cromwell sat just the seat below me. He
hearing of me make some stir by whispering, he looked at me, and asked if I was
my self; what I meant to do, that I could not be quiet. So I started upon the
nick when the Clerk was Commanded by Bradshaw to Read the Sentence, I stepped
up and said, My Lords, I have Reasons to offer against it, and I desire the
Court may adjourn to hear me. Presently Bradshaw viewed me, and said, If any
Member dissented, they must adjourn. So they did into the Court of Wards, where
I alleged the Kings general satisfaction to the Parliament, (that a Common
Prisoner was not used so, but that he might be heard.) I urged the Order of
Parliament, that upon any emergency or renata in the Court, we should apply our
selves to them. To which Cromwell answered, Sure you do not know that you have
to deal with the hardest hearted man in England. And much other incitation was
used by some of those that are doomed (whom he desired favor not to nominate)
telling me I was either a Sceptick or an Infidel.

Vincent Porter was troubled with a fit of the Stone, Vincent Potter.
and could hardly endure standing; and had a Chair to ease himself, and
confessed the whole guilt.

Augustine Garland was further accused of spitting in the Kings face, August.
Garland.
besides his sitting. He answered, he was a Parliament man but in 1648, and
drawn into this business, and desired no favor from God if he was guilty of
that inhumanity; to avoid which imputation he made this troublesome defense.

Simon Meyn, James and Peter Temple, Simon Meyn, James and Peter Temple.
Pleaded ignorance, and no malice.

Colonel Thomas Wayt Pleaded the same with Downs for withdrawing the Court, and
his Courtesies to the Cavaliers Party, and preventing a Petition for the Kings
Murder in Rutland-shire; Tho. Wayt.
and that the first day he came to Town, Cromwell made him sit the last day of
the Court of Justice.

Sir Hardress Waller.
Sir Hardress Waller brought again to the Bar, gave evidence of his penitence;
which my Lord Finch his kinsman allowed here, and deplored him. Heveningham did
show his sorrow; but both were Condemned.

Harrison Executed.
On Saturday the Fourteenth of October, One thousand six hundred and sixty,
between nine and ten of the Clock in the morning, Mr. Thomas Harrison, or,
Major General Harrison, according to his Sentence was upon a Hurdle drawn from
Newgate to the place called Charing Cross, where within certain Rails lately
there made, a Gibbet was Erected, and he hanged with his face looking toward
the Banqueting House at Whitehall (the place where our late Sovereign of
Eternal memory was Sacrificed:) being half dead, he was cut down by the common
Executioner, his Privy Members cut off before his Eyes, his Bowels burned, his
Head severed from his Body, and his Body divided into Quarters, which were
returned back to Newgate upon the same Hurdle that carried it, the People
loudly shooting at his Fall. His Head was since set upon a Pole on the top of
the South-east-end of Westminster Hall, looking toward London. The Quarters of
his Body are in like manner exposed upon some of the City-Gates.

Monday following, being the Fifteenth of October, about the same hour, Mr.
John Carew was carried in like manner to the same place of Execution, Carew
Executed.
where having suffered like pains, his Quarters were also returned to Newgate
on the same Hurdle which carried him. His Majesty was pleased to give (upon
intercession made by his Friends) his Body to be buried.

John Cook and Hugh Peter's Executed.
Tuesday following, being the Sixteenth of October, Mr. John Cook, and Mr. Hugh
Peter's were about the same hour carried on two Hurdles to the same place, and
Executed in the same manner, and their Quarters returned in like manner to the
place whence they came. The head of John Cook was set on a Pole on the
North-East-end of Westminster Hall (on the left side of Mr. Harrison's) looking
toward London, and the Head of Mr. Peter's on London Bridge. Their Quarters
were exposed in like manner upon the tops of some of the City-Gates.

Thomas Scot, Gregory Clement, Adrian Scroop, and John Jones Executed.
Wednesday, October Seventeen, about the hour of Nine in the Morning, Mr.
Thomas Scot and Mr. Gregory Clement were brought on several Hurdles; and about
one hour after, Mr. Adrian Scroop and Mr. John Jones together in one Hurdle
were carried to the same place, and suffered the same death, and were returned
and disposed of in like manner.

Francis Hacker and Daniel Axtel Executed.
Mr. Francis Hacker and Mr. Daniel Axtel were on Friday the Nineteenth of
October about the same time of the Morning drawn on one Hurdle from Newgate to
Tyburn, and there both Hanged. Mr. Axtel was Quartered, and turned back, and
disposed as the former; but the Body of Mr. Hacker was (by his Majesty's great
favor) given entire to his Friends, and buried. Axtel's head was set up at the
furthest end of Westminster Hall.

To^ dye impinitent as to the Fact.
Not any one of these at his Death expressed any sorrow or Repentance for the
Fact, but justified the Authority by which they did it, and themselves therein:
but whether they agreed now, by a Combination at their death, as in the
Conspiracy of the King's, or whether it were not Diabolical infatuation, or the
Sin and impiety of their Crime, that they were given over to a Reprobate sense,
it is not in man to determine: their Party and Abettors in the Rebellion highly
magnified this their obstinacy for Christian Courage, and printed their Prayers
and Speeches with all the advantages Revenge and Rebellion could invent; and if
they could have brought the Law, the sense of the Kingdom, nay, the whole Word
into their mould, they might have passed for Martyrs: for as to the repugnant
s^ffrage of Divine Authority, they could and did wrest that with an easy
finger. Thus much therefore may suffice to Posterity concerning the ends of
these men, That they were Convicted according to Law, whose utmost benefit they
had, by a Jury of their Peers, against whom they had full liberty of exception:
That the Person of the Prince they Murdered, was (beyond any parallel) by the
confession of his Enemies, of some of these Cook the Solicitor.
, a most virtuous, most Innocent, most Religious, and Fit for the Government:
That these his Judges and Murderers were for the most part, nay generally,
mean and desperate persons, and their hands lifted up by Ambition, Sacrilege,
Covetousness, and success, against the Life of this incomparable Prince, whose
lamented and barbarous Death God would not suffer to go unrevenged, nor His own
sacred Name to be Blasphemed, as not only said by them to be the Author, but
the maintainer of this impiety.

And it is remarkable, that Hugh Peter's, who by his Function, as a Priest, had
most dishonored God in Preaching and pressing this Parricide, making use of
his holy Writ to this same wicked purpose, most plainly discovered the
footsteps of the Divine Vengeance in his Tragedy. Hugh Peter's 's stupidity.
The miserable Wretch had not a word to say for himself, or to God, of whom he
said he was abandoned: he that was so nimble and quick in all Projects of this
nature before, was now like a Sot or a Fool, playing with the Straw in the
Sledge, as he went to Execution. Of which his sad condition, Cook, his
fellow-sufferer, was so sensible, as to pray for some respite for him; but it
was out of the Sheriffs power, who attended them in person to their respective
Executions. It was observed also by Scot, who having wished the mention of this
Fact to be graven on his Tomb, Digitus Dei has written it on the Gates of
London in such bloody Characters and Hieroglyphics, that whoever passes cannot
but read it.

Those being thus Executed, Prisoners that came in upon Proclamation respited.
the other Prisoners that came in upon Proclamation, and were to be respited
from Execution till the pleasure of the Parliament should be known, were after
Sentence remitted to the Tower from whence they came, their Estates being
seized on to the use of the King. The Quarters of the other had not long been
set up, but a report was raised that a bright Star appeared over those at
Aldgate, and this in favor of these Saints as they were termed, and as if it
were a Constellation of their bright innocence: but it was observed and known
to be the Planet Venus then in her greatest Elongation from the Sun, the same
distance as their Phanatical stories were from the Truth.

This parentation being over to his Father, His Majesty's next respects were
due to his Mother, Queen Mother arrives in England.
whose welcome to his Kingdoms he could not better manifest, or oblige to her,
than by rendering them innocent and free of that horrible guilt which had
divorced her from her Husband, and estranged her from his People. Nor was it
just or civil she should be here received without satisfaction and expiation of
those Crimes, the very tendencies whereto had so rudely driven her to seek her
safety abroad. The King brought her back to his Palace at White Hall, after
Nineteen years discontinuance, the second of November: with her came the
Illustrious Princess Henrietta, who had never breathed English Air, but some
two years after her birth, which happened in Exeter, June 16. 1644. as also
Prince Edward, brother to Prince Rupert, and to the Prince Elector Palatine, an
absolute stranger to these Kingdoms. The meeting could not but be as joyous,
after so tedious and injurious an absence, as the entertainment highly
Magnificent. On the Sixth of November, the Recess of the Parliament being
ended, The Parliament re-assemble.
the Lords and Commons met again in Parliament, to resume their weighty task of
settling the Kingdoms; and a Council for Trade now began their sitting,
according to the Kings Commission. Several dangerous and pestilent Speeches and
Rumors being daily uttered and vented, especially by the Fifth Monarchists at
their Meeting House in Coleman-street and other places, and Colonel Overton
being the chief man of that persuasion; by Order of the Council he was seized,
and upon some further information against him committed to the Tower for
Treason: which soon after appeared, in some of his Opinion. With him Mr.
Lenthal, the Speakers Son, was Committed, upon suspicion of Counterfeiting the
Kings Seal.

Upon the Kings Restitution, the Marquess of Arguile had the confidence to come
up from Scotland, hoping to have inveagled and obtained his Pardon for all
those base Treasons he had acted so covertly in that Kingdom since his
Majesty's departure; and that his Majesty, according to his gracious
inclination, would have past by those many undutiful and irreverent usages of
him, by him and the Kirk, while He was there among them: but such was the
general hatred and detestation of that People (and especially of the Nobility)
against him, that the King gave order for his Commitment while he was waiting
at Court. Argyle committed.
He desired to speak to the King, but could not be admitted; he desired to
speak with Mr. Calamy, in his way to the Tower, but that was refused: from
thence by Sea he was conveyed to Edinburgh, where his Process was making ready:
The Earl of Middleton the Kings great Commissioner following him thither about
the end of December.

Death had tasted of the Blood Royal, in the immature decease and lamented Fate
of that Noble Henry Duke of Gloucester, as aforesaid: and, as if there were not
only a Circulation of it in every individual, but it naturally ran in the same
Distempers round a whole Family, the Infection by a kind of Sympathy in the
same Disease of the Small Pox seized the Vitals of the most Illustrious Mary
Princess of Aurange; Princess of Aurange dies, December. 24.
and in spite of all Art and Remedy (though the Blooding of her was causelessly
and ignorantly taxed) carried her to the Grave, leaving the whole Court in very
great and almost disconsolate sadness, and her Son the Prince of Aurange ten
years old, and a Month over. She deceased on the Twenty fourth of December;
her death being ushered with a sad accident, the oversetting the
Assurance-Frigate Riding at Anchor at Wolledge by a sudden gust of Wind; by
which disaster several Persons of the Ships Company were drowned.

This happy Parliament, which had rebuilt the Glorious Structure of the English
Ancient and Renowned Government, and had assured the Foundation thereof in the
Established Throne of our Sovereign, came to its Period. But that no Revolution
of time should obliterate or blot out the memory of those Excellent worthy
things had been done by it for the good of King and Kingdom, Parliament
Dissolved.
his Majesty Honored it by his Royal mouth with the never-to-be-forgotten
Epithet of the Healing Parliament; which will undoubtedly recommend it to
Posterity, as long as any grievance, or humors, or distempers shall remain in
Church and State.

The Princess of Aurange was buried with a private Funeral; in the narration of
which, I shall crave leave for this digression: there was indeed as much Honor
in that privacy, as there was vain and profane solemnity in the gewgaw Exequies
of Oliver, which wanted of their due Grandeurs till his Execution. In
opposition therefore to that rabble medley of a Funeral, it will not be
extravagant to set down, here, the Compact, yet Illustrious manner of this
Princess, to show the difference betwixt Princes and Ringleaders of the Rout.

On Saturday December the 26 th. but five days after her Decease, the chiefest
of the Nobility met together in the House of Peers, to attend the Royal Corpse
of the Princess, which was brought about Nine a Clock at Night from
Somerset House thither: from whence they proceeded with the Funeral, Princess
of Aurange her Funeral, December. 26.
through a lane of Guards of the Duke of Albermarl's Regiment of Foot. First,
went several Gentlemen and Knights; next, the Servants of his Highness the Duke
of York; then the Servants of the Queen; after whom came his Majesty's
Servants; and next, those of the Deceased Lady: then two Heralds before James
Marquess (now Duke) of Ormond Lord Steward of his Majesty's Household, and
Edward Earl of Manchester Lord Chamberlain of the same; after whom went Edward
Lord Hide Lord Chancellor of England, with the Purse and Mace born before him:
after whom came another Herald with a Coronet upon black Velvet; and then the
Royal Corpse carried by her own Servants, the Pall being supported by six
Earls, and the Canopy carried over it by several Baronets. His Highness the
Duke of York (as principal Mourner) followed the Corpse with a Herald before
him, diverse persons of quality bearing his Train. In this order they came to
King Henry the 7 th's Chapel, where she was Interred in a Vault particularly
set apart for the Royal Line.

This Princess, and the Duke of Gloucester who preceded her to Bliss, needed no
Effigies to present them to our Eye, being (like Virtue) not to be Pictured,
and can have no resemblances but in the mind, where with immortality they have
placed their Monuments, to dure and last with Eternity it self.

E contra, on the Thirtieth of January, that the Earth might no longer cover
the Blood which was impiously and traitorously split on that day, Vengeance
pursuing those wicked miscreants even beyond the Sanctuary of the Grave, the
odious Carcasses of Cromwell, Sejanus ducitur unco spectandus, gaudent omnes,
quae labra quis illis vultus erat?
Ireton and Bradshaw, were dug out of the ground, from those sumptuous
Monuments, which (as they did the Throne in their Life) they had now Usurped in
their Death: they were drawn in a Cart from Westminster, where they were first
interred, to the Red Lion in Holborn, and thence on Sledges to Tyborn, where
they were pulled out of their Coffins, and hanged at the several Angles or
Corners of that accursed Tree, Cromwell, Ireton and Bradshaw dig'd up and
hanged, etc.
(with the dregs of Peoples Curses and Execrations) from Ten a Clock till
Sunsetting, and then cut down; their loathsome Bodies thrown into a deep hole
under the Gallows: their Heads cut off, and placed aloft upon Westminster Hall.
Where they will continue the Brand-marks of their Posterity, and the expiatory
remains of their accursed Crime.

Notwithstanding the seizing of many suspected Persons, Fifth Monarchists, as
Colonel Overton, of whom before, Cornet Day, Courtney, Major Allen, etc. yet
that Sect persisted in a Devilish design, which soon after, in the beginning of
January, they thus executed.

This strange and unheard of Action will afford the truest sight and judgment
of this Fanatic crew, Venner 's Insurrection.
even beyond all Example or History of the most perdite sort of men: For but a
handful of these wild People dared to attempt the City of London, and that at
two several times: First, on Sunday the Sixth of January 1660. After their
meeting at Coleman-street in the same City (having then a gracious Liberty from
the King for their Devotion) they Armed themselves, and came to St. Paul's in
the Dusk of the Evening, where having Mustered and ordered their small Party,
they placed Sentinels for the time, one of whom killed an Innocent Person
coming by accidentally, for saying, (when he was demanded by them who he was
for) For God and King Charles. After this Exploit the Alarm being given, and
some Parties of the Trained Bands coming upon them and Charging them, after
they had repulsed those few Files, they Marched to Bishops-gate, where they
passed, and from thence to Cripple-gate, where they came into the City again,
and so to Aldersgate, where the Constable (being weakly attended) at their
threatening him for the Keys, let them out again. Here they declared themselves
for King Jesus, and their Friends or Masters upon the Gates: Thence they
proceeded to Beech-lane, where a Headborough opposing them, they shot him, and
killed him. [It is observable, that none whomsoever, or wheresoever they shot,
recovered of the hurt; it being conceived they poisoned their Bullets and
Slugs, by chawing or other destructive Art.] And so with all haste made toward
Canewood, where they lurked a while, resolving to make another Insurrection in
the City, till they were routed by a Party of Horse and Foot sent to drive them
out thence, and some Thirty taken Prisoners and brought before the General, who
sent them to the Gate House.

Notwithstanding the others, after they had quitted the Wood, returned for
London, with assurance of success in their begun enterprise; Venner telling
them (a Wine-Cooper by Trade) he was assured that no Weapons formed against
them should prosper, nor a hair of their Head be touched; which their impunity
in their first attempt made them very credulous of, even to an absolute
confidence.

It may not be omitted, that just before this sudden eruption, the King was
gone to Conduct his Mother and Sister (who feared the same mortal Infection of
the small Pox, and had had some grudges thereof) to Portsmouth, in order to
their Embarquing for France; which opportunity they took for their Rebellious
Tumult, having disposed, as they thought, the minds of their late Party to take
part with them, by their Declaration, called, A door of Hope opened, stuffed with
abominable slanders against the whole Royal Family, and the General, who (with
the Duke of York) appeared presently with part of the Life-Guards to suppress
them.

To proceed: on Wednesday-morning, January the Ninth, after the Watches and
Guards were removed, they reinforced their first Enterprise. Their first
effort and appearance was at Thredneedle-street, where they alarmed the Trained
Band that was to watch all that Day; a Party of whom being sent out to follow
them, were forced to retreat to their Mainguard; who Marching in a Body toward
them, the Fifth-Monarchists retreated into Bishops-gate-street, some of them
into an Alehouse known by the Sign of the Helmet, where, after a sharp
Dispute, two were killed, and as many taken; the same number being killed and
wounded of the Trained-Bands. The next sight of them (for they were just like
wildfire) was at Golledg-Hill, by which way they went up into Cheapside, and
so into Wood-street, Venner being their chief Leader, having a Murrion on his
Head, and a Halbert in his Hand. Here was the main and fiercest Action; for
they fought stoutly with two of the Trained-Bands of Foot, in very good
Discipline and Order. Here also they received a Charge from the Horse of the
Lifeguard, whom they put to the Retreat, till being over-powr'd, and Venner
knocked down and wounded with Shot, Tufney and Crag, two more of the chief of
their Teachers being killed by him, they began to give ground, and soon after
dispersed themselves in flight, taking several routs and ways. The greatest
part of them went down Wood-street to Cripple-gate, firing in the Rear at the
Trained-Bands of Yellow, then in close pursuit of them. This Train-Band lodged
ten of them in the Blew-Anchor Alehouse by the Postern; which house they
maintained. Soon after came Lieutenant Colonel Cox with his Company, and
surrounded all places about it. In the interim, part of the Yellow aforesaid
had gotten up into the Tylings of the next House, which they threw off, and
fired in, the Rebels being in the uppermost Room, who even then refused
Quarter; when at the very same time another File of Muskets got up the Stairs,
and having shot down the door, entered upon them: six of them were killed
before, another wounded, and one refusing of Quarter, then also was knocked down
with the But-end, and afterward shot with a Musket. The rest being demanded
why they craved not quarter before? answered, They durst not, for fear their
own Fellows should shoot them; such was their Resolution and Desperation.

The whole number of this last Insurrection cannot be reckoned to more than
Fifty Persons: though not above Forty were ever seen together, yet so great was
their confidence in the Revelations of their Teachers, that they presumed to
Subdue and Conquer with that small remnant, alluding to that History of Gideon
recorded in Holy Writ; admitting of no other Sect but the Quakers, (and but
those also who agreed with them in the Tenet of their Monarchy) being the
nearest of Affinity to their Enthusiastic Opinions, to have the honor of
partaking with them in this their great and glorious Design, as they termed it
in their aforesaid Declaration; wherein they further Blasphemously said, That
if they were deceived or misled, 'twas God that deceived them; laying their
delusions, and charging their sinful and desperate folly upon him as the Author.

In this Tumult and Rebellious Insurrection were slain of the Kings People
Twenty two, and as many of the Traitors, most whereof were killed in Houses;
and some after being taken Prisoners, for refusing to tell their Names were
presently shot. There were taken Twenty, besides a few upon suspicion: the
Twenty were as follows, viz. Thomas Venner the Wine-cooper their Captain,
Roger Hodgkins a Button-seller in St. Clements-lane Lumbard-street; Leonard
Gowler, Jonas Allen, John Pym, William Orsingham, William Ashton, Giles
Pritchard A Cow-keeper, Stephen Fall, John Smith, William Corbet, John Dod,
John Elston, Thomas Harris, John Gardener, Robert Bradley, Richard Marten, John
Patshal, Robert Hopkins, and John Wells; five of these had been in the design
against Oliver, as before. These were brought to the Bar together; the
Wounded-men had Chairs allowed them: and after the Indictment read to them,
which was laid both to Treason and Murder, Thomas Venner was first called,
who, when he had held up his hand at his Arraignment, being asked Guilty, or
Not Guilty, began a wild Phanatique discourse about his Conversation in New
England, and concerning the Fifth Monarchy, and the Testimony within him above
these Twenty years, with such like impertinent discourses and stories. He
confessed he was in the late Rising, but was not guilty of Treason, intending
not to levy War against the King; and so sallied out into the same nonsensical
defenses as at first: but at the Court's instance of his Pleading directly to
the Indictment, he answered Not Guilty, and put himself upon his Country. In
the like manner Hodgkins, after some rambling diversions from his present
Business, and the Threats of the Court of his being Recorded Mute, and the
submission of the rest of his Fellows, (who all pleaded, after some previous
excursions in their way and manner) pleaded likewise to the Indictment:
whereupon the Witnesses being sworn, two against every particular Person, they
made it appear, That Venner, Tufney, and Cragg, (the two last whereof were
slain in the Business) did several times persuade their Congregation to take up
Arms for King Jesus, against the Powers of the Earth, (which were his Majesty,
the Duke of York and the General:) That they were to kill all that opposed
them: That they had been Praying and Preaching, but not Acting for God: That
they Armed themselves at their Meeting House in Coleman-street with
Blunderbusses, Muskets, etc. and other particular Evidence against each to
matter of Fact. The proof against Martin, Hopkins and Wells was not so full,
and against Patshal only one Witness; who were acquitted by the Jury. The other
sixteen being found Guilty, and brought to the Bar, were demanded to show Cause
why Sentence should not pass against them, etc. The Lord Chief Justice Foster
charging this Venner with the Blood of his Accomplices by his Seduction and
leading of them; He answered, He did not. To which the Witnesses being produced
again, he Blasphemously quibled, and said, It was not he, but Jesus that led
them. Three of them confessed their Crime and Error, and craved Mercy; so they
were all sixteen Condemned to be Hanged, Drawn, and Quartered. According to
which Sentence, on Saturday January 19* 1660, Venner and Hodgkins (both uncured
of the Wounds they received in their Rebellion) being guarded by two Companies
of the Trained-Bands, were drawn on a Sledge from Newgate through Cheapside,
over against their Meeting House in Swar-Alley in Coleman-street, and Executed
according to their Sentence. Venner spoke little but in vindication of himself
and his Fact, and something of his Opinion, being confident the Time was at
hand when other Judgment would be; There were two Executed in Cheap Side the
same day Prichard the Cow-keeper and another of them.
reflecting much upon the Government. The other, Hodgkins, raved and cursed in
manner of Praying, calling down Vengeance from Heaven upon the King, the
Judges, and the City of London; nor would he give over, though the Sheriff
forbad him to run on in that strange way, until the Hangman was hastened from
his Employment of Quartering Venner, to turn him off; so as in that mad
Religion they lived, in the same they dyed. Their Quarters were set upon the
Four Gates of the City by the late Executed Regicides, whose Quarrel and
Revenge they undertook in this their Phanatique Attempt; their Heads also set
upon Poles by some of them on London Bridge.

On Monday the Twenty first of January Nine more of them were Executed all in
one Morning, at five several places, by one Executioner; Two at the West End of
St. Paul's, two at the B^ll and Mouth, two at Beech-lane, Two at the Royal
Exchange; and a notable Fellow, the last, by name Leonard Gowler, at
Bishops-Gate. They all obstinately persisted in their Error (especially the
last, who began with Imprecations like Hodgkins, and was silenced the same way
by the Command of the Sheriff) excepting a Young man who was Harged in
Redcross-street, who did relent and Repent of his Sin, and the Blood he had
spilt, but yet dyed in the Opinion of Chilianism. After they were cut down, the
Sentence was not Executed upon them to the full, only their Heads were cut off,
and set upon London Bridge.

Most remarkable was the prudence and valor of the Right Honorable Sir Richard
Brown the Lord Major, in this tumultuary and dangerous Insurrection. He it was
whom they designed as a Sacrifice to their first outrages; and had they met
with a person of indifferency of Spirit, had undoubtedly surprised the
Magistracy and Government of this Famous City, and in him subdued (their great
Quarrel) Authority.

Sir Arthur Hazelrig dies.
Sir Arthur Haslerig died a Prisoner in the Tower of London, with impatience at
the happiness of the Times; and Mr. Crofton, an eminent stickler for
Presbytery, came in-his room. Mr. Crofton committed.


But we must pass to the Glories of the entrance of the Year One thousand six
hundred sixty one, the Thirteenth of the Kings Reign.

Anno Domini 1661.
AND now, lest any of these scattered Rays and refractions of this Monarchs
Glory should be dimmed or disappear in the obscurity of Time, we will translate
them to their bright Orb (as Jupiter is feigned to have Stellified his Heroes)
encircle them in the Diadem, Eternize them in that Spherical Figure, and fix
them in his Crown, the FIRMAMENT of his past, present, and future greatness:
the Celebrity of which Action is not less due to the intrinsic matter, than to
the outward beauteous form; it being not so much an excess of Pomp, as a
Boundary of Government; not so much height of Glory, as profoundness of
State-reason; and in that large capaciousness may justly pass for the
consummation and perfect excellence of all Regal felicity. This, was the Crown
profaned by the lewd hands of those prostitute Members at Westminster, when the
Regalia were seized on by them, and by H. M. his advice thought fit to be
alienated to the Public, that is, shared among the Usurpers. This was the
Crown, afterward violated, deprived, and widdowed of that Sacred and Royal
Head of King Charles the Martyr. This was the Crown which alone of all the
Insignia of Majesty, (as Elijah of all the Prophets that had not bowed their
knees to Baal) abhorred the Idolatry of Cromwell's Usurpation, and escaped the
ravishing and polluted hands of that Tyrant, when like Caligula, that set the
heads of the gods upon his own Statues, he assumed all the other Regalities of
his rightful Sovereign, but could no way fit this Sacred Symbol of Majesty
(though he could all other Holy things, and the Scripture it self,) to his
impious designments. That was that Crown which the Malignity of a dire
Pestilence had envied the sight and blessing thereof to the City of London, his
Majesty's Imperial Chamber (which sadly felt the other Plagues of War and Want
in a more forcible absence of it thereafter) at his Royal Fathers Inauguration,
and was now Boded and bespoke with the like Contagion; when never were the
Influences of Heaven more curiously propitious, the two Serene days of that
Solemnity exsiccating and exhaling those vapors, which a long moisture to the
danger of a Flood did seem to portend. Lastly, this was that Crown, whose just
and ancient Descent, under which we have flourished ever since we were a
Nation, till our late Anarchy; upon the Head of this Miraculous Prince, now
vindicated it self from the indignities and assaults of base and insolent
Demagogues, who from our Kings regardlesness of State and Sovereignty, have
evermore wrought their contempt in the Subject: who now, with a like joy of
reverence, fear, and love, beheld this awful and most delightful Triumph which
is here related.

HIS Majesty on the Twenty second of April early in the Morning passed from
Whitehall to the Tower by Water, from thence to go through the City to
Westminster Abbey, there to be Crowned.

Two days were allotted to the Consummation of this great and most celebrated
Action, the wonder, and admiration, and delight of all Persons both Foreign
and Domestic: and pity it was, that the solid and lasting happiness it
portended should not have taken up a Month, and given it the name Coronalis.

First therefore we begin with the City of London, The King^s passage through
London to his Coronation.
which participating the greatest share of that inexpressible happiness that
the Three Kingdoms received by the auspicious Restoration of the King, took
occasion to express in this Triumph of his Majesty's Coronation their joy and
gladness with the greatest Magnificence imaginable: They spared not therein any
cost to manifest their affectionate duty to the King, considering, that if ever
excessive charges might be justified, this signalizing their affection at this
time might well be allowed.

In his passage through Crouched Friars, He was entertained with Music, a Band
of Eight Waits, placed on a Stage. Near Algate, with another Band of Six Waits
in like manner, with Music, from a Balcony.

In Leaden Hall Street, near Lime-Street-end, was Erected the First Triumphal
Arch after the Dorick Order: on the North-side, on a Pedestal, before the Arch,
was a Woman personating REBELLION, mounted on a Hydra, in a Crimson Robe torn,
Snakes crawling on her Habit, and begirt with Serpents, and her Hair Snaky; a
Crown of Fire on her Head; a bloody Sword in one hand, a Charming Rod in the
other. Her attendant, CONFUSION, in a deformed Shape, a Garment of several
ill-matched Colors, and put on the wrong way; on her Head Ruins of Castles;
torn Crowns, and broken Scepters in each Hand.

On the South-Pedestal was a Representation of BRITAIN'S MONARCHY, supported by
LOYALTY, both Women; Monarchy in a large purple Robe, adorned with Diadems and
Scepters; over which, a loose Mantle, edged with blue and silver Fringe,
resembling Water, the Map of Great Britain drawn on it: on her Head London, in
her right hand, Edinburgh; in her left, Dublin: Loyalty all in White, three
Scepters in her right Hand, three Crowns in her left.

The first Painting on the South Side is a Prospect of His Majesty's landing at
Dover-Castle, Ships at Sea, great Guns going off, one kneeling and kissing the
Kings Hand; Soldiers, Horse and Foot, and many people gazing. Above, ADVENTVS
AVG.

The whole Tablet representing his Majesty's blessed Arrival. Beneath the
Painting, this Motto, IN SOLIDO RURSUS FORTUNA LOCAVIT.

Alluding to that of Virgil, Thus rendered, Fortune, reviving those She tumbled
down,
Sporting, restores again unto the Crown.


Above the Arch, on two Pedestals, Southward and North-wards, stood the
Statues of King JAMES, and King CHARLES I. In the middle somewhat higher, just
over the Arch, the Statue of his Sacred Majesty. Under that of King James, DIVO
JACOBO.

Under that of King Charles I.

DIVO CAROLO. Under that of his Majesty, this following Inscription; D. N.
CAROLO II.

D. G. BRITANNIARUM IMP. OPT. MAX.

UBIQUE VENERANDO, SEMPER AUG.

BEATISSIMO AC PIISSIMO, BONO REIP. NATO.

DE AVITA BRITANNIA, ET OMNIUM HOMINUM GENERE MERITISSIMO.

P. P. EXTINCTORI TYRANNIDIS, RESTITUTORI LIBERTATIS, FUNDATORI QUIETIS, OB
FELICEM REDITUM, EX VOTO L. M. P. S. P. Q. L.



Upon his Majesty's advance to the East-India-House in Leaden-hall-street, the
East India Company took occasion to express their dutiful Affections to his
Majesty, by two Youths in Indian Habit; one attended by two Black-moors; the
other Youth in an Indian Vest, mounted upon a Camel, led out by two
Black-Moors, and other Attendants; the Camel having two Panniers filled with
Jewels, Spices, and Silks, to be scattered among the Spectators.

The next Entertainment was at Corn-hil-Conduit, on the top of which stood
eight Nymphs clad in White, each having an Escutcheon in one Hand, and a
Pendent and Banner in the other. On the Tower of the said Conduit, a Noise of
Seven Trumpets.

NEar the Exchange, in Cornhill, was erected the second Arch, which was Naval.

On the East Side were two Stages Erected; on each side of the Street one. In
that on the South Side was a Person representing the River Thames.

In the other Stage on the North-side, which was made like the upper Deck of a
Ship, were three Seamen, whereof one habited like a Boat-swain*

A Shield, or Table, in the Front of the Arch, over this Inscription.

NEPTUNO BRITANNICO, CAROLO II.

CUJUS ARBITRIO MARE VEL LIBERUM, VEL CLAUSUM.

The first Painting on the North-side over the City-Arms, represented NEPTVNE
with his Trident advanced; the Inscription NEPTUNO REDUCI.

On the South Side, opposite, MARS with his Spear inverted, his Shield charged
with a Gorgon; by his Knees the Motto MARTI PACIFERO.
Over the Arch, the Marriage of Them and Isis.


The Painting on the North-side, over Neptune, did Represent the Exchange: the
Motto -- GENERALIS LAPSI SARCIRE RUINAS.


The uppermost great Table in the fore-ground represented King Charles the
First, with the Prince, now Charles the Second, in his Hand; viewing the
Sovereign of the Sea, the Prince leaning on a Cannon, the Inscription, O nimium
dilecte Deo, cui militat Aequor,
Et conjurati veniunt ad Classica Venti.
For thee O Jove's delight, the Seas engage,
And mustered Winds, drawn up in Battle, Rage.


At the Stocks, the Entertainment was a Body of Military Music, placed on a
Balcony, consisting of six Trumpets, and three Drums; the Fountain there being
after the Th^scan Order, venting Wine and Water.

In like manner, on the top of the great Conduit, at the Entrance of Cheapside,
there was another Fountain out of which issued both Wine and Water, as in a
Representation of Temperance; and on the several Towers of that Conduit were
eight Figures, habited like Nymphs, with Escutcheons in one hand, and Pendants
or Banners in the other: and between each of them Wind-Musick; the number eight.

On the Standard also in Cheap Side there was a Band of Waits placed,
consisting of six Persons.

THe third Triumphal Arch stood near Wood-street-end, not far from the place,
where the Cross sometimes stood. It Represented an Artificial Building of two
Stories, one after the Corinthian way of Architecture, the other after the
Composite, Representing the Temple of Concord; with this Inscription on a
Shield, AEDEM CONCORDIAE, IN HONOREM OPTIMI PRINCIPIS, CUJUS ADVENTU BRITANNIA
TERRA MARIQUE PACATA, ET PRISCIS LEGIBUS REFORMATA EST, AMPLIOREM
RESPLENDIDIOREM RESTITUIT, SPQL.

In the Spandrils of the Arch there were two Figures, in Female Habits leaning:
One representing PEACE, the other TRVTH. That of Peace had her Shield charged
with an Helmet, and Bees Issuing forth, and going into it; the Word, PAX BELLO
POTIOR.

Truth on the other side in a thin Habit, on her Shield Time bringing Truth out
of a Cave; the Word, TANDEM EMERSIT.

Over the great Painting upon the Arch of the Cupula, was represented a large
GERYON with three Heads Crowned; in his three right-hands, a Lance, a Sword,
and a Scepter, in his three left-hands, the three Escutcheons of England,
Scotland, and Ireland; before him the Kings Arms with three Imperial Crowns;
beneath in great Letters, CONCORDIA INSUPERABILIS.

Here the City Recorder, Sir William Wild, made a Speech, and presented the
King with a Purse of Gold.

On the little Conduit, at the lower End of Cheap Side, were placed four
Figures, or Nymphs, each of them having an Escutcheon in one hand, and a
Pendant in the other.

In a Balcony, erected at the Entrance of Paternoster Row, were placed his
Majesty's Drums and Fi^e; the number of persons Eight.

Between that and Ludga^e there were two other Balconies erected: In one was
placed a Band of six Waits; in the other, six Drums.

On the top of Ludgate six Trumpets.

At Fleet-Bridge a Band of six Waits.

On Fleet-Conduit were six Figures or Nymphs, clad in White, each with an
Escutcheon in one hand, and a Pendant in the other; as also a Band of six
Waits. And on the Lanthorn of the Conduit was the Figure of Temperance, mixing
Water and Wine.

IN Fleet Street, near White-Friers, stood the fourth Triumphant Arch,
representing the Garden of PLENTY: it was of two Stories; the one of the Dorick
Order, the other of the Ionick. Their Capitals had not their Just Measure, but
inclined to the Modern Architecture.

Upon the great Shield over the Arch, in large Capitals, this Inscription.

UBERTATI AUG. EXTINCTO BELLI CIVILIS INCENDIO, CLUSOQ JANI TEMPLO ARAM CELSIS
CONSTRUXIT S. P. Q. L. Over the Postern, on the South Side of the Entrance was
BACCHUS in a Chariot drawn by Leopards, his Mantle a Panther's skin; his Crown
of Grapes; a Thyrsis with Ivy in his left hand, a Cup in his right: underneath,
LIBER PATER.

The Painting over this, represented Silenus on his Ass, Satyrs dancing round
about, in Drunken and Antic Postures; the Prospect a Vineyard.

On the North-side opposite, Ceres, drawn in a Chariot by winged Dragons, and
Crowned with ears of Corn: in her left hand Poppy; in her right, a Blazing
Torch. The Painting over her was a description of Harvest; with CERES AUG.

His Majesty having passed the Four Triumphant Arches, was at Temple Bar
Entertained with the View of a delightful Boscage, full of several Beasts, both
tame and savage, as also several living Figures, and Music of eight Waits. But
this being the Limit of the Cities Liberty, must be so likewise of the
Description.

Thus much for the City, now for the Court, which in order challenged the first
place; but 'twas best to deal with the biggest first; and those Colossus in
London were indeed Gigantick and stupendous greatness: Come we now to the
Knights of the Bath made at this Coronation, who appearing at the Court of
Requests in Westminster, were called over by the Lords Commissioners appointed
for that purpose, viz.

The Duke of Ormond Steward of the Kings Household, the Earls of Northumberland,
Suffolk, Lindsey, Manchester.

Their Names were as follows.

Sir Fiennes Lord Clinton Heir apparent to the Earl of Lincoln, Sir Egerton
Lord Brackley Son and Heir apparent to the Earl of Bridgewater, Sir Philip
Herbert second son to the Earl of Pembrook and Montgomery, Sir William Egerton
second son to the Earl of Bridgwater, Sir Vere Fane second son to the Earl of
Westmorland, Sir Charles Berkley eldest son to the Lord Berkley, Sir Henry
Bellasis eldest son to the Lord Bellasis, Sir Henry Hide now Viscount Cornbury
eldest son to Edward Earl of Clarendon, Sir Rowland Bellasis brother to the
Lord Viscount Faulconberg, Sir Henry Capel brother to the Earl of Essex, Sir
John Vaughan second son to Richard Earl of Carbery, Sir Charles Stanley
Grandchild to James late Earl of Derby, Sir Francis and Sir Henry Fane
Grandchildren to the late Earl of Westmorland, Sir William Portman Baronet, Sir
William Ducy Baronet, Sir Thomas Trevor Knight and Baronet, Sir John Scudamore
Baronet; Sir William Gardner Baronet, Sir Charles Cornwallis son to Fred^rick
Lord Cornwallis, Sir John Nicholas eldest son to his Majesty's principal
Secretary, Sir John Monson, Sir John Bramston, Sir Richard Temple, Sir
Bourchier Wray, Sir John Coventry, Sir Edward Hungerford, Sir John Knevet, Sir
Philip Botler, Sir Adrian Scroop son of Sir Iervas Scroop who received Nineteen
Wounds at Edgehill in his Majesty's service, Sir Richard Knightley, Sir Henry
Heron, Sir John Lewk^or, Sir George Brown, Sir William Tyringham, Sir Francis
Godolphin, Sir Edward Baynton, Sir Grevil Verney, Sir Edward Harlow, Sir Edward
Walpool, Sir Francis Popham, Sir Edward Wise, Sir Christopher Calthorp, Sir
Richard Edgecomb, Sir William Bromley, Sir Thomas Bridges, Sir Thomas Fanshaw,
Sir John Denham, Sir Nicholas Bacon, Sir James Altham, Sir Thomas Wendy, Sir
John Manson, Sir George Freeman, Sir Nicholas Slanning, Sir Richard Ingoldsby,
Sir John Roll, Sir Edward Heath son of Sir Robert Heath late Lord chief
Justice of England, Sir William Morley, Sir John Bennet, Sir Hugh Smith, Sir
Simon Leech, Sir Henry Chester, Sir Robert Atkins, Sir Robert Gayer, Sir
Richard Powle, Sir Hugh Ducy, Sir Stephen Hales, Sir Ralph Bush, Sir Thomas
Whitmore. In Number sixty eight.

After their calling over, they proceeded in their usual Habits, each of them
between his two Esquires, and a Page following, the Heralds going before them
with their Coats not put on, but only hanging loose on their Arms, to King Hen.
7. Chapel, where after the wonted reverence performed, they took their seats.
Prayer being done, they returned to the Painted Chamber and the other Rooms
adjoining, to repose themselves, till the Supper of Two hundred dishes at his
Majesty's Charge, was brought to the Court of Requests, where they placed
themselves according to their Seniority at the Tables, by the Wallside, their
Esquires and Pages waiting on them on the other.

Supper ended, the Lord Cornwallis and Sir Charles Berckley (the Treasurer and
Comptroller of his Majesty's Household) gave them his welcome, and then
conducted them to the Painted Chamber, and the Lords House adjoining, and some
other near rooms, where their Bathing Vessels and Beds, which were Pallets with
Canopies, were prepared, being covered with red Say: There, after they had
Bathed more or less as each of them found convenient, they remained all Night;
and early in the Morning were bade good morrow by his Majesty's Music. Then
arising, and Apparelling themselves in a Cordeliers Habit (being a long russet
Gown, with wide sleeves, and a Hood tied close about the middle with a Cordon
of Ash-colored and Russet silk, reaching down almost to the knees, and a white
Napkin or Handkerchief hanging thereat) they proceeded to Hen. 7. Chapel, in
the same order as the Night before, doing the same rev^^^^^^, and heard Divine
Service, and took the usual Oath before the said Lords ^ommissioners, which was
read to them by Sir Edward Walker Principal King o^ Arms, in these words.

Right dear Br^^her,
GReat Wo^sh^p be this Order to every of you. The Oath of the Knights of the
Bath.
You shall Honor God above all things. ^ut shall be steadfast in the Faith of
Christ, and the same maintain and defend t^ your Power. You shall love your
Sovereign above all earthly things, and for y^u^ Sovereigns Right live and dye.
You shall defend Maidens, Widows, and Orphans in their right. You shall suffer
no Extortion as far as you may: nor sit in any place where wrong Judgment shall
be given, to your knowledge. And of as great Honor be this Order to you, as
ever it was to any of your Progenitors or others.


This done, they returned in the same order they came to the Painted Chamber,
and put on the Habit of the Order, which was a Mantle, and Surcoat of red
Taffata lined and edged with white Sarcenet, and thereto fastened two long
strings of white silk, with buttons and tassels of red silk and gold; and a
pair of white Cloves tied to them, a white Hat and white Feather: in this Garb
they Dined in the Painted Chamber; and thence, girded with a Sword, the Pummel
and cross-Hilt whereof were guilt, the Scabbard of white Leather, and Belt of
the some, with guilt Spurs carried by their Pages, they marched on Horseback
by Seniority to White Hall, with the Heralds before them, from the Old Palace
round about the New, and so through Kingstreet, going round the place where
Charing Cross stood; and then to White Hall, where they alighted: and after
they had gone about the first Court, they were conducted by the Heralds to the
Banqueting House, where His Majesty sat under a Cloth of State to receive
them. They were brought up by six and six, each between his two Esquires, with
his Page carrying his Sword before him. In their approaches toward his Majesty
they made three Obeysances, and each Knight being presented by his two Esquires
upon their knees to the King, (the Lord Chamberlain of His Majesty's Household
receiving the Knights Swords from the Pages, and delivering it to the King) He
with the Sword of State ready drawn conferred upon them their respective
Knight-hoods, by laying the Sword upon their shoulders, and so put the
presented Sword upon the Knights Neck, in such sort, that it might hang on his
left side; and then the said Scabbard, with the Order hanging at it. Which
done, the Knight made his obeisance of Gratitude to His Majesty; and falling
back, the rest were brought up and Knighted in like manner.

After this, they went down into his Majesty's Chapel, and there heard Divine
Service, with the Organ and Anthems, and then went up six at a time to the
Altar, and offered up their Swords; where Gilbert Lord Bishop of London, Dean
of His Majesty's Royal Chapel, received them, and laid them upon the Altar,
and afterward restored them, with this Admonition.

By the Oath which you have taken this day, I exhort and admonish you, to use
these Swords to the Glory of God, and defense of the Gospel; to the maintenance
of your Sovereigns Right and Honor, and to the upholding of Equity and
Justice, to your power. So help you God.

This done, they returned from the Chapel, where the Kings Master-Cook stood,
with his Chopping-Knife in his hand, challenging their Spurs, which were
severally redeemed with a Noble in Money. As they passed by, he said,
Gentlemen, you know what a great Oath you have taken; which if you keep, it
will be great honor to you; but if you break it, I must back off your Spurs
from your heels.

When they came unto the great Hall, the Officers at Arms acquainted them, that
on Monday following they were to attend his Majesty from the Tower to
White Hall on Horseback in the same Robes wherein they were Knighted, and on
Tuesday to meet early in the Painted Chamber in their Purple Satin Habits,
thence to go before his Majesty to his Coronation at Westminster.

Creation of Earls and Barons at the same time.
This Ceremony being over, the King to honor this great Solemnity, advanced
some eminent Persons to higher degrees of Dignity, to be as Jewels to that
Crown which should be placed on his Head: they were Twelve in number; six
Earls, and six Barons. The Names of whom are as follows: Edward Lord Hide of
Hendon Lord high Chancellor of England, was created Earl of Clarendon; Arthur
Lord Capel was created Earl of Essex; Thomas Lord Brudenel was created Earl of
Cardigan; Arthur Viscount Valentia in Ireland was created Earl of Anglesey; Sir
John Greenvile Gentleman of His Majesty's Bedchamber, and Groom of the Stool,
was created Earl of Bath; Charles Howard of His Majesty's Privy Council was
created Earl of Carlisle; Denzil Hollis Esquire was created Lord Hollis of Ifeld;
Sir Frederick Cornwallis was created Lord Cornwallis of Eye in Suffolk, an
ancient Barony; Sir George Booth Baronet, was created Lord de-la-Mere; Sir
Horatio Townsend was created Baron of Lyn-Regis; Sir Anthony Ashly Cooper was
created Baron of Winterbourn St. Gyles; John Crew was created Lord Crew of
Stene.

The Earls at their Creation, had two Earls their supporters, their Cap and
Coronet carried by one, their Sword by another, and their Mantle by a third.
The Lords were likewise supported by two Lords, their Cap and Mantle in the
same manner, but no Sword.

These Peers being thus led up, Garter King of Arms attending them to the King;
upon their several approaches, their Patents were presented by Sir William
Walker, Principal King at Arms; which being by the Lord Chamberlain delivered
to the King, and from him to Secretary Nicholas, were by him read, and then
given by His Majesty to the Respective Nobles, who after they were vested with
their Robes, had their several Caps and Coronets placed upon their Heads by His
Majesty's own hands, as he sat in a Chair of State.

These likewise were ordered to attend the King at his Coronation, which
Commenced its glories Monday the Twenty second of April aforesaid: it having
rained a Month together before, it pleased God that not one drop fell on this
Triumph, which appeared in its full Luster and Grandeur; but as soon as the
solemnity was past, and the King and his Train at Dinner in Westminster Hall,
it fell a Thundering, Lightning and Raining, with the greatest force,
vehemence, and noise, that was ever heard or seen at that time of the year.

The Streets were gravelled all the way, and filled with a multitude of
Spectators out of the Country, and some Foreigners, who acknowledged
themselves never to have seen among all the great M^gnificences of the World,
any to come near or equal this: even the Vaunting French confessed their Pomps
of the late Marriage with the Infanta of Spain, at their Majesty's entrance
into Paris, to be inferior in its State, Gallantry and Riches, unto this most
Illustrious Cavalcade. Which proceeded on this manner, as the NOBILITY and
GENTRY were placed within and without the Tower.

First went the Horse-Guard of his Highness the Duke of York, the Messengers of
his Majesty's Chamber, the Esquires of the Knights of the Bath, One hundred
thirty six in number; the Knight Harbenger, the Serjeant-Porter, the Sewers of
the Chamber, the Quarter-waiters of the six Clerks of the Chancery, the Clerks
of the Signet, the Clerks of the Privy Seal, the Clerks of the Council, the
Clerks of both Houses of Parliament, the Clerks of the Crown, the Chaplains in
Ordinary having Dignities, ten in number; the King's Advocate and Remembrancer,
the Kings learned Counsel at Law, the Master of the Chancery, the Kings puisne
Sergeants, the Kings Attorney and Solicitors, the King's eldest Sergeants;
Secretaries of the French and Latin Tongues, the Gentlemen-Ushers, daily
waiters, the Sewers, Carvers and Cup-bearers in ordinary, the Esquires of the
Body, the Masters of standing Offices being no Counselors, viz. of the Tents,
Revels, Ceremonies, Armory, Wardrope, Ordnance, Master of Requests, Chamberlain
of the Exchequer, Barons of the Exchequer, and Judges of the Law according to
their Dignity; the Lord chief Baron, the Lord chief Justice of the Common
Pleas, the Master of the Rolls, the Lord chief Justice of England; Trumpets,
the Gentlemen of the Privy-Chamber, the Knights of the Bath sixty eight in
Number, the Knight Marshal, the Treasurer of the Chamber, Master of the
Jewel-house, Knights of the Privy Council, Comptroller of his Majesty's
Household, Treasurer of his Majesty's Household. Two Trumpets and Sergeants,
Trumpets, Two Pursivants at Arms; Barons eldest Sons, Earls youngest sons,
Viscounts eldest sons, Barons, Marquesses younger sons, Earls eldests sons. Two
Pursivants at Arms. Viscounts, Dukes younger sons, Marquesses eldest sons. Two
Heralds. Earls, Earl Marshal, and Lord Chamberlain of the Household, Dukes
eldest sons. Sergeants at Arms on both sides the Nobility. Clarencieux and
Norroy, Lord Treasurer, Lord Chancellor, Lord High Steward, Duke of Ormond, two
persons representing the Duke of Normandy and Aquitain, Gentleman-usher,
Garter, Lord Mayor Sir Richard Brown. The Duke of York alone. The Lord High
Constable of England Earl of Northumberland, Lord Great Chamberlain of England
Earl of Lindsey. The Sword by the Duke of Richmond.

The KING.
Equerries and Footmen next and about his Majesty, Gentlemen and Pensioners
without them, the Master of the Horse Duke of Albemarl leading a spare Horse,
the Vice-Chamberlain to the King, Captain of the Pensioners, Captain of the
Guard, the Guard, the Kings Life guard Commanded by my Lord Gerrard, the
Generals Lifeguard by Sir Philip Howard; a Troop of Voluntier Horse, and a
Company of Foot, by Sir John Robinson.

The way from the Tower to Aldgate was guarded by the Hamlets, from thence to
Temple Bar by the Trained-Bands of London, on one side, and lined with the
Liveries on the other side, with the Banners of each Company. The Windows were
all along laid with the best Carpets and Tapestry; Bands of Music in several
places, and the Conduits running with Wine.

In St. Paul's Churchyard stood the Blew-coat boys of Christ-Church Hospital.
One in behalf of the rest declared their joy for his Majesty's wonderful
preservation in his absence, and his Arrival thither; humbly beseeching his
Majesty's Gracious favor and indulgence, according to the example of his Royal
Ancestors, and his Father of blessed memory. The King was very well pleased
with this Speech, and after conferred something on the Boy that spoke it.

In the Strand, and through Westminster also the ways were gravelled and
rayled, being guarded on both sides with the Trained bands of that Liberty and
City; and his Majesty's two Regiments of Foot, under the command of his Grace
the Duke of Albemarle, and Colonel Russel brother to the Earl of Bedford. The
houses were also richly adorned with the Carpets and Tapestry; and Music,
(particularly a stage of Morice-dancers at the Maypole in the Strand) in the
several places all along his Majesty's passage.

When his Majesty came through Temple Bar into his Ancient and Native City of
Westminster, the Head-bayliff in a Scarlet Robe, and High Constable in Scarlet,
received his Majesty with loud Music; where alighting off their horses, and
kneeling down to his Majesty, the Head-bayliff on behalf of the Dean and
Chapter, City and Liberty, signified their joyful reception of his Royal person
into that Liberty; declaring how much more happy they were than any part of the
Nation, in that their Sovereign Lord and King was born within their Liberty,
and humbly desiring his Majesty to continue his Grace and Favor still to them,
whereby that City might still be enabled to do his Majesty's Service. When the
Head-Bayliff had ended his Speech, he and the High-Constable mounted their
Horses, and fell in next after his Majesty's Servants at Mace; in which order
they attended his Majesty to White Hall.

Infinite and innumerable were the Acclamations and Shouts from all the parts
as his Majesty passed along, to the no less joy than ^mazement of the
Spectators, who beheld those glorious Personages that rid before and behind
his Majesty. Indeed it were in vain to attempt to express this Solemnity, it
was so far from being utterable, that it is almost inconceiveable: and much
wonder it caused in Outlandish persons, who were acquainted with our late
Troubles and Confusions, (to the ruin almost of three Kingdoms) which way it
was possible for the English to appear in so Rich and Stately a manner.

It is incredible to think what costly Clothes were worn that day; the Cloaks
could hardly be seen what Silk or Satin they were made of, for the Gold and
Silver-Laces and Embroidery that was laid upon them: the like also was seen in
their Foot-cloaths. Besides the inestimable value and treasures of Diamonds,
Pearl and other Jewels, worn upon their Backs and in their Hats: To omit also
the sumptuous and rich Liveries of their Pages and Footmen; (some suits of
Liveries amounting to fifteen hundred pounds;) the numerousness of these
Liveries, and the orderly march of them; as also the stately Equipage of the
Esquires attending each Earl by his Horse-side: so that all the World that saw
it, could not but confess, that what they had seen before, was but solemn
Mummery, to the most August, noble and true Glories of this great day.

In this order the King arrived at White Hall a good time before the Evening,
and then retired himself to Supper, and so to his Rest, to recommence the next
day, and to put an end to this Triumph. On the 23 of April, St. George's day,
to consummate the Coronation, the King came from his Privy-stairs to the Old
Palace, to a Room called the Princes Lodgings, behind the House of Lords, and
stayed there till the Lords and his Train had Robed and ranked themselves in
Westminster Hall; who being ready, the King placed himself on a Throne at the
upper end thereof, when the Dean of Westminster (with the Prebends in their
rich Copes, each having a part of the Regalia) with St. Edward's Crown, came
and delivered them to the Lord High-Constable, and he to the Lord Great
Chamberlain, who set them on a Table; and the King immediately bestowed them on
this manner; (Sir Gilbert Talbot the Master of the Kings Jewels, having laid
the Sword of State and Sword called Curtana with two others on the same Table)
St. Edward's Staff to the Earl of Sandwich, the Spurs to the Earl of Pembrook
the pointed Sword on the left hand of Curtana to the Earl of Derby, the pointed
Sword on the right to the Earl of Shrewsbury, Curtana to the Earl of Oxford,
the Sword of State to the Earl of Manchester, the Scepter with the Dove to the
Duke of Albemarle, the Orb with the Cross to the Duke of Buckingham, St.
Edwards Crown to the Duke of Ormond, the Patina to the Bishop of Exeter, and
the Chalice to the Bishop of London: and then his Majesty set forward on foot
(in the same order as before almost) upon blue Cloth laid upon the ground from
the Hall to his Chair in the Abbey, The Kings procession to the Abbey.
by the appointment of Sir George Carteret, His Almoner appointed for that day.
The King was supported by the Lord-Bishops of Bath and Durham; his Train was
carried up by the Lords Mandevil, Cavendish, Ossery, and Percy, assisted by the
Lord Viscount Ma^sfield, Master of the Robes: then came the Earl of Lauderdale
Gent. of his Majesty's Bedchamber, next came Mr. Seymore, Mr. Ashburnham,
Grooms of the same, the Captain of the Guard, Captain of the Pensioners, and
Yeomen.

All the Peers with their Coronets in their hands came up along with his
Majesty, till his Majesty was placed in a Chair of State (not in his Throne:)
then the Lord Bishop of London* for the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, went to
every of the four-sides of the Throne, and at every of them spoke to the People
in these words. Here I present unto you KING CHARLES the rightful Inheritor of
the Crown of this Realm. Wherefore all you that are come this day to do your
Homage, Service, and bounden duty, be ye willing to do the same?

Whereupon all the Peers in their Parliament-Robes, and People, gave a shout,
testifying their willingness. This while the King standing from his Chair,
turned himself to every of the four sides of the Throne, and at every of them
spoke to the People, who again with loud acclamations signified their
willingness all in one voice. After which the Choire sung an Anthem, in the
interim whereof his Majesty, Supported by the two Bishops of Durham and Bath
and Wells, and attended by the Dean of Westminster, went to the steps before
the Communion Table, where upon Carpets and Cushions the King offered a Pall
and a piece of Gold.

After his Majesty had offered, he went on the right hand, and kneeled down
during a short Collect or Prayer; and then Sermon began, which was Preached by
the Lord Bishop of WORCESTER. Sermon being ended, the Lord-Bishop of LONDON
went to the King, for the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and asked if he were
pleased to take the Oath usually taken by his Predecessors; to which his
Majesty showed himself most willing.

Then his Majesty rose out of his Chair, and by those two that before Assisted
Him, was led up to the Communion Table, where he made a solemn Oath to observe
those things he had before promised. After this Oath, the King returned to his
Chair, and kneeled at his footstool, while the Hymn of the Holy Ghost was
singing; which ended, the Letany was sung by two Bishops.

After which, the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury began and said, Lift up your
hearts, etc. Then his Majesty arose from his Devotion, and dis-robed himself of
his upper Garment (his under Garment being so made, as the places to be
anointed might be opened by undoing certain loops; which the Archbishop undid,
his Majesty sitting in a Chair.) The Archbishop first Anointed the Palms of
both his hands, the Choire singing an Anthem; after which and certain Prayers,
the Lord Archbishop proceeded and anointed his breast between the shoulders,
on both the shoulders, the bending of his Arms, and the Crown of his Head:
whereupon the Dean of Westminster closed the Loops, and the Lord Archbishop
said several Prayers; which ended, the Coif was put on His Majesty's Head, and
the Colobium syndonis or Dalmatica, then the Super-tunica of cloth of Gold,
with the Tissue buskins and Sandals of the same; then the Spurs were put on by
the Peer that carried them: then the Archbishop took the Kings Sword and laid
it on the Communion Table, and after Prayer restored it to the King, which was
Girt upon him by the Lord great Chamberlain: then the Armil was put on, next
the Mantle, or open Pall; after which, the Lord Archbishop took the Crown into
his hands, and laid it on the Communion Table, Prayed, and then set it on the
Kings Head; whereupon, all the Peers put on their Coronets and Caps, the Choire
singing an Anthem: next, the Archbishop took the Kings Ring, prayed again, and
put it on the Fourth Finger of the Kings Hand; after which his Majesty took off
his Sword, and offered it up; which the Lord great Chamberlain redeemed, drew
it out, and carried it naked before the King. Then the Archbishop took the
Scepter with the Cross, and delivered it into His Majesty's right Hand, the Rod
with the Dove in the left; and the King kneeling, blessed him: which done, the
King ascended his Throne Royal, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal attending him,
where after Te Deum the King was again Enthroned, and then all the Peers did
their Homage; The Archbishop first, who then kissed the Kings left Cheek, and
after him the other Bishops. After their Homage, the Peers all together stood
round about the King, and every one in their order touched the Crown upon his
Head, promising their readiness to support it with their power. The Coronation
being ended, the Communion followed, which his Majesty having received and
offered, returned to his Throne till the Communion ended, and then went into
St. Edwards Chapel, there took off his Crown, and delivered it to the Lord
Bishop of London, who laid it upon the Communion Table: which done, the King
withdrew into a Traverse, where the Lord great Chamberlain of England disrobed
the King of St. Edward's Robes, and delivered them to the Dean of Westminster,
then His Majesty was newly arrayed with his Robes prepared for that day, and
came to the Communion Table in St. Edward's Chapel, where the Lord Bishop of
London, for the Archbishop, set the Crown Imperial, provided for the King to
wear that day, upon his Head. Then His Majesty took the Scepter and the Rod,
and (the Train set in order before him) went up to the Throne, and so through
the Choyre and body of the Church out at the West-door, to the Palace of
Westminster.

The Oaths of Fealty being casually omitted, are here subjoyned as they were
sworn in order.
I William Archbishop of Canterbury shall be True and Faithful, and true Faith
and Truth bear unto you ou^ Sovereign Lord, and your Heirs Kings of England;
and shall, and do, and truly acknowledge the service of the Land which I claim
to hold of You in right of the Church. So help me God. Then the Duke of York
did the same, in these Words ( Garter principal King at Arms attending him in
his Ascent to the Throne.) I James Duke of York become Your Leigeman of Life,
of Limb, and of Earthly Worship; and Faith and Truth shall I bear unto You, to
live and dye, against all manner of Folk. The Dukes of Buckingham and Albemarle
did the same for the Dukes. The Marquesses of Worcester and Dorchester for the
Marquesses. The Earl of Oxford for the Earls. Viscount Hereford for the
Viscounts. And the Lord Audley for the Barons.
Note, that there were Collects and Prayers said upon the putting on of the
Regalia, as the Armil, the Pall; the delivery of the Scepter, the Sword, all
according to ancient Form; and upon the setting on of the Crown, a peculiar
Benediction. The Bishop of Worcester's Sermon was Preached upon the 28 of Prove.
verse 2.

Before the King, the Peers now according to their Ranks and degrees proceeded
to the said Palace, and not as they entered the Abbey, but with their Coronets
on; at the upper end whereof there was a Table and Chair of State raised upon
an ascent: on the South-East-side of the Hall were two Tables placed; the first
for the Barons of the Cinque Ports, the Bishops and Judges; the other for the
Masters and six Clerks of Chancery; at which Table* by some mistake or
disturbance, the Barons dined. At the North-East-end the Nobility at one Table,
and behind them, close to the Wall, the Lord Mayor, the Recorder, the
Aldermen, and twelve principal Citizens: in the Court of Common Pleas dined the
Officers at Arms. Which Tables being served (each had in all three Courses and
a Banquet) the King came in from the inner Court of Wards, where he had staid
half an hour, and sat down, and the Duke of York sat at the end of the same
Table on the left hand: the Earl of Dorset was Sewer, and the Earl of
Chesterfield his Assistant, the Earl of Lincoln was Carver; the Dishes were
most of them served up by the Knights of the Bath: at the second course came in
Sir Edward Dymock who by the service of this day, as the King's Champion, holds
his Manor of Serivelsby in the County of Lincoln; as several other services
were performed upon the same account: (particularly Mr. Henry Howard, in behalf
of his Brother the Duke of Norfolk, for a Manor in Norfolk; gave the King a
rich right-hand-Glove, during the Coronation, with which he held the Scepter.)
He was mounted upon a goodly White Courser, himself Armed at all points; and
having staid a while, advanced a little further, with his two Esquires, one
bearing a Lance, the other a Target, and threw down his Gantlet; the
Earl-Marshal riding on his Left, and the Lord High-Constable on his Right hand,
when York the Herald read aloud his Challenge, which was done the third and
last time at the foot of the Ascent where the King dined, and his Gantlet by
the Herald returned to him at every of the three times, after it had layn a
little while: the Challenge was in these words.

If any person of what degree soever, High or Low, shall deny or gainsay our
Sovereign Lord King Charles the second, King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, defender of the Faith, etc. and Son and Heir to our Sovereign Lord
Charles the first, the late King deceased, to be right Heir to the Imperial
Crown of the Realm of England, or that he ought not to enjoy the same: Here is
his Champion, who says that he lies, and is a false Traitor, being ready in
person to Combat with him, and on this quarrel will adventure his life against
him, what day soever he shall be appointed.

Which read aloud, the Earl of Pembrook presented the King with a Guilt Cup
filled with Wine; who drank to his Champion, and sent him the said Cup by the
said Earl; which after three Reverences, and some steps backward, he drunk off,
and kept it as his Fee, and departed.

Then Garter Principal King-at-Arms Proclaimed the King thrice with his Title
in Latin, French* and English, and at every time at the end cried Largess, and
the people shouted God save the King: then the Lord Mayor Sir Richard Brown
presented a Golden Cup and Cover full of Wine, which the King drank off, and
gave it the Lord Mayor for his Fee. By that time the third course was carrying
in, the King called for Water; which the Earl of Pembrook assisted by another
Earl brought in a Basin and Ewer; and the King having washed, withdrew to his
Barge: but before his departure, it fell a Thundering, Lightning, and Raining,
as if it imitated the noise and fire of the Cannon which played from the Tower;
and it was observed that they kept time in this loud Music, so that they were
distinctly to be heard; the Thunder intermitting, as if it staid to receive and
answer the reciprocated and ecchoed Boation and clashes of the Guns. And in all
ancient Augury, such signs were taken for the most auspicious, however the mad
remnant of the Rebellion would have it paralleled to Readiness inauguration,
never considering the season, nor the different occasion and case between the
most ancient Kingly Right and descent in Christendom, and that a new Title and
Government in Iewry, which had before the most special presence of God among
them.

All the Kingdom over, great rejoicing was made by Feasting and other Shows, as
Training the several Bands of the Countries, with the additional Voluntary
Gentry in a new and gallant Cavalry, which showed the resurrection of their
former Loyalty, in its immutable state of Peace.

But to proceed to the disclosing the whole luster of this our present and most
delightful Subject (omitting the same Triumphs in Scotland and Ireland, in the
express resemblances of this Magnificence; several Honors being conferred both
by the Lord-Commissioner his Grace, and the Lords-Justices on that Solemnity)
we will take a full view of all our personal Dignities at home.

We proceed then to those Magnificences of the King which are in him Honorante,
not in Honorato. After the miserably vulgarly multitude of those evil
Counselors we had been oppressed with for so many years (who had raised
themselves to the mysteries of Government by their public scandals thereof in
its former administration, following the impious politics of Absalom) we saw
an Assembly of Princes met in his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council,
whose superlative and eminent endowments, assisted by their conspicuous
Grandeur, restored the form of the British Empire, such, as Pallas gloried to
be in the midst of her Heavenly descent; such their Noble Extractions, and
their excellencies in all prudent menage of the Public, accomplished to Her
own AUTHENTICAL INSTITUTION of true policy: such Pilots, whose happy and
skillful hand could guide the tossed Bark of the Kingdom in the darkest Night,
and the most frightful Tempests, when there was neither Sun, Moon, nor Stars,
no face of Authority nor Rule, no Directions nor Chart to follow, in the
unexampled case of our late Distractions, and without any other Compass than
their Piety to God, Duty to their Prince, and love to their Country, by which
they confidently steered through all those Shelves, Rocks, and Sands, which
imminently threatened its Shipwreck and Destruction.

Their sacred Names, for perpetual Memory, and to the Eternal Fame of this
their blessed Conduct, (understanding that by his Majesty's call to this
sublime eminent dignity, their precedent Services were signated and notified to
the World) as most Religiously and gratefully is due, are here transmitted
among the rest of his Majesty's felicities to inquisitive Posterity.

The Names of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
HIs Royal Highness the Duke of York. Earl of Clarendon Lord Chancellor of
England. Earl of Southampton Lord Treasurer. Lord Roberts Lord Privy Seal. Duke
of Albemarle. Earl of Lindsey Lord High-Chamberlai^ of England. Duke of Ormond
Lord Steward of his Majesty's Household. Marquess of Dorchester. Earl of
Northumberland. Earl of Leicester. Earl of Berkshire. Earl of Portland. Earl of
Norwich. Earl of St. Albans. Earl of Sandwich. Earl of Anglesey. Earl of
Carlisle. Viscount Say and Seal. Lord Wentworth. Lord Seymor Chancellor of the
Duchy of Lancaster. Lord Hollis. Lord Cornwallis. Lord Cooper. Earl of
Lauderdale. Lord Berkly. Sir George Carteret. Sir Charles Compton. Secretary
Nicholas. Secretary Morice.
To which have been since added Christopher Lord Hatton, Rupert Duke of
Cumberland, the Duke of Buckingham, Earl of Middleton a Scotch Lord, the Kings
Commissioner there.

From these Glories of the Crown, we are next invited to as Illustrious, those
of Chivalry, a medium betwixt War and Peace, that there might be nothing that
his Majesty's Fortunes could not comprehend. The most Honorable Order of the
Garter, Famous for its Martial and Civil Achievements, had been dragged in the
Dirt, and trampled under Foot of Plebeian Anarchy and Usurpation; when the
innocent charm of its Motto, H^ni soit qui mal y pense, Evil be to him that
Evil thinks, which had preserved it so many Ages, found not veneration nor
respect, being ridled by that Monster of Rebellion, to be a badge and
significator of its certain, though long-look'd-for Vltion and Avengement, in
its own dire Retorts, and self-punishing Revolutions.

It is not, nor ever will be forgotten, how they abased this Royal Ensign, the
highest Order of Knighthood in the World, when it was derided by the most
abject and meanest degree of the People; when its True Blue was stained with
the Blot of Faintise and imbecility of courage, till another Saint George arose
to be its Champion, Assertor, and Restorer of its Renown and Glory.

Some of these most Honorable Knights survived his Majesty's Restitution; some
he made abroad, others he decreed so; and they were so de jure, having had the
Order sent them, but the Investiture wanting. The rest of these Noble
Companions were allied to the Restoration; all of them are ranked in the manner
as they sat at Windsor, April 16. 1662, being St. George his day; where after
the usual Magnificent Procession, His Majesty renewed the usual Solemnities and
Grandeurs thereof; Himself being there in Person.

The Fellows and Companions of the most Noble Order of St. GEORGE, commonly
called the GARTER, as they were the 23 of April, in the Thirteenth year of King
Charles the Second, 1661.
CHarles the Second, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Sovereign of
the Order. James Duke of York the Kings only Brother. Charles Lodowick Prince
Elector Palatine. Frederick William Marquess and Elector of Brandenburgh.
Rupert Count Palatine of the Rhine, and Duke of Cumberland. Edward Count
Palatine of the Rhine. William of Nassau Prince of Orange. Barnard Duke of
Espernon. Charles Prince of Tarante. William Cecil Earl of Salisbury. Thomas
Howard Earl of Berk-shire. Algernon Piercy Earl of Northumberland. James Butler
Duke of Ormond. George Villiers Duke of Buckingham. Thomas Wriothesley Earl of
Southampton. William Cavendish Marquess of Newcastle. George Digby Earl of
Bristol. Gasper Count of Marsin. George Monk Duke of Albemarle. Edward Montague
Earl of Sandwich. Aubery de Vere Earl of Oxford. Charles Steward Duke of
Richmond and Lenox. Montague Berty Earl of Lindsey. Edward Montague Earl of
Manchester. William Wentworth Earl of Strafford.
A Roll of the PEERS of the Kingdom of ENGLAND. according to their Birth and
Creations.
Dukes of the Blood Royal. JAmes Duke of York and Albany, Lord High Admiral of
England. Rupert Duke of Cumberland.
These take Places in respect of their Offices.
Edward Earl of Clarendon, Lord Chancellor of England. Thomas Earl of
Southampton, Lord Treasurer of England.
DUKES. Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk. William Seymour Duke of Somerset. George
Villiers Duke of Buckingham. Charles Stuart Duke of Richmond. George Monk Duke
of Albemarle.
MARQUISSES. John Paulet Marquess of Winchester. Edward Somerset Marquess of
Worcester. William Cavendish Marquess of Newcastle. Henry Peirrepont Marquess
of Dorchester.
EARLS. These three take places in respect of their Offices. Montague Berty
Earl of Lindsey, Lord High Chamberlain of England. James Butler Earl of
Brecknock, Lord Steward of his Majesty's Household. Edward Montague Earl of
Manchester, Lord Chamberlain of his Majesty's Household.
EARLS. Aubery de Vere Earl of Oxford. Algernoon Piercy Earl of Northumberland.
The Dukes of Norfolk and Somerset were restored by Act of Parliament 12 year
Caroli Secundi.
Francis Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury. -- Gray Earl of Kent, Infra aetat. Charles
Stanly Earl of Derby. John Mannours Earl of Rutland. -- Hastings Earl of
Huntingdon, Infra aetat. Thomas Wriothesly Earl of Southampton. Wil^iam Russel
Earl of Bedford. Philip Herbert Earl of Pembrook and Montgomery. Theophilus
Clinton Earl of Lincoln. Charles Howard Earl of Nottingham. James Howard Earl
of Suffolk. Richard Sackvil Earl of Dorset. William Cecil Earl of Salisbury.
John Cecil Earl of Exeter. John Egerton Earl of Bridgewater. Robert Sidney Earl
of Leicester. James Compton Earl of Northampton. Charles Rich Earl of Warwick.
William Cavendish Earl of Devonshire. Basil Fieldi^g Earl of Denbigh. George
Digby Earl of Bristol. Lionel Cranfield Earl of Middlesex. Henry Rich Earl of
Holland. John Hollis Earl of Clare. Oliver St. John Earl of Bullingbrook.
Mildmay Fane Earl of Westmorland. Edward Montague Earl of Manchester. Thomas
Howard Earl of Berk-shire. Thomas Wentworth Earl of Cleveland. Edward Sheffield
Earl of Mulgrave. Henry Carry Earl of Monmouth, deceased without Issue male.
James Ley Earl of Marlborough. Thomas Savage Earl of Rivers. Montague Bertue
Earl of Lindsey, Lord Great Chamberlain of England. Nicholas Knollis Earl of
Banbury. Henry Carry Earl of Dover. Henry Morda^t Earl of Peterburgh. Henry Gray
Earl of Stamford. Heneage Finch Earl of Winchelsey. Charles Dormer Earl of
Carnarvan. Montjoy Blunt Earl of Newport. Philip Stanhop Earl of Chesterfield.
John Tufton Earl of Thanet. Jerome Weston Earl of Portland. William Wentworth
Earl of Strafford. Robert Spencer Earl of Sunderland. James Savil Earl of
Sussex. Charles Goring Earl of Norwich. Nicholas Leak Earl of Scarsdale. --
Wilmot Earl of Rochester, Infra aetat. Henry Iermin Earl of St. Albans. Edward
Montague Earl of Sandwich. James Butler Duke of Ormond, was Created Earl of
Brecnock Baron Butler of Lawthy.
James Butler Earl of Brecknock. Edward Hide Earl of Clarenden. Arthur Capel
Earl of Essex. Thomas Brudenal Earl of Cardigan. Arthur Annelsley Earl of
Anglesey. John Greenvile Earl of Bath. Charles Howard Earl of Carlisle. The
Right Honorable Elizabeth Viscountess of Kynelmeky was by Letters Pattents
June 14 Created Countess of Guildford for her life, in the Twelfth year Caroli
S^cundi.
VISCOUNTS. Leicester Devereux Viscount Hereford. Francis Brown Viscount
Montague. James Fiennes Viscount Say and Seal. Edward Conway Viscount Conway.
Baptist Noel Viscount Camden. William Howard Viscount Stafford. Thomas Bellasis
Viscount Faulconberg. John Mordant Viscount Mordant.
BARONS. John Nevil Lord Abergavenny, lately Deceased. James Tutchet Lord
Audley. Charles West Lord De la Ware. George Barkley Lord Barkley. Thomas
Parker Lord Morley and Monteagle. Francis Lenard Lord Dacres. Conyers Darcy
Lord Darcy. William Stourton Lord Stourton. William Lord Sandys De la Vine.
Edward Vaux Lord Vaux. Thomas Windsor Lord Windsor. Thomas Wentworth Lord
Wentworth. Wingfield Cromwell Lord Cromwell. George Eure Lord Eure. Philip
Wharton Lord Wharton. Francis Willoughby, Lord Willoughby of Parham. William
Paget Lord Paget. Dudley North Lord North. William Bruges Lord Chaundos. John
Carry Lord Hunsdon. William Petre Lord Petre. Dutton Gerrard Lord Gerrard.
Charles Stanhop Lord Stanhop. Henry Arundel, Lord Arundel of Warder.
Christopher Roper Lord Tenham. Foulk Grevil Lord Brook. Edward Montague Lord
Montague of Boughton. Charles Lord Howard of Charleton. William Gray Lord Gray
of Wark. John Roberts Lord Roberts. William Craven Lord Craven. John Lovelace
Lord Lovelace. John Paulet Lord Paulet. William Maynard Lord Maynard. Thomas
Coventry Lord Coventry. Edward Lord Howard of Escrick. Warwick Mohun Lord
Mohun. William Botiller Lord Botiller. Percy Herbert Lord Powis Edward Herbert
Lord Herbert of Cherbury. Francis Seamour Lord Seamour. Thomas Bruce Lord
Bruce. Francis Newport Lord Newport of Higharchal. Thomas Leigh Lord Leigh of
Stone-Leigh. Christopher Hatton Lord Hatton. Henry Hastings Lord Loughborough.
Richard Byron Lord Byron. Richard Vaughan Lord Vaughan. Charles Smith Lord
Carrington. William Widdrington Lord Widdrington. Humble Ward Lord Ward. Thomas
Lord Culpepper. Isaac Astley Lord Astley. Richard Boil Lord Clifford. John
Lucas Lord Lucas. John Bellasis Lord Bellasis. Lewis Watson Lord Rockingham.
Charles Gerrard Lord Gerrard of Brandon. Robert Lord Sutton of Lexington.
Charles Kirkhoven Lord Wotton. Marmaduke Langdale Lord Langdale deceased.
William Crofts Lord Crofts. John Berkly Lord Berkly. Denzil Hollis Lord Hollis
of Ifeild. Charles Lord Cornwallis. George Booth Lord De la Mere. Horatio
Townsend Lord Townsend. Anthony Ashley Cooper Lord Ashley. John Crew Lord Crew.

The Lords Spiritual being restored to their Honors and Places in Parliament
since the Coronation, and to all the precedent Honors, we have observed the
Order of Time, and not of Dignity, as they should have been Ranked before the
Lords Temporal.
A. DOctor William Iuxon, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his Grace, Primate and
Metropolitan of all England, was consecrated Bishop of London 1633. Translated
from London to Canterbury 1660. A. Dr. Accepted Frewen Lord Archbishop of York
and Metropolitan of England, was consecrated Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield
1644. Translated from thence to York 1660. Dr. Gilbert Sheldon Lord-Bishop of
London, was consecrated October 28, 1660. Dr. John Couzens Lord-Bishop of
Durham, was consecrated December 2, 1660. Y. A. Dr. Brian Duppa Lord-Bishop of
Winchester, (this See is now possessed by Dr. Morley, Translated thither from
the Sea of Worcester) Prelate of the Garter, and Lord Almoner; he was
consecrated Bishop of Chichester 1638. from thence Translated to Sarum 1640.
and from thence to Winchester 1660. and since deceased 1662. A. Dr. William
Piers Lord-Bishop of Bath and Wells, consecrated 1632. A. Dr. Matthew Wren
Lord-Bishop of Ely, was consecrated Bishop of Hereford 1634. thence Translated
to Norwich 1635. from thence to Ely 1638. A. Dr. Robert Skinner Lord-Bishop of
Oxon, was consecrated Bishop of Bristol 1636. thence Translated to Oxon 1640.
A. Dr. William Roberts Lord-Bishop of Bangor, and Sub-Almoner, was consecrated
1637. A. Dr. John Warner Lord-Bishop of Rochesters consecrated 1637. A. Dr.
Henry King Lord-Bishop of Chichester, was consecrated 1641. Dr. Humphry
Heuchman Lord-Bishop of Salisbury, was consecrated October 28. 1660. Dr. George
Morley Lord-Bishop of Worcester, was consecrated October 28. 1660. since
possessed by Dr. Gauden, after by Dr. Earls late Dean of Westminster. Dr.
Robert Sauderson Lord-Bishop of Lincoln, was consecrated October 28. 1660.
since deceased, and Dr. Laney Translated thither. Dr. George Griffith
Lord-Bishop of St. Asaph, was consecrated October 28. 1660. Dr. William Lucy
Lord-Bishop of St. David's, was consecrated December 2. 1660. Dr. Benjamin Laney
Lord-Bishop of Peterborough, was consecrated December 2. 1660. Dr. Hugh Lloyd
Lord-Bishop of Landaff, was consecrated December 2. 1660. Dr. Richard Stern
Lord-Bishop of Carlisle, was consecrated December 2. 1660. Y. Dr. Brian Walton
Lord-Bishop of Chester, was consecrated December 2. 1660. Y. This See was
possessed by Dr. Fern, who dying also, Dr. George Hall was Lord-Bishop thereof.
Dr. John Gauden (who dying, Dr. Seth Ward is since Lord-Bishop thereof)
Lord-Bishop of Exeter, was consecrated December 2. 1660. Dr. Gilbert Ironside
Lord-Bishop of Bristol, was consecrated January 13. 1660. Dr. Edward Reynolds
Lord-Bishop of Norwich, was consecrated January 14. 1660. Dr. William Nicholson
Lord-Bishop of Gloucester, was consecrated January 13. 1660. Dr. Nicholas Monk
Lord-Bishop of Hereford, was consecrated January 13. 1660. who dying, Dr.
Herbert Crofts was consecrated in his place 1661. Dr. John Hacket Lord-Bishop
of Coventry and Litchfield.
A. Notes the ancient Bishops. Y. The Diocesses in the Province of York. All
the rest are in the Province of Canterbury.

The Names of the Judges.
EDward Earl of Clarendon Lord High-Chancellor of England. Sir Robert Foster
Knight, Chief Justice of the King's Bench. Sir Harbottle Grimstone Baronet,
Master of the Rolls. Sir Orlando Bridgeman Knight and Baronet, Chief Justice of
the Common Pleas. Matthew Hale Chief-Baron of the Exchequer. Sir Thomas Mallet
Knight. Justices of the King's Bench. Sir Thomas Twisden Knight. Justices of the
King's Bench. Sir Wadham Windham Knight. Justices of the King's Bench. Sir Robert
Hide Knight. Justices of the Common Pleas. Sir Thomas Terril Knight. Justices
of the Common Pleas. Sir Samuel Brown Knight. Justices of the Common Pleas. Sir
Edward Atkins Knight. Barons of the Exchequer. Sir Christopher Turner Knight.
Barons of the Exchequer. Sir Ieoffrey Palmer Knight, Attorney General. Sir John
Glynne Knight. The Kings Sergeants at Law. Sir John Maynard Knight. The Kings
Sergeants at Law. Sir William Wild Knight. The Kings Sergeants at Law.
The two Principal Secretaries of State, persons eminent for their faithful and
industrious Loyalty, Sir Edward Nicholas, of the same place to his late
Majesty* and Sir William M^rice, the only Confident the Renowned General the
Duke of Albemarle used in those blessed Counsels toward the Restitution of the
King and Kingdom.

The Names of the BARONETS made by Letters Patents since his Majesty's most
happy Restoration, Anno 1660. With the times of their several Creations. Anno
Duodecimo Caroli Regis Secundi.
SIR Orlando Bridgeman Knight, was created Baronet June the 7th, in the Twelfth
Year of the Reign of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second,
in the year of our Lord 1660. Sir Ieoffery Palmer Knight. created Baronet June the
7. Sir Heneage Finch in Com. Bucks Knight. created Baronet June 7. Sir John Langham
in Com. Northampton Knight. created Baronet June 7. Sir Robert Abdy in Com. Essex
Knight. created Baronet June 9. Thomas Draper in Com. Berks Esquire. created Baronet
June 9. Humphrey Winch in Com. Bedford Esquire. created Baronet June 9. Jonathan
Rease Esquire. created Baronet June 9. Henry Wright in Com. Essex Esquire. created
Baronet June 12. Hugh Speak in Com. Wilts Esquire. created Baronet June 12.
Nicholas Gould of the City of London created Baronet June 13. Sir Thomas Adams
of the City of London Knight. created Baronet June 13. Richard Atkins in Com.
Surrey Esquire. created Baronet June 13. Thomas Allen of the City of London Esquire.
created Baronet June 14. Henry North in Com. Suffolk Esquire. created Baronet June
15. Sir William Wiseman in Com. Essex Knight. created Baronet June 15. Thomas
Cullum in Com. Suffolk Esquire. created Baronet June 18. Thomas Davy in Com. Essex
Esquire. created Baronet June 20. George Grubbum How in Com. Wilts Esquire. created
Baronet June 20. John Cutts in Com. Cambridge Esquire. created Baronet June 20.
William Humble of the City of London Esquire. created Baronet June 20. Solomon
Swale in Com. York Esquire. created Baronet June 21. Gervas Ews in Com. Suffolk
Esquire. created Baronet June 22. Robert Cordel in Com. Suffolk Esquire. created
Baronet June 22. Sir John Robinson of the City of London Knight. created Baronet
June 22. John Abdy in Com. Essex Esquire. created Baronet June 22. Henry Stapleton
in Com. York Esquire. created Baronet June 23. Jacob Ashly in Com. Warwick Esquire.
created Baronet June 25. Sir Robert Hilliard in Com. York Esquire. created Baronet
June 25. Sir William Bowyer in Com. Bucks Knight. created Baronet June 25. John
Shuckbrugh in Com. Warwick Esquire. created Baronet June 26. William Wray in Com.
Lincoln Esquire. created Baronet June 27. Francis Hollis in Com. Dorset Esquire.
created Baronet June 27. Nicholas Steward in Com. Southampton Esquire. created
Baronet June 27. George Warberton in Com. Pal. of Chester Esquire. created Baronet
June 27. Oliver St. John in Com. Northampton Esquire. created Baronet June 28. Sir
Ralph Delaval in Com. Northumberland Knight. created Baronet June 29. Andrew Henley
in Com. Somerset Esquire. created Baronet June 30. Thomas Ellis in Com. Lincoln
Esquire. created Baronet June 30. Sir John Covert in Com. Sussex Knight. created
Baronet July 2. Maurice Berkley in Com. Somerset Esquire. created Baronet July 2.
Peter Harr of the City of London created Baronet July 2. Henry Hudson in Com.
Leicester Esquire. created Baronet July 3. Thomas Herbert in Com. Monmouth Esquire.
created Baronet July 3. Thomas Middleton in Com. Denbigh created Baronet July
4. Verney Noel in Com. Leicester Esquire. created Baronet July 6. George Ruswel in
Com. Northampton Esquire. created Baronet July 7. Robert Austen in Com. Kent Esquire.
created Baronet July 10. Robert Hales in Com. Kent Esquire. created Baronet July
12. John Clarke in Com. Oxford Esquire. created Baronet July 13. William Thomas in
Com. Essex Esquire. created Baronet July 13. Sir William Boothby in Com. Derby Knight.
created Baronet July 13. Wolstan Dixey in Com. Leicester created Baronet July
14. John Bright in Com. York Esquire. created Baronet July 16. John Warner in Com.
York Esquire. created Baronet July 16. Sir John Harbey in Com. Hartford Knight. created
Baronet July 17. Sir Samuel Moreland in Com. Berks Knight. created Baronet July 18.
Sir Thomas Hewet in Com. Hartford Knight. created Baronet July 19. Edward Honywood
in Com. Kent Esquire. created Baronet July 19. Basil Dixwel in Com. Kent Esquire.
created Baronet July 19. Sir Richard Brown of the City of London Knight. created
Baronet July 20. Marmaduke Gresham in Com. Surrey Esquire. created Baronet July 20.
Henry Kernor in Com. Salop Esquire. created Baronet July 23. Sir John Aubrey in
Com. Glamorgan Knight. created Baronet July 23. Thomas Sclator in Com. Cambridge
Esquire. created Baronet July 25. Henry C^^way in Com. Flint Esquire. created Baronet
July 25. Edward Green in Com. Essex Esquire. created Baronet July 26. John Stapley
in Com. Sussex Esquire. created Baronet July 28. Metcalf Robinson in Com. York Esquire.
created Baronet July 30. William Dudley in Com. Northampton Esquire. created
Baronet August 1. Hugh Smithson in Com. York Esquire. created Baronet August 2. Sir
Roger Mostyn in Com. Flint Knight. created Baronet August 3. Sir William Willoughby
in Com. Nottingham Knight. created Baronet August 4. Anthony Oldfield in Com.
Lincoln Esquire. created Baronet Aug. 6. Peter Leicester in Com. Chester Esquire.
created Baronet Aug. 10. Sir Willam Wheeler of the City of Westminster Knight.
crea^^d Baronet Aug. 11. Thomas Lee in Com. Bucks Esquire. created Baronet August
16. John Newton in Com. Gloucester Esquire. created Baronet Aug. 16. Thomas Smith
in Com. Chester Esquire. created Baronet Aug. 16. Sir Ralph Ashton in Com.
Lancaster Knight. created Baronet Aug. 17. John Rous in Com. Suffolk Esquire. created
Baronet Aug. 17. Henry Massingbeard in Com. Lincoln Esquire. created Baronet Aug.
22. John Hales in Com. Warwick Esquire. created Baronet Aug. 28. Ralph Bovey in
Com. Warwick Esquire. created Baronet Aug. 30. John Knightly in Com. Warwick Esquire.
created Baronet Aug. 30. Sir John Drake in Com. Devon Knight. created Baronet Aug.
30. Sir Oliver St. George in Com. Letrim in Ireland created Baronet Sep. 5. Sir
John Cowy^r in Com. Stafford Knight. created Baronet Sept. 11. Sir William Wild
Knight. Recorder of London created Baronet Sept. 13. Joseph Ash in Com. Middlesex
Esquire. created Baronet Sept. 19. John How in Com. Gloucester Esquire. created Baronet
Sept. 22. John S. ^^burn in Com. Northumberland Esquire. created Baronet Sept. 26.
John Trot in Com. Southampton Esquire. created Barone October. 11. Humphrey Miller in
Com. Kent Esquire. created Baronet October. 15. Sir John Lewis in Com. York Knight.
created Baronet October. 16. John Beal in Com. Kent Esquire. created Baronet October.
6. Sir Richard Frankline in Com. Hartford Knight. created Baronet October 26.
William Russel in Com. Carmarthen Esquire. created Baronet November 8. William
Barkhouse Esquire. Grandchild of Rowland Barkhouse, of the City of London created
Baronet Nov. 8. Thomas Boothby in Com. Essex Esquire. created Baronet Nov. 9. Sir
John Cutler of the City of London Knight. created Baronet Nov. 9. Giles Mottel of
Liege Esquire. created Baronet Nov. 16. Henry Gifford in Com. Leicester Esquire.
created Baronet Nov. 21. Sir Thomas Foot of the City of London Knight. created
Baronet Nov. 21. Thomas Manwaring in Com. Palatinate of Chester Esquire. created
Baronet November 21. Thomas Bennet in Com. Cambridge Esquire. created Baronet Nov.
22. John Wroth in Com. Kent Esquire. created Baronet Nov. 29. George Winn in Com.
York Esquire. created Baronet December 3. Humphrey Monoux in Com. Bedford Esquire.
created Baronet December. 4. William Gardener of the City of London Esquire. created
Baronet Dec. 4. Heneage Fetherston in Com. Hartford Esquire. created Baronet Dec.
5. John Peynton in Com. Cambridge Esquire. created Baronet Dec. 10. John Fagge in
Com. Sussex Esquire. created Baronet Dec. 11. Edmund Anderson in Com. Lincoln Esquire.
created Baronet Dec. 12. Matthew Herbert in Com. Salop Esquire. created Baronet
Dec. 18. Edward Ward in Com. Norfolk Esquire. created Baronet Dec. 18. George
Marwood in Com. York Esquire. created Baronet Dec. 21. Ralph Ashton in Com.
Northampton Esquire. created Baronet Dec. 21. William Killigrew in Com. Cornwall
Esquire. created Baronet, entailed upon the Heirs-Males of his Body for ever: and
for default of such Issue, to Peter Killigrew, Son of Sir Peter Killigrew Knight.
and the Heirs-Males of his Body for ever, by Letters Patents bearing date at
Westminster, December 22. John Keyt in Com. Gloucester Esquire. created Baronet
Dec. 22. John Buck in Com. Lincoln Esquire. created Baronet Dec. 22. William
Frankland in Com. York Esquire. created Baronet Dec. 24. Richard Stydalph in Com.
Surrey Esquire. created Baronet Dec. 24. William Iuxon in Com. Sussex Esquire. created
Baronet Dec. 28. John Leggard in Com. York Esquire. created Baronet Dec. 29. John
Iackson in Com. York Esquire. created Baronet Dec. 31. Sir Henry Pickering in Com.
Cambridge Knight. created Baronet January 2. Henry Bedingfield in Com. Norfolk
Esquire. created Baronet Ian. 2. Walter Plomer of Inner Temple in London Esquire.
created Baronet Ian. 4. Herbert Springet in Com. Sussex Esquire. created Baronet
Ian. 8. William Powel in Com. Hereford Esquire. created Baronet Ian. 23. Robert
Newton of the City of London Esquire. created Baronet Ian. 23. Nicholas Soughton in
Com. Surrey Esquire. created Baronet Ian. 29. William Rokeby in Com. York Esquire.
created Baronet Ian. 29.
Baronets made in the 13th year of the Reign of our most gracious Sovereign
Lord King CHARLES the Second.
Walter Earnly of New Sarum in the County of Wilts Esquire. created Baronet the 2d
of February, 13. Carol. 2. 1660. John Husbands in Com. Warwick Esquire. created
Baronet Feb. 2. Thomas Morgan in Com. Moumouth Esquire. created Baronet Feb. 7.
John Lane in Com. Roscommon in the Kingd. of Ireland created Baronet Feb. 9.
George Wakefren in Com. Gloucester Esquire. created Baronet Feb. 13. Benjamin
Wright in Com. Essex Esquire. created Baronet Feb. 15. John Colleton of the City of
London Esquire. created Baronet Feb. 18. Sir James Modiford of the City of London
Knight. created Baronet Feb. 18. Thomas Beaumont in Com. Leicester Esquire. created
Baronet Feb. 21. Edward Smith in Com. Durham Esquire. created Baronet Feb. 23. John
Napier, alias Napier, alias Sands Esquire. created Baronet March 4. Thomas Gifford
in Com. Mead in the Province of Lemster, in the Kingdom of Ireland Esquire.
created Baronet March 4. Thomas Clifton in Com. Lancaster Esquire. created Baronet
March. 4. William Wilson in Com. Sussex Esquire. created Baronet March 4. Compton
Reed in Com. Berks Esquire. created Baronet March 4. Sir Brian Broughton in Com.
Stafford Knight. created Baronet Mar. 10. Robert Slingsby in Com. Hertford Esquire.
created Baronet March 16. Sir Ralph Verney in Com. Bucks Knight. created Baronet
March 16. John Crofts in Com. Suffolk Esquire. created Baronet March 16. Robert
Dicer in Com. Hereford Esquire. created Baronet March 18. Sir John Bromfield in
Com. Surrey Knight. created Baronet March 20. Thomas Rich in Com. Berks Esquire.
created Baronet March 20. Edward Smith in Com. Leicester Esquire. created Baronet
March 25. Walter Long in Com. Wilts Esquire. created Baronet March 26. John
Fettiplace in Com. Berks Esquire. created Baronet April 8. Walter Henly in Com.
Sussex Esquire. created Baronet April 8. William Parsons in Com. Bucks Esquire. created
Baronet April 9. John Cambel in Com. Essex Esquire. created Baronet April 9. Sir
Charles Gaudy in Com. Suffolk Knight. created Baronet April 20. William Morice in
Com. Devon Esquire. created Baronet April 20. Sir William Cayly in Com. York Knight.
created Baronet April 20. Sir Charles Doyly of the City of London Knight. created
Baronet April 26. William Godolphin in Com. Cornwall Esquire. created Baronet April
29. Thomas C^rson in Com. Oxford Esquire. created Baronet April 30. Edmund Fowel in
Com. Devon Knight. created Baronet May 1. John Cropley in Com. Middlesex Esquire.
created Baronet May 7. William Smith in Com. Bucks Esquire. created Baronet May 10.
George Cook in Com. York Esquire. created Baronet M^^ 10. Charles Lloyd in Com.
Montgomery Esquire. created Baronet May 10. Nathaniel Powel in Com. Sussex Esquire.
created Baronet May 14. Denny Ashburnham in Com. Sussex Esquire. created Baronet
May 15. Sir Hugh Smith in Com. Somerset Knight. created Baronet May 16.
And so we have glided through this Sphere of Glory, in which the ancient
honor of the Government is refixed, and gives us the full and complete fight
of this wonderful Revolu^^on; each Luminary shining in its proper Orb, and in
its Degree; the Sovereign, Nobility, Clergy, and Gentry recovered to their
former and distinct Luster: and to say no more, the whole community of English
Freemen, whose state and condition no Nation can parallel, from being the
servants of servants, are become their own Masters, and are arrived by this
Change, to be again the envy, that were but lately the scorn and derision of
the World.

In this Consistency the King was desirous to meet this Illustrious Body in
Parliament, to close those distances and separations, and redintegrate the
mutual affections, endearments, and natural kindnesses, which the unnaturalness
and perverse malignity of the times had by our Divisions abrupted and hitherto
discontinued: the King had promised so much at the Dissolution of the late
Free-Parliament or Convention, and accordingly issued out His Writ, (soon
after) for their sitting down the Eighth of May (a little before which, A new
Parliament, May 8.
several Musters had been made in England of the Militia; and a General Train
in London, in Hide-Park of Horse and Foot, Fourteen Regiments whereof the King
was pleased to view there.) In these Elections it appeared how much a
Commonwealth, or those Actions which were pretended to be done by the People in
Parliament (by a few modulers thereof) were ever approved; for not such a man
had a Voice, and the Election of the Free Parliament gave little Encouragement
to stand for it: the main stickling was between the Episcopal and Presbyterian
Parties; and even that numerous Party (as was said by themselves) found how
much they were mistaken in the Suffrages of the Kingdom, when under no awe,
nor in the phrensy of misguised Zeal: several Letters were intercepted from the
chief Ministers of that Persuasion, exhorting their Correspondents to do their
utmost for favorable Elections to their Discipline, and that very confidently,
after the choice made at London, of persons the most of them of their way. But
nevertheless, that there might not the least remain of the Government be left
unjustified and unreared; it so happened, that far the major part of this House
of Commons were not better affected to the Peace of the Kingdom, than to the
Restoration and Settlement of the Church.

To this Parliament the King with his Nobles, according to the splendid custom
of opening these grand Assemblies, rode in State and Triumph: but because so
full a Narrative of such Glory has already preceded, I will not further dazile
the Reader. The House being met, the King sent for the Commons into the House
of Lords, where most obligingly he declared, His content in meeting them; most
of them being known to him: that he was as confident, as of any thing
whatsoever, that it would be a happy Parliament; and in conclusion, acquainted
them with his Resolution of marrying the Infanta of Portugal, which Match (he
said) he had proposed to his Privy Council, and they had every one highly
approved it; that he thought none of them would willingly have him live and dye
a Batchelour, and therefore he had newly made and signed a Treaty with the King
of Portugal by his Ambassador Don Francisco De Mello here Resident, Portugal
Match mentioned by the King to the Parliament.
and now upon departure with the same Treaty, in which this Article of Marriage
was inserted. And then my Lord Chancellor, by His Order, gave the Parliament a
further Account of His Majesty's calling them. Sir Edward Turner the Dukes
Attorney General was chosen Speaker for the House of Commons; who in his
Speech to the King expressed the hopes of the Commons, that as His Majesty had
manifested his great Indulgence to that Adopted, so that he had a Blessing left
for this his Natural Parliament. These Ceremonies being over, wherein the
dutiful respects of the Houses answered the favor and affection of the King;
the Parliament proceeded to the Affairs of the Kingdom. Near that very time, a
Parliament began in Ireland (after a like happy Convention had been by his
Majesty's Order, from their Adjournment upon his Restitution, reassembled in
that quality) Sir Audly Mervin being chosen Speaker. The Convocation of the
English Clergy, all eminent and most learned pious Persons, met on the
sixteenth of May at Westminster. And the Queen of Bohemia his Majesty's Aunt,
from a long absence of forty eight years; The Queen of Bohemia returns into
England.
returned to White Hall, where She was Married in One thousand six hundred and
twelve to the Prince Elector Palatine.

He return was further signalized by the reviviscency of the memory of the most
renowned Marquess of Montross, whose Limbs having been set upon the Gates of
four distant Cities by the Kirk and Argyles party there, were taken down, and
in State, and in all fit Solemnity, and with the same Honor brought together,
The Marquess of Montross enterred in State, May 11.
and by his Majesty's Order (whose love and memory of his Servants is one of
his many other Princely virtues, and great evidence of the sweetness of his
Nature) and the resolution of the Parliament, Interred with a Funeral becoming
his Family, and (as far as such too late evidences and expressions of Grief and
Honor could reach his merit) his own personal Renown and Glory; so much the
more indeed conspicuous, by the Death and deserved Execution of the Marquess of
Argyle, Arguile beheaded, May a^ and Guthrey and Giff^n Hanged, June 1
who was this Hero's mortal and spightful Enemy, that now expiated by a juster
Sentence, those barbarous violencies he had done to Montross: he cunningly
defended himself, and Pleaded the Kings Pardon, and the Treaties in One
thousand six hundred and fifty, and One thousand six hundred fifty one; but
there were Crimes of a later date (besides the never-to-be-forgotten Treachery
of Selling King Charles the first to the English) which Condemned him. He
seemed at his Death to be resolved enough, and justified the Covenant, and had
his Head taken off with the Maiden, so is the Axe called in Scotland. Near the
same time Mr. James Guthery one of the Remonstrators, and a violent Adversary
of the Marquess of Montross and all the Loyal party, together with Captain
Giffan a ^eneg^do to Cromwell, by Sentence and Decree of Parliament, were Hanged
in Edinburgh: so far the Laws, and a suffering-sense of the Miseries and
Reproaches that Nation lay under by these men, and their Partisans guilt, did
now prevail against the Dominion of the Kirk, which had Inslaved and Enchanted
the whole mass of that people.

And for a final blow (as these men's Fates did usher out what their devices had
introduced (as great Events never go unattended) the Solemn League and
Covenant, (first invented by Arguile and his Accomplices) which had raised such a
Combustion in the three Kingdoms, was Sacrificed to the Flames by a Vote in
Parliament; the common Hangman in ample manner burning it in several places in
London; which also was done all the Kingdom over with great Acclamations; which
being omitted hitherto, when so often unwelcome occasion has been given to
recite it, take it now in this its Mittimus.

A Solemn League and Covenant for Reformation and Defense of Religion, etc.
WE, Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, Ministers of
the Gospel, and Commons of all sorts, in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, by the providence of God, living under one King, and being of one
Reformed Religion, having before our eyes the Glory of God, and the Advancement
of the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the Honor and Happiness
of the Kings Majesty and his Posterity, and the true Public Liberty, Safety,
and Peace of the Kingdoms, wherein every ones private Condition is included.
And calling to mind the Treacherous and Bloody Plots, Conspiracies, Attempts,
and Practices of the Enemies of God, against the true Religion and Professors
thereof, in all places, especially in these three Kingdoms, ever since the
Reformation of Religion; and how much their Rage, Power, and Presumption, are
of late, and at this time increased and exercised, whereof the deplorable
Estate of the Church and Kingdom of Ireland, the distressed estate of the
Church and Kingdom of England, and the dangerous Estate of the Church and
Kingdom of Scotland, are present and public Testimonies: We have now at last
(after other means of Supplication, Remonstrance, Protestations, and
Sufferings) for the Preservation of our selves and our Religion from utter
Ruin and Destruction, according to the commendable practice of these Kingdoms
in former times, and the example of God's People in other Nations, after mature
deliberation, resolved and determined to enter into a Mutual and Solemn League
and Covenant, wherein we all subscribe, and each one of us for himself, with
our Hands lifted up to the most High God, do Swear, 1. THat we shall sincerely,
really, and constantly, through the Grace of God, endeavor in our several
Places and Callings, the Preservation of the Reformed Religion in the Church of
Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government, against our Common
Enemies: The Reformation of Religion in the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government, according to the Word of God,
and the Example of the best Reformed Churches: and shall endeavor to bring the
Churches of God in the three Kingdoms to the nearest Conjunction and Uniformity
in Religion, Confession of Faith, Form of Church Government, Directory of
Worship, and Catechizing. That we and our Posterity after us, may as Brethren
live in Faith and Love, and the Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us.
2. That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavor the
extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, ( that is, Church Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellors and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters,
Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that
Hierarchy) Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be
found to be contrary to Godliness, and sound Doctrine, and the power of
Godliness; left we partake in other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to
receive of their plagues: And that the Lord may be one, and his Name one in the
three Kingdoms. 3. We shall with the same sincerity, reality, and constancy, in
our several Vocations, endeavor with our Estates and Lives, mutually to
preserve the Rights and Privileges of the Parliaments, and the Liberties of
the Kingdoms, and to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's person, and
Authority in the preservation and defense of the true Religion and Liberties of
the Kingdoms, That the World may bear Witness with our Consciences of our
Loyalty, that we have no thoughts or intentions to diminish his Majesty's just
Power and Greatness. 4. We shall also with all faithfulness endeavor the
discovery of all such as have been or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or
evil Instruments, by hindering the Reformation of Religion, dividing the King
from his people, or one of the Kingdoms from another, or making any Faction or
parties amongst the people contrary to this League and Covenant: that they may
be brought to public Trial, and receive condign punishment as the degree of
their offenses shall require or deserve, or the supreme Iudicatories of both
Kingdoms respectively, or others having power from them for that effect, shall
judge convenient. 5. And whereas the happiness of a blessed Peace between these
Kingdoms, denied in former times to our Progenitors, is by the good providence
of God granted unto us, and has been lately concluded and settled by both
Parliaments. We shall each one of us according to our place and interest
endeavor that they may remain conjoined in a firm Peace, and Union to all
Posterity; and that justice may be done upon the wilful opposers thereof in
manner expressed in the precedent Article. 6. We shall also according to our
Places and Callings, in this common Cause of Religion, Liberty, and Peace of
the Kingdoms, assist and defend all those that enter into this League and
Covenant* in the maintaining and pursuing thereof, and shall not suffer our
selves directly or indirectly, by whatsoever Combination, Persuasion, or
Terror, to be divided and withdrawn from this blessed Union and Conjunction;
whether to make defection to the contrary part, or to give our selves to a
detestible indifferency or neutrality in this Cause, which so much concerns the
Glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms, and Honor of the King; but shall all
the days of our lives zealously and constantly continue therein, against all
opposition, and promote the same according to our power against all Lets and
Impediments whatsoever. And what we are not able our selves to suppress, or
overcome, we shall reveal or make known that it may be timely prevented or
removed. All which we shall do as in the sight of God.


And because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins and provocations against
God and his Son Jesus Christ, as is too manifest by our present distresses and
dangers, the fruits thereof: We profess and declare before God and the World
our unfeigned desire to be humbled for our own sins, and for the sins of these
Kingdoms, especially that we have not as we ought valued the inestimable
benefit of the Gospel: That we have not labored for the Purity and Power
thereof; and that we have not endeavored to receive Christ in our Hearts, nor
to walk worthy of him in our Live^ which are the Causes of other sins and
transgressions, so much abounding amongst (...) and our true unfaigned purpose,
desire, and endeavor, for our selves and all others under our Power and
Charge, both in public and in private, in all Duties we owe to God and Man, to
amend our lives, and each other to go before another in the Example of a real
Reformation, that the Lord may turn away his Wrath and heavy Indignation, and
establish these Churches and Kingdoms in Truth and Peace. And this Covenant we
make in the presence of Almigh^y God, the Searcher of all Hearts, with a true
intention to perform the same, as we shall answer at that great day, when the
secrets of all Hearts shall he disclosed; most humbly beseeching the Lord to
strengthen us by his Holy Spirit for this end. And to bless our desires and
proceedings with such success, as may be deliverance and safety to his People,
and encouragement to the Christian Churches, groaning under, or in danger of
the York of Antichristian Tyranny, to join in the same or like Association and
Covenant, to the Glory of God, the Enlargement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
and the Peace and Tranquillity of Christian Kingdoms and Commonwealths.

It consisted just of 666 Words, as some curious Critics observed the number
of the Beast in the Revelations. Most certain it is, the baiting and disputing
of it, made the Field, the Pulpit, and the Press, a sad Theater.

Plots and Designs laid by the Fanatics.
The good Progress was made by this Parliament in this way, to return us where
we were, did highly urge the discontents of the late Anarchy; and their anger
suggested to them some hopes of undoing all again; and in this revenge they
parted themselves, because they saw the Presbyterians concerned, who either
must comply, or equally Suffer with them by such proceedings; and therefore new
designs were meditated, and diverse Conspiracies framed, and Councels and
Meetings had by several of that Party, who afterward were seized into custody,
after they had vainly endeavored and projected new troubles; such were Praise
God Barebone, Samuel Moyer, Colonel Salmon, Major Wildman, late Alderman
Ireton, since secured in a remote Castle, Major Hains, and others, some of them
since released and discharged by the Kings favor.

Sir Charles Lucas re-interred with Solemnity, Jun. 7.
In the like manner as the renowned Montross had been interred, so with
proportionable solemnity the two most Loyal Commanders Sir Charles Lucas and
Sir George Lisle were re-interred at Colchester the Seventh of June, the same
day thirteen year they took up Arms for the King in that Town, which extremity
they nobly defended: the vicine Gentry and Townsmen in Arms and Mourning
attending their Hearses; both Corpse being laid in the Vault set apart for the
Sepulchry of Sir Charles his Family.

The Earl of Sandwich (the Streights and the Levant-seas being infested with
the Pirates of Algier, Tunis and Tripoly, notwithstanding our late League) by
the ^right of Porta Ferino (for since the departure of Captain Stoaks, who was
left by Blake in 1657. with eight Ships, and returned in 1659. the old Pi^^y
was frequently exercised) was sent with a Fleet of War, to reduce them (...)
better (...): He set sail with his Vice Admiral Sir John Lawson, leaving
(...)-Admiral Sir Richard Stayner on the 19 of June, and the 29 of July come
before that Port of Algier, ^
sending in a civil Message to the Die or Bashaw (...) the place that he came to
confirm the League made formerly between us (...); and a Treaty accordingly
ensued: but they refusing to deliver the ^^p^ves, except upon hard conditions,
and not to be brooked by those who had made them feel the smart of their former
Insolence; the General weighed, and stood into the Harbor; but they ever since
their former disaster had with new Fortifications and a Mole with Forts so
secured themselves, that after the firing of some of their Ships, and doing
some Execution on them, it was advised the Fleet should make out again; which
they did with the loss of some men, and the Wounding and maiming of others; as
also of their Yards, Sails and Rigging. After which Enterprise, the Earl
leaving Sir Sohn Lawson to block them up, and their Thieving-trade being stopped,
departed with part of his Fleet to the Coast of Spain, to Tangier, and so at
length to Lisbon, according to his Orders.

Several Laws confirmed and made, etc.
In the mean time the Parliament, at the special instance and desire of the
King, had passed an Act for Confirmation of the Act of Oblivion; which being
done by the Free Parliament not called by his Majesty's Writ, was not thought
by the guilty valid, and security enough to them. They likewise ratified most
or all of the other Laws Enacted by the same Authority. They framed another for
Regulating Corporations, Impowring Commissioners to displace such as bore
Offices, and were any way suspected as Ill-willers to the Government and his
Majesty's Authority, or should refuse to take the Oath of Allegiance and
Supremacy; or finally, which was the only Test, if they would not renounce the
Solemn League and Covenant, as unlawful in it self, and illegally imposed; the
Wisdom of the Parliament knowing what Seeds were sown of that Thistle, and how
untractable it was. During this Debate of the House, Mr. Pryn questioned, etc.
Mr. Pryn could not refrain, against the privilege of the House, of which he
was a Member, from publishing of certain Reasons against the said Bill, as
contrary to Magna Charta; which the House being informed of, the Sergeant at
Arms was ordered to seize the Printer; and Mr. Pryn owning of it, he was
brought to the Bar, Mr. Pryn questioned by the House.
and rebuked by the Speaker; but upon his submission, and the Houses favorable
reflection on his great endeavors to the Restitution of the King, he was
remitted the censure and punishment he had by this oversight incurred, not
considering the necessity and Peace of the Kingdom required this course, and
how usual and constant it was with the Usurpers; whereas now the Supreme
Legislative Power, who may, and do substitute, Repeal and Enact such Laws as
the times require, had thought fit to establish this. There passed also another
Act repealing that of the 1 Caroli 7. against the Prelacy, Acts against Bishops
repealed
and the Bishop^ meddling in civil Judicature and Affairs, debarring them also
from their Privileges to fit as Peers in the House of Lords; to all which
Honors, they were by this Repeal restored to all purposes, as if the same had
never been Enacted: a little before which, the whole Order of them were
magnificently feasted at Sir Richard Brown's the Lord Mayor his house, the 25
of June.

The Free-Parliament having respited the punishments of several of the
Regicides, as well those that lay under Condemnation, as others not so fully
guilty of that Crime; the Houses resumed the matter, and caused the Lord
Munson, Lord Munson, Sir Henry Mildmay and Wallop sentenced.
Sir Henry Mildmay, and Mr. Robert Wallop, to be brought to the Bar, where
their Estates were declared confiscate, and they degraded from all Titles and
Arms of Gentility, and farther Sentenced to be drawn from the Tower through the
City of London to Tyburn on the 30 of January next, and so back again with
Halters about their Necks, upon Sledges, and to suffer perpetual Imprisonment.
Sir James Harrington was to have been in this very predicament, but he having
his Liberty upon Bail from the Sergeant at Arms, left his Bail in the lurch,
and fled for it, and put himself out of the benefit of this qualification.
Phelps, one of the Clerks of the Court of Justice, was marked for this, but was
not Sentenced. The Earl of Middleton the King's great Commissioner, came about
this time from Scotland to White Hall; and on the 30th of this Month the
Parliament was adjourned by the King to attend their business in the Country
till the 20th of November; Parliament adjourned July. 30, to Nov. 02.
the King and they parting with mutual satisfaction; the Lord-Chancellor
declaring that the King's confidence in them had not in the least deceived him.
Much discourse there was all the Summer, that his Majesty would take a Progress
to visit his Loyal City of Worcester, and the places of his Sanctuary and
Refuge in his escape thence; and to that end, his Tent-Office was held at
Clarkenwell green, to prepare and make all things ready for the accommodation
of his Progress: but the suspicion of affairs, and the designs of the old
Enemy, who as was said before was at work, deferred it this year, and a shorter
journey took up the next. Commissioners likewise came from the Parliament in
Ireland with an acceptable present to the King at White Hall.

The Duke of York, who had been chosen Captain to the Artillery-company in
London, and by their Deputies humbly requested to honor them with his
acceptance, which he was nobly pleased to do, and lead with them in their
Ground, and see them Exercise to his good content; accepted now likewise from
them an invitation to dine with them, on their annual Feast Day, at
Merchant-Taylors Hall; whither accompanied him with the same invitation the
Duke of Buckingham, and diverse other Persons of Honor.

This Month of August was the Reading of that excellent Lawyer and most
accomplished Gentleman Sir Heneage Finch his Majesty's Solicitor, at the Inner
Temple; whose Nobleness and Generosity were herein equal to his matchless
Abilities in the Laws, as his magnificence in this Solemn occasion did make
appear, especially in that particular Treatment he gave the King, The King is
entertained at the Inner Temple by Sir Heneage Finch.
who to honor this, one of his best servants, was graciously pleased to accept
of it, and to dine in that Hall; a favor not before indulged to any of these
famous Societies by any of his Royal Progenitors: the most Illustrious Duke of
York was present, and Dined here with his Brother, to both their likings and
approbations.

Count Conningsmark, from the young King and Queen of Sweden, had been here
some while; and now came another more splendid Embassy by Count Brahe, at whose
reception near the Tower, a Fray or Conflict happened betwixt the French and
Spanish Ambassadors Coaches for Precedence which should first follow the
Swedes Coach: both Parties came prepared for the Encounter; but the French were
basely worsted, and seven or eight of them killed. This had like to have caused
a new Rupture betwixt both Crowns, the French King sending a Messenger to
Madrid to demand satisfaction; but at the entreaty of the new-Married Queen,
the difference was put up. While I am relating this Foreign matter, I must
insert, that the Prince of Spain, a Child about five years old, dyed, and a
young Prince or Dolphin was born to the French King on All Saints day, and
therefore Christened Lewis Tous Sancts.

Several Prisoners in the Tower, Regicides and others, by reason of the
practices of their Parties, were now in October sent a way from the Tower to
several remote places, Castles, and Islands, for securing the Peace; and with
them, the Market of Herbs, which usually stood before in Cheap Side, (and by
Tichburn in his Majoralty, because it cumbred up the ways, was placed in St.
Paul's Churchyard,) and a Cross built there, which is yet standing, was by
Proclamation, to avoid the scandal of selling and buying in that Ground, now
removed into Aldersgate Street, and Aldermanbury. Several suspected persons of
the Phanatick Party were now seized, and committed to several Prisons. The
Right Noble James Duke of Ormond, after several uneffectual designments of
others, was appointed by his Majesty Lieutenant of Ireland, which Place and
Dignity he had before so prudently discharged.

The Lords Spiritual restored.
After the expiration of the Adjournment of the Parliament from July last, they
met again the Twentieth of November, now in their full and entire Constitution;
the Lords Spiritual the Bishops, by virtue of the Act of Repeal made the last
Session, taking their places; which the King in his Speech to the Houses did
congratulate to them, as a felicity He much desired to see accomplished, in
this goodly restored Fabric of the Government. Regicides before the House of
Lords, November.
On the Twenty fifth of the same Month, the Regicides that came in upon
Proclamation, and were respited after Sentence to the pleasure of the
Parliament, were brought to the Bar of the House of Lords, to answer what they
could for themselves, why Judgment should not be Executed: they all Pleaded the
Proclamation, which they understood and supposed did extend to favor of Life
upon the rendering themselves thereupon, as likewise that as to the Crime they
were all of them guilty of no malice toward the Person of the King: Henry
Marten added, that he never obeyed any Proclamation before but this, and hoped
that he should not be Hanged for taking the Kings Word now. They were remanded
back again to the Tower from whence they came, and no further proceeding had
concerning them. The Lord Chancellor in his Speech made mention of a Plot,
which one Major White had discovered, and upon which several Persons had been
secured, that were Officers formerly in the Army; and what care had been taken
by the King to prevent the danger, and to attain to a full discovery. And this
Michaelmas-Term, John James Hanged and Quartered, November. 27.
one John James (one of the Fifth Monarchists, a Small-coal-man by Trade, and
engaged in Venners business, but was absent, or saved himself the last day they
broke out; but had not departed from his malice ever since that disappointment,
but continued his Meetings and Conventicles with others of his desperate Crew,
among whom he was a great Rabby or Teacher) flew out into several Traitorous
Speeches and Invectives against the Kings Person, Government, and Family, which
relisht of the same Design couched in Venners Declaration; which being
overheard by some Neighbors living near the same Conventicle, James was
seized and carried before a Justice, who Committed him to Newgate, whence this
Term he was brought to the Kings Bench Bar, and there the Words were proved
against him, and he Convicted and Condemned as a Traitor: On the Twenty seventh
he was drawn on a Sledge to Tyburn, some of his Sect and Opinion throwing
themselves into the same Sledge, and embracing him; so fond were they of this
their silly though bold Seducer. At the Gallows he denied the words, but owned
and avowed his Chilianism and the Personal Reign of Christ, out of which
respect he prayed not for the King, or any Authority, but with the usual
confidence of his Party made an end. His Quarters were disposed of by his
Majesty's Orders, and his Head set upon a Pole in White Chapel near the place
of his Meeting, for example to his Fellows.

Some discourses there were of a Design about Dunkirk, and the Duke of York
passed over there this Month, carrying the Garrison money, and upon his arrival
viewed the Fortifications and Lines, and found it stronger by some new Forts
the Governor the Lord Rutherford, now made Earl of Tiviot, and Governor of
Tangeir, had raised thereabouts; and after a short stay returned again for
England.

In Ireland, Sir Charles Coot Earl of Mountrath, Sir Charles Coot died December.
one of the Three Justices of that Kingdom died, and was buried in State, the
power of the other Two remaining, being invested in Sir Maurice Eustace and the
Earl of Orery till the arrival of the Duke of Ormond. He had done excellent
Service in that Kingdom against the Rebels; and though he afterward sided
with those here, yet did he by his last Actions in securing that Kingdom to
the Interest of his Majesty, and helping on the Restitution, redeem his former
demerits, which could be charged on him, no otherwise, than as a Soldier of
Fortune! he was one of General Monck's right hands in carrying on the Change.
The Duke of Ormond was by the Parliament of Ireland gratulated upon his
appointment to that Government, by Letters sent from the Speakers of both
Houses.

The Council for the Principality of Wales was also erected by the King, A
Council of the Principality of Wales reestablished at Ludlow.
and settled at Ludlow the usual Residence; the Earl of Carbery Lord Vaughan was
made President, the old Earl of Norwich Clerk of the Council, and others of the
Nobility and Gentry Assistants; Judges also were established, and the said Lord
President in great State brought into the Town, attended by a great Train of
the chief Persons thereabouts, and joyfully welcomed and complemented.

This Christmas the Honorable Society of Lincolns-Inne renewed their Custom
of the Inns of Court, by choosing a Prince, who during the Festival commands
like a Sovereign in the places adjoining to the said Inn: the Gentleman chosen
this time was one John Lort Esquire, a Gentleman of Wales, by the Title of
Prince Le Grange: he gave, and the King was pleased to accept a Treatment from
him; the Ceremonies due to a Prince being exactly observed in every respect, a
Council, Judges, and Officers of State Honor and Nobility attending this his
Highness, whom the King at the expiration of his term of Royalty made a Knight
Baronet. The Marquess Durazzo Ambassador from the Republic of Genoa was about
this time honorably received by the King attended through the City to Sir
Abraham Williams his house by the Earl of Carlisle; Complemented from the King
by the Earl of Bullingbrook, and brought to Audience by the Lord Buckhurst.

In Scotland, Episcopacy established in Scotland.
Episcopacy which had been so long banished thence, was now reduced with all
gladness and testimonies of a welcome reception, after the experience of so
many miseries and confusions which had befallen that Nation, through the Fury
and Zealotry of the Kirk. The four Bishops that were Consecrated at Lambeth a
little before this, whereof Dr. James Sharp Archbishop of St. Andrews
Metropolitan of Scotland was one, Consecrating others in that Kingdom; the
whole Order being there defunct, by the long Usurpation of the Presbyterian
Discipline. To the confirmation therefore of this Sacred resetled Authority,
the Lord-Commissioner, with most of the Nobility and Gentry accompanied the
Archbishop of Glascow, where the Kirk-Rebellion was first hatched, to that
City, where the face of things was quite altered; no Person or occasion ever
welcomer or more acceptable than this, as their Bells and Bonefires declared.
And here the Lord Commissioner put sorth a Proclamation prohibiting the payment
of any Ecclesiastical Rents o Tithe, or profits of the Ministry whatsoever, to
any who in a short time limited should not acknowledge and own their Diocesan
Bishop and his Authority, and receive Induction from him. Some few grand
Factious Predicants stood out, and were cuted of their Livings, and others the
most unquiet and refractory Commanded to depart that Kingdom, now well cleared
of that Clergy, the Original and Fountain of those bitter waters and Rivers of
Blood which overflowed the three Nations.

A like Church-work was taken in hand in England: the King at his Entrance into
London, upon his Restitution-day, May 29, fadly observed, and shook his Head at
the Ruins of St. Paul's Cathedral* The King reflects on the ruin of St. Paul's
London.
and therefore the first vacancy his affairs permitted him, was bestowed on the
consideration of that Religious Structure; and thereupon he issued out a
Commission to Sir Orlando Bridgeman, Sir Ieoffery Palmer, and others of the
Long Robe, with other Gentlemen, to take some speedy Order for the Repair
thereof: and to that pious work he gave the Arrears of Impropriations and
Ecclesiastical Livings excepted out of the Act of Oblivion; impowering to call
all such as owed any Moneys thereupon to account, and to lay it out to that
use. The former Dean of which Cathedral (Dr. Nicholas, Brother to Master
Secretary of State Sir Edward) died now of a malignant Feavor, called the
Country new Disease: and Dr. Barwick, a man that had suffered all Extremities
even of Dungeon and Famine in the Tower from the Rump, soon after the King's
death was substituted by the King in his place, it being reckoned with the late
improvement the best Deanery now in England. Fatality among the Clergy.
Soon after Dr. Nicholas, died Dr. Nicholas Monk Bishop of Hereford, and
Brother to the Noble General, whose private Contemplative li^e, was no less
observed than Jewels in the dark, which then shine brightest; his Illustrious
Brother governing the conspicuous splendour of the Times, while he ruled with
the recluse virtues of his mind in the obscurity of the Church: (which
afterward spread and luster it borrowed from the Beams of this its Luminary,
though now suddenly deprived of a great part of it in this his Setting.) And
most fit it is, that his Name should be Canonized, and for ever had Sacred in
our Calendar and Church-Annals. About the same time died also Dr. Brian Walton
Lord-Bishop of Chester, famous for the Polyglotte-Bible, and other Excellencies
becoming a Prelate; nor did his successor Dr. Fern many weeks outlive him,
whose defenses of the Church will never be forgotten. And lastly died Dr.
Thomas Fuller, known by his several Books and indefatigable industry, better
than by any account can here be given of him. Such a Train of Scholars and
Learned men did barbarous Death lead in Triumph to the Captivating Grave, that
her envious Pomp might draw our eye and tears to this sad spectacle, and that
might honorably accompany the Fate of the Bishop of Hereford.

Another Fleet for Portugal and Tangier.
A Fleet was Rigged and set to Sea to fetch home the Queen from Portugal, and to
carry the Forces to Tangier, which was delivered by the Portugueze Garrison to
Sir Richard Stayner, who with 500 men was left to maintain it till the Earl of
Peterborough, designed for that Command, should arrive. And for the Queens own
Transportation, the Royal Charles, which brought the King from Holland, was
sent with this Fleet. In the mean while, the Queen of Bohemia the King's Aunt
died, February 13. aged 66 years, having been out of England 49 years, and
survived all the misfortunes of her Family, which almost from the time of her
Marriage in 1612. on St. Valentines day (on the eve of which she now died) had
fallen very thick, and chiefly and solely upon it: Queen of Bohemia dies Feb.
13.

A Storm Feb. 18.


She now came to her rest among her Royal Ancestors and Relations, whose
Glories and Honors she left more flourishing and greater than ever. Her
Decease was followed with a most violent and Tempestuous Wind, February the
18th, (by which several persons were killed, and much damage done in all parts
of the three Kingdoms, and in Foreign Countries) which might give notice, that
all those Troubles and Calamities this Princess had suffered, and by which most
parts of Europe were Tempested, were quite blown over, and she gone to her last
Repose.

A very unfortunate accident happened the same Month; An unfortunate Accident
happened to the Lord Buckhurst and others.
The Lord Buckhurst but now mentioned, his Brother Mr. Edward Sackvile, Sir
Henry Bellasis Knight of the Bath Son and Heir to the Lord Bellasis, Mr.
Bellasis Brother to the Lord Faulconbridge, and Mr. Wentworth Son to Sir
George, accompanying an acquaintance out of Town, upon their Return, being
informed there were Highway men and Thieves in the Road, meeting a Tanner, and
suspecting him for one of them, after some resistance made by him, killed him:
for this mischance they were Arraigned at the Kings Bench Bar, but by the Jury
quitted; it not being probable, that Persons of their Estates and Quality would
set upon a single Person to do him injury, but it might happen merely by a
mistake, and good intent of freeing the Road.

The Parliament had under their consideration the bringing of Lambert and Vane
to their Trial, Lambert and Vane ordered to Trial.
being excepted out of the Act of Oblivion, as main Authors and Contrivers of
those Troubles in the Rebellion, and therefore desired His Majesty that he
would be pleased to send for them from their remote Prisons they were in, that
they might be brought to Trial; that such bold Treasons might not pass with
impunity. On the other hand, that they might testify their acknowledgments to
the Duke of Albemarle, of his great merit and services, in the Redemption of
his Country; they by Act now resolved to settle some Manors and Lands upon
him, The General honored, etc.
and confirmed the Kings Grants and Patents, or what should afterward by
Grants or Patents be conferred on him. The Duke of Ormond was likewise
presented with the sum of Thirty thousand pounds in Bills of Exchange, as a
gratuity from the Parliament of Ireland, in respect of the Services he had done
that Kingdom in the same capacity before; where also the Bill of settlement of
Lands was the sole Affair in Debate, the difficulty about Claims of the English
and Irish, intricating and perplexing the Bill; so that the Dukes presence was
very much desired, as by whose prudence, understanding, and competent
knowledge, together with his equal relation to both Parties, that tedious Work
could only be accommodated, which brings with it the conclusion of the year
1661, the 14 th year of the King.

Anno Domini 1662.
THE beginning of this, and the end of the last year, was remarkable with a
very notable Providence, which for the more compact account of it, is totally
referred hither. It happened, that among other the Fugitives for the parricidial
Conspiracy in the Death of the King, Miles Corbet, Colonel Okey, and Col.
Barkstead, which had traversed most parts of Low, and some of High Germany,
where they had for a while resided at the City of Hanow, under borrowed names;
about the beginning of March were returned to Delf in Holland, having appointed
their Wives to meet them there, to understand their Affairs in England; but
these their Letters being intercepted and opened by the vigilance of Sir George
Downing His Majesty's Resident at the Hag^e, they were all three taken together
at Barkstead's and Okey's Lodging, just as Corbet after Supper was going home,
Miles Corbet. Colonel Okey and Barkstead taken in Holland, sent over to the
Tower.
by the Thief-takers and the Marshal of that Town. Okey offered a resolute
Escape; Barkstead denied himself, and desired he might fetch his Cloak in the
next Room, Corbet (as he said) having taken Physic that day, fell a Purging
upwards and downwards in a very strange manner. Sir George himself was present
at the seizure, and had them that Night secured in the common and ordinary
Prison, and thence conveyed them by the States order on Board the Blackmore
Frigot, then accidentally at Helve^t-Sluce, having only brought over Mr.
Armorer sent from the King to the Lords upon special occasions. About the end
of March they came to Gravesend, where Sir John Robinson Lieutenant of the
Tower, by Warrant from his Majesty, with a Guard carried them to the Tower;
whence on the 16th of April they were brought to the Kings Bench Bar, and there
demanded what they could say for themselves, why they should not die according
to Law, the Act of Attainder being read to them: To which they alleged, they
were not the same persons mentioned therein; whereupon Witnesses being ready,
were called, and a Jury impannelled, who gave verdict that they were the same
persons; and so the Lord Chief Justice Foster proceeded to Sentence, which was
the same with the former accomplices and sufferers for that Fact, Sentenced and
Executed Ap. 2.
and was Executed on Saturday, April the 19, at Tyburn, where they with better
ends than any of the rest, acknowledged their resolved acquiescence under the
Kings Government, as of God, and exhorted others to do so; especially Colonel
Okey, a person that for his valor and other good qualities was pitied by all
men, for his being so blinded and ensnared in this Crime to his destruction.
They all pretended no malice to his late Majesty, and their mistake of the
Parliaments Authority for good and sufficient.

They were all three Hanged, Bowelled, and Quartered; but his Majesty was
graciously pleased, Col. Okey 's body gi^en to his Friends.
out of regard to Colonel Okey's Christian and dutiful carriage, to return his
Quarters to his Friends to be interred; which was done in the Chapel of the
Tower, by the Rites appointed in the Common Prayer, to prevent the unruly
concourse of the Fanatics, who assembled in multitudes to accompany his Corpse,
insomuch that the Sheriffs were forced to disperse them. Barkstead's and
Corbet's quarters were set upon the Gates, the Head of the former upon a Pole
on Traitors Gate in the Tower; and Corbet's on London Bridge. For this
kindeness and civility of the Dutch States, the King ordered his Resident to
thank them in his Name; from which parts several of the Fanatics that fled
thither upon the Kings Restitution, about this time traveled into Germany, an
invitation being published from one of the Princes there, for all Nations to
come and inhabit (with full privileges and immunities) certain waste places of
his Dominions; and an invitation was sent hither from them to others of the
same principles to follow them.

Her Majesty Queen Catharina was now expected to be at Sea, and therefore his
Majesty came to the Parliament and acquainted them with the same, and desired
that as a Complement to her, they would cause the Highways and Streets of
London to be fitted and cleansed against her reception, and to make what have
with convenience they could, with the dispatch of those Bills under their
consideration. And soon after, to remedy the perverseness and obstinacy of the
Quakers against taking the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and their meeting
(and Conventicling publicly together) to the pestring of the prisons whither
they were Committed, and their Enthusiast tricks (one Thomas formerly a
Lieutenant of that party, poisoning himself; and one Powel a Widow poisoning
of her Son-in-law and another person) a Bill was passed against them, Acts of
Parliament passed.
with the said Bill for Highways, now ready for the King's assent, which he
gave by his Commission to the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Duke of
Albemarle, and Earl of Manchester. By this Act several inconvenient passages in
London are to be enlarged, and Houses that jutted into the street and
obstructed the ways, were to be pulled down, as the upper end of Ludgate Hill,
on the South Side of the street, and elsewhere.

Having but only mentioned the Kings Declaration of his Marriage, for his
choice, whereof both the Lords and Commons returned him their thanks; it will
not be impertinent in this place to give a larger and fuller account thereof.
This Royal Bride Heaven had more especially prepared and predisposed out of the
Royal Family of the Kings of Portugal; An account of the Marriage of the King,
etc.
which having suffered an Eclipse by the powerful interposition of the Spanish
Monarchy, for the space of near an hundred years, was now revisited in its
Splendour in the assumption of John (Duke of Braganza) the fourth of that Name
King of Portugal, by almost as miraculous a Turn as that of our Captivity by
the Kings Restitution. So Providence was pleased to adapt and fit both these
Princes Conditions and Estates to this happy juncture of them in this Royal and
happy Estate.

This was designed by King John in the beginning of our Troubles, and of his
Reign; and was one of the first Acts of State he did with us, managed here by
Don Antonio de Souza his Ambassador hither, who was very instrumental in
transacting His late Majesty's Affairs of Foreign Concernments, receiving and
returning his Dispatches. One Ingredient no doubt in point of Civility and
Honor, among those other of Affection and Interest, that make up this Princely
Match. These were something, as also his Majesty's reflection on his Personal
picque with the Spaniard, who had very much disobliged him in the time of the
Usurpation, by courting and owning his Rebels, to satisfy himself of some
pretended injuries done him by his Grandfather and Father, by loss of his
Spanish Fleet in the Downs, which the King had a most inviting opportunity here
to remember.

Upon the return of the Conde de Mello, as aforesaid, with the Articles of
Treaty and Marriage to Lisbon, they were presently noysed about the City, and
more loudly reported from all the Cannon in the River, both Portuges and
Forraigners; by which means, without further Proclamation, it was public about
the Town; who like over-joyed People, betook themselves to the presentest, yet
most solemn de monstrations thereof, by Bonfires and Entertainments, etc. the
Streets resounding with Healths, al Re del Grand Brettanna; which continued
that Night and the next Day.

Not long after, by an Express from England from the King to her, she was
Complemented with the Style of Queen of Great Britain; which put that Court
into a new Splendour, both to her Retinue and Attendance; and all Honors and
Duties done her, as if she were actually Crowned. It will not be much material
to insist on all the other particulars, viz. those several Messages sent and
returned betwixt those two Royal Lovers, together with the intercourse betwixt
the Two Crowns in point of Alliance and Security; nor the numerous resort of
the English every day to Worship this Sun of the East, and pay their Early
Devotions to her: It will be more unnecessary to relate those Romances and
Fictions made by the Phanatick Crew at Home, that there were a Fleet of
Spaniards and Hollanders that lay ready in her way to intercept her Passage
into England.

We will only mention the happy Arrival of that Fleet and the Royal Charles
from England, (with Sir Richard Fa^shaw sent to salute the Queen for his
Majesty, who now impatiently expected her Arrival, as did the whole Nation
together with him.) Just at the same time the Earl of Sandwich now the second
time visited the Queen, being appointed to attend her departure, and to convey
her into England; the King her Brother, and Mother, with his Nobles and the
whole Court, in a solemn Procession and Cavalcade from his Palace, where the
English Gallantry there present assisted, accompanied her, till she Arrived at
the Riverside (the Golden Tagus) where she entered a Stately Brigandine, and
the Naval Triumphs commenced their Glory.

For as soon as the King and Queen were reimbarqued for Lisbon, The Queen
reReimbarques April 13.
and returned with the discharge of all the Cannon, the Fleet immediately with
a fair wind and leading Gale, began their course, being as they past the River
saluted by all the Block-Houses, Forts, and Castles, with the imitation of
their Thunder.

That Night, and part of the next day, the Wind and Weather was very
propitious; but then coming clear about and contrary, it so retarded the
Voyage, that in a Fortnights time they hardly got into the middle of the Bay of
Biscay, where the Queens Majesty dispatched away Mr. Montague, Sir Tho. Sands,
and Sir Joseph Douglas, on the 29 of April at Seven at Night, to give an
account to the King of Her Condition; which the untowardliness and averseness
of the Wind had much altered, by protracting her longing desires of meeting the
King; and also incommodating her by the tossing and topping of the Sea, so that
she lay sick for the most part of the Voyage; until about Fifth of May, with
indefatigable working and skill, the whole Fleet reached the Islands of Scilly*
the furthermost Western Dominions of England.

The Duke of York at Sea to attend the Queens Arrival, with the Duke o^ Osmond,
etc.
Her Arrival had been every day expected a fortnight before; which caused the
King to send down his only Brother the Duke of York, Lord High Admiral, to
attend on her upon the Coast, and to Complement her in his Name: whereupon his
Highness hasted to Portsmouth; and on the Eleventh of May attended by the Duke
of Ormond, the Earls of Suffolk and Chesterfield, the Lord Berckley, and other
Persons of Quality, went aboard the stately Yacht, with which the City of
Amsterdam presented the King, to Coast about the Isle of Wight to meet her
Majesty. On the same day Sir Joseph Douglas making toward Portsmouth with an
Express from her Majesty to the King, was met by his Highness the Duke of York,
five Leagues off the Isle of Wight, who commanded him back with him to the
Fleet. On Sunday morning about ten a Clock, they discovered the Royal James;
but there was so great a Calm, that they could not reach the Royal Charles till
six at Evening. No sooner had the General espied his Highness Yacht, but he
went out in his Barge to meet him, the Royal Banner being all the while vayl'd
till he was aboard. When his Highness came into the Ship, the Soldiers gave
three several shouts, and all the great Guns in the Royal Charles (which from
that time to the Queens Entrance had been silent) proclaimed his Welcome; after
which, several Ships of the Fleet paid him their Salutes. Being conducted to
her Majesty's Cabin, he was placed in a Chair on her right hand, where after
several expressions of Joy for her Majesty's happy Arrival on the Coast of
England; and having presented his Majesty's high respects to, and as exceeding
Affection for Her; his Royal Highness took his leave, to retire himself to his
Yacht for that Night: and the next morning Sir Joseph Douglas was again
dispatched to the King, in the illustrious Company of the said Duke of Ormond
and Earls; but was forced to Tide it thence, and sometimes lay at Anchor, and
could not reach Portsmouth till the Evening, Thirteenth of May, from whence Sir
Joseph took Post, leaving the Duke of Ormond to make preparation for the
Reception of her Majesty.

Queen Arrives May 13.
That Night the Royal Fleet with the Princely Bride came to St. Helens point,
the Eastermost Promontory of the Isle of Wight, almost opposite to Portsmouth,
from whence, had it not been too bold an adventure to hazard her Majesty in
that narrow Straight of Sea, and in a Night-Tide, they might have reached
Portsmouth the next morning; but making use of the Day-tide, which served about
Ten of the Clock, on Wednesday the Fourteenth of May, the Queen landed at
Portsmouth, about Four of the Clock in the Afternoon, where She was received
with all possible demonstrations of Honor; the Nobility and Gentry, and
Multitudes of Londoners, in most rich Apparel, and in great numbers, waiting on
the Shore for her Landing; and the Major and Aldermen, and the Principal
Persons of that Corporation, being in their Gowns, and with a Present and
Speech, ready to entertain Her; the Cannon and small shot, both from round that
Town, and the whole Fleet, Ecchoing to one another the loud Proclamations of
their Joy.

The King stays to give his consent to Bills Preparing.
The King having received the express of his Queens Landing, prepared to be gone
forthwith, to Salute her upon her Arrival: but his great Affairs of State, and
Bills to be ratified by him into Acts of Parliament, which were not quite ready
for his Royal Assent, delayed him at Whitehall till Monday-night the 19 th of
May, having sent before him the Bishop of London, who departed the Seventeenth,
in order to the Solemnizing of the Marriage aforesaid.

Which Bills being numerous, and very important, when passed into Acts, set us
right where we were the same time Twenty years, designing and enacting Remedies
against those Mischiefs which prevailed against the happy Estate of the
Kingdom before, such as their Act passed in the former Session against Armed,
or Army-like Multitudes, and number of Petitioners, which are not to exceed
seven or eight; and have, as far as humane Wisdom can, provided against the
like dangers of our late Confusions.

There passed likewise many several private Bills for selling of Lands, The
Nature of several private Bills.
and alienating them for payment of Debts; which gave his Majesty occasion to
take notice of the depravity and corruption of manners in the late times; and
to declare, that his goodness in passing them now, should not be brought into
precedent for the future, and he himself would become an example of frugality,
and would provide sumptuary Laws against the Excess and Vanity of the Age,
whose looseness and superfluity did so sadly affect him. But to return.

His Majesty having Signed all the Acts, which are now so many wholesome and
good Laws, as no Age of our Forefathers can boast of, to adorn and Honor his
Queens Arrival, posted away at Nine a Clock that Night, with his ordinary
Guards, in the Earl of Northumberland's Coach, Prince Rupert with him only, to
Kingston, where he came soon after Ten; and at the end of that Town entered
into the Earl of Chesterfield's, there set ready for him, and the Duke of
York's Guards to attend him, and came before Twelve at Night to Guilford, being
Twenty five miles, where he Lodged that Night, and next morning Posted with the
same speed to Portsmouth, King at Portsmouth.
where he arrived about Noon; and because of the Queens indisposedness, which
yet held her in her Chamber, the King satisfied himself by giving her a Visit
privately that day, and then withdrew to his own appartments.

Yet it pleased God to restore her Majesty to such a degree of Health, that she
was able to Consummate the Marriage Sacred Rites, which were performed in that
Town, in private; after which the Nuptials were concluded there, by his
Majesty's Bedding his Queen that night.

During the rest of the stay, Visits were given to the Grandees of Portugal who
came over with the Queen, by all the English Lords and Ladies, and by them
again returned, until the removal of the Court next week to Winchester, thence
to Farnham, to Windsor-Castle, and so to Hampton Court, where their Majesty's
took up the most part of this Summer 1662. as well for the Salubrity as Majesty
of it, being one of the most Magnificent Structures of all the Royal Palaces.

Here the Queen received the Addresses of all the Nobility, Queen at
Hampton Court.
and Submissions of the several Deputies for the Cities of England; more
particularly, from the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, who by Sir William
Wild their Recorder (who pronounced a Spanish Oration) presented her with a
Purse of Gold, June 2.

On the Twenty third of August she was in great Triumph brought by Water from
Hampton Court to finish her Voyage to Whitehall; all the Companies in their
Barges nobly set out, attending the Lord Mayor at this Solemnity; and several
Pageants were placed upon the River, and Speeches designed. All which made a
very noble sight, illustrated by the rich and glorious setting out of the
King's Barge. About seven at night, their Majesty's arrived to that Palace; as
somewhat before, the Queen Mother, being fetched and attended by the Earl of
Saint Albans, arrived at Greenwich, where for a while after she resided, till
her settling at Somerset House, as the abode of her remaining Widdowhood.

The Parliament of Ireland had likewise agreed upon an Act for raising One
hundred and twenty thousand pound, in two years, by Subsidies. In Scotland, six
Bishops were Consecrated, in the Abbey-Church of Holy-Rood-House at Edinburgh,
with great satisfaction and solemnity; where also the King had graciously
Pardoned Lorn the Marquess of Arguile's Son, Lord Lorn pardoned by the King.
his Life, which he had forfeited by judgment in Parliament; the merciful
disposition of the King declining the instigates of his justice against the
demerits of so obnoxious and Capital a Deliquent.

While the main Fleet, with the General the Earl of Sandwich, was upon return
with the Queen from Lisbon, Vice Admiral Sir John Lawson, with the Frigots left
with him, yet plied to and fro about the Barbary-shore, taking and sacking all
Vessels belonging to the Pyratical Trade of those Places, to the almost
breaking the Nest of those Infidel Thieves; and on the Twentieth of April,
having notice of some of their Ships in a Port called Bugia, he fell in with
his Frigots in spite of their Castles and Guns, and burnt and rendered them
unserviceable, and came out again with little loss, April the Twentieth; which,
with the despair of being rid of him and his Fleet, made the Algier Bashaw
stoop now to the offer of a Treaty, and to former Articles, with the required
advantage to our Commerce in those Ports and Seas, which were sent from Sir
John Lawson about June, and brought to the King at Hampton Court, who very well
approved of it; the Dutch having concluded a very shameful Peace or Truce with
them about the same time.

Tangiers condition.
Our Prossession of Tangier alarmed the adjacent African Potentates with the
danger of our encroachments, and the Fame of our Warlike Martial Achievements
by Land as well as by Sea; which consideration drew down into the confines of
that Place one Gayland a Warlike Prince, but then a Rebel against the King of
Morocco and Fez, and usurping part of his Dominions; who continued there,
appearing and disappering for a space of time, upon pretense of a League and
Friendship, when meeting of a sudden as he was ranging thereabouts with his
Horse (the swiftest in the World,) with some of our Forces Forraging for
Provision and Horse-meat, he surprised and defeated them. Their manner of fight
being to leave and take as they see advantage, which they do with very active
and quick force and resolution. Since, we requited it upon some of his
venturing straglers: not long after, he came very freely and entered into
Treaty, which he finished, and is in good Amity at present with us. Shortly
after, the Earl of Peterborough returned thence, and gave his Majesty an
account of the place, and the Lord Rutherford late Governor of Dunkirk, and
newly made Earl of Tiviot, is now the Governor thereof; and Colonel Alsop, an
ancient Soldier throughout the War, Commands under him. The King has made it
a Free Port, and granted it all the Privileges of a Merchant-City, being
seated very conveniently for Commerce, especially by reason of the security
thereof.

This Trinity-Term Sir Henry Vane and Colonel Lambert, at the request of the
Parliament, having been brought from their remote Prisons in Scilly to the
Tower, were Arraigned June the Fourth, before Sir Robert Foster Lord chief
Justice at the Kings Bench Bar, and Indicted; Sir Henry, Sir Henry Vane and
Colonel Lambert Condemned.
for imagining and compassing the Death of the King, and for taking upon him,
and usurping the Government; and Colonel Lambert, for Levying War against the
King in Middlesex, Cheshire, Yorkshire, and other places of the North of this
Kingdom. Sir Henry Pleaded the Authority of Parliament, and justified it, and
put the Court to a deal of needless trouble and impertinent repetition, but
disowned his meddling or making with the Kings Death. Colonel Lambert behaved
himself very civilly and respectively to the Court, and pleaded as his last
Plea, that it did not appear by any additional word, that he was the same John
Lambert mentioned in the Indictment: but he was told it was John Lambert
Esquire; and then he confessed civilly his not minding it before, and
submitted. The Counsel then craved Judgment against him; the Sollicitor-General
saying, That good manners cannot commute for Treason. Both were Sentenced as
Traitors, but the Colonel Reprieved at the Bar by the King's favor, and regard
had to the report the Justices had given him of his submissive and handsome
deportment at his Trial and therefore desired the Judges to return unto his
Majesty his most humble thanks for his so unexpected mercy (which the Judges
said might have been, and was) once thought to be extended to Sir Henry, if his
frowardness and contemptuous behavior had not precluded the way to it: He
nevertheless had this favor shown him, at the intercession of some of his
Relations, who had deserved well of the King in his service, Sir Henry Vane
Executed June 1^.
that his Majesty mitigated the Sentence to a Beheading only, which was
Executed on the Fourteenth of June, on the Scaffold at Tower Hill (where the
Earl of Strafford bled first by his Fathers Treachery,) and there he ran out
into Treasonable Discourses, but was stopped; and after two or three warnings,
his Notes endeavored to be taken from him; which to prevent, he tore them in
pieces, and in that Passion submitted to the Block.

Several Contrivances and Designs being related to the Council, A Proclamation
for Twenty miles, againt Rump. Officers.
hatched by the Phanatick Party, caused the King in their usual method to
retort their Twenty Miles Proclamation upon their own heads, commanding all
Officers, etc. under any of the late Usurped Powers, that had been disbanded,
to depart Twenty miles from the City and Suburbs of London, and not to return
within Eight Months; such only excepted as by the Privy-Councel upon their
Application to them, should obtain license.

The only Discourse and Disputation throughout the Kingdom was, what the
Presbyterian could expect after the Act of Uniformity was passed, and St.
Bartholomews day the Twenty fourth of August expired, which was the time
limited for their Conforming to what the Act had required, by renouncing the
Covenant, and reading Divine Service and Common Prayer in Church-Vestments, as
the Surplice (the main thing bogled at.) Many endeavors there had been before
in Parliament for some Toleration, Presbyterians endeavors for Toleration.
and their Friends solicited to the utmost; but not able to carry it there,
they Applied themselves to his Majesty and the Privy-Councel, (the most of them
having deserted and relinquished their Livings, which the Bishop of London with
much prudence and foresight had provided of able and pious Minister, and
exceptionless, whom he settled in their places) but upon full debate of their
Petition, and as full a hearing, the Council laid it aside, there being none
present to answer and dispute their pretenses to a superseding the express
meaning of the Act, but the aforesaid Bishop; and so all their Chimaera's or
expectations they had raised in the Country by their Letters, to the
obstinating of the more indifferent to the resistance of this Law, from which
they made sure to get a Dispensation (to the ruin of some Families) came to
nothing: and now nothing but Transportation was talked of, for using the free
Exercise of that Religion. The Commissioners for Regulating Corporations had
likewise proceeded to the dismission of such from all Offices and Places in
Council, and otherwhere, who refused to renounce and declare the said Covenant
Illegal, and Suspected, and not cleared for disaffection to the Government; but
not many they were that were upon this account outed and discharged.

By virtue of the Alliance and Treaty with the Crown of Portugal, several
Forces were sent hence to Assist that Kingdom against the prevailing Power of
the Spaniard, who just at the Majority of that King, and his taking the
Government into his own hands, had made a formidable Invasion and Progress into
those Dominions. Forces sent under the Earl of Inchequeen to Assist the King of
Portugal.
These Forces most of them immediately set Sail from Dunkirke, some Troops and
Companies Landing there from Leith, all Commanded in chief by his Excellency
the Earl of Inchiqueen (the famous Soldier in Ireland) Colonel Morgan late
Governor of Scotland being his Major General: they arrived well and in good
health there, on the Twenty ninth of June; and after a little refreshment, (and
being prohibited to eat the Fruit of the Country for fear of Fevours and other
Distempers) advanced toward the Campania: but the Spaniard having notice
thereof, thought it not advisable to Fight with them in their strength and
vigor, but to waste them with the usual incommodities of those Climates to us,
and retreated back again immediately into Spain.

In July following, the Duke of Ormond Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, His Majesty
having given him a very Honorable and friendly farewell, Duke of Ormond arrived
in Ireland.
and having received the like civilities from the whole Court, set forwards in
his Journey and Voyage to that Kingdom, where he Arrived three weeks after,
and was most Magnificently received into the City of Dublin, and congratulated
and welcomed by the whole Body of that People in Parliament; to whom in their
Assembly he delivered himself in a most Excellent Speech.

There was mention made before of the Commissioners for Regulating
Corporations, for the securing of the peace of the Kingdom; by these Gentlemen
named for each County, City and Borrough, it was ordered, besides the
displacing of Officers, that the Walls of the respective Cities and Towns of
Gloucester and Coventry, Gloucester Walls, etc. Demolished.
Northampton, Taunton, and Leicester, and other places which had Bulworks and
Garrisons, and maintained them throughout the War against the King, and were
the Reception of and maintenance the Rebellion, should be demolished, as
Examples and Security to successive times: the County-Troops and respective
Trained Band-Regiments guarded these places when they were Demolished. Dr.
Gauden the Bishop of Exeter died about this time, September; as also William
Lenthal the Speaker of the Long Parliament, very penitently.

The Town of Dunkirk taken from the Spaniard in One thousand six hundred fifty
eight, and kept ever since at a vast and great charge, was by advice of the
Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council, as being never annexed by Act of
Parliament to the Crown of England, returned to the French King, who upon
surrender of it in the year aforesaid delivered it unto us. Now, for the sum of
Five hundred Thousand pounds fully paid, that Fortress was delivered into the
Possession of the French, Dunkirk returned to the French King, October
under the Government of the Count d'E^irades and his Deputy the Marquess of
Montpear; two English Companies with the Governor only Guarding the Gates at
their entrance, and delivering the Keys of the same Town. The Honorable Sir
Edward Nicholas, having served his Majesty and his Father as Secretary of State
for many years, obtained his Quietus est from the King, who would have
dignified his Merit with a Barrony, which Sir Edward modestly declined, because
His Majesty should not increase the Nobility; and Sir Henry Bennet, late the
Kings Resident in Spain, a very excellent Person, was named to that Preferment.

Among these and the like Honors conferred by the King upon his Faithful and
Loyal Servants and Subjects, which the purport of this Chronicle obliged me to
take notice off, and be their Herald; this time challenged my observance of a
Dignity conferred on that eminent and worthy Personage Dr. John Berkenhead, Dr.
John Berkerhead Knighted.
Knighted with a Testimony from his Majesty that he had done his Father and
himself very signal and great services during the last twenty years Revolution:
and there is scarce any Honest man in the Three Kingdoms who will not say Amen
to this his Majesty's EVGE.

There had been suspicion of a Plot, and the City Trained Bands had watched and
warded every Night, for the most part of the Summer, ever since the Kings
departure to meet the Queen: but now, the Design appeared; the first named was
one Captain Baker a New-England-man, an acquaintance of Hugh Peter's there, and
preferred to be one of Olivers Band of Pensioners: this Fellow acquaints one
Hill, A Plot discovered.
the Son of a Phanatick or Independent Preacher in the Street, and tells him of
a Design, and brings him acquainted at several Meetings of diverse of the
Conspiracy, which he having good information of, revealed, with the names of
the Conspirators, to Sir Richard Brown. Some of those engaged thus, only met,
and heard, and reported their discourses of Arms and other preparations to
their own gang, but approved the Treason so well, that they never discovered
it. This Plot was against the Sacred Life of the King, the Duke of York, the
noble Duke of Albemarle, and Sir Richard Brown; and generally the Bishops,
Nobility, Gentry and Commonalty that were not of their Opinions, and Assisted
them not: and they had ready prepared a draught of their Government: their
Councels were carried on by six, who never sat twice in a Place; nor could be
known to any two: their Commander in chief was Ludlow, Colonel Danvers, Mr.
Nigh, Mr. Lockyer, and one Lieutenant Strange; the Captains, Spencer and
Taverner, were favorable to the Design, and would surprise Deal Castle in
Kent, as Windsor was certain to be theirs: and the Word the Night they were to
fall on (which after several put offs, was appointed the last of October) was
to be given them by George Phillips a Sergeant in the Colonels Company of the
White Regiment. For this, the Eleventh of December, the said George Phillips,
Thomas Tongue a Distiller of Strong Waters, Francis Stubs being a Cheesmonger,
James Hind Gunner, John Sellers Compass-maker, and Nathanael Gibs Felt-maker,
were Convicted by Evidence of their fellow-Conspirators, Edward Rigge, Bradley
and others; only Hind Pleaded Guilty, and craved the King's Mercy: they
alleged, they never Acted such Traiterous intentions; but the Design was
proved to have been communicated and laid open to them: after their full
Defense, they were all found Guilty; and on the Twenty second of December,
Phillips, Philips, Tongue, Gibs and Stubs Executed December 22.
Tongue, Gibs and Stubs were Executed according to Sentence: but His Majesty
was graciou^ly pleased to give their Quarters to be buried, but their Heads to
be set up upon several Poles, two on each Tower Hill, the nearest place to the
Tower.

On the Twenty sixth of December, his Majesty, to satisfy the Kingdom of his
intents, in reference to the unsatisfiedness of Dissenters to the Established
Settlement of the Church, expressed his Indulgence to their Consciences, so far
as such Liberty would not Disturb the Public Peace; nor entrench upon the
Orthodox Religion professed; and that he would use his best endeavors with the
Parliament to that end.

About the same time came hither a very splendid Ambassy from the Emperor of
Russia, delegated to three of his Knez or Princes; the one of them came some
time before the other, Ambassadors with Presents from Russia.
to prepare all things suitable to the State of their Reception, and had
Audience by the King in privatate at Hamton-Court. The Principal was Knez Peter
Simonewitz formerly Governor of Archangel, our Port of Trade in those
Dominions: he was received in greater State than any former Ambassadors from
any Prince whatsoever, both in respect He uses the same Honors to our
Sovereigns Public Ministers, and the great Immunities and Privileges the
English enjoy again there; as also from that particular Affection which is
between these Two Monarchs: as has been hinted before. At his Receipt, the
whole Military Force of the City was in Arms, Trained Bands, Auxiliaries,
Hamlets, Westminster-Regiments; several of the Companies and Liveries of the
City on Horseback in their Gold Chains, with the Aldermen of the City Riding
before him, who near York-House (where he was to be entertained by the King,
during his stay) made a Lane for Him to pass through them thereunto: Two of
them Rode in the Kings Coach; the Principal was at that time sick, and came by
Water to his House: their Retinue, according to their Country Fashion, were
Vested in a long Robe girt about the Middle, loop-laced on the Breast, and
caped behind; His two Coachmen and Postilions the like, though English men:
there were some Thirty Servants that Rode a Horseback with Hawks on their
Fists, as Presents. On New years-day they were Conducted to White Hall, where
they delivered their Presents of Furs, as black Fox Skins, Ermins, many Timber
or scores of Martins, Beavers, and the like; Persian-Carpets, three Persian
Horses, Argamarick, and other Commodities of that Country, as Damask, Silks,
and Embroyderies; also a Ship Loading of Hemp: there were Presents of the like
Nature from the Empress to the Queen; and from the Prince of Russia likewise:
they were all received with that affection and kindness which the King on all
occasions has manifested to have for that great Potentate. Two of those
Ambassadors departed hence for France, and so to Italy; the Chief stayed to to
return in June with our ships for his own County.

On the Twenty sixth of December at night, in the House of one Mr. ^. la Noy,
an Hamborough Merchant, who had lately married Sir Thomas All^^ Daughter of
Middlesex, being now with Child, as the Family were in Bed, a sudden fire,
without breaking out into the Street (which was the new Buildings in Loathbury,
where others stood) or being discerned, suddenly consumed all that were within,
goods and all, the Chambers and Goods being all burnt from top to bottom, and
not a shreik or cry heard, it being supposed the greenness of the Timber,
smoking more vehemently at the eruption of the fire, instantly smothered them.
A very sad and much-lamented providence, seven being reckoned that were killed
in this manner. The fire was perceived at last by the heat it caused in the
next House; but the Bricks and the shutters in the Windows kept it from
breaking out.

Notwithstanding the inhibition to Nonconforming Ministers to Preach or
Exercise their Ministry, and the penalties thereof; yet Mr. Calamy, late Pastor
of Aldermanbury, by reason the Parish was disappointed on Sunday the Twenty
eighth of December by a blind old Minister that should have Preached there, as
he pretended, went into the Pulpit and Preached; and by his Text, and Sermon,
and Inferences, did reflect hardly and strangely upon the state of the Church,
and beyond his Last, if he had been also capacitated to Preach. Mr. Calamy
Committed.
For this Transgression and Contempt, he was by Warrant of the Lord Mayor
committed to Newgate, where many persons came to visit him, to his no little
advantage; but within two or three days, was by his Majesty's gracious Clemency
and his Order discharged from this Imprisonment, though it were an Offense
done, as it were, to affront that tenderness held forth in His Majesty's
Declaration aforesaid. The Bishop of Lincoln the famous Casuist, Dr. Sanderson,
died in the middle of January; as many of that Function had preceded him since
the King's Restitution, and left his See to the Lord Bishop of Peterborough,
Dr. Laney.

Lord Warreston in the Tower.
The Lord Warreston, a Committee of Safety-man, and infamous for his Treason in
Scotland, and a Fugitive there, being Proclaimed Rebel and Traitor, was taken
and secured in France, and sent over hither, where he was Committed by his
Majesty's Order to the Tower, in order to his sending for Scotland: from thence
Gibs the Brother of the aforesaid Nathanael, who fled, and was lately retaken,
was sent to the Sessions at the Old Baily, February the Twentieth, and with the
beforementioned Baker, Condemned for the same former Treason, and both
Executed at Tyburn in like manner.

The Nineteenth of February the Parliament met, where the King took notice of
his said Declaration of the Twenty sixth of December, Declaration of the King,
and Resolutions of the Parliament.
wherein he cleared himself of any mistakes, as favoring Popery: though he
acknowledged the Services of many of that Profession, yet he was so far from
Tolerating or qualifying them thereby to hold any Office or places of Trust in
the Government, that he desired Laws might be made to hinder the growth of
their Doctrine: That his Zeal to the Protestant Religion and Uniformity shall
not yield to the Bishops themselves; and yet, if the Dissenters will demean
themselves peaceably and modestly under the Government, he could heartily wish
He had such a Power of Indulgence, to use upon occasions, as might not
needlessly force them out of the Kingdom, or staying here, give them Cause to
Conspire against the Peace of it.

In Answer to this His Majesty's Explanation of Himself, and his Declaration of
the Twenty sixth of December, the House of Commons distinctly and separately,
to every particular thereof, gave His Majesty their most humble Thanks; withal,
by their Votes and Addresses to him, Vindicating their settlement of Religion
in the ancient Form, Discipline, and Government thereof, from the Calumny and
danger of Schism; and promised to Assert it with their Lives and Estates, as
their particular and Parliamentary Honor: which Resolutions and Reasons being
of so recent Date, and the Answer of the King not yet given thereunto, which
out-measures the time of this Chronicle, I do remit to another unwearied and
unperplexed Pen.

Scotland in a most Peaceful state and condition; and the Kingdom of Ireland
in a tendency thereunto: but through so many variations and vicissitudes of
Domination and propriety the Lands thereof had passed, that it was not
imaginable the total subversion thereof by the Rebellion of both Parties there,
the Irish and Long Parliament, could devolve things into any presumed security,
it having been the first and last Stage of the War. -- sed Tucro Duce and
Auspice Tucro -- But the Eminence and Prudence of this Lord Lieutenant, the
most noble Duke of Ormond, who has so often Governed this Realm, has given
the greatest pledges of assurance of an happy Establishment, whose beginning I
will not trouble with the short-lived rumors of Commotions and Stirs now very
frequent and rise by the Arts of our Malcontents.

Thus far have I deduced the account of the Three Kingdoms from the most Funest
War, to a blessed and most promising Peace to us and our Posterity: and may
there be in the succeeding years of His Majesty's and his Royal Progenies Reign
(which Almighty God derive through innumerable descents) no other occasion of
our Pens than the gratulatory Records of our undisturbed, unalterable Repose,
Plenty and Tranquillity.

A BRIEF ACCOUNT Of the most Memorable TRANSACTIONS IN ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and
IRELAND, AND Foreign Parts: From the Year 1662, to the Year 1675.

LONDON: Printed by I. C. for T. Basset, at the George near Cliffords-Inne, in
Fleetstreet. 1676.

A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF TRANSACTIONS IN ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND, etc.
THere is a justice due to the Memory of Actions, as well as the Memory of Men;
and therefore since the times of Usurpation have had the favor done them, as
to have the Transactions of those Years publicly recorded, though to the shame
of those Times, that had nothing but Enormity to signalize 'em; with more
justice may we assay to take a short view of those great and Noble Actions,
performed in the succeeding Years: Not that we pretend to a History, but in
short ^^^nals, and brief Collections, to facilitate the way for those that
shall hereafter take a larger and more considerable pains.

Anno Dom. 1663.
THat which the expectations of people were most fixed upon, Parliament begins.
the beginning of this Year, was the Session of Parliament, which beginning on
the 19 th of February 1662, continued to the 27 th of July 1663.

The first thing remarkable, was a Petition of both Houses, Representing, that
notwithstanding his Majesty's unquestionable zeal and affection to the
Protestant Religion, manifested by his constant prosession and practice against
all temptations whatsoever; yet by the great resort of Jesuits and Romish
Priests into the Kingdom, the Subject was generally much affected with
jealousy, that the Popish Religion might much increase, and the Church and
State be thereby insensibly disturbed: esuits banish.
upon which the King set forth a Proclamation, Commanding all Jesuits, and
Irish, Scotch, and English Priests to depart the Kingdom of England and
Dominion of Wales, before the 14 th of May then next ensuing, upon pain of
having the penalty of the Laws inflicted upon them. But while they are bringing
other Consultations to maturity, many other things preceding the Conclusion of
their deliberations, are to be related.

In April his Majesty kept the Feast of St. George at Windsor, where the Duke
of Monmouth, and the Prince of Denmark, by his Deputy Sir George Carteret,
Vice-chamberlain, were installed Knights of the Garter.

Campeach tak^^.
Toward the later end of May, came News from Iamaica, that the English under the
Command of Capt. Mymms, being about 800 men, had made an attempt upon the City
of Campeach, in the Golden Territories of the King of Spain; and that they took
the Town, though defended with four Forts, and 3000 men. But the Spaniards
having intelligence of their coming, had sent away their Women and Riches; yet
though they missed their chief aim, they took the Governor, brought away 50
pieces of Ordnance, and 14 Ships which were in Harbor.

Irish Plot.
The beginning of June brought News of a Conspiracy of several wicked persons
in Ireland, who were endeavoring to raise a new Rebellion there, by surprising
the Castle of Dublin. The Design was to have been put in execution upon the 21
th of May, and the Duke of Ormond first to be seized. To which effect, diverse
persons with Petitions in their hands were to wait in the Castle, while 80 Foot
in the disguise of Handicrafts-men, attended without. Their business it was to
trifle about for an opportunity to surprise the Guards. The Plot was
discovered, and 500 lib. a head set upon five of the Ringleaders, to what
persons soever should apprehend them.

Earl of ^ot^es Commissioner in Scotland.
About this time, his Majesty caused the Earl of Middleton's Commission, as
Commissioner of Scotland, to cease; and appointed the Earl of Rothes to succeed
him in the same Quality.

Bills passed by Commission.
On the third of June, His Majesty by his Commission under the Great Seal of
England; to the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Lord Privy Seal; Duke of
Albemarle, Marquess of Dorchester, and Lord High Chamberlain, passed ten Bills,
which were all private ones, but three; of which the chiefest was, for repair
of the Highways of Huntington, Hertford, and Cambridge-shires.

About the beginning of December, Mr. Paul Rycaut, Secretary to the Earl of
Winchelsey, came from Constantinople, Mr. Rycaut comes from Constantinople.
bringing with him the Grand Seigniors Ratifications of the several Treaties
made with Argier; and as a mark of the Kings satisfaction in the management of
his Employment, and the Message he brought, His Majesty was pleased to honor
him with a fair gold Chain, and a Medal.

Jersey a new (...).
No less mindful was he of the Loyalty of his Island of Iersey; and as a reward
thereof, mu^ about the same time, he ordered a stately silver Mace, richly
gilt, to be bestowed upon the Bailiff, or Chief Magistrate of the Island, to be
born ever after before him and his Successors, as an honorable Badge of his
Majesty's affection to them, for their constant adhering both to his Father and
Himself. It was received with all imaginable demonstrations of joy; and the
first that had the honor to have it born before him, was Philip Carteret, Esquire.
Brother to Sir George, Vice-Chamberlain to his Majesty.

Northern Plot discovered.
But now so loud and so heinous were the rebellious Treasons daily discovered in
the North, that it was thought convenient to give requitals of another nature,
and in the depth of winter to send a Commission of Oyer and Terminer to York,
for trial of the most notorious Offenders in that Conspiracy. Seventeen were
first arraigned; ten of which appeared to have been actually in arms at
Farnley-wood. ^
The Plot was excellently opened, to have been a Design which came from the
Bishopric about a year before; and that an Intelligence was settled between
the disaffected there and in Yorkshire, as also in Ipswich, in Suffolk, and
other Counties; an Oath of Secrecy taken, and Agents employed at London, and
in the West of England, for assistance.

In June preceding, two Agitators were sent into Scotland, to reconcile the
Sectaries there; who were entertained at one Oldroyd's house in Deusbury,
commonly known by the name of the Devil of Deusbury; and afterward diverse
meetings were appointed at a place called Stanh-house in Yorkshire. Whereupon
Marshden and Palmer were sent to London, as Agitators to the Secret Committee
there; and at their return, brought Orders to rise the 12 th of October. with
assurance, that the Insurrection should be general, and Whitehal be attempted.
Nottingham, Gloucester, and Newcastle were to be seized, as Passes over the
Severn, Trent, and Tine; and Baston in Lincolnshire, for a Seaport to receive
Succors out of Holland, and other Foreign parts. All the Gentry were to be
secured, and persons were dispatched abroad for assistance. York they aimed at,
but of Hull they absolutely despaired, as Walters affirmed; who, to give him
his due, dealt most sincerely. Their pretenses were to have been the opposal of
Excise, Subsidies, etc. to re-establish a Gospel-Magistracie and Ministry; to
restore the Long Parliament; and lastly, to curb the Gentry, Clergy, and
Lawyers.

Fifteen of the seventeen first arraigned, Plotters ^ri'd.
were found guilty; the chiefest of whom, was one Captain Oats. Afterward
several others were arraigned; who farther confessed, how the Design had been
carried on by a private Committee at London: That Lambert, or Ludlow, was
proposed for to have headed them: That the Rising was to have begun in Ireland,
to have followed in England, and then in Scotland. Of these, Cotton, Denham,
and Atkins were the chief, who all behaved themselves with a notorious
insolence; Cotton protesting, that he valued his life no more than the Judge
did his Handkerchief. There was also among them one Corney a Preaching
Anabaptist. Most of them being convicted and condemned, were afterward
executed, Executed*
some at York, some at Leeds, and others in other places.

Immediately after this, James Turner, a person for nothing more known than for
the confidence of his behavior, came upon the Stage to plead for himself, who
had been a Solicitor for others before; he was Indicted for Felony and
Burglary, as one that had robbed his own most intimate friend, Mr. Samuel
Tryon, breaking into his house, and binding him in his bed, and then rifling
away what he pleased in the house: Turner tried and hanged.
the matter of fact was so ill defended by a tedious Speech of his own, that he
was condemned, and shortly after executed in Leaden-hall-street, near
Lime-street-end.

But to go on where this necessary digression interrupted me, and to show how
the links of their treasonable Combination hung together; at London shortly
after was tried a Printer, A Printer tried, and executed.
for having had a hand in Printing one of the most execrable Libels that was
ever brought to light; being a design all at once upon the Life, Honor,
Authority, and Royal Family of the King, wherein there was a general Call to a
Rising, in these very words, [ If there be any City, Town, or County in the
three Nations that will begin this Righteous and Glorious Work, referring to
the word Revolt, they may be assured, etc.] It was also ordered to have met the
day appointed for the general Rising. He was found Guilty of having advisedly,
and maliciously Printed the said Libel; and was thereupon adjudged to be drawn,
hanged, and quartered.

After him, Others Pillori'd, and Fined.
a Printer, a Bookseller, and a Book-binder, were tried for a Misdemeanor,
found Guilty, and fined: the one a hundred Mark; the other two forty Mark
apiece; all of them to stand in the Pillory, and be returned to Prison till the
next Sessions; and then to confess their faults in such manner as the Court
should direct; and to put in Security 400 lib. for themselves, and 200 lib. for
their Surety, never to Print, sell, or publish any Book, but such as should be
by Law appointed. The prementioned condemned Printer was executed accordingly.
The three others stood in the Pillory in Smithfield, and before the
Royal Exchange, their Offense being expressed in these words, For selling, and
uttering malicious, scandalous, and seditio^s Books, against the King, the
State, and Peace of the Kingdom.

A remarkable providence.
Nor must we omit the particular Acts of Providence, as well as those which are
universal. A Story very observable, in the preservation of diverse Persons of
Quality, in a house in Holborne; who being there met to a considerable number,
a Link-boy passing under the wall of the House, observed the House failing; who
thereupon immediately ran in, and bid the Company be gone, for the House was
falling upon their heads. And so returning at the same instant, and the Company
following him as fast as they could, they were no sooner out, and clear of the
door, but the house fell indeed to the ground, without any harm to the Company.

A barbarous murder committed by a Portugueze Servant upon his Master.
This Month an Ancient Gentleman, a Portugueze, lodging in Hart-street in
Covent Garden, having been abroad at his Devotions, sent his Servant out to
provide him some Fish for his Dinner; which being dressed and served up, a
little while after, the people of the house heard the report of a Pistol, but
took no farther notice of it. A while after that, the Gentleman's Servant, a
Portugueze likewise, called Peter Caesar, came down and sat to Dinner with the
people of the house, where he staid most part of the afternoon; and then went
abroad, and came in again. Toward the evening he went forth another time, and
caused a Porter to bring home a large Chest, which being carried up stairs, the
Boy drew it into his Masters Chamber; and a good while after, called the Porter
to help him down with it, which he did accordingly. But the Chest proving too
heavy for the Porter and the Youth, another Porter was called, and so they
carried it away to the waterside; where it was put into a Boat, and the Boy
bidding the Water-man cross the water, pretending he was to receive money for
the Goods in the Chest, from a person that was to meet him there, staid a
while; but no body coming, at length in a rage to see himself disappointed,
caused the fellow to row him back again, and by the way slipped the Chest into
the Thames, and left it as in a fury to see himself sent of an Errand to so
little purpose. After this, the Boy returned to his Masters Lodging; but some
blood being discovered upon the stairs, the fellow was apprehended: next
morning the Chest being taken up and opened, there was found the body of his
Master shot through the head. That which moved him to this horrid Villainy, was
a sum of money, between 3 and 400 hundred pound, which his Master wore about him
in a List. He was afterward condemned, and executed at Tyburn.

The Lord Holles Ambassador to the French King.
Upon the Nineteenth of March, the Lord Holles, Ambassador from his Majesty to
the French King, received his Audience at Chasteauneuf, with great Justice to
the Royal Dignity of his Master, and with honorable respect to himself. The
sum of what his Excellency delivered, which was in English, tending
principally to signify his Royal Masters Intentions to preserve an Amity and
fair Correspondence with that King, upon confidence of the like from his
Christian Majesty. To which the French King's Reply was briefly, That his
Excellency might assure his Master, the King of Great Britain, of as much from
himself: concluding with some expressions of particular respects to the Person
of the English Ambassador. And it was observable, that none of the Princes of
the Blood, who had got the precedencie of several Ambassadors of late years,
were there to dispute it with Ours.

June.
This Month the King was graciously pleased to dispense with the attendance of
Sir Thomas Mallet one of the Judges of the Kings Bench, Judge Mallet by reason
of his age dispensed with, and Sir John Keeling sworn in his place.
who had been Judge in the time of King Charles the First; and by consequence
being now, by reason of his very great age, disabled, Sir John Keeling was
sworn in his place. He was a Person of eminent Loyalty and Fidelity to the
Crown.

The same month died the Learned and most Reverend Prelate, Dr. Bramhal,
Archbishop of Armagh; to which See he had been by his Majesty translated from
that of Londonderry. Dr. Bramhal departs this life.
Of whom it is enough to say, that he was the beloved Darling of those two
Renowned Patriots, Archbishop Laud, and the Earl of Strafford.

Gayland assaults Tangier.
In July came Intelligence from Tangier, that Gayland had made a very vigorous
Assault upon Tangier with about six thousand men, the May before. But the Earl
of Teviot, who was there newly arrived, gave him so warm a welcome, that he
retired with the loss of above an hundred men, Re^reats with (...).
and the Commander of his Horse, who by his Crimson-velvet Coat, was thought to
be a Person of Quality; besides that after he was slain, the rest went off
immediately.

Not long after he made a second Attempt, Makes another Attack, but is forced
to retire with great loss.
with 10000 men; but though he made a very sharp Assault, his Entertainment was
far more warm than the former: for he lost a thousand men. After which Defeat,
the Earl of Teviot sent him a Letter, to let him know, that though the King of
Great Britain wanted neither resolution nor ability to maintain his Right, yet
he was a friend to Peace: Makes peace.
which so prevailed upon Gayland, that he sent Messengers for a Treaty, and
soon after came to an Accord.

On the 22 th of this month was Christened James, Duke of Yorks Son Christened.
Son of his Royal Highness, in the Chapel of St. James's, by the Bishop of
London, then Elect Archbishop of Canterbury. His Majesty and the Lord
Chancellor were Godfathers, and the Queen Mother was God-mother. The State was
born by the Earl of St. Albans and the Earl of Sandwich, and the Duchess of
Buckingam held the Infant.

On the 27 th of July, Parliament Prorogu^d.
his Majesty going to the House of Peers, where the House of Commons went to
attend him; after a short Speech, declaring among other things, how he had
proceeded by Commands and Directions to all his Judges, in all Affairs which
the Season and other Necessities would not permit to pass into Acts, gave his
Royal Assent to several Bills, and then Prorogued them till the 16 th of March
following. The chief Acts were. An Act for four entire Subsidies to his
Majesty, by the Temporalty. An Act to confirm four Subsidies granted by the
Clergy. A third in behalf of Indigent Officers; and for settling the profits of
the Post Office and Wine-Licences upon the Duke of York and his Heirs. And for
better Collecting the Duty of Excise, etc.

Nor may it be amiss to relate the manner of the Translation of the Right
Reverend, August.
Gilbert Archbishop of Canterbury, The manner of the Translation of the
Archbishop of Canterbury.
as being novel to the Reading of this Age, and a Solemnity not every day
common.

Just before the Bishops, came into the Chapel the Mace-bearer, the
Archbishops Steward, Treasurer, and Controller, all in their Habits, with white
Staves in their hands.

In the next place followed the Bishops in their Episcopal Robes.

After these, the Dean of the Arches, the Judge of the Admiralty, and the Judge
of the Archbishops Prerogative-Court, with diverse Advocates in Scarlet Robes.

Lastly, several Proctors in the Archbishops Court, in Hoods and Habits.

The Congregation being placed in the Chapel, Divine Service was celebrated by
two of the Archbishops Chaplains; which being ended, the Bishops were brought
up from the Seats they had taken, to that part of the Chapel, where all things
were transacted relating to the Ceremony; in which having seated themselves,
the Kings Commission under the Great Seal was presented to the Bishops, by the
Archbishops Vicar General, and was publicly read by the Dean of the Arches:
whereupon the Bishops accepting of the Commission, the Vicar General went forth
and conducted the Archbishop into the Chapel, the Mace-bearer, Steward, and
Controller marching before, and presented him to the rest of the Bishops; who
being then seated in a Chair before them, the Bishops Commissioners proceeded
in course of Law, and at length to a definitive Sentence; which was publicly
read by the first Bishop in Commission, and then subscribed by himself and the
rest of the Bishops; whereby the Election was confirmed, and made good in Law.

It being now Vacation-time, Kings Progress*
His Majesty went his Progress Westward from London to Bath* and from thence
through Gloucestershire to Oxford* being presented at Reading and Newbury with
Purses of Gold; receiving wherever he came, very high and splendid
Entertainments; particularly, at Littlecot, from Sir Popham; at Newbury from
Sir Thomas Dolman; from the Lord Seymor at Marleborough; from Sir James Thyn at
Ling-leet; at Badmanton from the Marquess of Worcester; and at Cornbury, from
the Lord Chancellor. Coming to Oxford, he was met half a mile from the City by
the Doctors and Scholars in all their Formalities; and entering the Suburbs, by
the Militia of the City, through which he passed from his first Entry to his
Lodgings. During his abode there, he visited the Schools, where a Noble Banquet
attended him: He also touched above 300 Persons; with which impression of duty
and reverence left behind him, he returned in October to London.

Scotch Parliament.
The Parliament of Scotland had this year sat ever since the 18 th of June; in
which time the main thing which they did of general Concernment, was their
Condemnation of Archibald Johnson, alias Lord Wariston, a Member of the
Committee of Safety, who was executed on the 22 th of July at the Market-Cross
of Edinburgh, having received his Sentence in the Parliament House. In the next
place was their Constitution of a National Synod, or Assembly of the Church,
the first that ever was constituted in that Kingdom under Bishops; whereby the
ordering and disposal of the external Government of the Church, and the
Nominations of the Members of the Synod, were to be in the King, by virtue of
his Prerogative Royal in Causes Ecclesiastical: As to the Members constituting
the same, they were to be Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, and Archdeacons, the
Moderators of Meetings for Exercises, with one Minister of each Meeting, to be
chosen by the Moderator and plurality of Ministers for the same. The Synod to
meet at such time and places as his Majesty should appoint by Proclamation; and
to debate of such matters, relating to the Government and Doctrine of the
Church, as his Majesty should deliver to the President. And lastly, no Assembly
to be held without the presence of his Majesty, or his Commissioner. Their
second Act was for an Army of 20000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, with forty days
provision, to be in readiness, as they should be called to march to any part of
his Majesty's Dominions, for suppressing any foreign Invasion, or for any other
Service of his Majesty.

Bishop of London one of the Kings Council.
Upon the 9 th of December, the Right Reverend Humphrey, Lord Bishop of London,
was sworn one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, having for his
great Worth, Learning, and Integrity, been a little before translated from New
Sarum, to the more dignified See of London.

Judge Jenkins dies.
Soon after came news of the death of that Eminent, Loyal, and Renowned Patriot,
Judge Ienkins, who died at his house at Cowbridge, in the 81 year of his age,
in perfect Sense and Memory. He di'd, as he lived, preaching with his last
breath to his Relations, Loyalty to the King, and obedience to the Laws of
England; leaving behind him an unspotted Fame, and the Memory of a President,
which this Age only could have needed, and the next will hardly outdo.

Dutch surpised by the Turk.
A great storm threatened the Dutch Merchants trading in the Grand Seigniors
Dominions, by the miscarriage of their Ships; which loading the Grand Seigniors
Goods, and Merchandise of Turks, to the value of 170000 Dollars, was surpised
by a Malthese. But the Turks would not believe, but that the Commander of the
Dutch Vessel was privy to some Treachery; and therefore the Grand Seignior
resolving not to lose what was in his power to recover, sent for the Holland
Resident, persuading him that he engaged for the fidelity of the Master, to
make him and the Dutch Nation responsible for his loss; in order whereunto,
directions were given to secure the Dutch Merchants in Smyrna, and the Resident
commanded to abide in Adrianople: so that there was no way to redeem him from
ensuing mischief, but a quick promise of satisfaction.

Pope and K. of France differ.
In Italy, the Pope and King of France were like to have been engaged in a very
great Quarrel. For the Pope being incensed against the King of France, for
encroaching upon the Church, occasioned by the Popes delay of giving him
satisfaction for the injury done to the Duke of Grequi by the Corsi, began a
serious debate in the Conclave how to proceed against him, whether by
Excommunication, or otherwise; though carried in the end for moderation.
However, the King of France possesses himself of Avignon. The Pope kept a great
bustle at first, and made a fair show as if he would have opposed the French
King: but the King of France having already s^nt some Troops into Italy, and
ready to advance with a greater Body; They come to an Agreement.
at length Articles of Agreement were signed at Pisa, between Bourlemont, and
Cardinal Rasponi.

First, That the Cardinal Imperial should be confined to Genoa, during the
Kings pleasure.

That Dom Mario, the Popes Brother, should be banished to Siena for three
years, not to return to Rome; upon any pretense whatsoever.

That Cardinal Chigi, the Popes Nephew, should be sent into France; where at
his first Audience, he should desire the French Kings Pardon, for himself and
his whole Family: and in his second Audience, in the Name of the Pope,
supplicate the Christian Kings excuse, for the affront given to the Duke of
Crequi.

That the said Duke, in his return to Rome by Land, should be met at the
Frontiers of the State Ecclesiastic, by Dom Augusto, another of the Popes
Nephews: if by Sea, at a proportionate distance, by the Galleys of the Church.
And the Duchess of Crequi to be received at a Leagues distance from Rome, by
the Wife of Dom Mario.

That the Duke of Crequi being returned to Rome, shall be there treated with
all b^n our due and customary to the Ministers of France.

That the Duke of Cesarini be restored to his Goods and Honors, and indemnifi'd
for the future; and all others who had suffered in the King of France's Quarrel.

The Duchy of Castro restored to the Duke of Parma, paying 1200000 Livres, at
such and such payments.

The Valley of Cornachio to the Duke of Modena, paying 500000 Livres, in
consideration of the charge of Garrisons.

That there be a Pillar raised in the Palace of the Corsi, with an Inscription
bearing the substance of their Condemnation.

Out of which Articles, the ground of the Quarrel is easy to be gathered; and
how easily a Catholic Prince, though one of the Eldest Sons of the Church, can
dispense with his obedience to the Pope* when he has a power and spirit to
resist him; and that it is not the Law of Nature, that the Pope should trample
upon the Necks of Princes. Rasponi, with great reluctancie, lingered out to the
last moment; but the Pope found himself obliged to yield to the King upon his
own Conditions.

While the Christian Princes are thus at difference, The Turks B^siege
New-hausel.
the Turk enlarges his Dominions; laying Siege to New-hausel, one of the most
considerable Passes and Forts which the Christians had in those parts. The
Bassa coming before the Town, sent in a Summons to Count Fo^gats, the Governor,
in these words: I, through the Grace of God, and through the Miracles of our
Prophet, who is a Son of both Worlds, and by whom there is happiness and glory:
I, that am the first in Council, and General of the most Mighty Emperor of the
Turks, that is the King of all the Kings of the Earth: To you, Adam Forgats,
that are the Chief of the Nobility of Hungary, Do make known, that through the
Command of my gracious Lord, I am come with his Forces before New-hausel, to
reduce it to his obedience. Wherefore if ye shall deliver up the place to us,
you shall have liberty to march out with what belongs to you, from the highest
to the lowest, and to what place you please. And he that will rather stay,
shall keep his goods and estate: But if you will not yield, we will take it by
force; and every man of ye, from the highest to the lowest of you, shall be put
to the sword. If the Hungarians did but know the Intentions of the Mighty
Emperor* they and their Children would bless God for them. Peace be to the
Obedient.



But for all this menacing Summons, the Town held out many a brisk Assault of
the Besiegers, who lost near 20000 of their men before it: so that it was
verily reported, that the Enemy would have quitted the Siege, had it held out a
week longer. New-hausel surrendered.
But Count Forgats delivered i^ up at length, contrary to the will of the
Germans, upon Conditions to march out Bag and Baggage to the next Garrison,
leaving behind him 60 brass Guns, Powder and Ball in proportion, 3000 fats of
Wine, and plenty of Provisions.

Count Serini beats the Turks at the River Mur.
Count Serini watched all advantages, yet durst not attempt to relieve it, by
reason of the smalness of his force; and yet in some measure, he quit scores
with them shortly after. For hearing of a great Body of the Enemy, who were
intending to lay a Ship-bridge over the River Mur, he marched thither; and as
soon as he understood that two thousand were got over the water, he set upon
them at such a disadvantage, that he put them to the rout: their fellows that
were coming over, fell into such a consternation, that they could neither get
back, nor swim, nor defend themselves; so that the River was quite covered with
men and Horses. The Count made use of the opportunity, not taking so much as
one Prisoner; so that between killing and drowning, very few escaped, though
above 10000 in all: above a thousand of their Horses were taken coming out of
the water. A considerable prevention of their entering Stiermark, and coming up
as far as Grats, without any possibility of opposition.

The Portugals take Ginaldo in Galicia, and totally rout the Spaniards.
The like success had the Portugals against the Spaniards, taking the Town of
Ginaldo in Gallicia, wherein was the Magazine of Spain. Afterward giving
Battle to Don John of Austria, who commanded 7000 Horse, 12000 Foot, and 18
pieces of Ordnance, they routed him in the open field, and took all his Bag and
Baggage, being assisted by the English. They slew 1000, took 4000 Prisoners,
and most of the eminent Commanders.

But a worse fate had attended the Protestants of Piedmont, had not they
s^outly defended themselves. For while their Delegates were pleading for them
at Turin, under the Protection and Safe Conduct of the Duke of Savoy, their
Sovereign Prince, protesting their Loyalty and Submission to him; his Forces,
to the number of between 16 or 18000 Horse and Foot, entered the Valleys at
Prerustine, St. Bartholomew, Rocheplate, and other places; endeavoring to
possess themselves* of Angrogue, and St. Martins, two of the strongest Holds in
all the Valley of Piedmont. In their way, they set all on fire, cut and tore
the Vines, and destroyed all. The Inhabitants seeing themselves assaulted,
contrary to Faith given, and seeing they were undone, The Protestants of
Piedmont defeat the Forces of the Duke of Savoy.
made head: the Fight was hot for the time; but though the Savoyards were
thirty for one, they were at length forced to retreat with the loss of above a
thousand men killed and wounded, and many Officers. All which was said to be
done by the Jesuits Council de Propaganda Fide.

Anno Dom. 1664.
WE shall begin this Year with the Trial of several persons for their Lives,
being of the same Party with those last Year executed at York. The greatest
part of their hopes of destroying his Majesty, was built upon the confidence of
a power they had, as well to divide and distract his Friends, as unite his
Enemies; which they endeavored to do, by diverse false and scandalous Rumors,
which upon all occasions they scattered among the people, as being one half of
their business. The Tragedy was to have begun in the Counties of Westmerland,
Durham, and Yorkshire, by seizing upon Carlisle, all the eminent Persons and
Justices of the Peace of the said Counties, and what Public Treasure they
could find. A small Party met at Kirkby-Steven, but failing of their number,
Traitors executed.
soon dispersed themselves again. Several were executed, particularly at
Appleby, Robert Waller, Stephen Weatherhead, and Henry Petty.

But such was the inveterate malice of these kind of people, such was the
Influence of Ejected Ministers among them, that notwithstanding so many persons
had suffered the year before, yet at Newbury, the Mayor and Company of the Town
being met upon Easter- Tuesday to choose Churchwardens for the year ensuing,
Disorders at Newbury.
they were assaulted by a rude and confused multitude, of all sorts of
Phanaticks, some crying one thing, and some another; and though sundry times
excluded by the Constables that were called to keep the peace, yet they still
broke in with fresh clamours, crying out, that it did not belong to the Mayor
and Company, but the whole Parish to make the choice. In fine, they came to
this at last, that they did not matter who was chosen, so one Pocock, rendered
odious to the Rabble for his Loyalty to the King, were not one. But Sir Thomas
Doleman coming immediately to Town, Sir Thomas Doleman seiseth upon the chief
sticklers.
upon notice of the disorder, with a Guard of Soldiers, seized the chief
sticklers, who were afterward proceeded against according to their demerits.
And understanding that certain Grand Phanaticks, being charged with Arms,
refused to send in their men, he with the rest of the Deputy Lieutenants caused
them to be fined, and levied their fines by distress of their goods. In the
mean time, notice being taken of several dangerous applications made to some
Prisoners in the Tower, Mildmay, Wallop, Fleetwood, and Garland were sent away
to Tangier, and certain other Prisoners disposed of into other places of
security.

This Month also brought Intelligence of the proceedings of the Earl of Teviot,
then Governor of Tangier, who finding Gayland unwilling to comply with him in
his propounded Articles of Peace, resolved to make use of Force; and having
worsted the Moor in an Attack which he made upon the English, with great
courage and vigor, for some time afterward undisturbed, began and finished a
great part of the outermost Fortifications: and to make room for the English,
Jews expelled Tangier.
and Strangers of better account, turned all the Jews out of the City.

Now was it less welcome news, Sir Richard Fanshaw Ambassador in Spain.
for his Majesty to hear, that his Ambassador Sir Rich. Fanshaw was
magnificently received and entertained by the King of Spain, in testimony of
the high value which that King put upon his Majesty's Alliance, and the
reverence he had for that Correspondence, which so great an Ambassador was sent
to continue and preserve between both Kingdoms.

But as if the heat of the Spring had warmed the English bloods, English
Complaints against the Dutch.
His Majesty and his Parliament, at this time sitting, began to take into their
deep Consideration, the great Complaints that had been made against the Dutch,
whose injuries and affronts had not a little enraged the Nation. Whereupon, a
Report being made by Mr. Clifford of their Encroachments upon Trade, from a
Committee appointed to examine that affair, Resolves of the Houses therein.
Thereupon the House made two Resolves, the Substance of which were* That the
wrongs, dishonours, and indignities, the damages, affronts, and injuries done
by the Subjects of the United Provinces to our Merchants, were the greatest
Obstructions to Foreign Trade: That His Majesty should be moved to take speedy
and effectual course for the redress thereof, and that they would assist him
with their lives and fortunes, against all opposition whatsoever. The Lords
concurred; and thereupon both Houses attended his Majesty, who declared his
Royal Sense, The King declares himself.
and high Esteem of their care and tenderness for the Honor and Good of the
Nation. Letting them farther know, That he would examine and prove the
particular Complaints; that he would demand satisfaction by a Public Minister,
and do his utmost endeavor to secure his Subjects from the like Violences for
the future; depending upon the Promise of both Houses to stand by him. Upon
which Declaration, both Houses returned their humble and hearty Thanks.

April 6 th. Soon after this, the King came to the House, passed two particular
Acts, the one for holding Parliaments once in three years at least; and
repealing a former Act, called, An Act for preventing the inconveniences by
long intermissions of Parliament. At the signing thereof, his Majesty gave them
thanks for their ready concurring in a thing so advantageous to the Nation; and
for recalling the other so prejudicial, and so much to the discredit of
Parliaments, as if the Crown were jealous as Parliaments, or that Parliaments
were jealous of the Crown.

Sir John Lawson with a Fleet for the Streights.
While these things were transacting, Sir John Lawson, Admiral of the English
Fleet, sent into the Mediterranean Sea to repress the Insolences of the
Pirates of Argier, sent home seventeen Ships, and between two and three hundred
men, and great store of Goods, which those Corsairs had taken prize; to the
Honor of the Public, and private satisfaction of many.

Buchanans Bank burned in Scotland.
Nor can we omit the punishment of a Criminal Book, long after the Author's
decease. For with the same justice may Books, as well as men, be executed for
Treason. And therefore long after his death, about the beginning of May, was
Mr. George Buchanans Book, De Iure Regni apud Scotos, called in and suppressed,
by an Act of the Parliament of that Kingdom; having been condemned before by
another Act of Parliament, in the year 1584.

A Proclamation ag^in^t Contributions, etc.
Nor was it less to the advantage of his Majesty's Service, that at the same
time they issued out another Proclamation, To prohibit all persons, to seek
demand, receive, or deliver any Contributions, or Supplies, but what were
publicly allowed and practiced, without allowance of the Lords of the Privy
Council. For without Libels and Collections, the grand support of Conventicles,
it is morally impossible to unsettle any Government.

(...)rous Tartar.
Among such serious things as these, Historians have allowed themselves to
entertain their Readers with miraculous Accidents. Which puts us in mind of the
portentous Tartar, which Count Serini was reported to have taken about this
time. From the shoulder upward, he had the shape of a Giant-like man, his Neck
long, and like that of a Horse, with a Man^; the lower part of his face like a
man, with a great wild Beard; the upper part like a Horse, with large Ears. He
was armed with a great Bow, and a Quiver by his side, with a long Dart. If
this Relation may not gain sufficient credit, yet the Monster may serve to
fight many Ages hence with Regulus's his Serpent.

Barbado's ^e^^ir.
Another strange Accident was related from the Barbado's, then published not
without great Authority; which was, that about 900 miles Eastward of the
Barbados, a Vessel being in her full course, a certain great Fish struck the
Ship on the Star-board side, and passing under it, touched the Rudder, and
threw the S^e^rs-man from the Helm; and when she came on the other side, heaved
a great Sea into the Ship. At her first stroke, she ran her Horn through the
sheathing, a three-Inch Plank* and threw the Timber into the Cieling, where it
broke short off, so that a piece of 12 Inches long, and 100 and a half weight,
was left in the hole. Had not the Horn been broke in the hole, the Vessel had
been lost; for notwithstanding that stoppage, the water came in so fast, that
it kept a Pump employed. The Horn was like an Elephants Tooth, but more
ponderous.

Sir John Lawson proclaims War against Argier.
But passing over these Relations of lighter moment, the next Intelligence which
we meet withal, is of Sir John Lawson, who having offered all fair
Accommodation to the Pirates of Argier, yet finding them disdain his proffered
Peace, he declares open War against them; and immediately after took one of
their Corsairs of thirty four Guns, and 260 men, which he sent into Majorca.
Part of the Prisoners, being Turks and Moors, he sold to the Duke of Beaufort,
Admiral to the King of France, then in those Seas.

But now his Majesty mindful of the great work he had in hand, had given his
particular Instructions to his Ambassador in the Netherlands; who thereupon
about the middle of May gave in his Memorandum to the States of the damages
which the English complained to have suffered by the Subjects of those
Provinces. A Memorandum delivered the States.
But the unprepared Belgian, not finding it convenient to give such speedy
Answers, resolved to send their own Ambassadors to the King himself; which, as
it was a way of answering more magnificent, so it was the occasion of greater
delay.

Upon the 17 th of May, the Commons being met in the House of Lords, His
Majesty in a gracious Speech, gave both Lords and Commons to understand his
Royal Approbation of their Cares and Labors for the good of the Public;
together with a Princely acknowledgment of their compliance with his pleasure
in the dispatch of the business of the last Sessions. Afterward his Majesty
caused them to be Prorogued till the 20 th of August ensuing. Par^ia^^^t
Pro^og^ed.
Withal declaring, that unless something extraordinary should fall out, it was
his Royal purpose not to call them together till November following, whereof
they should have seasonable notice by Proclamation.

Upon which, Sir Edward Turnor, then Speaker, represented to his Majesty the
humble Thanks of the House for his Gracious acceptance of their endeavors in
the Service of his Majesty and the Public. After which, he particularly
insisted upon the unsettled condition of the Country, by reason of Phanaticks,
Sectaries, and Non-conformists; and next to that, upon the Injuries complained
of by our Merchants, concerning the frauds and practices of our Neighbors the
Dutch, in the East and West Indies, in Turkey, and Africa; which, besides the
Indignities offered to his Royal Majesty and the Crown of England, were
computed to amount to no less than the value of seven or eight hundred thousand
Pounds. Lastly, he presented the Heads of several Bills ready for his Royal
assent.

Accordingly, his Majesty signed several private, and some few public Acts;
among the rest, An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles; which
though it occasioned great trouble to the Magistrates of the several Counties,
yet it made apparent their faithful care, and Loyalty to his Majesty's Service;
so that indeed it was the whole employment of this Year, to apprehend and try
the daily offenders against this Statute.

His Majesty in the mean time finding it agreeable to his Royal wisdom
forthwith to equip two considerable Fleets, both to secure his Subjects in
their freedom of Trade, and maintain the Honor and Interest of the English
Nation, employed some of the Lords of his most Honorable Privy Council to the
City of London, The King sends to the City for Money.
for the Loan of an hundred thousand pounds upon so extraordinary an occasion,
referring them to the Lord Treasurer for terms of repayment. This was received
with so dutiful a compliance by the Common Council of the City, Granted.
that the said Supply was presently Voted; acquitting themselves at once both
in point of Loyalty and prudence. Their present duty and Service to the King,
manifestly redounding to the welfare and safety of themselves.

While his Majesty is thus busied in his preparations at home, Earl of Teviot
killed.
we may look abroad; where we are forced to behold the fall of the Noble Earl
of Teviot, who upon the third of May passing the Jews River, fell into an
ambush planted there by Gayland, sheltered by a thick wood, and seconded by his
whole Army. The Party which the Earl commanded was totally lost, excepting a
very few: his Memory however is there held in great Honor, as if the Memory of
his Courage were the Soul of the Garrison.

And seeing we are got so far abroad, Turks defeated.
it may not be unseasonable to remember the famous Battle fought between the
Turks and Christians, under the conduct of Montecuculi, it being one of the
(...) famous Occurrences of this year, most fatal to the Infidels, who that day
left dead upon the field the flower of their Infantry, to the number of 6 or
7000; among which, two Bassaes, all their Cannon, above forty Colors, with
Plunder inestimable. To which Honorable Victory, the wounds of the French did
not a little conduce.

Nor are we so slenderly to pass by another Achievement of Geneal Souches,
Turks a second time defeated.
the general good of Christendom being equally concerned in both; who with an
unequal number of only six thousand, encountering above 15000 of the Enemy near
the Garrison of Lewentz, with the loss only of 250, slew eight thousand;
thereby gaining an absolute Victory, vast Booty, and Provisions of all sorts.

All this while though there was open War with Argier, and that Lawson kept so
vigilant an eye over them; yet by reason that either through Cowardice, or want
of sufficient force, they were constrained to keep close in their Harbors, that
sedulous Admiral could do little good upon them, otherwise than by blocking up
their Harbors, to keep them from Roving, and doing mischief: His Majesty
therefore having more occasion for so great and eminent a Commander at home,
sent for both him and C. Berkley into England, Lawson called home.
to employ them against a more Noble Enemy; in pursuance of which Order, Sir
John Lawson returns for England, leaving Captain Allen to Command in Chief in
his Room, Capt. Allen in his room.
who in a short time after brought them to that distress, that they were glad
to accept of Peace, upon terms advantageous enough for the King of England. The
Divan disowning the Breach, and laying the fault upon some few, that for their
own benefit, would not be ruled by their Superiors.

Ambassadors sent abroad.
As thus his Majesty's Arms, so were his Counsels active abroad. The Earl of
Carlisle is sent Ambassador to Muscovy and Sweden, whither also Sir Gilbert
Talb^t was likewise employed as a particular Envoy; as likewise Mr. Coventry to
Denmark. All upon such important Instructions, as the emergency of Affairs at
that time required; but in general, to keep a strict union and Correspondence
with those Nations, Neighbors of his Enemies.

Sir G. Downing sent into Holland.
Sir George Downing was presently after his return into England, sent back again
with full Instructions what he had to do. Many Conferences he had about the
Lists of Damages; but the Dutch would return no positive Answer to any thing,
nor come to any Agreement, hoping to prove the event of certain great
expectations which they had: not the least of which, was the return of a vast
Treasure in several great Fleets of Merchantmen. His Majesty well knowing how
strong a Nerve of War Money is, resolved to way-lay those vast Masfes of Wealth,
as they passed his own Channel; moved also by certain Intelligence which he
had, that the Dutch were resolved in contempt of his power, to send their
Guinee preparations by Sea, and that Opdam should convey them through the
Channel. To which end and purpose, that he might be beforehand with the
preparations of the Dutch, the King strives with all his Puissance to make
ready his Navy. Naval preparations.
Whose Royal endeavors, and indefatigable pains in his own particular Person,
were answered by the Success. For such was the alacrity of his Subjects, that
saw him continually traveling from place to place, by the presence of his own
Majesty to encourage and forward the work, and to see all things effectually
and speedily done, that the City freely, at the first demand, made by the Earl
of Manchester, A second Loan by the City.
Lord Chamberlain of the Kings Household, supplied him with another Loan of
another hundred thousand Pounds: which so highly promoted his Royal Design,
that while the Dutch, slattering themselves with vain suppositions of his want
of Men and Money and broken with the Calamity of the Pestilence, were only
forced to look on, and with envy behold his vigorous preparations, the King had
furnished out such a magnificent Navy to the Sea, as the Ocean had hardly seen
in any former Ages.

On the other side, the Dutch having considered the dangers of the Northern
Passage, seemingly lay aside all thoughts of going about by Scotland, and
resolve to force their passage through the Channel. The Commissioners therefore
of the several Admiralties having revictual'd Opdams Fleet, from the middle of
October to the middle of December, Dutch Bravado.
gave him order to hasten out to Sea with the first wind, and to Conduct the
Guinee-Succors through the Channel, having taken care for some other Ships from
the Vlie and Texel to join with him; and in the mean time they sent a Galliot
before to their Director-General in Guinee to give him notice of their
Proceedings. Which resolution taken, and carried on with so much vigor, most
men believed to have been extorted from them by the necessity of their present
condition; for they had scattered many Contempts upon the English Nation, and
yet falter'd in the point of execution: Nor was the Issue of this Bravado it
self other, than what their ^ear presented; for about the middle of October,
Prince Rupert at S^a.
Prince Rupert arrived at the Spit-head with sixteen Sail of Men of War.

The first thing he discovered, was a small Man of War of 14 Guns, which the
Prince suspecting to be employed for Discovery and Advice, sent his Smack out
to Sea, with Orders to forbid him to beat there any longer, unless he were upon
Trade: upon which Message he vanished.

At the beginning of November, The D. of York set forth to Sea.
the Duke of York Lord high Admiral of England departed toward his Charge at
Portsmouth, having received a most gracious farewell from his Majesty: in a
short while after, he went aboard, and joined with the Prince, and Earl of
Sandwich; so that it was no easy thing to unlock the Narrow Seas.

Opdam lay with his Fleet in the Goree, Opdam dares not adventure out.
and great debates there were whether he should out or no; but the Wind
continuing cross, put an end to that Dispute. And a fair excuse they had, for
not adventuring upon so great disadvantages as they were like to have found;
for, as we said before, the Duke was now joy^^d with the Prince and the Earl of
Sandwich: Thereupon, about the beginning of December, The Dutch lay up their
Fleet.
perceiving great likelihood of Frosts and high Winds, they thought good to lay
up till Spring; which was accordingly put in Execution, to the great
dissatisfaction of the Merchants, who now found themselves abandoned and left
to all the hazards of a Winter Voyage.

Opdam returned to the Hague, and the Seamen were paid off. And last of all,
for the better Information of the King of France how Affairs stood, Monsieur
Benninghen was dispatched away Post for Paris.

To recompense the Stay of the Royal Navy to attend the Motion of the
Netherlanders, Dutch Burdeaux-Fleet taken.
the Dutch Bourdeaux-Fleet, laden with Wine, Brandy, and other Commodities,
fell all, or the greatest part, into our hands; which together with many other
Prizes at other times this Year taken, made up the number of above a Hundred
thirty five, with great Caution condemn^d in the Admiralty of London. Nine
Dutch Ships were brought into Dover at one time, laden with Canary, Salt, Oil,
Brandy, Spice, and other good Merchandises.

Certain it was, that the Hollander received a very great Foyl in the Opinion
of the People, by that Action of withdrawing his Fleet; the Vulgar being
supported till then, with an expectation of some mighty Actions, to Answer
their Prodigious Boasting.

This was all the Action of the English and Dutch Fleets at home. For his
Highness the Duke of York, Duke of York returns to London.
finding that the Netherlanders had laid up their Ships, and that there was now
no need of keeping so great a Navy abroad; with all his Train upon the seventh
of December arrived at White Hall, leaving a considerable number of stout
Vessels, under the Conduct of the Earl of Sandwich; having before his
departure, by a Speech which he made them, inspired the Seamen with an
admirable resolution and cheerfulness to obey the Commands of their Admiral in
whatever Enterprise he should have further Order to Prosecute. Earl of Sandwich
keeps the Sea.


This year were Launched the Royal Catherine, Royal Katherine, and Royal Oak
Launched.
and the Royal Oak. And that noble Ship the London being by an Accident blown
up, the City made their humble Addresses to His Majesty, that they might have
leave to make a Contribution among themselves for the building another Ship of
equal Goodness. The King graciously accepted their kind offer; and to show his
greater Acceptance, enjoined them to add the Title of Loyal to the Name of
London.

As yet there was no public Declaration of War on either side; Only the King
seemed to Treat with his Arms in his hands. And therefore Sir George Downing
still pressed in the heat of all this Preparation and Action, according to his
Instructions, The States disappointed by the English.
for Satisfaction of Damages. The King had also made an Embargo upon the Dutch
here in England; which was carried so privately, that Sir George Downing had
Intelligence of it a full Week, before the States knew any thing thereof. By
which means he gave timely Notice to fifteen or sixteen Sail of the English to
Ship away; insomuch that there remained nothing for the other to Seize, but two
inconsiderable Vessels, and a Colchester Oysterboat.

About the List of Damages there were several Conferences with Sr. George
Downing, which proved all to little or no Effect: But that which pinched them
most, was the Regulation propounded by Sir George for the Government of Trade
for the future; being very sensible, that the English did make themselves much
more Popular among the Natives where they settled, than the Netherlanders had
the fortune to do.

Dutch Scandalous Libel.
At length, in Justification of their Proceedings, they put forth a Scandalous
Libel, entitled, An Extract out of the Memorials of the States General of the
United Provinces, upon the Memorial of Sir George Downing. Envoye, etc.
wherein, they cast many Invective Aspersions upon His Majesty, and put Sir
George to the necessity of a Printed Vindication.

Dutch Des^gnes
The reason of this delay, was to feel the pulses of their Neighbors, and to
try what Assistance they could get from them* especially France, whither they
had posted away Monsieur Benninghen, as was said before; but his Negotiation
did no way answer their expectations: Besides that the Minister of the Crown of
Sweden charged them in a large Memorial with a direct breach of Articles; The
Condition (...) the Dutch with other Kingdoms.
neither would Denmark Meddle with their Cause: The Bishop of Munster threatened
'um for the Eyler Fort: The Emperor solicited 'um to do Reason to Malta: And
Spain Visibly rejoiced for their misfortune before Calice. Which, at the latter
end of Sixty four, after all their Embassies and Negotiations, was their
Condition with Foreign Princes.

They were angry with His Majesty of England, for making a Peace with Argier
without their Assent; whenas they had given order to De Ruyter, who Commanded
the Squadron which was sent to the Assistance of the English, to leave that
Enterprise, having designed him to destroy the English Factories in Guiny: De
Ruyter Sayls for Guiny.
to which purpose, De Ruyter set Sail from Gibralter about the latter end of
September with Thirteen Ships, and Arriving in Guiny, made seizure of all that
he found within his reach at Cape Verd, and the Island of G^gee; where the
Governor with his men finding himself deserted, made Conditions to be
Transported to Gambia.

But this was in part retaliated, by the News which came from Captain Allen,
Smyrna Fleet Encountr'd by Cap. Allen.
who with the Ships under his Command discovering about thirty Dutchmen, which
proved to be the Smyrna-Fleet, with their Convey, made up to them, and upon
their refusing to strike Sail, gave them a Salute; which they answered. After
some Dispute, the Dutch made for the Bay of Cadiz, having lost four of their
Richest Merchantmen, and one taken, and diverse of the rest very much
shattered; one of the Captains of their Men of War was killed. This Action was
the more considerable, in regard that the Sea was so high, that Captain Allen
could not bear out his lower Tire.

About the seventh of June, Sir Thomas Modeford arrived at Iamaica with four
hundred Passengers; Sir Tho. Modeford Arrives at Iamaica.
whither he was followed soon after with Three hundred more, where they found
themselves very well pleased with the Country, and very much encouraged to
settle themselves, the Governor endeavoring with all diligence to settle a
fair Correspondence with his Neighbors both in Sancto Domingo and Cartagena;
to which purpose, he called in all Private Men of War belonging to the Island.

On the 24th of November the Parliament met again, at which time the King in a
Speech signified to them, how unkindly he had been treated by his Neighbors*
yet that he had upon the Stock of his own Credit set forth a Navy that would
not decline meeting with all the Naval Power of the Enemy: that he had borrowed
very liberally out of his own Stores, and of the City of London; so that to
discharge the one, and replenish the other, would require little less than
Eight hundred thousand pounds: That he expected from them all necessary
Expedition in their Resolutions; and that their Supply might be Real and
Substantial.

This was Answered by Sir Edward Turnor, then Speaker, with all Expressions of
Loyalty and Affection to the King; setting forth the deep sense which the
Parliament had of the Injuries of the Dutch, of His Majesty's Expenses, and the
necessity of his Warlike Preparations: Assuring Him of their Constancy and
readiness to yield him all obedience* both with their Bodies and Purses.

To make their words good, they first past a Vote for a Supply of Four and
twenty hundred seventy seven thousand and five hundred pounds; a great
heartbreaking at that time, and that which showed the King would want no hands
while he had such large Sums to carry on the War. In a short time, the
Pr^positions of the several Counties, and the Names of the Commissioners, were
agreed upon by both Houses of Parliament.

Upon the Eleventh of February following, the King Signed the Act, being
Entitled, Act for the Royal Aid.
An Act for granting a Royal Aid of Twenty four hundred threescore and
seventeen thousand and five hundred pounds. For which, his Majesty returned his
Royal thanks.

In the beginning of March following, Parliament Prorogued.
his Majesty having passed several other Acts presented him by both Houses, and
received their good wishes for the prosperity of his undertakings, delivered in
a Speech by the Speaker, Prorogued them till the Twenty first of June 1665.

A little before the Parliament met, Seamen Encouraged.
His Majesty set forth a Declaration for Encouragement of Mariners and Seamen
employed in the Service: Allowing all Officers and Seamen after the rate of Ten
shillings per Tun, for every lawful Prize; and to take to themselves as free
Pillage, whatever they should take on or above the Gun-Deck; with his Royal
Promise to provide for the Sick and Wounded, Widows, Children, and Impotent
Parents of such as should be Killed; with several other advantages mentioned in
the said Declaration: His Majesty's Wisdom and Goodness in that, and in all
other things, plentifully providing for all Events both of War and Peace.

In December following, Reprisals granted against the Dutch.
His Majesty setting forth the Consideration which he had taken of the
Injuries, Affronts, and Spoils done by the Subjects of the United Provinces, to
the Ships, Goods, and Persons of His Majesty's Su^jects, notwithstanding many
and frequent demands for Redress; by the Advice of His Privy Council ordered,
That general Reprisals should be granted against the Ships, and Goods, and
Subjects of the United Provinces.

As this did not a little vex the Dutch, so with greater reason the action of
De Ruyter in Guiny did Incense the King of England* and therefore in, the
beginning of February he put forth a Declaration, Feb. 1664/5 Declaration of
War against the Dutch.
That the Subjects of His Majesty had sustained several Injuries and Damages
from the Subjects of the United Provinces: That he had made Complaint thereof,
and frequently demanded Satisfaction: That instead of Reparation, they had not
only ordered De Ruyter to desert the Consortship against the Pirates of the
Mediterranean Sea, but also to do all acts of Violence and Hostility against
His Majesty's People in Africa: And that therefore His Majesty did with the
Advice of his Privy Council, Declare the Dutch the Aggressors; Impowring His
Majesty's Fleet to Fight and Destroy the Ships of the Netherlanders.

This Declaration being a solemn Denuntiation of War, was proclaimed in the
beginning of March, at White Hall, Temple Bar, and the Royal Exchange, with the
usual Solemnities.

This Declaration charging them to be the Aggressors, stuck heavily in their
Stomachs, and they took it into their serious consideration.

But instead of answering to so high a Charge, they contented themselves with a
second Libel, Another Dutch Libel.
which they had published somewhile before; which they called [ A Summary
Observation and Deduction, delivered by the Deputies of the States General,
upon the Memorial of Sir George Downing, Envoy Extraordinary of the King of
Great Britain.] As lewd a piece, for foulness of Language, and weakness of
Defense, as ever came into the light, under pretense of Authority.

In the mean while, Dutch Embassies prove fr^^^less.
their Embassies to Swedeland and Denmark went slowly on; and instead of being
befriended by France* the Ambassador of that Crown is ordered to demand
reparations for the loss of two very considerable East India Ships, taken from
the Subjects of that Kingdom. And at the same time, his Electoral Highness
renewed his demands of satisfaction from the Governors of Wasel, for the
affront offer^d to the Son of his Excellency the Earl of Carlisle, of which it
may not be unseasonable now to give the Relation.

Earl of Morpeth affronted by the Hollander.
The Lord Morpeth, Son of the Earl of Carlisle, traveling from Munster to
Collen, found a T^oop of Horse drawn up in his way; the Captain whereof coming
to the young Lord, told him, he had Orders to carry that Company to Wesel, by a
Verbal Order from the Governor* which he did, and lodged the Company in two
Inns. After they had been two days Prisoners, one Hayes, a Gentleman belonging
to the Duke of Brandenburghs Council in Cleve, demanded the Prisoners in the
Dukes name, threatening to seize the Goods of the States Subjects in the Dukes
Dominions, in case of refusal. The Governor answered, that he was informed,
they were gathering a Party to fall upon his Garrison; but finding the
Information false, he gave them all free liberty to proceed in their Journey.
But the Lord Morpeth and the English not so contented, went to Cleve, and there
in the Dukes Court exhibited a Charge against the Governor.

Major Holms committed.
Not long after, Major Holmes was committed to the Tower, upon several
Accusations laid against him. But when the whole matter came to be strictly
enquired into and examined, Discharg^d.
he did so fully clear himself upon every point, that the King was not only
pleased to discharge, but to honor him with a singular mark of his favor.

Foreign Ministers complain in Holland.
Toward the middle of March, several Memorials were delivered in by the
Ministers of France, Portugal, and Swede, complaining of their Ships being
detained contrary to the Usage and Practice of their Friends and Allies. To
which the States gave little or no satisfaction, only permitted some French
Ballast-ships to go out.

Capt. Allen returns.
About the latter end of March, Captain Allen arrived in the Downs with a
considerable Squadron of his Majesty's Fleet, and a Convoy of rich Merchants,
together with a rich Prize, one of them that were taken at Cadiz, a lusty Ship,
which was afterward made a man of War, and carried above 40 Guns.

Dutch Manufactures prohibited.
About this time, his Majesty published a Proclamation, prohibiting the
Importation or Retailing of any Commodities of the Growth or Manufacture of the
States of the United Provinces, occasioned by a Prohibition on their parts, of
the Importing or Vending any Goods or Wares made in any of the Kings Dominions.

Peace with Gayland.
But while we prepare for War at home, we make Peace abroad. For the English in
Tangier had by this made an advantageous Accord with Gayland; the M^ors being
very ready to agree with them in all Amity and good Correspondence.

Sir C* Cotterel sent to Bruxels.
Nor was it less pleasing to hear of Sir Charles Cotterels reception at Bruxels;
who being sent on his Majesty's behalf, to preserve and continue the Ancient
Amity, had an entertainment suitable to his Quality.

If there were any thoughts of Peace among the Hollanders, it was only in show;
for their preparations for War were open and public: and therefore the King
with most indefatigable diligence, journey'd from Port to Port, to hasten out
his Fleet, already in great readiness; as also by his presence to encourage the
Seamen, English Fleet ready to set sail.
that by the 25 th of March, ending the Year 1664, the Fleet most magnificently
prepared with all Provisions necessary, was ready to receive their most
renowned Admiral, the Duke of York, who some days before went early in the
morning to his Charge, Duke of York goes aboard.
attended with diverse Eminent and Honorable Volunteers: It was a Navy, for
number of Ships, and choice of men, such an one, as the Nation never set to Sea
one more formidable nor more glorious.

This did not a little terrify the Dutch; besides that some Weeks before, they
had been put to a great disorder, English Fleet upon the Dutch Coast.
upon the appearance of some part of the English Fleet, under the Earl of
Sandwich, which though at a distance, and without any rational appearance of
danger, set them into such a confusion, that it fell little short of a general
Cons^er^ation.

Nor were they yet able to come forth, though making all the haste they could.
Nor had they done any thing considerable all the Winter before; only sent
Bankert to Sea; which, to what intent soever it was contrived, the Design
proved ineffectual. For attempting to go about by the North, he met with
nothing but the boistrousness of a tempestuous Sea, making a quick return home,
and leaving behind him four of his best Ships, unmercifully shattered in the
storms.

And thus, while the English are their Enemies at Sea, they will make use of
none of the English friendship by Land; English Officers cashiered in Holland.
And to that purpose they order a Cassation of the English and Scotch
Regiments: only that the Officers might be admitted again, taking an Oath to be
faithful to the Lords States General, and to the States of the respective
Provinces whom they served. But the English were so Loyal, as to throw up their
Commissions, disdaining to serve, upon such monstrous Terms, the professed
Enemies of their Prince and Country.

Foreign Affairs, 1664.
That which was most remarkable this Year in Foreign parts, Cessation of Arms
between the Turk and Emperor.
besides what we have already related as they fell in time, that is to say, the
two great Victories obtained against the Turk by the Emperor, was the Cessation
of War that ensued thereupon; of great Concernment, not only to those Empires,
but to all Christendom; a solemn Peace not long after ensuing.

The City of Constantinople was so fatal to the Grand Seignior then reigning,
Grand Seignior leaves Constantinople.
that he resolved to make this Year to be not a little fatal to it, by
withdrawing his Court and presence from thence; and that with so much
indignation against the Place, that he vowed he would rather set fire to it
with his own hands, than return to it again: whereupon he retired to
Adrianople, a place seated fit for his Sports of Hawking and Hunting*
Divertisements that made him seek Peace rather than War.

But the joy of this Cessation was not a little disturbed by the death of Count
Serini; Sireni killed.
who being upon the chase of a Boar, and seeing the Beast likely to escape,
quitted his Company, and followed him single; till coming near him, he fired
his Pistol at him. The Boar finding himself wounded, furiously rushed upon the
Count, and then with four deadly wounds, the first in the neck, the next in the
head, the third in his belly, and the fourth in his foot, tore him up, and
dispatched him.

The French this Year had a mind to get some footing in Barbary, and to that
end got possession of a small Seaport Town or Fort, The French at Gigery.
called by the name of Gigery. The Moors, to expel them thence, came down with
great Forces, and in assailing and defending, great Numbers were slain on both
sides. The Moors in one Assault they made upon it this year, lost six hundred
men; the Duke of Beaufort being wounded on the French side. In which posture we
shall leave them for this Year: Only it is not to be forgotten, that the Great
Turk in revenge of the Battle of Leweniz, and the surprise of Gigery, caused
all the French which he found in his Dominions to be put to death.

But the Portugals with better success, Portugals Victory.
under the Conduct of their General Pedro Jacques de Megalharma, gave battle to
the Spaniards under the Duke of Ossuna; whom they utterly overthrew, with the
loss of 500 men slain upon the place, 300 Prisoners, and all their Baggage and
Provision, which became a Booty to the Conqueror.

In Avignon happened a very great disturbance, Sedition in Avignon.
insomuch that above twenty thousand Burgers gathered themselves together
against the Vice-Legat, having first fallen upon the Garrison, some of whom
they threw over the Walls, and put the rest to flight. This Commotion was
raised, upon a pretense that the Vice-Legat went about to impose something upon
them, against the Liberty of the Inhabitants. But ot length, by mediation of
their Archbishop, they were brought to terms of accommodation, upon condition
that the Italian Garrison should depart the Town and Country, and the Italian
Provost with his Officers be banished for ever out of their Territories. The
Pope took very ill the proceedings of the Vice-Legat. But for better security,
Monsieur de Merceur was appointed to do his best in conjunction with the Forces
of the Neighborhood, either by fair means or by foul to bring them to reason.
At length a composure was made between the Pope and the King of France, and
Avignon was restored into the possession of the Romish See, upon Conditions
which will be hereafter mentioned.

Lisle kill^d.
In August came news from Losanna, that certain Irish-men having Intelligence
that a knot of the Murderers of the late King were gotten together in that
place, and there entertained and protected by the Magistracy of the Town,
entered into a Consultation how they might seize and carry some of those
Regicides off, and deliver them up to the Justice of that Government which they
had so hainously betrayed. The Persons named to be of the Gang, were Goff,
Ludlow, Lisle, Whally, and Fare; whereupon, in the disguize of Lacqueys, they
attempted them, as they were going to Church, under the very Guards of the
Town, and accompanied with the Magistrates, Bailiffs, and Burgomasters of the
place: But finding it impossible to bring any of them off alive, they fell in
particular upon Lisle, as one whom they knew to have been the Condemner of
several of the Kings best and most Loyal Subjects, whom they shot dead upon the
spot. After the act was done, they were forced to encounter the Guards, and
several other people, who engaged themselves on the behalf of the Rebels;
wherein they acquitted themselves to a Miracle, wounding diverse; and having
broke through them, they cried with a loud voice, Vive le Roy d'Angleterre, and
so ^ode quite away.

Anno Dom. 1665.
April 1655. English Fleet at Sea.
THe Duke of York was now aboard, the English Fleet, well manned, and in brave
order, and furnished with all things necessary, and answerable to the
indefatigable care and diligence of so great a Monarch, and the free expenses
of his large Dominions. The Dutch neither ready, nor likely to come forth, as
in the event it proved; so that among them there was nothing memorable, but the
bustle of Council, and hurry of unfinished preparations.

French Ambassador expostulates with the Dutch.
The first Alarm they had was from the French Ambassador, who began to deal
roundly with 'um, and to insist upon the very Letter of a late Treaty for the
restitution of two French East India Ships, which had been so long and often
demanded. The Dutch offered certain small Vessels, which they pretended would
do the French business as well.

Embargo in France upon the Dutch.
Hereupon a general Embargo was ordered by the King of France upon all their
Merchants Vessels, till the Dutch made satisfaction for the two Ships: for
though the Netherlanders had the confidence to withold 'um, yet the King of
France had effectually paid for 'um; so that at length they were forced, not
only to part with the Ships, but the Lading to boo^.

Embargo in Holland upon the English.
In the mean while they enlarged their Embargo upon the English, and not only
made a Prohibition of Trade with England, but also provided that none of the
Subjects of that State should ensure any Goods belonging to the Subjects of the
King of England: And all Newters were forbid to carry Counterband-goods to the
Dominions of his Majesty. The Reason why the States were so backward with the
Fleet, was most certainly the aversness of the people, whom it cost the States
not a little cunning to make tractable to their purposes. To which intent,
Dutch endeavor to amuse the Common people.
they insinuated into the ears and minds of the people, That the King of
England was not in a condition to set out a Fleet; which they not only found to
be otherwise, but also purely done upon the stock of his own proper Authority
and Credit. When they saw that brought to pass, the next thing they flattered
the people withal, was, that though the King had strained himself to bring a
Fleet to Sea, yet that the Parliament would never supply him with a sum of Money
answerable to the Charge of so expensive a War. Finding themselves deluded
therein also, by their Act for the Royal Aid; the next suggestion was, that the
people would never submit to pay it. But the voluntary Present made to his
Majesty by the City of London, soon cleared that mistake. To these they added,
that they should find friends in England, together with great Aid and Support
from Foreign Princes; wherein they found themselves at length totally
disappointed.

Among the rest of their disappointments, the King of Denmark's calling in all
his Seamen out of Foreign Service, was not the least; for thereby they were
disfurnished of many able Seamen, which otherwise they might have had for
their Money.

This Month also arrived at London, French Ambassadors to England.
the Duke of Verneuil, and Monsieur Courtin, from the King of France; and from
the King of Spain, the Conde de Molina. The two former had their Audience
within three days after their Entry, which was very magnificent. They were sent
upon Mediation and Composure; the event whereof the Dutch did much depend upon,
and extremely hearken after.

Nor were the Dutch a little active, Dutch Libel against the English.
in hopes to deceive Foreign Princes, in Printing and publishing Libels, to the
scandal and defamation of the English Nation. Among others, the most remarkable
of their Papers were, the Remarks of the Deputies of the States General, upon
the Memorial of Sir George Downing, Envoy Extraordinary, etc. A Discourse full
of irreverence and falsehood, of which the world was sufficiently convinced,
when they read the Reply of Sir George Downing thereto.

In the next place, Valkenburghs Letter.
they Printed a pretended Letter from one Valkenburgh, Director-General of
Guinee to the States, feigning how that at Adia, the English after they had
given quarter, with rusty Knives cut off the Noses of those whom they had taken
alive, and exercised many other strange Amboyna-cruelties upon the Hollanders
in these parts.

Therefore, that so great a scandal might appear the more notorious, there was
published an Account of the Guinee-Transactions. In brief,

That Captain Robert Holmes, Guinee Relation.
who was Commanded for the Coast of Guinee, in October 1663, coming thither,
all people complained how ^ll the Dutch had treated the English, how they had
engaged the King of Barra to assault the English Factories; which Design
failing, how they had endeavored to corrupt the Officers of the Charles and
James Islands, to deliver up their Forts. How they had counterfeited the King
of England's Signe-Manual and Signet, to countenance their Entry into the
River, had they not been frustrated by the notice which the King of Barra gave
of the whole Design.

After this, Captain Holmes, for the better security of some English Ships
daily expected, sailed to Cabo Verde, fearing one Johnson, that was said to lie
in the way; where without any provocation, they ^ired from the Fort, killing
his Master, and wounding diverse of the Company; notwithstanding all which, the
Governor surrendering the place next morning, he and all his Company were
treated with all possible respect and civility by the Captain.

At Sestos they had been dealing with the King of that place to throw out the
English, inveigling the people abroad, and then abusing them under English
Colors, the better to attain their ends.

The like was done upon the Coast of Castle de Mina, where Valckenburgh offered
a Bendy of Gold for every English head.

At another time they shot at a Convoy of Capt. Holmes from a Fort of theirs;
which so enraged the Moors, that they fell upon the Fort, and took it, and
would have put all the Hollanders to the Sword, had not the Captain prevented
them.

Lastly, Captain Holmes having sent a Drum to Ariamaboa, with Honorable
Proposals; contrary to the Rule of War, they mangled, stripped, and left him dead
upon the place.

Which Account being so far from the Accusations of Valckenburgh, gave no small
satisfaction to the world; so that they lost their aim among all just and sober
Persons.

Dutch ill treated in Russia.
But now the Netherlanders finding how little they could boast of their
Alliances near home, they made great Brags of the kindness shown their
Ambassador at a distance by the Emperor of Russia, though by his reception no
such thing appeared; for as for his Present, which was of silver Plate, it was
so miserably thin, that it would scarce endure the carrying: His allowance was
very ordinary; and the person appointed to attend him as Master of the
Ceremonies, was only a Merchant and Alderman of the City, who having at a
drinking Bout began the Prince of Orange's health before that of the States
General, raised a very great Dispute; so that upon the whole, his Entertainment
seemed rather a matter of State and Custom, than of kindness.

General Fast.
In England was observed a general Fast, with a reverence befitting the
Solemnity of the occasion; both Queens did most affectionately concern
themselves therein, by express and particular Appointment commanding all their
Servants to set themselves apart with more than ordinary Devotion for the
Service of the Day.

Ships taken by the English.
This was answered with the happy Omens of future Victory, from the fair success
of small Enterprises. For not long after, were taken three men of War. The
first a Caper of seven Guns, and 47 men. The other were Direction-Ships; the
one of 32 Guns, and 80 men, taken by the Diamond; the other of 22 Guns, and 60
men, taken by the Yarmouth. They all made stout resistance, till being upon the
point of boarding, they cried for Quarter. Captain Golding in the Diamond, a
brave Officer, was slain. One of the Direction-Ships was Commanded by young
Evertse, Everts taken.
whom the Duke treated with much courtesy. And a little while after being
brought to attend his Majesty, He in consideration of respects formerly
received from the Father of the young Captain, was generously pleased not only
to give him his liberty, Dismissed.
but to order him a hundred Pounds sterling, in testimony of his Royal Goodness
and Bounty.

Order and Discipline of the English Fleet.
Nor will it be here superfluous, while Action ceases, to speak of the
extraordinary Government and Discipline then in the Fleet. For upon a Complaint
made to the Admiral, a Court Marshal was called aboard the Royal Charles. The
matter in Question was, concerning some abuses done to a Swede by some of the
Company of the Kent, and other injuries to a French Vessel by the Guernsey. The
Offenses were striking, wounding, pillaging and plundering. Three of them being
found Guilty, had their fingers burnt with Matches, and one of them his head
woolded with a cord.

Three also belonging to the Guernsey-Frigat were sentenced; one to be whipped,
and to receive three stripes by the side of every Rear-Admiral, five by the
side of every Vice Admiral, and seven by the side of every Admiral. The second
to lie in Irons 48 hours; the third, being the Master, was Cashiered without
his Ticket.

Two Dutch East India Ships taken.
In reward of so much Justice, suddenly came News that two East India Ships,
coming about by the North of Scotland, had stranded themselves upon a Bank near
Orkney, and were secured.

Duke of York makes for the Coast of Holland.
About this time, the Duke impatient of the Hollanders stay, resolved to give
'um a visit upon their own Coasts; and accordingly with 114 Sail made for the
Texel, within five Leagues whereof he came to an Achor; some of the Fleet
ventring within two Leagues of the shore; where the Duke took a full view of
the Dutch Ships. Some few days after, they showed themselves just before the
mouth of the Harbor, to the great amazement of the People ashore. Nor did the
English forsake their Stations for a fair season, being now increased to 120
Sail; which made the Hollanders erect Beacons all along the Coast of Holland,
from the Texel to the Maes, to give notice upon any attempt of landing.

The Duke staid longer than he intended, partly in expectation of drawing the
Dutch to an Engagement; partly, by reason of cross Winds, and hazie Weather.
Among many Foggs, there happened one in a happy hour for the Hollander; For the
Duke having commanded Three Frigates out of his own Squadron, and Four out of
the White and Blew, to try if they could meet with any Holland Merchantmen
returning toward the Vly, Several Holland Merchantmen taken.
the Fogge was so great, that only the three first could Sail. Had not this
Fogg prevented, the whole Fleet had fallen into the Hands of the English.
However, ten Sail were taken, laden with Wine and Brandy; only one West India
Ship of good Value, another from Lisbon, and the last an English Vessel taken
by them before in the Soundings: there were afterward at times fifteen or
sixteen more taken, and Eight or Nine run aground: which was the fatal account
the Hollanders had of their Bordeaux Fleet this Year.

Nor was this all their loss at this time, Smyrna Ships sunk.
for that before was followed by another, near the Coast of Lisbon, where five
English Frigates encountering three Holland Men of War, and three rich Smyrna
Ships, sunk two of the Merchantmen, and ran the third aground: The Dutch Men
of War seeing themselves no longer able to maintain the Fight, blew themselves
up.

While Opdam is preparing to get out, Lord Bellasis Governor of Tangier.
we may be at leisure to take a view of Tangier; at which place the Lord
Bellasis, newly made Governor, safely Arrived toward the beginning of April:
He was no sooner entered at one end of the Town, but the Moors showed themselves
at a distance upon the other, The Moors show themselves without Effect.
but without making any attempt; and indeed Gayland soon understanding the
Courage and Bravery of the New Governor, though importuned by the Dutch with
Assurance of their Conduct, not only abstained from any further acts of
Hostility, but by his own Letters signified to the Governor his extraordinary
desire of Peace.

Toward the beginning of May, English Merchants return safe home.
the Prizes brought in under the Dukes Flag, were all safely lodged in Port;
and not only so, but this no unwelcome News was accompanied with most happy
tidings of the return of diverse rich Fleets of our own; not only acceptable to
their Owners, but seasonable for the Public.

About this time came News of De Ruyters design upon the Barbados; De Ruyter
attempts the Barbados.
and that with such a force, that had it been equal to the report, it might
have put that Island into some danger. But by the care and Prudence of Col.
Henry Willoughby the Deputy Governor in the absence of the Lord Willoughby,
the Island was forthwith put into a posture to receive him: which when De
Ruyter found, after an Attacque upon Nedham-Point, which lasted about four
hours, he departed as he came, without doing any thing of hurt; having by this
Alarm only wakened the Courage of the Inhabitants.

But the Attempt upon the Governor himself had like to have proved more fatal:
Lord Willoughby wounded by Allen.
for one John Allen having taken a determinate Resolution to destroy the
Governor, took his Opportunity as my Lord was at Evening-Prayer, and entering
just as the Chaplain was reading, And Io^^ smote Abner under the fifth Rib,
unknown and unsuspected, he made a blow with a Cutlass provided for that
purpose, at the Governors head's seconding that blow with another, which the
Governor received on his hand, with the loss of two of his Fingers; and
another wound on his Head some what dangerous. Upon the second blow, Allen was
laid hold on, who then thrust the Weapon into his own Body to have killed
himself* but that failing, (...) at length Poisoned himself. His dead Body was
handled very ignominiously, and his Head and Quarters set up in the most
Eminent parts of the Plantation.

But now the Dutch, Duch at Sea.
finding their Ambassadors not able to effect any thing either in Sweden or
Denmark, (where they met with a very cold, though Ceremonious Entertainment)
began to show their own strength; their Navy at length appearing upon the Ocean
in all its splendour, divided into seven Squadrons: Their Numbers.
Under Opda^ fourteen Men of War and two Fireships; under John Evertse fourteen
Men of War, and Two Fireships; under Cortenaer Fifteen Men of War and one
Fireship; under Stillingwers, Fourteen Men of War, and one Fireship; under
Tromp Sixteen, and one Fireship; under Cornelius Evertse, Fourteen, and one
Fireship; under Schram Sixteen, and two Fireships; besides Yachts and Galliots
belonging to each Division: in all, One hundred and three Men of War, Eleven
Fireships, and Seven Yachts.

Captain Nixon Executed.
The Duke all this while kept the Fleet in most excellent Order; and, which was
more, under so strict a Discipline, that Captain Nixon, Commander of the
Elizabeth, for letting two Capers escape which he had encountered in the
Soundings, and a Common Soldier for Seditious and Mutinous words, were both
Executed; that as no encouragement should be wanting to them that behaved
themselves honorably, so no unhandsome Action should go unpunished.

June 1664. Parl. Prorogu^d.
In the mean time, the Parliament that was to have sat the Twenty first of
June, was by his Majesty again Prorogued by Proclamation, for sundry weighty
Reasons, till further time.

A Curiosity.
It will not be here amiss, for variety sake, to mention a Curiosity discovered
at a place called Bald Bathford, three miles from Bath; where was found a
Monument very admirable, both for its Antiquity, Form and Structure: from the
top, three or four Foot deep, it was ^ourteen foot long, and sixteen foot
broad, made of stones of several Colors, as Blew, Red, Murray and White,
delicately cut, not above an Inch broad; curiously set, and strongly Cemented:
the Floor was very delightful to behold: Round about it were placed diverse
Figures; and in the midst, a Bird standing on a Sprig. It is thought to have
been a convenience for water. A Work of great cost and labor, and which showed
the excellency of much lost Art.

A Loss.
But we must now return to feats of War again, where we find our selves at first
to have received some loss, as well as all honor and Victory: And this
happened by reason of the miscarriage of the Hamborough-Fleet. True it is, that
a Convoy was desired of the Duke, then lying before the Texel; and as true it
was, that a Convoy was dispatched, but with Instructions to hasten the Ships
away within ten days, and caution not to venture after that: yet they after the
Ten days were over, venturing against Orders to Sea, fell into the Enemies
hands, who upon our removal from the Dutch Coast, had upon Notice sent out to
Attaque them; which was the more easily done, by reason that the Roe-Ketch,
ordered to give them advice of the Dukes removal, mist of finding them; they
being gone out of the Road before the Ketch could arrive there.

Nor was this the first Disaster, for the Diamond had been thus lost before,
upon the Coast of Italy, and carried into Villa Franca, and there made Prize.

The Duke of York Engaging the Dutch Fleet gained a very ^^cal Victory.
But for these Losses, that Noble and Signal Victory which ensued, made a most
Ample Satisfaction: For upon the third of June both Fleets met, between which,
there followed a most sharp and fierce Encounter; in which, with the loss only
of one Ship, named the Charity, a Vessel formerly taken from the Enemy, were
taken Eighteen very considerable Ships, and good Men of War, as the Chancellor
gave an account in his Speech at the following Sessions of Parliament; funk and
fi^d Ten more of the biggest the Dutch had, carrying between them Five hundred
and forty Guns, besides four Fireships totally destroyed. Opdam's Ship,
carrying Eighty four Guns, was with himself, and all his Men, to the number of
Five hundred, blown up* in the heat of the Fight. Captain Smith in the Mary
Boarded a Zealander of Seventy six Guns, and Four hundred Men, which (...)
Opdam's Ship was blown up, came to have grappled with the Duke: The Zealander
was torn in pieces, and the Captain taken, but soon after died of his Wounds.
Two Thousand sixty three Prisoners were brought into Colehester, of which
Thirteen Commanders. In sum, it was Computed, that they los^ ten for one; among
the rest were said to be blown up in Opdam's ship certain of the French Nation
of no small quality; though some of ours were persons of greater Note, as the
Earl of Falmouth, Lord Muskerry, and Mr. Boil, who fell all three by one
Cannon-shot, so near the Person of the Duke, that he was besprinkled with their
Blood: besides them, the Earls of Portland and Marleborough, Rear-Admiral
Sanson, and Sir John Lawson as good as killed, for he died of his Wounds: as
great a loss as any. Nor was it without Reason, that Fate fell so severe upon
these persons, seeing that the whole burden of the encounter lay upon Thirty
only of the Kings Ships. After this great Action, the chief business of the
Fleet was, to prepare for more. But the ill success of this Fight, caused many
disorders and complaints among the People in Holland; for appearing whereof,
the States took a strange way, to Revenge themselves upon their own Officers;
many of whom they taxed either of Cowardice, or ill Management; and questioned
for their Lives. Three of their Captains were Executed at the Helder; Two more
were ordered to have their Swords broken over their Heads; and the Master to
Vice Admiral Cortinaer, to stand upon a Scaffold with a Halter about his Neck.

But this success in War was somewhat allayed by the heat of the approaching
Sickness, July 1665. The Sickness.
which now grew hot in London and the Suburbs.

The Queen Mother therefore returns for France, Queen Mother returns for France.
being attended to the Kentish-Coast, in the Katharine Yacht, by the King,
together with his Royal Highness, Prince Rupert, the Duke of Monmouth, and
others: between whom, after all Solemnities of taking leave had passed, the
King leaves his Mother to pursue her Journey into France. Afterward he went
aboard the Royal Charles, in the B^oy of the Nore; where he bestowed the Honor
of Knighthood upon several Captains that had behaved themselves valiantly in
the late Fight, as Rear-Admiral Tiddeman, Captain Cuttins, Captain Jordan, and
Captain Sprage; after which, he visited most of the Flag-ships, giving all
necessary directions for the dispatch of the Fleet, and so returned by water to
Greenwich; and from thence by Coach to Hampton Court, from whence in a short
while he removed afterward to Salisbury; but the Distemper there increasing,
he retired to Oxford, The King at Oxford.
where he remained a considerable time. The Seat of the Muses, now the Palace
of the British Monarch, proving so happy a Receptacle, that all the Concourse
of People to a Kings Court, to a Parliament, and to a Term, proved no way
prejudicial to the health and safety of the Place.

However, Duke of Albemarle stays in London.
for the security of his Chief City, the King, that he might not absolutely be
said to withdraw his Beams from her Disconsolate Walls, left them to the Charge
and particular care of the Duke of Albemarle; who in all the heat of the
Distemper continued at White Hall, with a Courage equal to his Dignity.

And for the better preventing of Tumults, Disaffected Officers ordered to
depart the City.
a Proclamation was Published, Requiring all Disbanded Officers and Soldiers
who had served in the Armies of any of the late Usurped Powers, to depart the
Cities of London and Westminster, and not to return within Twenty Miles of the
same, till November following.

And now his Majesty's Fleet, English Fleet Rendezvouse.
the damages of those Ships which were damnified in the late Fight being
repaired, and several of the Dutch Prizes being fitted for Service, began to
Embody again; so that upon the fifth of this Month about 60 Sail weighed away
from Southwold-Bay, to the Coast of Holland: the Standard was born by the Earl
of Sandwich; to him Sir George Ascue Vice Admiral, Sir Thomas Tyddeman
Rear-Admiral. Sr. William Pen was Admiral of the White; to him Sir William
Barkley Vice Admiral, Sir Joseph Jordan Rear-Admiral. The Blew Flag was carried
by Sir Thomas Allen; and his Flag-Officers were, Sir Christopher Mimms, and
Captain Harman.

The Alarm of the English being out, Bankert returns.
as was the common Opinion, brought back Bankers, sooner then he intended; who
having been three weeks at Sea with an inconsiderable Squadron, returned into
Harbor. It was expected he should have brought De Ruyter along with him; but
as yet there was no News, neither of him, nor of the East India Fleet. Other
Design of his could not be imagined, seeing that it appeared that he had no
intention to go further than he did; ^or that he had any likelihood of doing
good where he had his Station, unless the States might think it worth their
while to put on a miserable Countenance of keeping the Sea, while the English
were in Harbor: All the Exployt he did, was the taking of Four or five Ships
belonging to Norway, which the Dutch had the confidence to keep.

De Ruyter Sails for Newfound-Land.
De Ruyter, as his Voyage was longer, and his Force more considerable, so did
he do more mischief, not without some marks of Dutch Inhumanity; for after he
had been beaten from the Barbados, he arrived at St. John's in Newfound-land
with 17 Dutch Men of War, where he took the Diamond of Plymouth, and the Unity
of Dartmouth, stripping the People Naked as they were born, and leaving them
without any sort of Provision. At Bay Bulls Harbor they took Two Ships more:
In Pitts Harbor three other ships, using the Men with the same rigor they had
done the former: and yet after all, they would have been dealing with the
Seamen, whom they tempted with great promises of reward, if they would serve
the States; but they bravely and unanimously refused. For which they might have
pleaded the extravagant License of War, had they not treated the Women in a
most Barbarous and Beastly manner, without favor or distinction. He took away
all the Cattle from the Planters, and Eight Guns from off the Land: however, he
restored three ships of the seven which he had taken, to bring home the Seamen,
which were in all 120.

The Stroaker.
About this time, seeing that leisure from business will permit the Relation,
the Fame of Greatrates the Stroaker filled the Mouths of all People, both in
City and Country. A Novelty not unfit to be mentioned, seeing that at that time
many wise men were affected with it.

They that knew him, reported him for a Civil, Frank, and well-Humour'd Man,
Conformable to the Discipline of the Church; born in Munster, of English
Extraction; and sometimes a Lieutenant in Colonel Farr's Regiment: he was
Master of a Competent Estate, and performed strange Cures by Stroaking, or
Touching, for which he took neither Money nor Presents. That which first created
the Wonder, was, That he passed without Contradiction; and that such Multitudes
followed him, as only they could believe who saw them. He was said to admire
himself the Gift which he had: had he stayed among the ignorant Irish, his Fame
might have continued longer; but the Infidelity of the English made him often
fail in his Divinity; and his Reputation once blemished, his Healing Mystery
soon vanished.

Casualty in Norfolk.
This Wonder having made its exit, behold another of another Nature, A Prodigy
that made work for the Stroaker; he Cured, but this Killed and Wounded: for in
the Parish of Erpingham in the County of Norfolk, there arose a very great
Storm; in the midst of which, as the People were at Church, there Descended
among them the appearance of a great Ball, which as it was supposed, beat down
the South-East corner of the Steeple; for at that instant that it fell, it
carried along with it the South-Porch: being come into the Church, it turned
upon the South Side where the Men sat; passing to the Chancel it brake, and
then the whole Church seemed to be of a light Fire: it left a great smoke and
stench behind it: and in conclusion, there was one Man found stark dead, and
many others were wounded, who for some time so continued. But upon this, and
several other Mischiefs done in the same County by Lightning and Tempest, we
leave it to others to make their descants.

A General Fast
But the Pestilence increasing, the King commanded a Proclamation for a General
Fast throughout the Realm of England, to the end, That Prayers and
Supplications might be every where made for the Removal of so heavy a Judgment:
And that the Day might be observed with order and decency requisite, the King,
with advice of the Bishops, directed such a Form of Prayer as was thought most
meet for the Service not only of that day, but of all the succeeding Wednesdays
in the Week, during the Contagion. Collections also were ordered to be made,
for the relief of the sick and needy in so great a Calamity.

Toward the latter end of July, the King went to Portsmouth, King goes to
Portsmouth,
where with much satisfaction he viewed his Naval Stores and Preparations. He
also ordered Pesthouses to be Erected, that if the worst should happen, there
might be seasonable relief and remedy for the sick. And to prevent Casualties
by Fire, he Commanded several Thatched Houses to be otherwise covered. From
thence he sailed over in his Pleasure-boat to the Isle of Wight, to the Isle of
Wight, and returns for Sallsbury.
where he took a view of the Castles and Trained Bands of the Island; and so
returning, took Horse for Salisbury.

The Parliament should have met about this time; Parl. Prorogued
but by reason of the Sickness, it was Prorogued till the Third of October
following.

In the mean while, long look'd-for De Ruyter Arrives in the Western Emms: De
Ruyter returns into Holland,
but the Purchase which he brought with him, was only Five English Prises,
Three Laden with Sugar, the other Two Empty. His own Ships were miserably torn
and out of order; and therefore knowing the danger he was in, he passed by
Fero, Shetland, and so over to Bergen, and then crept along the Coast of Norway
and Denmark: however, upon his coming home he was made Admiral of the Dutch
Fleet, and is made Admiral.
so soon as it could be got ready to set Sail.

This they were Eyewitnesses of; but of their ill success at farther distance,
they had Intelligence by another hand; for by Letters to the General of the
Jesuits in Rome, from certain of the same Order in China, news came, that upon
their endeavors to retake the Island of Formosa on the backside of China,
Dutch loss in China.
they had been put to the worst, with the loss of two Fleets, one of 17, the
other of 18 Sail; together with Tidings of their being driven out of Macasser,
Ternate, and Amboyna, by the Natives: which was the rather believed, by reason
of the exact Correspondence which the Roman Society of Jesuits holds with those
parts.

But though De Ruyter carried the Flag, he did not Command in Chief, but under
the Triumvirate of De Wit, Huygens, and Boreel, who according to a new Model,
had now the Superintendencie over the Naval Affairs.

And now the Bishop of Munster's Drums sound in their Ears, Bishop of Munster
threatens Holland.
almost as terrible as the English Cannon; besides that his Army began to grow
very numerous. This made the States order a Flying-Army to the Frontiers,
though with small satisfaction to the Inhabitants, who daily fled to the
Fortified Towns for their Security.

In the mean while, August.
the English Fleet lay in Three Squadrons from Brookness to Hitland, and so to
Norway; which made the Dutch very earnest to put to Sea; but one while the
Water, another time the Wind would not permit it. The Earl of Sandwich being
thus abroad, upon Notice of 50 Hollanders being sheltred in Berghen, sent a
Squadron of 22 Men of War, under the Command of Sir Thomas Tyddeman, Dutch
Assayl'd by Tyddeman in Bergen.
with Orders to Sail directly for Berghen, and there to Attacque and Fire the
Hollanders; which Enterprise had proved very fatal to the Dutch, had not the
Wind and the Dane himself very much befriended the Dutch, and given them
liberty to Plant their Guns ashore against the English. However, they received
very great Loss, in the disabling many of the most considerable Ships then in
the Harbor.

But soon after, the Earl of Sandwich himself met with a Convoy of the Dutch,
with several Merchants, and some East India Men in his Company, East-Indie
Ships taken Sept. 4.
where though the storminess of the Weather did much favor the Dutch; yet he
took above 8 good Men of War, two of their best East India Ships; and 20 Sail
of their Merchantmen.

Some few days after, some of his Majesty's Fleet encountering with 18 sail of
Hollanders, took the greatest part of them, whereof four Dutch Men of War, with
above a thousand Prisoners.

Parliament sits in the Schools at Oxford, October. 10.
Upon the 10 th of October the Parliament met at Christ-Church in Oxford, the
Schools being fitted for their reception, where his Majesty delivered himself
to this effect.

His Majesty's Speech.
That they might confidently believe, that had it not been absolutely necessary
to consult with them, he would not have called them together, when the
Contagion had spread it self over so many parts of the Kingdom.

That he had entered upon the Dutch War by their advice and encouragement, and
that therefore he desired they might receive information of the Conduct and
Effects of it, to the end be might have the continuance of their cheerful
supply.

That it proved more chargeable than he could imagine it would have been.

That the addition which the Dutch made to their Fleets, made it unavoidably
necessary for him to make a proportional preparation.

That as the Dutch endeavored by false suggestions to make themselves friends,
so he had not been wanting to encourage those Princes that had been wronged by
the Dutch, to recover their own by force; to which end he had assisted the
Bishop of Munster with a considerable sum of Money.

That these were the Reasons that his Supply was upon the matter near spent.
However,

That he made not War for Wars sake, but was ready to receive all fair
Propositions; but that the Dutch were no less Insolent than ever, though they
had no advantage that he knew of.

Upon this the Lord-Chancellor Hide enlarged, observing from point to point the
whole process of Affairs, from the time of his Majesty's Restoration, to this
instant. That notwithstanding the affronts upon the Royal Family in Holland
during the Usurpation, His Majesty was pleased to Embark himself in one of
their Ports, though pressed by the two Neighbour-Kings to have taken his passage
through their Territories.

That being returned, the King was forced to support himself upon Credit, till
the Armies were disbanded, and the Fleet paid off; which Debt was heightened by
the supplies of his Majesty's Stores, so exhausted at that time, that there was
not Arms for 5000 men, not Provisions for the setting out ten new ships.

That his Majesty replenished his Stores, reduced the expense of his Navy,
providing only a necessary Guard for the Narrow S^as, and a Fleet against the
Pirates, which had brought them to submission.

Then he repeated the several Insolences and unkindenesses committed by the
Dutch. The King's application to the Parliament. The Parliaments humble desires
of Redress. The States preparations for War: And the whole Series of the War,
and its Success until that time.

Then reflecting upon the greatness and necessity of the King's disbursments,
he concluded.

The Commons Answer.
In answer whereof, the House of Commons returned their Thanks to his Majesty
for his care and Conduct, for the preservation of his People, and Honor of the
Nation; declaring withal, that they would assist him with their Lives and
Fortunes.

They returned him also Thanks for his care of his Brother the Duke of York.

Then they gave the King an additional Supply of 1250000 l. by Monthly
Assesment.

They gave him also a Present of a Months Tax, to come in the Rear, after the
expiration of the Monthly Aid; which they desired his Majesty would bestow
upon his Royal Highness.

They also passed a Bill of Attainder of certain English Fugitives who had
joined with the Dutch.

Also a Bill for suppression of Nonconformists; which with some other Bills
being signed by his Majesty, Parliament Prorogued.
they were Prorogued till the 20 th of February following at Westminster.

On the last of their Sessions, the House of Commons considering that they sat
in the Convocation-House, and remembering the Fidelity and Loyalty of the
University, Voted, Thanks of the House given to the University.
that the Thanks of the House should be given to the Chancellor, Masters, and
Scholars, for their eminent Loyalty to his Majesty, and his Father of blessed
Memory, during the Rebellion; particularly, for refusing to be visited by the
Usurped powers, and to subscribe the Solemn League and Covenant; and for these
Excellent Reasons they published to the World to justify his Majesty's Cause.

Mr. L. Hide, Sir Heneage Finch, Sir John Birkenhead, and Colonel Strangways,
were ordered to present these their Thanks to the University; which was
accordingly done in a full Convocation, within the same Walls where the Vote
past.

After this, Sir Heneage Finch and Colonel Strangways were made Doctors of Laws
by Dr. Ienkins Principal of Jesus College. Mr. Hide and Sir John Berkenhead
having received their respective Degrees before.

Soon after, the Duke of Ormond, Duke of Ormond returns into Ireland.
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland was remanded back into that Kingdom, where in a
short time he arrived at Dublin, and was received into the City with great
splendour and Magnificence.

This Month the several Courts of Justice sat in the Schools at Oxford,
November, 1665. Term at Oxford.
being Michaelmas-Term, where Sir John Keeling was made Lord Chief-Jus^ice of
the King's Bench, and Sir William Morton one of the Judges of the same Court,
in the place of Sir Wadham Windham deceased. The next Term (being Hillary) was
from thence adjourned to Windsor, and from thence to Westminster, where they
sat February the ninth.

But among actions of lesser note at Sea, the courage of Captain Howard
deserves remembrance, Captain Howard 's Valor.
who now commanding one of the King's ships, rendered himself as signally
faithful to his Sovereign, as to his Owners: who having certain Victuallers and
other Merchantmen under his Convoy, as he passed by the Bay of Cadiz, five
Dutch Men of War, against the Dutch.
then under sail before the Bay, having notice thereof, being Vessels of 43,
40, and 36 Guns apiece, had immediately fetched up the Merchantmen; but the
Captain so behaved himself with his Merlin, a Frigate of 12 Guns only, that the
whole English Fleet had time to escape into the Bay of Tangier; and by and by
perceiving the headmost of the Dutch ships of 45 Guns, who had done him most
mischief, to be making after the Fleet to their inevitable Ruin, he frankly
ran himself aboard the Dutchman, where he fought above an hour board and
board, till being himself dangerously wounded, and all his Men dead, or
desperately wounded, save eight, he was at length compelled to yield, and
carried into Cadiz.

But to return nearer home, to the Grand Affairs betwixt England and Holland,
we find the Netherlanders in no small perplexity. Dutch Ambassador recalled
out of England. The King's Letter to the Dutch.
They had now recalled their Ambassador Van Gotch out of England, who took his
leave of the King at Oxford: by him the King sends a Letter to the States;
wherein, though he could not but charge them as the Authors of the War, yet he
signified to them his readiness to come to any fair terms of Accommodation: nor
could this Letter be so stifled by the contrary Faction, but that the People
got a view of it; by which when they saw the disposition of the King of
England, they were not a little enraged at the Province of Holland, who had so
much endeavored to keep them in ignorance, and made them more pliant to yield
to those Alterations that not long after followed.

Munster so bestirs himself all the Winter, Munster active against the Dutch.
that he allows no time for rest, but upon Thaws and mild Weather; so that he
defeated several considerable parties of the Dutch, and advanced not a little
way into their Country of Friezland, burning and spoiling some, and taking
other of their Towns; whilst Prince Maurice with 18000 men is forced to look
on, without being able to attempt any thing of moment. King of France supplies
the Dutch.
Their chief Assistants were the King of France and Dukes of Lunenburg. As for
the first* he sent them a Supply of men; but they brought along with them so
much Rudeness, and such Diseases into the Country, that the Dutch were soon
weary of their company; for they were forced to quarter 'am in the
Brandenburgher's Country, which did them no good. The th^eats of Waldeck, and
the conjunction of the Confederate-Forces, did them as little kindness, only it
caused the Bishop to retire with his main Body out of Friezland, leaving a
sufficient strength in Garrisons; for he had destroyed already 900 Horse in one
place, Munster 's Success in Holland.
200 Foot in another* he had defeated two Troops of their Horse, and 500 Foot
in another place, and 400 Foot that had repossessed themselves of Vriesveen,
forcing them to render themselves; and had now Garrisoned his Foot in his new
Conquests, and withdrawn his Horse into his own Country. Lunenburg excuses
himself to the King of England.
The Dukes of Lunenburg grew cold in their assistance, and sent to excuse
themselves to the King of England, for what they had done, as being ignorant of
the Grounds and Causes of the Bishop's taking Arms. The Brandenburgher offered
a Mediation with the Bishop, but with much delay. Their main hopes was in the
King of France, who believing the Balance of Affairs not even enough yet, (and
it is thought rather acting as he did out of an affectation of Sovereignty in
the Mediterranean-Sea) not only continues their friend, but declares War
against England, French King declares war against England.
acquainting the Queen Mother of England, that though he could no longer keep
off a Declaration of War against his Majesty of Great Britain, yet that he
should always preserve the same esteem and value for his Majesty's Person,
hoping his Majesty would continue the same kindness and affection for him.

January 1665.
Accordingly, upon the 27 th of January the French King's Declaration of War was
publicly proclaimed, upon pretense of Succouring the States General in
consequence of the Treaty 1662. But the Lord Hollis the King of England's.
Ambassador in France, having remonstrated the great injustice of that
Declaration which subjected all Englishmen in their Estates and Persons to the
last acts of Hostility, contrary to the Treaties between the two Crowns,
allowing each party three Months time for the withdrawing their Estates and
Persons after a Rupture; The King of France thereupon issued out a second
Proclamation, giving the English the said Liberty of three Months to Transport
themselves and Goods.

However, in return of the first Declaration, the King of England soon after,
that is to say, in February, February, the King of England declares War with
France.
published also his Declaration of War against the French. Importing, that
whereas the French King pretending an Alliance Defensive with the States
General, had proclaimed a War against his Subjects, That he was resolved to
prosecute the War which the French King had so unjustly undertaken against him,
with his utmost Force by Sea and Land.

It was then admirable to see with what a harmony and cheerfulness the Maritime
Counties offered their service to his Majesty, upon their receiving his first
Orders to put themselves into a posture of defense: But he being tender of
continuing them under the trouble of a needless Duty, was pleased to direct
their dismission and return home till further occasion.

In the mean time Sr. Christopher Mimms was Crusing about, with a Squadron of
stout Ships; Sir Christopher Mimms Chases the Dutch.
who hearing of a Squadron of the Dutch that were out at Sea near Ostend, he
made away for Discovery, and at length had a view of them, out of fight of Land
about Newport, being in all 16 Sail and 3 Flags. Fain he would have been
dealing with them; but they not daring to abide the shock, made all the Sail
they could away, and easily escaped him, being near their own Burrows.

Pestilence abates; and the King returns to White Hall.
The Pestilence was now so well abated, that the King returned again to
White Hall, where the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs of London attended Him, and
humbly welcomed Him home to his Chief City, after so long and melancholy an
absence.

The Term also, which to prevent the too early resort of People to London and
Westminster, had been Adjourned to Windsor, was now again Adjourned from thence
to Westminster.

But the Parliament, Parl. Prorogued
who should have met the 20th of this month, were again Prorogued till the 23
of April, by a special Commission directed to the Archbishop of Canterbury,
and others of the Lords both Spiritual and Temporal.

About this time, Sir Thomas Clifford, the Kings Extraordinary Envoy to Sweden
and Denmark returned into England. Earl of Sandwich sent Ambassador into Spain.
And the Earl of Sandwich was sent Ambassador extraordinary into Spain, where
what good Services he did, the following years will declare.

And to show how diffusive the Kings Royal care was, for the good of his
Subjects, as well far distant, as near home; Mr. Warren, employed for that
purpose, had now for the benefit of the English Trade in Africa, Peace made
with the Moors in Africa.
made a Peace with Sancta Cruze, Sophia and Morocco: In the last of which
Places, when the Emperor heard that the English Agent was come to make a Peace
with him, he ordered a Guard of 500 Horse to Conduct him to his Court, which
attended the Agent above Fourscore Miles.

And all this while the Mediterranean Sea were secured by a strong Squadron of
Ships under the Command of Sir Jeremy Smith.

Sir Christopher Mimms missing of the Dutch at home, General Wrangle comes
aboard Sir Jeremy Smith.
sailed away for the Coast of Sweden, where coming to an Anchor at the Mouth of
the Elve, with a Charge of Merchants under his Convoy; General Wrangle made it
his business to travel 30 miles to give him a visit Aboard his Ship; whom the
English Admiral entertained according to his Dignity.

The Parliament in Scotland Issued out a Proclamation, Nonconformist Ministers
suppressed in Scotland.
Commanding all Ministers, who had entered before the Year 49; and since the
Restitution of the Church Government by Archbishops and Bishops, had
Relinquished their Ministry, or had been Deposed by their Ordinary, to remove
themselves, within Forty days after their Relinquishment or Deposal, out of the
Parishes where they were Incumbents, and not to Reside within Twenty miles of
the same, nor within six Miles of Edinburgh, or any Cathedral, nor within Three
Miles of any Burgh Royal; nor to Inhabit Two in one Parish, upon Penalty of
Incurring the Laws made against movers of Sedition.

This Proclamation was occasioned, by the Insolent Carriage of one Alexander
Smith, a Deposed Minister, who being taken at a Conventicle, was convened
before the High Commission-Court; but gave such reviling Language against the
Archbishop of St. Andrews, who sat there as President, that the Lord
Commissioner ordered him to be put in Irons Twenty four hours, in the Theives
Hole.

In Ireland, Parliament in Ireland.

Irish Traitors there examined.


the Parliament being likewise Sat, fell upon the Examination of certain of
their Members, who were said to have been in the Plot in the Year 1663. Robert
Shapcott, Alexander Staples, and five others, were called to the Bar, and for
that Reason, were Expelled the House, and made incapable of ever sitting in any
Parliament of that Kingdom.

Foreign Affairs, 1665.
The King of Poland having made a fruitless and very unsuccessful expedition
against the Muscovites, King of Poland 's ill success.
the event thereof was, That being deserted by his Tartars and Cossacks, for
fear of being surrounded by the Muscovites, who having intelligence of his
condition, had gathered their Forces together with the same intention; he was
forced to make his retreat through a vast Desert of twenty Leagues over,
wherein meeting with neither Forage nor other conveniences, his whole Cavalry
was utterly ruined: and all his Nobility and Gentry highly discontented to see
themselves in that manner lost without a stroke, dispersed themselves and left
him.

Lubomirsky revolts.
This Calamity, which they say broke his Heart, was followed by the revolt of
Lubomirsky, a great Soldier, and of high repute in that Country, whose
dignities and Estate the King had Confiscated, as not conformable to his
Government. Lubomirsky takes Arms, gathers together a very formidable Body; and
though now grown considerable, both in his own Forces and the affections of the
Polish Nobility, tenders his service to the King, offers to make use of his
power against the Common Enemy the Muscovite, on condition he might be restored
to his Territories and Charges. But the King giving no heed to his Proposals,
raises and Army, marches against him, and being come now within four miles of
Lubomirskie with an intention to give him Battle, he assembled his Nobility and
Gentry, and in a long Oration endeavored to encourage them to behave
themselves resolutely against the Enemy of their Country, and Rebel to
himself. But they gave him for answer, That they acknowledged it was their duty
to hazard their Lives against any public Enemy whatsoever; but to fight
against their fellow-Subject and Citizen, whom they could not find to have
committed any crime worthy so high a punishment as was inflicted on him, they
could not adventure at all. This Answer so disturbed the King, that he withdrew
himself, and posted directly for Warsaw, destitute of Counsel or Assistants,
and was at length forced to the Restoration of Lubomirskie, to avoid the
hazard of greater Inconveniences.

German Princes quarrel.
This year a great Quarrel broke forth among the Princes of the Empire, as the
Electors of Mentz, Triers, Collen, and others. But as those difference; were
long a brewing, so it was not an easy work to compose them, though the
Emperor was very diligent in his Mediation.

He had no reason to desire War, who was in daily expectance of the arrival of
his Contracted Empress the Infanta of Spain, of whose hastening into Germany he
had received certain intelligence from her Father. In February, he sent his
power into Spain to the Duke de Medina de las Torres for the Marrying of her;
but she arrived not at Vienna this year.

Beaufort encounters the Argier- Pirates in Argier.
But returning to feats of War, we find the Duke of Beaufort encountering in the
Mediterranean-Sea with a Squadron of Argier Men of War, five in number; but two
of them ran themselves aground; the other three he caused three of his Captains
to set upon; who did so well acquit themselves, that the Admiral of the
Pirates, carrying 600 Men, and 50 pieces of Cannon, lost in the dispute above
half her men, the rest threw themselves into the Sea, and set fire on the ship:
Nor did the other two, carrying 400 Men, and 30 Guns apiece, run a better
fortune, being both sunk and burnt. Nor did it serve their turns, that they had
withdrawn themselves within Carabine-shot of the very Forts belonging to Tunis.

This was an honorable undertaking, and as successfully performed: However,
the Victory which the Portugueses obtained against the Spaniard, Portugals
defeat the Spaniards.
made a greater noise in the World, which most not be forgotten, as obtained by
the Valor of the English. English bravery in Portugal.
At first, the Spaniards Charged the Portuguez and French Horse so home, that
they beat them into the Rear; but the English coming to charge, recovered all
the ground which the other had lost, and kept it; which so encourage'd the
rest, that they came on again afresh; and then the English charging again, with
the same success as before, caused the Enemy to quit the Field. Major Trelawney
charged the Prince of Parma at the head of his own Battalia, killed most of his
men, and brought off his Standard. He had his Horse ^lain under him, but was
remounted by his Lieutenant. The General of the Horse was taken, five thousand
Prisoners, all their Baggage, and seven pieces of Cannon, together with 3000
Mules.

The Emperor's Brother deceased.
But in the Imperial Court there was no small distraction, by reason of the
death of Duke Sigismun^^ the Emperor's Brother, whom some supposed to have
been taken away by Poison, though others affirmed that he died by a heat taken
in Hunting; however, the Emperor was very diligent to take all convenient
orders for the prevention of any disquiet that might arise by reason of his
death.

The Cessation made the last year between the Emperor and the great Turk,
Peace made between the Emp^^o^ and the Turk.
began now to look with a favorable aspect toward a general conclusion of
Peace. The Emperor's Ambassador, Count Lesley, having had a very honorable
Reception from the Grand Vizier at Constantinople: And the Turkish Chiaux
having been no less sumptuously attended by the Emperor's Commissioners
appointed to conduct him to Vienna, whither the Presents which he brought from
the Grand Seignior were not a little sumptuous; among the rest a Tent, for
Workmanship of Embroidery and Jewels, Turkish Embassad^r's present to the
Emperor.
valued at 200000 Rix-dollars. In September, the Peace betwixt the two Great
Emperors was wholly concluded, with that satisfaction to the Turk, that Count
Lesley the Emperor's Ambassador acknowledged himself to have been Treated with
that Civility and Magnificence, that never any Imperial Ambassador had received
the like before.

It was thought this year would have put an end to the differences between the
Duke of Savoy and the Commonwealth of Genoua: Savoy and Genoua at odds.
But instead of Composure, the Breach grew wider; for the Duke of Savoy
demanded the restitution of certain Villages, which he claimed as belonging to
his Ancestors, which the Genoueses in possession were loath to part with. He
also claimed the right of Passage to carry Salt through the State of Genoua
into Piedmont, together with a privilege of being named first in all Articles
of Treaty.

Better success had the Quarrel between the Electors of Mentz and Collen, Mentz
and Collen Electors reconciled
which with much difficulty this year was brought to a final conclusion, upon
Conditions, That the City of Erford and the Villages thereto belonging should
continue Hereditary to the Elector of Mentz, the Duke of Saxony renouncing all
pretenses to them: That Saxony should keep possession of seven Lordships which
the Elector of Mentz laid claim to: That Religion should remain unmolested
according to the Auspurgh Confession: And that the two Electors should enter
into a League Offensive and Defensive.

The Portugueses heightened with their late Victories, Portugueses make an
inroad into Spain.
and still backed with the English Succors, Invade Galicia, where they Sacked
24 Towns and Villages; at length coming before La Guarda, the English leading
the Van, were commanded to enter the Town, which they gained with small loss;
but in Storming the Fort they found a smarter resistance, though that also was
in a short time compelled to yield; but with the unhappy fall of Captain
Charles Langley, Lieutenant Senhouse, and Ensign Berry.

In Germany, the Duke of Brandenburg makes new Levies of Horse and Foot,
Brandenburg takes Arms, and expostulates with the Dutch.
and now with his Arms in his Hands he demands a Restitution of the Tolls at
Genuep, and a regulation of Quarterings and Musters through his Country; (which
though Beverning was sent to excuse, yet it could not be forgot.) The Dutch did
not care to have too many Enemies; which made the Brandenburgher think it
seasonable to raise his Market, the price of his Alliance being nineteen Tun of
Gold. At length, all the Conferences of his Ministers and the Dutch ended in
this; That there should be a speedy meeting appointed, to consult for the
common Peace and Safety of that Circle of the Empire; the Elector Declaring,
that he could not conclude any thing in relation to the present War, without
the consent of the rest of his Allies.

This year the Queen Mother of France, Queen Mother of France dies.
Anne of Austria, Sister to Philip the 4 th, departed this Life; before her
expiration, making use of her last Breath to recommend to her Son, The easing
of his People, to preserve Unity between himself and his Brother, and in all
things to imitate the Example of his Grandfather Henry the 4th.

In Italy there arose a Contest of no small consequence between the Venetian
and the Pope. The Venetian and the Pope differ.
For the Venetian claiming the Sovereignty of the Adriatick-Sea, finding a
Vessel belonging to the Pope there, demanded the Custom due to that Republic;
which the Master denying, they carried the Vessel to Venice. The Pope demands
Restitution; but they make such a tedious Demur, that it amounted to a denial.
Hereupon, the Pope makes an Embargo in Ancona, and all his other Ports, of the
Venetian Ships. They send to their Ambassador at Rome to complain; the Pope
denies him Audience: but by the Mediation of the Cardinal Patron, the
difference was Composed, in regard of their War with the Turks; against whom
the Pope then reigning was a most Devout Enemy.

A counterfeit Messiah appears among the Jews.
About this time the Jews were strangely Alarmed with the News of a New Messiah.
The Impostor was a person bred and born in Smyrna, who in a short space grew to
such a Head, that no one Jew durst open his Mouth against him: he drew after
him great Multitudes, and was strangely adored by the chiefest of the Jews.
That which contributed to the Imposture, was a Confederacy of Thirty others,
who pretending themselves to have the Gift of Prophecy, in all their Public
Ejaculations pointed out him for the Messiah.

Another Jewish Prophet in Arabia Foelix.
Whether it were he, or another; but in Eden, a great City in the Kingdom of
Elal in Arabia Felix, there was at the same time a Jew, by the Name of
Giorobaon, who by his dextrous Oratory reduced all the Citizens, for the most
part Jews, to his Obedience; killing the Bassa, and forcing the Garrison to
submit to him. In a little time, his Numbers increased, he calling himself
their Prophet; so that in a short time he drew after him all the Arabians of
the Mountain Cabuburra; thence passing through Arabia P^trea, he Possessed
himself of Medina and Mecca, writing from those parts to all the Jews of Idumea
and Syria to prepare for his Reception. Nor were these two alone: for at the
same time, one Sabadai, not so Warlike, but more Prophetical, did strangely
entoxicate the brains of his Brethren, with an Assurance of the Arrival of
their Expected Messiah; and was so vain as to go to Constantinople, to demand
the Land of Promise from the Grand Signior. One thing must not be omitted,
since we are among the Jews, and the Turks, That the Secretary to the Turkish
Ambassador sent to Conclude the Peace at Vienna, Turkish Embassadour's
Secretary turns Christian.
after the business was over, took an occasion, whether out of Design, or
Devotion is for others to conjecture, to absent himself with several Papers of
Importance, from his Masters Service, and turn Christian.

Yet notwithstanding the Turkish Peace, the Emperor was not a little disturbed
by the Revolt of Palaffi Imbre, Palaffi Imbre, revolts from the Emperor.
who with a great number of ill-disciplin'd Vagabonds did very much infest
Hungaria, soliciting the Bassa of Ersa to his Assistance: but through the
great diligence of the Palatine of Hungaria, he prevailed little or nothing
this Year, more than in spoiling and Robbing the Country. He was soon defeated
and taken: his Person was Committed to Prison, where he remained till the
Nuptials of the Empress; at which time he enjoyed the benefit of a general
Oblivion.

King of Spain died.
Toward the beginning of Autumn, died the King of Spain; and the Queen Mother
was Confirmed Regent; much to the settlement of that Kingdom.

Anno Dom. 1666.
March.
THE War continuing between the English and the Dutch, the beginning of this
Year brought Intelligence from America, where the Governor of Iamaica resolves
to Attaque their American Plantations; Governor of Jamaica assaults the Ducth
Plantations in America.
and accordingly, by the Assistance of the Buccaneers or Hunters upon
Hispaniola, made themselves Masters of Sancta Eastachia, Salia, St. Martins,
and Bonaira; and took the Island Tabago by Storm. At which time a Party sent
from the Barbados to have done the same, being thus prevented, fell upon the
Dutch Plantations in the Continent, where they possessed themselves of New
Zealand, taking the Fort with seven Guns: upon the River Maccurah and Wina,
they spoiled Ten Sugar-works, and took 500 Negroes, which they sent to
Martinego. And thus, with a handful of Men, they Expelled the Dutch out of all
their Plantations in the West Indies, excepting only Curressa, being a Fort
built by the Dutch in an Island without any Plantation, and not worth
Attempting.

At home, Dutch conclude Peace with the Dane.
the Dutch endeavor all they can to strengthen themselves with Alliances, and
therefore make Peace with the Dane, on condition, That both Parties absolutely
renounce all manner of Pretenses: whereby Denmark became a gainer of 60 Tun of
Gold. All disorders in Norway were to be quite taken away; which doubled the
King's Revenues at that time. Lastly, the Hollanders were to pay yearly to the
Dane 15 Tun of Gold so long as the War with England lasted. In lieu whereof,
the Dane was to maintain 30 Men of War in the Sound; to which the Hollander was
to add Eight, or Ten, with some Landforces. This the Swede took ill, Declaring
to all Public Ministers his Resolution to stand firm to the League with
England; Swede stands firm to England
in order whereunto, Wrangle understanding that some Dutch ships were come into
the Elbe, where then a Fleet of English Merchants rode, commanded a Swedish man
of War to Guard them, and rather to sink by their sides, than see them injured:
the same care being likewise taken to secure the English in Schonen. They also
sent an Ambassador into Denmark, to Expostulate the Reason of their Alliance,
and to show their dislike of the whole Transaction: and when the Danish
Resident, in a studied Speech, endeavored to give the Queen and Regents of
Sweden an account of his Masters Intentions in that League for the security of
the Sound, and the Provocations pretended from England, which forced him to
Revenge, and offered the Crown of Sweden to be included in the same Alliance:
He was presently Answered, That the Procedure of his Master seemed so fowl and
Dishonorable, that they knew not how any Prince for the future could Treat
with him. But the Swedes seeing what the Dane had done, resolved in no wise to
suffer the Sound to be shut up at pleasure; reinforced their Garrisons in
Schonen, and prepared a sufficient Navy for their Defense. However, to show
themselves not altogether averse from Peace, the Swedes did frame a Project for
an Accommodation between the States and them, which contained so many points of
Restitutinos, Reparations, and amends, to be made by the States, that they were
nothing pleased with it. Besides, the Swede insisted to be admitted into the
Trade of India; a point, above all the rest, which the Dutch were most jealous
of.

The King now taking into consideration the hazardous consequences by the
extraordinary resort of People to the Parliament, April 6. Parliament Prorogued.
by his Commission directed to the Lord Chancellor, Prorogued them to the 18
of September next.

He also Issued out a Proclamation, A Proclamation, requiring Desborough, and
others, to return into England.
whereby John Desborough, Thomas Kelsey, and others, were required to return
into England, and render themselves; and in case of Disobedience, to stand
Guilty, and be Attainted of High Treason. A while after, Desborough was brought
over from Ostend in the Little Mary, and Committed to Dover Castle, by the Lord
Middleton: but at length, released by the Kings Order.

Another Proclamation was issued out, Giving all Persons that would, liberty
till the 25th of December following, to export all Woollen Manufactures beyond
Sea; in regard that the War and Contagion bad caused such a deadness of Trade
in the Nation.

But at the Old Baily were Tried several Malefactors; Plotters Tried at the
Old Bailey.
in all, Eight Persons, formerly Officers or Soldiers in the Rebellion; among
whom, the most noted was John Rathborn an old Army-Colonel. Their Indictment
was, For Conspiring the King's Death, and the overthrow of the Government;
having in the Kings absence from the City laid their Plot and Contrivance for
surprisal of the Tower, the killing General Monk, Sir John Robinson the
Lieutenant of the Tower, and Sir Richard Brown Major General of the City, and
then to have declared for an equal division of Lands. The better to effect this
Design, the City was to have been Fired, and the Portcul^^ces to have been let
down, to keep out all Assistance; the Horse-Guard to have been Surpised in the
several Innes where they were quartered; several Ostlers having been gained for
that purpose. The Tower had been Viewed, and its Surprisal Ordered, by Boats
over the Moat, and so to Scale the Wall. There was in the Conspiracy one
Alexander, who made his Escape, who had distributed several S^^s of Money to
these Conspirators: and for the carrying on the Design more effectually, they
were told of Great Ones, that sat constantly in London, who issued out all
Orders; which Council received their Directions from a Council in Holland, who
sat with the States. The Third of September was pitched upon for the Attempt,
as being found by a Scheme Erected for that purpose, a Luckie Day; a Planet
then Ruling, which Portended the downfall of Monarchy. Condemned, and Executed.
They were found Guilty of High Treason, and Executed at Tyburn.

The Month of May was without Action; only in the beginning thereof, the Fleet
being ready to set Sail, His Majesty and the Duke of York went down to see the
Condition thereof; and having staid there three days, returned to White Hall.

Earl of Sandwich Arrives at Madrid.

Lord Hollis returns from France.


Toward the latter end of May, the Earl of Sandwich His Majesty's Extraordinary
Ambassador Arrived at Madrid; and the Lord Hollis returned from his Embassy
in France.

The Fleet was now ready, under the Conduct of Prince Rupert, and the Duke of
Albemarle: But while they are searching for the Enemy, it will not be amiss to
relate a Combat of lesser Note, The Fleet ready.
for the Honor of the English Courage abroad, as well as at home. The Guiny
Frigate being in the Port of Lisbon, found there a French Man of War, the
Captain whereof bragged what he would do, when the Guiny Frigate should dare to
put to Sea. Which Captain Coite understanding, A French Drag came to nothing
stood out to Sea, expecting when the French Champion would follow; but he
consulting more his own security, than his honor, was content to let the Guiny
Frigate tire her self with attendance: so that the Captain having stayed
hovering in sight of the Town, for three days together, returned into Harbor;
and bringing out the Ships under his Convoy, steered his own Course.

June.
But to return to the Fleet. It was at this time divided, and the White Squadron
under Prince Rupert was gone toward the Coast of France, The Fleet divided.
upon an apprehension of Beauforts coming to join with the Dutch; at which time
the other two Squadrons under the Duke of Albemarle being Four Leagues off the
North-Foreland, the Bristol plying about a League from the Fleet, discovered
several Sails, and thereupon fired Three Guns for better Information: Soon
after, A Fight for two days together, maintained by the Duke of Albemarie.
from the top of the Admiral, they discovered the Dutch Fleet. The Fight began,
Friday the First of June, and was maintained for two days together with only 50
ships of the English, against double the number of the Dutch. The Duke had all
his Tackle taken off with Chain-shot; and his Breeches to his skin were shot
off. Captain Harman in the Henry, had the luck to have all the Dutch Fleet upon
him, single; which he bravely supported, and forced his way quite through them:
he had three Fireships upon him, of which one took fire, but it was soon
quenched; and at length, he was forced to leave the Fleet. The Rainbow being
the second, as the Henry was the first that Engaged. This was the first days
Dispute, from one of the Clock, till nine at Night: wherein, the Dutch had two
great ships Fired.

The Fight renewed.
On Saturday, the Fight was renewed with greater Violence than before, wherein
the Dutch lost Three Sail more, which were forced to retire out of the Dispute;
and it is thought, that this part of the Fleet would have given a very good
account of the Enemy, had not the Dutch received a Reinforcement of 16 fresh
ships. The General was Attacqu'd by a Vice Admiral of the Enemy, who came up so
near, as that the Yards arms touched; but the General received him with so full
a Bread side, besides a Volley of small shot, that he fell a Stern, and
appeared no more. However, on Sunday, the General finding the Fleet overpowered
in number, and ti^^d with continual service, began to stand over to the English
Coast. In this Retreat, which was managed with all care and prudence, the Saint
Paul and two other ships were by the General's order set on fire, to prevent
their falling into the Enemies hands; all the men disposed into other ships.

Toward the Evening of that day appeared the Prince; Prince Rupert appears.
upon whose approach, the Enemy leaving 50 Sail to make good against the
General, sent out 30 more to intercept the Prince; but he avoiding them, made
up to the General: when he drew near the Fleet, he sent word to the General,
that if he approved of it, he would keep the Wind and engage those thirty ships
which bore up to him: but the General supposing that Squadron to be only a
Decoy to draw the Prince upon the Galloper, sent a Caution to the Prince not to
meddle with that Squadron. And now both Generals being joined, on Monday by
Morning-light the Dutch Fleet were got out of sight; but the English soon made
them again, Sir Christopher Mimms leading the Van, the Prince in the Middle,
and Sir Edward Sprague in the Rear of the fresh Squadron. Here the Encounter
was very sharp, the English fighting some to the Windward, some to the Leeward
of the Dutch. In this Engagement the English passed the whole Body of the
Enemies Fleet five times, with good advantage on their side: which the Dutch
not enduring, began to run, and were pursued so long as the Powder lasted,
there being not above 35 of the Enemy left in a Body; and doubtless they had
received more mischief, the Generals resolving to have born in among 'um a
sixth time, but that the Prince having received in the last pass two shots in
his Powder-room, and finding his Masts disabled, was forced to let the Enemy
make the best of their way, whereby they escaped much fairer than otherways
they could have done.

Of the English Fleet was only burnt the Prince, having by misfortune first run
aground upon the Galloper, Sir George Ayscue Prisoner.
by which means Sir George Ayscue the Commander became a Prisoner. The Essex
was also taken, having entangled her self by grapling with one of the Enemies
ships which she had almost taken. The Swiftsure was also missing (taken by
Rear-Admiral Swaert) her Commander Sir William Berkley being slain. Beside
these, not a ship, except the Slugs expressly burnt by Order; all the rest
arriving safe in the Gunfleet. Certainly many of the Enemy were Burnt and Sunk.
The Enemy endeavoring to conceal their Losses as much as they could; but it
was generally concluded that they lost above 15 Ships, and 21 Captains, among
the rest Evertson one of their Admirals, and of common Seamen above 5000.

Sir George Ayscue was sent to the Castle of Lovestein, and Captain Reeves
imprisoned in Amsterdam, having, Wounded as he was, received most barbarous
usage from the hands of those that took him.

This bloody Encounter being over, July.
the King makes all the have imaginable to take the Sea again; to which purpose
the King proposes to the City the furnishing him with a sum of Money to answer
the great occasion of the War; whereupon, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and
Common Council agreed to furnish him with 100000 l. the most of which was
subscribed upon the place. The City furnish the King with 100000 l. The Dutch
out again.
However, the Dutch, by reason they had several ships already fitted, which
were intended for the Sound to assist the Dane, got out some time before the
English could possibly be ready, and were several times discovered toward the
Coast of France to meet with Beaufort, who was to have joined with them, but
never did.

But it was not long before the English Fleet were at their heels in very good
order: The English at their h^els.
The Flags being carried by the Generals Sir Joseph Jordan, Sir Robert Holmes,
Sir Thomas Allen, Sir Thomas Tyddiman, Captain Vtburt, Sir Jeremy Smith, Sir
Edward Sprague, and Captain Kempthorn.

On Monday, the English Fleet set sail from the Gunfleet, the Enemy plying
Eastward before them. That Night proving stormy, the Iersey disabled by
Thunder, her Main-topmast being broken to pieces, and the Mainmast split from
the Top to the Bottom, and another Fire-ship receiving some harm, were sent
away to be refitted. At two of the clock next day, they weighed and discovered
the Dutch Fleet standing with them, having the Wind, but not the Courage to
engage them. Next Morning by nine of the clock, both Fleets engaged, Another
Engagement.
the English not firing till they came up close with the Enemy, and then the
Anne headmost of the White began the Fight, the Red and Blue Squadrons coming
up within an hour after. Between ten and eleven, one of the English Fireships
endeavoring to board their headmost Admiral, was put off, and burnt down
without effect. At eleven, the Van of their Fleet began to give way; and about
one, the whole Van bore away from the English before the Wind: near half an
hour after, the Royal Katherine, the Saint George, and another of the White lay
by to repair, together with Sir Robert Holmes. After that, the Resolution was
burnt by a Fire-ship sent on board him by Tr^mp, but the men were most of them
saved,

About three of the clock, the Royal Charles went out of the Line, and with
much Gallantry fought ship to ship with De Ruyter within Musket Shot, leaving
her place to the Sovereign, till having repaired her self, she stood in again,
and so warmly handled De Ruyter, that he was forced to give way; but so
disab^'d her self, that she had not a Rope left, but was towed out of the Line
by Boats: about which time two of the Enemies ships were observed to be blown
up.

About four of the clock De Ruyter made all the sail he could, and ran for it,
but made frequent tacks to fetch off his maimed Vessels; once hazarding himself
very much to rescue his Second, who was so disabled, that he could not be got
off: in which condition he chopped to an Anchor, which brought the English to the
Leeward of him; a Fire-ship attempting to get up to him, was assailed by
another from the Enemy, and both burnt together.

The Van thus running, were pursued by the Red and White Squadron, which
continued among them all Night: the Royal James taking Bankert's ship of 60
Guns, Vice Admiral of Zealand, himself hardly escaping; and the Snake of Harlem
of 66 Guns, which the English afterward burnt, having Tromp in the Rear,
engaged with the Blue Squadron.

Next Morning the Dutch had all the Wind that was, so that the English could
not get up with them; only the Fanfan, a little Sloop built for Prince Rupert,
with her Oars made up to De Ruyter, and bringing her two little Guns to one
side, continued for an hour plying De Ruyter Broadside and Broadside, to the
great Laughter of the English, and Indignation of the Dutch to see their
Admiral chased so stoutly. The English Fleet continued the Chase over many
Flats and Banks, till they came so near the Shore, that the great ships could
not follow, but left the lesser Frigates to attend them till they got into the
Darlow-Channel of Zealand.

De Ruyter's ship was batte^'d very much in this Chase; and if the Wind had
served for the great ships, he had inevitably been taken, and most of those
that were with him had been destroyed.

Not long after, the Wind veering, the Generals discovered Tromp with the
remainder of the Dutch Fleet in the Offen, chased by the Blue Squadron, having
the Wind; so that toward Night, the Royal Charles tacking to keep between Tromp
and home, stood in with the English Fleet, and came to an Anchor; but Sir
Jeremy Smith in the Nightime lying by for fear of Shoale ground, the Dutch in
the mean time stole away, getting to Windward, so that the General's Squadron
could not reach 'um, though they chased 'um till they had but six Fathom Water;
by which means they got into the Wielings to the rest of their Fleet.

English Loss.
On the English side were only three Captains slain, the Resolution burnt, and
not much above 300 wounded men.

On the Dutch side, Dutch Loss.
were above 4000 killed, and near 3000 wounded of common Seamen. Several of
their Captains also were slain; among the rest, Evertson Admiral of Zealand,
Tirrick Hiddes Admiral of Friezland; the Vice Admiral of Friezland, and
Rear-Admiral Van Saen. They were above a hundred sail, of which only eighty
eight returned: which was the general computation of that time.

It was impossible for the Dutch to deny this to be a Victory, their own ships
being beaten home in such a miserable condition, that many of their best ships
had much ado to float above Water: And the English keeping the Sea, and not
only so, but presently after the Engagement showing themselves upon their own
Coast.

Nor were their own Harbors secure; Sir Robert Holmes enters the Vly.
for Sir Robert Holmes being ordered to go into the Vlie to burn that Island,
with five Fireships, some Ketches, and one fifth-rate Frigate, went in: the
Fireships went ahead, and soon destroyed two Men of War, and other ships that
lay there in defense of the Fleet; which being done, he sent the rest of the
Boats to burn the rest of the Ships, which they did with so good success, that
in a short time the most of that great Fleet, consisting of 170 sail, Burns 160
sail of ships.
was in a flame, except a Guiny-man of 24 Guns, and three Privateers, who
getting into the narrow of the Channel, protected five Sail more that were
ahead of them, so that the Boats could not come at them. After that, he went
ashore upon the Schelling, He lands on the Schelling, and burns a Town.
where he burnt the chief Town upon the Island, which was accounted very rich;
and had destroyed all the other Villages, but that being high Water, he durst
not lose the opportunity of returning. The number of Ships burnt, were judged
to be 160 Sail; which was the more considerable, in regard it was performed
with so little loss to the English, there being not above twelve men killed and
wounded in the whole Action.

Yet neither this nor the last disaster were so fatal as to keep the Dutch from
taking the Sea again, which they did toward the latter end of August, though
not with so powerful a Fleet as before; The Dutch at Sea again.
and therefore they passed by the back of the Goodwyn, making for the French
Coast, to have joined with Beaufort, who lay at Rochel with forty Sail: but the
English Fleet followed 'um close, The English follow them close,
and finding the Dutch gone toward Calice, they stood a course after them; but
upon the approach of the English, the Dutch got all under sail, and stood for
Bulloigne-Road, haling close to the shore: And here they had in all probability
been utterly Ruined, but that the Weather grew so extremely stormy, but stormy
Weather hinders any attempt.
that the English could not attempt any thing upon them; nor durst the other
adventure out to Sea; therefore the English thought it best to make away for
St. Hellens-Bay, the place of Rendezvouze, and the most proper station to
hinder the Enemies conjunction with the Fleet.

But the French were not a little tamed by the taking of Monsieur La Roche, who
scattered from the Body of the Fleet with five or six more French Men of War,
was discovered by Sir Thomas Allen lying between Fairlee and Dungeonness, who
having the Wind, came up by the side of the Frenchman Yard-arm and Yard-arm,
and poured into him a Broadside of great and small shot, receiving the like
from the other; but before Sir Thomas could tack again, the Frenchman having
spent his Foremast, and finding himself fallen between two other of the
English Frigates, and Sir Thomas at his heels ready to give him another
Broadside, he immediately yielded. This ship was called the Ruby, of a
thousand Tuns burden, Monsi^ur de la Roche taken in the Ruby*
carrying 412 men, and 54 Guns, whereof 50 Brass.

And now De Ruyter falling sick, was forced to leave the Dutch Fleet under the
care of Van Ness. But the States, finding the Weather unseasonable, and their
Ships much shattered by Tempests, thought fit to call their Fleet home, and to
put an end to any further occasion for this year. Saving only that five of the
English Frigates meeting with five of the Dutch, of 38, and 36 Guns a piece,
took the Admiral and two more, and chased the other two ashore.

Tromp and De Ruyter fall out.
Being returned, Tromp and De Ruyter fell out, laying the blame of all the
Summers Losses and Miscarriages upon one another. The States in favor of De
Ruyter took away Tromp's Commission, and confined him to Amsterdam; and a
second Examination and Execution was done upon many of their Officers for
Cowardice, and others deeply Fined.

But now to return homeward; in Guernsey the Governor of Chousey in France, A
design upon Guernsey discovered.
together with the Pilot or Master that brought him, were apprehended for
bringing a Letter to Major General Lambert there in Prison, and offering a
contrivance by his escape to engage him against the public Peace. At first,
though the D^signe was fully proved against him, he denied all; but the next
day confessing the whole matter, and retracting what he had said the day
before, Spies hanged.
he and the Pilot were both Executed upon the common Gallows for Spies.

Thus were the English s^cure enough from Foreign Enemies; but the City of
London had now to grapple with an Adversary more powerful than all their
Machinations: For upon the second of September, about one of the clock in the
Morning, The dreadful Fire of London.
broke out a most sad and deplorable Fire in Puddinglane near New Fish street;
which falling out at that time of the Night, and in a quarter of the City so
close, and built with Wooden Pitch^d Houses, spread it self before Day so far,
and with such distraction to the Inhabitants, that due care was not taken by
them for the timely preventing the further d^ffusion of it, by pulling down
Houses, as ought to have been; so that in a short time the Fire began to be too
big to be mastered by any Engines or working near it. It fell out most
unhappily also, that a violent Eatterly Wind somented it, and kept it burning
all that Day and the Night following, spreading it self up to
Grace Church Street, and downwards from Cannon-street to the Waterside as far
as the Three Cranes in the Vintrey.

The People in all parts were distracted by the vastness thereof, and their
particular care to carry away their own Goods; yet many attempts were at length
made to prevent the spreading of it, by pulling down Houses, and making great
Intervals; but all in vain, the Fire seizing upon the Timber and Rubbish, and
so continuing its progress through those spaces, and raging in a bright Flame
all Mundy and Tuesday, The King and the Duke of York take great pains to
prevent it.
notwithstanding the King and Duke of York took most indefatigable pains night
and day to apply all possible remedies to prevent it.

At length, the Wind slackning on Tuesday-night, and the Flames meeting with
Brick buildings in the Temple, by little and little it was observed to lose its
force on that side.

On Wednesday-morning, by the personal care and labor of the Duke of York a
stop was put to it at the Temple-Church; as also near Holborn-bridge,
Pi^-corner, Aldersgate, Cripplegate, at the lower end of Coleman-street, the
hither end of Bishops-gate-street, at Leaden Hall and the Stand in Cornhil, at
the Church in Fen-Church street, at Cloathworkers-ball in Mincing-lane, in the
middle of Mark-lane, and at Tower-Dock.

On Thursday it was wholly Extinguished, but so, as that Evening it burst out
again at the Temple by the falling of some sparkles upon a Pile of Wooden
building. But the Duke of York, who all that night watched there in Person, so
encouraged the People with his presence, that by blowing up the Houses about
it, before day they most happily mastered it.

Suspected persons Imprisoned
Two strangers Dutch and French were during the Fire Apprehended and Imprisoned,
and afterward Examined by the Chief Justice of the King's Bench, assisted by
the Lords of the Council, Though notwithstanding that suspicion, it was most
generally concluded to have been the Effect of some unhappy Chance; or, to
speak better, the heavy hand of Heaven. About the Tower, the seasonable Orders
that were given for plucking down Houses, to secure the Magazines of Powder,
were more successful; that part being up the Wind, though the Fire came almost
to the very Gates: by which early provision, the several Stores of War lodged
in the Tower were entirely saved.

It was observed, An Observation
that this Fire first happened in such a part of the Town, where though the
Commodities were not very rich, yet they were so bulkie, that they could not be
well removed; so that the Inhabitants sustained no very great loss of Goods:
but the other parts of the Town, where the Commodities were of greater value,
took the Alarm so early, that they saved the greatest part of their richest
Merchandises; which did not a little diminish the loss.

Through this sad Accident, The King takes care to relieve the distressed.
it is easy to be imagined how many persons were necessitated to remove their
Goods into the open Fields, where they were forced to continue some time;
therefore the King was frequent in Consulting all ways to relieve these
distressed persons, as well by his Proclamations, as Orders to the Justices of
the Peace, to send Provisions to the Markets; Commanding the Victualler of his
Navy to send Bread into Moor-fields, which for the more speedy supply, was sent
in Biscuit out of the Sea-stores.

The Fire being thus happily quenched, A General Fast.
the King Proclaimed a General Fast through England and Wales; and ordered,
that the distresses of those who had more particularly suffered in that
Calamity, should be recommended to the Charity of all well-disposed persons,
upon that day, to be afterward distributed by the hands of the Lord Mayor of
the City of London.

And to show his Pious Care for the Cities Restoration, His Majesty's
Declaration concerning the Re-building of the City.
he passed a Declaration in Council, wherein he first prohibited the hasty
Building any Edifices, till care could be taken for its Re-edification, so as
might best secure it from the like Accidents.

That no person should Erect any House or Building, but of Brick or Stone.

That the most Eminent Streets should be of a breadth; and that no streets,
especially toward the Water, should be so narrow, as to render the passages
inconvenient.

That a fair Wharf should be left, all along the Riverside; no Houses being to
be built, but at such a Distance; and none of those Houses to be Inhabited by
Dyers, Brewers, or Sugar-Bakers.

That an Exact Survey should be made of the Ruins, for the satisfaction of
particular Interests; and that a Model should be framed of the whole Building.

He also Recommended the Re-building of the Churches to the Charity and
Magnanimity of well-affected Persons. And for encouragement of others, promised
to Re-build his own Custom-House, and to enlarge it, for the benefit of
Merchants: which he afterward did accordingly, at his own Charge. He also
engaged to part with all his right and benefit upon all his own Lands, for the
Public benefit; and* to remit the Duties arising from Hearth-money, for seven
Years, to all that should Erect any New Buildings according to his Declaration.

And therefore Valentine Knight, Val. Knight committed, for dangerous advice
about it.
for presuming to Print certain Propositions for Re-building the City, with
considerable advantages to the Crown, was Committed to Custody, as being
repugnant to the Gracious offers of the King.

After this Distraction in the City, Parliament reassembles.
the Parliament met at Westminster according to the time limited at their last
Prorogation, to whom the King expressed his satisfaction, to see them so
happily met again; making known to them, the Progress and vast Expenses of the
War, and the urgent occasion of supply. Whereupon the House resolved, that the
humble and hearty thanks of the House should be returned to the King, They
thank the King for his care in the War.
for his great Care in the Management of the War; and that they would supply
him proportionably to his Occasions: and afterward in a Body attended the King
in the Banqueting House, to signify the same to his Majesty; in order
whereunto, they Voted a Supply of 1800000 l. Vote a Supply of 1800000 l.
In relation to which, in January following they passed an Act for raising
money by a Pole, and otherwise, toward the maintenance of the present War: to
which the King gave his Royal Assent in the House of Lords. But that not being
thought sufficient, they so diligently plied their business, that in February
they passed another Act, for granting the Sum of Twelve hundred and fifty
thousand three hundred and forty seven pounds thirteen shillings, Another
Supply of 1250000 l.
for the same reasons, and upon the same occasion as the former.

And to show their readiness to forward the Re-building of the City, they
passed another Act, A Court of Judicature Erected, for deciding differences in
the City.
for Erecting a Court of Judicature to determine all differences touching
Houses Burned or Demolished in the Fire; which, with an Act for the Relief of
Prisoners, was the chief business of this Session: being upon the 8 th of
February Prorogued till the 10 th of October following.

That Fire which had laid the City of London in Ashes, now threatened the City
of Westminster, and the Kings Palace it self; having by the misfortune of a
Candle falling into the straw, violently seized upon the Horse-Guard in the
Tilt-yard over against White Hall, burning down the North-West part of the
Building; His Majesty's Horse-Guard burned.
but being so close under the King's own Eye, it was by the timely help which
the King and the Duke of York caused to be applied, in a very short time
stopped, and wholly mastered.

About this time, complaint was made by several Merchants, of the ill dealings
of the Inhabitants of the Canary-Islands, in enhansing the Prizes of their
Wines; Banishing the English Consul and Factors out of the Island of Tenariff;
publicly declaring against the Loading or Unloading of the English Ships; with
other severe dealings with the Merchants of England Tra^ing thither. Upon
consideration whereof, the King put forth a Proclamation, Proclamation
prohibiting Importation of Canary.
Prohibiting the Importing of any Wines of the growth of the Canary-Islands,
and all Trade and Commerce with those Parts.

And at the same time, another Proclamation came forth, Prohibiting the
Importation of any Manufactures, Wines, Merchandises, or Commodities
whatsoever, of the Growth of France, or of any Lands, Territories, or Places
belonging to the French King.

No less care was taken for suppressing the Insolences of the Papists, upon
the humble Address of the Lords and Commons made to the King to that purpose.
The Parliaments Address (...) suppressing (...) Insolences.
And therefore all Popish Priests and Jesuits were by public Proclamation
likewise Commanded by a prefixed time to depart the Kingdom.

And now the King, to justify his Breaking with Denmark, Published a Deduction
of all the Transactions of Affairs between Himself and the King of Denmark;
with his Declaration of War against the said King, and the Motives that obliged
him thereto: wherein the King alleges, that he had been unavoidably provoked
by the King of Denmark, Declaration of War against Denmark.
by many Aspersions, Indignities, and breach of Faith, which that King had
offered him; making the Assault made by His Majesty's Ships in the Port of
Berghen, the Ground of his late entering into a League Offensive and Defensive
with the States of the United Provinces; whereas in truth, his Majesty had the
Freedom of that Port frankly offered him, by the King of Denmark himself, at a
time when his Majesty thought nothing of it; and that in order to the doing
those very Acts of Hostility wherewith he was then reproached. And for a good
Omen of his Majesty's Success, in the beginning of November came News, That the
Vice Admiral of Denmark was taken by some of His Majesty's Frigates upon the
Coast of Scotland.

Too long had the City now lain in Ashes, when Sir George Moore, a Proprietor
in some Houses in Fleetstreet, City Building begins.
upon promise of conforming to the Model, Form, and Scantling set by the
Committee appointed by the King for that purpose, had liberty given him to
begin that great Work; which was soon after followed with that Expedition and
Beauty, that none could imagine, but they who beheld it.

Prodigious Storms in Lincolnshire.
It was a Year of Wonders, and this not the least which happened in the County
of Lincoln; where at a place called Welborn, after a Prodigious Thunder, with
Hailstones as big as Pigeons eggs, Prodigious Storm in Lincolnshire.
there followed a Storm and Tempest with so great violence, that it threw down
most of the Houses to the ground, broke down and tore up Trees by the Roots,
dispersing the Corn and Hay: from thence going to the next Village called
Willington, it threw down some Houses, which with the fall killed two Children;
thence proceeding to Nanby, it fell so violently upon the Church, that it
dashed the Spire in pieces, tearing and rending the Church it self both in the
Body and Timber-work, so that it left little of the Wall standing with the body
of the Steeple. It was observed to run only in a Cha^el, which had it held any
considerable breadth, could not but have Ruined a considerable part of the
County.

But that which after so many severe Calamities revived the Hearts of the City,
A day of Thanksgiving for the ceasing of the Plague.
was the absolute ceasing of her devouring Enemy The Sickness; in
acknowledgment whereof, the King ordered a public day of Thanksgiving.

In Scotland, there happened a Riot of no small consequence at Dumfreeze, Riot
at Dumfreeze in Scotland.
where some persons having gathered the people of the Neighboring Parishes, to
the number of about two hundred, armed with Clubs and Sythes, took Sir James
Turner out of his Bed, carried him naked into the Marketplace, and had much
ado to be restrained from cutting him in pieces, for his severity (as they
pretended) in exacting Fines upon Nonconformists. Nor was this contemptible
number long ere they increased to a considerable force, in all 1600 men, and
were marching within four miles of Edinburgh, when hearing that the whole
Country was up in Arms against them, they thought it more convenient to return;
but being set upon by Lieutenant Colonel Dyel and Major General Drummond, near
Glencarn-Kirk, they were totally defeated, 500 slain upon the place, and 100
taken Prisoners. Several of the Rebels were afterward Sentenced and Executed:
among the rest, Corson that first began the Mutiny, and Malkel their Minister,
a main Incendiary of the people; so that in a short time all things were
reduced to their former quietness.

In imitation of England, the Barbados, another England in the other part of
the World, would not suffer the same Enemies of both to lie undisturbed. To
which purpose, the Lord Willoughby Governor of the Caribby Islands, having set
forth from the Barbados a considerable Fleet, well Manned and Victuall'd set
sail from thence upon some particular design, The Lord Willoughby sets forth a
Fleet from the Barbados.
and in his way burnt two ships richly laden in the Harbor of Los Santos, and
took two other Prizes: but as he was in pursuit of his further design, there
arose a Hurricane so violent, that their Cables giving way, they were forced to
abandon themselves to the rage of the Storm, A Hurricane.
which continued with that extremity, that they were wholly separated and
dispersed, His Lordship lost.
and the Lord Willoughby himself absolutely lost.

In January, Scotch Convention meets.
the Convention of the Estates of Scotland met according to appointment, where
the Oath of Allegiance being administered and taken by the several Members, they
fell upon the public concernments, as securing the Kingdom from public and
Domestic Dangers, and how to put the same into a posture of defense; and for
the raising so much Money as should be thought convenient to defray the charge,
and thereupon 6000 l. per Month was agreed on, for the entertainment of such
Forces as should be employed in his Majesty's service.

But in the parts near Surinam, At Surinam better success.
the English were more successful than at the Barbados, where they having
destroyed and ruined a considerable Colony of the Dutch at Apecawaca, resolved
to attempt something likewise upon the French, and particularly to attack the
Fort of Sinamary, which they took together with fifty Prisoners, and the
Governor, besides what were slain. The English dismantled the Fort, and
carried away all the Guns and Ammunition.

Captain Read also passing up the Canessa toward the Berbices, a very populous
Creek inhabited by the Enemy, he landed at Carenteen, and marching twenty miles
by Land, took the Fort of the Arawaces, taking Men, Women and Children
Captives, and much Booty, with little or no loss.

But though it were how December, some English Vessels were still abroad. And
among the rest, Captain Robinson, who lighting upon three Dutch Men of War near
the Texel, destroyed them all: in requital of which courtesy, the Dutch not
long after took the Saint Patrick off of Portsmouth, deserted by her own
Fire-ship.

At the conclusion of the Year, Captain Vtbert returned from the Streights with
the Squadron under his Command, and seven Dutch Prizes.

Foreign Affairs, 1666.
The King of France having received a very high Affront from the Great Turk in
the person of his Ambassador, The French King affronted by the Turk.
thought no way better than to send the same person again, to require
satisfaction for the repair of his Masters Honor. An Ambassador sent for
reparation.
But the Turk retaining in his mind the attempt upon Gigery, and the Succors
sent the Emperor, would hearken to no Proposition that might add to the Honor
of his solemn Entry; so that he was forced at last to land as it were
Incognito, and privately attended to walk from the Ship to his House. He went
with much pomp to his Audience, and at his Entry made several stops, expecting
the Vizier would have risen to him; but finding no more respect, he sat down
upon the Stool appointed for him, and in his Masters Name, whom he styled
Emperor of France, demanded more Honor to be done him. But the Vizier
incensed with the manner of his demanding it, broke out into a passion; which
the French Ambassador resenting, He is reviled,
rose from his seat, and in going away, thr^w the Capitulations with the Case
over his Shoulder, which hit the Vizier on the Breast; upon which, the Vizier
commanded his Officers to apprehend and strike him; which was accordingly
performed, and he hurried out of the Chamber, where he had received several
boxes of the Ear, and blows upon the Breast; Beaten, and ^^prisoned.
and was carried Prisoner to the Bashaw's House, where he was kept Prisoner in
a base low Room under the Stairs, and there detained four days, till by the
Intercession of the English Ambassador he was delivered. The King of France had
sent a person of quality to be a Witness of the Great Turk'^ submission; but he
became a fairer testimony of his Embassador's hard usage.

The Electors of Brandenburgh and Colen, the Dukes of Newburgh and Brunswick
labored hard to find out ways expedient for composing the Differences between
the Bishop of Munster and the States of the United Provinces, and with them the
Emperor and the Princes of the Diet at Ratisbone; so that at length the Bishop
was over-perswaded to conclude a Peace; which was accordingly signed toward the
beginning of the Year, though he had received 100000 Rix-dollars from the King
of England for carrying on the War; but it lasted not long; for when the King
of France became their Enemy, he broke it again, which was not long after.

At Musco, great alterations had like to have fallen out in matters of
Religion: For a certain F^ya^ in his Sermons endeavoring to make the people
wise^ than formerly they had been in that ignorant Country, among other
Doctrines that were new ^here, instructed them, That Images signified nothing,
and therefore were not to be worshipped: That the Saints know nothing of our
Prayers to them, and consequently were not to be called upon. Which wrought so
powerfully upon the people, that many hundreds of them began to reform their
ancient practice, and openly refused the use of Pictures: But a great party of
Soldiers being sent immediately to reduce them from their Heresy, frighted
the generality into a Recantation: some 20 persisting in their new Faith were
burnt, and 30 more hanged to terrify the rest. This being the second attempt
of this nature in that blind part of the World.

In Poland, the difference between that King and Lubomirskie still continued.
But the generality of the Polish Nobility not only appeard to Mediate on his
behalf, but seeing no effect of their Mediation, entered into a Confederacy with
him, against the King. This brought the King to hearken to some terms of
Agreement. But while both sides were at work busy to contrive it, the Royal
Party endeavoring to put a more speedy end to those Affairs, attempted to have
surprised the Confederates at unawares; but the Design was so timely
discovered, that Lubomirskie, by an Ambuscado of his best Troops, cut off above
Five Thousand of the Kings Soldiers, in such a place, where the King was
forced to look on and behold the Slaughter of his men, without being able to
Assist them. Whether upon this occasion or no, is uncertain, but a Peace
immediately ensued, between the King and the Confederates* upon Condition, of a
General Act of Oblivion, an Evacuation of Garrisons, and the Confederates to be
Dissolved. Soon after, Lubomirskie, with both his Sons, kissed the Kings Hands,
and took the Oath of Fidelity.

Last Year you heard how Sabaday the great upstart Prophet to the Jews, went to
Constantinople, to d^mand the Land of Promise for the Jews: but upon his
Arrival, the Great Turk consulting with his Mufti and one of his Judges what to
do with him, concluded, That he was to be dealt with as a Traitor to the
Ottoman Empire, and so to be Flayed alive; after which, that People fell very
severely upon the Jews, and slew a great Number of them. But the Sentence was
respited, and he only sent to the Prison of the Seven Towers in the Dardanelli,
from whence he wrote a Letter to the Hebrews in Smyrna, encouraging them to
stand fast in their Opinion; after that, taking upon him the Title and
Personage of a Great King and Prophet; insomuch, that many Thousands of his
Religion made their Visits to him in the Prison. But the Vizier taking notice
of the great Confluence of People to him, and fearing their Principles might
lead them to some Action prejudicial to the Government, gave Order to bring him
from the Dardanels to Adrianople, where being by a Learned Jew of his own
Country, after seven days Conference with him, found to be an Impostor, the
Grand Vizier so wrought upon him by Threats and Promises, that he was content
to lay his Royal Titles aside, and to take a servile Employment upon him in the
Grand Signiors Court; leaving to his Countrymen only Shame and Repentance.

To visit Sweden in the Circuit of this Year, we find the Swedish Prince highly
offended with the City of Bremen, for encroaching too much upon the Privileges
of that Crown, and assuming upon themselves to be a free Member of the Empire.
After tedious Parleys, they come to Blows: Wr^ngle lays close Seige; but
Brandenburgh, Lunenburgh, and the Dutch, Engage in their Defense, bringing
their Forces together for their Relief: the noise whereof (for the Enemy now
drew near) so far wrought upon the Swede, that he was willing to come to
Composition; and at length, Articles are agreed upon, and the Siege raised,
upon condition, That they should claim no Vote or Session in the Meetings of
the nether Circle: That they should pay their Contributions, as thereby
directed: That the Works of the City built upon the Kings Ground should
continue: That they should forbear to use the Title of a Free Imperial City.
For other things, to enjoy their Customs, Privileges, and Ecclesiastical and
Civil Rights, as in the Treaty 1648.

But the Venetians have their Hands full, the Great Turk bending all his Forces
to the Conquest of Candia. The Grand Vizier had already laid Siege to the Great
Town, and raised a Battery near the Lazaret, to hinder the Passage of the
Vene^ian Ships for its Relief, and was so offended with the Bassa of Canea and
Candia Nova, that he took off their Heads, for being defective in their Duties,
as he pretended, the Summer before. The Venetians on the other side were very
s^dulous in the Defense of their Territories; soliciting all their
Neighboring Princes, and having already received great Encouragements from the
Pope: and therefore the Event of the Siege was to be this Year Discovered.

Anno Dom. 1667.
Swedes offer a Mediation.
THE Swedes had offered a mediation last Year, between the King of England, and
the States of Holland; the result whereof was, That the King of England did
accept of Breda for the place of Treaty; Accepted.
and would send for the Management thereof, the Lord Hollis, and Mr. Henry
Coventry, so soon as the Passports necessary for their Transportation should be
ready: Breda the Place of Treaty.
which being communicated by the Swedish Ambassadors, they embraced the Offer
most willingly; however, their preparations for setting out their Fleet were
carried on with all imaginable diligence: which the King of England saw; but
resolving that they should waste this Summer in a fruitless expense, stood only
upon his own Guard.

A Valiant Act of Capt. Dawes.
Some Ships the English had abroad, but not to do any considerable Service, but
what their own Courage, when they accidentally fell in with the Enemy, led them
to: among the rest, Captain Dawes in the Elizabeth, meeting with 15 Sail of
Rotterdam Men of War, Fought with their Rear-Admiral of 64 Guns, and Five
others of 48 and 50 Guns; and presently after, with the Admiral of 70 Guns, and
two of his Seconds; yet got clear of them all, forcing the Enemy to lie by the
Lee.

Not long after, the same Frigate engaged with Two Danish Men of War of 40 Guns
apiece; where after four hours Fight, Captain Dawes was slain with a great
Shot; yet had the heart to Cry, For God's sake, never yield the Frigate to those
Fellows. Not long after, the Lieutenant being desperately wounded, the Master
succeeding him slain, the Gunner took place, who so well plied the two Danes,
that they Steered away to their own Shore; while the English Anchored within a
Mile of them, to repair the Damages which they had received. The next morning,
though but badly ready, yet they resolved to expect the Danes again; who,
though they were to Windward of the English, and had the advantage of the
Current, yet they would not attempt any thing ^urther; although the English
shot off a Gun in Defiance, but could by no means come nigh them, and therefore
bore a way for England.

The English Ambassadors enter Breda.
By this time, the English Ambassadors are Arrived at Breda, and had made their
Public Entry, which was very Solemn: they were met a Mile from the Town by
200 Horse, sent by the Governor; with whom went the Commander of the Town, in
the Governors Coach: the Horse led the Van, then sixteen Pages on Horseback;
and after them, four Trumpets, in the King of England's Liverie; after them,
the Gentlemen of the Horse to the Ambassadors, followed by the Marshall of the
Embassy; who preceded the Ambassadors Coach, which was very rich, drawn with
six Horses; besides three others of their own, and the Governors. At the Gate
of the Town they were met and Complimented by the Governor, who passed with
them in their own Coach to their House: but while they were busy at the
Transactions of Peace, it will not be amiss to follow the Dutch Fleet in their
Military Progress.

About the beginning of June, they appeared abroad at Sea, with a considerable
Fleet* and finding no Enemy to resist 'um, they kept plying upon the English
Coast, for many weeks together.

The Dutch Attempts upon the Coast. Burnt-Island attempted.
They had toward the latter end of April, made an Attempt, with a Squadron of
Ships, upon Burnt Island in Scotland; but were beaten off with loss.

And Sheerness
Their next attempt was upon the Platform at Sheer-Ness; which being a place of
small strength, and consequently unable to resist the Force of their Artillery,
after a stout resistance made, was quitted by Sir Edward Sprague. Animated with
this Success, with 22 Sail they made up toward the Chain, though with some
difficulty, several Vessels being sunk about Muscle-Bank, which was the
narrowest part: Here the Lord-General was in person with a considerable Force
to oppose them; however, the Enemy taking the advantage of an Easterly Wind,
and the Tide, pressed on; and though their first ship stuck upon the Chain, the
second brake through; and notwithstanding the stout resistance which was there
made, they clapped their Fireships upon the Mathias and Unity which lay as a
Guard to the Chain, and then upon the Charles the Fifth, all three Dutch
Vessels, They seize the Royal Charles.
which had been formerly taken from the Enemy. The same day they possessed
themselves of the Royal Charles, which was twice set on fire by the English,
and as often quenched by the Enemy.

After this, with the same advantage of Wind and Tide, they advanced with six
Men of War and five Fireships as far as Vpnore-Castle; but were so warmly
received by Major Scot from the Castle, and by Sir Edward Sprague from the
opposite shore, that they received no small damage in their Ships, but more in
the loss of a great number of Men; yet before they retired, they burnt the
Royal Oak (having spent three Fireships upon her) and much injured the Loyal
London and Great James, Royal Oak burnt.
which had been sunk before, and lay the greatest part under Water. In their
return, two of their own Men of War ran aground; Two Dutch Men of War burnt.
though others say, so disabled by Vpnore-Guns, that they could not carry them
off; and were fired, to prevent falling into the hands of the English.

Upon this, Commissioner Pett, Commissioner Pett committed
the person who was entrusted with the Yard of Chatham, and all the Naval
Provisions, was committed close Prisoner to the Tower. While he was there a
Prisoner, he was twice Examined by the Lords of the Council, for several great
neglects, in not executing the Orders sent him for the safety and preservation
of the Ships in the River. Upon which a Commission was issued out under the
Great Seal, for a further enquiry into the whole matter.

The next attempt of the Dutch, The Dutch come up into the River of Thames.
was upon the River of Thames, into the Mouth whereof they stood upon the 27 th
of June with 43 Sail great and small, but made not any attempt more
considerable, than to send some few men ashore to steal Sheep in the Marshes.
Sailing downwards, one of their Flag-ships ran aground upon Blithe-Sands, where
she lay till they were forced to unrig her.

From hence sailing toward Harwich, Dutch land near Harwich.
they landed 3000 men near Felstone-Cliff, with a Stand of Pikes: 2000 of them
adventured to make two Assaults upon Languard-Fort: the first dispute lasted
about three quarters of an hour, the second one quarter; but they were forced
to retire in such haste, that they left all their Ladders behind, being hardly
able to carry off their Dead, which were judged to be an hundred and fifty.

While these Assaults were making upon the Fort, about 1200 that were left
behind near the Cliff, to secure their Retreat, Encountered by the
Train'd-Bands.
were encountered by the Trained Bands under the Command of the Earl of
Suffolk; and a smart Skirmish passed between them, and continued till ten of
the clock at night, and was again renewed by the return of the beaten Companies
from the Fort: but the Horse not being able to come up, that Execution was not
done upon them which otherwise might have been.

However, the Dutch would not stay for their coming, but as soon as their Boats
were afloat, they Embarked with all the haste they could, and returned to
their Fleet.

From hence they came up as far as Hull-Haven, They come up to Hull- Haven, are
encountered by several ships that lay there.
where the Success then lying, with about eighteen other Men of War of the
English, there happened a sharp Engagement with a Squadron of the Enemy
consisting of eight ships. While the Fight continued, one of our Fireships
wrought up to one of theirs, and grapling together, both of them burnt down,
but so close to another of the Enemies, that she took fire likewise, and blew
up. In a short while after, another of their ships took fire, and burnt down:
and after that, another of our Fireships and one of theirs were both burnt,
being grappled together. All the time of this Fight, the English made good
their place, insomuch that another of their Men of War ran aground, and fired
her self; and another of their Fireships was burnt, with the loss of one of
ours. As they were about to draw off, they sent one Man of War and four
Fireships toward the English; but with such ill success, that the foremost of
the Enemies Fireships, seeing the English ready with their Ketches to cut off
their Long-boats, forsook the Vessel, which was presently seized by the
English: the other three Fireships out of fear burnt themselves; which the
Dutch Man of War seeing, retired to the rest of the Fleet. But then the English
Admiral with his own ship bore up to the whole Fleet of the Enemy, and sent out
a Fire-ship, which had wrought her self very near one of the Enemies greatest
Men of War, being stoutly seconded by the Man of War; but being galled by the
shot of the whole Fleet, they thought it convenient to come off. Upon this, the
English fall down to Gravesend; the Dutch Anchored in the Hope, but durst
attempt nothing further, though both the Wind and Tide served them. By this
Engagement, the Dutch were reduced from 24 or 25 Sail, to 14. the English from
19 to 15. This happened upon the third of June.

The next day they were pursued by Sir Edward Sprague, who was now returned to
his Command, to whom Sir Joseph Jordan was also joined from Harwich with
upwards of 20 Sail of small Frigates: but little or no action happened, by
reason that the Dutch avoided any further Engagement, keeping still at a
distance.

Dutch attempt to land near Wenbury in Devonshire.
Their next attempt was in Devonshire, where they endeavored to land at
Wenbury; but the Militia of the Country gave them so warm a return of their
Vollies, that they immediately retired with all the speed they were able, to
their Ships. When this would not do, they sent another Boat with a White Flag,
desiring friendship, and leave to buy fresh Victuals: but being answered that
nothing of that nature could be done without leave of their Officer in chief,
they made another attempt with twelve Boats full of Men, to have landed near
Cawland in Cornwall; Near Cawland in Cornwall.
while their Fleet Anchoring within Musket Shot of the Shore, spent their shot
in vain for above an hour, but were beaten off by the Foot which were placed
upon the Shore in expectation of their coming.

Then they sent out another Boat with a White Flag and two Officers, desiring
to speak with the Commander in Chief; who being brought before Sir Jonathan
Trelawney, they first desired, from their General, to know what News there was
of Peace: Next, they desired to buy Provisions, excusing the Hostilities past,
as done without their Generals order, who had no Commission to molest or
trouble any People on Land; offering the Faith of the Seven Provinces to any
that should be sent aboard their Fleet for their safety in going and returning.
Sir John dismissed them with promise of a speedy answer: Sir Jonathan
Trelawney, Major Sparks, and Mr. Windham, sent aboard the Dutch Admiral.

Their Entertainment.


and upon consultation with the Earl of Bath, it was agreed that Sir Jonathan
Trelawney, Major Sparks, and Mr. Windham should go aboard.

At their approach, De Ruyter met them at the Boat-side, and inviting them
aboard, saluted them with 13 Guns; excusing what had past, and promising for
the future, that no other acts of that nature should be committed while he
continued on the Coast. De Wit, Doleman, the Count de Horn, with above 20
Captains more, attended the English at the Great Cabin, where they offered a
Present to De Ruyter for his own Table, but refused any greater supply till
Peace should be Proclaimed. Accordingly, upon their return the Earl of Bath
sent the Admiral a Present of fresh Provisions, A Present sent De Ruyter.
with a fat Buck and some Fruit; which De Ruyter received with seven Guns, as
an acknowledgement. Notwithstanding De Ruyter's Complement, after he parted
from Plymouth, two of the Dutch Fleet came before the Harbor of Hoy, and
advancing near the Shore, plied with their Broad-sides certain Works that were
newly raised at the entry of the Harbor; but after an hour and an half, they
were forced to retire, Foy Harbor Attempted.
with several Shots received in their Hulls, and the loss of one of their
Top-Masts, and several men, without any loss to the English. After this, they
were only seen to hover about the Coasts, but without any farther Attempts; and
Peace ensued.

For about the beginning of June, Plenipotentiaries meet, and T^eat at Breda-
the Ambassadors of England, France, and Sweden, the Plenipotentiaries of the
States and Denmark, repaired to the Castle belonging to the Prince of Orange,
where there was great care taken, to avoid all contests about Precedence. A
while after, Mr. Coventry, one of the Ambassadors, being sent over into
England, and having received the King's Answer and Resolution touching the
Articles discussed and agreed to by the Plenipotentiaries, returned for Breda:
so that upon the Twenty first of June, the Articles were signed by the
Plenipotentiaries. Peace Concluded.
And upon the Fourteenth of August, the Ratifications of the Peace were
enterchang'd: The Mediators first bringing in the Ratifications, and other
Instruments of the Dutch, French, and Danes, into the English Ambassadors
Apartment, received from them theirs in Exchange: Which done, the English
Ambassadors went into the Apartment of the Dutch and their Allies, where they
made and received the Compliments usual upon the Conclusion of so great an
Affair. The Peace was immediately Proclaimed before the Doors of the several
Plenipotentiaries, in their respective Languages. Afterward, upon the Twenty
fourth of August, it was publicly Proclaimed in the City of London. And as if
this had not been enough, it was afterward confirmed by an Additional Treaty,
made and concluded by Sir William Temple, in January following.

Having thus pursued the Series of the Dutch War and Peace, other intervening
actions, must not be omitted.

It was murmured, Commissioners to take an Account of Public Money.
that the Public Treasure was wasted and miss-spent; the King therefore to
satisfy the People, Issued out a Commission to several Members of both Houses,
to take an Account of such sums of Money as had been raised, and assigned to
him, during the present War, being in all 2477500 l. granted at several times,
by several Acts; with full Power to call to Account all Treasurers,
Pay-masters, Receivers, and all other Agents and Persons whatsoever.

And what had not been lately practiced before by the King, this Year the Feast
of St. George was kept in his Palace of White Hall.

The Earl of Southampton, Lord High Treasurer of England, The Office of Lord
High Treasurer in the Hand of Commissioners.
being now lately Dead, the King did not think fit to give the Place to any
particular Person for the present, but made the Duke of Albemarle, the Lord
Ashley, Sir Thomas Clifford, Sir William Coventry, and Sir John Duncomb, by a
Commission under the Great Seal, his Commissioners for executing that Office.
The Parliament had met according to the Kings Proclamation, in July; but were
then Prorogued again, Parliament met.
till the Tenth of October: at which time being again Assembled, the King gave
for one reason of his last Prorogation, That it was to give himself time to do
some things in the mean time, which he hoped would not be unwelcome to them,
which he had since done: leaving his other Reasons to be delivered by the Lord
Keeper; who not only afterward enlarged upon the King's Reasons for the said
Prorogation, but also recommended to them the Obstructions of Trade, and the
settlement of such a Balance of Trade between England and Scotland, that
neither we should be prejudiced by the Import of their Commodities here, nor
they put to seek new places of Vent abroad. As to the Money raised for the War,
he told them what the King had done, in reference to calling all Persons to
Account; and had committed the Examination thereof to themselves, to follow
their own Method; adding withal, that if any grievances had happened, his
Majesty would be as willing to have them Redressed, as they to have them
Represented; not doubting, but that they would endeavor to Imprint the known
Truth into his Subject hearts: that there was no distinct Interest between the
King and his People.

The Commons taking into Consideration the King's Speech, resolved to return
him their humble Thanks; to which purpose, having obtained the Concurrence of
the Lords, the Two Houses in a Body attended the King in the Banqueting House,
where the Lord Keeper, in the Name of the Two Houses made known to the King,
That they, His Majesty's Loyal and Faithful Subjects, having taken into their
serious Consideration the Speech, wherein he was pleased to let them know the
reasons of their last Prorogation, which was to give himself time to do some
things which would not be unwelcome to them but be a Foundation of a greater
Confidence for the Future, between the King and them: They found themselves in
duty bound to give him thanks; and particularly, for that he had Disbanded the
New-raised Forces: that he had dismissed the Papists from his Guards, and other
Military Employments: for his Care in quickening the Execution of the Act
restraining the Importation of Canary: That He had seen the Canary Patent
Vacated: And Lastly, for his displacing the Lord Chancellor.

But the Parliament having Sat till the Middle of December, passed several
Acts; among the rest, An Act for taking an account of the several Sums of Money
therein mentioned. An Act, for Banishing and Disenabling the Earl of Clarenden;
to which, when the King had given his Consent, by Commission, they Adjourned
till February. Parl. Adjourned


Commissioners appointed to hear the complaints of Seamen.
And because it was a general Complaint among the Seamen and Soldiers who had
been in Service, that they were frequently constrained to give money, or lose
some part of their Wages to recover the rest, the King therefore for the more
effectual Redress of such abuses, if any were, appointed the Duke of York, and
several of the Lords of the Council, to receive and hear all such Complaints as
any Seaman or Soldier should make of any Exactions practiced upon them by any
of the Officers, Sub-Officers, or Clerks in the Navy-Office, or
Treasury-Office: that if the same should appear to be true, Justice might be
done upon the one, and Satisfaction given to the other.

Mr. Cowley 's death.
About this time died Mr. Abraham Cowley, one of the chiefest Ornaments of this
Age, whose Immature Death, succeeding Ages will lament, when they find what
Treasures they have lost, by his untimely Fate. His temperate Life did not
deserve so short a Period: But Heaven perhaps, thought he had done enough, that
could not well do more, than make himself Immortal. His Body was conveyed from
Wallingford-House to Westminster-Abbey, attended by many Persons of very great
Quality: over whose Grave, has been since Erected a stately Monument, to
Eternize his Memory.

In America, the French had a Design upon Mevis, having drawn out all their
Forces from Martenico, Guadaloup, and St. Christophers; strengthened also with
an additional force of their own, and two Dutch Men of War, being in all 32
Sail: but being encountered by 10 Sail of the English, who were sent by
Lieutenant General Willoughby for the relief of the Island, Dutch beaten by Sir
John Harmon in the West Indies.
the English so smartly Encountr'd them, that he Chased them home to St.
Christophers. Upon the Return of the English to Mevis, they found Sir John
Harman newly Arrived there, with seven Men of War, and two Fireships, who
understanding what had happened, resolved to fall upon them in their own Ports,
which he did so effectually, that he burned their Admiral, and six or seven of
their best Ships more; the rest, all but two, were sunk, partly by the industry
of the Enemy, partly by the Shot of the English Ships: in which Service, the
English lost not above 80 Men, with little damage to their Vessels.

From the other Indies two ships about this time arrived under the Convoy of
Sir Jeremy Smith, who having been cruising in the Streights the most part of
the Summer, had met with no opportunity of considerable action, more than to
keep the Dominion of the Seas. However, at length he made a shift to meet with
two D^^ch East-Indie-Prises outward bound, which he brought home; returning
into St. Hel^ens-Road toward the end of September.

Nor did the Dutch at any time Triumph where the number was not too unequal, as
appeared by the success of six of our smaller Frigates, who falling in with
three Holland Men of War of 42, 36, and 30 Guns, and two Merchantmen to the
Northward, took the three Men of War and one of the Merchantmen, Three Dutch
Men of War and a Prize taken.
being forced to quit the other, upon view of a whole Squadron of the Enemy.

At home, the King had notice of the great concourse of very many persons of
the Romish Religion to the Chapels of St. James and Somerset House; and
therefore gave order in ^ouncil, Proclamation against Papists.
That if any of his Subjects, not being of the Families of the Queen, or
Queen Mother, or of Foreign Ambassadors, should repair to hear Mass or perform
any Exercises of the Romish Religion, that they should be severely prosecuted,
and such punishments inflicted upon them, as by Law were provided.

And for the better discovery of such as were addicted to Popery, the
Lord Keeper was Authorized to issue out Commissions of Dedimus Potestatem, for
administering the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy in all places of England and
Wales, where they had not been already granted by the Lord-Chancellor.

The abuses also of the Company of Woodmongers were looked into, Woodmongers
Charter demanded.
and upon frequent consultations thereupon had, it was thought fit, that for
the convenience of the Public, their Charter should be surrendered; which when
they peremptorily refused to do, the Atturney-General was ordered to proceed
against them by Quo Warranto, and by Information in the Crown-Office.

The City began to rise with more splendour now than ever; which the King to
forward as much as in him lay, as soon as the Foundation of the Royal Exchange
was appointed to be laid, His Majesty lays the first Stone of the Royal
Exchange.
was pleased to be present and assisting at the Solemnity; His Majesty there
placing the first Stone with the usual Ceremonies.

Not long after, the Duke of York, attended with several persons of Honor,
went into the City, and being honorably received by the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen, with the usual Ceremonies upon such occasions, The Duke of York the
second.
laid the first Stone for a second Pillar: which gave so great an encouragement
to the Workmen, that never did so large a Structure go on with greater Vigor.

The remaining part of the Year was more for Counsel than Action: And therefore
the King* for the better regulating affairs for the future, among other
Important parts thereof, taking into his consideration the ways and methods of
managing matters at the Council Board, established several standing Committees
for several businesses, with regular days for their Assembling.

And not content to have Peace at home, His Majesty, to show himself a Mediator
among his Neighbors, Earl of Sandwich sent to Portugal. January 22.
sent his Ambassador the Earl of Sandwich on that Grand Errand of making Peace
between Spain and Portugal, who soon after he had his dispatches, arrived at
Lisbon.

He no sooner had had his Audience, but upon the resignation of the former
King, the Infanta his Brother took possession of the Scepter. However, so well
he managed his employ, that in a short while after the Articles were fully
agreed on between the two Crowns of Spain and Portugal, and the Ratification
mutually exchanged between the said Ambassador of England and the Spanish and
Portugueze Commissioners, and soon thereupon published both at Madrid and
Lisbon.

The Insolences of private Men of War were about this time very great,
February.
and therefore the King taking into consideration, as well the safeguard and
protection of his own Subjects as of his Allies, the disturbances of Commerce,
and the diminution of his own Revenues in his own Ports and Harbors, set forth
a Proclamation, commanding an inviolable T^uce and Cessation in his own Ports,
Havens and Roads.

Proclamation to hinder the roving of private Men of War.
That his Subjects by Sea and Land should do their utmost to hinder the roving
and hovering of any Men of War near the Entry of any of his Ports or Harbors.
That if any Men of War of one side, came into any Port where were Merchantmen
of another party, the Merchantmen should be suffered to depart two Tides
before the Men of War. That no Privateer with foreign Commission should stay
above 24 hours in any of his Majesty's Ports or Harbors. That none of his
Majesty's Subjects should contract or deal with any foreign Man of War. That no
Mariner or Officer, being the King's Subject, should presume to put himself
into the service of any foreign Prince or State.

Toward the beginning of this Month, the Pa^^^ament, according to their
Adjournment, February.
met. At which time, the King coming to the House of Lords, directed his Speech
to both Houses, telling them, that he had made a League Defensive with the
States of the United Provinces, with a League also for an Efficacious Mediation
of Peace betwixt the two Crowns, into which Sweden had offered to enter as a
Principal. Then putting them in mind of his vast Expenses pas^, and
necessarily to ensue, by the building of Ships, and setting out another Navy,
he desired their speedy assistance with Money. Lastly, he recommended to their
care to consider of a course how to beget a better Union of his Protestant
Subjects.

After this Peace with the Dutch, ensued the Peace with Spain; not only
renewing the ancient Friendship, but enlarging the Trade and Commerce between
both Kingdoms, concluded in May last, and this Month Proclaimed in England.

Count de Dona the Swedish Ambassador dies in England.
Toward the beginning of the Month, the Count De Dona, Ambassador Extraordinary
from the Crown of Sweden, arrived at London; but before he had concluded his
Negotiation, died in May following.

Toward the latter end of the Month, Sir William Temple, Envoy Extraordinary
from his Majesty to the States of the United Provinces, Maritime League
concluded with the Dutch by Sir Will. Temple.
having exchanged the Ratification of the late concluded League, concluded
another League concerning Maritime Affairs; and having sent it into England for
confirmation, departed from Holland for Brussels.

Charles the second launched, March 3. 1666/7.
The third of this Month was Launched that Famous Ship, still known by the Name
of Charles the Second.

This Month also, upon the Petition of the Commons in Parliament, a
Proclamation was issued forth, to enforce the Laws against Conventicles, and
for preserving the Peace of the Nation against unlawful Assemblies.
Proclamation against Papists.


Foreign Affairs, 1667.
A Gentleman of Savoy, having his Head cut off at Geneva, for some Crime
committed there; the Duke of Savoy did so exceedingly resent their Proceedings,
(which he affirmed to be both against the last Treaty between that City and
him, and against the Law of Nations) that he was resolved to employ his Arms
against them. The City of Geneva appealed to the Switzers, who in a Diet at
Baden, as well of the Roman Catholics as Protestants, where were also present
the Ambassadors of the Emperor and King of Spain, unanimously resolved to give
their Assistance to Geneva. The Emperor's Ambassador declared the like in the
Name of his Master, who was obliged to protect Geneva as an Imperial City,
being unjustly assaulted by a Prince of the Empire. The Spanish Ambassador
delivered himself also in their favor.

But the main Affair which alarmed the Princes of Europe, was the pretension
which the King of France made to the Spanish Netherlands, and his great
preparations to get the possession of what he laid claim to, by force of Arms.
Castle-Rodrigo represented to the King of France the scandal which would be
given to all the World, when they should see him engaged in a War against a
Brother of only six years of age, and a Regency subordinate to the Laws of a
Testator, without any form of Justice, or demand of satisfaction: That he
doubted not but the Queen his Mistress would willingly refer her self to the
Princes of the Roman Empire, to the Crown of England, or the United Provinces:
And therefor left it to his consideration how unjust it would be to attempt
any Invasion without those Formalities and Interpositions which the Christian
Princes had always observed.

Of this the King of France takes little notice: for he thought he had done
enough a little before, by his Letter to the Queen of Spain, wherein he wrote
to her, that she could not but know the right which the Queen his Wife had to
several Territories of the Netherlands* which she knowing to be solid, had
desired her Majesty to take particular Cognizance of, and do her Justice
therein. That she in her Answer had not only pretended that she could not upon
any consideration of that Affair enter into a discussion thereof, but had sent
Orders to the Governor of Flanders to administer the Oath of Fidelity to be
administered to all the States and People of that Country; which being an
absolute refusal of doing him Justice, had put him upon a necessity of being
wanting to his Honor, to himself, to his Queen, and the Dolphin his Son,
should he not by force of Arms endeavor to obtain that reason which had been
denied him.

The Queen of Spain returns for Answer, that the King of France could not be
ignorant of the just Rights of the King her Son: however, that she was willing
to enter into an Amicable Treaty, wherein the Rights of her Son and Him might
be seasonably examined, so that Justice might take place by the ways and means
most proper.

But the King of France, not liking these delays of Words, falls into the
Spanish Territories in the Netherlands, and takes Tournay, Doway, Bergen St.
Winox, Courtrich, Oudenard, and Lille; and almost wholly reduces those parts
under his Jurisdiction: and besides all this, he defeats a great part of the
Spanish Army under Marcin, killing 2000 upon the place, and pursuing the rest
to the very Walls of Damin.

On the other side, he sends the Duke of Crequi with a Body of 8000 men, to
secure Alsatia, and to prevent any Succors that the Emperor might send: And
hearing that his Forces were upon their March, commanded the Prince of Conde,
as Generalissimo of that place, to send a supply to Crequi to lie in their way.

Toward the latter end of the Year, he fell into Franche Comte, where the
Prince of Conde took Bessanson, Dole, Gray, Besterans, Rochefort, and so many
other places, that by the latter end of February the Conquest of that place was
wholly completed.

Though the Swedes stood firm to England during the War, yet now that the King
of England had concluded a Peace with the Dutch, they also did the same.

The chief Conditions of the Treaty were, That Swedeland should give up all
their pretensions upon account of the Fort Cabo Corso in Guiny, and the Ship
Christina.

That the Swedes should give up all their Rights to the East Indies, and
neither directly nor indirectly sail into those Coasts upon the account of
Trade; For which the King of Sweden should receive from the Dutch the sum of
140000 Crowns.

This Year, toward the latter end of May, died Pope Alexander the 7 th, in the
sixty ninth year of his Age, and the twelfth of his Papacy. In his place, after
several warm disputes, was at length chosen Iulio Rospigliosi of Pistoya,
Secretary of State to the late Pope deceased. He entered upon the Chair in the
71 year of his age, by the Name of Clement the ninth.

As for the Venetian, he had his hands full this year, the City of Candy being
now closely Besieged; but though it were with greater numbers Assaulted, it was
with greater courage all this year defended.

Nor was Poland free from the Irruptions of the Tartars, who had almost
defeated the Polish General Sobieskie, but that he made a timely Peace with
them upon condition of a general Oblivion, release of Prisoners on both sides*
and a sum of Money to be paid them.

Anno Dom. 1668.
Prentices make a Tumult.
TOward the end of March, several idle persons in and about the City being got
together, and abusing the Liberty giv^n 'um by the Holy Days, it being then
Easter-week, tumultuously took upon 'um to pull down Houses of ill fame about
the Suburbs, according to former practices; though their chief design was to
Steal and Plunder: Some mischief they did, and more intended, had they not been
dispersed by the Guards of Horse. The Scandal lay upon the Prentices, but
afterward it appeared otherwise. Four of the number that were apprehended,
were upon Trial found Guilty, and Executed, two of their Heads being set upon
London Bridge.

May 1668. His Majesty goes to the House, signs several Bills, and adjourns
the Parliament. Lord Vaughan Chief-Iustice.
The twelfth of this Month, the King went to the House of Lords, where he was
presented by the House with several Bills; the chief whereof was one for the
raising of 310000 l. by way of Imposition upon Wines and other Liquors; which
being passed with the rest, the Parliament was adjourned till the 11 th of
August next ensuing.

The place of Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas being vacant, Sir John
Vaughan was at the latter end of this Month solemnly Sworn Sergeant at Law,
and being the next day advanced to the vacant Dignity aforesaid, took his place
accordingly in Court.

June 1668. Bridge- Town burnt.
This Month arrived News, that came then too soon, of the burning of the
Bridge-Town, being the chief place of Trade in the Barbados; the Fire not only
consuming the greatest part of the Houses, but also blowing up the Magazine, to
the great detriment of the public, as well as private persons. But as it fares
with most convenient Situations, all hands going to work, it quickly flourished
again, being above half rebuilt before the latter end of the year.

August 1668. Sir William Godolphin Knighted, and made Resident-Embassador in
Spain.
His Majesty had his Ambassadors of Envoys in most other parts of Christendom,
only Spain; and therefore having first conferred the Honor of Knighthood upon
Sir William Godolphin, hs made choice of him to reside as his Ambassador in the
Court of the Catholic King, sending him away with all convenient speed.

And to keep a Correspondence with the Grand Signior, for the good of the
Merchants, Sir Daniel Harvey was sent much about the same time Ambassador to
Constantinople.

These were no sooner gone, but Monsieur Colbert arrived at London, as
Ambassador from the King of France.

Sept. 1668.
At the beginning of this Month, the Duke of York went for Dover, near which
place, in a Tent erected for that purpose, he took the usual Oath of Warden of
the Cinque Ports.

And to show that his Majesty was not unmindful of keeping a Watch upon the
Proceedings of the Netherlands, it was not long after, that Sir William Temple,
now the King's Ambassador Extraordinary in Holland, made his public Entry into
the Hague, and had his Audience of the Deputies of the States.

It was in August expected the Parliament should have met again; but the King
by his Proclamation, for great and weighty considerations, adjourned them to
the tenth of November ensuing.

Duke of Munmo^th made Captain of the Horse-Guards.
In November, upon the Resignation of the Lord Gerrard, the Duke of Monmouth
receives the Command of the Life-guards of Horse, being openly conferrd upon
him by the King.

Some few days after Pietro Mocenigo, Venetian Ambassador has Audience.
Ambassador from the Republic of Venice, made his public Entry, and had
Audience of his Majesty.

And now Mr. Secretary Maurice growing old, and ti^'d with State Affairs,
craves leave of the King to make a resignation of his most important
employment; which being consented to by his Majesty, Sir John Trevor made
Secretary.
Sir John Trevor Knight* succeeded him, who at the same time taking the usual
Oaths of a Privy-Councellor, soon after was admitted to take his place at the
Council Board.

Nor was the King less careful of the Church than State; this Month being
famous for the Consecration of that Learned Prelate Dr. John Wilkins Bishop of
Chester, Dr. Wilkins Bishop of Chester.
in the Chapel of Ely-House.

His Majesty's Navy, though considerable, had done little else but showed its
Grandeur all this Summer; when on a sudden Sir Thomas Allen, being dispatched
for the Mediterranean, appears before Argier; where though at first they stood
upon their terms, yet when they saw him preparing to use force, their Stomachs
began to come down, Sir Thomas Allen made Peace with Argier.
so that they immediately offered a release of all the Captive English which
had been taken by them belonging to Tangier. They also agreed to the former
Peace made between the King of England and them, with some additions, which
were signed by them and Sir Thomas Allen, to this effect.

That all their Captains should be commanded to let all English Vessels pass
without damage or molestation, upon their showing English Colors. If in any
Vessel the English were equal to the Strangers, then they should be free; if
the Strangers exceeded the English, then Lawful Prize; however, if they showed
an English Pass, to be let go.

That none of their little Frigates with Oars shall stop any Vessel laden with
Provisions or Ammunition for Tang^er.

That they shall not deliver any of their little Frigates with Oars to any of
the Salley-men to make use of.

That if any of their little Vessels intended for Tangier, they should take a
Pass from the English Consul at Argier.

From thence he sailed for Tripoli, at whose appearance the King of the place
sent out a Brigantine and a Favorite of his to bid him welcome, assuring him
of his readiness to keep and maintain the ancient Friendship, and continue the
Articles already agreed on.

The Parliament, who had adjourned themselves to the first of March, were about
the middle of this Month by the King's Proclamation Prorogued, December. 1668.
Parliament Prorogued.
for many; weighty and urgent reasons, till the tenth of October following.

The Births of Princes and Princesses, oftentimes the subjects of Great
Histories, are never to be omitted: Ian. 166^. Duchess of York brought to bed
of a Daughter.
Therefore was this Month not a little signalized, seeing the Duchess of York
was about the middle thereof delivered of a Daughter, which was Baptized by the
Name of Henrietta by the Archbishop of Canterbury; the Duke of Ormond
assisting as Godfather, the Marchioness of Dorchester and the Countess of
Devonshire being honored for Godmothers.

The King in testimony of his Amity with Spain, Sir Edward Sprague sent into
Flanders.
had sent Sir Edward Sprague as his Envoy to complement the Constable o^
Castile upon his Entry upon the Government of the Spanish Netherlands; who
having performed what he had in charge, returned at the latter end of this
Month.

That which completed the double date of this Year, The Duke of Tuscany
arrives in England.
was the coming of the Prince of Tuscany to complete his Travels by a view of
England, where after he had been magnificently Treated by the King himself,
both at London and Windsor, and in many other Cities and places, by several of
the Nobility and persons of Quality of this Kingdom; he departed for Holland,
and so to his own Country.

Foreign Affairs, 1668.
The Differences at Avignon being composed, the Citizens sent two Ambassadors,
one on the behalf of the Nobility, the other of the Commonalty, to Rome; who
being admitted into the presence of the Pope, swear F^alty to him, after the
usual manner; and showed their great Satisfaction of the choice which the Pope
had made of Cardinal Rospigliosi his Nephew to Reside there, as his Legate.

France may be thought to have no kindness for the Jesuits; however, the most
Christian King could not be said to do amiss, not to let 'um Triumph over their
Superiors: for Complaint being made, that the Jesuits in the Diocese of Fambers
had refused to give Obedience to the Bishop of that Diocese, the King gave
leave to the Bishop to proceed against them by Excommunication, according to
the Privileges of the Gallicane Church: whereupon, the Bishop suspended them
from all their Functions, forbidding them to Preach, Teach, or Confess any
person, within the Territories of his Diocese.

The King of France being now Master of several Towns of Flanders, late under
the Jurisdiction of the Spaniards, and having totally reduced the County of
Burgundy under his Subjection; of which, in favor of the Prince of Conde, he
immediately granted two Reversions, one to the Duke D' Enguien Son of the said
Prince, and the other to the Duke of Bourbon his Grandchild; thought it
convenient to listen to the Mediation then proffered by several Princes of
Europe; chiefly, by the King of England, and the States of the United
Netherlands: so that a Treaty was concluded upon, and Aix la Chapelle appointed
the Place for the Commissioners to meet in.

In the mean time, while the Spaniards lay upon their Demurs, a League was
Concluded by the Mediation of the Earl of Sandwich, the King of Englands
Ambassador at Lisbon, between the two Crowns of Spain and Portugal; a League of
sincere and perpetual Peace, containing a Release of Prisoners, Nullity of
Confiscations, Freedom of Commerce; and such other Usual Articles: which were
in Six Months after Publication, to be Confirmed and Ratified by the King of
Great Britain.

And now, as if the General Design of Europe were Peace, the Commissioners meet
at Aix la Chapelle; for the King of England, Sir William Temple; for the Dutch,
Mr. Beverning; for the French, Monsieur Colbert; for the King of Spain, the
Baron of Bergeick; who having some time before Signed Provisional Articles, in
order to a final Conclusion, whereby a suspension of Arms was granted, and the
March of the French Army Countermanded; at length, fell seriously to their
Work, so that by the second of May, the Articles of General Peace were signed
by the Plenipotentiaries of both Kings; and afterward, Proclaimed through all
the Chief places of France, Spain, and Flanders; to the general content of
Europe, and satisfaction of the Mediators.

But notwithstanding this fair Peace, the Spaniards did not like the
Neighborhood of the French; and therefore would have made an Exchange of some
other Territories of theirs lying farther off, for that o^ Fr^nche Com^e. On
the otherside, the French not satisfied with what they had got, Claimed several
Towns, as dependencies upon their late Conquests; as the Towns of Conde,
Newport, and other places. Hereupon, to end these differences, and to settle
the bounds of the French Jurisdiction, Commissioners are appointed to meet at
Lille: but they determine nothing: upon which, the French King makes a positive
demand of all that he Challenged; and the Spaniards Order the several
Commanders to have a care of the Defense of their several Charges. In which
posture, we leave 'um hatching new Discords for this Year.

Leaving these great Actors upon the Stage of the World, we are coming to one
who is making his Exit; for the King of Poland, at the beginning of the Year,
had signifi^^ to the public Diet of that Kingdom his Resolution to make a
Resignation: many applications were made to him, whether Real, or out of
Ceremony, not here to be determined, that he would please to change his
purpose; and some other delays happened, as in a matter of so great importance,
so that the Ceremony was not performed till September; at which time, the King
appearing in the public Assembly, and in a pathetick Speech insisting on his
misfortune to meet with such bad times, and desiring pardon for what had been
done amiss during the time of his Reign, departed out of the Assembly, and in
his own Coach, leaving the Castle, went to a private House he had in the City.
The Nobility would have attended him, but he refused it.

But there were enough that ardently coveted what he had so calmly forsaken.
The Duke of Muscovy was urgent for his own Son: The Emperor for the Prince of
Lorrain: And the French King for the Duke of Newburg, a Creature of his own.
But the Pole refused all, but more especially the French, whose Ambassador, the
Bishop of Bezieres, they would not endure should stay in the Kingdom, to have
any finger in the Election: Nor was any thing this Year concluded. In Holland,
Monsieur Cari^ius put a very hard Riddle to the States, When they would be
pleased to pay his Majesty, the King of Denmark, several sums of Money, which
he pretended to be due upon Promise; particularly, 400000 Rixdollars from the
States of Holland, and 14000 from those of Amsterdam. This Question occasioned
many Debates and Conferences, and was at length put to the Arbitration of the
King of France.

Now for varieties sake, and to show there was some Justice at Rome, I must not
omit an Act of the Pope at this time reigning: A Complaint being Exhibited to
his Holiness, by a person of Tivoli, that whereas he had lived several years
with his Mother, with great content and satisfaction, upon an Estate of 1500
Dollars per Annum; His Mother falling sick, was during her sickness so far
prevailed upon by a Jesuit, her Confessor, that she had by Will given away all
the Estate to the Order, not reserving any thing for the subsistence of him
(her Son). The Pope extremely dissatisfied with this Complaint, sent for his
own Confessor, and in very severe Language commanded him to find out the
General, and in his Name to require him to write to the Superior at Tivoli to
restore the Petitioner his Land again.

Nor must we omit, now we are at Rome, the Canonization of an American Virgin,
named Rosa, a Nun in a Covent of St. Dominick: For every body in England does
not understand, what a glorious thing it is to be made a Saint. The Church was
hung with Tapistry, and Inscriptions, in honor of the New Saint; on the Altar
stood her Image; and about it, the Arms of the Pope, the King of Spain, the
Kingdom of Peru, and this Religious Dominican. During the Te Deum, one of the
Cannons of St. Peter's Church was fired, a great number of Drums and Trumpets
sounding, and several Vollies of shot given by a Squadron of Germans, drawn up
near the Church. After which, a solemn Mass was sung, by six Quires of Music.
In the Afternoon, the Pope heard Vespers in the same Church, present several
Cardinals, with the Ambassadors and Ministers of Foreign Princes; and the
Evening spent in Lights and Fireworks.

The Venetians are busied for the defense of their Candia; and by the
Assistance of the French, hold the Turk hard to it, this year; besides that
their Admiral Morosini, with Twenty five Galleys, some few Galliasses, and
several Fireships, engaging above One hundred of the Turks Galleys, with Sixty
Saicks, burnt, sunk and took the greatest part of them; among the rest of his
Prisoners, Two Bashaws, with six Months Provision and Ammunition for supply of
the Besiegers.

The success of Gayland, an Enemy of the English, must not be omitted; who
being at Argilla, and hearing of a great Defeat given by Taffalette to Ben
Buker, wherein Ben Buker himself was taken Prisoner, and that there was little
hopes of getting another Army into the Field to oppose the Conqueror; and
finding how the ill news worked upon his own people, who began to threaten to
desert him unless their wants were supplied; he got out of Argilla with 300
men, and Transported himself for Argier.

The Prince of Portugal made R^g^nt.
At this time, about the beginning of March, the King of Portugal, having caused
his Brother the King to resign, married the Queen, and was by the three
Estates of that Kingdom confirmed in his Regency, and in a solemn manner they
swore Obedience to him accordingly.

Now though all things went well at home on the French side, yet they had not
the success which they promised themselves at Madagascar, where by engaging
themselves in other peoples Quarrels, they not only lost many Men, but
carrying themselves too high and imperious, and forcing the Inhabitants to
carry their Arms for them, the Natives taking hold of the opportunity, fell so
heartily upon their new Lords, that they destroyed the greatest part of them.

But Queen Christina, having disintrigu'd her self out of these Hurly-burlies,
at the latter end of the Year arrived at Rome, where her entertainment was
Pompous and Magnificent: Nor did the Pope himself the next day disdain to give
her a visit in his own proper person, glad no question of so Eminent a
Proselyte.

Anno Dom. 1669.
THe 25 th of March being past, the Year 1669 begins. A Year wherein there
could be nothing more calm and quiet than the surface of the English Affairs,
had not the future effects of its silent contrivances made it appear, that
though action failed, 'twas busy enough in Council. Therefore Envoys and
Ambassadors were frequently employed, a most certain Prognostic of active
designs.

Earl of Carlisle sent into Sweden.
About the beginning of the Year, the Earl of Carlisle was sent Ambassador
Extraordinary to Sweden. While he reposed himself in Copenhagen, in which Court
he was well known, he received a Letter sent after him by the King of England,
in return of a very obliging Letter from the King of Denmark; with the receipt
whereof, the King of Denmark was so well satisfied and pleased, that at the
seasonable instance of his Lordship, he was pleased to cause his Orders to be
dispersed to all his Ports, particularly to his Custom-places and Havens in
Norway, for restoring the Engish Trading to any part of his Kingdom or
Dominions, and the same privileges which they formerly enjoyed, according to
the Treaty concluded in the Year 1660.

Being arrived in Sweden, among other Transactions, he had a private Audience,
in which he presented the King of Sweden with the little George, worn by the
Knights of the Order of the Garter; King of Sweden presented with the Garter.
which the King received with great expressions of joy; being after that,
solemnly and publicly, by a particular Commission, presented and invested by
the said Earl with all the peculiar Habits and Ornaments belonging to the said
Order.

Other Ambassadors were sent to other parts; as Mr. Montague Extraordinary for
France; Sir Peter Wyche for Muscovy.

Earl of Winchelsey returns.
In July, the Earl of Winchelsey returned from his Embassy at Constantinople.

Nor can History be so ungrateful to Learning, as to bury in silence the Honor
due to its most bountiful advancers. It was therefore this Year that the
University of Oxford, being assembled in a full Body, went to take possession
of the New Theater, Theater at Oxford f^nished.
the magnificent gift of Dr. Sheldon Archbishop of Canterbury; where after the
reading his Grace's Grant by the Register of the University, Dr. South the
University-Orator made a Speech suitable to the occasion. After which, several
Panegyricks were pronounced in Prose and Verse; concluding the Ceremony with
several sorts (...) Music both Vocal and Instrumental.

But in the King's Ears the discords of Schism were more unpleasing: Meetings
suppressed.
for now from several parts of the Kingdom came several Informations, that they
who separated themselves from the established Worship, met in greater numbers
than formerly, to such a degree, as to endanger the public Peace, and greatly
to the contempt of the Kings Indulgence to Tender Consciences; which forced the
King to issue out his Proclamation for the suppressing of such Meetings, by
putting the Laws in execution, and proceeding particularly against the
Preachers.

Learning always deserves an honorable Mecaenas; and therefore the Archbishop
of Canterbury having upon satisfactory reasons refused the Vice-Chancellorship
of Oxford, Dr. Fell Vice Chancellor of Oxford.
Dr. Fell, with the greatest part of the Body of the Convocation meeting at
Worcester-house, Installed the Duke of Ormond Chancellor of that University.

The King was now diverting himself, together with the Duke of York; in the New
Forest in Hampshire, when they both received an express of the Death of their
Mother the Queen Dowager of England, who died upon the last of August at
Col^mbe, Queen Mother of England dies.
after a long Indisposition and decay of Health: which made them both repair
with all speed to Hampton Court. Her body was for some time exposed with usual
Ceremonies in the Gallery of St. Columbes; after which, her Heart was in a
Silver-Vessel, inscribed with her Name and Title, carried to the Monastery of
Chaliot. Her Body was carried to St. Deni^s, and placed in a Chapel behind
the Quire. In November following, she was buried after the Form and
Magnificence which was formerly used at the Funeral of the Queen Mother.

This Month brought us news, that the Enemy was more than ordinarily busy
about Tangier, appearing often, and in great numbers, both of Horse and Foot.
The Moors attempt Tangier, but beaten off.
They laid two considerable Ambushes to have sur^riz'd the Garrison; but one
was discovered by the Sentinels, the other by the barking of Dogs, purposely
kept there by the People and Soldiers; by which means they were beaten off
with considerable loss. This not taking effect, they appeared next day on the
other side of the Town, and gave the occasion of a smart dispute for an hour,
but were thence also forced to retire, much to their disadvantage. This made
them quiet for some time, when on a sudden they again showed themselves
behind a Hill, near a Fort called James's Fort; here as the Onset was
powerful, so they met with equal resistance, and a courage so much superior,
as quickly forced 'um to leave the Enterprise and many of their men behind,
with the loss only of one Corporal: which this Year ended all the trouble of
that Garrison.

The Duke of Ormond had been some time since called out of Ireland, who
thereupon left his Son the Lord Ossory to command in his room: But now to take
the charge from-both, the Lord Roberts arrives at Dublin. Upon the news of this
change, Lord Roberts Lord-Deputy of Ireland.
the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, the Provost of the College, the Dean of
Christ-Church, and most of the Clergy attended the Lord Ossory, where the one
acknowledged the many benefits which the City had received from the Government
of his Father and himself; the other, the many benefits which the Church had
enjoyed, as well by their good Examples, as by the plentiful provision made
them by the Clergy. The reception of the new Lord-Deputy was intended to have
been made with much State and Solemnity; but he waving those public Honors,
met the Lord-Deputy and the Council at the Council Chamger the same Evening
after his arrival, where after he had taken the usual Oath, the Lord-Deputy
delivered him the Sword. He was no fooner entered upon his Government. but he
issued out a Proclamation, commanding all Governors and Officers to repair to
their several Charges and Duties, not admitting any disp^nsation to the
contrary.

Royal Exchange f^^ish'd.
London had long layn in Ashes, and the Confluence of all the World had been as
long confined within the narrow limits of a Colledge-Court; but now again the
Merchants, to their great satisfaction, and the lasting Merits of Sir William
Turner then Lord Mayor, whose ind^^a^igable pa^^ and zeal was Eminent in
advancing and forwarding so great a Work, met in the Royal Exchange; a Fabric
equal to the Honor of the Undertakers, and holding a true proportion with the
rest of the Goodly Buildings of the Reviving City.

P^^^. Assembles
But now men began to listen after things a higher Nature, seeing both Houses of
Parliament again Assembled, upon the 19th of October. The King in a Speech
acquainted them With his joy to see them at that time, and the hopes he had of
a happy meeting, which he promised himself, from the great experience he had of
their Affection and Loyalty, of which he did not doubt the Continuance; briefly
minding them of his Debts, which though pressing, he was unwilling to call for
their Assistance till this time: acquain^ing them also, that what they last
gave, was wholly applied to the Navy, and to the Extraordinary Fleet for which
it was intended: desiring they would now take his Debts effectually into their
Consideration. Afterward, hinting to them a Proposal of great Importance,
concerning the Uniting of England and Scotland; which because it required some
length, he left that, and some other things to the Lord Keeper, to open more
fully, which was by him done: and then both Houses Adjourned.

Parl. attended the King in the Banqueting House.
At the beginning of November, both Houses, in pursuance of a Vote which they
had made, attended the King in the Banqueting House, where the Lord Chief
Justice Vaughan supplying the Room of the Lord Keeper, in the name of both
Houses returned their Humble Thanks to the King, for his Care of the Public,
in Issuing out his Proclamation for the suppressing of Conventicles: Humbly
desiring his Majesty to continue the same care for the future. In Reply to
which, his Majesty returned an Answer, to the satisfaction of both Houses.

But now Christmas drawing near, and having sat above a Month without
effecting any thing of consequence, the Lords sent the Usher of the Black-Rod
to the House of Commons, Parl. Prorogued till February.
to tell them, That by Virtue of the King's Commission, they desird their
Attendance: who Attending accordingly with their Speaker, the Commission was
read, and the Parliament Prorogued till the 24th of February next ensuing.

At the same time that the Parliament of England sat at Westminster, the
Parliament of Scotland sat at Edinburgh; Parl. in Scotland.
where the Earl of Lauderdale having taken the Chair of State, as Lord
Commissioner of Scotland, the Earls Commission was first read, and then the
doubtful Elections of Members referred to Examination.

That done, the Kings Letter to the Parliament was twice read, seconded by a
shorter from the Lord Chancellor, persuading them to a concurrence with the
King in his Design of Uniting the Two Kingdoms. Then they proceeded to Elect
the Lords of the Articles; the Bishops choosing Eight Bishops; and those Eight,
Eight of the Nobility, and these Sixteen, making choice of Eight Knights, and
as many Burgesses: by whom, all Affairs were to be prepared for the House.

During this Session, they Published an Act for the Naturalization of Strangers
within the Kingdom of Scotland; Declaring, that all Strangers of the Protestant
Religion, that should think fit to bring their Estates into the said Kingdom,
or should come to set up new Works and Manufactures therein, should be
Naturalized, as Native-Born Subjects of that Kingdom, to all intents and
purposes. The King farther Declaring, That upon application by such Strangers
made to him, he would grant them the free and public use of their Religion in
their own Language, and the Liberty of having Churches of their own: However,
no persons were to have the benefit of the said Act, till first by Petition to
the Lords of the Privy Council, containing an exact designation of their Names,
and places of Birth, and former residences, and that they be of the Prot^stant
Religion.

They also made another Act asserting his Majesty's Supremacy over all persons,
and in all Causes Ecclesiastical. By Sea, little was this Year done, only. Sir
Thomas Allen being again sent with a Squadron of Ships about the beginning of
August, came before Argier; Sir Thomas Allen before Argier.
and sending in his Boat, began to Treat: they in Argier seemed willing to make
restitution of such Money as they had taken from an English ship bound for the
East Indies; but not agreeing to some other demands, the Treaty proved
ineffectual: thereupon he began actual Hostility, seizing a Bark laden with
Corn which rode in the Bay, with eleven Moors, and a Brigantine, which he took
in view of the Town. From hence, having done little or nothing else
considerable, he set sail for Tripoly, the Bashaw of which place sent him an
assurance of his readyness to pr^serve Peace and a good Correspondence with the
King of Great Britain. And after a short crusing up and down in those Seas, he
returned for Cadiz, where this Year leaves him.

But being now so near the English Territories at Tangier, the King of
England's Ambassador Mr. Henry Howard must not be forgot, who being sent by the
King his Ambassador Extraordinary to the Emperor of Morocco (at that time
Taffalette, Mr. Henry Howard sent Ambassador to Taffalette.
by virtue of his new Conquests) was now arrived at Tangier; but understanding
the danger of hazarding his person among those Barbarians, stayed at that
place, expecting a sufficient strength to convoy and conduct him to his place
of Audience.

In November, he received his Safe Conduct, with an assurance from the Emperor
that he should not fail of receiving all satisfaction in order to whatsoever he
should desire for his security, and that he had already caused Justice to be
done to such as were found guilty of giving any affronts to his people. And
true it was, that he caused all the English which were taken by the men of Sa^y
since the Truce made with him, to be restored to their Liberty. But the further
issue of this Embassy is to be expected in the following Year. And for this
delay, the Emperor excused himself for not engaging so great a person in a
Country where he had not power to protect him.

Returning home, Duke of Albemarle dies.
we meet with no small loss in the Decease of the Duke of Albemarle, after a
long indisposition of Health, in the sixty second year of his Age. His Garter
being brought to the King, was by his immediate command carried back to the
Earl of Turrington, then by his Father's death Duke of Albemarle; with a
further declaration that he should immediately also succeed in the place of
Gentleman of his Bedchamber, and Lord Lieutenant of the County of Devon; and
farther the King was pleased to send him word, that, as the last mark of
Gratitude to the memory of the Deceased, he would himself take care for the
Funeral: which, not long after, was performed with great Solemnity, at the
King's particular charge.

Nor did the Duchess his Wife stay long behind him, His Duchess dies.
dying toward the latter end of the Month; but was more privately buried in
the Chapel of Henry the seventh.

The Republic of Venice had ^ent a very honorable Embassy into England; Jan.
1669.
in requital of which, the Lord Falconbridge, by the King's order, departed in
the same employment to the Venetian State, being commanded in his way to visit
some other Princes and States of Italy.

Nor must we omit the kindness of the Grand Duke of Tuscany, who besides his
civil entertainment of the Earl of Northumb^rland, in acknowledgement of the
courteous entertainment which he had received in England, built and gave to the
King of England two very stout Galleys, for a guard of the Coast about Tangier,
being of great importance to the service of his Majesty.

Parliament meet.
The Parliament, according to the term appointed in their last Prorogation, was
now assembled; to whom the King, as he was wont to do, made a short Speech,
which was enlarged upon by another from the Lord-^eeper. The King therein
recommended three things more especially to them; the one was Unity among
themselves, the Union of England and Scotland, and the Supply of his present
and urgent Necessities. As to the differences among themselves, they were, as
soon as sat, buried in oblivion, and all matter of prejudice threatened thereby
as suddenly vanished: For they were no sooner sat, but according to his
Majesty's Recommendation, both Houses came to a full agreement in the matter in
debate between 'um, greatly to the encouragement of all that regarded the good
of the Nation, as by the effect of their unanimous consultations soon after
appeared.

Foreign Affairs, 1669.
The Treaty at Aix la Chapelle, one would have thought, should have brought a
general repose to Europe; but jealousies of State had interrupted the quiet
that should have attended upon it. The King of France's new demands of
appendencies to his Conquests in Flanders startled the Spaniards; whereby
Contributions were exacted by the French from places under the Spanish
Jurisdiction, as they took it for granted: Nor did the States of Holland care
at all for their Neighborhood. This made the Constable of Castile, then
Governor of the Spanish Netherlands in the place of Castel-Rodrigro, send his
Complaints to the French King, who appointed Commissioners to sit at Lille for
the composure of all these differences.

These Complaints the King of France eludes, by renouncing his pretensions in
one place, and claiming in another; quitting Charleroy, and claiming Ipre*
quitting Conde, and claiming Oudenard: in which contests the Commissioners at
Lille having spent many Months in vain, were at length forced to break off
without doing any thing. On the other side, Pompone the French Ambassador
endeavors all that might be to assure the States of Holland of the great
inclinations of the King his Master to entertain all Friendship and good
Correspondency with them; telling them, that he doubted not but the cares which
he had for the glory of Christendom, would in time sufficiently convince 'um of
the vanity of those fears which some did endeavor to sow amongst 'um.

Nevertheless, the States prepared for the security of their Frontiers, and
gave particular order to fortify several Towns of Overyssel, and upon the
Borders of Westphalia. In this juncture of time came news that the King of
France had laid double Impositions upon the Manufactures of Holland; in
recompense of which kindness, the Dutch lay an Imposition upon French Wine and
Brandy; proceeding at length to do the same upon all French Wares, and forbid
absolutely the Importation of Brandy and all other Distilled Waters into
Holland: and upon this fuel, those silent Animosities fed, which afterward
brake out into greater Flames.

But between the States and Portugal there began to be a better understanding,
a new League being made betwixt them, with condition that Cochin and Conomer in
the East Indies should remain to the Dutch, and that four Millions of Money,
due to the States, should be paid according to the Agreement made between them.

The Venetians in Candy had held out a long while against the main force of the
Turk, being assisted by many Princes of Europe, especially the French, first
under the Command of Beaufort, but with ill success, he being slain in a
Salley; after him, under the Conduct of the Duke of Navailles; who after many
Salleys and attempts, finding little good to be done, with what Soldiers he
had left, deserts the Garrison, and returns for France, though not without some
disgrace to his person: for the King of France hearing of his being landed,
commanded him to retire to his own possessions, forbidding him to see his Face.
The Venetian seeing no hopes of keeping the Town any longer, surrendered it
upon Articles, and at length concluded a Peace inviolable for the advantage of
Trade, and mutual quiet of both Subjects.

King Casimire of Poland having resigned, and being now retired into France;
after many debates, and much contention, one Wisnowiskie, a Native, and one of
the chief Nobility, was the Elected King, being Crowned in September, and soon
after Married to Eleanor Sister to the Emperor of Germany.

This Year, Clement the ninth, of the House of Rospigliosi, died at Rome,
having promoted six new Cardinals a little before his death. A great Stickler
against the Turks; his Galleys under the Command of his Kinsman Don Vincenzo
Rospigliosi, being very serviceable to the Venetian. After his Decease,
Cardinal Rospigliosi, by virtue of a Brief, acted as Pope till the new Election.

His death was followed by the death of the King of Denmark, to whom succeeded
his Son Christian the fifth.

The King of France at length signifies his willingness to refer the
differences between himself and the Crown of Spain to the Arbitration of the
Kings of England and Sweden.

But all this hindered not the conclusion of the Triple Alliance, which was in
the latter end of March in all points agreed upon by the Respective Ministers,
meeting at the Spanish Embassador's-House at the Hague, where they signed and
exchanged all acts thereto belonging.

Anno Dom. 1670.
IN the beginning of April, the Parliament having prepared several Acts ready
for the King to sign, The King signs several Acts, and adjourns the House.
the King came to the House of Lords and gave his Royal Assent, signifying also
his consent for an Adjournment till the 24 of October ensuing, having only
granted the King an Imposition upon all Wines and Vinegar for such a certain
time: And prepared a Bill, to Authorize such Commissioners as the King should
nominate, for treating with the Scotch Commissioners in order to the Union
desired.

This Month also, the Lord John Berkley arrived in Dublin, to succeed the Lord
Roberts as Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, who upon weighty considerations was
called back again into England.

And now in this time of leisure, Duchess of Orleans arrives in England.
the Princess of Orleans comes to Dover to visit her two Brothers, his Majesty
and the Duke of York; her stay in England was short, and her stay in this World
not much longer; for in a short while after her return into France, Dies.
she departed this life; the Court of England being not only grieved, but
astonished at the suddenness of her death.

Upon some apprehension of private designs, a Proclamation was issued out,
commanding all Soldiers and Officers who had served under the late Usurped
Powers to depart the City, and not to come within twenty miles of the same for
a prefixed time, and in the mean while not to wear Arms, upon a severe penalty.

The Parliament of Scotland now sitting, July 1670. Parliament in Scotland.

Act for the Treaty of Union passed there.


and understanding what the Parliament of England had done in that Affair, the
Act for the Treaty of Union passed both Houses at Edinburgh, and was touched by
the Commissioner with the Royal Scepter; of which, although the design were of
high concernment, yet because the Event was not correspondent, it will be
enough to say, that the Commissioners on both sides had often Conferences, and
great encouragements from the King; but it met with so many delays and
difficulties, that as a thing not to be compassed, it was at length laid aside.

The King was every year very intent upon the suppression of the Pirates of
Argier, which was the only War he now had; wherein though his Commanders had
prosper'd, by taking particular Prizes, and single Ships; yet never could they
meet with a Body of those Rovers, to signalize their Courage, till now: neither
was this a Body of above seven men of War, Argier men of War destroyed.
too many for the Algerines to run the Fate they did. There were the Hampshire,
Portsmouth, Iersey, and Centurion Frigates, under the Command of Captain Beach;
these met the seven Argier Men of War, the least of which had 38 Guns, and full
of Men, who after a short dispute, were forced to run all their Ships ashore,
where they were all burned, two by themselves, and the rest by the English;
besides the loss of most of their men, and the Redemption of 250 Christian
Captives.

Valor gets Renown, but Cowardice Disgrace: therefore Captain John Pierce,
Cap. Pierce shot to Death.
and Andrew Legate, for the loss of the Sapphire Fregat in the Streights, were
both, about this time, which was in September, tried for their Lives, at a
Court Marshal held upon the River of Thames; where it plainly appearing that
the said Frigate was basely and shamefully lost, through the default and
cowardice of the said Captain and Lieutenant, they were both Condemned to be
Shot to Death, and soon after both Executed.

Parl. meet.
Both Houses of Parliament re-assembl'd, according to their Adjournment.

Peace between Spain and England ratified.
This Month, the Ratification of the Peace between England and Spain beyond the
Line was agreed and Ratified; and the Ratifications Exchanged, and Notice
given to the Governors in those Parts, for the punctual observation thereof, on
both sides.

Prince of Orange comes into England.
In the mean while, the Prince of Orange Arrives, to give his Uncle a Visit: He
came to London upon the 30th of October, but his stay here was not long;
However, he visited both the Universities; and his entertainmen^ was in all
places answerable to the Dignity of his Person. His coming, no question, had a
Mystery in it; but Mysteries of State are not to be dived into: However, at
the beginning of the Spring, he returned well satisfied, both as to his Public
Reception, and private Concerns.

Sir Thomas Allen returns from the Streights.
In November, Sir Thomas Allen returned home with his Squadron, having made many
attempts upon the Pirates of Argier, whose Cowardice still shuning the English
Force, made the Voyage seem the less successful; Sir Edward Sprague Commands in
his room.
leaving Sir Edward Sprage in his Room.

December seldom passes without some act of Villainy: one more remarkable was at
this time performed; for the Duke of Ormond going home in his Coach, D. of
Ormond violently assaulted in the Night
was between St. Iames'^ and Clarendon-House, by six persons Armed and Mounted,
forced out of his Coach, and set behind one of the Company, who was riding away
with him; but he was at length Rescued, partly by his own strength, partly by
others coming to his Assistance. A Fact which rendered the performers not so
bold, as it rendered the Duke Memorable in his Forgiveness.

Sir Edward Sprage was now the King's Admiral in the Mediterranean Sea; of
whose Action, the next year must give a farther Account.

The Parliament having at this time completed several Acts, the King came to
the House, The King passes some Acts.
and gave his Royal Assent to them; being chiefly for Regulation of the Law,
and for an Additional Excise upon Beer and Ale.

Popish Priests Banished.
During this Session, the Lords and Commons by their Humble Petition Represented
to the King, Their fears and apprehensions of the growth and increase of the
Popish Religion: whereupon, the King in compliance with their desires, by His
Proclamation, commanded all Jesuits, and English, Irish, and Scotch Priests,
and all others that had taken Orders from the Sea of Rome, except such as were
by Contract of Marriage to wait upon the Queen, or Foreign Ambassadors, to
depart the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales, upon pain of having the
Laws and Statutes of the Realm inflicted upon them.

Foreign Affairs, 1670.
The first occurrence of Moment, is the Election of the new Pope, Cardinal
Altieri, who at first refused the Honor; but the persuasion of the Cardinals
prevailing, he told them, they had opened upon Him the Gates of Hell; and so
yielded to their importunity. He had no Nephews, and therefore Adopted Cardinal
Paluzzi, whose Brother had Married his Niece.

And now the Grandeur of the House of Orange began to revive again; The States
Concluding in a full Assembly, his admission into the Council of State; and
settling an honorable Pension upon him: Nor was he long without the Title of
their Captain General by Sea and Land.

In Flanders, some Alteration happened, by reason that the Constable of Castile
growing sickly, could not abide the trouble of business any longer; he departed
privately to Ostend, and so by Sea for Spain: in his place the Count de
Monterey was soon advanced.

While Tangier makes us concerned with the Moors, our nearest Neighbors, we
must not omit the Actions of those people, whose Losses and Successes are to be
narrowly observed by the English; either their Allies, or Enemies. Taffalette
therefore having Intelligence that the people of Suz had united their Forces
with those of Sancta Cruz, marched toward the farther part of Suz, with an Army
of 140000 Men, which at first so Terrified those people, that they presented
him with their Leaders Head, and with great submission begged his Pardon. In
confidence of this, Taffalette Marches toward Sancta Cruz; but the people
Repenting of what they had done, underhand renewed a League with the Governor
of that Town; and unexpectedly setting upon the Army of Taffalette, quite
routed it, and slew Taffalet's Brother who led the Van, himself only escaping
with four Horse: but being soon recruited, he returned to Sancta Cruz, and took
it, and in a short while recovered what he had so unadvisedly lost.

But that which made the greatest noise in the World, was the sudden Invasion
of Loraine, by the King of France. For the surprise of which Country Marshal
Crequi being sent with a great Army, he overran the Country like a mighty
Torrent: insomuch, that by the beginning of Winter there was scarce a Town in
Lorraine that was not at the French Devotion. The design of the King of France
was to lay aside the old Duke, and confer the Duchy on Prince Charles; on
condition that he should raise the Fortifications of Chastel and Espinal, and
give up to the King the Marquisate of Nomende. Certain it was, the King of
France did send to the said Prince, then at Vienna, to offer him the Possession
of Lorrain, on condition he would hold it of him, and to maintain no greater
Number of Forces than he should think fit; telling him withal, that he were
best have a care, that upon his refusal, the Duke of Guise did not accept of it
upon the same terms.

The old Duke thus outed of all, wandered up and down from place to place,
begging Aid of the Neighboring Princes; who promised fair, but did little
more, than come to a conditional Agreement for the raising Forces for the
common good and safety of the Empire.

This Alarmed not only the Dutch on the one side, but the Switzers on the
other; the Effect of which was, that it made them both careful to put
themselves into the best posture of Defense they might.

While this part of Europe is thus preparing for Mischief, we find Russia
overwhelmed with an Inundation of Rebellion; where one Stephen Radskin a
Tumultuous Ringleader, having Poisoned the Rabble with the fair pretenses of
Liberty, the common motives to Insurrection, of a small Snowbal, grew to a
mountainous Number; and having seized the great Kingdoms of Astracan and Casan,
and got into his Possession the Treasures of the Great Duke in the chief City
of Astracan; he grew Potent and Formidable, and made up for the City of Mosco
it self, taking upon him the Title of Duke Radzin: But at length, after a short
Reign, and having glutted himself with the Blood of as many Muscovitish
Nobility as fell into his Power, he was overthrown by Dolkerouski General to
the Emperor, and his whole Power totally dispersed.

Anno Dom. 1671.
The Duchess of York dies.
IN the beginning of this Year, dyed Her Royal Highness Anne Duchess of York,
Wife to his Royal Highness the Duke of York, and Daughter to the Earl of
Clarendon; being shortly after privately Interred in Henry the Seventh's
Chapel at Westminster.

The Parliament still sitting, had by this time prepared several other Acts
ready for the Kings Royal Assent; which the King being present in the House of
Lords, as readily passed. The chiefest, and most of Public Concern was, The
Addition which they made to the King's Revenue, by an Imposition upon
Proceedings at Law; not being unmindful of settling such differences as might
arise about Houses burned in the Fire of London: taking care also, to prevent
the Disorders of Seamen, Parl. Prorogued.
and the Imbezelment of the King's Stores. After which, they were again
Prorogued to the 16th of April next ensuing.

And an Address about English Manufactures.
However, before they dispersed, both Houses met in a Body in the
Banqueting House, where they made an (...), That the King would be pleased, by
His own Example, to (...) the constant wearing the Manufactures of his own
Kingdom, and discountenance the use of Manufactures made in Foreign Countries:
who kindly receiving the Address, told them, That he had as little used in his
own Person Foreign Manufacturs, as any; and would discountenance them for the
future in those that should.

Earl of Manchester dies.
Nor must we pass by the Death of the Earl of Manchester, Lord Chamberlain of
His Majesty's Household, a Knight of the Garter, and a Privy Councellor; though
his loss was soon recompensed, by the succession of the Earl of St. Albans.
Soon after died the Lord Chief Justice Keeling; into whose Place, the Lord
Chief Justice Hale was immediately Sworn: in his Place, Sir Edward Turnor was
made Lord Chief Baron, and Sir Francis North Sollicitor-General.

Nor was it fit the Offices of such Eminent Ministers of Justice should be
vacant, when such Criminals were to be examined as were soon after discovered:
For upon the ninth of this Month, four men coming to the Keeper of the
Jewel-House in the Morning, The Crown attempted.
and desiring to see the Regal Crown, were carried into the Room where it was
kept; but they Stabbing and Gagging the Keeper, an ancient man, and putting the
Crown and Ball into two Bags, which they had brought for that purpose, fairly
walked away, and had almost past all the Sentinels; but the Son-in-law of the
Keeper casually passing by, and seeing the condition his Father lay in, run out
hastily, crying out to the Guards to stop 'um: upon this they, mending their
pace, made their own discovery. Being then commanded to stand, they fired a
Pistol at the Sentinel: but two of them were presently seized, carried to
White Hall, and after Examination, sent back again to the Tower, to be kept
close Prisoners where they had committed the Fact.

To make an annual Record of St. George's Feast, is not necessary; but of this,
King of Sweden, and Duke of Saxony by Proxies Installed Knights of the Garter.
as being more singularly Signal, it may not be expedient to omit the
rehearsal: For now it was that the Earl of Carlisle, introduced between his
Royal Highness and Prince Rupert, was Installed as Proxy for the King of
Sweden; and the Earl of Winchelsey, between the Duke of Ormond and the Duke of
Buckingham, was Installed as Proxy for the Duke of Saxony; both which Princes
were invested the year before: After them, the Duke of Albemarle, between the
Earl of Sandwich and the Earl of Oxford, was Invested in his own Stall.

June was Crowned with the success of Sir Edward Sprague, who being now the
King's Admiral in the Mediterranean-Sea, met with nine Men of War belonging to
Argier, Sir Edward Sprague meets the Argerines, and destroys them.
together with three Merchantmen, near Bugia, who upon his appearance retired
under the shelter of the Castle, and put themselves into the best posture of
defense they could; but the English in the mean while attacquing them with
their Fireships, performed their business with so much valor and success,
that they ^et the most part of the Enemies ships on fire; those which escaped
the Flame, were seized on by the English: the Men of War were the principal
ships of Argier. And to complete this Victory, Captain Beach brought in to the
rest another ship of 40 Guns, and 350 men, which he had but newly taken. So
that now Sir Edward Sprague, believing that by this loss the Algerines might be
brought to an easy accommodation, made a speedy return to his station before
that Port.

This Month, The King takes a Progress.
the King minding to look after the condition of his Western Sea-port-Towns,
made a kind of a Sea-progress. For arriving first at Portsmouth, he went in
his Yacht to the Isle of Wight, where he took a view of the most considerable
Ports of the Island; thence he returned to Hurst-Castle; thence he went to view
Corf-Castle; thence, returning for Portsmouth again, he sailed away, attended
by five Frigates, for Plymouth; thence back to Dartmouth, with an intention to
return by Land to London. Observing this the great Proverb of The Masters Eye.

The Moors and we were not yet so friendly, but that Taffalette, proceeding in
his design of attempting all the Christian Sea-port-Towns upon the Coast of
Barbary, would needs visit Tangier, The Moors attack Tangier,
giving a warm attacque upon the Fort called Anne-Fort, though at a distance,
firing upon our men in Rank and File, and falling back while others supplied
their places; being the first time the Moors were observed to fight in such
order: and are beaten off.
but finding our men too hot, they soon retreated. And thus are the Moors
become a part of the English History.

Then was the Parliament again Prorogued from the 16 th of April following till
the 30 th of October 1672. Parl. Prorogued
The King, as it afterward appeared, having now his hands full of foreign
Consultations.

Nor was it for nothing that so many Agents and Ambassadors were sent abroad.
Coventry Esquire. for Sweden, the Lord Sunderland for Spain; it being the great
care of Princes, Ambassadors sent abroad.
to draw what assistance they can from their Enemies: Sir George Downing for
Holland; it being no less their care to offer all honorable terms of Peace if
they may be obtained.

At home, his Majesty, to reward Valor and Virtue, in consideration of that
stout and memorable action performed by Capt. Boddison Captain of the Swallow,
a Merchant-man of 150 Tuns, and 26 Men, who had fought against an Argerine of
36 Guns, and having Boarded him several times, forced him at last shamefully to
leave him and six of his men-behinde, was pleased to order the Captain a
Gold-Chain and a Medal.

Nor was the City of London (having its public Buildings recovered out of the
late Ruins to a greater Splendour and Beauty than heretofore) less mindful to
make an Invitation to his Majesty to honor their Lord-Mayor's Feast with his
presence; which he did accordingly, to show how much he was pleased to see the
City so revived from such a sad Calamity.

The issue of Sir Edward Sprague's success against the Pirates of Argier, was
by this known in England* for he returning from the destruction of their ships
to his former station before Argier it self, found a strange alteration among
those people, for the Aga had taken off their General's Head, and soon after
five of this General's Soldiers cut off the King^ Head; and brought it openly
in to the Divan, crying out, they must have Peace with the English. Upon this
they created a new King, who seeing the inclinations of the people, constrained
by their own necessities, thought it his best way to enter into a Treaty, which
at length ended in a Peace as honorable and advantageous as ever was made
between the English and those Rovers.

Ian. 1671/2.
It could no longer now be concealed what the secret Counsels of the Great ones
had so long been aiming at: For now the King publicly intending War with the
Dutch, openly Declared, That seeing all the Princes and States his Neighbors
were making preparations for War both by Sea and Land, he looked upon himself
obliged, for the safety of his Government, and protection of his People, to
make such preparations as should be answerable to the preservation of both: to
which end he had given order for fitting and setting out a considerable Navy
against the Spring; but Money was wanting, and his own Revenues all anticipated
and deeply engaged. As therefore the necessity was inevitable, the Course taken
was extraordinary: It being thought absolutely convenient to put a stop upon
the paying of any Money then brought in, Stop upon the Exchequer.
or to be brought in to the Exchequer, during the space of one whole year. To
which, as to the last remedy, as the King himself declared, nothing could have
moved him, but such a conjuncture of affairs, when all the Neighboring Princes
and States were making such threatening preparations, that his Government could
not be safe without appearing in the same posture.

About this time died Dr. Cosens Bishop of Durham and Count Palatine there, in
the 77 th year of his Age, and was buried at Aukland near Durham.

Sir George Downing presses for answer to the King's demands.
Sir George Downing being now in Holland, according to his particular
Instructions, was very urgent with the States, in the affair of the Flag, and
by several Instances and several Memorials pressed for an Answer to his
Demands: but finding all their delays insufferable, and all his endeavors
consequently fruitless, in a few Months returned for England; but after a
private Examination by some of the Lords of the Council, and report made
thereof to the King, Sir George Downing committed.
he was by his Majesty's Warrant committed to the Tower for not having obeyed
the Orders sent him.

It was not safe, while we are going to Wars abroad, to have dissension at
home; and therefore the King put forth a seasonable Declaration of his will and
pleasure freely to indulge all Nonconformists and dissenting persons in matters
of Religion; Nonconformists indulged.
asserting however his resolution to maintain the Doctrine and Discipline of
the Church of England as it was established.

And now they, who would return no answer to Sir George Downing, are Summoned
by Sir Robert Holmes to remember their Duty in another manner: For upon the 13
th of this Month, five of the King's Frigates, crusing by the Isle of Wight,
Sir Robert Holmes attacks the Dutch Fleet near the Isle of Wight.
met with the Dutch Fleet of Smyrna-men, and others, to the number of 50 Sail,
convoyed by six Men of War: Above 20 of their Merchantmen carried between
twenty and forty Guns apiece. The English Frigates coming near, shot at them, to
make them strike and lower their Sail; which when the Dutch refused to do, the
Fight began in the Afternoon, and continued till Night; then three Frigates more
coming in, the next Morning they fought again, and all that day. In the
Evening, five of their richest Merchantmen were taken; their Rear-Admiral was
Boarded by Captain John Holmes, but was so leaky that she sunk immediately. In
this action Sir Robert Holmes was Admiral, the Earl of Ossery Vice Admiral, and
Sir Freschevil Hollis Rear-Admiral.

War declared against the Dutch.
The first blow thus given, the King publishes his Declaration of War against
the States General of the United Provinces, to this effect: That the
dissatisfaction his Majesty had in the carriage of the States General of the
United Provinces toward him for some years past, being come to that pass, that
be could no longer without the diminution of his own Glory dissemble the
indignation raised in him, Mar. 1661/2.
by a Treatment so unsuitable to the great Obligations which he and his
Predecessors had so liberally heaped upon them; he was resolved to declare a
War against them; forbidding all his Subjects to hold correspondence with them
upon pain of death. War proclaimed against Holland


This Declaration was with the solemnities openly Proclaimed at the usual
places both in London and Westminster; of which more in the succeeding years.

And now to share in the Triumphs of this War, Sir Edward Sprague comes home.
Sir Edward Sprague returns, happy in the favors which his Prince did
afterward bestow upon him for his services in the Mediterranean Sea.

It stock mightily in the Stomach of the Dutch, that the King of France should
lay such Impositions upon their own Domestic Manufactures; and the King of
France was glad it did; and therefore though they sent him word, That unless he
took off those Impositions, he should not take it ill if they laid an Impost of
50 per Cent. upon Salt and all other Merchandises of France: And though they
were at the charge of an Ambassador to press for an Answer to this Affair, yet
they found the King took no care to give 'um any satisfaction at all in that
particular. They therefore thus exasperated, lay the Imposition. The King so
exasperated, The French King continues, and increases Impositions on Dutch
Goods, notwithstanding their threats.

French Warlike preparations breeds jealousies.


lays hold of the occasion, Taxes all Spices and Herring imported by the Dutch,
and forbids his Subjects to lade any Brandy or other Commodities aboard any
Holland-Vessels.

Besides this, they saw the King of France's Forces drawing into a Body in
Flanders, and that with such an unusual preparation, as the buying up of all
the Flambeaux or Torches that could be got in the Country, as if the French
intended to labor day and night, whereby all the adjacent parts began to be
very inquisitive into their own strength. Cologne at odds with her Elector,
comes with much ado to reasonable Terms, and in the mean time falls to
Fortifying with all her might: and the Emperor took that City so far into his
protection, that he sent the Marquess of Grana to keep it in his Name, Cologne
fortifies.
to the great encouragement of the Inhabitants. Munster was so kind as to
offer this City his Forces for their assistance, provided they would admit of
no other Garrison; but they thought it not convenient to accept of his offer.
The Dutch fortify Maestricht.
The Dutch repair the Works of Maestricht, re-inforcing the Garrison with Men
and Provision, fearing the violence of the Storm there. Newburg fortifies
Dusseldorp, and Montery raises men in Flanders.
The Duke of Newburgh fortifies Dusseldorp upon the Rhine, careful of the
Imperal Territories. Monterey in Flanders makes it his utmost endeavor to
raise Men and Money for the defense of the remaining part of the Spanish
Jurisdictions.

In this interim of time, the two Dukes of Brunswick resolving to bring that
City to that obedience which they affirmed to be due, Brunswick Besieged.
and challenged from it, lay Siege to the Town with considerable Forces: the
Townsmen within made a notable resistance for the time; but when the Duke's
Army began to approach near the Walls, and were ready to fling their Grenades
and other Combustible stuff in their very Houses; they were forced to surrender
on Conditions, that the Magistrates and Inhabitants should do Homage to the
Duke of Wolfenbuttel, They surrender.
as the rest of his Subjects, receive and pay his Garrison, and pay moreover a
considerable sum of Money for their disobedience.

Those Flames that could not have their will upon Brunswick, are now raging
upon the beautiful Escurial, the most magnificent piece of work in all Spain,
if not in Europe. The Escurial burnt.
It was several days consuming; and among other things, was destroyed the
famous Library there; a loss the most considerable, as being most difficult, if
not altogether impossible to be repaired.

But to return to other Combustions, in the midst whereof we find the Dutch
laboring all they could to get the Dane and Swede on their side. But the King
of France had put the Dane and they far enough asunder; The Dutch endeavor to
get Assistants.
for the King of Denmark having referred the matter in difference concerning
the remaining Subsidies due from the States to that Crown to the King of
France, He makes an Award for the payment of five Millions of Crowns Principal*
and one Million Interest; so that it was in vain for Amerongen to Solicit
there till the States had submitted to that advantageous determination. Besides
that the continual Negotiations of the King of England's Ambassadors and
extraordinary Envoys had no small influence upon those Crowns; so that the
Negotiation of Van Haren gave little satisfaction to his Masters.

Their Consultations are therefore all employed for provision of Men and Arms:
and lest they should want a Head, the Prince of Orange is now by the general
Consent of the States in a full Assembly, The Prince of Orange made their
Captain General.
made their Captain General, and Admiral, for that Campaign; engaging to renew
it again, after Expiration, during Life: Commissioners were also appointed to
Assist him; De Wit, Van Putten, and others.

The Emperor offers to Mediate.
The Emperor seeing things at this height, offered his own Mediation between the
King of France and the States; bu^ now proved too late. And as for the
Queen-Regent of Spain, the King of France had sent to know Her positive Answer,
how she would behave her self in this juncture of Affairs; but she being a
Lady, took time to give in her Answer.

Dutch Ambassador slighted at Paris.
Nor was it without some kind of slight, that the Dutch Ambassador was dismissed
from Paris; when desiring leave for his last Audience, and a Pass for the safe
Transporting his Goods by Sea, Reply was made, That for his Audience, he might
have it so soon as he pleased; but for his Goods, they were to be viewed by the
Officers of the Customs, before they could stir.

Anno Dom. 1672.
Convoys taken care of, for the Merchants.
THE War with the Year being thus openly begun, the King of England in the first
place takes care for the security of his own Subjects Trading by Sea, by
allowing them sufficient Convoys, and giving them liberty to Sail their Vessels
with the assistance of what Foreign Mariners they could procure; taking
particular Order also against the sculking, and absconding of such Officers and
Seamen who were his own Natural Subjects.

And knowing that Actions of Importance depend in their success upon good
Advice, he called to his Privy Council four persons of great Honor and
Integrity: Henry Marquess of Worcester, President of the Council of Wales;
Arthur Earl of Essex; Several Lords called to the Privy Council.
Thomas Viscount Falconbridge; and George Viscount Hallifax; and soon after,
Sir Thomas Osburn Baroner.

While the King of England is preparing his Fleet by Sea, the King of France
leaving the Management of Affairs at home in the Hands of the Queen, begins his
March at the Head of his Main Army himself; King of France begins his March.
and first he Arrives at Charleroy, the chief place of Rendezvous; whence he
sends to Montery, to assure him, that though he were constrained to March
through those Countries, yet he would take care, that not the least Act of
Hostility should be committed.

Turrenne blocks up Maestricht.
Toward the beginning of May, Turenne appeared within a League of Maestricht,
which was soon after wholly Blockt up; in which condition the King leaving it,
Marched directly with the gross of his Army toward Rhinebergh.

Fight between the English and Dutch.
In the mean while, at Sea, the English Fleet, being in all, English and French,
160 Sail, had often sight of the Dutch; But upon the 28th of this Month, about
five of the Clock in the Morning, a most brisk Fight began, near the Bay of
Southwold. The Blew Squadron first Engaged, and the Royal James was the first
Ship that fired; next to which, his Royal Highness, who was becalmed: but the
Blew Squadron, and the French, having a Gale, came up with the Duke, and Fought
briskly: In the Afternoon of the day, the Sovereign, St. Andrew, and about 20
more, getting the Weather-gage of the Dutch, were hotly Engaged: about which
time, the James being over-pres^ with Number of Men of War, and Fireships, a
Flag-ship of the Dutch laid himself athwart his Hawser; but finding his
Entertainment too hot, cried out for quarter; whereupon, the English entering,
and leaving the James naked, the Fireships took their advantage, two of which
were sunk, the third took place, and fired a stout ship, where the Earl of
Sandwich perished for want of Relief; but his Captain, Captain Haddock escaped
with a shot in his Thigh. The Henry, and Two other ships more, were likewise
disabled. At Night the Dutch stood away; which the Duke perceiving, stood after
them, keeping in sight of their Lights all Night: In the afternoon of the next
day, the Duke horsed up his Bloody Flag, and bore lasking upon the Dutch,
intending a second Engagement: but on a sudden, there fell such a thick Mist,
with much Wind, that they could not see a ships length: about an hour and a
half after, it cleared up again, and the Bloody Flag was put out a second time;
but the Fog coming thick again, nothing could be done. Whereupon, the Duke
finding himself near the Oyster-Bank, Tacked about, stood away some Leagues,
and came to an Anchor: there he staid all Night, and the next Morning till Ten
a Clock, but could hear nothing of the Enemy; who were retired to the shallows
of their own Coast. In this Engagement were lost outright, the Earl of
Sandwich, Captain Digby in the Henry, Sir John Cox in the Prince, Sir
Freschevile Hollis, Monsieur de la Rabinier the French Rear-Admiral, with
several others: several others Wounded; about seven hundred Common Seamen
slain; and as many Wounded; and the Royal James only Burned. In the Henry, not
an Officer was left alive, and above half the Men slain. The Katharine was
taken, and the Captain put on Board a Dutch ship, and the Men clapped under
Hatches, the Dutch going about to Fire the ship, at what time a French Sloop
came in, and cut away the Fireships Boat; and then the English finding a way to
break out upon the Dutch, redeemed both themselves and the ship, and brought
away Sixteen of the Dutch Prisoners, that were a little before their Masters.

On the Dutch side were lost, Admiral Van Ghent, and Captain Brakhel: most of
their great ships miserably torn; among the rest, two sunk, one by the Earl of
Sandwich, another by Sir Edward Sprage* one taken, and one Burned; besides a
very great loss of Common Seamen: another great Vessel, supposed to be a
Flag-ship, was seen to sink near Alborough; and several others that were
missing, supposed to be sunk or burned. As this was no small loss at Sea,
considering some advantage they had, to be beaten into their own Ports; so was
their loss as great by Land, Several Towns taken from the Hollanders.
the French having at the same time taken Rhineberg, Wesel, Oysup, and Burick:
Groll, Borkelo, taken by the Bishop of Munster: and after them, Rees,
Sckenk-Sconce, and several others, underwent the same Fate, possessed by the
French: Nor was this all, for the French without much resistance, had now
forced their Passage over the Rhine, near Tolbuys.

This near Approach of the French bred such a Confusion in the Netherlands,
Hollanders confused at the success of the French.
that many of the most wealthy Inhabitants forsook the Country, not willing to
hazard their Persons and Estates in a Country falling into the hands of a
Victorious Forreigner. The States also themselves removed from the Hague, to
Amsterdam, for their better security; opening the Sluices, and putting the
Country round under Water, to the damage of above 18 Millions of Gilders.

The King of England being thoroughly informed of these Proceedings, The King of
Englands Declaration, inviting the Dutch Subjects into England.
puts forth a seasonable Declaration; signifying, That if any of the Low
Country Subjects, either out of Affection to His Majesty or his Government, or
because of the oppression they meet with at home from their Governors, should
come into his Kingdoms, they should be Protected in their Persons and Estates,
that they should have an Act for their Naturalization; and that all such Ships
and Vessels as they should bring along with them, should be accounted as
English built, and enjoy the same Privileges and Immunities, as to Trade,
Navigation, and Customs, as if they had been built in England, or belonged to
his own Subjects.

And to restrain the Licentious Tongues of those that were apt to talk too
busily and sawcily of State Affairs, the King did farther by his Proclamation
forbid all his loving Subjects, either by Writing or Speaking, to divulge or
utter false News or Reports, or to intermeddle in matters of Government, or
with any of his Majesty's Counselors or Ministers, in their common Discourses.

Dutch more and more distressed.
All this while, the Dutch at Land began to be more and more straightened: for on
the one side, the King of France was Advanced within Three Leagues of
Amsterdam; Arnhem, Vtrecht, and Zutphen, and Emmerick, surrendered up to him: on
the other side, the Bishop of Munster pressed hard upon Frizeland, having taken
Deventer, Groll, Borkelo, Doetechem, and several other Places of lesser
Consequence; insomuch that the People began to Tumult in all places, The People
Mutiny.
but more especially at Dort, whither they sent for the Prince of Orange, where
as he was at Dinner with the Lords at the Paw, being the Principal House in the
Town, the Burgers who were in Arms, surrounded the House, and sent up their
Captains, to tell the Lords, That except they presently drew up a Paper and put
their Hands to it, for declaring the Prince Stadt-holder, they would Cut all
their Throats: whereupon, the Paper was immediately drawn up and signed; by
which the said Prince was declared Stadt-holder, with all the Powers and
Authorities, in as ample manner as any of his Ancestors had enjoyed: they also
renounced that perpetual Edict, by which they had obliged themselves never to
admit of a Stadtholder; Prince of Orange declared Stadtholder.
and discharged the Prince of the Oath he had taken, never to accept of that
Dignity: which thing thus begun by a Tumult, was afterward Confirmed in a full
Assembly of the States General.

The Condition of the Dutch.
There were at this time taken from them by the French, several Towns and Forts,
some of them of great Importance: and by the Bishop of Munster six; and besides
this, by the former Maestricht, by the latter Groninghen Besiedg'd: their Fleet
in Port, patching up their bruises. Yet now the King of England compassionating
their Condition, and believing those misfortunes might have rendered 'um more
humble* sent over the Duke of Buckingham, The Duke of Buckingham, and the Earl
of Arlington sent into Holland.
and the Earl of Arlington, to try if now at length they would hearken to any
Reasonable Terms of Accommodation. It was remarkable with what joy and
satisfaction they were received by the People; the Men, Women, and Children
joining in their Acclamations as they passed along the Streets, God bless the
King of England: God bless the Prince of Orange: and the Devil take the States.
They passed from Holland through the Prince of Orange's Camp to Vtrecht, where
they found the King of France, who had now reduced the whole Province; of whom
they had their Public Audience in the Camp: thither likewise came the Lord
Hallifax, sent by the King of England as his Envoy Extraordinary; and was,
after his Audience, joined with them in Commission: being thus all together,
they attended the Motion of the Camp, in expectation of Plenipotentraries from
Holland, upon their last Proposition.

While they are upon Extraordinary Affairs abroad, Henry Coventry Esquire now
returned from Sweden, is made Secretary of State at home, in the room of Sir
John Trevor deceased; and the Duke of Richmond Arrives in Sweden Ambassador
Extraordinary from the Court of England, where he afterward Died.

Duke of Buckingham and Earl of Arlington return.
Toward the Latter end of this Month, the Duke of Buckingham, Earl of Arlington,
and Lord Hallifax, Arrived at White Hall; having expected fourteen days in the
French Camp, the return of the Dutch Deputies: so that all which they effected
at that time, was a Promissory Act between the two Kings, not to treat or
conclude without a Participation and Inclusion of each others Interests: which
was afterward formed into Articles, and Ratified and Exchanged with the French
Ambassador at London.

The King of France had now drawn the Gross of his Army from the Neighborhood
of Amsterdam, Marching for Boys-le-d^c and Maestricht, both which he left
blocked up; the first by Turenne, the second by Chamille; and being satisfied
at present with the Victorious Progress he had made, returned for Paris.

Yet the taking of Nimmenghen by Storm, wherein were made Prisoners of War 4000
of the best Soldiers which the Dutch had, and the appearance of the English
Fleet upon the Coast of Holland, was occasion enough to continue the Tumults
and Insurrections, which were now so general, that there was scarce a Town in
Holland where the people were not Masterless.

It Is true, the heat of Action began to cool for some time; nor did the English
Fleet do any thing more considerable, but only keep the Seas, besides that
they mist the taking of the Dutch East-Indie-Fleet, English mis^ the Dutch
East-Indie- Fleet.
of which there was only this account, that the Cambridge and Bristol, being
upon the Scout, had met with the East Indie-Fleet, with whom there happened a
smart Encounter, insomuch that the Cambridge was forced to ly by to splice her
Rigging; and that though they both followed 'um again, and gave 'um many
Broad-sides, yet because they could no way separate 'um, nor the Bristol could
carry out her lower tire, they were forced to quit the Fight: Only one ship too
severely chased, was forced to destroy her self.

This Month, the Earl of Essex arrived in Ireland, Earl of Essex Lord-Deputy
of Ireland.
and having taken the usual Oath, had the Sword delivered to him as Lord-Deputy
of Ireland, in the room of the Lord Berkley.

In Holland, the Prince of Orange, being now settled in the Supreme Authority,
did not a little win the favor of the people, by endeavoring to call to an
account the chief of those who had been their former Leaders. Among the rest,
he Imprisons Ruart Van Putten, The fall of De Wit and Van Putten.
and his Brother De Wit. Van Putten was accused of an Intention to have
destroyed the Prince of Orange by the assistance of a Barber, who was to have
received from him a considerable sum of Money for doing it.

The Court of Holland, upon examination of their Crimes, having Condemned both
the Brothers to lose all their dignities and employments, and ordered 'um to
quit the Country as Banished men; Thereupon De Wit goes to the Prison to fetch
away his Brother; but the people being incensed that they deserved a greater
punishment, as they were coming out again, forced 'um back again, broke open
the Prison-door, haled 'um out; and thus the Rabble having got 'um into their
possession, never left till they had beat and trampled 'um to death. This not
sufficing, they dragged their dead Bodies about the Streets, cut off their
Fingers and Ears, and then hung 'um up naked by the Heels upon the Gallows:
such was the miserable end of those two Brothers.

The first good fortune that befell the Dutch, next to that of the escape of
their East-Indie Fleet, was the defense of Groninghen, to which the Bishop of
Munster had laid a most furious and close Siege; but notwithstanding all his
fury, after several attacques, and the loss of many men, was at length forced
to break up his Siege and depart, having battered and burnt down above two
hundred Houses with his Guns and Grenades.

The Dutch had, no question, promised themselves great matters from the
Emperor; but there was nothing appeared to give them any hopes, till at length
a general Treaty was concluded for the public Security and general Defense of
the Empire, at Ratisbone; which though it proved slow, as passing three
Colleges, That of the Electors, That of the Princes, and That of the
Free-Towns; yet after this Conclusion, the Imperial Forces being upon their
march from one side, and the Brandenburgher on the other, to make a conjunction
upon the Frontiers of the Enemy, The Confederates divert the French.
made a very seasonable diversion to give the Netherlander some breathing time;
so that Turenne was forced to draw off to attend their motion toward Leipstadt,
and the Bishop of Munster thought it convenient to look toward his own
Territories for fear of the Brandenburgher.

So that now the Prince of Orange had some time to look after the Civil
affairs, and to settle disorders at home; which he did by a change of the
Magistrates in most of the Towns of the Low Countries; Magistrates changed in
Holland.
wherein he was not a little encouraged, by the satisfaction which it gave the
generality of the people, who now began to b^ by little and little better
composed in their minds.

In England, the Parliament, Parl. adjourned
which was to have met in October next, was upon weighty considerations
adjourned till the fourth of February following.

But in Scotland the Parliament had sat till this very time, and had made
several Act for the public good of the Nation; among the rest, one that gave
toward the defraying the King's Expenses 864000 l. Sterling.

The Duke of York returns from the Fleet, and Action ceases.
About this time also, the Duke returning to London from the Fleet, put an end
to all further expectations of any considerable actions at Sea this year.

But to return to the French Camp: Marshal Turenne, upon the approach of the
Imperialists and Brandenburghers, sends to the Electors and Princes of the
Empire, Turenne 's Declaration.
to let them know in the King of France's Name, That it was not the King's
intention to meddle with any thing that belonged to the Empire; and that if any
of his Troops had entered into it, it was the inevitable consequences of the War
against the United Provinces: and therefore understanding that several Forces
were upon their march toward his Conquests, to disturb his Possession, and to
give occasion of jealousy to his Allies, he was therefore obliged to pass his
Army over the Rhine. And as for the Duke of Brandenburgh, that the King had
frequently requested him not to meddle with a War in which he had no concern.
And therefore, if things went further, they were desired to take notice, that
it was once in their power to have preserved the peace of the Empire, and their
own.

The Elector of Cologne and Bishop of Munster openly declared at the Diet
against the March of the Imperialists; but the rest being for the most part
Deputies, could make no Reply without larger Commissions. But the Duke of
Hanover absolutely showed his dislike of their March, by denying them passage
through his Territories.

But now Sir Edw. Sprague gives us occasion to return to Sea again, who being
left with a Squadron to keep the Seas, went to the Northwards, Sir Edward
Sprague spoils the Dutch Fishing.
where he spoiled the Dutch Fishing-trade, taking a Buss, several Doggers, and
350 Prisoners.

By Land, Fortune might have been more kind to a young General, such as was
the Prince of Orange, Prince of Orange succeeds ill.
in his first attempts; but she favored him not at all. For whereas he thought
to have done great things, he had still the worst in all his chiefest designs;
first at Woerden, which he thought to have retaken from the French; but being
encountered by the Duke of Luxemburgh, was forced to retreat with the loss of
above 1500 of his men: the second time at Charleroy, which he had surrounded
with the assistance of Count Marci^, in order to lay a formal Siege to the
place; but being assailed from without by the Sieur Montal, and by the Garrison
from within, he was forced to raise his Siege and march off, having lost near
700 of his Soldiers: the last, in his attacque upon Swart-sluce, where his
design again failing, above 1600 of the Dutch came short home.

As for any thing else this year, there was little considerable done, either by
the Prince, Turenne, or Bournonvile, who was now General of the Imperialists in
the place of Montecuculi. Only a kind of Chess-play among the great
Commanders, and moving of the Armies from place to place as the Commanders saw
most for their advantage: yet for all that, Turenne got ground, and advanced as
far as Hoxter.

Returning home, we find some changes of great Officers. The Lord Keeper
Bridgeman desirous through Age to resign his place, the Earl of Shaftsbury was
in his room made Lord-Chancellor of England; Earl of Shaftsbury Lord-Chancellor.
and not long after, the Commissioners of the Treasury laid aside, and Thomas
Lord Clifford Controuler, made Lord High Treasurer. Lord Clifford Lord-Treasurer


And now the time coming on for opening the Exchequer again, the King by
another Declaration signified, that the same inevitable Necessities still
continuing, which urged him to make the first stop, Stop upon the Exchequer
continued.
did now compel him to make a second till the first of May ensuing.

In Holland, the Duke of Luxenburgh, General for the King of France, taking
advantage of the Frost, with a great body of men advances almost as far as
Leyden, forces the Dutch from the strong Posts of Bodegrave, Newerbrug, and
Swammerdam, and takes them; which put the Cities of Leyden and Amsterdam into
such a Consternation, that the Dutch to defend themselves were forced to cut
their Dikes, and put the Country under Water; which caused such an Inundation,
that all the course Goods in Cellars and Warehouses were utterly spoiled,
being forc^d to bring all their Cattle into New Town, and to kill great numbers
of them, merely for want of Fodder for them. But among all these disasters, the
retaking of Coverden did not a little revive them, which they took with little
loss; the Bishop of Munster having drawn out a considerable part of the
Garrison a little before upon some other design.

Toward the beginning of December, the Duke of Richmond, Duke of Richmond dies.
Parl. meet.
Extraordinary Ambassador from the King of England to the Court of Denmark
departed this life. He had been at Elsenore to dispatch the English Fleet
there, in a season of much Snow, and very excessive Cold; whence going aboard
the Yarmouth-Frigat, toward the Evening he returned to shore in the ships
Pinnace, but in his passage was so pierced with the extremity of the sharp Air,
that before he came to the Shore he was insensible of what he did, and in that
condition being carried to his Calesche, expired therein in his passage to
Elsenore.

Upon his death, the vacant honor of Knight of the Garter was supplied by the
Earl of Southampton, who was immediately Elected by the Sovereign and
Companions of the Order.

It was no time to act, but to provide for War; and therefore the King, in
order to his preparations for the next Spring, for the encouragement of his
Seamen, puts forth a Proclamation, promising to every Seaman, that would
voluntarily List themselves in a Second Rate, a free Largess to the value of
six Weeks pay; and to every one that would voluntarily List themselves in a
Third Rate, a free Largess to the value of one Months pay. And further, that
their Pay should begin from the very first day of their Listing themselves.

Toward the latter end of the Year, the Parliament, the time of Prorogation
being expired, Sir Job Charleton made Speaker.
met again; and being summoned to attend the King in the House of Lords, the
Chancellor by the King's Command acquainted them, that by the advancement of
Sir Edward Turner to be Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, the place of Speaker
of the House was void; and being thereupon directed to choose a new one, they
returned to the House, and elected Sir Job Charleton. In the Afternoon of the
same day, the King met them again in the Lords House, where, after he had
approved their choice, he declared to them the success and charge of the War,
and his resolutions to carry it on with their assistance for the honor of the
Nation; which particulars were more largely insisted upon by the Lord
Chancellor.

The next day, being resolved into a Grand Committee, upon their taking into
consideration the King's and the Lord Chancellor's Speeches, they made an
unanimous Vote, 18 Months Assessment given to the King.
that a supply should be given the King of 18 Months Assessment, not exceeding
70000 l. a Month. While they were thus acting, Sir Job Charleton falls sick,
and his Indisposition continuing, the House by the King's permission chose a
new Speaker, Edward Seymor Esquire by Name, a person of great Loyalty and known
ability.

Soon after, The Parl. make an Address to to the King.
they presented the King an humble Address for satisfying and composing the
minds of his Majesty's Subjects. To which the King returned for Answer, That
he did readily and freely agree thereto.

That on the other side, it was five Months since he had demanded a Supply*
and that their Unanimous Vote, did both give life to his Affairs, and
disheartened the Enemy; but their delay would make them take new courage.

That the Enemy was preparing a greater Fleet than ever they had, and therefore
desired them that the fears and jealousies of some, might not bring a Ruin
upon all.

That if there were any Scruples remaining with them, concerning the suspention
of Penal Laws, He promised, that what had been already done, should not be
drawn into future Example. Lastly,

That as he expected the Bill for his supply; so He should as willingly receive
and pass any other, to give them satisfaction.



The Effect of all which, appeared at the beginning of the following Year.

Foreign Affairs, 1672.
The most important difference between the Lesser Princes and States of
Christendom, was between the Duke of Savoy, and the State of Genoa, who taking
advantage of a difference between the Officers and Soldiers of the Garrison,
had surprised Oneglia, and the Territories thereto belonging. Thereupon, the
Duke with a strong Army invades the Jurisdiction of the Genoeses; takes Guado
the Key of the Genoese State toward Mon^ferrat; after that Sissello, a most
delicious place, and full of rich Booty; together with Iustinesi. Not thus
content, he overran all the Riviera toward Nizza, and retakes the Principality
of Oneglia: But then, by the Interposition of the King of France, first a
Cessation, then a Peace was Concluded.

Nor was Poland without a great share of Civil Dissension, by reason of great
differences between one part of the Nobility, who were termed Malcontents;
and the other part of the Nobility, who sided with the King. The Army under
Sobieskie, undertook the Defense of the Malcontents; and Marches for Warsaw,
under pretense of protecting their Nobility, which were so severely prosecuted.
The Archbishop of Gnesne, a potent Prelate, kept himself from Court, in
Opposition to the Kings Interests; though all endeavors were used to reconcile
him. In this posture, the Popes Nuntio arrives to Mediate, but it was too hard
a task to be accomplished this Year.

From these troubles Casimire having withdrawn himself, by a timely
Resignation, lived for some time privately in France, where he this Year died
of an Apoplexy at Nevers.

But his Death was not so much taken notice of, as the Death of the Empress, to
whom this Year was equally Fatal.

Anno Dom. 1673.
THE first remarkable passages of this year, were the Transactions in
Parliament; who being pressed by the King for a Supply, fell with that
seriousness and quickness to their Work, that by the latter end of March they
had completed several Bills; among the rest, an Act for raising the Sum of One
hundred thirty eight thousand, seven hundred and fifty thousand pound, for
supply of his Majesty's Extraordinary occasions. And another Act of General and
Free Pardon: To which, when the King had given his Assent, the Parliament was
Adjourned till the 20th of October next ensuing. Parl. Adjourned


James Piercy pretends to the Earldom of Northumberland.
About this time, the Earl of Northumberland being Dead, and the Family of the
Peircies being Extinct, one James Percy, an ordinary Mechanic, coming out of
Ireland, laid claim both to the Title and Estate; and went so far as to present
a Petition to the House of Lords, to hear him, in Relation to his Claim, but
when his Petition came to be read notwithstanding that he had two Months time
given him before, and that he had caused above forty Witnesses to be sworn at
the Bar, he made so little of any probability appear toward his said Claim,
that the Lords resolved that the Petition of the said James Percy should be
dismissed, and that they would consider how to proceed against him as an
Impostor.

Much about this time was the Island of Tabago taken from the Dutch, The Island
Tabago taken by the English.
by the English, under the Command of Sir Tobias Bridges* with a Boo^y of 400
prisoners, and as many Negroes; though a greater loss hapn'd to the English, by
the taking of Sr. Hellen^s by the Dutch; and might have proved great
Obstruction to the Trade of the East Indies, had it not been soon after
regained by the English, with a more fatal Loss to the Dutch, of Three very
considerable East India ships; which, with the regaining of the Island, was
such a seasonable piece of Service, performed by Captain Monday, that the King
himself thought it worthy the honor of a Knighthood, which was conferred upon
him at his return in August, when he brought along with him both the good News
and Prizes.

But now the English and Dutch Fleets being abroad, Actions of higher
Importance call to be related; wherein, it will not be amiss to follow the
whole Series of this Years Maritime Transactions, without any digression.

The Belgians first got to Sea, Dutch at Sea*
and showed themselves at the Rivers Mouth, with an intention to have stopped up
the Mouth of the Thames, by sinking several great Ships in the Narrow Passages
of the Channel called the Middle-ground, but the broadness of the Channel, and
the commodiousness of other Channels, rendered their Attempts altogether in
vain. Prince Rupert, who Command^d the English Fleet, that he might not seem to
be shut in, sails toward the Enemy; w^o unwilling to abide his coming, recover
their own Shore: The Prince therefore sails away for the Streights of Calis,
with an intention to join with the Fleet from Portsmouth, and the French; and
coming to Dunganess, there casts Anchor, in expectation of their coming, who
were not long absent: in this interim, no small danger threatened the Admiral,
by which the Edgar and Lion were forced from their Anchors, by the accidental
firing of a Fireship. But now the French, consisting of 27 great Ships, and the
Portsmouth Fleet, being joined with the rest of the Navy, the Prince resolves
to visit the Dutch Coast, and comes before Schonevelt, where the Fleet of the
Enemy lay: May 26.
the Prince's intention was, to have Engaged; but the Sea growing rough, they
came to an Anchor till the 28th. May 28.
The morning proving fair, and a fresh Gale, the English prepare to Engage; to
which end, the Prince Commands some 35 of the more nimble Frigates to provoke
'um out of the Sands, with which they lay surrounded: but they, contrary to
expectation, boldly come ^orth, and in excellent order oppose Force to Force;
by which means it happened, that while those lesser Frigates retreated to their
own, they extremely disordered the rest of the Fleet: yet the Battle was
desperately Fought. The French that could come up, fought well, with whom the
English intermixed, out of their eagerness entangled one another. Among the
rest, most covetous to engage was the Earl of Ossory; but being pestered among
the French, falling foul upon an English Frigate, and entangled with one of our
own Fireships, he had much ado to free himself: he was no sooner clear, but he
was Attacqued by De Ruyter, and all the Squadron that followed him, whom with a
vast Courage he stoutly resisted, and gave as good as they brought. The Prince
in the Van, drove the Enemy before him; and pursued them as far as he could for
the Shallows and Sands: whose Magnanimous and Invincible Example, was most
strenuously followed by Captain Leg, Wetwang, and others: at length, Night
put an end to the Combat. The Dutch retired to their old station; the English
lay by all Night, under Sail. Of common Men of the English, were very few lost;
and not one Ship: Captains there were slain, Fowls, Finch, Tempest, and
Woorden. On the part of the Dutch were killed, Vice Admiral Schr^m,
Rear-Admiral Vlugh, and six more Captains: their loss of Men was considerable;
but only one Ship called the Deventer was taken.

Both parties assum^d to themselves the Honor of the Victory: the Dutch,
because they had removed the Assaylors; The English, because they had beaten
the Dutch into their Lurking holes.

The next three days were spent in repairing the Ships damages; wherein the
Dutch had the advantage, as having their supplies ready at hand from their own
shore. In the beginning of June the Dutch changed their station, but lost a
fair opportunity: For the Wind favored them, and the Weather was hazy, so that
if they had then took their advantage to have fallen upon the English, who lay
scattered for the advantage of Repairing, they might have exposed the English
Fleet to some danger. But the English observing the motion of the Enemy,
presently make ready; which the other perceiving, let fall their Anchors, as
the English did likewise, having drawn their Fleet first into a Line, which
reached at least three Leagues in length.

June 4.
The Dutch again make sail; and Sprague believing they did it only to change
their station as before, and not with an intention to fight* made the less
haste to bear up; whereby it came to pass that he lost the Wind, which by
making haste he might have gained. The French were in the middle: the Prince in
the Rear eager to come to blows, pressed upon the French; the French upon
Sprague; which made no small confusion. But what Sprague did amiss in delay, he
recompensed in fighting courageously; nor did he give out till his ship was so
ma^m'd that he was forced to retire; into whose place the Earl of Ossory
succeeding, maintained the Dispute with equal bravery.

The Dutch now perceiving the English-standing North-West, fearing to lose the
Wind which they had so favorable to them, did the like; which was the reason
that the day began to close, before their shot did any execution, having spent
thousands of Bullets all the day in vain; at which time the Prince changing out
of the Royal Charles into the Sovereign, continued the Fight the greatest part
of the Night, having no other light than the fire of the Guns, and the Flame of
several Boats, that, being ^^^'d by one accident or another, floated up and
down upon the Sea. By break of day the English saw the shore near Laystaff, but
no Enemy, but only a small part of the Rear, the rest having withdrawn
themselves in the dark. A Council of War was thereupon called: some were of
opinion to pursue the Enemy, but the greatest part advised to return ^o the
Thames; their Ammunition being spent, and many ships very much out of repair;
which, by reason of the first retreat of the Enemy, they might do without any
prejudice to their honor. There was no great loss of Common Seamen. Of
Captains, only Sadlington and White. The French lost some Fireships. And the
Earl of Oss^ry sunk one by his side. Not a ship of the English was wanting: nor
could the loss of the Dutch be very great, in regard they fought at a distance,
and strove rather to keep the advantage they had got, than to offend their
Enemies.

July 17.
The middle of July was spent before the Fleet could be got ready again; which
was no sooner done, but in the presence of the King himself the Fleet weighed,
and the same night got into the Gunfleet, and thence to the Ness. The next day
they made for the Dutch Coast, and the following day they perceived the Dutch
about eight Leagues off of Zealand; July 20.
who seeing the English prepare to engage, returned to their own shore, not
daring to hazard themselves in the open Sea far from their Sanctuaries. At
length, understanding De Ruyter to be about the Gorce, the English make
thither: toward night they saw the Dutch Fleet; August 10.
but it being late, they thought fit to stay till Morning. In the mean while,
the Dutch by stealth in the night got the Weather-gage, and by break of day
showed themselves above us. De Ruyter, ^aving thus got between the English and
Camperdown, according to his own desire, bore directly upon the English; which
the Prince perceiving, changing his course about seven a clock, in excellent
order stood to the S. West. The French led the Van, the Prince in the middle,
Sprague brought up the Rear. The Dutch came boldly on, Bankert attacques the
French, De Ruyter the Prince, and Tromp engaged Sprague. Then was it incredible
to think how equally, and with how much vigor the Fight was maintained: But by
and by the French in the Van, thinking to get the Wind, sailed away; which
Bankert perceiving, leaving a few ships to observe their motion, with the rest
falls in with De Ruyter upon the Prince; nor did the French when they had got
the Wind come up to his assistance, only Martel with much courage stood by
him. As for Tromp fiercely bearing up upon Sprague* he was as undauntedly
received by Sprague, who slackned his Sails in expectation of him; which the
rest of the Squadron observing, it fell out that being by this means separated,
the Squadrons could not relieve one another as they should have done. The
courage of both Captains was equal, and their desire of Glory the same. The
Wind however favored the Dutch, and they refused to come near, but fought at a
dist^nce. About Noon, the Wind changing, Sprague, who before stood to the
South, now bore Westward, followed by the Earl of Ossory. Tromp still engaged
with Sprague; Tromp's Second with the Earl of Ossory. In the Afternoon Sprague
lay by to repair his Rigging; but his ship being at the same time disabled by
two unhappy shot, he left the Vessel, and taking the Flag along with him, hasts
to the St. George, and puts up the Flag; which when the Earl of Ossory saw, who
had in the mean time brought new Foresails to his Yards, he sent Norborough to
tell him, that if he would, he would set upon Tromp, and board him if he had
assistance: Sprague praises his resolution, bids him go on, and he would
immediately be with him. But his sudden death was the loss of a Noble Design:
For he had not been long aboard the St. George, when through the loss of her
Mainmast he was forced to forsake her too; and as he was going aboard the
Royal Charles, the Boat being shattered to pieces by an accidental shot, he was
himself drowned in the Ocean, over which he had so often Triumphed.

After Sprague's ship had lost her Masts, Tromp confident of carrying her, bore
up briskly and gave her a Broadside, and brought up two Fireships, but all in
vain; for as he passed by, he was so severely galled by the Earl of Ossory,
that he had hardly time to discharge six of his own Guns: Neither did the Earl
of Ossory leave the Flag-ship till he saw her towed off by the Hampshire. Tromp
sufficiently wearied, having got his Squadron together, at first retired; but
when he saw De Ruyter coming toward him, he stayed. By and by the Prince was to
be discerned a far off with his Squadron, who had born the brunt of the
Zealand-Squadron and De Ruyter all the day; for the French, having gained the
Wind in the beginning of the Fight, never came in; but at two of the clock the
Prince and De Ruyter, as it were by consent, seemed to leave off: for both
being sollicitous for the rest of their Fleets, whom they saw afar off, sailed
peaceably, and directed their course toward their Friends, though all the while
within Cannon-shot. But now De Ruyter being joined with his own, falls upon the
Blue, endeavoring to separate that Squadron from the Prince; but in vain, the
Prince making all haste to come in, and the other seasonably joining with him.
Then began a most sharp dispute on both sides, at what time the Prince sending
two Fireships, guarded by Captain Leg, upon the Enemy, put them into such a
confusion, that had the French then come in, being, as they were, Masters of
the Wind, the Dispute with the Dutch concerning the Dominion of the Sea had
certainly been at an end.

The Dutch lost two Flag-Officers, several Captains, and about 1000 Common
Seamen. Among the English, Sprague was much lamented, Captain Neve was slain,
Reeves and Heywood died of their Wounds. Of the French, but one Commander
slain. The loss of Common English Seamen was not so great, being chiefly in the
Earl of Ossory's and Sir Edward Sprague's ships.

About the middle of June, the Lord Clifford of Chudleigh resigned his Staff as
Lord-Treasurer into the King's hands, and Sir Thomas Osborn, created Viscount
Osborn of Dumblaine in Scotland, and afterward Earl of Danby in England was
made Lord-Treasurer in his room.

Upon the 10 th of October, the Parliament meeting according to their last
Adjournment, were Prorogued by Commission till the 27 th of the same Month:
then meeting again, they were prorogued till the seventh of January following.

After which, the King having taken the Great Seal from the Earl of Shaftsbury,
gave it to his Attorney General Sir Heneage Finch, afterward created Lord
Daventry in the County of Northampton.

Soon after, His Majesty was pleased to call before him in Council the two Lord
Chief-Justices, and the Lord Chief-Baron, commanding them to consider of the
most effectual means for putting the Laws in Execution for preventing the
growth of Popery; and at the same time ordered, that no Roman Catholic, or so
reputed, should presume after the 18 th of November to come into his presence,
to his Palace, or where his Court should be: and the Lord-Steward, and
Lord-Chamberlain of the Household, were ordered to see the same effectually put
in execution. And by further Order a little after, forbid them to come near St.
James's House, or into the Park.

Immediately after, in pursuance of his Gracious Assurance to both Houses of
Parliament, His Majesty issued out his Royal Proclamation to the same effect,
further requiring the Judges, and all Justices of the Peace, to take effectual
care for the prosecution of all Papists and Popish Recusants, according to the
Laws and Statutes of the Realm.

About the latter end of November the Duchess of Modena arriving at Dover, in
order to her Intermarriage with his Royal Highness the Duke of York, was there
met by the Duke; and some few days after, coming from Gravesend to London by
Water, was by his Majesty and diverse of the Nobility met in Barges upon the
River, and so conducted to White Hall, where, after her Royal Highness had been
received in the most obliging and kind manner by her Majesty, she was
conducted to St. James's. Within few days after, their Royal Highnesses gave
Audience to the French, Portugal, Swedish, and Danish Ambassadors, as likewise
to the Residents of Venice and Newburgh, who all went to Complement them upon
their late Marriage.

About this time his Majesty (the great numbers of extraordinary Servants that
had been sworn and admitted into his Service, who making use of the Protections
they received thereby, did obstruct the due course of Law) issued forth an
Order in Council, whereby all persons that did not by virtue of their Places
receive Fee, Wages, Salary, Diet, or Board-wages, should be absolutely disabled
from making use of any Protection whatsoever, for the future, to save them from
the prosecution of their Creditors.

From Tangier came Intelligence, that the Earl of Middleton Governor,
understanding the defeat and death of Gayland, and the great success of Muly
Ishmael in those parts; and having received a kind Letter from the said Muly
Ishmael, purporting his great desire to be in Amity with the Governor, and a
proposition of sending Commissioners to treat with him; accordingly appointed
Major White, Alderman Read, and Mr. Wollaston for that purpose, with full power
and Instructions to conclude a Peace and Treaty of Commerce, and particularly
for the Redemption of the Captives in Sally; wherein the Earl doubted not the
same success as he had had with Gayland above a year before; with whom he had
made so firm a Peace, that the Moors and Inhabitants of Tangier conversed
together as if they had been one Nation.

Notwithstanding the vigor and fury of the War, yet neither in the height of
this years Preparation nor Action, were the thoughts of Peace laid aside; but
rather all endeavors tending thereto vigorously pursued. To this purpose, a
Treaty was concluded on between the King of England and the Dutch* whereat the
Allies of both Parties were to be present. The place accepted of by the King of
England was Cologne, whither by the middle of Summer, and some before, came all
the Plenipotentiaries of the several Confederates. For the King of Great
Britain, Sir Joseph Williamson, and Sir Lyonel Ienkins. For the King of Spain,
Count Areschot, and Don Emanuel de Lyra. For the Emperor, Count Conningsech,
and the Baron D'Issola. Count Tott for the Crown of Sweden. For the Dutch, Van
Beverning, Van Haren, and Odyke. For the French, the Duke de Chausnes.

But the Dutch having other Designs in their heads, than what were driven on
in that place, would yield to nothing there; nor were they so fully instructed,
but that upon the Propositions delivered by the English Plenipotentiaries, they
pleaded they could give no positive Answer, without consulting their Masters:
and returning to Holland, had leisure enough to take their pleasure, while the
States were contriving an Answer; which when they had delivered at Cologne, was
nothing but a device finely spun for delay, which made Cologne a place of great
Concourse, but little business.

In the mean time, the Dutch send a Letter to the King of England; to which,
the King of England returned so full an Answer, that though they said, The King
was very sharp and obstinate in his Letter: That nothing was to be done, but to
continue the War: That no farther Instructions should be sent to their Deputies
at Cologne, till they saw how the Parliament would order matters, to whom they
were resolved to send a Copy of their Reasonable Proposals, hoping otherwise to
bring the King to better Terms: Yet upon cooler thoughts, they not only
listened to the Motions of Peace, but also came to terms of Accommodation: and
thereupon, in February following, they dispatched a Trumpeter into England; by
whom they received that satisfaction, in Answer to their Letters, from the King
of England, that soon after the Peace was concluded between His Majesty and the
Spanish Ambassador residing in London, on the behalf of the Dutch. The News was
received with incredible joy in the Low Countries. Sir Gabriel Sylvius was sent
by His Majesty to the Prince of Orange, to Complement him upon the Conclusion
of the Peace; with whom also the States did interchange the Ratification of the
Articles.

In the interim, His Majesty having caused a new sort of Brass Halfpence and
Farthings to be made current throughout all England, and Coined in the Tower,
issued forth a Proclamation, for the suppression of the particular farthings
and halfe-pence of private Shopkeepers; and being informed that Shopkeepers did
notwithstanding continue to utter Halfe-pence and Farthings of their own
stamping, he caused them to be proceeded against according to Law: which was so
effectually done, that many were Convicted and fined but upon submission, by
the King's mercy Pardoned.

Before we fully conclude the Dutch War, it will be necessary to relate a piece
of Gallantry performed by Captain Harman in the Mediterranean Sea: where the
Vice Admiral of Evertson's Squadron, in a Man of War called the Sehaerlaes,
carrying 36 pieces of Cannon, and 140 Men, Commanded by Captain Pasqual De
Wit, met with Captain Harman in the Tygre, returning from Tangier; and coming
both into Cadiz-Bay, where Evertson lay to Careen, the people of the Town began
to laugh at the Dutch, telling them, That they durst not Fight the English;
that they had left their station for fear: Which Evertson hearing, told the
Captain of the Dutch, that to save his Honor, he was obliged to Challenge the
English Captain. Which being resolved upon, De Wit fi^ted himself the best he
could for the Rencounter next Morning: Evertson thereupon furnished him with
Two new Lieutenants, 70 Soldiers, and 60 Mariners more than he had; making in
all 270 Men. The Tygre which had not above 184 Men in all, saw all these
Preparations, and prepared himself the best he could, but without any more
addition of Men. The next Morning, getting out a League to Sea, within view of
the Town, and in sight of the greatest part of the Inhabitants; so soon as both
Frigates came within Pistol-shot of each other, the Fight began, with that
success to the English, that with one Broadside, the Tygre shot down the
Main-yard of the Dutch Vessel, and killed and wounded above 80 Men, without
receiving much Damage; so that after half an hours Dispute, the Dutch ship was
Boarded and taken by the English; the Enemy having lost 140 Men, and 86
Wounded. The Dutch Man of War was so disabled, and shot through and through,
that She was hardly fit for service, to the great wonder of the beholders.
After which, Captain Harman returned into Port with great Honor, having lost
only 9 Men Killed outright, and 15 Wounded; one of which, was himself, being
shot in at the left Eye with a Musquet-Bullet, that went out between the Ear
and the Jaw Bone; of which he was happily afterward recovered.

Peace with the Dutch.
At home, the Dutch made great rejoicing for the Conclusion of the Peace; and
being now quit from the fear of the English, minded only the setting out of a
small Fleet, consisting of 32 Men of War, under Tromp, Haen, and young De
Ruyter.

Proclamation against Papists
Nor was His Majesty less mindful to proceed against the Papists, giving Order
to the Judges to put the Laws against them in Execution.

Foreign Affairs, 1673.
Toward the beginning of the Year, the Elector of Brandenburgh concludes a
Peace with the King of France; and in order thereto, draws his Troops out of
the Territories of Cologne and Munster, Allies of France; and Monsieur Turenue
drew out his, out of the County of Mark.

In Poland, things were now in an indifferent quiet posture; the Archbishop of
Gnesna, a great Opposer of the Kings Designs, was Dead; and the Diet
concluding in a very great Calm. The Turk indeed threatened them, but they
doubted not of their Ability to oppose him: But the King lived not long to see
the fruits of his Accommodation, dying toward the beginning of Autumn ensuing.
Great were the Fears of that Nation, what would fall out during this
interregnum; and probably they might have suffered much, had they not been
freed from those fears at present, by a great overthrow given the Turks by the
Polish-General Sobieski, who Attacquing the Enemy in their Retrenchments, by
the Assistance of the Hussar Horsemen, totally Defeated him; so that of 45000
men, not above 3000 remained alive after the Fight; Two Bassa's were slain, and
a vast Plunder became a prey to the Victor; besides the Castle of Cochim, which
the Turks had some while before taken from the Christians. That which chiefly
contributed to the obtaining this Victory, was the valor of the Hussars, and
the Revolt of the Hospodars of Moldavia and Wallachia, who fell from the Turk
at the beginning of the Fight, bringing with them again those Two Provinces
under the Subjection of the Polish Crown, from whence they had fallen off above
50 Years since.

But the chiefest Scene of War now, lay in the Low Countries, into which the
King of France being fallen with a considerable Army toward the beginning of
Summer, had beleaguered Maestricht, a Frontier Garrison, and one of the
strongest belonging to the States of Holland. Among all other Actions performed
at this Siege, there was none more Signal than the Atchievment of the Duke of
Monmouth; who Commanding one of the Posts, where the Enemy made a Vigorous
Sally, and springing a Mine, which slew a Captain, an Ensign, and fifty
Soldiers; and seeing the out-Guards give ground, sent a Party of the King of
France's Musquettiers, designed for the Guard of his own Person, to make good
the Post; but seeing them retire, with only 12 Volunteers, all English, through
a storm of Shot, hasted to their Relief. The Enemy had now possessed a
Half Moon, which had been but lately taken from them before: but the presence
and Encouragement of the Duke, and the small succor he brought with him, so
animated the retiring Musketeers, that they fell on anew; and the Duke, with
some little help more, rallied out of the Trenches, recovered the Halfe-Moon,
and delivered it to Monsieur Fuillade, who came to relieve him at the ordinary
hour. The regaining of which Post so soon, was no small reason of the Rendition
of the Town, which soon after, in the beginning of July followed, upon
honorable Conditions to the Soldiers and Townsmen, both as to the Privileges
of Religion and Trade. Of English Commanders slain at this Siege, were none of
Note but Sir Henry Jones, who Commanded the English Regiment of Light Horse,
and only accompanied the Duke of of Monmouth as a Voluntier to the regaining
the Half Moon beforementioned. But the Dutch were not a little comforted for
the loss of this Town, by the recovery of Vtrecht and Wo^^den* which were
quitted by the French without any Damage done to the Fortifications or
Inhabitants, upon a consideration of a certain sum of Money given to the
Soldiers by the Townsmen; and the retaking of Ban, which was at length
surrendered into their hands, after it had been Besieged by the whole power of
the Confederates, their own, and the Forces of the Imperialists and Spaniards,
who had in the middle of October declared open War against the French; so that
there was nothing more frequent than the Meetings and Conferences of Monterey
and the Prince of Orange together, as to the ordering and governing their
common Interests.

But Naerden fell into the Hands of the French; for the loss of which, they
were so much incensed, that they Beheaded the Governor Monsieur Pa^, for
surrendering it in so short a time, though it were afterward retaken by the
Prince of Orange to their great joy.

In the mean while, the Pope, being at more leisure at Rome, thought it
convenient to fill up the vacancies of the Conclave, to which end he disposed
of four Hats this Year. One to Francisco Nerli, a Florentine of 38 years of
Age* A second to Seignior Ieronimo Gustoldi, a Gen^ese, 60 years old. A third
to Ieronimo Casanalti, a Neapolitan, 58 years old, And the fourth to Pietro
Bassaduana, a Venetian, Aged about 60 years. A fifth was intended, but not then
disposed of.

The King of France was fretted at the March of the Emperor's Forces; and
therefore to try if he could stop their further March, he writes to the King of
Sweden to do his utmost endeavor, who was at present a Mediator between them,
and at the same time gives a Memorial to the Swedish Ambassador in his Camp,
wherein he pretended how tender he had been all along of the Peace of the
Empire; but withal declares, that if the Emperor did persist to give
assistance to the Dutch, and should march his Forces out of Bohemia, he was
resolved to oppose him to the utmost of his power with all his Forces. Besides
this Threatening Letter, and his passing into Alsatia, and hovering from thence
about Charleroy, the King of France did little else, returning soon after to
Paris.

The Dutch secured from the English, strive to strengthen themselves by other
Alliances. And therefore having, by a public Placaert, conferred the Commands
of Stadtholder, Captain, and Admiral-General of the Provinces of Holland and
West-Friezland to the Prince and his Heir-Males by Lawful Marriage, with all
Rights and Privileges thereto belonging; who thereupon took his Seat in the
Assembly of the States of Holland and West-Friezland as Primier Noble: The next
thing they did, was to conclude such a League as they thought most
advantageous; and thereupon a League was entered into, and ratified by them and
the Emperor; the King of Spain on the one part, and the Duke of Lorain on the
other. The Conditions whereof were, That the Duke of Lorain should raise an
Army of 18000 Horse and Foot by the times in the Treaty limited, to be paid by
the Emperor, the King of Spain, and the States, after the rate of 9000 Crowns
per Month; and to act by their orders and directions. The League to last 10
years.

On the other side, the Swede joins himself strictly to the French, upon
condition to receive 50000 Crowns a Month from the King of France for six
years, to begin presently after the conclusion of the Peace. Being obliged to
declare himself for the French, in case the States, the Emperor, and the King
of Spain did not make a League with the French before the fifteenth of May next
ensuing.

But there was no likelihood of that; for the King of France having demanded
satisfaction at the Emperor's Court for the injury done to Count Furstenburgh
Plenipotentiary for the Bishop of Cologne, but obtaining none, the Emperor
rather seeking to justify the action, than to punish the actors, recalled his
Ambassadors from Cologne, and brake off the Treaty. Nor would the Interposition
of the King of England prevail, though he offered his Mediation to reconcile
the differences between the two Crowns of France and Spain.

The Swedes also proposed, That the Spaniards should give Air, St. Omer, and
Ipres into the Hands of the French, on Condition that the French should quit
all they had got in those parts, and restore Maestricht to the Spaniards: But
all in vain, the Spaniards affirming, that the French were to restore not only
the places they had got in this War, but also all the places they had possessed
themselves of since the Treaty with the Pyreneans.

The business of Count Furstenburgh was this: He being at Cologne, and going in
his Coach, accompanied only with his Secretary, and two Gentlemen more,
attended by three Lacqueys, to visit the Elector of Cologne, whose
Plenipotentiary and chief Minister he was, was set upon in the Street by nine
persons, armed with Sword and Pistol, who being too strong for the Count's
party, after some killed and hurt on both sides, the Count was forced out of
the City, where stood another strong party to receive him, who carried him to
Bonne, whence he was sent Prisoner to Vienna. The Emperor pretended him a
Subject of the Empire, and that he had, contrary to his trust, taken part with
his Enemies. Nor were the Swedes, as well as the King of France, less active in
interposing for his Liberty, affirming, that he was the Elector's
Plenipotentiary; that though he had a French Regiment, it was only Nominal, and
that he did not receive the profits of it. But the Emperor denied he knew of
his being a Plenipotentiary, and that it was not for one of his Subjects to
take up Interests contrary to the Interest of his Sovereign; and would not hear
of his Release.

During these Treaties, the King of France had possessed himself of a great
part of the Palatinate, and had put a Garrison into Germerstein of 300
Soldiers, yet proffered the Elector if he would stand Neuter, to satisfy him
for all his Damages, and to withdraw his Soldiers out of Gemerstein, and put
it into the Hands of any Neutral Prince of the Empire: which he refused, upon
Caprara's coming to his Succor.

The Switzers, to hinder the King of France from coming into Burgundy, offered
that Burgundy might stand Neutur, proffering themselves security that that
Province should punctually observe the Neutrality, and that they would guard
the Avenues into it against any Forces of the Empire. And thus stood Affairs at
the end of this year.

Anno Dom. 1674.
PEace being now concluded between the English and the Dutch, this Year was not
memorable for much at home.

April.
The first motion of the Court this Month, was to Windsor, where the Earl of
Mulgrave was Installed Knight of the Garter.

The Lord Lockhart Mediates a Peace between France and Spain.
This Month also, the King, by his Ambassador the Lord Lockhart, offered his
Mediation between the King of France and the Queen of Spain, to compose the
differences betwixt them.

And to the end he might be no way concerned in their differences, by public
Proclamation forbid any of his Subjects to enter into the Service of any
foreign Prince.

Proclamation against scandalous News.
He also set forth a Proclamation, forbidding the broaching and uttering false
and scandalous News, as also against any that should talk impertinently of the
Government or the Governors.

In May, Sir Lyonel Jenkins and Sir Joseph Williamson return to London.
Sir Lionel Ienkins and Sir Joseph Williamson returned to London from Cologne.

Who were followed into England by the Baron de Reed, Van Benninghen, and Van
Haren, Extraordinary Ambassadors from the States of Holland.

In June, came a strict Proclamation against the Jesuits and Friests,
Commanding their discovery and apprehension, and promising five pounds for
every one that should be discovered and taken.

Toward the beginning of September, upon Resignation of the Duke of Buckingham,
Duke of Monmouth chose Chancellor of Cambridge.
the Duke of M^nmouth was made Chancellor of the University of Cambridge. The
Ceremony was performed with all its circumstances, at Worcester-house in London.

Not long after, the Right Honorable the Earl of St. Albans, having resigned
into his Majesty's Hands the Staff of Office of Lord-Chamberlain of his
Majesty's Household, his Majesty was pleased to give it to the Right Honorable
the Earl of Arlington, Earl of Arlington Lord-Chamberlain.
in recompense of his long and faithful Services, and particularly for having
performed to his Majesty's satisfaction for the space of twelve years, the
Offi^e of Principal Secretary of State, which his Majesty was pleased to con^er
at the same time upon the Right Honorable Sir Joseph Williamson Knight, Sir
Joseph Williamson Principal Secretary.
one of the Clerks then of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, for his
long and faithful service in the said Office under Sir Edward Nicholas, and the
Earl of Arlington; and in his place Philip Lloyd Esquire was sworn one of the
Clerks of the Privy Council.

Upon the 22 of September, his Majesty was pleased to cause a Proclamation to
be published for the further prorogation of the Parliament, from the 10 th of
November till the 13 th of April ensuing.

In the beginning of December, Earls of Ossory and Arlington ^ent into Holland.
the Earls of Ossory and Arlington, together with the Here Odike, not long
before Extraordinary Ambassador in England, arrived at the Hagne, where they
went to pay their Respects to the Prince of Orange.

About the same time was concluded, between his Majesty's Commissioners and
those of the States General of the United Provinces, A Marine Treaty between
the King and the U^ited Provinces.
a Treaty Marine for all parts of the World, in pursuance of the 8 th and 9 th
Articles of the late Treaty of Peace made at Westminster the February before,
and was after ratified by the States in the beginning of February following.

Presently after, His Majesty having been graciously pleased to Translate the
Right Reverend Father in God Dr. Crew Bishop of Oxford, Dr. Crew made Bishop of
Durham.
and Clerk of the Closet to his Majesty, to the Sea of Durham, made choice of
the Honorable Dr. Compton, Brother to the Right Honorable the Earl of
Northampton, to succeed in his place. Dr. Compton Bishop of Oxford.


Toward the middle of December, His Majesty having been pleased at his
entertainment at Guild Hall, when Sir Robert Viner was newly Lord Mayor of the
City, graciously and freely to condescend to the acceptance of the Freedom of
London, in the Chamberlains Office, from the Hands of Sir Thomas Player
Chamberlain, beyond the Example of any of his Predecessors; The said Sir Robert
Viner Lord Mayor thereupon, having first obtained his Majesty's leave,
presented his Majesty, in the Name of the City, with the Copy of the Freedom,
in a large square Box of Massy Gold, the Seal of the Freedom hanging at it
enclosed in a Box of Gold set all over with large Diamonds.

Toward the beginning of January, Her Royal Highness was brought to Bed of a
Daughter, The Duchess brought to bed of a Daughter.
Christened at St. James's by the Bishop of Durham, by the Name of Catherina
Laura; the Duke of Monmouth being Godfather, and the Lady Mary and the Lady
Anne Godmothers.

The Term beginning at the latter end of January, Sir Francis North Lord
Chief-Iustice of the Common Pleas.
Sir Francis North the King's Attorney General was sworn Lord Chief Justice of
the Common Pleas, in the room of Sir John Vaughan deceased.

In the beginning of February, his Majesty caused several Orders and
Resolutions concerning Papists to be published: That the Conviction of Popish
Recusants should be encouraged, quickened, and made Effectual. That no Person,
of what Condition or Quality soever, should presume to say Mass in any part of
this Kingdom. That all Persons born within His Majesty's Dominions, being in
Orders by Authority derived from the Church of Rome, should depart the Kingdom
by a short time prefixed. That none of His Majesty's Subjects should presume to
send their Children to be Educated in any Popish Colleges or Seminaries, upon
a strict Penalty. That none of his Majesty's Subjects being Popists, or so
reputed, should presume to come into His Majesty's Presence, into White*Hall,
St. James's, or any place where His Majesty's Court should be. And Lastly, That
care should be taken for the suppression of Conventicles.


Foreign Affairs, 1674.
The first thing that presented it self of most Importance beyond Sea this
Year, was, that the King of France gave order to quit all his Conquests in the
Netherlands belonging to the States of Holland, except Maestricht.

The States also, to be rid of so great a trouble as the Bishop of Munsteri,
makes Peace with him; the Baron D' Issola signing the Articles on the behalf of
the Emperor. The chief Articles whereof were, That the Bishop should restore
all places taken during the War: That the Treaty of Cleves should be punctually
observed: And that the King of Spain and the Emperor should be Warranters for
the Observance.

And now for the better support of the Prince of Oranges Dignity, the Dutch
East India Company unanimously resolved to give Him and his Heirs Male after
him, Three in the Hundred of all that their gains, upon the division.

And then having secured themselves from Munster, they made an agreement with
Lunenburgh, to keep 14000 Men in the Service of the States, they paying him
such a certain Sum.

About this time also, the difference between the King of France and the State
of Genoa were wholly Reconciled, by the Mediation of the King of England.

But on the other side, the King of France continues his German War; so that
Besancon the chief City of Franche Compte falls into his hands, being rendered
upon ordinary Articles, after a short Siege; Nor did the Ciradel hold out much
longer.

The next Town Besiegd was Dole, which not being able to withstand the Fortune
of the French Arms, yielded it self. After which, Solines and Castle St. Anne
being taken, made the Conquest of Franche Compte complete.

About the middle of June was fought the Battle of Sanzeime, between the
Marshal Turenne and the Imperialists, wherein the Imperialists being far less
in Number, had the worst; It was fought from Nine in the Morning till Night,
when the Imperialists finding themselves over-powr'd, retired in very good
order, leaving behind about 2000 Men. Nor was the loss of the French less
considerable: for they lost a great many common Soldiers, but more Commanders.

A little before this, the Dutch had taken the Island of Normantier from the
French, where they destroyed a great deal of Corn; but not long after quitted,
it upon Agreement made with the Inhabitants, and the Religions Order of
Cistertians in that Island, to pay them 14000 Crowns in four Months; and for
their security, taking with them the Abbot and some of the Principal Islanders.
After that, they approached Bell Isle, intending to have made a descent there;
but the Castle upon the Island was too well provided for their Entertainment.

In August was tought the Battle, or rather Notable Skirmish, called the Battle
of Seneff, between the Prince of Conde and the Confederates, Imperialists,
Dutch, and Spaniards; in sho^t thus: That the Confederates Army being upon
their March toward a place called Binch, the French tell upon the Rear, and
forcing them to Retreat through a narrow way, which they could only pass in
Files, put them into great Confusion: upon this, the French soon became Masters
of the Baggag^ and Cannon; when the Prince of Orange, and after that the
Germans, came and engaged the Enemy, so that the Fight continued till Night,
and then the French were forced to retreat to their Camp; and the Prince of
Orange and the Imperialists remained Masters of the Field. The Prince of Orange
was in great danger, having been long Engaged with the Enemy. Several Officers
of Quality were slain on both sides: among the rest, on the Prince of Orange's
part, Sir Walter Vane Major General to the Prince having bravely behaved
himself, was shot in the back and knee, of which he dyed soon after; and of 32
Colonels of the Dutch Army, 26 were either Killed or Wounded, the stress of the
Fight lying upon them. Many Common Soldiers were slain on both sides, though
the greatest Number was reported to be lost by the French, being said to be
above 3000, and many more confiderable Officers than upon the Dutch side.

The next Attempt of the Prince of Orange and the Confederates was upon
Oudenard, to which they had laid a ^ormal Siege; but they were soon disturbed
by the Prince of Conde, upon whose Approach and Resolution to fall upon them,
the Confederates drew off and marched toward Ghent.

In November, Graves a strong Town Besieged by the Dutch, was after a rough
Siege, and many Assaults, retaken from the French. The Garrison consisting of
1600 Foot, and 400 Horse, marching out upon Composition.

And now the Army of the Confederates, and the French under Turenne, lying near
one another, produced some considerable Action, though their wary Commanders
would not put all to the push; nor was the Victory fully determined by the
grandest of their peformances

In the first place, 4000 French Horse, most of them the Troops of the King's
Household, Commanded by Monsieur Montauban, fell upon some Munster Troops, and a
Regiment of Imperial Cuirassiers, who guarded a certain Passage; and with the
suddainness of the Attack, put the Imperialists into disorder: but Caprara's
Regiment, that of the Prince of Lorain, and some others, coming to their
Assistance, they gave a stop to the Enemy, till such time as other
Lorain-Regiments came in: the Fight was sharply maintained on both sides, but
at last the French were forced to retire, the slaughter being great on both
sides, but greatest on the French; and among the rest, Mountauban himself was
taken Prisoner.

The next was an Engagement between the Gross Bodies of both Armies: for
Turenne Advancing toward Colmar, found the Confederates drawn up in Battalia,
readily attending his coming. The Fight was bloody and tedious, and many of the
French Commanders were slain, but more common Soldiers of the Imperialists
side; but Night coming on, all Action ceased: However, the French continued in
Arms all Night, expecting to have renewed the Fight next Morning; but when the
Imperialists perceived that, they retreated in great Disorder to Schlestadt,
and repassed the Rhine at Strasburgh. Turrenne made himself Master of Colmar,
and sent Provisions to Brisa^; which together with his keeping the Field, were
the Reasons that the French concluded themselves the Victors, and sung Te Deum
for their success at Paris. On the other side, the Imperialists took themselves
to be Conquerours, because their loss was no greater.

In Flanders there was nothing remarkable, only the change of the Governor.
For Monterey being called home, the Duke de Villa Hermosa was sent to succeed
him.

Anno Dom. 1675.
Parl. meets.
UPon the 13 th of April both Houses of Parliament met, in pursuance of their
last Prorogation. They sat till above a Week in June following: But the
difference between the two Houses increasing about the business of Fag and
Shirley, upon which four Lawyers were Committed by the Commons to the Tower,
His Majesty was pleased upon the 9 th of June to Prorogue them again till the
13 th of October following, having only signed some private Bills.

Prince of Newburgh arrives in England.
In May, arrived in England the Prince of Newburgh; having made some stay in
London, he went to Oxford, where he was nobly treated by the University.

In the Barbados, Barbados Conspiracy.
a Conspiracy was discovered among the Blacks to have destroyed the English;
which had been carried on with great secrecy till the very time of the
Execution; and was begun by the Blacks belonging to Captain Swanley, who was
killed by them: But the Plot being found out, several were made Exemplary.

In New England, the Natives, under King Philip Hegamore of those parts, fell
upon the English, Indians Rebel in New England.
and killed several, and plundered and burned their Houses and Plantations: But
the Bostoners and they of Plymouth, arming a considerable Force, soon drove
them to their Sculking-holes, so that they were soon restrained from doing any
further damage: nor did the English leave hunting them, till they could not
find at length so much as an Indian left in all that Promontory.

In July, his Majesty made a Sea-progress; he took shipping at Gravesend, being
attended by several Frigates and Yachts, sailed through the Downs, intending for
Portsmouth; but meeting with bad Weather, he Anchored on the back of the Isle
of Wight. He visited the Isle of Wight, where he was entertained by Sir Robert
Holmes the Governor; from thence he arrived at Portsmouth in the Greyhound,
where he saw the Royal James Launched; and upon the sixth of July toward
Evening, returned again by Water to White Hall.

In August came into England the Count S. Maurice from Savoy, to signify to
his Majesty the death of the late Duke.

Northampton f^red.
In September happened a most lamentable Fire in Northampton, by which the whole
Town was reduced to Ashes, leaving very little standing except some of the
Out-skirts of the same.

River by Salisbury began to be made Navigable.
About this time, the River Avon, running from Salisbury to Christ-church in the
County of Southampton, was first begun to be opened in order to the making the
said River Navigable from Christ-Church to Salisbury, to the great improvement
of the Trade of that City.

Upon the 13 th of October, both Houses met again, in pursuance of their
Prorogation in June; Parl. meets.
but they had not sat long before some difference in relation to the Appeal of
Shirley to the Lords House brake out again, so that upon the 22 of November
they were again Prorog^'d till the 15 th of February 1676. having only passed a
Bill for the Rebuilding of Northampton, and two other private Bills.

While the Parliament sat, Monsieur Luzaney being converted from the Romish
Church to the Protestant Religion, and having preached a Sermon expressing the
reasons of his Conversion, one St. Germane, a French Jesuit, coming to the
Lodging of Luzancy, with others, by Threats and Terrors of Assassinating the
affrighted Luzancy, and of carrying him away by force, compelled him to write
and subscribe a feigned recantation of what he had preached and published;
Proclamation against St. Germain the I^suite.
whereupon his Majesty issued out a Proclamation for discovery and apprehension
of the said St. Germane and his accomplices.

Nor was the Barbados threatened only by her Slaves, who were easily dealt
with, Hurricane at Bardoes.
but with an Enemy against whom there was no resistance: For upon the last of
August happened so violent a Hurricane in that Island, that eight Ships and
five Ketches in the Road were cast away, and most of the men drowned, besides
300 Houses thrown to the ground, and above 200 Whites and Negro's killed.

But as the Barbados suffers, Jamaica f^ourishes.
Iamaica increases, by the removal of several Families with their Goods and
Servants from Surrinam, who for their own, and the encouragement of others, had
a double quantity of Land allotted them by the Lord Vaughan Governor.

Foreign Affairs, 1675.
The Confederates and French were now the most considerable Actors upon the
Stage of Europe. But the Emperor dissatisfied with Bournonvile's Conduct the
last Year, sends his old General Montecuculi to take the charge of the Army,
granting him all that he desired in relation to the Campaign, and giving him
full power to act as he should think good for the common Interest of the
Allies: who thereupon, being furnished with large supplies of Men and Money,
repairs to his Charge.

In Holland, the Prince of Orange fell sick of the Small Pox; but very speedily
and perfectly recovering his Health, he kept the Field all the Summer long.

As for the French, they begun the Year with some success; for sitting down
before Limburgh, after a smart, but short Siege, the springing of some Mines,
and a general Assault given to the Town, the Prince of Nassau, seeing the Enemy
entered, and not willing to expose the City and the Inhabitants to the fury of
a Storm, beat a Parley, a surrendered upon Articles.

In the mean time the Hollander declares open War against Sweden. Upon which,
the Swede resolves to make War upon the Dutch both by Sea and Land, and seized
all Debts owing by the Subjects of that Crown to the Dutch.

But in an ill time did the Swede appear, in the declination of the French
Interest: the first Effects whereof he felt from the Brandenburgher, who
falling upon him near Fehr Berlin, defeated a very considerable Body of the
Swedish Infantry, taking from them six pieces of Cannon, and great part of
their Baggage. On the Swedes side were killed above 4000 Men; nor did the
Brandenburgher buy his Victory cheap, having lost near 2000 of his own
Soldiers.

But a worse Fate befell the French; for the two great Armies of the
Confederates and Turenne, having layn long posted near one another, at length
came to Blows, which proved very unfortunate to the French: for, besides the
loss of several great Commanders, as Du Plessy, Vaubrun, and others, there fell
the Famous Turenne himself, being shot to death with a Cannon-bullet, being the
second shot that was made from a Battery of six Cannons by Montecuculi to play
upon the French Cavalry. About 3000 Men were slain upon the Spot, and more in
the pursuit; and had not the Conde de L'Orge made a Souldier-like Retreat, (of
which he had obliged the good-natured English to bear the brunt, though to
their sad Havoc, and loss of Colonel Lambert) they had suffered a greater
Ruin. The death of Turenne was lamented by the King of France with Tears: He
was buried at St. Dennis among the Kings of France, with his Epitaph: Turenne a
son Tombeau parmy ceux de nos Roys
Cest le fruit glorieus de ses fameux Exploits.
L'on a par cet Honneur couronne sa vaillance,
A fin qu' aux ^iecles a venir
Il n'ait point de difference
De Porter la Couronne, ou de la Soutenir.
Turenne among our Kings entombed lies,
The glorious fruit of his great Victories.
Such fair rewards thus honor his Renown,
That aftertimes may learn from hence,
How little is the difference
'Twixt those that wear, and that support a Crown.


^onde succeeds, but with worse success: for he thinking to make all good,
posts himself at a place called Ensheime; but Montecuculi, being resolved to
force him thence, or make him fight, attacks him in his Intrenchments, and with
twelve pieces of Cannon, which he had advantageously planted, he so battered
the French Camp, that they were forced to make a disorderly Retreat in the
Night, cutting down Trees with which they filled the ways, to hinder the
Imperial Cannon; which was the reason they escaped a second Scowring.
Montecuculi sent out two Major-Generals with 1000 Horse apiece; the one brought
in 200 Prisoners, and 20 Wagons laden with Baggage; the other met with the
French Commissaries, took their Convoy, and a vast quantity of Bread and Corn.

After this followed the surrender of Treves to the Imperialists upon Articles,
of which one was, That Crequy, who had escaped thither from his Rout, should be
a Prisoner of War.

In September, the Duke of Lorrain departed this life at Hermansteine near
Coblentz.

Farther off the King of Poland removed a very great Storm that threatened his
Dominions, by a very great overthrow of the Tartars, wherein a great number of
them were slain, with the loss of their chief Standard; which struck such a
terror into the Turks, that with their Captain Ishmael Bassa, they made a
shameful Retreat out of the Polish Territories.

But the Low Countries had a worse Enemy to deal with; for the Sea breaking
into North-Holland, the Inundation continued with that violence, that many of
the Cities of North-Holland had a great share of that Calamity: The
Harlemeer-Dyke was broken, and all the Country round about lay under Water, so
that many of the Boors Houses were drowned, being covered with the Sea. The
same Fate befell South-Holland; and it is said, that had the Inundation
continued 24 hours longer, the whole Country would have run a hazard of being
lost.

And thus you have an account in brief of all the most memorable Transactions
since the greatest act of Providence that has been observed for many Ages, The
happy Restoration of his Majesty. And we may aver, that here is nothing but
Truth, if all the public Intelligence of so many years have not failed. This
is then a Story in dead Colors; it behooves them that will lay it in the lively
Painting, to take more pains than may be thought has here been taken, and have
greater helps than it was possible for us to have to make use of. And therefore
if there be any that with the Knowledge of a Privy-Councellor, and the
Eloquence of a Salust, will undertake to cull out the most important Actions
which are here reduced into order ready to his hand (for some of these he must
take, or be silent) and compile them into a judicious History, we are ready to
vail Bonnet: in the mean time, these few Sheets may pass for Common
Satisfaction. FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE.
A
ABingdon-Garrison Page 70 Aberdeen and St. Andrews yielded 302 Abjuration of
the King by the Rump 436 Account of the Dutch War; from 315, etc. to 323. Their
Intrigues with foreign Princes and at home 323. of the Revenue and Charge of
the Kingdom under the Usurpation of Oliver 415 Act against proclaiming of the
King 225. For Assessment 235. For sale of Cavaliers Estates. ibid. Executed
303. For Marriages 351. For Irish Adventurers and Allotments 352. Several
confirmed 500. Against Bishops repealed 501. Pretended of annulling the Title
of the King 383 Accidents 315 Addresses, how begun 67. To Cromwell upon the
dissolution of the Parliament 343. To Richard 410. To the Rump from foreign
Princes 423. To the Rump by the Army 422. to the King from the Nobility and
Gentry of the whole Kingdom 452 Adjutators 127 forbid Adventurers for Ireland
352 Aix la Chappelle, Treaty there 570 Alarm in London 403 Albans Earl 455,
made Lord-Chamberlain 580 Allen Sir Thomas Lord Mayor of London 428 Allen
Captain sent for the Streights 528. Allen Sir Thomas makes peace with Algiers
569. Lies before Algier 575. Algier Men of War destroyed by the English 578.
Returns ibid. Albemarle's stay in London 539. General at Sea 550. One of the
Commissioners of the Treasury 563. Dies 575. His Duchess dies ibid Anabaptism
the uppermost Religion 431 Andrews proclaims the Abolishing of Kingly
Government, and made Lord Mayor 231 Andrews Colonel beheaded 270 Anniversary
Act of the King's Nativity 456 Anthony Sir Ashley-Cooper 427 Approbation of
Ministers 359 Arches Triumphal 475 to 479 Ards Lord 240 Arguments for Cromwell's
accepting the Kingship 386 to 390 Argyle a Privy Councellor, sides with the
Assembly 8. Policy and shifts 304. Marquess seized 470. Beheaded 497 Arlington
Earl sent into Holland 586. made Lord Chamberlain 599. Sent into France ibid.
Armagh Archbishop dies 380 Armstrong Sir Thomas joins with the Marquess of
Ormond 240 Army English very gallant and resolute 10. Parliament. Army raised
36. New moduled 67. Quarrel with the Parliament about Irish Transportation, and
publicly declare their power over them 132. Purging the House ib. Pretend
civilities to the King 132 to 136. Design upon the City, and claim the Militia
136. Declaration and insolence 140. Triumphantly through London 141. Delude the
King. Their Proposals 145 to 147. Suppress a Rising in London 170. Quarter in
London, Whitehal, and the Mews 192. And force the Parliament ibid. Shipped for
Ireland, at Milford-Haven 237. English advance into Scotland 268. Face the
Scots 272. Remonstrance to Richard 416. Their address to the Rump 422. Their
representation to the Rump 428. New molded by Lambert 429. Declaration upon
outing the Rump ibid. Their Address, joyfully receiving the King's Declaration
466. Disbanded 456 Array Commission 27 Articles of Scotch Cessation 15 Arundel
Earl made General of the English 9 Arundel Castle taken by Sir William Waller
56 Ascham slain in Spain 236 Ashley Sir Bernard at Naseby 79. Mortally Wounded
at Bristol 84 Ashley Sir Jacob defeated at Stow in the Would 96. Deserts
Newcastle 13 Ashby de la Zouch 97 Ashburnham Mr. John 99 Ashb^^nham Mr. William
148 Ask Judge 254 Assembly General indicted, and meet by their own Authority,
packt and made up o^ Lay Elders, refuse the Bishops to sit; bu^ cite them to
answer as Guilty; dissolved within 7 days, but continue nevertheless 8.
Assembly of Divines 69. General in Scotland 325 Ashton Colonel Edward Quartered
404 Aston Sir Arthur Governor, slain at Drogheda 244 Aubigny Lord 41. His Lady
47 Aurange Prince the Kings great Friend 235 dies, and a new Prince born 276.
Christened 282. Old Prince buried 284. His Interest in Holland 323 Avignon,
Sedition there 533. Peace composed 570 Axtel Guards the High Court of Justice
205 Ayscue Sir George at Barbados 306. Returns to Plymouth 322. At Dover ibid.
In danger Engages De Ruyter at Plymouth, and discharged 323. Prisoner 551
B
Badajox Marquess killed 383 Balmerino Lord his Treason 4 Baggot Kath.
Ballishanon 241, 242, 251 Banbury 108 Barnstable 99, 106 Barbados reduced 306.
Wonder 526. Attempted by De Ruyter 537. Lord Willoughby wounded there 537.
Sails from thence with a Fleet 557. Lost in a Hurricane ibid. The Bridge-town
burnt there 568. Barbados Conspiracy 602. A Hurricane there 602 Bar^bone
denominates a Parliament 350. His Petition 437 Barons created 482 Baronets
Catalogue 493 to 496 Bastwick, Burton, Pryn return from Banishment in great
state 16 Bastwick Dr. of Physic, Burton a Minister against Bishops, etc. 2
Basing-house Besieged by Waller in vain 62 Taken 91 BATTLES. Edgehill 40.
Newberry first 50.51. Newberry second 65.66. Marston-moor 59. Tepper-moor,
Alderne, Kilsith, Philipshaugh, in Scotland 73. Naseby 78 to 80. Lamport 82.
Routon-heath 89. Colonel Jones defeated near Dublin 164. Defeats Lord Preston
with a huge slaughter soon after at Trim 164. Preston in Lancashire 178. Dunbar
273 Worcester 397 Beaufort encountered by Argier Pyrat^s 546 Slain 576 B^nnet
Sir Humphrey 404 Benson Captain Executed 270 Beaumont a Minister, Murdered at
Pontfraict 227 Berkenhead Sir John Knighted 512 Berkley Sir John 98. Berkley
Sir John, and Col. Walter Slingsby 258 Bernard's Treachery rewarded 395
Betteley John Quartered 404 Bishops 12. Accused of high Treason, to the Tower
ten of them 26. Their Charge ibid. Restored to their Honors 502 Biddle an
Infamous seducer 369 Blake blocks up Prince Rupert at Lisbon 256 At Lisbon
again 267. A wary Commander 366. At Porto-Ferina defeats the Pirates 372. Sails
for the Coast of Spain 381. His desperate attempt upon the Spaniard in Sancta
Cruz Fight 391. Fires the Spanish Fleet there ibid. Dies returning into England
402. His Character and Funeral ibid. Blackburn vide Moris Blackness yielded 288
Blechingdon-house 74 Blood attempts the Crown 580 Bourdeaux French Ambassador
owns Cromwell 359 Boys Sir John 62 Boil Dean his management of affair with
Cromwell about Articles for the English 252 Booth Sir George -- rises in
Cheshire 424 Defeated and taken 425. Sent to the Tower, and Examined by Vane
and Haslerig 426. Obtains his liberty of the Rump upon Bail 433 Bramhal Dr.
dies 522 Bradshaw the bold President of the high Court of Justice 106 to 217.
Dies 430 Bradshaw Agent at Hamburg and Denmark 334 Brain sent General to
Jamaica 381 Brandenburghers 547 Mortogh O Brian lays down last Arms in Ireland
356 Breda the place of Treaty 560. English Ambassadors there ibid.
Plenipotentiaries meet, Peace concluded 563 Bristol intended to be surprised
for the King 45, 46. Taken by his Forces 47. By Fairfax 87 Bristol Earl
honored with the Garter 344 Bridgewater taken 82 Brickbat flung at the
Protector's Coach 358 Broughton Col. 296 Broughil Lord lands in Munster with
Forces from England 246. Defeats David Roch, and hangs the Bishop of Ross 252.
Brown Major General 57. Reconciled to the King at Holmby 128. In a new design
discovered 434 Brown Bushel beheaded 285 Brooks Lord killed 42 Brunt-Island
taken 294 Brunswick besieged, and surrendered 583 Buchanan's Book burnt in
Scotland 526 Buckingham Duke 177. sent into Holland 584 Buckhurst Lord, etc.
505 Burleigh Capt. 163 Butler Col. Richard taken 242
C
Cahi^ Castle weakly yielded 521 Calamy Minister Committed 514 Canons made
against the Church of Rome and justifying this 12 Capel Lord Tried and
Sentenced 228. and Beheaded, his noble deportment 229 Carlisle Earl sent into
Sweden 572 Cavalca^e and Procession, from 474 to 486 Campeach taken 520 Canary
prohibited 556 Candia besieged 559. Surrendered 577 Carlisle yielded to the
Scots 106 Carnarvan slain 50, 51 Casimire King of Poland dies in France 590
Carrick taken by Treachery 247. Attempted in vain to be recovered from Colonel
Reynolds 248 Carteret Sir George Governor of Jersey 255 Castlehaven Earl for
the King in Ireland, and against the Nuntio's party 238 Casualties 315
Cavaliers to depart London 258. Conspire against Cromwell 366. Their Plot again
discovered 401. They Plot against the Rump 423 Ceremonies in Religion one main
cause of the War, opposed and murmured at 2, 3 Cessation granted by the Scots
upon very difficult terms 15 Cessation agreed in Ireland 53 Chains of Gold and
Medals given to the chief Sea-Officers 349 Chaloner Chute Speaker dies 416
Chancery regulated 368 Character of the Kings Judges 196 to 203 Charles Prince
in the Downs 175. At Goree in Holland 176 Charles the second, Proclaimed King
by dispersed papers 225 Chester Charter taken away 427 Chichister City 42
Chepstow-Castle taken by Sir Nicholas Kemish 171 St. Christophers and the
Cariby Islands subdued 307 Christmas day Celebrated 398 City Alarmed with a
pretended Plot 403 City invite Parliament and Army to dinner 429. Send
Sword Bearer to Genesis Monk 435. Their Gates and Portcullices pulled down 437
City and Companies feasts the General 438 Their joy upon the King's return 453
Lend the King Money 575, 528, 551
City Building begins 556 Citadels built in Scotland 313 Claypool's Lady dies,
buried 404 Dr. Clargis, also Mr. Caryl Minister, etc. sent to Genesis Monk in
Scotland 432 Clanrickard Marq. his services 249. Substituted Lord-Governour of
Ireland 251. Defeated by Col. Axtel 277. Lays down his Arms 324 Clubmen 83
Clement Gregory 255 Clifford Lord made Lord Treasurer 588. Resignes his Staff
591 Clogher Bishop defeated 267 Clonmel yielded after a stout resistance 252
Colchester Siege 175 Cock-matches, and Horse-races prohibited 359 Committee
appointed for inspection of Charters 381. Committee of Safety 429. Like not
themselves, declare for another Parliament 433 Common Prayer abolished 69
Commonwealth altered by Cromwell 338 Composition 88 Compton Dr. made Bishop of
Oxford 599 Commissioners in Scotland 166 Commission of the Great Seal altered
359 Commissioners for approbation of Ministers 359 Commissioners to treat with
the King at the Isle of Wight 183 Commissioners to General Monk from the City
436 Commissioners to the King at Breda arrive at the Hague 447 Commissioners of
the Treasury 563. To take account of public Money ibid. To hear Seamens
complaints 564 Cologne Treaty 594 Colmaer Battle 601 Colliers the Dutch design
337 Confederate party of Irish Rebels 250 Confirmation of Acts 500 Constable
Sir William dies, and buried in Hen. 7th's Chapel 373 Contents of the Kings
Declaration from Breda 445 Convocation in England grant 5th part of their
Livings to Scotch War 12 Convention in Ireland 440 Conway Lord defeated 13
Coronation of the King 475 to 496 Cotterel Sir Charles sent to Brussels 532
Court erected for rebuilding the City 556 County-troops established 373
Counselors several Privy-Councillors made 584 Covenant first in Scotland what
7. Taken 45. Burnt by the Hangman 498 to 500 Council of State erected 226. New
chosen 258 named by Cromwell 343. Supreme power named by the Rump 421. A new one
appointed 435 Courts of Justice in Ireland 332 Courts ^it in the interval of
the Rupture by Lambert 343 Coot Sir Charles defeats the Irish 250, 267, 305.
His Stratagem on Galloway in Ireland for a free Parliament 438. Died 503 Cooper
a Minister Executed 278 Cork vide Youghal Cowley Abr. dies 564 Craven Lord his
Case 291, 365 offered again to the Parliament, but deferred by the Protector
392 Crew Dr. Bishop of Durham 599 Crosses demolished 45 Cromwell
Lieutenant General at Marstonmoor, at Islip 59, 74, 112, His Conspiracy in
seizing the King at Holmby 129. Complements and Courts the King 144. And then
abuses him 147. Awes the Votes of Non-addresses 162. His Politics on People,
City, and King 163. Collogues the City and Parliament for fear of the Scots
165. Marches into Scotland 178. Makes the Scots disband 179. Treacherously
surprizeth the Levellers; his subtle Clemency 234. Graduated at Oxford ibid.
And presented and treated by the City of London 234. Made Lord-Governour of
Ireland 237. Lands there ibid. Storms Tredagh, his cruelty and policy there;
Winter-quarter at Youghal 254. Sent for by Letters, leaves Ireland, and Ireton
in chief there 253, 266. His cruelty to the English Cavaliers ibid. Arrives in
England 267. Made Genesis for Scotch Expedition 268. His Sophistry with the Scots
271. Marches for Sterling, 275. his progress in Scotland 279. Alarms the Scots
283. At Glascow sick 289. His design upon the Parliament 324. A Dictator 343.
Made Protector, and Installed at Westminster 354. The module of Government and
his Oath ibid. Proclaimed and gratulated 355. Names his Privy Council ibid.
Invited to dinner by the City, and dines there 357. Supplies the Courts with
able Judges ibid. Concludes a Peace with the Dutch ibid. His designs to secure
himself 358. Falls from the Coach-box in Hidepark 363. Calls a Parliament Sept.
3d. his speech to them, and designs 363, 364. His designs in the West Indies
365. His Mother dies, buried in state in Hen. 7th's Chapel 366. His Cabal
with the French Cardinal 369. His Conspiracy with the King of Sweden and the
Prince of Transylvania 373. Affronted by Coney a Merchant 374. Gives
preferments, and sends his son Henry to command in Ireland 358. His oppression
of the Loyal party 378. His design in setting up Major-Generals 378. To awe
the Parliament new called 381. Treats with the Jews about a Toleration 379.
Allows 200 l. toward Bishop Usher's Funeral 380. Excludes diverse Members ibid.
Congratulated by his Convention on Syndercomb's Plot 385. His design is
motioned to take the Title of a King 386. The danger makes him refuse it 390
Assists the French with 6000 men 391. Confirmed in his former Dignity of
Protector 392. Signs several Acts 392. His speech to the Parliament containing
Thanks for the Money-Acts 392. His Investiture and Inauguration in the
Protectorship 394. Frighted at a Book 395. Sends Ambassadors to mediate betwixt
the Dane and Swede 397. Advances and prefers his Children 398. Swears his
Privy Council ibid. Chooses another House 399. The frame of his Government
questioned by the Parliament 401. He dissolves them ibid His policy in
discharging Sheriffs of their pences at Assizes 401. In fears and troubled
condition 402. Falls sick, his Family and himself vainly presumptuous of his
recovery, Dies 408. His Character ibid. Sixty thousand pound allotted for the
expense of his Funerals, from 411, to 413 Cromwell, Bradshaw and Ireton dug
up, and hanged at Tybourn 432 Cromwell Henry tamely surrenders Ireland 423
Crosby betrays Kingsale, Condemned 248 Cumberland Earl^ 44 Cyrencester 42
D
Danemark, War declared against it 556 Daniel Col. John Articles 252 Davison,
etc. kills a Soldier at St. James's 379 Daws Capt. his courage 560 Davis a
Water-man betrays Lord Capel 220 Declaration of the King conecrning the Act of
Uniformity 514 Declaration of Cromwell upon dissolution of Parliament 340 to
343. Of the Rump 420 Decimation of Cavaliers 378 Delinquents Capital and
otherwise qualified 229 Democracy established in the City 231 Denbigh Earl
killed 44 Dennington Castle Besieged, and stoutly defended, and yielded 98
Denial Self order 67, 126 Denmark King 225. Dies 577 Deploration of the loss
before Dublin, the causes thereof 242 Derby Earl corresponds with the King 234.
Discovered ibid. Ioyns with the King in Lancashire 295. Defeated at Wigan, and
flies to Worcester 296. Taken at Newport, Sentenced by a Court-Marshal,
Beheaded at Bolton 302, 303. Derby-house Committee, formerly the Committee of
Safety 166 De Ruyter sayls for New Foundland 540. Returned to Holland 541.
Made Admiral ibid. De Ruyter and Tromp fall out 554. Presented by the Cornish
Gentlemen 562 Desborough Col. and others summoned 549 Dean General slain 344
Devizes 46 Digby Lord honored with the Order of the Garter at Paris 344
Dignities conferred by the King 455 Dillon Lord at Baggot-rath 242 Directory
125, 126 Disorders and divisions the ruin of the Irish Army 251 Dives Sir
Lewis escapes 220 Divisions among the Scots, fomented by Cromwell 271 Dorrington
Sir Francis 63 Dorislaus slain at the Hague 236 Downing Sir George 448. Sent
into Holland 528, 529. Presses for answer to the King's demands 582. Returns
ibid. He is Committed ibid. Drogheda besieged and taken by Cromwell, and a
bloody Massacre there 244 Dublin besieged by the Marq. of Ormond 241. Siege
raised, and Besiegers routed 242 Duckenfield Lieutenant Colonel stops the
Speakers Coach 429 Dunbarton yielded 308 Dunslo pacification 10 Dundalk taken
23. Retaken 25 Dundee stormed by Genesis Monk 301 Dunferling Earl to London 10
Dumfreize, Riot there 557 Dunkirk taken by the Spaniards 325. Siege 405. The
Battle there ibid. A defeat given the Spaniard 406. Yielded, and put into the
English possession 407. Restored to the French 512 Dunotter-Castle yielded 313
Dury's religious Cabal in Germany 377 Dutch Ambassadors to Oxford 57. Commerce
and Fishing molested at Sea 308. War toward ibid. Send Ambassadors to treat
ibid. Ambassadors extenuate and mediate the Rupture; their Papers, and our
States answer thereunto 320, 321. Fleet gives the English a go-by in the
North-Seas, and comes into the Down^ 344. Engage with the English ibid.
Defeated 345. Send to England in order to Peace ibid. Trade at a stand 346.
Their Ambassadors have Audience of the Protector 355. Peace, and private
Articles of it against the Prince of Orange 357. Magnificently treat the King
448. Surprised by the Turk 524. Complain by the English 525. House resolves
therein ibid. King declares himself ibid. Bravado 528. Bourdeaux-fleet taken
529. A Dutch Libel 530. Dutch arrive in Guernsey 530. Their Smyrna-fleet
encountered by Captain Allen 536. Reprisals granted against them 531. Dutch War
declared ibid. Dutch Libel ibid. Dutch Embassy, proves fruitless 531. Dutch
Manufactures prohibited 532. Cashire the English Officers 533. Dutch Imbargo in
France 534. Dutch ibid. Dutch Libel 535. Ill treated in Russia 536. Dutch lost
in China 541. Make peace with the Dane 548. Dutch attempt Brunt-Island 560.
Sheerness ibid. Come up the River 561. At Harwich ibid. At Wenbury in
Devonshire 562. At Cowland in Cornwall ibid. Dutch lose several Towns 585. Dutch
Mutinies 586. Dutch East-Indie-fleet escape the English 587. Dutch Magistrates
changed. Dutch make peace with the Bishop of Munster 600. Dutch take the Island
of Normantier from the French ibid.
E
Earls of Pembroke and Holland sent with a Declaration of the fears of the
Parliament to the King 31. Answered ibid. Earls created 470 Earthquake in
Cheshire 395 East-Indie ships Dutch taken 541 Edinburgh entered by Cromwell 275.
Castle yielded 280 Elector Prince Palatine comes to London, departs, taken in
France 10 Elections for a free Parliament 440 Elizabeth Princess dies 276
Emperor his Brother dies 146. Makes peace with the Turk 147. Offers to mediate
584. His Forces marched 597 Enfield-chace a Skirmish there 423 Engagement
annulled 439 England and the Dominions made a free State by Act 235 English
under Lord Marquess Ormond and Inchiqueen disbanded and dismissed by the Irish
252 Eniskillon delivered to Sir Charles Coot 250 Episcopacy re-established here
456. And in Scotland 503 Escapes of diverse Cavaliers 227 Escurial burnt 583
Essex Earl Lieutenant General of Foot against the Scots 9. General of the
Parliament Forces departs London 38. Attends the King's motion 39. Fights at
Edgehill, retreats to Coventry 40, 41. Relieves Gloucester 49. At Newberry 50.
At Theal, Redding, London 52. Marches reduce the West 58. Pounded at
Lestithiel, and escapes with Lord Roberts by Boat to Plymouth 58. Resignes his
Commission 72. Dies 124 Earl of Essex Lord-Deputy 587 Essex County joins with
Lord Goring, Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lisle 174 Estate of the Kingdom
in a sad condition after the death of the King 124, 125 Everts. taken 536.
dismissed ibid. Exchange Royal finished 574 Exchequer shut 582 Execution of the
Kings Judges 466 Exeter yielded, and Articles 98, 99. Engagement forced by the
Independant-party for the Parliament to live and die with the Army -- City
refuse the Parliaments Orders and Acts 231. Tumults about a free Parliament
Excise 157 Exclusion of secluded Members 229.
F
Fairfax General in Commission 74. Marches 75. Is cajoled to manage the
seizure of the King. Made Generallissimo and Constable of the Tower 141.
Marches against the Levellers 234. Complemented and graduated at Oxford with
Cromwell and Lambert ibid. Magnificently treated and presented by the City ibid.
Lays down his Commission 268. Arms against Lambert 434 Faulkland Lord-Viscount
slain 51 Fanshaw Sir Richard Ambassador in Spain 525 Fatality among the Clergy
504 Farrel Lieutenant General of Ulster-Army 245. Put into Waterford to defend
it 247 Farewell to the Scotch-War Fast general 540 Faulkner perjured 291
Faulconbridge Lord Arms against Lambert sent to Venice 575 Fee-farm Rents 455
Feak Parson 540 Fiennes Lord Commissioner Fifth-Monarchists plot against
Cromwell 366 FIGHTS, at Newborn with the Scots 13 Worcester in the Lanes 40.
Brainford 41. Yarum 42. Wakefield 43. At Liscard ibid. Caversham-bridge ibid.
Hopton-heath 44. Bramham-moor ibid. Chalgrave-field 45. Stratton ibid.
Middleton-Cheney -- Lansdown 46. Round-way-down ibid. Adderton-heath and
Bradford 47. Stow in the Would 49. Auburn-chace 50. Newark at the relief of it
by Prince Rupert 56. Brandia or Cherington 57. Cropredy 58. Lidbury 74.
Sherburn 90. Torrington 93. Saint Fagons 171. Maidstone 174. At Dublin 241.
Muscleborough 264. Warrington 295. Wigan 296 Fincher Mayor, vide Pie resigned
Finch Sir Heneage his Reading 501. Made Lord Keeper 594 Fire in London 554. In
the Horse-Guards 556. In Fleet Street 368. Another at Aberfoyle in Scotland
ibid. Another in Thred-needle-street 368. At Lambeth 373. At St. Johnstons in
Scotland 381 Fleet sent under Hamilton to the Frith in Scotland 9 Fleet Spanish
denied protection, and ruined by the Dutch in the Downs 11 Fleet returns to the
Prince, Earl of Warwick employed against them as Admiral 175, 176. Fleets Dutch
and English at Shetland 322 Fleet under Pen from Jamaica, accidents of the
return 376 Fleet declare their Royal acceptance, etc. 446 Fleet English 532.
Beats the Hollander 538. English Hamburgh-fleet taken 538. Rendezvous ibid.
Fleet ready 250. Divided ibid. Fleets Engage ibid. Engage again 552. Out again
553 Fleets Engaged 584. Fleets Engaged 591 Fleetwood made Deputy of Ireland
366. More of him Foreign Princes, how affected to our States 254 Forces from
Ireland to assist the King 53. Surprised and defeated 54. Sent by Cromwell to
assist the French 391. Under Earl Inchiqueen to Portugal 511 Fornication Act
225 Fray likely at Westminster At Tower Hill Fundamentals of the Army French
prohibit English Cloth, and are prohibited their Wines 255. Conclude a peace
with Cromwell 377. Their Fleet taken by Blake 325. At Gigery 533. Ambassadors in
England 535. King supplies the Dutch 544. Declares against England ibid.
Ambassadors beaten and Imprisoned in Turkey 558. Lays claim to the
Low Countries, breaks with Spain 579. Invades Lorrain 579. Breaks with the
Dutch 583 Free Parliament noised 434 Frigates of Breast rove at sea 356
Furstenburgh Count seized 598
G
Gates and Portcullices of London pulled down 437 Gayland 522, 523. Makes peace
532. Transports himself for Tangier 571 Gell Sir John Sentenced 270 A General
required by Officers of the Army 439 Gentry secured over England 373 Gerrard
Col. John and Sir Gilbert 538. Col. John beheaded 361 Gibbons Sentenced 290
Glencarn Earl submits to the English 362. Prisoner in Edinburgh 380. Chairman
to the Scotch Convention 432 Gloucester Duke born 13. With the King at Colen,
from the Jesuits at Paris 365. Dies 456 Gloucester Siege and Summons, and
Relief by Essex 49. Walls demolished 512. Cathedral begged 381 Godolphin Sir
Will. Knighted, and sent into Spain 568 Goff Col. friend to Richard Cromwell 417
Goring Col. into France 39 Goring Lord Condemned, but saved 228 Goodman Bishop
refuses to subscribe Canons against the Church of Rome 12 Good Old Cause 417
Grace Colonel 324 Graigs Town 245 Grantham Col. killed 380 Grantham Town 44
Granger a Forger 256 Greenvile Sir John 445. Rewarded by the Parliament and
City 446 Greenvile Sir Bevil 46 Great Cities and Towns in Ireland refuse to
admit Garrisons, which proved their ruin 244. Accept of them at last upon
condition the English be dismissed, Cavaliers and others 251 Gray Lord Grooby 291
Groves Col. vide Penruddock Guiny Relation 535 Guernsey-castle stormed 284. A
design upon it discovered 554 Gunning Dr. in Divinity his Congregation seized
and plundered for celebrating Christmas 398 Gurney Lord Mayor in the Tower 34
Guthury and Giffan Hanged 497
H
Haberdashers-Hall 129 Hackney-coaches regulated 368 Haddington Earl blown up
by Gunpowder in Scotland 14, 15 Hamilton Marquess the Kings Commissioner into
Scotland, at London 7. Prisoner to Pendennis-castle 52. Defeated and taken
Prisoner 178 Hamilton Duke tried and sentenced 228. Beheaded 229 Hamond Col.
secures the Kings person 151. His baseness 163. Shot in Ireland ibid. Hannam,
the Infamous Thief, breaks Prison and escapes 376. Hanged 381 Harman Capt. his
Exploit 595. Beats the Dutch 564 Harrisons impudence in bringing the King to
London 193. A main man for the little Parliament, outed and dissatisfied 353.
Apprehended 453 Harris a great Cheat 368 Harvey Sir Daniel sent to
Constantinople 568 Hazelrig Sir Arthur seizes Portsmouth 433. returns to
Westminster, and is thanked by the Rump 435. Dies 474 Healing Parliament 470
Henrietta Princess 469 Henchman Dr. Bishop of London 524 Hertford Marquess 38
Heresies and Schisms 368 Hewit Dr. seized 404. Tried and Beheaded ibid. Hewson
Col. made Master of Arts in Oxford 234 Marches into London 433 Hide Sir Henry
beheaded 285 Highland-War in Scotland, its account 361, 362. Hind the Highway
man 303 Hispaniola expedition, from 369 to 372 Holland Earl Lieutenant General
of Horse against the Scots 9. Rising at Kingston and defeated 177. Tried and
Sentenced 228. Executed in Palace-yard Westminster 229 Hollis Lord Ambassador
into France 522. Returns for England 550 Holmes Major Committed 532. Discharged
ibid. Enters the Vly 553. Attacques the Dutch Fleet 582. Holstein Duke 255
Honors and Dignities denied to some Malcontents, another cause of the Scotch
troubles 4. Honors given by the King vacated 292 Hopton Lord 42. Disbanded
honorably after many services and Victories, at Truro in Cornwall 96, 97
Horse-races and Cock-matches prohibited 359 Horton Adjutant to Maj. Genesis Brown
at Dennington 63 Hotham refuses to admit the King into Hull, but suffers the
Duke of York and Prince Elector Palatine; is proclaimed Traitor 33, 34. Revolts
from the Parliament, and his son and he sent Prisoners to the Tower 56.
Executed 68 House of Lords voted useless 226. Protest against it ibid. Howard
Lord advises Richard Cromwell 417 Howard Lady to the Tower 423 Howard Capt. his
valor 543 Howard Master sent Ambassador to Taffalette 575 Hoyle Alderman Hangs
himself 256 Hull Garrison 33. Hotham Governor of it ibid. The dispute of
transferring that Magazine 32, 33 Humble Petition and Advice 393 Hume-castle
yielded 283 Humphries-Col. to Jamaica 377
I
Jamaica 370 Jamaicans assault the Dutch Plantations 548 James John Executed
502 Jealousies, Fears, and pretended Plots 26, 27, 30.31. Jenkins Judge his
writings 155, 156. Designed for slaughter 229. Dies 524 Jersey a new Mace 520.
Surrendered to Col. Haynes 306 Jesuits in France proceeded against 570. Exiled
373 Jews treat for admission with Cromwell 379 Jewish Prophet 548, 559
Imposition on Seal-coal 359 Independants rise 66. Quarrel with the
Presbyterians, and cajolethem 67. undermine and defeat them 112, 113, 139.
Synod at Savoy 413 Inchiqueen Lord defeats Lord Taaff 164. Declares for the
King ibid. Ioyns with the Confederate Catholics for the King under the Lord of
Ormond, made Lieutenant General of the Army 238. His overfight, like to be
surpri^ed 245. Falsely suspected, and accused by the Marquess of Antrim 263.
Leaves Ireland 277 Indians rebel in New England 601 Ingoldsby Col. offers aid
to Richard 417. Suppresseth a Mutiny and Lambert Instrument of Cromwell's
Protectorian Government, and his Oath 354 Joachims Ambassador from the Dutch
267. Sent home 270 St. Johnstons yielded 294 Jones draws out of Dublin to
oppose the advance of the Marquess of Ormond, retreats 239. Raises the Siege
before Dublin 211. Comes before Drogheda, and retreats 243. Dies in the quality
of Lieutenant General 247 Ireland and Ulster Forces submit 344 Ireland its
state and condition 238 Ireton's appearance and notice at Naseby-fight; wounded
78. In the Cabal of the Army 84. Draws their Papers and Proposals 84, 85.
Parliament Votes 161. Intrigues between them 116, 118, 119. Dies of the Plague
305 Irish affairs, an account of the Cessation and the Marq. of Ormond's Treaty
with Rebels and Parliament; the Articles thereof with the Rebels the Popes
Nuntio there 122, 123, 124. Strength, what after Cromwell's departure 253.
Abused by Cromwell's fair carriage at first, into horrible slavery at his
departure 253. Defeated at Finagh 234. Their affairs 292, 309, 310. Seem to
acquiess in Lambert's actions 431. Affairs 515 Judges Commissioned by the new
State 224. New ones again 254. New placed by the Rump 422. Of the King and
others exempted out of the Act of Oblivion 454. They that came in upon
Proclamation respited from Execution 469. Brought to the House of Lords, and
remanded to Prison 502. Of the Law, their Names 492 Justice High Court 203 to
217. Again erected 258, 278. To try Col. Gerrard and Powel 360
K
Kentish Insurrection 173. Suppressed ibid. Kent mastered and reduced by Rich
and Berkstead 175 Keyling Sir John Lord Chief-Iustice 543 Ker Col. defeated 280
Killing no Murder, a Book 395 King dispenceth with the Common prayer and Book
of Canons in Scotland, by a Declaration, slighted and cavilled at as a device,
and opposed by the Earls of Hume and Lindsey, with another Declaration 7, 8
Arms against the Scots 9. At York and Barwick agrees upon a Pacification 10.
Goes to his Scotch Parliament 20. Departs thence with mutual satisfaction
ibid. Received Magnificently at his return to the City ibid. Demands five
Members 25. To Hampton Court, to Dover, to Greenwich, Theobalds 27. To Royston,
New Market, York ibid. Asserts his right in the Militia 30, 31. His innocence
of any design of War, etc. ibid. Resolves for Ireland 32. Expostulates his
affront at Hull from Beverley 34. Takes a guard of York-shire-Gentlemen ibid.
His intentions of no War attested by the Lords ibid. Answers and refutes their
Remonstrance 35. Forbids the Militia 36. Invites his Subjects to his assistance
ibid. To Newark, back to York, to Nottingham sets up his Standard, to
Staffordshire, Leichestershire, confines of Wales and Shrewsbury, and caresses
the Gentry and Commonalty 37, 38 39. Melts down his Plate at Shrewsbury and
Mints it 38. Faceth Coventry, to Southam 39. Stays and turns upon Essex: his
Speech 39, 40. Takes Banbury, to Oxford, toward London, at Brainford, 41. Into
the West after Essex -- Overtakes him at Lestithiel, defeats him 58. in the
associated Counties 88. Into Wales ibid. At Newark 90. At Oxford ibid. Escapes
thence 99. To the Scots 100. Information of it, and his Majesty's Messages and
the Parliaments Answers, from 100 to 104. The King at Newcastle 114. disputes
with Henderson 115. And betrayed by the Scots 121. His escape intended from the
122. Delivered to Commissioners 127. At Holmby 128. Carried away by Cornet
Joyce 129. At Childersley with freedom of Chaplains 130. The design of it 131
to 133. Deluded by the Army Proposals 132. At Hampton Court after many
traverses 145. Pretendedly at Liberty and Honor 147. His nearness to London
suspected by Cromwell 148. Frighted thence by Whaley, and departs ibid. His
Letters and Declarations there 148 to 151. In the Isle of Wight ibid. High
Treason to conceal his Person ibid. His Message from the Isle of Wight 151 to
155. A blasphemous Hue and Cry against him ibid. Answers the Message with the
Bills of Parliament. His Declaration upon the Votes of Non-addresses 166 to
169. Kings Message and Answer to the Votes of a personal Treaty 181, 182. Has
liberty of assistance and his Friends 183. Startled at the Remonstrance of the
Army 187. Shows the unreasonableness of it ibid. His farewell to the
Commissioners, and Declaration concerning the Treaty 188 to 190. And his Letter
of the result and advice to the Prince 190. Hurried from the Isle of Wight to
Hurst-castle, to Winchester, to Windsor, to St. James's 193. To the High Court
of Justice: his defense and Reasons 203 to 215. Traitorously Sentenced ibid.
Confers with his Children ibid. The Lady Elizabeth's relation of it 216. His
Speech upon the Scaffold 218 to 219. Murdered 220. His Corpse exposed to view
ibid. Buried by the Duke of Richmond, Marquess of Hertford, Durchester, and
Earl of Lindsey, at Windsor 221. The Service Book denied at his Interment ibid.
King Charles the second at Hague 235. Highly treated there and honored 236.
Departs for France by Rotterdam, Dort, Antwerp, and Brussels; treated by the
Archduke Leopold, attended thence by Duke Lorrain to Compeign, met there by
the French King 237. At Jersey 257. At Breda ibid. Takes shipping at Terheyden
for Scotland 268. Arrives there ibid. Withdrawing the Covenanting party 281.
Crowned at Schoone ibid. Marched into England 294. Comes to Worcester 295.
Summons the Country ibid. Flies by advice of the Earl of Derby to Whiteladies:
the manner of his escape, and arrival at Paris 311. Continues there ibid.
Interposeth betwixt that King and Princes, honored by the Duke of Lorrain
ibid. From Paris to Liege, and from the Spaw 363. to Colen 365. At the Duke of
Newburg ibid. Privately withdraws upon Penruddock's rising 367. At Frankford
376. An interview with the Queen of Sweden, in company with the Princess of
Aurange ibid. To Flanders, at Bruges 384. False reports spread of him here on
design 377. Honorably treated by the Elector of Mentz ibid. Entertains Forces
in Flanders 291. His Title to the Crown annulled 383. King at Dunkirk 396. In
readiness with Forces from Flanders 403. His design discovered by Manning 367.
Privately at Sir George Booth's rising, about St. M^^^'s in Britany 426. At St.
Jean de Luz ibid. And at Paris Complemented upon the Change by that Court 436.
At Brussels, thence to Breda 445. Sends his Letters and Declarations ibid. At
the Hague 447. Proclaimed ibid. Departs for England 449. Complemented with an
Elegant Speech ibid. Embarques and Lands at Dover 450. To Canterbury,
Rochester, Dertford 451. Manner of his entrance into, and passage through
London ibid. Proclaimed in Ireland by the Convention, Crowned 454. His answer
to the Earl of Manchester's Speech 453. Passes many Acts 454. His passage
through London to his Coronation 475. Married to the Infanta of Portugal at
Portsmouth 506. His Declaration concerning the Act of Uniformity 514. Kings
Progress 539. At Oxford ibid. Declares War against France 544. Lays the first
Stone at the Exchange 565. Makes peace with Spain 578. Takes a Progress 581.
Invites the Dutch into England 585. Makes peace with the Dutch 595. Mediates a
peace between France and Spain, composeth the difference between the King of
France and States of Genoua 600 Kingly power voted useless 226 Kirle a
Lieutenant Colonel betrayeth Monmouth to Massey 64 Knights of the Bath 481
Kniveton Daniel the Kings Messenger-Executed 256
L
Lambert Major General passes into Fife, defeats Sir John Brown there 293
Lambert made General against Sir Geo. Booth; his success. 425. His reward of a
Jewel 427. His policy and use of his Victory ibid. His Cabal with the Officers
of his Army against the Rump ibid. Offered Terms from the King by the Lord
Hopton 431. Marches against General Monk ibid. Would Engage 434. Deserted by
his men ibid. Turned off and discarded; escapes from the Tower, defeated, taken
by Ingoldsby 441. Ordered to Trial 505. Sentenced. 510 Lambs, a brave
white-coated Regiment of the Marquess* of Newcastle, overthrown and destroyed
61 Langdale Lord joins with Hamilton 1^7 Lane Lord Keeper dies at Jersey 270
Laud Lord Archbishop of Canterbury a zealous Protestant, traduced, etc. 12.
And intended to be murdered 12, 13. Impeached 17. And voted guilty of High
Treason, committed to the Tower ibid. Convened before the Lords, and after a
brave defense Sentenced 69, 70. As bravely suffered, Beheaded ibid. Col.
Laughorn, Poyer, and Powel rise in Wales 171 Laughorn, vide Poyer, etc. Laws
poted to be maintained and preserved by the new States, turned into English 287
to be new molded into another Body 351. Lawson Sir John sent to the Streights
526. Proclaims War with the Algiers ibid. Called home 528 De Led Spanish
Ambassador hither 373. Governor of Dunkirk, slain there 406 Leeds taken by
Fairfax 42 Leicester Earl made Deputy of Ireland 20 Leicester taken ^6. Retaken
80, 81. Lenthal Mr. John 469 Lesly Scotch General 13. Defeated at Marston-moor
59. Baulked at Hereford 87. Taken and sent Prisoner to Chester 302 Letters sent
from the King to the Rump 441 Levellers first 131 Levens Dr. Executed 269
Liberty of Conscience Enacted in England 275 Libberton Lord to the King at
Jersey 233. Slain at Dunbar 273 Ligne Prince 455 Lilburn John whipped at Carts
Tail for seditious Books 2 Lilburn and Levelling party secured 232. Their
History and Actions at Burford 234 Their new Commotions 255. Defeated, and
their Ringleaders shot 234 Lilburn Col. Chief Commander in Scotland, he
defeats the Royalists 355 Lilly's Prognostications 310 Lines and Bulwarks
about- London, alarmed by the King's march 39 Lindsey Earl General for the King
38. His Son 47 Limerick Siege 304. Surrendered 305 Lisle killed 534 Litchfield
besieged and taken 42. Retaken by Prince Rupert 44 Litchfield Earl 424
Littleton Lord Keeper 45 Little, or foolish, Parliament sit down 349. Their
Character and Names 350. Their strange Consultations and Actions 351. Dissolved
353 Lockyer shot to death 233 Lockhart the Rump Ambassador at St. Jean de Luz
426 Loans and subscriptions against Scotch War by the Earl Strafford, etc. all
the Nobility and Gentry 11 London proffers their ready service to secure the
two Houses; their Levies forbidden by the Kings Letters 27. A Plot to surprise
it for the King, Mr. Waller hardly escaped 47. Engage against the Army, and
Petition the Parliament 137. Too rashly 138. Tumult the Parliament ibid. Submit
to the Army, their Lines and Works dismantled, Army through it in Triumph 141
Bishop of London attended the King at his death 220 Londonderry relieved by
the joint forces of O Neal and General Monk, the ill consequences thereof 239
Longford house surrendered 92 Loudon Lord abuses the King 120 Lorn Lord
pardoned 509 Lords House comply with votes of Non-addresses awed by the Army
165 Lords of the Privy Council 488 Loathbury sad fire 513 Loughborough Lord 81,
97. Escapes 227. Arrives at the Hague ibid. Love Minister Sentenced and
Executed 240 Lucas Sir Charles and Sir George Lisle shot to death 179 Lucas Sir
Charles and Sir George Lisle reinterred at Colchester 500 Lunsford Lieutenant
of the Tower 25 Luzancy assaulted by St. Germain 602
M
Macquire and MacMahon seized in Dublin and sent Prisoners to the Tower 22.
Executed 71 Mace a new one made 235 Maestricht blockt up 584. Surrendered 596
Major-Generals established 378. Their power and awe of Elections, etc. 382
Mallet Judge resignes 522 Man Isle reduced 306 Manchester Earl at Marston 58.
At Dennington-castle 63. Disbanded 72. His Speech 452. Made Lord-Chamberlain
455. Dies 580 Mannings Treason 365. Shot 368 Mardike taken 396. Attempted by
the Spaniard ibid. Marlborough 42. Burnt 343 Mary Princess Married to the
Prince of Aurange 18 Marriage Act 351 Marston the Leveller hanged 257 Marsin
General 403 Marshals Court in Southwark abolished 291 Maynard Sergeant to the
Tower, etc. 374 Massey Col. 42. Disbanded 112. Heads the Citizens against the
Army 139. Impeached 132. Flies into Holland 143. Escapes from the Tower 303.
Escapes from St. James's 227* Arrives at the Hague ibid. Worsted and wounded at
Upton-bridge 296. Taken 303. Taken and Escaped 424. Mazarine Cardinal joys the
Queen Mother with Cromwell's death 410 Maurice Prince drowned in the West Indies
337 Members the five, the grand cavil of the Rebellion 25. Five Members charged
26 Eleven Members impeached by the Army 132. Fugitive Members sit in Council
with the Army 140. Reseated by them 141. Void and null all that was done in
their absence 142 Mentz and Collen at odds 547 Messiah counterfeit 548 Meetings
suppressed 573 Middleton now a Parliamentarian General 62. Taken 301. Seeking aid
from the Dutch 344. Lands in Scotland 358 Militia Ordinance 29, 30. Petitioned
by the Parliament 30 to 33. Messages about it ibid. On foot in Lincolnshire 34
Mings Sir Christopher chaced the Dutch 544. Sails for the Coast of Sweden 545.
General Wrangle comes aboard him ibid. Miracle ominous 390 Mohun Lord for the
King. Lord Hopton, Sir John Berkley, and Col. Ashburnham Commissioners for the
King in the West 43 Montross Marq. his Battles and activity 73, 74. His
Declaration 254. Tragedy and death, from 255 to 266. His Interment 497 Monarchy
the ancient and only British Government 223. Abolished in Scotland by English
States 308 Monk a Colonel from Ireland to assist the King, taken prisoner at
Namptwich, and thence to the Tower of London 53. To Ireland again 123. General,
his acts in Ireland for the pretended States 237. He had the honor of Dunbar
274. In Scotland 358. In Sir George Booths, etc. 426. Secures the Scotch
Nobility 427. Declares against the proceedings of Lambert, etc. And secures
Anabaptist Officers: maintains intelligence in England, and protracts time by
offers of Composure 430, 431. Sends Commissioners to London, they agree to no
purpose, obtains his desire of the Scotch Convention 432. Signifies his coming
to London 435. His passage, and Narrative of his Cabal 436, 437. Thanked by the
Parliament 442. The great instrument of the Restitution. Meets the King at
Dover 450. Dignified with the Order of the Garter 451. With the title of Duke
of Albemarle 455 Monmoth betrayed, and regained 64 Monmouth Duke made Capt.
Kings Guard 568. His valor at Maestricht 596. Made Chancellor of Cambridge 599
Monro Sir George defeated 247. His enterprise in Ulster 250 Modiford Sir Thomas
in Jamaica 530 Mordant Lord John seized 403. Tried and quitted 404. Summoned
423 Morris Col. Executed 254 Moor Lord 240 Morpeth Earl affronted in Holland
532 Moreland Sir Samuel 448 Mother of Cromwell dies 366 Montague Genesis 416.
Dignified with the Earldome of Sandwich 455. To Algier, and Lisbon 500. Brings
home the Queen 507 Mulgrave Earl made Knight of the Garter 598 Munster success
in Holland 544 Munson Lord, Sir Henry Mildmay, and Wallop Sentenced 501 Musco
alteration in their Religion intended 558 Mine Colonel slain, and his party
routed by Massey 64
N
Naerden taken from the Dutch 597 Nailor James the Quaker personates our
Savior 384. Sentenced ibid. Released by the Rump 426 Newburg Prince arrives in
England 602 Newberry disorders 525 Newark yielded 701 Newcastle Earl,
afterward Marquess 42. Besieged in York 58. Disswades fighting after the
defeat at Marston-moor, sets sail for Hamburgh with most of the Nobility and
Officers of his party 61 Newcastle taken 67 New-park given the City by the Rump
235 News of the Change by Cromwell acceptable to the King at Paris 344
New-buildings 392 Nimmegen taken 586 No Address votes 162 Nobility of the Loyal
and Presbyterian party 444 Noblemen English for the Scotch peace, against
Strafford's advice 15. Summoned to a general Council at York ibid. Conclude the
Peace ibid. Secured by the Rump in the Tower 753 Nobles their Catalogue 488
Nonconformists increase in the Reigns of Qu. Elizabeth and King James 2
Indulged 582 Norfolk-Insurrection 278 Northampton burnt 602 North Sir Francis
Lord Chief-Iustice of the Common Pleas 599 Northumberland Earl General of the
Scots second expedition 22. His reasons to reject the Ordinance for the Trial
of the King 194 Northampton Earl 42. Killed 44 Northern Counties oppressed by
the Scots 120 Norton Colonel 66 Norwich Earl General in Kent, at Rochester, and
Black Heath, at Bow and Stratford 174 Nuntio of the Popes in Ireland, his
business 123. Party in Ireland 238 Nigh one of the Commissioners for approbation
with Lockier 359
O
Oblivion Act by the Parliament 309 Oblivion Act by the King 456. Another 590
Obstructions in sales of Kings and Queens Lands, etc. removed 310 Okey Col.
dismissed from Command 366 Okey, Berkstead, and Corbet seized in Holland, tried
and Executed 505, 506 Omens and Prognostications of the Dutch War 315 O Neal
Hugh put into Clonmel 248. Defends it very handsomely 252 O Neal joins with the
Independant-party 237 O Neal Sir Phelim hanged 333 Opdam made
Lieutenant-Admiral in place of Van Tromp 349 Orange Prince arrives in England
578. Made Captain General in Holland 579, 584. Declared Stadtholder 586 Order
for the Murder and Execution of the King 217 Ordinances of Parliament obeyed
as Acts 36. For trial of the King disputed and thrown aside by the Lords,
entitled by the Iuncto, and passed as an Act 194 to 196. Ordinances published
in Parliament 364 Orleans Duchess comes into England 577. Dies ibid. Ormond
Marquess Lord Lieutenant of Ireland 53. Capitulates with the Parliament
Commissioners 164. Lord Lieutenant of Ireland 238. He has no power to punish
any faults or Delinquents 243. Recruits his Forces and Garrison-Towns ibid.
Makes agreement with O Neal by means of Daniel O Neal his Nephew 244. Resolves
to fight Cromwell before Duncannon 246. Before Carrick 247. But disappointed he
leaves Ireland 277. Hardly escapes out of Sussex 401. Main Instrument of the
Restitutio^ -- Made Earl of Brecknock 455. To Ireland Lord Lieutenant 511. Duke
of Ormond Chancellor of Oxford 571. Assaulted in the Night 578 Osborne Sir
Thomas Lord-Treasurer 591 Other House meet, and fawn upon the Commons 399. The
Names of the Members ibid. Overton Maj. Genesis seized in Scotland 366 Overton
Colonel 469 Owen Dr. preaches before the Protector and Parliament 382 Owen To
the great Rebel dies 248 Oxford the Kings chief Quarters and Court 47. Besieged
by Fairfax 75. Yielded 106
P
Pack Alderman 374, and 386 Palaffi Imbre revolts from the Emperor 548
Parliament in Ireland 4. Grant Subsidies to carry on the Scotch War 20
Parliament in England called, and dissolved, and why 12 Parliament in Scotland
(and Assembly) and adjourned 17. Meet again, and order their Army to march into
England 13 Parliament meets at Oxford 56 Long- Parliament 15. Enact a Triennial
one 18. Deny his Majesty's desire of going for Ireland, the reasons 32, 33.
Forbid any resort to the King but his Servants. Arm the several Counties. Admit
of no ways of accommodation 35. Arm and fight, etc. and having prevailed, agree
not about disposing the King 113, 114, 121. Buy the King from the Scots after
much tampering, and send Propositions to the King 118, 119, 121. Are refractory
to all his condescentions, offers, and messages, as appears 121. New Speakers
139. Fugitive Members sit with the Army in Council 140. Constrained to humor a
Treaty in the Isle of Wight 158. Four Bills passed as Preliminaries with
Proposals ibid. Necessitated to vote a personal Treaty; the votes of
Non-addresses cancelled 180, 181. Agree to his Majesty's condescension as a
ground for Peace 192. Forced by the Army ibid. Turned into a Iuncto 193.
Parliament Men twelve a penny 339. Dissolved, the manner of it 340. Dumb one
meets 362. Another pretended Parliament 382. Memberr excluded ibid. In a full
House with the Other House 398, 399. Dissolved 401. One called by Richard,
their Transacting with him, and the Other House, and the Army 413 to 418. The
Long one dissolved 439. Most gladly and reverendly reecive the Kings Letters
445. Their resolves thereupon 446. Their affairs before the King's return 453.
They say hold on his Majesty's Declaration from Breda 454. Dissolved 470.
Another meet by the Kings Writ 496 Parliament 519.520. Prorogued 523, 527. Meet
530. Prorogued 532. Meet at Oxford 542. Prorogued 543. Their Thanks to the
University ibid. Prorogued 545, 549. Meet 555. Vote a supply ibid. Prorogue^
and meet 563. Adjourn 564. Meet 566. Adjourn 568. Adjourn ibid. Prorogued 569.
Meet and Prorogued 574. Meet 576. Adjourned 577. Prorogued 580. They make an
address about English Manufactures 580. Prorogued 581. Adjourned 587. Meet 589.
Adjourned 590. Meet and prorogued 591. Meet 602. Prorogued ibid. Meet again
ibid. Parliament of Scotlaud 524, 526. Proceed against Nonconformists 545. Meet
at Edinburgh 574. Pass the Act for a Treaty of Union 577 Parliament in Ireland
545 Patrick Pursel Irish Maj. Genesis his treachery and cowardice 241 Pauw
Ambassador from Holland 227. Dies 324 Piercy James pretends to the Earldom of
Northumberland 590 Piercy Capt. Executed 578 Pembroke Siege 172 Pen Sea-Capt.
293. Sea-General 369 376 Pennington and Pym 36. Pym dies 56 Pen^e^^is-castle
111 Pendruddock's Insurrection, etc. 367. Tried and Beheaded 372 Perth in
Scotland five Articles 3 Petitions from Essex, Surrey, etc. for peace 172
Petition and Advice 393 Phanatick Plots 500, 512 Phelim O Neal Irish General 21
Phoenix lost 328. Regained 330 Philips, Young, Stubs, Baker, and two Gibs
Executed 513 Piedmont story of a Massacre 373 ^^ague in the Loyal-Irish
Provinces 242 (...) ships taken by Sir Richard Stainer 383 (...) tentiaries of
the Rumpin the Sound 462 (...) tentiaries return from Cologne 599 Plot
pretended against the Protector 358. Another started 403. vide Cavalier Plot in
Ireland 520. Plotters Executed 545 Plot in England 520. Plotters tried 521.
Executed ibid. More Plotters 549. Condemned and Executed 550 Pontefract-Castle
72. D^livered 131 Poland King his ill success 545. Polanders revolt 546, 549.
Make peace with the Tartars 568. The King resignes 571. Several pretend to the
Crown ibid. New King Elected 577. New dissentions there 590. King dies 596.
Defeats the Turks ibid. Popham Sea-General dies 303 Pope and King of France
quarrel 524. Agree 525. Popes Justice 571. Dies 577. A new one chosen 579, 596
Popish Priests Banished 578, 599. Orders against popish Priests ibid Porta
Ferina Fight 374 Porto Longone fight between the Dutch and Capt. Badily 328
Portsmouth taken 39 Portugueze murdered 522 Portugal Ambassador to the new
English States 277. Concludes a peace 332. Concludes a League ibid. His Brother
D^n Pontaleon Sa Beheaded, for what 361. That King dies 383 Portugal Match
declared by the King 497 Portugal routs the Spaniard 526. Victory 533, 546.
Invade Spain 547. At peace with Spain 570. Prince of Portugal made Regent 572
Potter Condemned 290 Powel and Laughorn saved ibid. Power only in the people
225 Poyntz Col. 89, 91, 139, 143. Poyer Col. shot to death 231 Prentices Tumult
568 Presbyterian Government established for three years 125. Ministers own not
the Parliament 255. Seized by the Council of State 290 Presbytery tending to an
establishment 439 Presbyterians endeavor a Toleration 511 Pride and Hewson,
and Sir Hardress Waller force the Houses 192 Private Bills passed by the King
509 Prizes taken from the Dutch 322 Proclamation of the King's Privy Council
slighted in Scotland 5, 7. Of the King for the Kings Judges to render
themselves 454 Of twenty miles to Rump Officers 511. Against Papists 565
Propositions to the King at Colbrook on his march to London 41. Made for trial
of the King by the Iuncto 194, 195. Protestants in Savoy 526 Pryn writes
agaidst Bishops and Ceremonies, put in the Pillory for it 2. Meets the Rump 420
Public Faith 37 Putten Van his fall 589
Q
Qualifications made by the Rump of all such to bold Offices 421 Quarter free
156 Quarrel, the state of it between the Scots and Cromwell 271 Queen Mother
Mary de Medicis coming to England taken for Ominous, why 9 Queen with the
Princess of Aurange for Holland carries the Crown-Iewels 27. Lands in
Burlington-Bay 42. Endangered by shot* proclaimed Traitor 44. Meets the King at
Edg^^ hill 43. Goes for security from Oxford to Exeter 57. From thence to
France 58 Queen Mother arri^^s (...) England 469. Departs. Returns 4^^. Returns
for France 539. Dies 573. Queen of Bohemia likewise dies* 504 Queen Catherine
^mbarkes from Lisbon 507. Arrives a^ ^^^^^mouth 508. At Hampton Court 509. To
White Hall ibid.
R
Ragland-Castle 109, 110, 111. Duke of Richmond with the King 132, 147
Rainsborough tur(...) of the Navy by the Seamen (...) at Doncaster 193 Ramsey
Col^ 42 Rea Lord defeat^^ (...) ^^otland 233 Re^^^ng besieged and rendered 43
(...) in Ireland* 20, to 25. The Rebels proclaimed Traitors 26 Recognition-Act
and expedient for it, the Army jar-with Richard 414 Red-house stormed 272
Remedies proper against late troubles 508 Remonstrance a second of the
Parliament, worse than the former 35 Armies villa^^^ Remonstrance first against
the King 185, 186. The Module of our ruin 136 Remonstrance of the Western
Scots 280 Remonstrants their folly 304 Repeal of Act against Bishops 501
Resolution of Parliament in answer to the Kings Declaration 51^ Restitution of
King and Kingdom 444 Revocation and Impropriation-Act in Scotland, original of
those troubles ^^4 Reynolds Commissary-General in ^reland, his actions 310
Reynolds Col. Knighted 373. Meets the Duke of York 397. Sent for by Cromwell
there upon, and cast away ibid. Reynoldson Lord Mayor refuses to proclaim the
Act against Kingly Government, fined, Imprisoned, and degraded 231 Richard
Protector 409. his advice and Counselors ibid. Proclaimed: a story of his
guards 413. Calls a Parliament ibid. Offered terms by the King, his suspense
417. Consents to a Commission and Proclamation to dissolve the Parliament 317.
Laid aside by the Army, in danger of arrest, and hides himself 418. Gives a
transcript of his debts; resolves and promises to acquiesce under the Rump
422 Richlieu intermeddles with the Scotch War 9 Riches Regiment of Horse mutiny
at Bury 438 Richmond Duke di^s 589 Riot at Lambeth-house; Ri^ers rescued 12, 13
Roberts Lord for the Parliament, Deputy of Ireland 573 De la Roche taken 5^^
Roch David defeated, vide Broughil ^^^ Rochester Earl at Ratisbone Diet in
Ger^^^ny 329 Rolf treacherously intends to murder (...) King 16^ Rosa
Canonized at Rome 57^ Ross in Ireland yielded by Luke Taaff ^^ Cromwell 2^^
Rothes Earl L. Commissioner in Scotland 5^^ Rous Francis Speaker to the little
Parl. 349 Rudyard Sir Benjamin a Patriot ^36 De Ruyter at mouth of Channel 326
Ruins of St. Paul's ^^4 Rump 419. Debar the secluded Me(...) Derivation of the
Rump (...) and Lambert fall out 428. Vote away Lambert's and eight more
Field-commission Officers ib. Outed by Lambert 429. Reseated 43(...) ter
company added to them 438. Arms defaced 446 Rupert Prince 40, 44. And
throughout the War -- Leaves Kingsale, and puts to Sea with a Fleet 254. Blockt
up at Lisbon 256, 267. His Fleet dispersed, and some taken 275. From Taulon to
Sea 289. Seizes Spanish ships, why 293. In France ^37. General at Sea 550.
Divides (...)yns again and fights 551 Russia Emperor 255. Ambassadors. Rycaut
Paul returns from Constantinople 520
S.
Sad condition of the Irish 333 Safety a Committee 429 Sales of the King's,
Queen's, Prince's* D^^ns and Chapters Lands and Houses 256. Of Kings Houses
agreed on, but avoided by Cromwell ^^^ Salisbury River begun to be made (...)
^^^ Sanzeime Battle 600 Salmasius his Roy^l defense 236 Salters-Hall
Commissioners for sale of prisoners Estates stopped 359 Sanderson Bishop dies 514
Saul Major Executed 278 Sandwich Earl keeps the Sea 528. Takes the Dutch
East-Indie-fleet 541. He is sent Ambassador into Spain 545. Arrives at Madrid
550. Sent to Portugal 569 Scalborough to the King by Brown Bushel 44. Yielded
to the Parliament 193 Savoy and Genoa at odds 547, 566, 590. Saxony Duke
installed Knight of the Garter by Proxey 580 Scilly Island rendered by Sir John
Greenvile 288, 289 Scot and Robinson sent to meet Genesis Monk 435 Scotch troubles
about English Liturgy and Book of Canons 3. Arm 1638. And desire the King of
France's assistance 9. Cunningly agree upon a Pacification; abuse the King, who
is betrayed by his Servants 10. War resumed, proclaimed Rebels, treated with
soon after 15. Peace ratified in Parliament ibid. Favor the Parliaments cause
35. Enter England with an Army for the Covenant 56. At Hereford 87. Iuggle with
and sell the King 120. Parliament dispute about the disposal of the King 115
Commissioners sense of the Parliaments Bills and Proposals. Presbyters murder
s^veral Scotch Gentlemen 164. Prepare a War under Hamilton 165, 166. Enter
England under Duke Hamilton 177. Defeated 178. Hamilton prisoner ibid. Scotland
detests the Murder of the King, and proclaims Charles the second at Edinburgh,
and expostulates with the Regicides at Westminster 232 Scots defeat a Royal
party in the North of Scotland 333. Send Commissioners to the King 233.
Defeated in Ulster in Ireland by Sir Charles Coot 247. They send Commissioners
to the King 257. Their Names. Except against Malignants: their other terms 257.
They endeavor to unite 274 Cavaliers admitted into Trust 282. Pass an Act of
Oblivion 290. Encamped in Torwood 292. Noblemen taken at Elliot in Scotland,
and sent Prisoners to the Tower: others of the Nobility submit 302. The reasons
304. Kirk reject the English Union 307. Deputies ordered to be chosen by the
Commissioners 310. The affairs of the Kingdom ibid. Several Scots, Earls and
Noblemen, taken after Worcester 298 New Great Seal 56. Great Seal broken 128
Sea Fight the first between us and the Dutch in the Downs, an account of it 315
to 320 Second Sea Fight between Sir Geo: Ayscue and De Ruyter at Plymouth 325
Third Sea Fight between Blake and De Wit in the North-Foreland 326, 327. Fourth
Sea Fight at Portland 335 Fifth Sea Fight at Leghorn, betwixt Captain Appleton
and Van Gallen 337 Sixth Sea Fight betwixt Genesis Monk, Dean, and Blake, and Van
Tromp, behind the Goodwyn-Sands 345 Seventh Sea Fight betwixt Genesis Monk and
Tromp 346 to 349 Seamen encouraged 534 Secluded Members restored and reseated
Sieges and Skirmishes in Ireland 274 Seldom John dies 366 Seneffe Battle 601
Serini beats the Turk 52. Is killed 533 Sexby Col. dies 398 Shaftsbury Earl
Lord Chancellor 588 Dr. Sheldon Archbishop of Canterbury 523 Sheriffs
discharged of expenses at Assizes 401 Ship Money voted illegal 17. The nature
of it 16, 17 Ships blown up near London Bridge 361 Shrewsbury 38, 39, 71
Sickness in London 539. Abates 544 Skippon Major General Articles for the
Infantry at Lestithiel 58 Skirmishes, Brill, Ast-ferry 64 Slanning Sir Nicholas
46 Slingsby Sir Henry decoyed 304. Tried and Beheaded 404 Smith Sir Jeremy
keeps the Mediterranean Seas 544 Soissons Count Ambassador hither 456 Sonds
Freeman kills his Brother, and is hanged 380 Southampton Earl 163 Spalding-Abby
fell, and killed 23 persons 380 Spaniard owns the English Commonwealth 278
Sprague Sir Edward sent into Flanders 569. Commands in the Streights 578.
Destroys the Algerines 581. Returns 583. Spoils the Dutch fishing 588 Stacy
Edmond Executed 404 States of England pretended declare the maintenance of Laws
227. Are guilty of the Irish Rebellion, with which they taxed the King 237.
Erect a new Council of State 283. Proclaim the King Traitor, and are in great
fear and despair at his entering England 294 Stamford Earl 42 Statues of the
late King and King James pulled down, and the Inscription writ under that at
Old Exchange 269 Steel Recorder of London refuses to be Knighted by Oliver
357. Made Lord-Chancellor of Ireland 366. Made Lord Chief-Baron of England 373
Stawel Sir John ordered for Trial 229. At High Court of Justice 279
Sterling-Castle taken 361 Sterry Oliver's Chaplain, his Blasphemy 409 Strafford
Earl Commander in chief against the Scots 13. Accused to the Parliament 15. To
the Black-rod and Tower 16. Trial 18. His willing resignation; his attainder
ibid. And death 19 St. Germain, a Proclamation against him 602 St. John and
Strickland Ambassadors to the Dutch, their business and departure 285, 286,
287. St. John 357. Stickles in the Council of State for terms with the King 440
Stratton Baron Lord Hopton dies 328 Straughan Col. 280 Stroker 540 Stuart Lord
John killed 57. With Sir John Smith Col. Scot and Sandys, and Colonel Manning
ibid. Stuart Lord Bernard slain 89 Submission of the Irish 324 Sunderland Earl
slain 51 Summons for persons of Integrity to take upon them the Government by
Council of state 345 Sums of Money raised by the Parliament Supplies to Jamaica
377 Surrenders several 91. As Basing, Tiverton, Exeter, Sheford 91, 92
Surrenders in Ireland 270 Surinam 557 Surrey Petitioners assaulted 172 Sweden
Queen supplies Montross 255. Complies with our States 358. Receives Whitlock
ibid. Gives our Sovereign an interview 376 Sweden King invades Poland 373
Swedes stand firm for England 549. Besiege Bremen 559. Mediations excepted 560.
Ambassador dies in London 566. Makes peace with the Dutch 567. King presented
with the Garter 572. Installed by Proxy 580. Ioyn with the French 597 Sydenham
Major slain at Linlithgow 288 Syndercomb's Plot and death 384, 385.
T
Tabaco taken by the English 591 Tables erected in Scotland 7 Tadcaster 42
Taffalette routed and slain 579. Moors beaten 581. Earl of Middleton Governor,
and makes peace with the Moors 594 Taaff Lord sent against Cromwell 246 Taaff
Luke Major General 248 Tangier 504. Jews expelled 525. Lord Bellasis Governor
there 537. Moors beaten there 573 Tartar taken in Germany 526 Tailor the Kings
Resident with the Emperor 329 Taxes, a mark on them 331 Teviot Earl killed 527
Temple Sir William concludes ^ League of Maritime affairs with the Dutch 566.
Extraordinary Ambassador in Holland 568 Thurlo Secretary to Oliver 357 Theater
at Oxford finished 573 Tickle Captain Executed for treasonable design of
yielding Kilkenny 250 Tiddiman assails at Bergen 541 Timptallon-castle yielded
283 Tinmouth-castle by Lilburn for the King 179 Tomkins and Challoner Executed
47 Tower-street Powder-blow 25^ Traquair Earl Kings Commiss^in Scotland 10
Treaty personal voted 180. Sir John Hippesly and Mr. Bulkly sent to the King a
prisoner in Carrisbrook-castle 181. Begun and managed 183. So as ended 187. All
that subscribed it voted by the Iuncto remaining to be incapable of bearing
Offices 193 Treavor Sir John made Secretary 569 Treavors Col. sides with the
Marq. of Ormond engaged at the Siege of Londonderry; intercepts Arms going
from Monk to O Neal 240 Trial of the Kings Judges 469 Trump Van defeats Blake
in the Downs 330 in triumph to Guernsey and Rochel 331 returns 335. Is killed
347. Buried, and his Elegy 349 Tumults in Endinburg about the Common Prayer 5.
The Bishop of that City in danger of life ib. Excused, but recommended in
London and at White-hall-gates 25. Increase, and drive away the Court 26.
Against the Parliament 138 to 140 Tumults in London against Army and Rump 433
Tunbridge and Red-hill design 424 Turner tried and hanged 521 Turk besieges
New-hausel 525. Surrendered 526. Defeated 527. Makes peace with the Emperor
533. His Ambassadors Secretary turns Christian 548 Tuscany Duke comes into
England 569. Gives the King two Galleys 575
V
Vane Sir Henry tried, beheaded 510, 511 Vavasor Sir William goes beyond Sea
after Marston-fight 61 Varny Sir Edward slain at Drogheda 244 Vaughan Sir Will.
slain at Baggot Rath 242 Vaughan Sir John Lord Chief-Iustice 568 Ven a Colonel
at Windsor 39 Venables General 369 St. Venant taken 396 Venetian Ambassador in
England 569 Venner's Insurrection, and Trial, and Execution 505, 510, 511
Vernon Sir Ralph 367 Vicariat of the Empire 397 Vieuville a French Marquess
slain 50
These are ye chief of them that came to David to Ziklag, and they were among
ye mighty men helpers of the War. Cro^ 1.12.2



