THE Paradoxal DISCOURSES OF F. M. Van HELMONT, Concerning the Macrocosm AND
MICROCOSM, OR THE Greater and Lesser World, And their Union.

Set down in WRITING by J. B. and now Published.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. and Freeman Collins, for Robert Kettlewel, at the
Hand and Scepter near S. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. 1685.

THE PREFACE TO THE Courteous READER.
I Here present thee with the seeming Paradoxal Discourses of B. V. Helmont,
which he discoursed with me, and were by his permission by me penned and now
Published.

And seeing that not only the Writings of his Father, but himself also, by
reason of his Knowledge, are highly and worthily esteemed of throughout all
Europe, by many knowing persons; I and my Companion passing through Holland,
heard of his being here in England, whereupon we hastened thither, and
immediately upon our arrival, we made it our business to obtain his
acquaintance, and information in some particulars, where opportunity and his
inclination toward us, so far favored us, that by his means we got a Lodging
in the same House with him; where by reflecting upon the palpable
demonstrations he gave of what he said, we took the liberty to ask of him;
whence it was, that so many contrary Opinions concerning Philosophy had their
Rise in the World?

Whereunto he returned this Parabolical Answer, by way of Question: Suppose,
said he, That a Man of extraordinary Wisdom and Understanding, had time out of
mind enjoyed a glorious Transparent Globe of Stone, all full of Life, called
Nosce le ipsum, comprehending the whole Man both Outward and Inward, being the
Little World, and consequently also the whole Great World; having them thus
both together, and represented in one and the same subject, which he having
offered to Men for their Information and Instruction in Wisdom, he upon their
neglect and contempt of it, broke it into 24^ pieces; which a Woman out of pity
received into her lap, forasmuch as she knew that there was yet Life in them,
and that by being united, they would come to Life again as before; whereupon
she searched every where throughout the World, for such Wise Men, who by a due
joining of the said parts, were able to restore its whole former life; in which
search she indeed met with many serious and likely persons, but yet who as to
the main business she came about, could return her nothing but bare words, they
never having operatively tried or experienced how to perform the same, and
thereupon fell into a necessity of contending about words amongst themselves,
from whence they fought stoutly with their Pens and Tongues against one
another, notwithstanding that all of them owned the same common name of
Philosophers. And if so, can you imagine now that these men without experience
could ever be able to accomplish and satisfy the Desire of this seeking Woman?

Whereunto when we had replied, that there was no doubt to be made of it, he
added, Well then, you have your Query answered.

But we enquiring further, what then was to be done in this case, and how we
might with certainty attain to Truth? he returned us this answer: That we must
imitate a wise Judge, who (in a matter that comes to be tried before him) from
the duly agreeing Depositions of several Witnesses, having an actual and
experimental knowledge of the thing, does orderly put together that Judgment,
which they by their infallible Evidences do in parcels bring to him, and having
made a whole of those parts, does afterward pronounce the same. In the mean
time wholly rejecting the Depositions of false Witnesses, as also of those who
have nothing else to say or depose, but I believe it, I think it, I suppose or
take it to be so, etc. as not at all serving his purpose.

Now as it cannot be, that when the Depositions of true and legal Witnesses, do
all justly and exactly agree together, the Judgment formed and deduced
therefrom should be opposed or gainsaid by any man of Understanding; even so
also, and much less can this natural union or agreement be gainsaid, as it is
evident to the eye, that the broken parts of a stone, or any slit pieces of
wood do so neatly and exactly suit to the parts from whence they were
immediately severed, that nothing can with any pretense or ground of reason be
objected against it.

This, said we, cannot be gainsaid; but how might we come to this Skill of
setting particulars thus in order, except that he himself would be pleased with
his directions to lend a helping-hand to us in this matter?

Whereupon he declared himself not unwilling to comply with our desires, and
ready to do what he could presently and out of hand in this matter, that so at
least by his beginning and undertaking of it, he might give others an occasion
of bettering and mending his Essay toward it. But that he did not use to write
himself, yea, that very rarely he took time to read over his own Thoughts, by
discourse communicated and writ down by others: And besides, had never yet met
with any man that truly and thoroughly understood the meaning of his Mind, and
who consequently could give a full and proper expression to it.

But notwithstanding these difficulties alleged by him, and that we from the
Conversation we for some time had with him, had observed that he made use of an
ancient Philosophical way of discoursing, propounding all his Matters in
Queries, and that very dexstrously; insomuch that when any one according to his
own pleasure, thinks of something in his mind, be it what it will, he by means
of his Queries, concerning the circumstances of the thing, all depending upon
one another as the links of a chain, and the Answers returned to his Questions,
would infallibly find out and name the thing, the party had concealed in his
mind and thought of. And when any Question is asked, he sometimes instead of an
Answer, divides the same into many parts, and propounds the^ as so many several
Questions to the Demander, and so makes him return an answer to the Query
himself had propounded. By which instances he demonstrates that Truth is clear
and simple, and that all things in nature belong to and agree with one another.

Which proceeding of his, certainly is a very peaceable and satisfactory way of
information; and from whence no quarrels, contests or opposition can arise;
though at the first it seemed strange and difficult to us, who were not
accustomed to it. Yet notwithstanding, my forementioned Companion offered
himself to set down his Discourses in Latin, according to his utmost
possibility: but after he had finished one sheet, he was seized of a Distemper
(the Air of this Country not agreeing with him) and so was forced to desist;
whereupon then I undertook to put it in High Dutch.

Wherefore, kind Reader, in case any thing in this Discourse may chance (as it
is not unlikely) to seem strange unto thee* or not in the usual School-dress,
or else not sufficiently explained and enlarged upon; in the first place know,
that the Author of it is far from the humor of pressing his Sentiments upon
any one. And again, that herein we have chosen rather to follow the free Order
of Nature, and the manner in which it came from the Author in Discourse, than
to follow School-inventions. And in the last place, the Reader may be pleased
to consider, that in case this Work should have been set down fully and at
large, the few leaves of this Book would not have been able to contain it, but
would have made a great, yea, rather many great Volumes, Nature her self being
so great a Book as she is.

But yet if in one or the other ^^ace of this Treatise, some further
Information may seem to be wanting, the same may be met with in other parts of
it, where, upon occasion, the same thing is again mentioned, for to avoid all
superfluity of words: forasmuch as in this Discourse, the End (conformably to
Nature) is contained in the Beginning, and the Beginning in the End. And
therefore neither can any due or right Judgment be passed concerning it, from
any one particular passage therein, nor indeed without a considerative and
oft-repeated reading over of the whole Book.

Nor that I would go about to deny but that some faults may be here found,
properly to be attributed to my self, as well for want of skill and capacity
with reference to the Language, I not being a German born; as especially by
reason of the weightiness of the things themselves; which therefore I doubt not
but will be easily pardoned me. Not to mention now the haste in which I did it,
by reason of my unexpected departure out of the Land, after I had undertaken it.

Moreover, seeing that for want of another, this Treatise has been now
Translated into English by a Hollander, it is not improbable but upon this
account also* some failures may have slipped in, which the Reader as he meets
with them, is desired favorably to pass by.

And because we had a great desire that he would be pleased to comply with our
desire, of having his Picture engraven in Copper printed in the front of this
Book, to the end that a stop might be put to the cheats of many, who make use
of his Name to deceive people, and their fraud detected.

Forasmuch as the same was done, to my knowledge, by a certain person at Paris
about five years since, who pretended to great and extraordinary Cares, and at
first by this means got great sums of money; but afterward was fain to slip
away in secret; whereas it is notorious that Van Helmont never received either
money or moneys worth for the like or any other testifications of his
Friendship.

In like manner we have heard of another here in London, a Lieutenant Colonel,
who pretended to have married his Sister, and that by this means he had
obtained many rare and excellent Medicines; but when Prince Rupert in presence
of the said Van Helmont, did send for this Lieutenant Colonel to come to him
and speak with his Brother-in-Law, he excused himself, and withal declared,
that what was reported of him was a mistake, and that it was not his Sister,
but a Servant of the House whom he had married. Wherefore we supposed that his
Effigies placed before the Book, might prevent such an abuse for the future;
but we found he was not resolved to gratify this our request at present; but
upon our importunate instance, he at last consented to another Request of ours,
viz. (to the end that many ignorant persons, who are very liable to mistake,
might be rowsed out of their dream) that for a testimony of his outward manner
of Life, the Patent of Honor freely given and granted unto him, by the
Emperor and the Roman Empire, should be printed at the end of this Book.

And forasmuch as all this is now published with the will and consent of the
Author, he expects that the generous and truth-loving Reader will be pleased
well to consider what is here set down, according to the circumstances
beforementioned; and so pass an impartial Judgment upon all; in the same
manner as the said Author promises, that whenever any in kind love shall
better inform him, to take and receive the same with a like affection, to the
end that Truth, which for so long a time has been strange and unknown to the
greatest part of Europe, may at length be manifested, and the Public Good
promoted.

Dat. Land. October. 5, 1684. J. B.

A Low Dutch HYMN of ADAM BOREEL, presented by him to the Author of this BOOK,
who had it translated into English.
I.
O Heavenly Light! my Spirit to Thee draw,
With powerful touch my Senses smite;
Thine Arrows of Love into me thraw
With flaming dart
Deep wound my Heart,
And wounded, seize for ever as thy Right.
II.
O sweetest sweet! descend into my Soul
And sink into its lowest Abyss,
That all false Sweets Thou may control,
Or rather kill
So that Thy Will
Alone may be my Pleasure and my Bliss.
III.
Do thou my Faculties all captivate
Unto thy self with strongest tie
My Will entirely regulate:
Make me Thy Slave,
Naught else I crave;
For this I know is perfect Liberty.
IV.
Thou art a Life the sweetest of all Lives,
Naught sweeter can thy Creature taste:
It Is this alone the Soul revives.
Be thou not here,
All other cheer
Will turn to dull satiety at last.
V.
O limpid Fountain of all virtuous Lear!
O Wellspring of true Joy and Mirth!
The root of all Contentments dear!
O endless Good!
Break like a flood
Into my Soul, and water my dry Earth.
VI.
That by this Mighty Power I being rest
Of every thing that is not ONE,
To Thee alone I may be left
By a firm Will
Fixed to thee still,
And inwardly united into one.
VII.
And so let all my Essence, I Thee pray,
Be wholly filled with Thy dear Son,
That thou thy splendor may display
With blissful Rays
In these hid ways
Wherein Gods Nature by frail Man is won.
VIII.
For joined thus to Thee by the sole aid
And working (whilst all silent stands
In mine own Soul, nor ought's assayed
From self-desire)
I Am made entire
An Instrument fit for thy glorious Hands.
IX.
And thus henceforwards shall all Workings cease,
Vnless't be those Thou do excite
To perfect that Sabbatick Peace
Which does arise
When self-will dies,
And the new Creature is restored quite.
X.
And so shall I with all thy Children dear,
While naught debars Thy Workings free,
Be closely joined in union near;
Nay with thy Son
Shall I be one
And with thine own adored Deity.
XI.
So that at last I being quite released
From this strait-lac'd Egoity,
My Soul will vastly be increased
Into that ALL
Which ONE we call,
And One in it self alone does all imply.
XII.
Here Is Rest, here is Peace, here is Joy and holy Love,
The Heaven's here of true Content,
For those that hither sincerely move,
Here Is the true Light
Of Wisdom bright,
And Prudence pure with no self-seeking mient.
XIII.
Here Spirit, Soul, and cleansed Body may
Bathe in this Fountain of true Bliss
Of Pleasures that will n'ere decay,
All joyful Sights
And hid Delights;
The sense of these renewed here daily is.
XIV.
Come therefore* come, and take an higher flight,
Things perishing leave here below,
Mount up with winged Soul and Spright,
Quick let us be gone
To him that is One,
But in this one to us can all things show.
XV.
Thus shall you be united with that ONE,
That ONE where is no Duality;
For from this perfect GOOD alone
Ever does spring
Each pleasant thing
The hungry Soul to feed and satisfy.
XVI.
Wherefore, O man! consider well what is said,
To what is best thy Soul incline,
And leave off every evil trade:
Do not despise
What I advise,
Finish thy Work before the Sun decline.
Concerning the MACROCOSME: OR, Great World.
CHAP. I.
Concerning the Lights of Heaven.
Quest. 1. HOw are we to consider the Lights of Heaven?

Respond. The Lights of Heaven are to be considered in a twofold respect: for
there are some warm Lights, and some cool or refrigerating Lights; both which
may be united, because they are of kin together, and symbolize with each other.

2. Q. Which are those you call warm Lights?

R. The warm Lights are those that are Male or Day-lights.

3. Q. Which are the Cool Lights?

R. Those which in opposition to the former may be termed Female or
Night-lights.

4 Q. How can we know that the warm Lights are Male or Day-light^^*

R. Because the Sun which is the ^arm Male Daylight does govern or rule by
Day, and the Day is more noble than the Night.

5 Q. Why are the cool Lights Female, or Night-lights?

R. Because the Moon and Stars which are cool Night-lights, rule in the night;
and for that the Night is the Days Wife.

6 Q. Must we then consider the Sun in opposition to the Moon and Stars, as the
Male or Husband?

R. Yes, forasmuch as we perceive that part of the Moons light proceeds from
the Sun, even as the Woman from the Man, Genesis 2. 22.

7 Q. When now the Light of the Sun which is warm, comes into the Moon which is
cold, what disposition or property is produced from this meeting or union.

R. Cold and Frost.

8 Q. How can this be made out?

R. This may be demonstrated several ways, both from Natural and Mechanical
Experiments.

9 Q. How can this be made out from Nature?

R. We perceive in the Summer, that when for some time together a great heat
has been in the air, and a cool air follows upon it, the drops of rain become
changed into cold Hailstones; by which means the former heat cease, and a
cool air succeeds.

10 Q. How may the same be demonstated Mechannically?

R. First, When the warm Light of the Sun, and the cool light of the Moon (both
which are united in the Moon) are caught and concentred by means of a large
burning-glass; the said united Rays produce cold, according to what several
curious persons, from their own experience have attested: and even Rusticks
know as much, for they will not lie down to sleep in the Moon shine but in the
shade, because they know by experience that the Rays of the Moon are cold.
Secondly, The same is likewise demonstrated by a peculiar Instrument made for
this purpose, invented by Basilius Title, Governor of the Electoral Castle of
Pleissenburg, with which Instrument, by means of a cool air which is drawn out
of a Cellar, through Leather Pipes into a Copper vessel, and another air heated
over the fire in a second vessel, being both of them in due manner through
Copper Cocks blown into a third vessel that stands in water, he produces Snow.
Several other experiments might be here alleged for confirmation of this, as
well from Nature as from Art, by means of Salts and Sulphars, warm and cool
things, which we on purpose pass by, as being commonly known.

11 Q. What is properly Heat and Cold?

R. Heat as well as Cold is not a bare accident, but a right true spiritual
Essence or Being.

12 Q. How can it be made out that Heat is a Being?

R. That Heat is a real Being, may be perceived by this instance; when a
Wain-load of wood of four or five thousand weight is burnt and reduced to
ashes, (which wood is for the most part, a birth or product of the Sun, as is
evident from its burning; and forasmuch also as by its warmth, it makes the
Vegetables of the earth to grow, like the Sun which is the Father of all
Sublunary things) which ashes do not amount to above ten or twelve pound in
quantity. In these ashes there remains a fix Salt, which before was a
Sulphurious Oil, but is now precipitated by Heat, and may be reduced again into
a natural Volatile Salt, and this in the way of Nature by means of the Air. The
greatest part of the said Sulphurous Oil would have gone away, in case the wood
had been burnt in the open Air, with a slow and soft fire: but when it is burnt
by a quick and strong fire of Reverberation, the said Sulphurous Nature becomes
precipitated into Salt, through the violence of the fire. A small part of the
said word is changed into a Combustible soot so that all the remaining quantity
of so many thousand pounds, was all turned to heat. Now this Heat, which at
first was a Spirit, and afterward became a Body, viz Wood, and now again is
changed into a Spiritual Being, can pierce through the closest bodies, even
through the hardst Stones and Metals, (forasmuch as from it they derive their
original) and dwell only in those bodies that stand in need of it, for their
sustenance, and makes the same more powerful and full of virtue, as also more
ponderous: as we may perceive, forasmuch as men and all other Creatures are fed
and maintained by the Heat of the Sun; for a man cannot eat so much in the
Summer, as he can in Winter. And the people that live in hot Countries, as well
as the Beasts, do not stand in need of so much food, as those of Cold
Countries, and yet they are more lively, vigorous and strong than these. So
likewise we observe, that the Fruits, Wood, and other Vegetables which grow in
hot Countries, are more virtuous, vigorous, ponderous and balsamic, because
they enjoy more of the Sun than those of other Countries.

The same is likewise further evidenced from hence; for that we find by
experience, that when the water of the Thames is carried to the East Indies,
when the ship in which it is comes under the Equator, where the power of the
Sun is most intense, the water becomes thick, tough and clammy; but as soon as
it is brought again to these parts, it becomes thin again, and takes fire like
Brandy. From whence is plainly seen, that the fiery virtue of the Sun is
entered into the said water, and corporified in the same.

The same effect may likewise be produced by the Sun or common fire in these
parts: for if we take clear rainwater, and put it into a well closed glass,
and set it for a long time in the Sun, or to digest in warm water, it will
putrify and praecipitate, and the water when distilled will yield an Oil.

Thus in like manner in Holland, when the Sun shines into the water, the faeces
are praecipitated, of which Turff are made, which in those parts they make use
of for their common firing.

It is likewise observed, that where fish ponds lie exposed to the Sun, that
the fish in them are much greater, and multiply more abundantly than in those
that are shaded from it.

We see also in the Country about Boisleduc, and other places besides, where
the Earth is not deep, nor far from the Quick-sand, that when it rains, and the
rainwater by reason of the nearness of the Quick-sand, cannot sink deep in the
Earth, the water stands in pools; and when the Sun by shining into the same,
does putrify and dry it up, some brown faeces are found upon the white sand;
and when this has been oftentimes repeated, a sulphurous Earth is produced
which burns like Brimstone.

In the same Countries when the Rainwater falls on a place, which is not above
a foot or two above the Quick-sand, so as the said brown Sulphur can reach the
lower water, which is a Sand-making water; which water containing all seeds,
the said Sulphur takes to it self from thence the seed of Iron, and so between
this Brimstone and the sand-making water, Iron-oare is produced; for that we
see that in such places, whole great plates of such Iron-oare, two fingers
thick have been sound under the grass.

In the same Countries upon the Moor called the Peel, which is all Turff and
nine miles over, I have met with people of an hundred years of age, who
themselves had dug up Turff there twenty foot deep, who showed me from place
to place, where formerly forty, fifty, sixty and seventy years agone they had
dug up Turff, which were by degrees filled up again as before. And at the
bottom of these pits from whence the Turff is dug, a yellow clay is found,
of which the Potters make their earthen ware.

Now from all these instances we may undeniably conclude, that the living and
vivifying heat of the Sun, is in it self a true Spiritual Essence; and that out
of the same as from their Universal Father, all real tangible bodies are
produced. And forasmuch as we see, that by means of the swift motion of a
little common fire, so vast a quantity of combustible matter is reduced into a
Spiritual Being, as into Fire or Heat: and also that afterward, (as but now
was mentioned) this invisible Being is brought to a Body again, it is well
worth our consideration, what a vast quantity of Matter and Corporeal
substance, the Sun (who as the Father, source and original of all fire, does by
the Central effusion of his Rays, feed and maintain all comprehensible
tangible Beings of this world, whether they be above or below) does daily and
without ceasing produce and work out, or give forth from himself, as shall be
more amply evidenced in what follows, when of all the several parts we shall
have made a whole, and showed how all, and every comprehensible Body works
together in order to one only Being.

13 Q. It is before mentioned, that the Light or Heat of the Sun, which was
called the Light of the day, is the Male or Father of all comprehensible
Beings, and so consequently must be a true Spiritual Being in it self: now the
Query is, how we are to understand, that the Cooling and refrigerating power of
the Moon (which is the Night light) and the Stars, is the Mother of all
comprehensible Beings, and likewise in it self a true Spiritual Being?

R. We have before said, that the Sun, as the Father, generates and produces
an essential Birth in the water, forasmuch as in the same, the Heat of the Sun
becomes corporified, from whence afterward Stones, Metals, Trees, Herbs and
Animals are brought forth. Now it is notorious, that no Birth can be produced
without the Union of Father and Mother: Now then if Father and Mother must be
united, that so from their union, a Birth, as a third thing, may be accordingly
brought forth, it is necessary that they, viz. the Male or Father, and the
Female or Mother, must be of kin and symbolize with each other: forasmuch as
the Birth which proceeds from them both, must be completely, and in all its
parts, partaker of both their Natures and Essences, without which it cannot be
a true and perfect Birth.

Now this Union of Father and Mother, in order to a Birth, can by no means be
performed in and according to the body as Body, (yet not for the reason which
our Modern Philosophers assign, who suppose that all bodies, as such, and in
themselves, are devoid of all life, and can never be made partakers of the
same) but in and according to the Spirit, of which the body is made, and does
consist, and into which, after it has attained its perfection, it must with
improvement and advance be again reduced. For a Body, when considered and
looked upon as a dead and wholly lifeless thing, and as being an Aggregate
only of corporeal parts, put together corporeally, may touch another Body, but
cannot be united with it, though its parts were brought to the utmost smalness
imaginable: for that Union is to be performed in unity and indivisibility, that
is to say, in spirituality and indefinitness, which has made the Body, and
cannot be attributed to a Body as a Body.

To which we may superadde this, that no Union can be performed, unless that
the things to be united, do through and through penetrate or pierce one
another. Now it is notorious, that sensible and comprehensible Bodies cannot so
intimately pervade and pierce one another, but can only outwardly touch, and
be contiguous. It follows therefore, that all Union is to be performed in and
according to the Spirit, and by no means in and according to the Body, as being
that which is not susceptive of inward and penetrating Union, except it be
first reduced to a kind of spiritual body.

And such a spiritual, and not corporeal Being, must we suppose the coolness of
the Moon to be, by means of the spiritual coalition and commixture of which,
with the spiritual warmth of the Sun, all comprehensible Beings are produced,
and in due time again reduced into Spirit.

14 Q. How is this Union of Father and Mother (the Sun and Moon) performed, and
how is the said Birth brought forth by and from them?

R. A Birth cannot be without a preceding Impregnation, neither can this
Impregnation be without two, viz. Father and Mother. For according to the
common and usual course of Nature, the Father cannot impregnate himself, nor
the Mother her self, neither can the Mother impregnate the Father; so then it
only remains, that the Father must impregnate the Mother.

Now if this Impregnation is to be performed, (which is nothing else but the
spiritual Union of both their spiritual Natures and Essences, in order to the
birth of a third Being or Body which resembles them) they the Parents must
needs (according to Nature) be of the same specifical nature, or of kin and
symbolize together, so as the Father must be partaker of the Mother's, and the
Mother of the Father's nature. Now forasmuch as naturally they are of kin, and
both of them work together in one, in order to the bringing forth of one only
third Being; it must needs follow, that before the said Impregnation, they both
proceeded from the same Unity, and were once united together; and that this
Union of both was in the man, as he that has the pre-eminence above his Wife,
and does not come from the woman, but the woman from the man: as shall be shown
hereafter, when we shall in particular treat of Man.

From whence then it is evident, that the Mother (the Moon) must of necessity
lie hid in the Father (the Sun) and be one with the same; and that in a far
more high and noble degree than she is in her self, viz. according to the
nature and property of the Father, viz. the Sun.

Forasmuch then as we may suppose it evident from what has been said, that the
Sun impregnates the Moon, and that he dwells in her; and not that the Moon
impregnates the Sun, or that she should dwell in him. Neither can it in like
manner be demonstrated, that as the Sun (which is a Fire, and the Daylight)
becomes corporified in the Water, (which is an out-working and out-birth of the
Night-light, viz. the Moon and Stars) so the Moon and Stars cannot become
corporeal in the Sun, which (if it were so) would cause a great confusion in
Nature.

15 Q. What kind of Essence or Being is that, which the Night-lights, the Moon
and Stars (after that they are impregnated by the Sun their Male) do work out
and bring forth?

R. The Night-light, viz. the Moon and Stars, do by day, with great desire and
longing, draw in, for their life, increase, and melioration, the Sun, as the
Daylight. Now every Star, as well as the Moon, have each of them their own
distinct substantial Life, Essence, and Nature, and every one of them draws in
the power of the Sun, according to the kind and property of their own Essence,
and in it self changes the same into its own property; and afterward by night
gives forth again in part this attracted virtue of the Sun, together with some
part of its own Essence, viz. the Night. And thus the out-birth, or working and
efflux of the Stars downwards into the Moon, as the Center of the Night-light,
happens according to the kind and property of the distinct Essence of each
Star. And in this manner the universal distinct efflux or out-birth of all and
every Star, becomes concentred in the Moon, into an upper ethereal water,
which in comparison of the lower and grosser, is a spiritual water; which also
is cool and more subtle than that in and upon which the Birds fly, ( viz. the
Air) even as the Fish swim in the lower grosser waters; which last water is
made or produced under the Quick-sand in the Center of the Earth: concerning
which, we shall speak more, when we come to treat of a Vacuum, improperly so
called.

This foresaid living essential virtue of all and every Star, which at first
proceeded from the Sun (in the which they, in and with the Moon, as an Army
under their General, were all hid) as their Seed, which was sowed above in the
Heavens; these virtues of the Stars, I say, after that by their entering into
the Moon they are united and concentred in the same, (as the universal
Night-light) do work and bring forth out, off, or from themselves (by means of
an universal cooperation of all and every one) these lower waters; which
forasmuch as they be the universal common effect and outworking of all and
every Star, it follows that every part of the same, even the very least and
most imperceptible drop, must comprehend and contain in it self the innumerable
multiplicity of powers, essences, and out-births of all and every Star; that
is, of all together, and each in particular: all which are comprehended
together in one only indivisible Being, which is the very body and essential
out-birth of the Stars, who therein have conjoined themselves into a body.

And as the outward water is produced out of the universal Night-light ( viz.
the cooling refrigerating virtue) which is a spiritual Essence; so can likewise
this coolness (as being the Spirit of this water-body) pierce through the said
water, and all bodies proceeding from the same, nourish, support and work in
them, altogether in the same manner as the heat of the Sun goes through all
Bodies.

From hence therefore we may plainly see and acknowledge, that as the Out-birth
of the Sun in these lower waters (as beforementioned) is an Oil, Balsome, and
sulphurous Essence, into which the heat or light of the Sun is changed in the
water; so likewise the Out-working or Out-birth of the Moon and Stars is this
lower and material water, which is without form, and therefore susceptive of
all, as being the Mother of all sublunary Creatures, that are produced from the
spiritual Union of all Stars and the Moon: and that the coolness of the
Night-lights is as well a true spiritual Being, from whence all sublunary
Creatures do in part receive their support and nourishment, as the heat of the
Sun.

16 Q. According to what has been said hitherto, does it not appear, as if (in
the Out-working, as well of the Sun, when he brings forth out of himself the
Moon and Stars; as well as of the Moon and Stars, in their producing the lower
material water) all and every part of the Out-birth (as the circumference) did
perfectly contain in it self the whole and the center, which at this rate seems
to run out into a kind of infinity?

R. It is so indeed, and may be clearly enough demonstrated by an example from
Quicksilver, which is like a Looking-glass, being a round or globular metalline
water. If we take a quantity of this Mercury and lay it in some place under the
open Heaven, we can see the whole Horizon with all its parts or objects very
plainly represented in the same; and when this Mercury is reduced into
sublimate, and by means of sublimation divided into an innumerable multiplicity
of little globular bodies, (which by reason of their smalness, must be
distinguished by a Microscope) we shall find that the whole Horizon (as was
said before) will appear in every one of them altogether in the same manner as
they appeared in the said greater quantity of Quicksilver. And in case the said
division should be yet further carried on into more minute parts than these of
the sublimate, yet the same Phenomenon would still appear in them also.

17 Q. From what has been said, it is evident, that as well the spiritual
life, and the spiritual living operation of the Sun, as of the Moon and Stars,
are in themselves a true spiritual Essence, and can, by means of an
Out-working, be reduced to a true essential comprehensible body, which then is
a true Out-birth of their spiritual contexture joined together in one united
Seed. Now it is further queried, whether the Sun, as well as the Moon and
Stars, do grow less, or are diminished by parting with that which they
continually give forth from themselves, as their Out-working or Out-birth, and
so finally may be brought to nothing? Or whether they receive again what they
give out from other Heavens, and consequently may continue the same without any
change in their own Beings?

R. Neither of these can be admitted: for if the first should be allowed, viz.
that they should still give forth before they had attained to their due
perfection, then by means of this their giving forth the heavenly Lights, would
at last be brought to nothing; and this World, on the contrary, would grow to
an immense, confused, and monstrous bigness; which would be contrary to Nature,
who (as was said before) conducts all things from an Unity into an innumerable
and incomprehensible multiplication or increase and melioration: whereas in
this case the quite contrary would happen, because all particular Out-workings
would go to nothing and perish, and all of them (without the glorification and
melioration of all and every natural Essence or being) be reduced into an
unripe, unseasonable, and confused Mass, like an Abortion. And in case we
should admit of the other Hypothesis, then by reason of this neverceasing and
ever-renewed Influx, this World, with all its parts and members, would never
arise to its destinated and appointed age, perfection, and glorification,
because still new Essences and Bodies would be produced; by which means the
bulk or mass of matter would be continually increased, and at last mount to
such an height, that it would reach beyond Sun, Moon, and Stars, and swallow up
the same in it self, from whence necessarily a total confusion would
overspread Nature.

18 Q. Forasmuch then as neither of these Hypotheses can stand, as drawing
impossibilities after them, and that this World and all Beings of the same, did
receive a beginning from their Creator, from a Being that never had a
beginning, and therefore can have no end, who placed and bounded them in a
measured and exactly-determined time, in which they must work out themselves to
their due perfection and glorification in all parts; what way or means is then
left by which the heavenly Lights may so work out themselves, in their several
set-times, in a right beautiful order and harmony, that without losing their
own proper Beings, and without hindering the due perfection of Nature, every one
of them, according to their measure, might work together, to the glorification
as well of themselves, as of this lower World?

R. This way is no other, nor can there be any other than that which is
represented by Jacob's Ladder: for even as upon the same the Angels of God
ascended and descended, so likewise the essential living Powers, or spiritual
Bodies of the heavenly Lights, do continually descend from above through the
ethereal Air to this lower World, as from the head to the feet; and afterward,
when they have finished their Out-working there to their own improvement and
melioration, they mount upwards again from below to the head, for to be united
again with the same, and by means of the said Union, to be more and more
advanced, bettered, and glorified; until after the consummation of the
destinated and set-time, all the particular imperfect parts and beings may
gradually be conducted to obtain their perfection. And this Ascension and
Descension of the heavenly Powers, and the continual melioration and
glorification of the same, which depend thereon, and proceed from thence,
endures and continues still without intermission, and must needs do so.

Now Descension and Ascension is performed with a twofold difference, viz. (as
is forementioned) according to Day and Night, Sun, Moon, and Stars, or a male
and female property; and that in all and every Creature after one and the same
manner: as shall be declared more amply hereafter, when we shall come to speak
of Man and his Revolution, and how the same is likewise done in his body.

The descension of the Sun, as the male, is chiefly in the daytime; and that
of the Moon and Stars, as the female-part, mostly by night. The Sun, by his
descension or influence, generates a fire in the Creatures, which in Man is to
be likened to his blood; but the influential descent of the Moon and Stars,
generates a water: both of which are driven about with the self-same
circulation in Man, the Microcosm, as they are in the Macrocosm or greater
World.

19 Q. It is evident then that there must be a never-ceasing Revolution; by
means of which, as well the fi^ry and male virtue of the Sun, as the cool,
watery, and female influx of the Moon, are first darted from above, and
afterward must mount up again without ceasing, if ever they shall obtain a
perfect spiritual body, and consequently thereby arrive to their full
perfection, according to the kind and property of a perfect World. And because
the Ascendings and Descendings are twofold, and of two different kinds and
properties, as also that the same are become a spiritual body, it will follow,
that there must needs be a third, as an Uniter of both the said Essences, of
which the said spiritual Body or Birth does consist, as before has been
showed; and that the said Uniter must be more subtle than they both, and
therefore in comparison of them a Spirit, or right true spiritual Being, much
more spiritual than either of them; and that to the end it may be able to
pierce through them, work in them, and rule them in a wise order and harmony,
being united with, and dwelling in them; that so by means of this Spirit, both
these may attain to their due melioration and perfection, by continually
approaching nearer to the same, and becoming more like unto it, until finally
they be perfectly united with the same.

Now the Question is, whether this Spirit be ^he same in all and every
Creature, or whether it ^t is different in every Creature, according to the
Creatures particular kind and property? And whether it admits of a particular
exaltation and melioration in it self?

R. Many Questions are here joined together, which may be answered in two
parts: for first, as ^o what belongs to the first Question, the same brings its
answer along with it: and as for the other Questions, which are, Whether the
said Spirit be one and the same in all Creatures, or different; ^s also,
whether it admits of its particular exal^ation? The Answer to these may be
best held forth in this Example: A Stone is a part of the Great World, as of
the whole, and is a right true living member in the body of the Great World.
Now the Spirit of the Great World, it dwells and rules in this Stone: when now
this Stone dies or consumes, it does not therefore go to nothing; but by the
means of a new birth, and multifarious changes, the same is reduced to a sort
of Earth, and that Earth (in which the said Spirit is still working on toward
perfection) when it dies also, it brings forth by means of another new birth,
diverse Herbs, Trees, and creeping Things; which when they are fed upon by
Animals, or (to speak more particularly) by man for his sustenance, they are
(by means of the digestion performed in his stomach, in which his vital
specific powers does overruled and operate) transmuted into his Essence, even
into his Flesh and Blood. And all these changes are superintended and governed
by the same Spirit, which by means of those vicissitudes and alterations, does
advance and carry on its own multiplication and glorification. And this
Dominion and Rule which the universal Spirit of the World has (as a Mother)
over the Creatures (as over her Children) does continue so long in every
Creature, as the same, like a member or part of this World, is fastened to and
united with it, as a Child to its Mother, whilst yet in the Womb; but when it
is born out of the Mother, and has attained to its perfection, so as to be
able to rule it self, then it begins to work for it self, and does not stand in
need to be ruled by its Mother; for itself is now become that, what the Mother
was before. And this is the joy and glory of the Mother, that she now sees her
self living in her Child.

20 Q. Since then there is (in manner as has been said) a never-ceasing
Revolution of whole Nature, as if it were a living Clock-work, bounded within a
certain beginning and end, in which the whole Age of the World consists, and
wherein the same must work out it self until its total perfection and Sabbath;
this Query seems to be necessary in this place, viz. Whether there be not a
sure way by which we may come to know and understand the true and right order
of this Clock-work, even the end and beginning of the same, and that from the
present point of time wherein we live? And whether there can be any other way
than the course and revolution of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, which were created
in the midst of the seven days of the Creation, viz. on the fourth day?

R. Yea verily, the Creator of this beautiful World, who is the Master of this
Clock-work, has pointed us to and given us such a way, by means of which we
may know when this Clock-work will have accomplished its Period, or when this
World (which comprehends in it self all the Wheels of this Clock-work) will
have wholly wrought out it self to its own perfection in one only harmony, as
well above as below, in order to the attaining of her proper exaltation and
glorification.

Now this way is to be considered in a twofold manner. First, in Man the
Microcosm: for seeing he is a Member, or rather the very Center of the Great
World, in whom all the parts of it concur and meet together; it is not at all
to be doubted, but that if man could dive so deep into himself, he would no
less perceive and understand the same, than heretofore some few holy men have
found and perceived it.

But because this way at present is unknown to the greatest part of men, in as
much as they are too far fallen into the outward obscurity of this World, and
are become lost therein: therefore the Creator does likewise set it continually
before man in the Macrocosm, that by the outward beholding thereof, he might be
stirred up to enter into himself for to find and know that which is no less in
the Microcosm than in the Macrocosm.

21 Q. Seeing then that this forementioned knowledge of the great Clock-work of
this World must be gathered from the course of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and
that the total Period of the Age of this World is far greater than that it can
be measured by the course of the Sun and Moon alone; forasmuch as the Sun
partly compleats his course in one day through the twelve hours of it,
according to what our Savior says, John 11. 9. Are there not twelve hours in
the day? and partly also in a year through the twelve Signs of the Zodiac?
And as for the Moon, she finisheth her course in a month or twenty eight days,
accordingly as we find by experience, that by virtue of this circumvolution of
the Moon, with sound and understanding people, the same working thoughts which
they have had before, but not wholly wrought them out, do return upon them at
the same time, when the Moon comes to that point in her Revolution where she
was when they had them before. But it is not so perceived with Fools and
Lunaticks, inasmuch as they are so enamored of the Image once born in them out
of the lunar waters, that they will not easily let it go again, and in freedom
or unconcernedly work it out; wherefore also they are by means of the said
Image subjected to the dominion of the Moon, whereas otherwise they ought and
might rule over their Moon and its Image. Is it not therefore necessary that
the whole period of the Age of this World, should be reckoned and measured by a
greater Clock-work consisting of greater wheels, and which make a longer motion
or circumvolution: and forasmuch as there is no other remaining but the course
and circumvolution of the other Planets, must not they make far greater hours,
days, and years, than the Sun and Moon do?

R. Yes certainly: for according to the common received Opinion of Astronomers,
the Circles of the other Planets, viz. Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and
Mercury, are so great, that some of the highest of them take up several common
years in p^^forming one of their Revolutions.

Now the right circumvolution of these, by which the whole Age of the World may
be defined, determined, reckoned, and measured, as being commensurate to its
total duration, is this; when the Planets all in general, and every one of them
in particular, has so finished his Course, as that after he has perfectly
wrought out his whole circumference, he returns again to the self-same point in
which he stood at his creation, and from whence he at first set out; so as all
the Planets in this state and at this juncture of time, become perfectly united
together, after that every one of them, by means of his foregoing conjunctions
with them all, has wrought out a total perfect World, according to his
measure, and is made partaker of the Essences of all the rest.

22 Q. In how long time is this perfect Circumvolution and Out-birth of all and
every Planet accomplished? And how many Revolutions must they perform, before
their finishing of this universal Revolution, when all of them shall be united
together again?

R. Forasmuch as according to Scripture-indication* Psalm. 90. 4. and 2 Pet. 3.
8. One day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one
day: and whereas the World was created in seven days, whereof each consists of
a thousand years, it follows clearly, that the whole Age of this World does
reach to seven thousand years, of which six thousand are the six work-days, but
the seventh thousand of years is the day of Rest or Sabbath of this World:
which is the reason why God commanded the day of Rest to be observed, and the
seventh day to be sanctified, to the end that in the six days we might end all
our works, and offer them up to God, for to enjoy a Rest the seventh day, in
order to a new week.

23 Q. Forasmuch as heretofore mention has been made of the continual
Revolution of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and that without ceasing they give out
and take in again; the Query is, Whether this might not somewhat more clearly
be represented and held forth to the Reader?

R. That this indeed is so, may be further cleared by this Example; that man
perceives and experienceth in all visible and living Creatures, (not one
excepted) and particularly in himself, a natural hunger he has continually to
draw something into him, as to take in the Air and Food for his support and
maintenance, and to restore and fill up what continually he gives forth from
him. And in like manner it happens also in the Great World: for Man, who is the
Little World, must have the self-same Life and Being in him, as has the Great
World; because he has all the parts of it in him, and is united with the same.

CHAP. II.
Concerning the Air.
1 Q. COncerning the Lights of Heaven, their Working and Revolution, some
Propositions have already been laid down; as also that the Great and Little
World do relate to each other, and stand in harmony and agreement. Now we see
that Man, the Little World, has a body which in all its parts is perfectly
united: the Query therefore is, How we may come to see and know the like
perfect Union in all and every part of the Great World, which there is between
the members of one body. For seeing that the heavenly Lights do only touch one
another with their Rays, by means of which they work with and upon one another,
and are no otherwise united with the lower parts of the Great World, their
fellow members, than by the influence and darting down of their Rays, how can
they be said to make up one only Body, together with the other parts of the
Macrocosm? And what a strange kind of body must that be, in which we find so
great a distance between the upper parts of it, and this Earth?

R. We do see indeed that the Air interposeth between the upper and these lower
parts of the World; in which Air the Birds do fly, who likewise are a part of
the body of this Great World. And this Air is not a Nothing, nor an empty
space, but it is likewise a member of, and in the body of this World, and has
an essential body of its own, which admits of being weighed, as may be seen in
my Alphabet of Nature, printed at Sultzbach 1657. page 49. where the same is
demonstrated.

2 Q. When therefore, in manner as is there expressed, we by force separate a
part of the Air from the rest of its body, and so weigh it, being shut up in a
Glass, what then is that other Essence which stays behind, and from which the
part we weigh is separated, is that a vacuum or empty thing in which neither
life nor activity is left?

R. No, it is not an empty Being, or without any virtue or power; but rather
the most powerful and virtuous of all: for whereas the force of other things is
earthly and tends downwards, this continually tends and carries upwards, and
consequently is more spiritual and heavenly. For we ^ee, that when an ounce of
Air is with violence drawn out of the Glass Vessel, and separated from the
other remaining Air, it then endeavors with greater force and strength to make
up again the defect of this separation and division of its parts; forasmuch as
it has been found by experience, that the remaining Air has attracted twenty
two measures of Water instead of the Air which was drawn out from it, so as it
has left no room or void space remaining in the Glass: From whence we find,
that this subtle spiritual Essence can unite it self to the Water, and dwell
in it, without increasing the bulk of it.

Of this spiritual Being the Weather-glasses are made, which represent to us
the changes of the Weather and Air. So that we may perceive even by the eye,
what a great Regiment there is in this spiritual Being or Essence of the Air,
which is indeed the vigor and strength of the Macrocosm.

3 Q. What does this spiritual Being (which is called the spiritual vigor and
strength of the Macrocosm) work or effect in the Air?

R. Even as in the Microcosm there be many continual Revolutions of various
sorts of water and blood, and that (according to what shall be showed
hereafter, when we shall treat concerning the Microcosm) the flesh and sinews
take their original from the bones; as also several living humors and winds,
salt and sulphurous essences, etc. In like manner in the Great World this
vigor and strength in the Air (which are as the spiritual strength of the
Macrocosm) do cause many and various Revolutions in the Air, streams and
drivings of the Clouds and Winds, and several sorts of Thunder and Lightning,
etc.

4 Q. What kind of operation does this spiritual Being in the Air perform in
Thunder and Lightning?

R. The Thunder and Lightning (which smell like Brimstone and Gunpowder) have
their own proper and peculiar nature and working. Thus in the month of May we
have little kind of Thunders, which in Hebrew are called Ramses, which promote
the fruitfulness of the Earth; so that not only by the Rain which follows upon
the said Thunder, but also by the change of the Air which then happens, the
Earth is made fruitful. And therefore we read, Genesis 47. v. 11. that the best
part of the Land of Egypt where Joseph placed his Father and Brethren, was
called Ramses.

Now that the Thunder has its peculiar working, may be partly perceived from
hence, that at the time when it thunders, Beer, Milk, etc. turn sower in the
Cellars; and some that are troubled with the Gout, fell their pains much
increased. So that we find that the Thunder does everywhere introduce
corruption and putrefaction, yea and in the Earth also, in order to a new Life
or Generation. And, as has been before said, concerning this spiritual Essence
in the Air, that it can pierce through the water, and unite it self through the
same; so we may likewise perceive the same in other Bodies, how that it
pierces them also, because it is living and ruling. Hence it is, that we
experience when it is kindled into a living Lightning, that it melts the blade
of a Sword in its sheath without hurting the sheath, which an artificial Fire
or Gunpowder cannot do. So likewise its necessary and glorious regiment and
motion is so swift, that as Christ says, Mat. 24. 27. it reaches in less than
the twinkling of an eye from East to West.

5 Q. It has formerly been mentioned that this spiritual essence of the Air,
does cause and effect many and different courses and streams of Clouds and
Winds in the Air; the Query therefore is. Whether and how we may know this by
experience?

R. That there are different streams or currents of Clouds and Winds in the
Air, in order to an universal effect or out-working, appears from hence, that
we often see that the Winds and Clouds go together; but again, at other times,
we find that the Wind goes the contrary way to the Clouds. Moreover we do often
find, that when many Ships lie together in the Haven wind-bound, that the
stream or drift of Wind sometimes is so narrow, that one Ship can get out into
Sea, when another Ship that lies near to it is forced to abide in the Haven,
for want of wind to get out to Sea. Now this stream or course of wind is often
excited and moved by the sympathetical faith or man; which faith likewise is
the cause why some experienced, courageous, and believing Masters of Ships,
have been still delivered from all the dangers they have met with at Sea. For
all they that stand in order themselves, and understand the same, do know that
all Storms and Winds are good, and that they can only hurt those that stand in
confusion, and are affrighted at them, because they do not know the order of
the Universe, but are contrary to it; by which means they come into danger and
suffer loss. And therefore our Savior reproved his Disciples for their being
fearful upon the Sea, Mat. 8. v. 26.

6 Q. From what has been said, appears clearly, that the Wind of necessity
must have its peculiar passages, courses, and operations; but may not the same
be made out more fully from other instances?

R. We find in several Countries, where high Mountains are, (as for instance,
upon the Alps) that one Region or Layer of the Air is more healthy for some
than others. And according as we mount higher and higher upon the Alps, we
perceive several sorts of Air: And it has been often found by experience, that
when men have been at the top of the Alps, they have not perceived any wind at
all, but as soon as they came down a little lower, they have found a wind to
purpose. This has been expressly tried several times for to know the certainty
of it, and it has always been found, that the Air within a very small
distance, sometimes of no more than twenty foot, has been very different.

On the same Alps we likewise observe, that the higher any one goes up the
same, the shriller and sharper he finds the voice of the People that dwell
there; which effect proceeds also from the difference of the Air. It is
likewise notorious in those places, that when a little Mist, not above two or
three foot broad, like a thin Smoke mounts up on high, as through a Chimney,
and reaches another Region of the Air, that then infallibly Wind or Rain
follows, and sometimes also Thunder and Lightning.

And that sometimes Winds and Storms are raised inwardly in the Mountains, and
from thence break forth, is (alas) but too well known by Miners that work in
the same, several known Miners having been struck down and killed in the Mines
by such subterraneous Storms.

That also sometimes a Wind arises out of the Water, is undeniable: for it is
observed upon the Boden-Sea in Switzerland (it being a thing very well know
thereabouts) that when the water of the said Sea begins to look as it were
boiling or troubled, and that a thin steam arises up from the same, then those
that are upon it must haste to land as fast as they can, for as soon as the
said steam or mist is mounted four foot high (where two different Regions of
the Air meet) there follows always so violent a Storm, that there is no abiding
upon the Sea.

In like manner, by another instance, it may yet further be proved, that the
motion of the water only, does sometimes cause a Wind: for in several parts of
Italy, where there is a Rivulet that has a fall of fifteen or sixteen foot, if
near the same an arched Vault be made, and above in the midst of the said
arched Vault be put a square Pipe passing thorough into the hollowness of the
Vault, and below the said Pipe a round Stone-table of three or four foot broad
be set also within the Vault, and underneath the Table a four square hole be
made, with a Register to widen or lessen the said hole according to pleasure,
and so to let out the water in a due proportion to its income above. When now
the water from above is let down through the square Pipe, so as no air can come
in with it, then the water makes a great noise and froth by falling upon the
Table; and when the said apiece hole which is under the Table is so
adjusted, as that no Air can come in nor out of it, then the Vault will be
filled with a strong wind or air: and when afterward a Pipe is opened, which is
placed in the side of the said arched Room, there proceeds so strong a blast
from the same, as serves instead of a Bellows continually day and night for to
melt down Iron-ore.

When water is stirred by fire, it likewise causes wind, as is well known,
that when we take a hollow brass Globe or Shell in which there is a little
hole, and fill the same with water, and then set it against a fire with the
hole of it turned toward another fire, a strong blast will proceed from the
said hole as long as any water is left in the Aeolipylae or round hollow of
brass, as is commonly known by Chemists.

Furthermore, that the motion of the water produces a wind, Seamen are very
well acquainted with; who when they have a great calm at Sea, so that they are
forced to lie still, they wait for the Flood, that the water may be put in
motion, forasmuch as they know that then they shall get a gale of wind.

Where (by the way) we may take notice, that the ebbing and flowing of the Sea,
is nothing ^lse but a continual Revolution, such as is to be ^ound in all other
things.

7 Q. Hitherto has been spoken concerning the several causes of Winds; but
forasmuch as mention has been already made of Thunder and Lightning (which are
the work and effect of the foresaid spiritual Being in the Air) that they smell
like Brimstone and Gunpowder, may not some further account of the cause thereof
be given?

R. That there is in the Air an inflammable sulphurous spiritual Being, has in
part been made out before; where we treated concerning the Sun, viz. how by
means of the Air, and the Sun's shining into the Water, such a Being is
generated; and the same may also in the Air it self be wrought out into a
corporal Pitch and Brimstone, such as was rained down at the destruction of
Sodom and Gomorrah. That likewise a subtle spiritual Saltpeter and Salt is in
the Air, some Salt-petre-men know very well; who when they have dug so much
Earth out of Stables as will employ them a whole year to elixiviate or draw out
the Salt from it, never after need to dig up any more fresh Earth for to
extract their Saltpeter therefrom. For at the years end they find their
elixiviated Earth, after it is again exposed, to be stored with Saltpeter
anew, as being impregnated by the Air, which they afterward again boil out of
the same Earth; and in refining the said Saltpeter, they separate a great
quantity of common Salt. From whence it is most clear and evident, that there
inflammable Materials, viz. Brimstone, Saltpeter; and Salt, are spiritually in
the Air, from whence the Thunder and Lightning are produced.

CHAP. III.
SECT. I.
Concerning the Water and Quick-sand.
1 Q. HItherto has been treated concerning the Air, its Essence, Operation,
and Properties; as also that the same has a spiritual ruling essential body,
which is united with the Sun, Moon, and Stars; and by means of its spiritual
and essential powers and firmness, is fit and proper to unite the Earth (as
being the Out-working of the said heavenly Lights) with them, and so to
complete, as it were, Jacob's Ladder beforementioned. Now we see that this
lower part of the Great World, viz. the Earth, is made up and does consist of
several Waters, Seas, and Rivers, and of different sorts of Sand, Stones, and
Metals, etc. The Query therefore is, how we may come to understand all these
things, with the Natures and Properties of them?

R. In order to this, a brief Introduction shall be here set down from proper
experience, that there by an occasion may be presented to others to search out
and advance further in the knowledge of these things.

We find everywhere in the World, in digging, whether it be in Valleys for
Springs, or in Mountains for to get out Metals, that though the same be never
so high, yet at the bottom is always a Quick-sand found, beyond which there is
no digging any further: for this Quick-sand drives with the water (and is
therefore called in Highdutch, Triebsands, that is, Drift or Drive-sand, and in
English, Quick-sand, from its continual motion) and is always mingled with the
same. Now this water with which the Quick-sand is mingled, and this Sand which
is continually made in the water, is the foundation of the whole Earth, and of
the highest and vastest Mountains, as being that on which they rest and are
supported; and is indeed the very Root from whence the whole Earth, all
Mountains, and other visible Bodies do arise and have their original, as is
expressed, Genesis 1. v. 25. and from whence they likewise receive and enjoy their
nourishment, as from their Mother: all which may be made out visibly to the eye.

2 Q. How can it be made out first, that the water and the Quick-sand are the
foundation of the Earth, and the Creatures that are in it? And in the next
place, how are the same the Root and Original of all Terrestrial Bodies?

R. As to what concerns the first Question, the same may be cleared in part
from this instance* viz. we find in plain and low grounds, as in Brabant near
Boisleduc, that we cannot dig above four or five foot deep in the Earth,
without coming to the Quick-sand: so that when in these parts they go about to
build a high, weighty, and square Church-steeple of Bricks, or the like, they
first lay a row of Oaken or other boards (that will not rot in the water, but
continue always sound and undamag'd in the same) upon the Quick-sand; and upon
the said Boards they begin to build the Church-steeple, about three hundred
feet high, which proves a most strong and lasting foundation, as appears from
several Steeples that have been in this manner built upon the Quick-sand, and
have continued firm and unmovable for many hundreds of years.

Add to this, that when in those parts any one digs a Pond for water, and that
he digs up more Sand than is fitting, thinking thereby to make his Pond, Pit,
or Well the deeper, he soon after perceives he is in a mistake; for that the
Sand flows and falls in again continually, so that the Well or Pond continues
still of the same depth. Moreover, he will find by experience, that if there be
built such a Steeple as was just now mentioned, within three or four thousand
foot from the said Pit, Pond, or Well, the same will begin to sink and incline
toward that side where the Pit is dug, forasmuch as its foundation, viz. the
Quick-sand, is drawn away from that side.

From all which, it incontestably follows, that seeing such great and massy
Buildings do, for so many years, continue firm and steadfast upon this watery
Quick-sand, without giving way or sinking; and that (on the contrary) by the
fleeting away of the said Quick sand, those Buildings are endangered; that the
said watery Quick-sand is the foundation of all material Bodies, as deriving
its original from above, viz. from the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and mounteth again
from beneath upwards, through several and multifarious alterations and
meliorations, in a ^^^^tinual Revolution: by means of which, the (...) World is
kept firm and unmovable on its center. Now the reason why this makes such a
steadfast and unmovable foundation, is, because neither the Water nor the
Quick-sand (both which are very nigh of kin to one another, for that the Sand
is produced by the Water, and continually renewed by the same; of which, more
in its due place) will suffer themselves to be thrust down or pressed together,
but always preserve their wonted station and measure, as shall be more fully
made out in what follows.

And as to what respects the second Question, viz. Whether this Water and the
watery Quick-sand are the Root of all other sublunary Bodies, this is evident
from the Testimony of Nature it self.

For first, that the Quick-sand is produced by the Water, has been found by
true and proper experience, viz. in a certain place in the Province of Brabant,
some of this Quick-sand-water has been taken, and being distilled, has always
left some sand in the bottom of the Glass; and when in order to a more certain
knowledge of this matter, the Water has been before filtred through several
Papers, that so it might be evident that no sand could remain in the water; yet
notwithstanding, when distilled, it has left sand at the bottom of the Glass,
as before. And as it is commonly known that water in several places, as in
Mountains and Rocks, is changed into stones, so here we find it changed into
sand.

Furthermore, Experience teaches us, that in Mountains and Rocks, the water
which continually mounts upwards from the Quick-sand, is still changed into
many different sorts of sand and stones. The same may also be perceived in
Mines, when the Miners have gone very deep to search for Metals, that though
the Rock has been so hard that it would not suffer it self to be cut with any
steel Instrument, but the Miners have been forced to break it down or burst it
asunder by fire; and yet in those very Stones that were thus broke off with
Instruments, a water has been found within which went through and through
them, and was their food and nourishment, and could be distilled from them in
great quantity.

Again, we find that Firr-trees do grow upon hard, high, and smooth shining
Rocks, where they have no Earth at all, and yet that they do not die or wither,
notwithstanding that their root is only fastened to the stony Rock, so as the
very ends and extremities of the said roots may be seen, as not having the
least Earth to cover them. From whence we gather, that these Trees must draw
the moisture which feeds and makes them to grow out of the said stony Rocks.

This Wood also which grows upon such high Rocks, is of great use to many
purposes, as is well known to the experienced Makers of Musical Instruments,
that the Firr-wood which comes from the high Mountains of Tyrol, is far better
to make the belly of their Musical Instruments, than other sort of wood, for
that the Firr-trees, and all strait Timber that has had its growth from out of
the mortified Rocks, are more airy, and partake more of the nature of those
Rocks, and consequently give a better sound.

And here (by the way) it will not be amiss to take notice, that the Seed of
these Trees is not lost or annihilated by their being burnt down on the ground
where they stand, but that they are meliorated and increased by means of their
being burnt by fire; forasmuch as it has been found by experience, that after
the burning down of several whole Woods, and many high-grown Firr-trees, all
the said ground (which was of a considerable extent) has been afterward over
grown, and filled with innumerable Burch-trees, and all that only from the
ashes of the said Firr-trees; which Metamorphosis the Ancients have alluded to,
and intimated to us by their Fable of the Phaenix.

This self-same water (to return to our former matter) mounts up from the
Quick-sand through the pores of the Earth, to a vast height, (as has been
said) just as the sap and moisture of a Tree, mounts up from the root to the
very top of it, spreading it self through the whole body and all the branches
and boughs thereof. And like as Joyners find by daily experience, that wood
changes as it grows, and is not the same at the top as it is beneath; so
Stone-cutters likewise find the same in the stones of the Mountains and Rocks,
viz. that they have several changes and various differences, notwithstanding
that it be all but one continued piece. Likewise as the Sap or nourishing Juice
of a Tree does change both its nature and taste, as it mounts from the root to
the top-branches, so also it is found in the Mountains: for the self-same life,
and the same regent power is in the Mountains and Rocks, which are found to be
in Trees; which Life, for its food and nourishment, takes in several sorts or
various kinds of moistures or waters, and gives them out again; that is,
manifests them in their bodies, and the parts which they grow into, and
produce according to the proportion and measure of every part and member of its
body.

Moreover also, forasmuch as it may easily be observed, how a Tree or Vegetable
consists of diverse various parts, which are not all the same; as for example,
the Roots, the Trunks or Bodies, the Branches, Leaves, Flowers, Fruits, etc.
yea, what more is, the same sort of parts, as for example, the Leaves of one
and the same Plant, do all of them differ each from other, as may be proved by
observation of any two Leaves of a Tree or Plant; which will be found to have
differing Veins or nourishing Vessels, which in their texture and distribution
are not alike, etc. Like as Man, who in his Body has diverse Members, Bones,
Nerves, and Blood, though all his parts be nourished with one and the same
Blood, yet we find that the Sweat which comes out through the pores of his Body
has its peculiar distinct smell in every part of the same: And in like manner
does the Water of the Earth and Mountains differ also.

3 Q. From what has been already mentioned, we may understand and conclude,
that the Water and Quick-sand are the foundation of the Earth; and that the
Water, as the common Mother of all sublunary Bodies, being produced by the Moon
and Stars, does bring forth the Quick-sand, and maintain the same; and
afterward through the Quick-sand which is born of it, and together with the
same, by a continual alteration and multiplication, brings forth several sorts
of Stones and Rocks. So that from hence we may conclude, (according to what
has already in part been mentioned concerning the Sun, Moon, and Stars, as
likewise of the Air) that the universal Spirit of the World, by means of a
continual Revolution and multifarious Glorification, does work out it self to
perfection; that so in like manner, in this Sand and Water there is a continual
Revolution in order to melioration and exaltation, and that the said Catholic
Spirit rules and works as well in this water and sand, as above in the
celestial Lights and the Air: as also that there is a spiritual operative life
in both these, the sand as well as the water. That such a spirit and life is in
the water, has been made out before in the discourse about the Nocturnal
Luminaries: it remains therefore to query, how it can be evidenced, that this
spirit and life is in the sand also?

R. This appears very clearly of it self, for if the Sand had no life in it,
how could it move it self in and with the water (as has been showed before,
that out of this Sand making water, sand is produced by distillation) and
propagates itself in so fruitful a multiplication, through stones and other
things, whose source and original it is (forasmuch as the Life does consist in
this motion and out-working) as in part has been already showed that it does.

The same may likewise plainly be seen, by spreading some of the said Sands
upon a black Table, and considering them through a Microscope; for so we shall
find that every grain of this sand has a different shape and figure, so as not
one of them is like another: from whence we may undoubtedly conclude, that as
every one of these grains is of a different form, so likewise there must in
every one of them (as also in every particular Being of the whole Creation, as
shall be more amply and fully declared hereafter) be a different life and
specific seed, which gave it such a form and preserves the same.

Moreover, every one of these grains of sand contains within it self its own
nutritive and spermatick moisture or water, which it drew in specificated and
digested, by its life and the powers thereof; and after its own particular
ripeness or maturity is attained to, it further advances that its primogenial
moisture, till it become fit to be given forth again as its milk, to its fruit,
propagation and offspring; and this in proportion as well as the greatest
Mountains, or any other Being whatever.

Furthermore, it is observed, that there is not one (though the very least
grain of Sand) but contains a little spiritual subtle Gold and Silver, (which
are nothing else but the light influence, and very being of the Sun and Moon,
which is specificated and wrought up in them) but it is in so small a quantity,
that it requires much pains and charges to extract it, and is only of use to
demonstrate, that such astral powers are there, and to teach men that all
beings come from thence, and consist thereof.

Having thus showed, that this Sand is to be esteemed as the second Mother and
Root of all Sublunary Bodies, (for the first Mother of all beings is the water,
accounting from the center of all upwards) we may from hence take occasion to
enquire, how those words, Genesis 2. v. 7. are to be understood, that Adam was
formed or fashioned of Aphar Adamach: Aphar signifies in the Hebrew, Dust of
the Earth, Gold ( viz. the least of the living Gold that is in the Sand and
Earth) as also it signifies the world.

We may also from hence (amongst other things) in part understand the reason,
why God first commanded Abraham to count the Stars, and told him, that his Seed
should be so, as in Genesis 15. v. 5. And in Genesis 22. 17. promised him that he
would bless his seed, in multiplying it as the Stars of Heaven, and as the sand
which is on the seashore, viz. because the upper and under agree together in a
continual beautiful Revolution and Harmony, and help to complete and make up
the perfect body of the world in a wise and comely order.

4 Q. Forasmuch then as it appears, that in general there is such a Revolution
from things above to things beneath, and again from beneath to above, and that
in a living or vital out-working and propagation; and also that it has been
already declared, that the Revolution of the Superior Being coming downwards,
does proceed and is carried on in order; the Query is, how we may come to know
and perceive this order also in these inferior bodies, viz. how the Revolution
from below to above, from the Quick-sand, to Stones, Metals, etc. even up to
the very highest Mountains is performed?

R. That the Sand-making water, and the moveable Quick-sand that is in it, are
the foundation and root of all other Sublunary Bodies, has hitherto been made
evident. Now then first of all, that the other sort of sand which is on the
Seashore, as well as that which is at the bottom of it, and elsewhere also on
the dry ground is formed out of it, and also wrought out by it, may be gathered
from hence; because in the bottom of the Sea, immediately below the other sort
of sand, a Quick-sand is likewise found, in which Quick-sand an Anchor cannot
take so very well hold, but only on the upper and other sort of sand, as is
well known amongst Seamen.

These other sorts of sand therefore, which are as an out-birth from the
Quick-sand, do also in part take in water from the Sea, and, as it were, do
digest it in themselves, which they afterward give out again, through the
Communication which they have with the other sand of the Mountains, Rocks, and
other parts of the Earth; from which, as from their original or source,
afterward Fountains, Springs, Brooks, and Rivers do arise. Now all Rivers as
they thus come out of the Sea, through this means of their Revolution, so they
therefore run back again into the same, and that with gain; forasmuch as they
are thus made partakers of the essence and virtue of all those other Beings,
through which they have passed, and that in a continual Revolution in order to
perfection. For every thing must be continually fed, nourished, and renewed,
the very Stones and Rocks not excepted, for that they have also some part of
Life in them, and cannot be separated from the whole, viz. the body of this
world, as has been briefly mentioned already, and will be more fully declared
in what follows. But before we proceed any farther, we will briefly Treat
somewhat concerning the other waters, viz. of the Seas, forasmuch as they have
their Rise from the Deep, and by means of a continual Revolution through the
Quick-sand, and the other sorts of Sand, and that in order to their being
continually newborn or formed; and further propagated and multiplied.

SECT. II.
Concerning the Waters of the Seas.
1 Q. WHat is the operation and effect of water properly: forasmuch as we find
so many different waters, Seas and Rivers, every where throughout the whole
earth?

R. The Seas (which within themselves contain many Currents, and go forth in
many differing streams, which by Circulation return to the Sea again) do stand,
or run (as before is mentioned, and daily experience teaches) over the Sand
which is the product of the Quick-sand, and have their particular Life, Rule,
Government, and Circulation, in all their innumerable grains or parts, as
before has been mentioned of the Sand.

2 Q. Would it not therefore be needful to set down a more plain declaration,
how and in what manner the waters have their Regiment and operation?

R. Yes, forasmuch as that the Seas have a distint Being, Life, and Regiment in
themselves, which may partly be observed from their out-working or products;
whereas they bring forth several sorts of Creatures, devoid of breathing, and
without Lungs. Experience also teaches, that in the inland Seas, Lakes and
many great Rivers, every month new sorts of fish are caught, which neither were
there before, nor can be found afterward, until the same time of the next
year. Thus it is well known that in the Boden-Sea in Switzerland (through which
the Rhine runs) Herrings are caught at the self-same time that they are caught
in the Sea, and in the same manner, even many Millions of them in sholes
together; but neither before nor after, till the next year at the same time:
from whence we must conclude, that the Boden-Sea, which brings them forth, does
likewise consume them, in like manner as the earth consumes all things which
are in it, in order to renew them, for no seed which God has Created can go to
nothing.

3 Q. What may be the reason why the Seas are so salt, and that in one place
more than another?

R. Of this many reasons may be given, amongst which this is one of the chief
and most considerable, viz. that from the Sea all Currents do in manner
abovesaid, proceed, and circulate to the same again; as well to be made
partakers of its vital operation, as likewise that by the power they receive
from the same, they might be able to produce all living Creatures. Upon which
account it is necessary for the Sea to have much salt, which is a a power of
life, and a good thing, as Christ himself witnesses, Luke 14. 34. And as we
find that there is Salt in the Sea, so likewise it is found in every other
Creature: for all of them stand in need of Salt for to preserve and keep
themselves in life, and to renew and propagate themselves. And this Salt they
make themselves, as we see in Kine, Sheep, and other Beasts, who feed upon
nothing but Grass, and drink nothing but fresh Water, and yet notwithstanding
they turn a great part of this their nourishment into Salt, as may be perceived
by their Sweat, Urine, etc. which are very salt. And the same likewise may be
seen in Man, who the more sound and healthful he is, the salter his Sweat and
Urine will be; and the salter they are, the stronger is his life.

From whence likewise we may partly gather, why every Sacrifice in the Temple
at Jerusalem was to be salted with Salt. Yea, for the same reason also it is
conducible to man's health to use much Salt, as a Blessing which comes to him
from above: for we see that the Air (which in part resembles the upper waters,
and without which man cannot live, forasmuch as the Air gives him life) does
contain Salt in it self, as was mentioned where we spoke of Saltpeter.

4 Q. Forasmuch then as the Seas have their own Regiment within themselves, in
order to a further working out, as may in part be gathered from the motion and
rolling of the water: and seeing that these great motions of the Sea are as
well found on the Ocean, as on other Seas, and that they often cause great
trouble to Seamen rightly to understand them, and to find out their true
course; and that this is the most difficult and troublesome case for Seamen,
that when they are up on the Sea and can see neither Sun, Moon, nor Stars, and
consequently know not whereabouts they be; Whether therefore a way might not be
found out, whereby we might arrive to a greater certainty in Navigation, than
hitherto has been had; and by means of which, Seamen might in such cases be
able to know their right course?

R. That there be many things in Navigation which ought further to be inquired
into and searched out by experience, is not to be questioned. Of which we may
have an instance in this common thing, viz. that when the Tackle of a Ship is
made of clean, good, and well-dressed Hemp, and the same finely spun, it is not
needful then to have the said Tackle made so thick as commonly they are,
because all the filth of the Hemp is left in them; and yet notwithstanding,
this Tackle made of fine spun Hemp, shall be much stronger, and last longer;
and that because the fine Hemp may be wrought much closer together, so that
when they are dipped in Tarr, no rain nor water can pierce them. And because they
have but half the thickness of the other, and therefore are more pliable, and
consequently more easily to be managed, so that the labor of one man shall go
further, and dispatch more with this fine Tacle, than the labor of two shall
with the coarser sort: so that the greater charge will be recompensed with
double profit.

Amongst other things, it may be matter of our admiration, that Seamen have
not all this while found out a way whereby they might measure exactly the
length of their Course at Sea, as well as an Instrument has been invented,
which being fastened to a Coach, or to a Person that travels afoot, as often as
the wheels of the Coach turn round, or a man steps forward, does exactly
measure the way that either of them makes. Now why might not in like manner a
Water-wheel or Mill of about a foot and a half diameter, be to this purpose
fastened to the bottom of the Ship, about the third part of the Ship toward
the Helm, the same Water-wheel or Mill being fastened to an Axel-tree or hollow
Pipe which must reach to the top of the Ship; which then by its turning about
will give a certain and infallible indication whether the Ship makes great or
small way.

And upon this occasion it will not be amiss here to relate the Experience of a
known, understanding, and curious Person; who to satisfy his own mind, caused
two Ships to be built, both of them of one and the same wood, grown in the same
place, and both of one form and bulk; ordered also all the Timber and Boards to
be made of one thickness and length. The one of these Ships he caused to be
built according to the common and cheapest way, for to spare Boards, by laying
the Boards in length together on the sides with their ends turned from one
another, viz. the upper or top-part of one Board against the root-end of the
other, so as that the lower part of the one made up one breadth with the upper
part of the other, which was narrower. The other Ship he ordered to be built
another way, viz. he made the Boards to be all sawed of one breadth, and to be
laid side by side together, according to the nature of the wood as it grew,
that is, top to top, and root-end to root-end, and that the top-ends of the
Timber should be all turned forwards; and thus throughout the whole Ship as far
as could be. Whereupon he found by experience, that this last-mentioned Ship
did always out-sail the other that was made of the same wood; yea, and all
other Ships besides, so as to get soon out of their sight.

The occasion which led him to this Invention, was, that he had in other cases
and at other times experienced, that Timber, even after that it was cut down,
sawed, and built, did notwithstanding yet retain a life in it in all its parts;
and thus he perceived that the said wood did still take in the Air, and in part
enjoy it in the same order which Nature has appointed, and as it did before,
when it was yet growing, it did enjoy the same.

And that Wood or Trees do attract the Air for their growth and nourishment, we
may plainly see in a Tree that is planted under a Covert, which as it grows up,
does incline and bend it self toward the Air.

This life of the Timber in a Ship, of which we have spoken, is also made
Partaker of the life of Man, and his Spirit: for when a Ship does good service,
so that the Master of it takes a liking to it, so as to set his love upon it,
and put a trust in it; we shall find that such a man who is a great lover of
his Ship, shall effect more with this his Ship, than any other shall do with
theirs. In like manner also a Horseman that has a good Horse upon which he
relies, and loves him, so that it has been known that some have escaped and
saved their lives by riding eighteen German miles in one day with one Horse,
for to get out of the Empire into Switzerland, by which means they have escaped
the Gallows, and that without any prejudice to their Horse too.

In like manner, it is matter of experience, that persons who have been in
love, have performed so great Journeys in one day on Horseback, as was
impossible for another to do the like. From whence we may take notice, that the
Spirit and Confidence of Man is operative in union with Vegetables and Animals.

By this also we may guess at the reason, how it came to pass, that when a
certain person had bought some young Trees of another, who assured him, that if
any of them happened to wither, he would stand to the damage, and make it good
again, that all of them proved well: But at another time buying othersome,
without any such assurance from the Seller, they all died, viz. for that the
Buyer being covetous, had no fear concerning the former-mentioned Trees,
because of the in^rance, but wanting that for the latter, he became doubting
and fearful, and communicated his fear to the Trees, and thereby killed them.

5 Q. It has been declared before, that the Water and Quick-sand do generate
and produce all other sorts of Sand and Water; but before we proceed further,
it will not be improper here to inquire, forasmuch as it is notorious, that in
Pits we can dig no deeper than till we come to the Quick-sand, and that this is
but an inconsiderable depth, compared to the whole Globe of the Earth from the
Circumference to its Center, whether (I say) this immense Bulk from the
Quick-sand to the Center be nothing else but mere Quick-sand and Water?

R. That cannot be, because the Quick-sand always and continually gives forth
water, (and that not salt, but sweet and fresh in all places) yet with several
continued alterations from the beginning, until it has transmuted it self in
every little grain of other sort of Sand, which has its own essence and
property, as has been showed: neither can the Quick-sand receive or take in
water from without, as will be made plain from what here follows.

1. In Fish Ponds that are dugg (in some places where the Quick-sand lies but
shallow, and a little below the surface of the Earth) until they come to the
Quick-sand, the water does not rise to above half a foot high, or thereabouts,
so that they are forced to convey Rain or other water into the same for to fill
it up. Now we find that the water thus added and conveyed, does always keep its
own height, and does not sink into the Quick-sand, as it does into other moist
sand, which is at some good distance above the Quick-sand: for such Sand (as is
known) will according to a certain proportion, drink up a vast quantity of
water.

2. Some Diggers of Wells are not unacquainted with this, who often deceive
people that have bargained with them to dig a Well unto the Quick-sand, and so
cause that the water may stand three or four foot high in the same, who when
they see that the Spring cannot rise so high, they privately fill it up to that
height with other water, which continues so, and does not sink into the sand;
but when the Owners come afterward and fetch water from thence, they then
perceive they have been deceived, forasmuch as the water still decreaseth, and
does not fill up again, which the Undertakers had promised to perform.

3. Forasmuch as the watery Quick-sand is the foundation of the whole building
of the Earth, therefore it lets no water into it self: for it is impossible
that two bodies of one and the same nature should enter into each other, and
consequently that water should enter into water, without increasing of its
bulk, etc. that is to say, should so corporally unite it self with the other
water, as that the other water and this new-added water should be numerically
one and the same water, without all increase of its quantity.

From all which, it is most clear and evident, seeing the Quick-sand has
continually from the very beginning of the World, given forth water from it
self, and that it can do no other, as having been created for this end; and
that the circumference of this water is not lessened, nor its quantity
diminished: therefore it must of necessity follow, that what the Quick-sand
gives out, must be made good and restored to it again from within, as the
following Query with its Answer will more fully demonstrate.

6 Q. Seeing then that this is the nature of the Quick-sand, how is it possible
that it should subsist, or how can it be, that since it continually gives out
water, and yet can take in no water externally from above, but that thus at
last it must be left emptied and destitute of all water, which cannot be
allowed neither? from whence is it then that it receives the water which it
gives forth continually?

R. Here remains no other cause to be assigned than this natural one, viz. that
(as has been said) the waters are continually made by the Sun, Moon, and
Stars; for that they, as spiritual Beings, are only able to penetrate the
water and sand. But forasmuch as the Sun, Moon, and Stars can make no water in
the water, and yet continually do bring forth water, both below as well as
above, we must therefore conclude, that there must be a great space and place
of abode for the Air in the Center of the Earth, in which the Sun, Moon, and
Stars do perform their operation, and where afterward their spiritual and
continually descending Rays (as they mount from thence upwards again) do change
themselves into water, that so all may proceed in a beautiful order? forasmuch
as the beginning and the end, with their whole circumference, according to all
parts, not the least excepted, do continually circulate until their full age,
maturity, and perfection. And is it not worth our enquiry, whether this space
below, beforementioned, be not spoke of in Scripture under the name of Abyss,
as Psalm. 42. v. 8. and elsewhere; as that above is in Scripture Phrase called
the Sling, 1 Samuel 25. v. 29. For the lower waters must in like manner be
generated of a grosser Air, and comporting with their property, as the upper
waters ( viz. the Air) are born of a more subtle and spiritual Air. And this
water that is here below (forasmuch as it continually comes down from above for
to be wrought out) cannot be dead, but must mount upwards again toward its
original and beginning, because it cannot be separated from the nature of its
Origin. And this drawing or Magnetisme is the cause of its continual
Revolution, and wheeling about unto Perfection.

CHAP. IV.
Concerning the Earth, Stones, Minerals, and Metals.
SECT. I.
Concerning Stones.
1 Q. FOrasmuch as the Revolution and Propagation of the Quick-sand and Water
has in part been already declared, it will not be amiss to make inquiry how
and in what manner this Revolution proceeds and is carried on further. And
seeing that everywhere we meet with so mamany stones in the water, as well as
in and upon the Earth, how the same are generated, and to what end and use they
be?

R. The Lord and Creator of this beautiful living World, had and has the Idea
of the same in his mind, and therefore it is impossible there should be the
least failure or oversight in the order of it, but all even from the highest
Star to the very Center of the Earth, and again backwards from the Center to
above, must work jointly in one harmony, to the end that the whole may work
together in a continual Revolution to perfection and old age, and that so, as
not the least atome or grain of sand (forasmuch as it is a Creature by it self,
though it belongs to the whole) can be forgotten ^r shut out: for it is a part
of the whole, and therefore no body can say, that he does not enjoy ^he same,
or that he has no need of it, no more than we can say, that the least point or
particle which God has created in man, should be in vain, and not concordant
and agreeing with the whole Body. Because Man is the Little World, and the
Center of the Great, and therefore cannot be separated from it, which (if we
speak with understanding and any ground of truth) cannot be denied by us; as
has already in part been made ^ut, and shall be more largely insisted on, when
we shall speak of Man, as being a Compendium and an Abstract of all this World.

Thus we see (as often has been mentioned) that the Quick-sand is, as the second
Universal Mother, that brings forth and maintains an innumerable and
incomprehensible multitude of sands, many sorts of Stones, Metals, and Minerals
of different (and seemingly to the ignorant, of contrary) kinds and properties;
all which, notwithstanding, in one Union work to one good end, and are changed
into an Earth which is the more immediate Mother of Herbs, Trees, Beasts, and
Men, which have their Seed in themselves, as is said Genesis 1. v. 11, 12. But at
present (for brevities sake) we shall only make mention of the chief and most
remarkable Stones, from whence others hereafter may take occasion from their
own experience to search out this point further.

All stones are by a constant and continual r^^volution, generated and
maintained by the sand* For when we consider the several heads in every
particular member of the world, we find that every sand to the very least
grain, does according t^ its kind and nature, continually and without ceasing
give forth food and nourishment to the stone as a Mother does her Milk to her
Children, which are born of her, and who from thence must have their growth and
increase. In like manner al^^ these stones produce other stones, and feed an^
maintain the same, even up to the very surface (...) the earth, where also many
and different sorts (...) stone grow, as well of the common as precious for^ or
kind. Now the life or milk and moisture (...) this incomprehensible multitude
of different stones, contributes much to the fruitfulness of the earth, from
whence (as has been mentioned) Herbs and Trees in every Country, according to
their kind are brought forth; from which afterward Beasts and men do take
their nourishment. Our Savior himself bears witness to this, that there is a
life in stones, Luke 19 v. 40. where he faith, If these should hold their
peace, the stones would cry out. And John the Baptist has a very remarkable
saying, Matthew. 3. v. 9. That God is able of stones to raise up children to
Abraham.

Now that stones conduce to the fruitfulness of the earth, experience teaches
us; for when some Countrymen have carried away from off their ground, some
sorts of Pebble-stones, that their ^and has not proved so fruitful as before:
con^rning which a larger account shall be given in that follows.

2 Q. But what way is there to reduce all stones (...) some general heads, to
the end we may distin^uish them the better, and learn to know them?

R. The Stones and Rocks which grow in the ^and, (Metals and Minerals excepted)
are;

1. Such as cannot endure the fire, but when put unto it, are burnt to Lime.

2. Another sort is of such stones, which without the addition of any thing
else, are by fire mel^ed into Glass.

3. A third sort is of those that do of themselves endure the fire, but with
Salts and other additions, suffer themselves to be run down or melted into
Glass.

Now all these stones are not wholly devoid of Metal; for they are operative
and living, as well as all other stones in general, whether great or small,
(the high Mountains and Rocks not excepted) and every one of them, in the
measure and order wherein they are placed, are parts of the great body of the
world.

3 Q. What is properly the Nature and Essence of the first of these three sorts
of stones, viz. of those which do not abide the fire, but are burnt to Lime?

R. These stones are partly of a Sulphurous nature, as we may perceive by
several of them, that when they are rubbed together, a sulphurous smell comes
from them. In these stones the fire continues after calcination, so that
afterward they may in part be reduced to a fixed Salt: and forasmuch as some
part of the fire is entered into them, and together with them turned to Salt (as
before has been showed, that Heat being a Spiritual Essence, pierces into
Bodies and dwells in them) and forasmuch as by reason of the violence of the
fire, the said stone has lost its stony nature, it endeavors to return to its
own nature again, as to its rest, and therefore it attracts the water with such
violence, that the water is heated thereby, as daily experience teaches.
Afterward when this Lime is made up into Mortar, it turns again into stone,
wherewith Houses may be built upon the land, yea and in the water also.

But when the Lime in any building is exposed to a moist air, the said building
cannot continue long, but the Lime will become impregnated with Saltpeter: for
the Saltpeter which is in the air, is by means of moisture conveyed into the
Mortar or Lime, and mortifies it, and quickens the small quantity of Salt which
is in the Lime, into Saltpeter and common salt: which happens the sooner, in a
place where Privies or Stables are; as Saltpeter men know very well how to
ripen and reduce Ashes and Lime to Saltpeter, by means of Saltpeter water.

Here by the way it will not be unworthy our remark, that when Saltpeter men
do first begin to boil their Saltpeter, and have no mother of Saltpeter,
which is a ferment wherewith they ripen their Saltpeter, they must then spend
much time in boiling, until the scum arises, which is that they call the
mother of Saltpeter, and which afterward they mix with their earth, for to
put the same into fermentation. But when once they have got this mother, then
they dispatch their work with more case: in like manner as we see that Bakers
and Brewers do carry on their work with more ease and speed, when they have got
yest and leaven, than they could do before when they had them not.

4 Q. What is the nature and property of the second sort of Stones, which of
themselves without any addition are melted down into glass?

R. These show that they do in part consist of a fixed Salt, as in the
following description and elucidation of the third sort of stones shall be
declared.

5 Q. What is it then we are chiefly to observe, about the third sort of
stones, which do of themselves abide the fire, but with addition are melted
down to glass?

R. These stones, as for example Chrystals of the Mountain, Flints and all
other fix stones, are of this sort, of which glass is made in this manner.
First, these stones are made red hot in the fire, and and then cast into the
water, by which means some part of the fire abiding in them, makes them soft
and friable, that they may more easily be reduced to powder: afterward this
powder commixed with Salt, is put into the fire, that they may melt together;
and that it may melt, more Salt must be added to it, than the glass stands in
need off, for to render the fixed unfusible stone fusible. When now this powder
is molten, it must be taken hot out of the oven or furnace, and cast into cold
water, that it may be broken again, and divided into small particles, to the
end the superfluous salt which is in it, may in the water be separated from it.
The oftener this operation is repeated with the foresaid powder, and the oftener
it is put into the fire to evaporate the relics of the Salt, and is melted
down again, the better and purer will the glass be, and become almost like to
the unfusible Crystal of the Mountains.

From what has been said, we may gather these following observables. First,
that Salt has a very particular affinity and union with stones, as proceeding
both from one Mother; wherefore when of them both an artificial Crystal is
made, they become so united to one another, that common water can no more
separate the salt from the stone.

2. We are likewise to consider, that the forementioned stones (which are as
the body of the glass) must contain a small part of unfusible Salt, to which
the common salt may join itself, when with the stone it is melted down to
glass, and so in proportion unite itself with the stone, in order to the
reducing of it into glass, as has been mentioned. The same also happens in
Metals and Minerals, when precious stones are artificially made of them.

3. We are to take notice that in the making of glass, the salt cannot be
perfectly united with the stone; because the operation is mechanical and not
natural: wherefore also by the addition of more salt, the salt may be wholly
separated from it, and the glass be consequently reduced again into its former
sand and salt.

6 Q. Forasmuch as so great diversities and changes of stones are to be seen
every where in the world, and that they, as well as the Rocks themselves,
contribute to the fruitfulness of the earth, would it not be necessary to Treat
more largely concerning them?

R. Yes, and therefore for the Readers further satisfaction and information in
this matter, here shall begin a Dialogue with stones, together with their
answers to the questions propounded to them, to the end, that if any please,
they may carry on and finish the same for their own satisfaction: seeing that
it may be Mechannically or Mathematically demonstrated, that the stones have an
operative life in themselves, from whence all sublunary Creatures derive their
corporeal and united essence, from which they cannot be separated.

The stones then were questioned in manner as follows.

1 Q. Were you stones so created at the beginning? And have you always been such
as you are at present, viz. (as you are commonly reputed to be) dead or
lifeless things.

R. If thou desire to know us and our essence, then thou must be able well to
understand our way of Reasoning and Speech, for we were created to bring forth
all living Sublunary Creatures, and to give them a body; for we are the Earth,
which is made of the Heavens, and the end of our working is, that in a
continual Revolution with increase and multiplication, we may become Heavenly
again; as may be seen in the History of our Creation, Genesis 1. 10, 11, 12. that
all things stand in a wise order; and try whether by thy utmost skill and
endeavor thou can find out one Sublunary Creature (be it of what kind it
will) that either has been, or is now at present, which did not receive its
Corporeal Essence from us, or can be without us, or that does not stand and
abide in continual union with us.

2 Q. Whence is it then that men say you are dead?

R. Consider all our operation and working, and so thou will be taught to
understand thine own Axiom the better, and find more truth in it, viz.
Corruption unius est Generatio alterius; the Corruption of one thing is the
begetting and bringing forth of another thing. For the fields will in part
declare thus much to thee, that when they have given forth their strength in
corn, they must then for some time lie fallow, until they be mortified again
and get new strength.

3 Q. Are the Stones and Rocks then the very same, as ye were created from the
beginning in all your parts without alteration? Or are ye continually and
without ceasing renewed in all your parts, so as that ye stand in need of
constant food and nourishment, for your maintenance and growth as other
Creatures do?

R. Thou do answer thy self, for we are not God but Creatures, as well as all
others that have their original from us, as our Children. How can it be then
that we should be immutable, and not need, as well as they, to be renewed by
food from the air and water?

4 Q. Do ye Stones and Mountains every where continue, as ye were from the
beginning, always in the same form and figure, or are not ye also subject to
mortification, so that in some places ye become leveld to the ground, and
turned into valleys?

R. Go and make an observation and inspection into many and diverse places of
the earth, but especially in the midst of Europe, where (as it were) the Navel
of it is, and particularly in the Principality of Sultzbach, in the upper
Palatinate near Bohemia, where there is a Spring whose water divides itself
into two currents, of which the one runs East, and the other West, and pour
forth themselves into the Rhine and Donaw. In the same place thou will meet
with many Mountains and high Rocks, which are altogether mouldred and
mortified, and others that decay and dye daily. For in many places you see
stones standing right up of different heights, it may be a hundred foot high
more or less, and ten, twenty, thirty, or forty foot broad, which you may judge
to have been the heart or kernel of some great Mountain, that formerly stood
there, and now is so far spent and decayed, and (as it were) died away. Below
upon the ground, near these great standing stones, are several great and
unmovable stones, that are fallen down: and in many places thereabouts, thou will perceive that the lesser stones, wherewith the fields thereabouts are
filled, are in part every year plainly, and so as cannot be denied, mouldred
and turned into an Earth, or fat clay, by which means the fields are made so
fruitful, that there is no need of dunging them before they sow Corn there.

In the said Principality of Sultzbach, thou will also find many holes or
Caverns, under the said perished Rocks, and that their Root is consumed and
devoured, like as wood is by worms; insomuch that many passages are found
there, into which those that enter, must take lighted Torches with them, that
they may be able to find their way in the said Caves, which extend themselves
to many miles. In like manner thou will find there, many curious high
stone-arches, which are higher than any that are found in Churches. From which
instances thou may clearly see and know, that in some parts of the world the
Mountains and Rocks do die and perish, and are changed into valleys.

5 Q. The question is, whether it be possible, that a man within the short
limit and time of his life, should himself see and be assured, that new stones
are produced which were not before?

R. In the forementioned Caverns and vast stony arches in the Principality of
Sultzbach, (and elsewhere in such stony places) thou will find a clear
transparent water, which men and beasts do drink of, and has no singular
distinguishing taste, and which drops down from the old perished arch, and does
by degrees fill up the said hollow or cavern again, with another new production
or birth, distinct from the former, viz. with an hard transparent stone, which
is fixed in the fire. Moreover, thou will find, in sundry places where the said
water has dropped down, that great pillars or columns are made by it of
different figures, which look like ice, and are greater than any pillars of
Churches. Thou will also find in other streams and Rivers, that the water
produces several sorts of stones; and there is one stone, among the rest,
which in a short time is produced by the water, called Terass-stone, which when
it is ground and mixed with Quicklime, in the stead of other Sand, the same
abides firm in the water, and unites well with the Lime.

6 Q. Might not another and clearer instance of this matter be produced?

R. In the forementioned Principality thou will find very hard Rocks, which
may wholly be burnt into Lime; and within the same, in the midst of the firm
stone, thou will see several great and lesser holes, of two, three, or four
inches or more round, which within are grown over with a transparent white skin
(as it were) or rind full of sparkling, shining, glittering, and polished
Chrystals, like Diamonds, and set in so curious an order, as it is impossible
for any Artificer to imitate them: some of which are, one or two inches long,
all of them six cornerd, and every one of them most curiously polished. All
these Chrystals are fixed in the fire, so that they are of another nature than
their Mother, of whom they are born and brought forth, which (as has been
said) is a hard Limestone.

And like as these Crystals are found in these Rocks; so in other Rocks thou will meet with diverse other sorts of stones.

7 Q. Is it possible for a man in his lifetime to see how the Rocks makes
holes in themselves, and in them bring forth other stones? And how these again
are changed, and yet other properties and figures?

R. Thou will find in Tyrol, at a place called Schwatz, in the Silver Mine
there, a sort of very hard stone, which is fix in the fire, transparent and of
a whitish color, which opens itself visible to the eye, like an Ulcer or
Fistula, and does by degrees through a little hole, thrust forth its birth or
foetus, in the appearance of a green and bluish thick moist pulp or seed,
which afterward grows hard, and changes itself into a green and blew stone,
which is called a Malachite, and is good against many diseases. And the deeper
men cut their way into the said Rock, the more of such places do they find;
which are filled up with the ^oresaid Malachite. So that it cannot be denied,
put that the Rock (as a Mother) opens her self for to bring forth her Child,
and this Child does afterward still change it self into other shapes until it
arrive to its perfection. For thou will often find such Sexangular Crystals,
which in one part continue transparent, whilst the other part of them remains
opace, dark, and metallic, and becomes heavier in weight, without any increase
of its outward bulk, and keeping its former shape and figure. It is further
observable, that these Crystals have every where in all their parts, their own
water, as the nourishment which they have from their Mother, that by means
thereof they may further work out themselves, even as the Rocks (which are
their Mothers) do. And this water may be got out of them by distillation.

8 Q. Is it not possible to find out a mean to know the further specialities
concerning these young Chrystals, and other Stones, viz. Whether they do grow
on to a greater bulk, until they have attained to their due magnitude, age, and
maturity? And whether their growth and increase be by opposition of something
from without? Or whether they increase in all their parts by means of their
inward powers and life, even as a Child grows up to be a man? As also whether a
way might not be found out, whereby we might be assured of this truth, and also
find it so to be by experience almost everywhere, and consequently that we
should not need merely to believe it, or to take a Journey to those places
where these Rocks are; as if this truth were limited to only, or shut up in
one place, but rather that she might everywhere stand open to the eyes of all,
as is highly necessary it should be: for Wisdom is everywhere, according to the
testimony of Solomon, Prove. 8. verse. 1, 2, 3.

R. Observe therefore such Stones which be thoroughly interwoven (as it were)
with several veins and strokes of various colors, which are everywhere to be
found, and known by every one. As for example: Thou may find black Stones
with white veins, which are wholly of another nature than is the Stone it self,
and can very plainly be distinguished from it; which veins do intersect one
another through and through from all sides: and these will answer to the
Inquiry thou have made. For consider with thy self, how it is possible that a
Stone should grow thus by apposition of parts from without, that every one of
the said strokes or lines should abide so curiously and exactly every one of
them in their order and proportion, and keep their several colors. And if thou will but well weigh and consider this, thou will find that it is absolutely
impossible that this should be done by such an apposition of parts from
without, but rather that it must of necessity proceed from within centrally to
its circumference, outwardly in various ways and manners, according to the
different kind and property of the Stone, and thou thereby wilt perceive and
acknowledge, that the Stones have at once opened themselves in several cracks
and slits, and that out of the same, from each side of every such crack or
slit, a juice or moisture comes forth, which interposing betwixt the sides of
the slit, separate themselves still further from one another; as it happens in
the breaking of a Bone, when the parts of it are healed together again.

And that thou may be assured that it was a whole Stone, and that a slit or
crack was made in it by it self, and that from within to without, and that it
did not come from without; all the parts of it will show thee the truth of the
whole. As for instance: When thou breakest a Stone into several pieces, thou
can set them together and join them again, so as one may perceive by the eye,
that they belong to one another. And if a man should have lost a piece of the
said Stone, it were impossible for him to find another piece that should every
way exactly suit with; or to join the parts together again so duly and
orderly, as that one should not be able to perceive the disconformity or
unfitness of the strange part which was thrust in amongst the rest. Wherefore
also if thou will mind it, when thou find a Stone with such veins in it,
thou shall commonly see that both the sides of the slit or crack between which
the foresaid vein runs, do belong to each other; so that in case the vein
should be taken away, thou would find that both the sides would exactly close
and fit together (like two Sticks slit from the same piec^ of wood): for those
sides did both grow at once* and was before one whole Stone. Furthermore, thou will see that these diverse cracks or slits came at several times; and thou
may exactly perceiv^ how one vein runs through the other, and from thence
evidently conclude, that the intersected vein^ must needs have been before the
intersecting one.

Also here in England thou will find in the Field^ (in Worcestershire and
elsewhere) many little Pebble-stones of different colors and figures; and
amongst them (especially if thou will take notice of those that are white as
Snow, and somewhat transparent) some of which have many cracks or slits, but
yet hold fast together and keep their shape. Others again thou will find of the
same color, which in their cracks or slits have small subtle veins of several
colors, which veins still grow wider, and do enlarge and expand themselves so
far, that the Pebble-stone thereby loses gradually its former shape and
figure. Sometime thou will find that the crack or slit does but reach half way
through the Stone, and a thick vein in the form of a Triangle growing in it, so
as the other end of the Stone continues whole. From whence we may gather, that
there is a life in Stones which is operative, and can according to its
property, and in its rank and order, fashion, bend, and move it self. In these
veins thou will often find little Crystals, which stick fast in the same, and
are all of them Sexangular, and curiously po^^shed in the same manner as was
said before. These Crystals are also sometimes changed, and ^ecome tinctured
with diverse colors like Precious ^ones, according to the Metals or Minerals
they ^re found with, even as in the Mountains.

Thus thou may find in these little Pebbles and ^ther Stones, an Image and
Representation of the great Mountains; and from them learn to know ^n some sort
the nature also of the Mountains themselves.

Besides all that has been said already, this following instance may give thee
some further information concerning this matter, viz. thou may meet with many
sorts of small Cockles or Snails which have little Stone-houses, which
Cockle-shells are very Stones. And because the Hollanders have no other
Limestone, they burn these Shells into Lime; and their Buildings continue as
long as any other that are built with Lime, that is burnt from Limestone.

Now these living Cockle-shells tell us, that they grow and increase not from
without, but from within, according to all their parts, together with the
Cockles or Shellfish which is in them, without any loss of their form, figure,
and color. For if their bulk were increased by an apposition of parts from
without, how is it possible they should retain their true proportion in all
their parts, or that the house and building should exactly correspond in
bigness to the Shellfish that is in it?

We do often find other Cockle-shells growing fast to these said Shells, which
are the product of a petrifying water, which proceeds from the other Shells, by
which means they become united and cleave close to them. Even as we find that
oftentimes many Pebbles and other Stones are united and baked together, as in a
piece of Dough, yet so as that every little Stone keeps its own essence and
form, so as it is easy to distinguish them from one another. And this
ordinarily is produced by means of an efflux or out-flowing of a petrifying
water, either from the Stones themselves, or from the Matrix wherein they are
formed.

Therefore these and the like instances have given occasion to the rise of that
common error, whereby (without any further considering of the matter) it has
been concluded, that Stones are increased from without only by an apposition
of parts, without any either life, order, or inward spermatick principle.

And to conclude, observe likewise, that when thou shall take to task and
examine Agates, Marble, Serpentine, and Porphyre-stones, which are of several
colors, and look narrowly upon them through a Microscope, thou will by this
means be able to distinguish (as before was mentioned) the multifarious kinds
and forms of Stones. And in Stones which are intermixed with two colors, as
with white and red, (as some Porphyre-stones are which are sprinkled with
white) thou will find, after a narrow search, that that part which is white in
the Stone, was before the red, and that the white brought forth the red: for
thou will perceive in some places of them many white parts, which in their
growth and increase were once conjoined, but by means of the red, are separated
from each other, though they did before belong to one another, and that the red
parts, as their blood, proceed from them.

We proceed now to a brief declaration of the operation and being of Metals,
and partly how they are interwoven together: which Metals are six in number, or
seven, if we count Mercury together with them, (which is a water from whence
the other Metals are produced or born) and withal we shall set down some short
Remarks concerning Minerals and also Salts, (which are few in number, and stand
in harmony together, that the understanding of man might the more easily be
able to comprehend them) in order to give the Reader a small hint how he may be
able to discourse with them, as well as with the Stones, forasmuch as they are
very nigh of kin, and that there is a great union between them; for that the
Stones are the Mother and Workhouse of the Metals.

SECT. II.
Concerning Metals, Minerals, and Salts.
ANd here first of all Mars appears in his whole Armor; wherefore it is fit to
put this Query to him.

1 Q. Why art thou the first of all the rest, who appear'st and show thy
self?

R. See thou not that I must have a nearer alliance in many respects with all
the Metals, more than they (the rest of my Brethren) have one with another. And
seeing that men cannot be without me, and I amongst all the Metals am of
greatest use to them, both inwardly and outwardly, by water and by land;
therefore at Sea they must make use of my Needle in their Compass, because I
have the North Pole for my propriety, as my Magnetical living power does
demonstrate, as also does my Minera the Magnet it self, which here in England
is found near the Tinn-Oare. Moreover, the whole Earth is everywhere, as it
were, sowed over with Iron-Oare. And besides this, all other Metals are best
known unto me, so that I am best able to give an account concerning them.

2. What meanest thou by that expression, when thou say, that thou art
profitable to man both inwardly and outwardly?

R. Ask the Earth and the plowed lands where Corn grows, from whence both
Beasts and Men do receive their life and nourishment.

3 Q. How am I to understand this?

R. Look into my several Changes, and thou will find by experience, that when I
am polished I shine like a Looking-glass, and am the hardest amongst all
Metals, especially when I am changed into Steel; so that between my Hammer and
my Anvil, all Instruments of Life and Death, and of Peace and War, are made and
formed out of me, and through me alone can be prepared. Moreover, I amongst all
Metals am soonest changed into Earth or Clay: for when I am moistened with
water, I become rusty, and by means of this corruption, corrosion, and
suffering, am changed into a yellow-colour'd body, which Painters use, and is
called Oker; this Oker, when put into the fire, is changed into a red color,
forasmuch as it still retains the nature of Iron, and into which the greatest
part of it can be changed again. This foresaid yellow Oker thou will find in
many places where my Mine or Oar is, which when it is again joined to me by
those that are skilful and experienced, it makes a softer and better Iron than
the ordinary, because my superfluous sulphur is meliorated in the said
yellow-colour'd body, through rust, and is no more so apt to melt, but withal
is less stony and brittle: whereas the other Iron wherein the said sulphur does
abound, is more apt to melt, but more stony and brittle when it grows cold.

4 Q. How can the Sulphur have this effect upon Iron?

R. When thou take a red-hot glowing and fiery piece or gad of Steel, and
hold to it a piece of Brimstone, then the Steel will drop down melted
together with the Brimstone, and the drops will be hard, stony, brittle, and
unmalleable, though more easy to melt; but when the said drops are often put
into the fire, until the Brimstone be burnt away from them, then they become
harder to melt again, but withal are softer and more malleable as they are cold.

5 Q. What further changes is this foresaid Oker subject to, when it is not
melted down to Iron, but is permitted to die and perish?

R. When the said Oker it is changed into a yellow Earth or Clay, which by
means of the fire is afterward baked or burnt into red Bricks, which by their
red color show that there is some Iron left in them; which in the fire (by
means of some additions) may be separated from them. And forasmuch as we find
everywhere throughout the whole World, such innumerable multitudes of Fields
which consist of such a yellow Clay or Earth, what can we else conclude from
thence but this, that the said Earth was formerly Iron-oare, which now partly
of it self, and partly by means of the Plough-share, is every year more and
more cut off from its Root or Mine, whereby its mortification is promoted, so
that it can be changed or transmuted into Grass, Herbs, Trees, and Corn; from
whence men and Beasts have their Food and Being. And from all this, thou may
lear the great inward profit and advantage I do afford to mankind.

6 Q. From this it may seem as if the advantage which arises from this change
or alteration, were the reason of the Iron Age (so called) wherein men,
forasmuch as they were sed herewith, became Iron-like, and cannot yet change
the food, and consequently also the ess^^ce, which they receive from the
Iron-like Earth, into a better and more noble essence, viz. into Love; so that
the Iron-like nature of their food still remains: which they, as being also
Iron-like, do draw magnetically into themselves, and therefore must be ruled
with a Rod of Iron, to the end that the said Iron-like nature, through
multifarious mortifications and advances, may be gradually improved,
transmuted; and lost through fire, and be changed into the Gold of Love and
Unity, which is fix in the fire. Give me therefore now an account also of the
outward advantage or profit thou affordest men.

R. Concerning my Hammer and Anvil, I have (by the way) mentioned something
before; to which may be yet added more particulars, according as Dr. Gilbert
has described them. When I am formed into the Needle of a Compass, and made
hot, if then they let me lie upon the Anvil toward the North till I am cold, I
shall by this means better turn my self toward the North, than if I had
received that impression from the touch of the Magnet.

Moreover, all sorts of Instruments, which men make use of throughout the whole
course of their lives, in times of Peace or War, for their Buildings, Clothes,
Food, etc. and for service in all the necessities of humane life, are mostly
made out of me, and are prepared between my Hammer and Anvil, as has already
been mentioned. Therefore it is with reason that I have the preferrence before
all other Metals, and thereupon also it is that I speak first, as being (as it
were) the Foreman and Captain of the rest.

7 Q. Mention has been made before concerning Steel, and the way of making it
which is known, but not the reason of it; shall we suppose then that this
knowledge of making Steel came by chance into the World? or is it possible for
us to understand how and why this is the way, and no other?

R. When a man for example, to make a proof hereof, takes some apiece good
tough Iron-rods of a different thickness, as of half, three quarters, or a
whole inch square, and a foot in length, of the best and toughest Iron, and
puts the same into a Melting-pot, whose depth must be a quarter of a foot more
than the length of the Rods; then set the Rods about one inch distant from one
another, and then fill up the interval with these following Materials close and
hard pressed together, so as they may neither touch one another, nor the
Melting-pot, viz. R. Dust of Beech-coals sifted through a coarse Sieve, and a
like quantity of the Ashes of the same wood, well mixed together, and with
these fill up the Pot, the closer and harder the better, as well above as
below, and on all sides. Then cover the said Rods or Gads the thickness of a
thumb-breadth with small Sand, and cover the Pot with a lid that shuts close,
and well-luted; then place the Pot upon a small Iron Trefoot, that the fire may
freely play about it in a calcining Furnace, which is then made wholly red-hot,
or candent rather, so as that the Pot may be red-hot likewise through and
through for the space of nine hours; then the said Beech-coals which have first
been chark'd (as being burnt to Coals in a close fire, and now again are put
into a like fire, where they cannot wholly fume away) will press the Rods of
Iron by means of their evaporating Sulphur now kept in and repressed; when they
are grown red-hot and endeavoring to fume away, they somewhat drive the two
volatile parts of the Iron (of which the Iron is made and produced) from within
toward the outward pores, which the fire has swelled up and opened. One part
of the Iron which we just now mentioned, is a combustible Sulphur which is
partly burnt and consumed by the fire, and is partly turned into a vitrioline
Salt; the other part is a white and somewhat fix Sulphur which remains still
sticking in the pores of the Iron, and can go no further, for that it is so
pressed on all sides with the fire in the circumference of the Iron, that he is
forced to stay within his own bounds; and it is this Sulphur that properly
makes Steel. This we may see clearly, and to the eye made good by experience,
when we take Iron-rods that are flawed, and have Bladders in them, and if we do
to them as with those mentioned just before, we shall find in the hollow
blown-up Bladders of the Iron, a white sublimed powder, which is the white
Sulphur but even now mentioned; which is the proper efficient of Steel, and
dwlleth in the outward parts of the Iron, and makes the Steel more fusible than
the Iron is in it self.

This Steel when it has been several times heated in the strong heat of an
open fire, and hammered, then those particles of the white Sulphur, which were
driven into the out-parts, do evaporate, and then the remaining is turned again
into Iron, as it was before. And if we will proceed further, and often repeat
this Operation, we shall finally observe, that the said Iron or Steel will for
the greatest part thereof be turned into the foresaid white Sulphur.

The reason why the Iron-rods are to be taken of a different thickness, which
we put into the Melting-pot, when we intend to make a proof of Steel, is this,
that one that is curious, and a Lover of these Inquiries, may be able to
calculate the heat and the time, that thereby he may see which of the Rods in
the said heat is quite turned to Steel throughout, and which are not yet wholly
transmuted, but retain still in the midst of them a long unchanged streak or
thread of Iron; by which means he shall exactly perceive how long the fire must
be continued, before the thickest of the said Rods or Gads will be pierced
through and through, and wrought by the fire, and wholly turned into Steel. And
as for those Gads which in the midst of them retain something of Iron, they are
by experience found to be good to make Spanish Swordblades of, forasmuch as the
tough Iron which they have in the midst of them, makes that the said Blades
will not snap or break.

This likewise is the reason, that if we take two Coat-Armours of the same
thickness and weight, and turn one of them into Steel, yet so as that some Iron
may be left in the midst of it, we shall find that the one of these
Coat-Armours may be pierced and shot through; but that the other which is
turned only in part to Steel, cannot, because the Iron in the inside of it,
makes that it cannot break, and the outward Steel that it cannot bend.

Furthermore, when we take out the Iron-gads that were an inch thick, when
first we put them into the Melting-pot, we shall find that they be grown
thinner, though they be not burnt from without. From whence we may in part
perceive, that the combustible Sulphur (which makes the Iron to be lighter, and
its h^e to be more black and leaden-colour'd than that of Steel is) is partly
evaporated and consumed in the fire.

When we give Steel and Iron the same heat, and afterward quench them in cold
water, we shall find the Steel to become white like Silver, hard and brittle;
but the Iron on the contrary, black and tough.

This hard and brittle Steel is not fit to make other Instruments of, except
Files; but when we let the same lie a little longer on the fire, we shall then
see that its whiteness will be changed into a yellow, and the yellow into a
red, and afterward the red into a Skie-blue, and at last also this Skie-blue
into a black color; and when we let the same thus cool by degrees, without
quenching it in cold water, or exposing of it to the Air, then it will be
somewhat soft. But when we quench it when it is of a yellow color, then it is
fit to make Instruments of to work with in Stone or Iron. And when we intend to
make of it Ingravers Tools, we are to observe that that part or corner of the
ingraving Instrument (being yet apiece in its ends) which attracts most
Iron-dust, when one works with it in Iron, is the fittest part to ingrave with,
because that there it is most hard and tough. Also observe, that when we make
the smaller ingraving Tools and quench them in cold Quicksilver instead of
cold water, they prove very good. But when Steel is quenched whilst it is yet
of a blue color, then it is fit to work with in wood.

8 Q. But what may be the reason why Steel when it comes into the cold, grows
harder; but when it is in warmth or heat, it grows softer?

R. Take a Gad of Steel of a foot long and make it red hot, and thou will find
that it is grown a quarter of an inch longer in the fire than it was before;
for the fire has expanded or dilated it. But when Steel comes into the cold,
as into cold water, it contracts it self and becomes closer, because the
volatile Sulphur and the fire it self, also is by this means shut up in it;
which is the reason that it grows harder.

9 Q. But how are these two parts of the Iron, viz. its combustible and fix
Sulphur naturally and mechanically woven and united together?

R. The word Weaving will somewhat instruct and inform thee of this: for in
things that are mechanically woven together, thou will find two sorts, viz.
long and short Filaments which are twisted into thread; and some short threads
(so they be not too short) we see may be mixed together, and spun into a long
sort of thread, of which Linen, Cotton, Silk, and Woollen Stuffs are made,
which serve for making of Cloth. And secondly, as for the shorter Materials,
as Hair and the like, which cannot be spun into a thread without the addition
of other longer Hairs, yet may (by reason of their shortness) be artificially
and conveniently entangled so together, as by means of hot water they are
fulled into Felts to make Hats of. And this is the second way of weaving.

The third sort of weaving is this: When Linnen-cloath which is woven of long
threads, as also that which is made of Hemp, Nettles, Cotton, Silk, etc. being
first worn out, are made to Paper, viz. by beating them very well upon an Anvil
in the water with Hammers, until they become like fine flocks of Wool, or the
down of Feathers; and then these small Linnen-filaments are put into a Copper
Sieve with water, and after the water is run through the Sieve, it leaves those
little Flocks entangled, and, as it were, woven together, (as was mentioned
before concerning Felts made of Hair) and when the water is quite pressed away
from them, being put between Woollen-cloath, the Paper is made, which hangs
together, and may be bended and folded at pleasure without breaking, for that
it is compacted and made up of many subtle Hairs of Filaments.

This Paper when dipped in Glue-water wherein Allome has been dissolved (that
it might not cleave together and be too stiff) and afterward dried, becomes
thereby better and fitter for use. But when too much Glue is put into the
water, the Paper is made too stiff and brittle, and will sooner break than
bend, and that because the little Filaments cannot move themselves at liberty
as before.

Moreover, when the Linen Rags are beaten overmuch, so that they be reduced
into little round Pellets, then no good Paper can be made of them, but it will
be apt to break; because these round Pellets cannot so well be entangled and
woven together, as the foresaid thin Flocks. And this is the only reason, why
no fine Paper can be made of coarse Linen. These various Textures may be
exactly observed and perceived by the help of a Microscope.

It will not be amiss on this occasion to speak something concerning Flax, and
the way and manner of well preparing the same; which is as follows. When we
take Line-seed, and sow it in the same place where it grew before,
notwithstanding that the Earth be well plowed, roled, raked, harrowed and
broken, so that it is very fine, as if it had been sifted through a coarse
Sieve (for in this manner the ground is to be prepared) and the seed sowed
therein very thick together, to the end that the stalks may grow up slender and
long, as having but little nourishment; as also that the stalks be several
times broken down by sitting upon them. viz. once when the Flax is weeded; and
again secondly, when they find that it grows up too fast, and that the stalks
grow too gross or thick: But yet notwithstanding all this, we shall find that
the Flax will still grow coarser and coarser, as long as it is sowed in the
same ground; for that the Line-seed in that place does unite it self too soon
with that Earth; and consequently grows up too fast. But when this seed is
sowed about fifty German miles from thence, in another far distant and strange
soil, and by that means comes (as it were) into a suffering, then it grows and
becomes good and fine again, as before. For the thin stalks have as many hairs
or strings in them as the thick; and every hair or string has again all its
hairs or due members, parts or smaller filaments, as well as the grosser and
coarser have.

But if any should try to make the coarse hairs or filaments of Flax thinner
and finer than they a^ naturally, by artificially dividing of them, the^ the
Linen made thereof, will prove thin and a^ to tare, because by this means they
are put out ^ their due nature and strength.

And as we find it happens to Flax, that (as abovesaid) by suffering (as by
breaking and tra^splantations) is meliorated: the same also we s^ in Trees by
means of Grafting, in Oculation, and^ Yea, and in Man also; for all suffering
is like a consuming fire which purifies, exalts and works (...) change for the
better. And here by the way (...) may take notice, that where in Holy Writ
men^tion is made of fine Linen, there it admits of (...) singular and wise
signification.

10 Q. Hitherto has been spoken concerning Mechanical or Artificial Weavings:
but now to return from whence we digressed, what is the Natural Weaving, and
how may we come to know and understand the same in Metals?

R. Metals consist universally of a hot and cold Sulphur, as of Male and
Female; both which the more intimately they be united, or naturally interwoven,
the nearer those Metals approach to the nature of Gold. And from the difference
of this union (according to every ones proportion and quantity arises the
distinction of all Metals and Minerals viz. according as the said Sulphurs are
more or less united in them.

11 Q. If Metals be produced and consist by the union of these two, where then
is there room for a third Principle of Metals, which is vulgar^y called Salt,
according to the Chemists; who make Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury the Principles
of ^ll Metals?

R. This indeed is only an aenigmatical Speech of theirs: For when we see that
the superfluous combustible Sulphur, which is found in great quantity in the
Oar of the perfectly united Metals, is by mortification, transmutation, or
calci^^ation changed into an acid Salt, it cease to be Sulphur. Now forasmuch
as all of the said Sulphur can be changed into a Salt; so as that it cannot be
re-changed into Brimstone back again (because the Salt serves only as a mean
to dissolve the two perfect Sulphurs, in order to unite them) and whereas the
white incombustible Sulphur, can never be changed into Salt; how can we then
make out three parts or principles which concur to the composition of Metals?
For two Fathers to one Mother would be monstrous and superfluous; forasmuch as
both of them are but one and the same. Likewise also there cannot be two
Mothers to one Father, in order to the bringing forth of one Birth; for so
there would be two Births, out of each Mother one. For it cannot be denied,
that for to generate a Child, whether Boy or Girl (of which the one has more
of the Fathers nature and property, the other more of the Mothers) there needs
only a union of Man and Wife; and it is impossible that a third thing should
be superadded essentially.

12 Q. Thou have now showed, that to the birth and production of Metals, Male
and Female viz. a white and red Sulphur are required. Now^ we see that in the
most perfect Metals, as Gold there is but little of this red Male Sulphur, as
its yellow color does witness, which red Sulphur does essentially join and is
united with the Female^ white Sulphur; and so brings it into such a compact
body: What is the reason then that so great a quantity of combustible Sulphur
is found in the Mines where Metals are; which Sulphur may be changed into
Vitriol, in which several Metals in the Mines have been found dissolved?

R. Thou may find an answer to this, in the answer to the next foregoing
question; and in this question itself also, viz. that this Vitriol which
proceeds, or is prepared from the said Sulphur, may be serviceable and helpful
to dissolve Metals, but not to make them.

13 Q. We have been in part informed concerning the red Male Sulphur; but may
not likewise an instruction be given us concerning the white Female unwoven or
unwrought Sulphur (which is not yet united to the red Sulphur, or come to be a
Metal) and is found by it self alone; as also together with the Metals, how may
we find and distinctly understand the same?

R. Concerning the white Female Sulphur, which in the German Tongue is called [
hutte^ rauch] and by Artists, Ars Senum or Arsenicum, and is found by itself,
and likewise with the perfect, as well as imperfect Metals in great quantity;
it is unnecessary for us to treat of it at large here, because the Books of
Metallurgist's do give us sufficient information where the said Sulphur is to
be (...) with in great quantity. This Arsenicum is by the Greeks called (...),
probably from (...) or (...), a Man, and in the Hebrew the word that signifies
a Man is [ Geber] from whence we may infer, that Geber the famed Author, has
writ with understanding, and like a man concerning this subject. This Arsenick
may also be compared to the Serpent, of which mention is made, Genesis 3. not
only because of the poisonous property common to them both; but also because
the Serpent was to eat the dust of the Earth, even as the Serpent Arsenick must
eat Ophir or dust of the Earth also; according to what elsewhere has been
hinted, viz. that Ophir signifies Dust, Gold, or Sand.

14 Q. Is it not necessary to have some information also, concerning the
Natural and Mechanical Weavings of both these Sulphurs?

R. When these Sulphurs are each of them alone or by themselves, they continue
brittle as Stones, so that they cannot be wrought with the Hammer, and when
they are added to Metals by fusion, they spoil them, and make them impure. As
for instance: When we take Arsenick and melt it down with Silver or Copper, it
robes and spoils the Silver and makes it impure; and Copper it makes white,
hard, and brittle.

Also when we take Arsenick, which is somewhat more fixed (by reason of a little
red Sulphur, which is in part nraurally interwoven with it) as white Zink,
called Spelter, which partakes of Lead, and is in the Silver-oare at Goslar,
found in a Lead-mine that contains Silver; and which sublimes and sticks fast
to the sides of the Furnace, partly in the form of a Glassie crust or rind, the
other part of it being fusible, like to Regulus of Antimony: when, I say, we
cast a fourth part of this in to molten Copper, it mechanically or externally
interweaves itself with the said Copper; so as the Copper by means of it gets a
golden color, higher than any common Brass, which is made of Copper by the
addition of Lapis Calaminaris.

For when this stony glassie crust, which sticks to the sides of the Furnace,
is taken thence and put to Copper it will not melt with it, in order to make
Brass of it. But when this glassie matter has been buried several years in the
Earth, the Salt of the Glass dissolves therein, and becomes nitrous, and by
this means becomes a good fluxing powder; and being ground to powder, it is
added to Copper instead of Lapis Calaminaris, and produces a gold colored
Brass, as was mentioned; insomuch that at Goslar some Goldsmiths make Rings and
Chains of the same, which to the eye may pass for Gold, but is not so in
weight. But when any one goes about to hammer this Metal whilst it is hot (as
they do Gold, Silver, Copper, and Iron) it breaks all to pieces under the
hammer: For the white volatile Sulphurous Zink, which (as a strange guest) is
unnaturally through heat forced into the Copper, as soon as it grows hot, and
that the Copper is swelled up, sublimes away gradual^y through the Copper;
which is the cause why (...) must of necessity break when struck with a hammer:
But when it is grown cold, we shall find upon the Anvil, in the place where it
was laid to cool, a white vapor (the same as the Lapis Calaminaris does in
Brass) evaporated, sublimed and sticking to the Anvil, and then it will let
itself be wrought with a Hammer, as Copper and other Metals are.

By which instances we may partly understand the natural, and partly also the
mechanical texture in Metals. To what has been already said, this further may
be added: that when we take the common Arsenick by itself (which is very
volatile and poisonous) and mix it with Copper, it makes the Copper white and
hard indeed; but cannot by reason of its volatility abide in the fire so long
as Spelter does; forasmuch as it does not partake of the red Sulphur, and
consequently is not so fixed and constant. For the volatility in Arsenick and
Mercury is the cause, that when the fire enters into the same, it makes them
swell up, and divides them into small Atoms that can hover upon, and fly away
in the Air, which cannot be in the fixed Metals, forasmuch as they be by nature
so well and close woven together, that the fire cannot separate or divide them.
And the better they are thus woven by Nature, the more like they be to Silver
and Gold, as shall be more largely declared, when we shall come to treat of
Gold in particular.

The common burning Sulphur which is foun^^ abundantly in Copper-oare, and some
of it also in Iron, does melt easily with the same, and make^ them of easy
fusion, because it finds its like in them, with which it can easily unite
itself, which it cannot do in Gold and Silver, because it does not find its
like so open in them. But when we melt Antimony with any metals, we find that
it makes it to be easily melted, for that it consists (...) both Sulphurs, viz.
of the combustible and incombustible. The white Sulphur has an ingress into
Gold and Silver, forasmuch as their whole body consists of it, and both the
Sulphurs have their ingress into all the other metals.

Before Copper can be brought to its true form, which gives it the denomination
of Copper, it stands in need of passing many fires and heates more than other
metals, to the end that the great quantity of common combustible Sulphur which
abounds therein may be separated from it. And when it is now become Copper, we
find it in a twofold Sulphur, viz. the Red and White Sulphur interwoven
together, from whence afterward arises and appears. 1. Its deep red color.
2. That it can like Gold endure a very strong fire before it is melted. 3. Its
malleability, as well when it is hot as when cold. 4. Its softness, forasmuch
as it suffers itself to be beaten out into thin leaves; and in all this
resembles Gold and Silver. 5. That both these Sulphurs by reason of their
strict union commonly fly away together in the fire, in the appearance of a
Green-blue flame. 6. That it gives tincture and color to pale Gold; which so
strongly and intimately unites itself with the Gold, that the fire can no more
rob the Gold of it. Likewise, that seventhly, It may be melted down with Gold
and Silver, without making the same brittle: and for these reasons (very well
worth our consideration) it is that the Ancients have endeavored to prepare an
excellent Medicine out of the same, comporting and agreeing with the nature of
man. Concerning which, upon occasion, more may be expected in my Annotations.

When a man will melt Iron, he must make use of a great heat; because it
contains much of a hard melting, unripe, white, fix Sulphur; which is the
reason why cast Iron which has not been wrought with a hammer, has so little
toughness in it, that when we strike upon it with a little hammer, it leaves a
dent in the surface of it; but when we strike on it with a great hammer, it
will sooner all break to pieces then bend; and that because the texture of it
is not such as it should be (according to what we mentioned concerning paper)
and the reason of it is, because Iron stands in need of so great heat for to
melt it, that by means thereof, it is reduced into a thin water; whereby its
natural texture, is, for the most part, broken; which we experience when we go
about to make it tough and malleable again; for then to bring it to its natural
threads or filaments, and them to their natural posture, we are fain to melt it
anew with a gentler fire, so that such thick drops may fall from it as makes it
into a Cake; which Cake when taken out of the fire proves malleable, and may be
hammered on the Anvil, because now it is grown tough. For every one of these
forementioned drops becomes a thread, and these threads twist themselves
together, and the more the Iron is extended on the Anvil, the tougher it grows;
because the threads continue the same in number, but become every time thinner,
as before was said of Flax and Linen. But when afterward we give this tough
Iron too great a heat, it will break to pieces again, as soon as it is cold,
and will not be tough, as it was before, and that by reason of the threads
being broken again through the great heat.

Furthermore, we may remark this Experiment, viz. when we take a foursquare Rod
of Iron of an inch thick, and make it red-hot in the fire, so that the sparks
fly from it, and afterward lay this Iron on the Anvil, and swiftly and
continually blow against the same with a common pair of Bellows, that the Iron
will melt and drops will fall down from it, which drops are no more Iron, but
are changed into Glass: for the wind which comes out of the Bellows, causes
that the fire cannot come out of the Iron, but is continually driven back by
the wind; and thus by its being forced to remain in the Iron, it unites itself
with it, and turns it to glass.

Again it is to be observed, that when a Smith does not understand the true
proportion of his fire, and the strokes of his hammers, as well as of the
thickness and heat of his Iron, but does stretch and expand his Iron farther,
than the heat of it will suffer him, with an intent to make the threads of it
the thinner, he will lose by so doing, and shows thereby that he does not
understand his craft: for by this means he will break the threads of Iron. And
the same is to be observed as well in Gold, Silver and Copper, for a short and
general rule.

And on the contrary, it will not be amiss to take notice also of this
experiment, that when a quick and active Smith takes a cold rod of tough Iron,
of the thickness of a finger, and hammers the uttermost end of it, which is to
be four square, very swiftly, then the said part of the Iron in the extending
of it, will be made wholly or thoroughly red hot, after that he has briskly
given it twenty strokes with the hammer.

15 Q. Seeing then the Metals are distinct and different from one another, must
we therefore suppose them every one to have a distinct and different form and
life, each for it self?

R. That all Malleable Metals have their proper and peculiar form and life, by
virtue whereof they are woven in such an order, and according to the property
and measure of every one of them, that they cannot so naturally and essentially
by fusion be united with one another, as they are in themselves. All Soders
will make out this very clear-all all things must perform their Revolutions, in
manner as was mentioned before, when we treated concerning the Earth.

68 Q. Now when all things in the Stomach of man are in good and due order, may
not we conclude that it must then needs communicate health to the whole body of
man, especially to the heart and head? And like as in the Body the Heart is a
more principal part than the Stomach, might we not compare the same with the
most holy place in the Temple? Moreover, as the Temple was open above, and that
the Head of man is placed above, and is the upper part of the body; might we
not compare it to Heaven, whither the smell and savor of the Burnt-offerings
and Incense mounted continually? And when all this is done in its due order,
will it not again come down from the Head as from Heaven, and so perform its
Revolution in order to perfection?

69 Q. Now for the way and means how this right and due order may be kept and
observed in the Body of Man, has not God fully declared this to the People of
Israel by Moses, and ordered the same to be registered in Scripture, as an
everlasting Record, viz. that they should eat no Creatures produced by
Putrefaction, nor such as be of a ravenous nature; but only clean Beasts that
divide the Hoof and chew the Cud, and revolving so the Meat?

And does not God hereby point out to us, that such Creatures as these were the
next to Man, and the fittest to be enobled into his nature? And whereas the
Beasts amongst the Jews were to be killed, without any affrightment, as much as
possible, to this end their slaughtering Knives were most sharp and keen,
without the least notch in them, and that for this end, that all cause of pain
and fright to the Beasts might be removed, whereby otherwise their blood might
be obstructed?

70 Q. Forasmuch then as Man ought to be a King and Governor in his Kingdom
which is within him in his Heart, must he not (in order to keep good rule by
means of his spiritual upper and under Officers, each in his own place and
order) so rule the whole Body, that all that is in it may be dispensed and
regulated in good order? And by consequence, must not there be many under
Officers, all under the command of the Stomach, which can and must distinguish
what is good or bad for man? According as we see in some sick persons, in whom
there is yet some strength of life left, that ofttimes there arises in them an
appetite to some strange thing by means of which, when they can get it, and
feed upon it, they soon after recover: And may not the wonderful healing,
renewing, and out-working power and property which is in these under Officers,
be further discerned in Women with Child, in that those things many time serve
to procure their health and recovery, which would be the death of others if
they should take them.

71 Q. Moreover, may not the extraordinary mentioned Arsenick. When we go about
to separate this Red Arsenick from its redness, it divides itself into two
parts; a small part of it yields a common combustible Sulphur, and the
remaining part is white Arsenick, which white Arsenick that has no mixture in
it of Combustible Sulphur, that is by art perceptible, is also found in great
quantity in the Silver Mines, as the red is found in Gold-oare.

From some Silver-oare they sublime the common white Arsenick, which is every
where to be sold, as made out of Cobalt, and in that part of it which in
sublimation stays below, a certain matter is found, which the Germans call [
Saffer] in which are many round Pellets or Globules, which in melting run
together, and are called Wismut or Bismut, which are altogether white like
Silver, and heavy, but very brittle as glass, and consist of very thin leaves,
lying upon one another, as it is in Izing-glass, and shining like the Regulus
of Antimony, which is their form.

When this Bismuth is sublimed, it changes into common Arsenick. But as for
the Saffer, when it is melted with Potashes and white sand, a Painters blew,
commonly called Smalt is made of it, which blew color shows that it is of a
Lunar nature, as indeed there are found several Cobalts that are rich in Silver.

As to what concerns the forms of Metals, I shall only in this place make
mention of the form of Gold, as being the most perfect Metal, and consequently
must have the perfectest form of them all: for the other imperfect Metals
especially are changeable, wherefore also their form cannot be so well
perceived, as that of the perfect ones. This likewise is the reason why the
perfect Metals retain their form upon the Test, and do not turn to glass
without some addition, as all the other Metals do. Upon this account also it
is, that the fire cannot dissipate these perfect Metals nor break their form,
so as that they should be divided into little particles, and carried away upon
the wings of the Air, as it happens to Mercury.

When we make an Aqua Regis of Vitriol or Alloms, Saltpeter, common Salt, or
Salt Atmoniack, slowly rectify it, and then dissolve Gold in it, and
afterward cohobate and digest the same several times, and at last slowly
distill the water from it; and pour again of the same Aqua Regis fresh upon it,
digesting and cohobating as before; and last of all distill it with a boiling
fire in a low Retort: we shall find that some part of the Gold will come over
with the water, and that when any of the said water impregnated thus with Gold,
falls upon any ones hand, it tingeth the same with yellow spots, which
afterward are changed into a bright and beautiful red; and last of all into a
high purple color. This fine dissolved volatile Gold, if we let it stand long
in the Air, so as the strength of the water may gradually evaporate, or put to
it a little common water distilled, and then let it stand for a while; we shall
observe and find, that the subtle volatile Gold will by degrees form itself
into little flat stars, and when we hold the Glass against the light and shake
it, we shall see that the whole water is full of such little shining Golden
stars, which afterward swim on the top of the water, and twist and weave
themselves in one another; so that we can plainly and visibly to the eye
perceive, how the said Stars do vitally and naturally form themselves, and
afterward reduce themselves to a Body again. From which instance we may exactly
see and perceive the form of Gold, and understand the reason why fine Gold is
so flexible, and suffers itself to be Hammered out into such thin leaves; yea,
and yet further to be expanded afterward, when fine Silver is gilded with the
foresaid thin Leaves, and Hammered out; for we find that Gold in conjunction
with Silver, suffers itself yet further to be dilated and hammered out, until
the Silver begins to appear or shine through the Gold, and becomes after that
whiter and whiter, until that the Gold at last grows so thin, that it vanishes
from the sight and comprehension of man.

This visible, glorious, spiritual Body, may lead us to endless glorious
thoughts and meditations, viz. if we consider that in all the Sands (as was
said above) created by God, there is a little Gold and Silver, from whence all
other Beings do exist and have their Being, as proceeding from their Father the
Sun, and their Mother the Moon: From the Sun, as from a living and spiritual
Gold, which is a mere fire, and beyond all thoroughly refined Gold; and
consequently is the common and Universal first created Mover (even as is the
heart of Man) from whence all moveable things derive all their distinct and
particular motions; and also from the Moon, as from the Wife of the Sun, and
the common Mother of all Sublunary things.

And forasmuch as man is, and must be the comprehensive end of all Creatures,
and the Little World (in whom all Seeds exist and are perfected, which
thenceforth can never be annihilated) we shall not find it strange that he is
counseled, Rev. 3. v. 18. to buy Gold tried in the fire (the Greek words are
(...), Gold, that is, all or thoroughly fired, or all a mere fire) that he may
become rich and like unto the Sun; as on the contrary, he becomes poor, when he
does abase the Arsenical posion, so that his Silver by the fire must be burnt
to dross, which comes to pass when he will keep and hold the Menstrual Blood
(out of which he in part exist) for his own propriety in his own thoughts and
out workings, and does not daily offer up the same in the fire of the Sun; to
the end the Woman may be clothed with the Sun, and become a Sun, and thereby
rule over the Moon: that is to say, that he may get the Moon under his feet, as
we may see, Rev. 12. v. 1.

17 Q. Forasmuch as we are here treating concerning Gold, it will not be
inconvenient to query yet further. Whether is any thing more to be considered
and taken notice of about Gold, viz How many sorts of Gold there be? And how
Gold is properly formed?

R. There are three sorts of Gold.

1. There is a white Gold, which has the weight and all the qualities of Gold,
except the color: for it is white as Silver, and has either lost its color,
or has not yet attained it.

2. The second sort of Gold is of a pale yellow color.

3. The third sort is an high yellow colored Gold. But how little the tincture
or color does that is in Gold, we may perceive from what follows.

1. In that the first fort, viz. the white Gold, in its substance is as
ponderous as any other Gold; from which hint or instance we may see, how little
the color conduces to the being of Gold; seeing it is not at all, or very
hardly to be perceived in its weight and substance.

2. And this also appears yet further, from this new instance, viz. When we
take notice how full and plain a yellow color a little Saffron tingeth a great
quantity of Milk (as if it were a white Gold) yea, into as high a yellow as
that of the most yellow Gold; and not the least part of the white color can be
perceived to remain in the Milk; nor yet is the weight or ponderosity thereof
sensibly increased by the Saffron.

Moreover, some Handicrafts men, as Guilders and Gold-beaters, will be able to
give us full information, by what means they bring the two first sorts of Gold,
viz. the white and pale yellow, to a high yellow, such as the third sort of
Gold has: to which end they make use of diverse means, as indeed it may be
performed by several caements, yet those that consist of Cuprous and Antimonial
materials, are found to be the most effectual: wherefore their use is to melt
their Gold several times with Antimony, and as often blow it off again; and
thus they give their Gold an high yellow color, as was said before.

Now as to the tinging and coloring of Gold, it is very well worth our further
taking notice, viz.

1. That the tincture of Gold thus colored by Art, is so united with it, that
with fire alone it can never be separated from the Gold, no more than its
natural color can be separated from it.

2. That an imperfect Mineral or Metal, which has not yet obtained a perfect
body (such as Antimony or Copper is) should be able to give a perfect tincture
to a perfect Body.

3. That the Gold takes in no more ticture than it has need of, and belongs to
it; so that notwithstanding its being never so often melted with Antimony or
Copper, yet it does never attain to a higher color than its pitch is.

4. Now seeing that pale Gold (as has been said) which either has lost its
color, or not yet attained it (and yet is good Gold) may receive an higher
tincture, which has a sure and firm union with the Gold; upon this ground many
have endeavored to separate the color, together with that part of the Gold,
which is and must necessarily be united to it.

As to what concerns the forming of Gold, the expert refiners of Gold and
silver are able to give us some information. For we shall find that in Cities
of great Trading and Commerce, where much wrought Silver is melted down, in
order to make essays for Coining or Minting, when some of them meet with old
Silver Salt-sellers, in which Salt has stood a long while, so that they are
become black on the inside, and deeply colored with the Salt, they are used to
cut out that part of the Salts, and not to melt it with the other Silver, for
that they have found, that a little Gold is contained in it, and that the Salt
has united part of the Copper, which is mixed with the Silver, by a long and
natural opperation with the said Silver.

18 Q. What may be the cause why Gold and Silver (as was said) are not by fire
upon the test turned to Glass, as other Metals are?

R. For that they have a perfect form, which the Lead by his vitrifying
property cannot break (as he does in other Metals) wherefore it is that Lead is
made use of on the Test, as the tryer of all Metals.

19 Q. How does it come to pass that Lead in a less fire is turned to Glass,
and in a stronger is again changed into Lead?

R. The reason hereof is this: When we turn a hundred pound of Lead into Minium
or Red-Lead, we find that the said hundred pound are augmented ten pound, viz.
when the Calx of Lead is ground to powder, and afterward exposed to a small
fire, the Lead borrows part of its weight from the fire, in which it was
calcined, and part from the water, in which it was ground; and each of these
two severally, and both of them jointly, do help to turn the easy melting Lead
to Glass; because the fire is naturally and easily reduced to a body in Lead,
by which means it also turns all other things into Glass. But when the Lead is
exposed to a greater heat in a strong fire, it is forced to leave its
vitrifying part behind, viz. the forementioned gained ten pounds, which from
the fire and water were super-added to it, and consequently turns to a Metal as
it was before; and then it pierces all melting-Pots whatsoever, which is the
reason why no Vessel is found which can hold such hot Lead.

20 Q. Is there no way to be found out for to make Glass of Gold?

R. Yes, for by adding Iron to it we may make Glass of Gold; and by this
addition the form of Gold is partly broken; forasmuch as the Iron contains much
unripe fix Sulphur, wherefore also Iron requires a strong fire for to melt it
down, and when it is molten with Gold, it is difficult to separate the Gold
again from it, without loss of the Gold.

21 Q. Is there nothing more to be taken notice of concerning Gold?

R. I shall mention one thing more for a conclusion of this matter, viz. when
fine Gold is melted several times with an equal quantity of Regulus of
Antimony, and after every time ground small, and sublimed with common
Sublimate, and afterward edulcorated; this has been found (when well
prepared) good for many sorts of diseases, and particularly for the cure of
some kinds of the Dropsy, exhibited to the quantity of two, three, or four
grains; and that for this reason, because that each time it is melted, some
part of the Gold is volatilized, and loses its Metallic nature, and becomes
disposed to take upon itself a Vegetable nature, as being now exalted and
higher digested, wherefore it can (together with the Antimony) the better
perform its opperations in man, and become united with him.

22 Q. What is now further to be observed about the other Metals?

R. I shall speak of some of these with all possible brevity; seeing that (as
has been said) they are not so perfect, that we can as exactly observe and
take notice of their texture and formation, as we can in Gold and Silver:
wherefore what here follows, may serve for a short indication and hint for
others to enlarge upon, as well concerning the other Metals, as concerning
Minerals and Salts.

The reason why the fiery Sulphur alone does make the white Sulphur malleable,
we may in part gather from what has been said already, and in part also from
what we find in Lead and Tin.

For Tin is the lightest amongst all Metals, and that by reason of the great
quantity of combustible Sulphur it contains; as appears when a small portion of
it is mixed with Silver, it makes it all brittle and unmalleable, which does
not happen so when it is mixed with fine Gold.

And on the contrary, when Lead is mixed with Gold, it makes the Gold
unmalleable; but has not the same effect when it is melted with Silver.

Now that the combustible Sulphur is the cause of this, may be further gathered
from this instance, viz. when we take filings of Tin and mix them with quarter
of Saltpeter, and put them into a Crusible upon the fire, then the Saltpeter
will kindle the combustible Sulphur; and at the bottom we shall find a small
portion of molten Tin, very hard, and ringing, or sounding. And if we repeat
this opperation, the whole will be changed into an unmalleable powder, of which
white Glass may be made; and of itself is no more reducible into Tin. So that
we see and may be assured, that the malleability of Metals, and their metallic
from, does proceed from the fiery Sulphur; as before has been made out at
large, when we treated concerning Gold.

We may likewise take a further observation of this, from an experiment of
Lead; which can endure a certain degree of fire upon the Test, before it turns
to Glass. When the said Lead is dissolved by Alkalies, and Salts or Oil, which
take in the Sulphur and separate it from the Body, the Lead by this means
becomes changed into a volatile running Mercury, which can no more endure the
fire, as before, but is cold and running like water, and without a metalline
form.

From all which instances we may clearly perceive, that Metals are made by the
union of both the foresaid Sulphurs; as also that the Metals differ from one
another, according to the quantity and proportion of Sulphur they have in them,
and according to the degrees of their natural union in order to perfection.

Now if any one should go about to imitate Nature in this her process and
endeavor, mechanically to effect the same mixture, which Nature performs in
her own way and order; he will find himself mistaken, for that his eyesight is
not sharp and piercing enough, perfectly to spy and perceive the fine and
subtle inter-weavings of Nature, and much less are his fingers fit to knit and
work the same. And in case he should try to do it, by a strong fire of fusion,
let him first well consider what before has been set down concerning this
matter; for he shall find that Nature does nor make use of any such violent
fire.

But if any should think to make use of violent, strong, corroding waters, in
hopes by this means to dissolve the Metals and Minerals, and to unite them
again; he will find by experience, that this will not succeed neither;
forasmuch as Nature never makes use of any such violent and unnatural things in
her process about Minerals: for all Salts which are found in the Earth are not
violent, but natural, as (amongst others) Vitriol is.

From both these deductions we may conclude, that a strong fire does burn and
change a thing, but does not therefore annihilate it, as may be seen in the
foregoing instance of burnt Firr-wood. In like manner, when Brimstone (which is
as a fire) is by heat or putrefaction changed into Vitriol, it has no more
ingress into Metals; and none have hitherto been found that have been able to
reduce it to Brimstone again. But a warm Fire gives and communicates growth and
life to a warm moisture: therefore when a strong Fire has reduced Brimstone to
Vitriol, yet the true proper life is not therefore there also, but time is
required that a warmth may excite and kindle life in the moisture. Wherefore he
that seeks for a Menstruum, which without any changing of it self, shall
perform its solutions, will find himself extremely mistaken; for that nothing
is to be found in the World that is not changeable, concerning which matter
much more might be said.

Common Sea Salt is a thing well known, and does not differ at all from Salt of
the Mountains, or Sal Gemme. Now this Salt appears in two different forms, viz.
as a living, or as a dead Salt; as we may perceive evidently to the eye, when
we take a piece of flesh and lay it at the bottom of a Vessel which is full of
little holes, and put under the same a Tub or other Vessel, and then strew salt
upon the flesh, which must be turned with the unequal part upwards, so that the
salt as it dissolves may run down from it; we shall find that the Pickle which
drops down through the bottom full of holes into the Vessel that is set under
it, when by boiling it is turned to Salt again, will retain the form and taste
of Salt, but its virtue and life will be gone, so as it will be impossible to
salt or season any thing therewith any more because its life is entered into the
flush, and has preserved it from corruption: for we shall find by experience,
that the flesh (in this case) will continue sound and good, but the salt not
so: for with reference to this it is what out Savior speaks of, Mat. 5. 13.

Saltpeter, which is made of the Air and Earth as in Stables, and out of
Mortar, as also out of Ashes, does not at all differ from the mineral
Saltpeter.

Now it remains only to speak something concerning Salt Armoniack. This same
is found in great quantity in the Territory of Naples, at (...), and elsewhere,
where the surface, of the ground is hot, by reason of a fire that burns under
it, where in many places we find this Salt sublimed being mixed with Brimstone;
which being made into a Lie, and afterward evaporated by degrees, yields a
perfect Salt Armoniack, and is fold in cakes at a cheap rate, because in those
parts it is got without any great pains.

Concerting the commixture and union of Sulphurs, which are either done
manually, as in the dry way, viz. by trituration and grinding; or with Mercury,
by way of amalgamation or solution, or lastly, by way of sublimation, I leave
it to the Lover of Truth for to judge of them himself, whether they be natural
ways, or ever like to reach the desired end, viz. the producing of a perfect
union: for without doubt he will find that it is impossible it should be
effected by any of these ways.

23 Q. We find everywhere up and down in the World, many Books, and we hear
much spoken concerning the Philosophers Stone, which should have the power to
tinge and transmute all meaner Metals into Gold and Silver; by which
imagination many have precipitated themselves into great sickness and poverty:
the sum of which amounts to this, that one grain of this Stone or Tinature can
suddenly on the Fire change a whole pound of Lead or Mercury into Gold; whether
therefore is it thus, or no?

R. In case this be true, the thing must be subject to the judgment of the
Senses, and be comprehensible; and if it be supposed so comprehensible, we'll
propound these Queries, which contain only my thoughts, and as such, are only
propounded to the curious for further examination.

1. How can it be, that such a small quantity of Tincture should enter into the
foresaid quantity of Lead or Mercury, and pierce through them per minima, so as
to change them into another perfect body, such as Gold is, so as to abide fixed
in the Fire, and not be changed into Glass, as before was said?

2. If so, it must follow that the whole body of this pound of Gold which is
changed out of Mercury, can be through and through, or wholly nothing else but
the white incombustible fix Sulphur: and forasmuch as there are no more but two
Sulphurs of which Gold consists, (as before has been showed) shall then this
grain of Tincture alone be sufficient to change the white part of Mercury into
Gold, and to give it the solar tincture? Or shall we suppose that Lead and
Mercury contain in them a fiery sulphur not united, which (by means of the
Tincture) must be united to the said white part? which is well to be noted.

3. We are likewise to weigh and consider how it can be, that such a little
body of one grain should naturally be able so to subtiliate it self, as to be
able to pierce a body of a pound weight in all its parts; which commonly is
held to be impossible, because they suppose the Metals to be mere gross bodies,
and that one body cannot penetrate another.

4. But if any should say that a spiritual body is able to do all this, as we
see that Sulphur being in Fire changed (as it were) into a spiritual body, does
with its heat or warmth pierce through all bodies in all their parts, so as
nothing remains shut up to it. As for instance, when we put Mercury into a
Crucible upon the fire, and when he swells up by the heat of the fire, before
he takes wing and flies away, and sulphur be melted together with him, with
what a great noise does the molten sulphur enter the Mercury, though indeed the
sulphur cannot unite it self wholly with the Mertury, because the sulphur which
is in Mercury is not so perfect as that which is in Copper, neither is it
united with a white, perfecting, and superabounding sulphur, of which also Gold
and Silver have no more than they stand in need of for themselves, as being
that which has given to each of them their peculiar form, that so they can be
melted without being broken or dissipated by the fire. How can these
difficulties be disintangled?

In answer to this, may be alleged, that if such a Tincture should be found,
it must be of such a nature, as to be able to pierce through all the parts of a
metalline body, and to make it fix in the fire, and incombustible, and
consequently must be incombustible it self (and easy of fusion to stop and fix
the Mercury, before he flies away from the fire) to the end it also may not
fly away like the sulphur, but abide in the said bodies united to them;
forasmuch as those bodies in all their parts have a part of the perfect Metals
united with them.

Seeing that (as has been mentioned before) one grain of Tin does pierce
through a whole pound of Silver, and one grain of Lead a whole pound of Gold,
so as that they cannot (without difficulty) be separated even upon the test it
self. Wherefore we are to consider, that if both these (which are but imperfect
Tinctures) be able to do so much, then the Metals cannot be such gross bodies
as commonly they are thought to be; but that indeed they are spiritual bodies,
and are the life of stones, in which they are found; which likewise their very
essence it self does declare, in that they are malleable and may be broken into
many little parts, and then made whole again as they were before, without
losing any thing of their form, because they retain their seminal and
attractive virtue, which the fire cannot rob them of.

24 Q. Here another doubt arises, viz. If such a Tincture should be found that
could tinge all Metals into perfect Gold, the Question is, Whether or no Silver
is to be excluded, seeing that it is fix in the fire, and has in it self a
perfect essence consisting of a white sulphur, and has also a white body, but
possesses very little united fiery sulphur, which yet alone is that which
makes it to be Silver and malleable but is too little in quantity to give it
the weight of Gold, or to advance it to the color of Gold, which
notwithstanding it must have, before that it can become Gold; and a grain of
Tincture seems too little to give a yellow color to so great a quantity?

R. The whole body of common Gold is nothing else, and cannot consist of any
thing else but Silver, which is a perfect body, and wants nothing of being
Gold, but the fiery male Tincture. If now it should happen that a certain
quantity of Silver should be tinged into Gold with one grain of Tincture, and
that the said grain should be only sufficient to turn it into Gold, without
giving it the true color, to supply this, we have already showed that the
Gold-beaters and Guilders know how to give it a fixed yellow Gold-colour.

25 Q. It may be further queried, how it comes to pass, that Antimony and
Copper can give to pale Gold its perfect color, and so can help others,
whereas they cannot help themselves? As also whence it is that they can
communicate this color to Gold and not to Silver, or any other Metal, and not
to themselves?

R. Forasmuch as Gold does want this color, and must have it as its due and
property, which it has either had before, and now lost it, or has not yet
attained to it, but must attain it for the future; wherefore the Gold, to
satiate it self, takes in this Gold-colour in order to its perfection, and can
naturally take no more than it ought to have.

26 Q. There remains yet one considerable Question to be asked, viz. forasmuch
as it has been said, that Gold naturally takes in no more of a Golden color
than it stands in need of for it self, and that a tincture which must first
turn the imperfect Metals into Silver (as being the body of Gold) and
afterward tinge them into Gold; must consist and proceed from Gold and Silver
(for no third or strange thing can be here admitted) and yet the said Tincture
must not be Gold or Silver, but the very first principle and beginning of Gold
and Silver, and so be partaker of the end and perfection of Gold and Silver,
and have the sulphur of Gold and Silver in it: for that bodies of one nature
(as before mentioned) cannot mechanically enter into each other, as being both
of them equally hard to be melted. The Tincture therefore must needs be and
consist of just such a sulphurous nature, ( viz. which is easily fusible) as
the sulphur of Gold and Silver is of, which has given them their form, and as
it was before it entered into the composition of Gold and Silver, at the
beginning of their being made such. And forasmuch as the said Tincture is to
tinge the other Metals through and through, not mechanically, but vitally and
naturally, it must of necessity abound with the said perfect metallic yellow
and white Tincture. Now Silver and Gold (according to what has been said)
cannot mechanically take in more than they stand in need of themselves; the
Question therefore is, From whence such a Tincture as this must be taken?

R. Ask Nature of what she makes Gold and Silver in the Gold and Siver-Mines,
and she will answer thee, out of red and white Arsenick; but she will tell thee
withal, that indeed Gold and Silver are made of the same, but that thou will
not be able to find any Tincture there: for the Gold which is there in its
vital place where it is wrought and made, is killed by the abundance of
Arsenick, and afterward made alive again and volatized, for to bring forth
other Creatures, as Vegetables and Animals, and to give unto them their Being
and Life. From whence we may conclude, that Gold is not only in the Earth for
to be dug thence, and made into Coin and Plate: for should we suppose this,
it would follow, that an incomprehensible great quantity of Gold must have been
created in vain, and be of no use at all, there being vast quantities of Gold
which never are, nor ever can be dug up.

It is here also to be considered, that seeing (as was mentioned) Gold and
Silver are made volatile and mortified by the Arsenick, in order to their
entering upon another and a new life, viz. into a vegetable nature, whether the
Gold and Silver must not before be united with the Arsenick, as with their
Original from whence they proceeded, before they can be changed into a
vegetable nature, because it is the Arsenick which effects this new Birth in
Gold and Silver: And whether this Essence, whilst it is yet of a mineral
nature, and not come so far as to be changed into a vegetable nature, would not
be a Tincture, by means of which the imperfect Metals might be brought to
perfection? Since it is probable that the Gold or Silver which (by means of the
Arsenick) are now made spiritual, volatile, and fusible, may have ingress into
imperfect Bodies, pierce through them, and being thus united with them, change
them into their perfect nature, and make them more glorious? But these are
only curious thoughts: for if this should be true, yet how could we be assured
of it, forasmuch as all this is done in the Mountains, and consequently hid
from our eyes and senses.

And here for a conclusion, that we may lend an helping hand to deliver men
from many Diseases, Poverty, and much Toil and Labor, we recommend to their
serious consideration what follows viz. That seeing (as has been declared) to
Tincture of Gold or Silver (of which we have here treated at large) was ever
found in any Gold or Silver-Mine in any part of the whole World, nor can be
found, as is very aparent; what ground then is there of that old and great ^ry
spread throughout the whole World concerning such^ Tincture, whereby so many
thousand of high and low degree have been deceived, led aside, bewitched, and
precipitated into utter (...)?

AN APPENDIX.
WE will here briefly set down what is most considerable about the Tincture of
Vegetables, viz. what Dyers do ordinarily make use of for to extract their
colors, and to prepare the things they do intend to dye or color.

Now therefore all sour liquors, out of Fruits and Vegetables, as Tartar,
Vinegars, and all sorts of Salts, as Alloms, Vitriols, Salt Armoniack,
Saltpeter, Sea Salt, or Sal Gemme; and finally, Urines also are useful to this
purpose. Only Alkalies are not ordinarily to be used with the Materials
forementioned; for that when they are mixed with Acid. Salts, they cause a
praecipitation, and consequently a change; and therefore they are to be used
alone and by themselves.

All the Colors or Dies which we make use of in Europe, are only Mechanical,
and have no natural union with the things themselves which they color or
tinge, but are only borrowed and strange to them, and therefore may be
separated from them again, as at first they were introduced into them.

But if Dyers and Distillers would look about them, and consider what some
other handycrafts men make use off, in order to the bringing about of a natural
union of things, they might then be able to find out the true way of Dying. In
order to which, they need only to mind and consider the practice of some
Mechanics, whom I here shall mention. As,

1. Tanners, who do bring forth life in two several things, which commonly
amongst men are looked upon as dead, and unite them so together, as that
afterward they cannot by any art whatsoever be separated again. As for
instance, they take the Hides of Oxen, or other Beasts, and when by means of
Quicklime they have rid them of all the hair, and afterward thoroughly washed
out the Lime, they dry them, and then lay them to steep in water impregnated
with the strength and virtue of Oak-bark, wherein they let them lie for some
time, and then take them out again and dry them, and so repeat this moistning
and drying them again three, four, or more times, according to the thickness of
the Hides, and then after this they take out the Hides, and lay them wet upon
one another, strewing some powder of the said Oaken Bark between them, and let
them lie so till they grow naturally warm of themselves, and by this means the
life and virtue of the Oaken bark, becomes so intimately united with the life
of the Hides, that it is impossible to separate them again; so as a third
Creature is produced out of two Natures united together, as is a Mule. For the
Leather which before would quickly rot and putrify in the water, has by this
means obtained on Oaken nature, so as to abide in the water without damage; as
experience teaches us, how that such a piece of Leather has continued for
several years in a Pump, without rotting or putrefying.

We may observe the same likewise from those that make wash-leather, who also
do unite two natures, viz. an earthly and watery, so as that they cannot be
separated again, viz. they take several skins of beasts, and fetch off the Wool
or Hair with Lime, as aforesaid, and then wash them well and dry them,
afterward they moisten them thoroughly with Train-oile, and beat it well into
them, as a Fuller does when he fulls Cloth: this done, they dry them in the
Sun, or in a Stove, till they find that when the Skins are stretched out, there
appear some white streaks in them: then they moisten and work or full them
again with Train-oile, and dry them, as before, in the Sun, or beated room,
which they repeat so long, until the said skins, according to the proportion of
their thickness, have taken in and do retain enough of the said Train-oile.
Then these skins (being almost dried) are laid in heaps one upon another in a
stove or hot-house, until they begin to grow naturally warm of themselves,
which they try by thrusting their arm into the midst of them, for when they
perceive they are warm enough, they must one by one be turned, so as that which
was under most must now lie uppermost, to the end that all of them may equally
partake of the said warmth: for if they should grow too hot, and lie too long
upon one another, the heat would become too great, and burn the skins. Those
parts of the skins, to which the warmth has not been communicated, will have
no true union with the Train-oile, but the same may be washed away from them,
and the Leather continues the same as it was before. But what is well united
with the said Train-oile, never can be washed off again, neither can the Oil
be separated from it; forasmuch as it is now become of an Amphibious nature, as
partaking of the nature of Fish and beast at once.

3. In some places they make vinegar in the manner as follows; they take the
dry stalks of Raisins, and fill a Barrel or other great vessel with the same:
and when any one has got a large vessel, such as are the largest Rhenish-wine
Fats full of these, he has enough for his whole life time, for to bring wine
to a natural heat withal, and so turn it to vinegar. For when the wine is
poured upon these stalks (called Rap) and has stood a while on them, the wine
gets through the pores, veins, or hollow pipe vessels of these stalks, as
having formerly passed through the same or like, and by means of this motion
and passage it grows warm, and then is drawn off, and other wine drawn upon
them instead of the former; and by this means of drawing off and pouring on
again, they do make vinegar in Holland.

Now if Dyers would well mind and consider the practice and performance of
these three sorts of Handicrafts men, they would soon find the great difference
there is between the natural union which those Artists introduce into their
Materials, and their own Mechanical conjunction of colors with the subjects of
their Trade.

The Second PART Concerning the MICROCOSME: OR, MAN As being the Little World.
CHAP. I.
Of the Original and Essence of MAN, and his Union with the Great World.
1 Q. SEeing that the Creator of all Beings, before the foundation of the
world, and before ever they were brought forth, had and contained the same in
his mind and wisdom, even the little world as well as the greater, according to
the testimony of Scripture, Prove. 8. 22, 23. and the following verses; also
Wisd. 8. 4. Must not then the world, the greater as well as lesser, have their
Creator (as their Original and Beginning) within themselves, so as neither the
Creator, nor his Creature are separate from each other? which St. Paul
confirms, Acts 17. 27, 28. That the Lord is not far from every one of us, for
in him we live, move, and have our Beings.

2 Q. Since then the Creator in and through the Son of God, is every where
present in the Creatures, in the greater as well as in the lesser world, Man
(who is the Seed and Fruit of the Tree of the greater world) filling the same
in all parts, and working in and with the same, to the end he may advance all
things to their due perfection and glory, Col. 1. 16, 17. Hebr. 1. 2, 3. Wisd.
8. 5. Sir. 24. 7, 8, 9. And seeing it cannot be said, that perfection is come,
before the end has reached its beginning, and the beginning united it self
with the end, in order to a New Birth, and production.

The Question then is, whether both the great and lesser world, for to arrive
at their perfection, must not in all their workings aim at this, viz. that they
may return to their beginning, and to be united with it. And that seeing their
beginning is the Son of God, John 1. 1, 2, 3. Col. 1. 17, 18. Rev. 22. 13. they
through the Son of God, who co-operates in them, and with whom they, as the
members of a Body (in order to their glorification and becoming Sons of God)
must be united, that so they, in the Son, the firstborn, as their head, may be
joined again and gathered together, Ephesians. 1. 10. and further propagate
themselves and be meliorated still more and more, and without ceasing be
advanced from one degree of glory to another? Because else it would follow,
that God either continually must create things a new, which is not only
contrary to the unchangeableness of God, which God himself confirms to Moses,
Exodus 3. 14. in these words, I AM THAT I AM, compared with the 102 Psalm. v. 26,
27. and Heb. 1. 11, 12. but it is also contradictory to the clear and express
Testimony of the Spirit of God in Holy Writ: That there is no new thing under
the Sun; but that that which was, is the same that shall be hereafter. In like
manner, that there is nothing of which we can say that it is new; for it has
been heretofore in former times that were before us, Eccles. 1. 9, 10, 11. and
3, 15. Or we must conclude, that if ever this continual Renovation,
Melioration, and Glorification of the Creatures of God should come to cease,
that the Creatures by this means, viz by ceasing from rising higher and higher,
would either come to a stand, or else go backwards toward nothing, neither of
which can be admitted, not the first, because God always works in his
Creatures; not the latter, because this working of God in his Creatures, is in
order to their perfection and advancement, and not to their annihilation or
destruction. It would also follow from hence, that God would thus finally cease
from Creating (seeing, as has been hinted before, that no new thing is
created), which would also oppose the infiniteness of God, who is from Eternity
to Eternity, Sir. 43. 21. And who is also immutable and present in all things.
Likewise it is against the Holy Scripture, which witnesses that whatsoever God
does, continues for ever. Also that wisdom continues the same she is, and yet
renews all things. Moreover, that whatsoever is, lives and continues for ever,
Eccles. 13. 14 Wisd. 7. 27. Sir. 43. 24. Now whatsoever it is that has life,
must likewise have a continual out-going, or outworking of the said life.

3 Q. Seeing then that Man the Little World being created by God, must come to
such a state, wherein continually without ceasing he may be meliorated, and
raised from one degree of glory to another, and so becomes still more and more
God-like. (if I may speak so) or be incessantly advanced: because by this
continual Revolution and Glorification, he still comes nearer to God, and yet
can never come to an end of his approaches, (forasmuch as in God there is
neither Beginning nor End) but this melioration and glorification must continue
without end?

And will it not follow from hence, that man as being a Compendium of all the
Creatures of God, has had no (absolute though a respective) beginning, because
if otherwise they must also have an end. It follows also if they have had a
Beginning, that before the same, they were not, and consequently that they
sprang and came of nothing? Now seeing that this cannot be, because by this
means, a nothing must be conceived to be in God; whereas indeed he is the
Eternal Being of all Beings, Blessed for ever!

They indeed who imagine to themselves a Creaturely God, and according to their
gross conceptions, or their outward senses, shut up God in a determinate place
or circumference, consistently with this their imagination, must suppose that a
Nothing (which neither is, nor can be conceived of, or comprehended by
themselves or others) before the Creation of the world, did exist together with
God. For whatsoever is beyond the bound which they have set themselves, that
they call a Nothing. Or else they must assert that God made a Nothing, out of
which he afterward created all things; which is a contradiction, because a
Nothing cannot be made, but whatsoever is made or is, must be something.
Moreover, according to this assertion God must have made himself to a Nothing
(because there was Nothing then but God) which is very absurd. Since then, I
say, that this cannot stand, the Question is, whether we must not conclude,
that all whatsoever is, must be without beginning or end, and consequently have
an Eternal Nature and Being in it self, which without end or ceasing, must
further and further work out it self, and that in order to its rising to a
still higher and higher degree of perfection; but yet so as it never can become
God himself, though continually it be made more and more like unto him.

4 Q. Seeing then that all the Creatures of God in order to their melioration
and glorification, stand in an endless Revolution, in order to perfection, and
yet must be known and comprehended: and a thing cannot be known otherwise, than
by its end and operation, or out-working, as a Tree by its fruits; and that the
lesser world is the end and comprizal of all Creatures and Works of God, and
consequently an Out-birth of the great world, wherein all other Creatures are
comprised: the question then is, whether there be any other way by which man
may attain to a right knowledge of the great world, with and in all its parts,
than in and out of himself; especially since in him (as in the end and
abridgement of all things) the Beginning has manifested itself: for the End is
nothing else but a Beginning wrought out, that is, displayed into act and
manifested; so that the End is hid in the Beginning? And whether (consequently
to this) both the worlds have not a great affinity, and perfect likeness, yea
and unity one with the other: and whether they must not be wrought out with one
another, and thereby arrive at their highest perfection.

5 Q Now even as both these worlds the greater and lesser, must always stand in
harmony and agreement, and as in the great world (according to what in the
first Part has been showed) the Sun, Moon, and Stars, together with all other
Creatures of the great world, according to all their parts, do every moment
continually flow forth, and again take in, so as still a perpetual Revolution
is performed in them, in order to their perfection.

Must not then the same consequently happen with Man also, who is the Out-birth
of the greater world? Must not he I say, in like manner, flow forth and take
in, and that as to his whole Man, and in all his parts. So that an entire
Spiritual Ideal Man, may proportionably without ceasing slow forth from him (as
a fountain gusheth forth water according to all its parts, so as no part can be
assigned of which it may be said that it is not water) and return to him again.
As we daily see before our eyes, that this Ideal man, as he flows forth from
every man, so he is again taken in by every one that receives him through the
senses, and stays with the receiver, in order to a Spiritual operation or
out-working, which is performed in the Head and Heart, in order to its union
with the Soulish body of him who receives it. And because these out-going
Spiritual Ideal Beings, are not mere Spirits, but Spiritual Bodies, and bodily
Spirits, as being born of the whole man, who consists of the Soulish Body and
Spirit; and that all these Spirits have their original out of, and from the
Central Spirit of man, viz. out of the Heart, and are sent abroad as his
Messengers? Must not therefore these Messengers, perform that which they were
duly sent about, and go thither, whether the contral Spirit or will of man
designs and aims them, and in like manner return by revolution to man again?
And must not therefore the works of man follow him, which he has done in his
lifetime, whether they be good or evil? especially seeing (as was mentioned
before) that new Spiritual Bodies go forth continually from man, which belong
to him, and contribute to the whole man, for to make out his full measure,
until that member which he supplies in Adam or Christ, do attain to that
perfection which suits with such a Head; that so a perfect member may be joined
to a perfect Body, and a perfect Body united to a perfect Head?

Must not also finally those Spirits (as a great and well ordered Army under
their Captain General, or Adonai Zebaoth) and every least Atome, after they
have wrought out their revolution, return to man again, and unite themselves
with his Central Spirit, and so all these Spirits being united with the Central
Spirit, make up the whole man?

6 Q. When now a man has lived long, we may consider how many of these
Spiritual Bodies, must needs have flown forth from him during the time of his
life, seeing that (as has been elsewhere hinted) every three Months the whole
man is totally renewed in all his parts: all which parts or spiritual Bodies
which flow forth in the time of these three months, belong to the Regiment of
that whole Body, which in the said three months has been renewed.

And when farthermore (as follows from what has been said) out of every part
of man such a total Ideal man goes forth, and yet these altogether make up but
one man, though there be a very great difference between them, so as some are
in the state of Children, some of Youths, and others of Manhood, and these
again either good or bad: the question therefore is, whether they always
continue in these states of imperfection? or whether or no there be a way
whereby they may be advanced to their perfection, and so become right perfect
men, to the end that every one of them for himself, may become a perfect
member, in the perfect body of Christ.

And seeing that Christ himself in this world was to be perfected by suffering,
Heb. 2. 10. whether there be any other way to perfect these Spiritual Bodies,
than by suffering in this world; since no renovation can be brought about
without dying, and that all dying is suffering? In like manner whether it does
not follow from hence, that they must so often perform their Revolutions in this
world, until they attain to their due perfection?

7 Q. Forasmuch then as every man (in manner as is showed before) does send
forth this Spiritual Ideal Image of himself, as a Spiritual Body, or bodily
Spirit, from himself into another man or thing, which he lays hold of with any
of his senses, and at the same time receives a like Image flowing forth from
the person or any other thing he has laid hold off; so that every one is in a
state of uncessant giving forth and receiving in again; forasmuch as he
continually gives forth his own Image, and again takes in and receives the
image of every object. And seeing moreover, that this out flowing Idea is taken
in by the receiving party with great lust and desire, as if it were drawn in by
a Magnet; so that he becomes enamoured of the Beauty of the said Image, which
takes so much the deeper root in him, and becomes more powerful and operative
in him, by how much the more he loves the same; so that his Central Spirit does
image himself with it; how can then this forementioned giving out and
receiving (when it happens in due likeness and equality) be any thing else but
love it self, in such a degree as the Reception is? Now as the senses of man
through which this Image or Spiritual Body, and out going Spiritual feed is
conveyed into man, cannot be separated from Man, will it not follow from hence,
that the received Image, cannot be taken away from Man, before it be duly
wrought out according to the property of the foregoing reception or
conception? Of which we have an example in Thaman, Genesis 38. according to the
Female property, how that after the death of her two Husbands Er and Onan (who
were Brethren) Judah the Father of her Husbands, was to raise up and excite in
her the seed of his departed Sons, and so bring forth the seed which remained
in her of her two Husbands, and was not yet wrought out. Which likewise may be
supposed to be the reason why God expressly commanded that a Brother should
raise up the Seed of his departed Brother, Deuteronomy. 25. 5.

8 Q. Seeing also that this Doctrine, viz. that such a spiritual Seed, without
ceasing, goes out and in from every man, is represented to us by out blessed
Savior much more clearly and expressly in several places of the New Testament,
but especially Mat. 5. 28. where he faith. Whosoever looks upon a woman to lust
after her, bath committed adultery withs hers already in his heart: the Query
is then, Whether or no there be any Doctrine besides this, whereby all
difficulties may be removed, which not without ground are moved by the
objecting Jews, viz. how we can make out that our blessed Savior Jesus was the
right, true and natural Son of David, and consequently the true Messiah
promised by God? For that the Messiah was to be the Son of David, is questioned
neither by Jews nor Christians. But now it is evident from Luke 1. 5. and 36.
that Mary, of whom Christ was born, was of the Tribe of Levi, (that so the
Messiah might at once be both King and Priest, viz. a King by his Father's, and
a Priest by his Mother's side). Now in this case a satisfactory and
unanswerable solution of this difficulty cannot be found out, by which it may
appear, without the least injury to the pure and perfect virginity of Mary,
that our blessed Savior was also a Son of Joseph, who was of the House of
David, how shall we ever be able to make out, that our Savior was a true Son
of David, and consequently the true Messiah?

Besides, how shall we else be able with wisdom and exactness, to make up the
number of the fourteen Generations mentioned Mat. 1. seeing that otherwise we
shall find only thirteen Generations from the Captivity of Babylon to Christ?
Moreover, by what other way can we make out the reason why our Savior in the
New Testament is so often called the Son of Joseph; for Joseph and Mary being
promised and betrothed to each other, became by this means united in spirit, so
that this Image and David's spiritual Seed of promise entered into her, and hers
again into him, and became united together; and being united, were wrought out
by the Holy Ghost. According to which Position, we see clearly that Christ was
really a Son of Joseph, viz. of the spiritual Joseph, or spiritual
multiplication, increase, or propagation, seeing that in Joseph the total
fullness of the promised Seed of Abraham and David were concentred?

CHAP. II.
Concerning the Spiritual and Bodily Conception and Birth of Man.
1 Q. SEeing that every man can know by himself, and certainly acknowledge,
that all Images which enter into him through the Senses, do retain the same
bigness and measure of the original whose Image is received; may not we
apprehend from hence, that the central Spirit of man (being the Image of God)
with which these Images are united, does want no room or matter to receive them
in, and work them out in time? And seeing that no Image enters into this
central Spirit, but for this end, that in the same it may be wrought out and
perfected; must it not follow therefore, that the more of these good Images are
wrought out in the central Spirit of man, the more perfect such a man must be?

2 Q. Moreover, when the central Spirit of man which dwells in the heart, as a
Center, between the two extremities of his out-flowing and receiving faculty
(both which tend and are in order to Union) viz. as well in the upper extremity
the Brain, as in the lower parts, which is demonstrable by Anatomy: If the said
Spirit, I say, shall both receive and work out to perfection these spiritual
Images, and we know that one thing alone can perform no operation, because
wheresoever shall be any working, there must necessarily be one that works, and
one that receives, and so the thing working must contain both natures; will it
not follow then that the central Spirit of man, which is both male and female
in union together, has room enough in his inward spiritual World, to range in
himself every one of the received Images in the place which is alike and proper
for it; and to give them their proper and peculiar food, suiting with their
several Natures and Beings, by which the said spiritual Image may maintain its
Being, and attain to its Perfection? Forasmuch as by means of this food it
becomes united with the central Spirit, and in order to its further perfection,
becomes the properiety of the said Spirit, forasmuch as it cannot return to
nothing. May not we therefore conclude from hence, that the central Spirit in
man, in its male and female propriety, is able to work out in himself perfectly
all the Images of created things? and that in the same there is no distinction
of male and female, but that they both (inasmuch as respects the central
Spirit, and his receiving of the spiritual Images) are alike and perfect?

3 Q. Forasmuch as the spiritual Conception happens and is completed inwardly,
as hid in two distinct persons, and spiritually, in the central Spirit which
wells in the heart, and has its out-working in the Brain, and the lower parts
of our body; and that nothing that is to be known in this outward World, is
known only in Spirit, but must manifest it self in a Body: must not then the
forementioned spiritual Conception and Birth also become bodily, to the end
that likewise a corporal and fleshly Conception and Birth may follow, wherein
the foregoing spiritual Conception may appear and be manifested? And seeing
that the spiritual shows it self, and dwells in the corporeal, must not they
both therefore needs be of near kin to one another?

4 Q. Seeing then that the spiritual Conception and Birth must become bodily,
and that no bodily fleshly Conception and Birth can naturally be completed,
without a male and female: must not therefore a union of Man and Wife precede,
because without a foregoing Conception and Union, no Birth can be brought
forth? Now how can such a Conception and Union of both be made out otherwise
than thus: that Man and Wife, before they are contracted, must have been
pleased with, taken delight in, and loved one another? And must not this Love
ordinarily stand in a constant growth, because every right Union must proceed
from a steadfast Love? And does not the Love which a man bears to his Wife,
cause him to have the Image of his Wife continually standing before him, with
her face turned toward his, even face to face? In like manner, the Love which
the Wife bears to her Husband, does it not cause her to have the Image of her
Husband within her standing before her, which she more and more unites to her
self, the said Image having its face likewise turned toward her, even face to
face?

But forasmuch as no Union can be of two things which in all their parts are
strange to one another, and between which there is no interceding relation or
affinity (as was hinted before, when we spoke of the Sun, Moon, and Stars) will
it not follow, that a man has the woman in a hidden manner, and as it were
asleep in himself, and so likewise a woman the man; insomuch that the one is
truly in a spiritual manner partaker of the other, and this in order to the
bringing forth a common (first spiritual, and afterward a bodily
comprehensible) Birth? And does not all this (notwithstanding the strangeness
of it at first sight) very well agree with the Doctrine of the ancient wise
men, both amongst the Jews and Heathens, who with one voice witness this? And
likewise with the Holy Writ it self, which with its high authority confirms the
same, Genesis 1. 27. where speaking concerning the Creation of Man, Moses expressly
declares, that God created man, male and female. As also Mat. 19. 4. where our
Savior himself does further confirm the same?

5 Q. When now Man and Wife have taken in and received each others Image, are
they satisfied with this alone, that they have received into themselves each
others Image spiritually, and retain the same? or rather have they not each of
them an uncessant longing and desire to restore the Image they have taken in to
the party from whom they received it? to the end that one Image being united
with the other, they may by this Union be brought to a corporeal, visible, and
comprehensible Being? When therefore such a longing desire possesses the whole
Humanity both of Man and Wife, so that every part and member of both (none
excepted) press to the union of both Images, and the bodily manifestation of
them, as to a bodily likeness of themselves, is it then possible for either Man
or Wife any longer to keep in themselves the received Image, seeing that it
must now be wrought out and brought to perfection?

6 Q. And forasmuch as the female Image of the Wife, which the man has taken
in and conceived in his spiritual Wife, cannot stay with him, notwithstanding
that by means of its passage through the senses of the man, it has taken in
something of man, and moreover by the nourishment it has drawn to it self from
him, is become yet more of a male property, because it presses on toward its
corporeal perfection. Now then, is the man able in himself alone to advance
this Image to the full perfection of a man? Or rather must it not, in order to
its becoming bodily, go down to the Birth, that it may there be wrought out and
perfected? The same may be said of the Wife, because she not being operative in
formation, but receptive, is much less able to work out the received Image of
her Husband, than he is (as being operative) to work out the Image received
from his Wife. And must not consequently the Image which is with the Wife (as
well as that of the man) descend toward the place of Birth for to attain its
out-working?

7 Q. Seeing then that to the accomplishing of the bodily Out-working and Birth
of the mutually-received Images of Man and Wife, a bodily fleshly union of Man
and Wife must go before, and they both be joined matrimonially in order to the
multiplying of themselves, and live together in Wedlock for the propagating of
their like; must not the man therefore bring back again to his Wife (as being
the Workhouse where the Birth must be wrought out) the Image which heretofore
he received from her, and which he had un^ted to himself, and given it a male
property, (...) such manner, as that her Image which the m^ brings along with
him, and the man's Image which she foremerly has taken in, cannot come togethe^
otherwise than as back to back. Is it not here t^ be considered, that when a
man can rule over h^ own spiritual Wife in himself, (of which togethe^ with his
male part he consists) and consequentl^ over the Image also which he has
received from his Wife, that then he is in a fair way to rule over his external
married Wife also, forasmuch as he ^ the head of the Wife? Now where the case
stand thus, whether upon matrimonial cohabitation an^ union of both Seeds, a
Son will not be born, fora^much as the Image of the man, being most prevalent,
comes forth bodily, but the Image of the Wife remains spiritually hidden in the
Birth? O^ the contrary, when the woman prevails, whethe^ then for the foresaid
reasons a Daughter will not b^ born, and the Image of the man abide spiritually
hidden? Is it not to be considered, that Genesis ^ v. 18, and 20. where of the
production of Eve men^tion is made, the word (...) is twice expressed
signifying that Eve was set face to face to ^^dam

8 Q. Seeing then that the soulish bodily union and conception in the Soul, is
performed, or come^ to pass after this manner, beneath in the Matrix viz. the
woman has on each side of her Womb N
The Membrane of the right Testicle separated and turned back, to the end that
the termination of the spermatick Vessels in the Ovarium and the Eggs
themselves, might the more commodiously be seen.

many little Eggs, every one of which hangs by a small Filament; and these are
born with her, and ^^re found in all female Creatures whatsoever, as ^ay be
seen in the annexed Figure taken out of Swammerdam's Anatomical Discourse.

Now when Man and Wife do matrimonially cohabit, and a conception follows, both
their Seeds are united together, and do light or fall on a small point or
particle of one of the foresaid Eggs, but so, as is incomprehensible to sense,
as being wholly spiritual. Now the spiritual union and conception which is
performed in spirit in the heart and head, has a great affinity with the
soulish bodily conception, because both of them are, and manifest themselves in
one and the same body.

9 Q. Whilst we are speaking of this Conception and Birth of Man, seeing that
so much and differently is spoken concerning the Garden of Eden where man was
placed as soon as he was created, it will not be amiss to enquire what and
where the said Garden was? Forasmuch then as God created Man in his own Image,
and that the essences of all things are in God, will it not follow, that in
man, as the perfect Image of God, the Images and Idea's of all created things
must have been likewise; because otherwise, if we should suppose any thing to
be in the Original, which is not in the copy or likeness, such an Image could
never be a perfect express of the original? And must not we therefore with
reason conclude, that the Idea of the said Garden of Eden must also have been
in the heart of man or his central spirit, as of all things in the greater
World? and that this inward Idea is the center from which the whole outward man
proceeded, who takes in through his senses the Idea of the whole outward World,
as it is in it self, and has the same vitally and essentially dwelling in him.

10 Q. Seeing then that man, as a perfect and express Image of God, had all
created Beings, and consequently all living Creatures in himself, and that
therefore it would have been unnecessary to bring the outward living Creatures
outwardly unto him; must it not then be supposed, that this was done inwardly
in the Center, wherein Adam then stood? And that in this Center he gave to all
Creatures their proper and essential names, forasmuch as this could not have
been done by him, in case the essential living Idea's of the said Creatures had
not been in him, from which he gave forth those essential names, as water
gusheth out from a living Fountain? And may we not therefore with evidence
conclude from hence, that the Garden of Eden was not only an outward place
without man?

11 Q. Does it not also clearly appear from this, that the Garden of Eden was
not only a place without man? For that when Adam by his Fall had lost the
inward Life out of the Center, (which proceeds from the Center to the
Circumference) and was come into the Circumference, his eyes were opened, so
that now he was fain to take in his Light from without from the outward World,
because his own inward World was hid and shut up from him; and now he saw his
earthliness and bodily nakedness (which is the present state of all men in the
World) for before he was full of Light from the continual eradiation from the
Center.

CHAP. III.
Concerning the Body of Man, of his Formation, and of some of his Parts.
SECT. I.
Concerning the Forming of Man in his Mothers Womb.
1 Q. SEeing that in the matrimonial cohabitation of Man and Wife together,
after that (as has been said in the foregoing 2 Chap. 8 Quest.) both their
spiritual Seeds being united, are implanted into the Egg, and it has received
them, the said Egg does through its Ductus or Pipe slip down into the Matrix,
in order to its being further, accomplished there; where within three days it
becomes as big as the thredle of a Hens Egg (as the adjoining Figure taken from
Dr. Kerckring's Anatomy, does show, and in which we may see the form of the
Child, but without arms or legs. And this Egg continually increases in bigness
by means of the menstruous blood, and is nourished until it come to perfection.
Must not we of necessity conclude therefore, that from this little Egg the
whole form of the Body is produced in the Womb?

Explication of the Figures.
FIGURE I.
Represents two humane eggs of a different bigness.

FIGURE II.
Represents an Embryo of three, or at the most four days after Conception.

A Represents to the eye the inward part of the Membranes, Chorion and Amnion
being imperfectly formed, and in which there is as yet no appearance of the
Hepar uterinum.

B Represents an Embryo in which may be seen the distinction of the Head from
the Body, but no delineation of any other parts.

FIGURE III.
Represents an Embryo of fourteen days.

A The Hepar uterinum, with the Veins and Arteries which are dispersed through
the substance of it.

Fig I
Fig II
Fig III
Fig IV
Fig V
Fig VI




BBBB The Membrane-Chorion dissected.

CCCC The Membrane-Amnion dissected in like manner.

D The Navel-string.

E An Embryo of about fourteen days, in which the Face now appears more
distinctly, and the rest of the Members are somewhat formed and distinguished.

FIGURE IV.
Represents to he eye a gristly Scheleton of an Embryo of three weeks.

FIGURE V.
Represents an Embryo of one month.

A The whole gristly bulk of the Head, showing the gristly points of both the
upper and nether Jaw Bone.

bb The Clavicula now all bone.

cc The points of the ossification of the Shoulder-blades.

dd The white strokes designing the ossification of the Shoulder.

ee The white strokes showing the ossification of the Arm-bone.

FF These white points in all the Ribs, except the first and last, do denote
the ossification already begun in them.

gg The Thigh-bones, representing what is bone in them.

hh The greater and lesser bone of the Leg both clearly represented, and
already of a bony substance.

FIGURE VI.
Shows an Embryo of six weeks, which differs not from that of two months
represented in my Osteogenia, but only in bigness, and that the lesser bone
(as we have before hinted) is to be seen here, which in the other did not yet
appear.

A Does exhibit the inferior Jaw Bone distinguished into six little bones.



2 Q. Seeing that we read in Scripture, that Eve was made out of a Bone or Rib,
because the Central Spirits have their residence in the Bones, they being the
first Product or Out-birth of the said Spirits; the Query is, Whether it will
not follow from hence, that the Bones are the first material being (which we
may call female) from which the flesh, as from a Spring or Fountain does
continually proceed, and to which it must by revolution return again in order
to perfection?

3 Q. It is further queried what the word (...) Tzaela does properly signify,
of which it is said, Genesis 2. that the woman was made, seeing that it has
several significations, as of a Beam, Prop, or Support, a Rib, a Side, a
Fountain, a Building, etc. And in case any one will needs have it to signify a
Rib here, we must ask which Rib it was, and of which side? Or whether the said
Rib were taken from both sides at once, because the Ribs are fastened to the
sides of the Vertebra of the Backbone, and most of them are likewise joined
together by Cartilages to the Sternum or Breast Bone? Or forasmuch as the word
also signifies a Beam, or any thing that is a Support or Prop, whether if we
take it in this sense, it can signify any thing else but the whole Backbone
of man, which bears up the whole Body in like manner as Beams support a
Building? Moreover, whether for to reconcile all these several meanings
together, we ought not to enquire where the mid-point and very center of the
whole Backbone and the Ribs, which are united to it, is? Forasmuch as this
Center is that out of which Eve was made. And is not this well worth our
consideration; for we may easily know that all the rest of the Bones in man
proceed from this center of the Backbone, because it is notorious that an
Embryo in the Mothers Womb, does first begin to have Arms and Legs fourteen
days after conception. Whether, I say, after a due weighing of all this, we may
not conclude that Eve was made out of the very Center of the whole Body of Man?

4 Q. Forasmuch as with all women, according to the ordinary course of Nature,
every month or four weeks is found a menstruous Blood, which ^easeth after that
they are with Child, because the Embryo in the Womb has its nourishment in
part from thence; so that the humane Body is partly made and consists of the
said menstruous Blood. Do not we by this means find the number four in man, and
the harmony which the Body of man has with the Moon, which performs its course
or circuit in four weeks, or twenty eight days.

5 Q. Seeing that we find, as is clear from Anatomy, that a Child in the
Mothers Womb, in the first fourteen days after conception, has neither Arms,
Legs, Hands, or Feet, but only a mere trunk of the Body, which has two
extreme parts, viz. the Head and Belly, in the midst of which is the Heart,
which is the Center from whence all Life comes into the Body of man, even as
all the Life of this sublunary World proceeds from the Celestial Sun; may not
we conclude therefore, that the number one is that within which God takes up
his dewlling place? And do not these three together, the Head, the lower Belly,
and the Heart, which rules over the other two, give rise or original to the
number three?

6 Q. Forasmuch as we find that a Child in the Mothers Womb, within the time of
three weeks, has all his Bones, Fingers, and Toes complete; which Bones (as
may probably be conjectured) are first formed, because to them are first
fastened the Muscles, Sinews, etc. and that when this number 3 of the 3 weeks
is multiplied by 13, the product is 39 weeks, in which time the Child is wholly
perfect for the birth: may not here therefore be matter for our enquiry,
whether in this case there be not to be found an agreement between the greater
and lesser World? because we see that a Child is perfected by thirteen
Revolutions, even as the Sun in thirteen Moons makes a year: so as thirteen
Revolutions make up a perfect Child^ year, like as thirteen Moons make a
complete Solar year?

7 Q. Seeing that in Arithmetical counting we can go no higher than 10, because
then we begin again anew, which is also evidenced by the 10 Fingers of Man,
which are the appointed Instruments for him to work out any thing; and that the
Child lies ten months in the Mothers Womb until it be born, according to the
testimony of Scripture, Wisd. 7. 2. May we not also from hence in a certain
manner find out the foundation of the number Ten in man?

SECT. II.
Concerning the Senses of Man.
8 Q. FOrasmuch as in the Head are five outward and five inward Senses, all
which so unite in a center, where Eyes, Ears, Nose, and Mouth meet together; so
that the four Senses are ^nited in the fifth of Feeling, even as the four
fingers (which are the working instruments of the Head) are joined and united
with the Thumb. And these five inward and five outward Senses make up the
number Ten. Do not we find here ^hen the ground of the number Five, and in part
of ^he number Ten also?

I. Concerning the Eyes and Sight.
9 Q. We find in those that have a strong eye^^ght, that when they rub their
eyes in the night ^^me, they excite a small fiery light, and can see it as it
were before them; which is a good sign that they have yet life and strength;
and if it be in the time of sickness it gives hopes of recovering former
health. In like manner when any one has a pain in his eyes, or receives a
stroke upon them, a fiery light is perceived, as it were, to come from them.
May not we therefore conclude from these instances, that the eyes have a fiery
operative life in them (like to that of the Sun) which flows from within from
the center of the eye, commonly called the Pupilla, or Apple of the eye, which
when by reason of the decay of life it becomes wide and fixed in that wideness,
this fiery operative light withdraws from the eyes, from whence arises a
distemper or blindness, which is called in the German Tongue [ Dieschwartre
Staar.]

10 Q. That the Eyes have waters or humors in them is evident from Anatomy,
forasmuch as within the Eye, three several humors are contained; the first and
last of which are properly a humor or water; the first being called Humor
Aqueus, or the watery humor, the latter Humor Vitreus, or the glassie humor;
but the middlemost commonly called Humor Crystallinus, or the Crystalline
humor, consists of a small cloudy, soft, and pulpy substance, (which may be
reputed as the brain of the eye) in order to the working out of the Idea's;
which we may experimentally find by taking the Eye of a Beast, and letting it
freeze, wherein then with the help of a Microscope, the said pulpy substance
may be easily discerned and clearly distinguished, from both the foresaid
liquors. And seeing that the Aqueous humor or water, is continually renewed in
the Eyes, and has its Revolutions quickly (as being the Sea of the Eyes)
insomuch as we find often both with men and Beasts, that when by reason of a
wound in their Eyes, the said water is shed or poured forth, that other new
water will come and supply its place, without hurting of their eyesight. Does
it not follow from hence, that this water has a similitude and agreement with
the waters of the great world? And that the foresaid fiery Being which is in
the Eyes, does work in the water of the Eyes, in order to the perfecting of the
said watery substance, even as the Sun of the greater World works in its own
waters?

11 Q. Forasmuch as the right Eye of man is ordained to work out, and the left
Eye for to draw in and receive to the heart, by which the left side is known;
and these two are like Man and Wife for to bring forth a spiritual Birth, the
right Eye being the Man, and the left the Wife. For without this Birth of a
spiritual Idea, we should presently forget any thing we had seen; and therefore
this Idea must abide in man, to the end he may be able to compare the Copy with
its Original. Now then seeing that (in manner as has been said) there is a
continual Revolution in the Eyesight, viz. from the right Eye to the left,
from the outward to the inward, as it is in the great World; may not we by all
this perceive a great agreement between both Worlds, viz. the Greater and
Lesser?

12 Q. Seeing that man receives his sight from the Sun, and the Sun, Moon, and
Stars (as his Father and Mother, from which as long as he is fastened to this
World, and has not yet wrought them out, he cannot be separated) are a right
spiritual Being, and communicate themselves to us, as a true Being or Essence;
insomuch as what we receive from them is nothing else but a true essence which
is subject to a continual Revolution. For the Sun by means of his daily
circumvolution from East to West, makes all things to become operative, and
puts them in motion: In like manner, when the Sun in a years time passes
through the twelve Signs of the Zodiac, it does from every Sign communicate
to us that of which our Essence consists; and by means of its out-flowing and
generative light and life, from whence also we receive our Eyesight, which
when the Sun, Moon, and Stars are just above the Horizon, can at once see no
further than over a twelfth part of the World: Does not this give us a certain
intimation, that we must continually be made partakers of the said course or
circumvolution of the Sun, and that we cannot be separated from the same? And
therefore the said Circumvolution of the Sun continues still, to the end it
might work without ceasing in us, who are its Seed, for to bring us at last for
Reward to the seven thousand years Sabbath.

Moreover, because we can find in our selves the four distinct times of the
natural day, how that in the nightime, as in death, when man is asleep, by
means of the Moon and Stars, the female fleeting waters in him are united, from
whence afterward the essential thoughts are orderly wrought out in him; which
with the approach of day, when the Sun has performed his whole course about
the Earth, and appears again in our Hemisphere, are further wrought out and
perfected into words, as so many Births, Psalm. 19. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

13 Q. These changes by taking in and giving forth, are confirmed and made out
to us by many Examples: as when in a darkened Room we leave only a little
round hole in the window, so as the light can come in through that alone; if we
hang and spread forth a white Cloth opposite to the said hole, we can see all
the Objects that pass by (without) as in a Glass, but turned upside down. In
like manner, if we take a white Stone-horse, or of any other color, and
artificially spot and paint him with what color we please, and then place him
at the end of a Water-pond, or the like, making a partition overthwart the
water by means of a piece of Cloth or suchlike, and on the overside of the
Pond place a Mare over against the Stone-horse, in such manner, as that by
means of the said partition coming between, they shall not be able to see each
others form otherwise than in the water. If we let them stand thus for several
days together, each of them bound in his own place until their Lust to one
another become strong and vehement, then if we loose the Stone-horse, and let
him cover the Mare, so that she conceives by him, we shall find that the Mare
will have a Fool whose color shall resemble the artificial painting of the
Stone-horse. And must it not be concluded from hence, that all Creatures,
continually without ceasing, take in a true substance, and give it out from
them again? And that the Species visibiles (which we may well call Virtutes,
virtues or powers) have a true living Being or Essence, which they receive from
the Sun as their Father; and that they do not return to nothing, but where they
are not received, they do by revolution return again to their original; but
when they are received, become essential and corporeal? And did not Jacob
(think we) very well understand this, viz. that such a living Essence
continually flows forth from all Creatures, when by means of the effect and
out-working of his peeled Rods he procured so great an increase of
Ring-streaked, Speckled, and Spotted Lambs from Laban's Sheep?

II. Concerning the Ears and Hearing.
14 Q. As it happens in Sight or Seeing, that the out-flowing Idea, as the
living Being or Essence, out of all Creatures comes into Man, and abides
dwelling with him, so that it cannot be separated from him, (because without
keeping the Idea with him, he could never know or remember the Original) and
all this by means of the influence of the Sun, Moon, and Stars: so we may in
part understand the essentiality of all Idea's, in that Spirits and Ghosts,
whenever they appear in a distinct form, do not only take upon them the Image
of the Man in whose form they appear, but likewise the Image of his Clothes;
from whence we may understand, that an essential efflux must have proceeded
from the Clothes, and entered the Spirit of Man.

And does not the very same happen in Hearing likewise? and is it not performed
by means of a real Essence: And do not the Idea's of things we take in by the
Ears, stay in the common Sense (so called) by means of which we can distinguish
and know such things another time? And is not this evident from hence, in that
by our Hearing we can distinguish between the voices and sounds of all
Creatures, so as to know which comes from each of them; which could not be, if
the same had no Being or Essence? Does not likewise the Angel confirm this,
when he says to Esdras, Show me the image of a voice, 4 Esdr. 5. 37. And here,
by the way, it is worth our enquiry, whether the said fourth Book of Esdras was
not called the Wisdom of God by Christ himself, Luke 11. 49. especially, seeing
that what Christ there alleges, is nowhere to be found in Holy Writ, save
only in the forementioned fourth Book of Esdras, chapter 1. v. 32?

15 Q. Forasmuch as the Central Life-spirit of Man, which has its habitation
in the Bones, has formed the Organ of the Ear of a Gristle, which is the
extreme or outward part of the Bones, and by reason of its softness, is fit and
adapted for the Spirit to have its out and in-working through the same. From
which Gristles likewise proceeds that balsamic bitter matter called Ear-wax,
which is of use in many Diseases, and is especially good for the Hearing.
Accordingly we find also in the Ears, a striral Cavity which ends at the
Tympanum or Drum (as is notorious from Anatomy) which Drum contains a vital Air
that makes its revolution with the heavenly Air of the Great World, together
with the Sun, Moon, and Stars. And is not this another great instance of the
harmony and agreement which is betwixt the greater and lesser World? Seeing
that even as the Central Spirit of Life in Man (as the Little World) has its
continual out-workings and revolutions in the several Nerves, Sinews, Veins,
and Arteries; so likewise in the Great World, the spiritual operative essence
in the Air, is always at work in a continual and never-ceasing Revolution,
causing many changeable courses of the Clouds and Winds?

16 Q. Forasmuch as we see that Nature has wisely ordered two Ears for Man, is
it not to this end, that both these Ears, as Man and Wife, or as the two Scales
of a Balance, should balance and weigh what must be again given out through the
voice, corresponding with what is received from the sound of another voice, to
the end it may be wrought out in an harmonious sound, in which whole Nature
stands, that so a perfect Revolution may be brought to pass? So that the left
Ear, as the Wife, must receive, and the right, as the Man, work it out or judge
of it; that so according to the universal sound (which has its seat in the
inward man) it may be wrought and formed as a spiritual Son by his Father.

17 Q. What may be the reason think we, why the Jews in the Hebrew Tongue
express Deaf and Dumb with one and the same word? May it not be upon this
account, that seeing the Speech of man must be sowed in him by Hearing, that so
^he Seed of the Word may be formed and wrought ^ut in him, especially since we
find that those that ^e born deaf are dumb likewise and cannot speak, ^orasmuch
as Speech cannot be planted in them, ^ut by the sense of Hearing? We may
likewise daily observe, how the tongues of little Children ^re moved, as by the
Seed of their Mothers voice, by which Tongue the Speech is formed. And is ^ot
this likewise the reason that we read of Zacha^ias the Father of John the
Baptist, Luke 1. 20. and ^1. that he was struck not only deaf, but dumb, when
he did not believe the Angel Gabriel, who ^eclared unto him the birth of his
Son John? for that seeing he did not lend a right believing Ear to ^he voice of
the Angel, he was also disabled from ^ttering what he had heard; as we find
that he ^ould not speak till after the birth of John: and that withal, he was
so deaf, that they were fain to make signs to him for to know how he would
have his Son named?

III. Concerning the Nose and Sense of Smelling in Man.
18 Q. When we see that the Nose (which is in the midst of the Face, and whose
substance is, for the most part, gristly, as the Ears) like a sponge, receives
through both the Nostrils (as male and female) the air of Life for to smell, as
also continually to feed and maintain the Life of man. And that the said air
which enters the Nose, is by the inward director (who in this work makes use of
the Belly for a bellows) through the Lungs (as through a sponge in which the
air is concocted and digested, as the meat is in the stomach) drawn into the
Belly, which is the common receiver, or place in which the attracted air is
treasured up: from which afterward the said air by a due and fit circulation
or revolution, is communicated to all other parts and members of the Body,
which is afterward given out again: to supply which, new air is still drawn
in, yet so* as that a certain part of this first attracted and wrought-out air
remains in the Belly, which serves to the necessary strengthening and
maintaining (...) Life. And may not we from all this, in part understand, that
in the Little World the Body (...) Man, as well as in the Great World, there is
a continual Revolution without ceasing?

19 Q. Do not we in like manner perceive this continual Revolution of the Air
in the Body of Man, and the Communication of the same from the Belly to all
parts of the Body, and that by means of the same, the Life of man is without
ceasing fed and maintained, in this instance: That when in aged Persons, and
sometimes young, (who by over-hard labor have already given forth their Life
and Strength) this Revolution comes to be weakened, and draws to a period, the
Dropsy follows upon it, because the living power and virtue in the Air can no
more be taken in by that party; and that consequently the Night and Moon, as
the Lady of Water, gets the upper hand: And thus the Water takes up its
residence in the hollow of the Body, where the Air before had its abode, and
from thence pours forth itself into the Legs and Feet, where the Air bore sway
before. And upon this account it is that the Dropsy proves incurable, when it
seizes persons in whom this revolutional power of Life is wholly lost, either
by reason of old age, or over-hard labor, or long-continued sickness?

20 Q. May not we further perceive of how great concern this Revolution of the
Air in the Body of Man is from hence, that when the Dropsy is only caused by
some obstruction or disorder, by means of which, this Revolution is hindered,
and that the Life be not wholly wasted, then it may be cured; as is known by
experience, that many who have had life enough, and by the help of Medicines
have had this disorder appeased and reduced, have been perfectly cured of this
sickness? and that by different ways, in case the Disease have not yet taken an
entire possession of man, so as to rule over him.

1. It has been found by experience, that Opium prepared in manner here
specified, has proved very successful in the cure of this Distemper: Take one
pound of Opium to eight pounds of the Juice of Quinces, with other Spices or
Drugs that shall be thought fit; digest and ferment these together the space of
three weeks (whereby it is spiritualized and made more fit for due operation)
the press it out and boil it to a thick consistence, and give the Patient daily
of this, six, seven, eight, nine, ten grains, or more, with regard had to his
strength, as well as the strength of the Opium, in some warm Vehicle, taking
care that he be kept warm in Bed. This, I say, is an experienced Cure of this
Distemper: for it makes the Patient to sweat, and opens the obstructed hidden
passages.

In like manner, for cure of the Quartan Ague, which is nothing else but a bare
custom left by the Agues going before, whereby Nature does, as it were, return
back from a Tertian to a Quartan: in which case we give some grains of this
prepared Opium, upon the first invasion of the Paroxysm, in some warm Vehicle,
and then compose the Patient to sweat in a Bed: and repeat this (if need be)
nine or ten times, until the Patient do mend and be restored; by which means
many have been recovered.

The same likewise is commonly of great use in all those Diseases which proceed
from an ebullition of the Blood, or from a contrariety aversion risen in
Nature, such as are the Cholick, Gripes, Bloody Flux, Pleurisy, etc. for to
bring Nature to rest and quiet again; but in cases where Vomits are necessary,
as in foulness of the stomach or Palsy, this Opiate must not be given.

2. Toads cut up in the midst, and their intrails taken out, and afterward
dried and beaten to powder, with a like quantity of Sugar; give the Patient a
thimble full of this Powder fasting in Wine, and it will strongly drive forth
the water of the Dropsy by Urine.

3. Where it is yet seasonable, and the sick party is not wholly overpowered
by the Disease, the vulnerary Herb called Asclepias or Wince-toxicum, taken
inwardly every day, is very good and profitable in this case.

Another means serviceable in the curing of this Disease, has already been set
down in the former part of this Treatise; to which we remit the curious Reader.

21 Q. Forasmuch then as we do perceive that the Great and Lesser World do
stand in an harmony and agreement together, and that the Moon and Stars do
continually produce water, and bear rule in the same; and that the Sun
continually works in the said waters, in order to the perfecting of them, in
that he makes a fiery water, by which means a perfect Revolution is brought
about. And do not we find that the same thing happens also in Man the Little
World; so that his Moon and Stars continually generate a water in him, and bear
rule in the same? And whenever this Revolution does not happen, so that the
light of the Sun cannot work orderly in the said waters, does not then the
nature of the Nocturnal Light get the dominion? And forasmuch as the same does
continually produce water, and that the said water cannot circulate for want of
the light of the Sun, must not then this standing water of necessity produce
the Dropsy? And according to this Hypothesis, can the cure of the Dropsy
consist in ought else, but in appeasing of the disturbed solar life; by which
means the Sun (being again duly united with the waters) does reduce the waters
to their former out-working subtilty and life: seeing that the light of the
Sun, Moon, and Stars (which pierces through all bodies, how hard soever they
may be) does again open the hidden spiritual passages that were obstructed,
(which are far more subtle and minute, than to be perceived by any Anatomist,
or the outward eyes of any man whatsoever) and through the said opened passages
it afterward (by means of the Air) drives forth that water by Sweat, Urine,
and Stool? But when for want of knowledge of a true Medicine, they tap the
Patient, and by making an Incision in his body, let out the water (in cases
where the said Disease is come to such an height, that by reason of the
weakness of Nature, the Physicians cannot any other way cure the same) all at
once, through unskilfulness and want of experience; how can it be otherwise,
but that sudden death must needs follow, because the life which is yet in the
said water, and cannot in this way be separated from it, is let out together
with the water?

In like manner also, when some unexperienced Physicians mistake the Tympanites
or Wind-Dropsie for the Water-Dropsie, and according to this imagination of
theirs, make an Incision in order to the letting out of the supposed water; and
when now instead thereof, the air at once gusheth forth (as before was said of
the Water-Dropsie) and with it the life, which as yet dwelt in the same; can it
be any matter of wonder to see the Patient die immediately upon the voiding of
the said air? viz. in cases where the Disease is come to its height; for then
the whole life is contained in the said Air. And when at any time by this undue
means, one or other dropsical person is helped, and the waters tapt from him by
degrees, (though indeed the life endangered thereby, and in some measure
weakened) may not we suppose that this comes to pass, because that Nature in
some persons, by means of their foregoing sufferings (where the Idea or Image
of the Disease, has not yet taken such deep root) is already reduced to some
quietness; so as nothing else is wanting to her, but that she be freed and
eased of the too heavy burden of water?

22 Q. Forasmuch as Experience shows, that when a Horse is over-rid or driven,
and by this means draws in more air than he can well digest or circulate, he
becomes seized with that Distemper which we call Broken-windedness: for that
such a Horse draws in too much breath, and has not time to circulate and work
out the same in himself; and by this means becomes puffed up like a Balloon or
Ball filled with air, so that he can take in no more air, as being quite full
and over-stock'd with it; yea, it sometimes happens, that by reason hereof, the
Horse falls down dead of a sudden. At Heidelberg and other places, they help
this accident after this manner, before it goes so far as to spoil the Horse:
The Horse is fast bound in a Stall that he cannot stir, and his tail tied up on
high, and then a blunt round Stick or Truncheon is thrust up his fundament
about nine inches, the Stick being of a convenient thickness to fill up the
same. This done, a small Incision is made crosswise, between the tail and
fundament; after which, they take a round Iron red-hot of the thickness of ones
little finger, being also sharpened at the end; this they thrust through the
Incision downwards through the Arse-gut, till it do reach the Truncheon
inwardly flaunting; and this hot Iron must be well and often turned in the said
Incision. And last of all, a leaden Ring of the thickness of a child's finger of
eight years of age, is thrust up through the fundament of the Horse into the
hole that is burnt with the Iron, and the wound anointed with oil, until it be
perfectly cured, and then the Ring is taken away. After all this, the Horse is
serviceable as before, and when he runs post, one may hear the air with a blast
gushing through the said hole like a Whistle or Pipe; for that now the air
(which is in the hollow of his Belly without the Guts) is not so compressed
inwardly as before, as having now a convenient passage or outlet. And does it
not most evidently appear from this example, that the air which is drawn in by
the Nostrils, is not only designed to cool the heart, and after that to be
blown forth again, without any further operation or usefulness; but that the
said air does incessantly pass through the whole body, and perform its
Revolution?

23 Q. As we find that in the Air of the Great World there is a great power
which we may call the strength of the Macrocosm, as by example, when by means
of a certain Instrument we do by force draw the air out of a Glass, we shall
find that the Glass (how heavy soever it be) will stick fast to the Instrument;
and that the more strongly the air is drawn out, the faster it cleaves, as has
formerly been declared more at large in our Alphabet of Nature, printed at
Sultzbach, Anno 1657. 49 page. And do not we perceive something of like nature
in Man (who is the little World) that when he is to put his utmost strength to
any thing (as when he goes to lift any thing beyond his ordinary force) he is
fain to keep in his breath, as being that wherein his Fire-life does consist,
to the end that his life and the powers of it, may be so much the more
increased and strengthened? It is likewise matter of every ones experience,
that when we move much and strongly (which motions are performed by means of
the Air) we can digest more than at other times, and that because we take in
more Air than usually: for the powers of our life being increased and
strengthened by the Air, make us to stand in need of more Food for our
sustenance, than at other times?

24 Q. May not we also perceive the effect or working which the Air has in
Man, from this instance: that when a man is in pain and grief, he is apt to cry
out and complain, which yet cannot in the least help him; forasmuch as by
crying he does but waste his strength? Now may not we suppose this to be the
cause hereof, viz. that a man naturally seeks to rid himself of the pain he
feels; but seeing that this cannot be, except the life it self (in which the
pain is) and the strength of it be weakened? Now this life is nothing else but
his living Air, which he has drawn in and keeps in his Belly, it being there
united to his own essence; and by his crying he strives, as by force, to thrust
out this Air and his Life together with it, that by this means he may be rid of
the fiery pain which is in the kindled or inflamed Life. And forasmuch as
through these continual outcries the Fire-life is thrust forth, it so happens
that a man loses his pain and strength together; so that at length he has no
more force to cry or speak, neither does his Belly move up and down any more:
and then consequently he must have a long time to draw in again and recruit
himself with air, instead of that which he has lost, and so fill his Belly
again which is the Treasury and Repository of the Air of Life. May not this
also be assigned as a reason why so many women (through the unskilfulness and
unexperience of their Midwives) die in Travel, because they suffer them to
spend themselves in outcries, before the right Birth-pains are upon them?

Do not we likewise find, that when a man is very weary, he is apt to yawn? And
may we not suppose this to be the natural cause of it; for that a man when he
yawns has a desire to sleep, and to that end lets out his breath, that thereby
he may be the more disposed for it; because as by drawing in of the air we
become strong, active, and lively, so on the contrary, the breathing forth of
the same, does make us heavy, dull, and drowsy?

Furthermore, when a man retcheth himself and yawns, may not we suppose this to
be the ground of it, that as when a man draws in air, taking in continually and
digesting it, to the end that thereby he may attain life, strength and motion;
in order to which, he does still more concenter the air, for as he draws in his
breath, his Sinews are drawn together and contracted: so on the contrary, when
a man yawns and retcheth himself, it will follow (according to what has been
said) that by this means he must lose much more strength, than when he only
yawns without retching.

For a further confirmation of this, I have known a man, who having
over-studied himself, so that he was quite weary and very drowsy, found that
by his much yawning and retching of himself, his Belly grew cold: but upon his
following the advice of a Friend that wished him to forbear the said yawning,
he sensibly perceived his Belly restored to its former warmth.

Moreover it is observed, that the Cramp often follows after yawning and
retching, where it has been used beyond measure.

And as for sighing, may not we conceive this to be the cause of it; forasmuch,
as when any man is in earnest study, or is troubled or grieved, he does not
fetch his breath so often as otherwise he is wont; and therefore as soon as he
finds in himself the want of it, he is forced to fetch in his breath long and
deep: and what is that else but sighing? And when in this case the seed of
Speech, which lies in the throat of man, wants breath and spirit, and
consequently quickness and strength, and the party then hems, does he not
thereby stir and excite the seed in his throat, as well as the strength which
is in his Belly?

25 Q. Now that there is in man a fiery life, and a fiery voice proceeding from
the same, which proceeds from him in a strong anguishful outcry, in which all
the powers of the whole life working in each other, do inkindle and inflame
themselves: and though it be impossible to describe the proper image of such a
voice, because we cannot with Letters represent the likeness of a voice; yet ^s
it not in some part evident from hence, according to what experience shows,
that when impatient unexperienced persons are put to the Rack, who are not able
to endure the said pain, or contain themselves, but give forth all their
strength by their outcries, we may then perceive a wonderful fiery voice
proceeding from them: and such persons as these grow very weak at last, and are
forced to confess what is demanded of them. But others who do know that, and
how to restrain their voice at the beginning, become patient and retain their
strength of life, and their whole body breaks forth into sweat, and their pains
decrease, so that they cannot be forced to confess.

26 Q. Now that the life of man, and the air which is in his belly, from whence
the voice proceeds, is a true living fiery Essence, may not this ^n part be
made out from hence, that when wan^on Children that are in health, let a fart
through their shirt kept close to their breech into the flame of a Candle, that
the same makes a great blaze much like that of Brandy or Brimstone when they
are kindled? But when these Children be sick, this wind will not take fire,
forasmuch as no Brimstone is in it; wherefore also it has no sulphurous smell,
as that of sound people has. Now that in this foresaid stinking smell there is
a true Brimstone, is not this evident from the kindling of these winds in those
that are sound? We find also that Brimstone when it is dissolved in Oil, gives
forth a much like smell to that of the backwinds and excrements of sound
people. Upon which account also the Balsome of Sulphur (which especially in its
preparation gives forth such a smell) is good for distempers in which the
Breath is concerned.

27 Q. Seeing that from what has been said, may be gathered, that the Nose by
which the air is drawn in, is an Instrument through which man's life was blown
into him by God; the Query is, Whether it would not be contrary to the Divine
Wisdom and disposal, if in such a noble Instrument by which man draws in his
Life and Smelling, as through a carthilaginous Sponge, such an impure matter as
the Snot of the Nose is thought to be, (being looked upon as a mere Excrement
by the ignorant, whereas it is without any scent, when man is in health) should
have its seat and dewlling place? Or whether that which is so commonly
esteemed, will not, after diligent consideration, be found a much more noble
thing? And seeing that in Anatomy it is notorious, that both the Nostrils or
Passages of the Nose (whereof the one has a male property to work out, and the
other a female to receive and take in, and that in order to the distinguishing
of the objects of smelling) do by Vessels communicate with and go up to the
Brain, and come down again to the Throat, and do meet together and are united
in the midst of the head, in the common Center, where the Organs of all the
Senses meet together; from which Center a twofold matter of distinct virtue and
property comes down from the Scull and Brain, which is afterward divided, one
part of it passing forwards into the Nose, the other backwards to the Throat.
Now forasmuch as this matter does appear to be no Excrement, whether we might
not call this a Seed of the Brain, which comes down into the Nose, and that for
the forming and working out the essential and vital Sense of Smelling? In like
manner, as the matter or seed which comes from the Brain to the Throat, does
unite itself with the seed that comes up from beneath from the Heart, and there
generates or brings forth the Speech.

IV. Concerning the Mouth, and of the Taste, and and Speech of Man.
28 Q. Forasmuch as the Mouth was chiefly given to man for this end, that he
might (through his voice) bring forth the Issues and Births of the other
Senses: for we find that in the Mouth are three Tongues, viz. the upper,
middlemost, and under-tongue; and may not we conceive this to be the use of
them, that the upper-Tongue ( Uvula) which from on high hangs downwards in the
Throat, conveys the seed for Speech from the Brain downwards to the
under-Tongue ( Epiglottis) or flap and cover of the Throat, which closes the
Windpipe on the top, as does the lid of a Can: which Palate when it is
diseased or defective, or any way ill-affected, it causes an hindrance to the
Speech, as well as when the middle-Tongue is affected or indisposed. But by
means of the under-Tongue or Epiglottis, the seed is conveyed from beneath
upwards from the Heart, through the Aspera Arteria or Windpipe, for to be
united with the seed that comes down from the Brain; and this Union is effected
by means of the middle-Tongue, by which union the Speech is afterward wrought
out and perfected? And is it not probable, that by means of this under-Tongue,
the Ventriloqu^ ( viz. such who speak through their Belly) can speak backwards
or downwards in their Belly, without the least motion of their Mouths, in such
manner as gives a most wonderful and strange sound, as if a third person did
speak, whereby they deceive many?

Now that a seed comes down from the Brain into the Throat, may it not be
gathered from hence, that when any one has a Cold, or when he hawks or hems
strongly, a tough slimy matter comes down into the Throat? And that a like seed
comes up from beneath, may not we perceive that likewise, from this instance,
viz. when weak persons with coughing do fetch up abundance of slimy matter,
which they spit o^t? Now that some part of this slimy matter is a Seed, may we
not partly perceive this from the toughness of it, and that when the said
matter is spit out on any thing that is made hot, it clings together, and
becomes coagulated like the white of an Egg, which other waters does not so do?
As likewise from hence, that those who are troubled with a Cough, are at the
same time indisposed for the act of Generation. Moreover, that coughing is
caused by the unripeness, crudity, or distemperature of this Seed, is it not
evident from hence, that when the Breath (which continually passes through the
Nose) does convey the praeternatural cr^de smell or scent of this Seed that
lies under it in the throat, through the Nose into the Breast, it then causes
(by reason of its Distemper) an unseasonable rising up of the Seed from
beneath; forasmuch as all parts of the body do partake and communicate with one
another, by which means the Cough is occasioned? For the cure of which, it has
been ^ound by experience in some Coughs, that when the Seed or crude slimy
matter (which in the Cough mounts up from beneath) is from the first beginning
of it, swallowed down into the Stomach; and by this circulation out of the
Breast into the Stomach, is there concocted and ripened, the Cough by this
means has sometimes been cured.

And seeing that there is a threefold Cough; (...). Such an one as was just now
mentioned. (...). A coughing from impatience, which is chiefly occasioned when
we cannot bear the tickling o^ the Seed in the Throat; from which impatience it
comes to pass, that the more a man spits up, the more matter for spitting is
still made inwardly; as we may see in those that weep, that the more tears they
shed, more water for tears is still produced and generated.

3. From both these sorts of Coughs, when they abide or continue long, a third
sort of Cough (...) generated, which is, when we make a custom (...) coughing;
and then it often happens that the first Cough goes away, and the other two
remain Would it not then be good from the very first (by degrees) to stop this
impatient coughing and not to give the Reins to it, that is, to keep ou^^selves
from coughing so strongly or so often, as w^ may be prone or apt to do? And is
it not probable, that by this means we may soon get the m^stery of a Cough? And
the same may be said (...) other Diseases.

29 Q. Now how both these forementione^ Seeds (the Upper and Under) by their
unio^ do produce the Speech and Voice, may not the be made out, partly from
what here follows, vi^ It Is known by experience, that when some stron^ men in a
fiery driving earnestness, by long and intense spea^ing about weighty matters,
have tire^ themselves, so that their Voice has grown low^ and their Speech at
last quite failed them: which in some has been known to continue for thre^
weeks together, and afterward upon the return (...) their Speech, they have
been sensible of a sweet ^limy matter which came in their Throat, of the ^ame
taste and smell with Wheat flower and wa^er mingled together (which in the
Great World ^s the true Seed of the Earth) and of much the ^ame scent as the
Seed of Man has; and that when they have chanced (with a light coughing) ^o
spit out this sweet slimy matter (which comes into the Throat both from above
and from beneath) before it was fully perfected and united, they have again
totally lost their Speech, and become dumb, until a like slimy matter has
afresh ^een gathered again. It has also been observed, that when they have eat
leavened Bread, before that this Seed has been perfectly united, they have
thereupon been taken with a Cough, and so ^spit out the Seed again, and by this
means lost their Speech a third time; but when they have eaten ^unleavened
Bread, or sweat Cakes, this has helped them to retain the said Seed. They have
likewise found, that a due use of Balsome of Sulphur, has been good for this
purpose.

30 Q. Upon this occasion of mentioning unleavened Bread and sweet Cakes, we
may enquire into the reason, why God commanded the Israelites to eat unleavened
Bread or sweet Cakes, at Easter in the month of March, or Springtime, when all
things begin to get a new life? whether it may not have been for this reason,
because man (as the Little World) receives his Seed from the Great World, to
the end that the Great World may be perfected in the lesser?

31 Q. Forasmuch as Wheat, of which Bread is made and baked, is the noblest and
best sort of the Food of Man, and that a certain Root commonly called
Earth-nuts, arises from and is nothing else but Wheat turned and growing
up-side downwards (and in Holland is esteemed and commonly held for no other)
forasmuch as the same is found ordinarily in fruitful Wheat-fields: And whereas
we read that Ruben found his Dudaim (Mandrakes, according to the vulgar
translation) in the field, in Wheat-harvest; may not this give us great
occasion to make inquiry, whether this same Earth-nuts were not the very.
Dudaim of Ruben which he brought to his Mother, for which she bought or hired
the company of her Husband Jacob that night from Rachel? For the word Dudaim
signifies in the Hebrew Tongue ( Loves) which the very forming of the sound in
the word (...) does show: for (...) signifies Love, and the termination (...)
makes it of the plural number, and signifies a multiplicity; for (...) which is
the fourth Letter of the H^brew Alphabet, and is formed by the Tongue when the
same presses it self forwards softly with its point against the teeth, which
point is the out-worker and former of all and every Letter, and in the Hebrew
is the Letter (...), which with the Cabalists (not without reason) stands for
the number 10, and is likened to the virile member, as may be more largely seen
in the Authors Book, entitled The Alphabet of Nature. When now this Letter
((...)) in order to a birth, enters into the vowel ((...)) (whose sound
expresses the death and dying of the word) then a new birth comes forth, viz.
another ((...)). This new ((...)) enters with his new point, as with the lower
((...)) into the shut-up ((...)), which signifies the Mother or Womb, in order
to multiplication: And that is the cause why this syllable (...) (with the
Hebrews) always signifies the plural number. Now Love is nothing else, neither
can it be represented otherwise than as a Mother with her Child; and seeing
that a Child (before it comes to be so) was only humane Seed, and that this
Seed of Man (the Lesser World) proceeds from the Seed of the Greater World,
which is Wheat, as being the chiefest Food of Man, and that the Wheat when it
turns downwards into a root, does bring forth a Fruit, and turns to that we
call Earth-nuts: and Rachel having for so long a time together (before their
cohabiting together) so heartily loved her Husband Jacob, and by him again been
spiritually beloved, and thereby also was spiritually impregnated by him; which
multiplied impregnation, seeing it was spiritual, went up to the head (as being
the first seat of Love) and abode there until the time of their coming
together, when his Seed being united with hers, by reason of a longcontinued
custom, having past so many Revolutions, still went upwards, till at length
these spiritual impregnations were so greatly multiplied, as to make her burst
out into these words, which she spoke to Jacob: Give me children, or else I
die. From which manifold spiritual impregnation, at last Joseph (whose name
imports multiplicity) was born. May not this therefore be supposed to have been
the reason, why seeing that Rachel knew that the impregnation in her, which
formerly (in a wrong order) went upwards to bring forth fruit in Idea only,
and in the head, before that the same could take root beneath, must needs first
be conveyed from above, downwards, before ever she could bring forth Children;
therefore she desired the Dudaim, because she knew that they were a Fruit that
had also grown in a wrong order (yea, wholly according to what was said of her
impregnation) viz. their upper part was turned downwards, that so by means of
this Seed of the Great World (in which the blessing of God or generative power
did lie) might cause in her the Seed of the Little World, which went wrongly
upwards into her head in Idea's of love to her Husband, to descend rightly
downwards in order to corporeal birth.

Now that upon every cohabitation of Man and Wife, a spiritual Seed also does
come into the woman and abide there, and is not annihilated, may not this be
evidenced from the example of Thamar, who after the death of both her Husbands,
had their Seed raised and excited in her by her Father-in-law Judah? Genesis 38.

32 Q. Forasmuch as we perceive that the whole Mouth of Man, above, beneath,
and on both sides, as well as the Tongue and Teeth, do every one of them,
continually and without ceasing, give forth a distinct circulating moisture, so
that in the Mouth there is a twofold water, one above, and the other beneath,
both which must be united by means of the Tongue, in order both to eating and
speaking; which latter is formed by the Tongue, which therefore is as a Sponge
moving and turning itself to all parts of the Mouth, destinated for the forming
of all the living Images and Letters, and the sounds of them in the mouth; as
we may see in the printed Hebrew Letters, that they have the same figure and
form as they are shaped and formed by the Tongue in the Mouth, especially when
any one is forced to speak loud to another at a distance; as is more largely
declared in the said Alphabet of Nature. And may not we again in this
circulation of waters in the Mouth of Man perceive an evident harmony and
agreement between the greater and lesser Worlds in their continual Revolutions?

33 Q. Now that the lower waters which come from beneath, viz. from the Belly
up into the Mouth, be of Lunar, Nocturnal, and Terrestrial property, and
consequently do incline us to fleep, and allay pains, may we not perceive this
from hence, that when the sweat of a man's feet is taken by the mouth and
swallowed down, it asswageth the pains of the Cholick, as has been experienced
by some; and as it is commonly known, that by applying the soals of a Stocking,
sore Throats are cured. In like manner also, that the Spittle of any one taken
in the nightime, as soon as they awake, and applied to the place where a
Ring-worm or Tetter is, does take away the same; when on the contrary, our
Spittle by day so applied, does increase the Malady.

And may not this (perhaps) be the reason why the lower waters are of such a
nature (as has been now said) viz. for that our Feet, from whence these waters
come (considered with their ten Toes) are (as it were) the roots wherein (as in
the roots of a Tree) all nourishment must die, as descending into the roots, if
ever they are to arrive at an operative power, and to bring forth Fruit through
the Arms. Hands, and Fingers, as through Boughs and Branches? An example of
which we have in Women with Child, who when by reason of a longing they have
for any Fruit, or from a sudden Fright and Amazement at any thing, they lay
their hand on any part of their body, the Child also which is in their Womb
will in the very some part of its body get an answerable mark or taken, which
retains a sympathy with the Fruit longed for, or with the thing which was the
cause of the Mothers affrightment. From whence we may see, that the hands are
nothing else but the essential Out-workers of the thoughts of the head.

We might further enquire here, seeing Man has his beginning and life from the
Trees by his feeding upon their Fruit, whether therefore an arboreal essence be
not in the first original, and most inward imaging of his outward body? And
whether this Mystery be not hinted to us in the New Testament (in which all
Wisdom, as in the highest divine Philosophy, is contained) in the story of the
blind man, Mark 8. 23, 24, etc. where it is related how Christ spit in the
blind man's eye, and laid his hand upon him, and asked him whether he saw any
thing? whereupon he looked up, and said, I see men walk like trees. But that
afterward, when Christ a second time had laid his hand upon his eyes, he saw
all things clearly.

34 Q. May not the foresaid continual Circulation and Revolution of waters in
the Mouth, be supposed to be for the reason as follows: Inasmuch as the said
waters must give the first serment, and must kindle the first life in the Food
which we take in, whereby our Food comes to be united with us; of which also
even the Americans themselves do not seem to be ignorant, viz. that these
waters are a true living Spirit, who when they prepare their strong Drink
called Perino, they take a great Root called Cassava, which they grate, and
after they have pressed out the Juice (which is poison) bake the remainder of
the grated Roots upon hot stones into Cakes of a finger thick, which they eat
instead of Bread: Another part of the (...) grated or rasped Root they sleep in
common water; and their women take some of the foresaid Cakes and chew them,
and spit what they have chewed into the water in which the Cassava is put to
sleep, and this makes the Liquor to ferment, which afterward serves them for a
usual Drink.

35 Q. Furthermore, is not the Revolution of the said waters partly also
evidenced from hence, that when women make use of mercurial waters outwardly,
for to beautify themselves, if then when they go to sleep they put one or two
Ducats into their mouths, (because they know by experience, that the Mercury
does revolve or circulate) the said Ducats become white; but when put into the
fire, the Mercury flies away, and so the Ducats come again to their first
golden color? In like manner, when some take Mercury inwardly, in order to
salivation, by which means an internal Revolution is brought to pass; now the
Mercury by its Circulation causes salivation, because not being digested, he
is not wholly estranged nor changed from his mercurial quality, but does as yet
in part retain the same, as may be urged from this Argument, viz. that he does
first set upon and kill that life of the parts of man's body, which yet is not
absolutely the first wherewith man is born, such are the Teeth, which are not
born with man; these, I say, he lays hold of in such a manner, as to cause a
corruption of the Gums, and falling out of the Teeth, when the said Mercury is
unmeasurably and unskilfully taken or made use off. And the reason hereof is,
forasmuch as the said Mercury is not yet wholly changed, and therefore cannot
pass through the Teeth, which are some of the Rocks and Stones of the Microcosm.

36 Q. That a certain water or moisture passes through the Teeth, and that
amongst other ends, they were especially formed for this likewise, viz. to
afford waters in quantity; as also that the water in all and every part of the
body must suffer a change, to the end it may distribute to every part and
member of man's body, its due food and nourishment, even as we may observe that
the sweat of man, in each several member, has a different odor; so may not we
also partly form the said judgment from hence, inasmuch as we find some of the
Teeth so fashioned and formed, that when we look upon them through a
Microscope, we can perceive in the middle or hollow part of them many spungy
bladders, by which they continually draw unto themselves much moisture, and
also do renew the same.

Might not we from hence likewise gather, in some measure, that the Teeth of
man, the Lesser World, bears somewhat a resemblance to the Mountains of the
Great World, which continually give forth their waters for to feed and nourish
the Earth; and this the rather, for that we find that a great strength and
force is in the Teeth, forasmuch as we daily take notice, that when Children
come to get their Teeth, they about the same time also begin to speak? And on
the contrary, when the Teeth by reason of age, or else through infirmity, or
other accidents, do fall out, notwithstanding that the party may be able to
speak all words as plainly as before, yet will he not be able to hold on a
discourse so well as formerly, but will soon be tired.

And lastly, does it not follow, that the Teeth were chiefly given to man, for
these three reasons and uses?

1. To afford water, or to give a ferment, and thereby to excite life.

2. To bite and chew his Food.

3. To speak, that is to help to form his voice.

Moreover, seeing that the Teeth are ordinarily thirty two in number, (even
just as many as the Hebrew Letters are, which likewise make up thirty two, the
Consonants and Vowels being reckoned together, viz. twenty two Consonants, and
ten Vowels, which are formed by the Tongue, and by means of the little Arches,
which make the roof of the mouth, and which are above the upper gums inwardly)
which Teeth, together with the foresaid parts, help to form the speech and
words, which are afterward uttered through the Teeth and Lips? so that through
the concurrence of all these, a word is produced or born. Must not therefore
both these ( viz. the Teeth and Letters) have a great analogy and agreement
with one another?

37 Q. Forasmuch as we treat here concerning the Mouth, wherein the speech or
words of man (...) formed and born, it may give just occasion to the starting
of this Question, viz. Seeing that a (...) and his word must be united or made
one, (...) that accordingly the words which flow from his heart, can as little
be annihilated, as the man himself can be; whether then this being so, all the
powers of man must not concur to the production and birth of his word? And
forasmuch as the voice and word of man are his Offspring and Children, viz.
his out-flown Spirits and Angels which continually (from the beginning of his
life, until his death) go out from him, and make up the whole man; Whether or
no then man must not give an account of his words, which do follow him, as well
as his works or thoughts? And whether or no his words should not be his
subjects, over which his Central Life-spirit, ought to rule as a King, yea and
as a Priest offer them up continually to the most High, and that so long until
his perfect Revolution be accomplished, and his total Perfection attained, to
the end that man might be capacitated to enjoy the thousand years Sabbath
(which is made and consists of the weekly Sabbaths) and obtain a spiritual
body, and be united with Christ? For seeing that God has made his beloved ones
Kings and Priests, how could he have made them Kings, in case they had no
Subjects? Or Priests, if they had nothing to offer up to him? Forasmuch then as
the words of Man are to be his Subjects, and consequently must belong to his
Regiment or Government; and that they (as well as his Sight, and all his
Outbirths through all his Senses and Desires) are a spiritual, endless, and
everlasting Being, as well as he himself is; how is it then possible that ever
they should be separated from man, or that they should lose themselves or
perish in the Great World, which is Man's Mother, any more than a man is able to
lose himself? As for example, let us suppose that if some thousands of men
should be taken away from their Wives, viz. by the Turks, or the like, and
carried away Captives into great slavery, and that then there should a man be
found who should redeem them all out of bondage, and convoy them home again to
their Wives and Children, and after that (he having made them meet together in
one place) should make a Speech or Discourse to them full of the greatest love
and friendliness; can we imagine that these redeemed Slaves, their Wives, and
Children, would ever be able to forget this man's countenance, words or works?
Or may not we much rather suppose that they would from time to time relate all
this to their Children and Grandchildren, that so the remembrance of this
their Redeemer might abide steadfast and fixed in all their Posterity? Moreover,
may it not probably be supposed that some of these women, one more, another
less, would become so far possessed of the Idea of this their Redeemer, as even
to bring forth Children, which might resemble and be like him, and have (as it
were) his perfect shape and form; just as we have had many such examples of
women, who have through liking and love, strongly imprinted on themselves the
Image of other men or women, and being impregnated, have brought forth
Children, which have very much resembled those whose Image they had imprinted
in themselves; insomuch as others (though strangers) could observe and take
notice, that the Children greatly resembled such and such persons?

38 Q. Now that not only the words of man, but also his operative thoughts,
before they are yet brought forth into word or work, have a Being, is not to be
doubted of, seeing that it is witnessed by our Savior himself, Mat. 5. 28.
when he says, Whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, has committed
adultery already with her in his heart. And do not we in like manner experience
daily, in many that are united together by a strong and vehement love, that
when they are absent from one another, yet not withstanding they are made
partakers of each others thoughts and dreams by day and night; and that also
when they are present, they can understand one another without speaking, and be
able to answer, before the other has spoke out his meaning, or expressed his
thoughts?

The same, on the contrary, is likewise found in those who fall into great
Anger. Envy, Jealousy, etc. against each other; of which, many examples might
be here alleged, but are on purpose (as being but too notorious) omitted. Must
not now this knowledge which one man has of the thoughts of another, be caused
and wrought by a continual influx, as well as e^flux of Spirits, which are the
good or bad Angels of Man? Seeing that these Spirits, without being bound to
time or place, do penetrate and pass through all bodies. Even as we see that
when a man fights in a Fencing-School, that according to the bent and intention
of his mind, all his members at once in one moment become operative and move
themselves. Now like as the Spirit of a man in his body does thus operate, and
man cannot be separated from the Greater World, as being united to the same
both in his Spirit and his Body; shall not we suppose then, that by means of
this union, and sympathy arising from thence, man is able to work in all parts
of the said Macrocosm, which are in harmony with him? As we may partly gather
by a similitude from without, viz. that when two Lutes are alike tuned, if we
touch the strings of the one, the corresponding strings in the other will give
forth a like fund.

39. Q. Upon this occasion we may enquire concerning the living Word and Wisdom
that are hid in the deep and abstruse Parables, which everywhere occur in
Scripture, whether the reason (why the same seem to be dead to many who read
the Scripture) be not this, as the Jews say by way of similitude, that the case
here is the same, as when a beautiful, lovely, and virtuous Virgin dwells in a
certain house, and of whom some young man becomes enamoured, who knowing that
this Virgin does often open a certain window of that house, and shows her self
thereat, to the doing of which he often secretly draws her by his strong love:
whereas others on the contrary, who know nothing of this Virgin, nor have any
love for her, they find the said window always shut; so that though they look
never so often, yet they only see the window, but do never see the Virgin. And
in like manner, the inward mystery of the Parables in Scripture, continues hid
and concealed from the unwise, as who gaze only upon the dead Letters.

40 Q. Seeing then that this is so, is there no Key to be found wherewith the
Mysteries of Scripture might be opened? And forasmuch as the Old Testament was
written in Hebrew, and that it cannot be translated into another Language, so
as to retain its own proper force and energy; may not we therefore suppose,
that in the Hebrew Language (as we consider the same to be a living Language)
this Key is to be found? especially since we see that there is no radical word
in the said Language, very few excepted, that consists of more than three
Consonants, as of a Beginning, Middle, and End; and that they are all writ
without Vowels, when especially the said Language is rightly and truly writ by
the Wise; and that for this reason, that they might be read and understood so
as to afford a variety of Wisdom, and diversity of Signification, yet all
agreeing and harmonizing together, the like to which cannot be found in any
other Speech whatsoever. And they who thus read the Hebrew without Vowels, are
necessitated to read the same with understanding and attention, and cannot
heedlesly run over it, as is common in other Languages. Must it not follow then
from hence, that the perfection of this Speech, and the wisdom which is
contained in it, does chiefly consist in this, that the most part of the
radical words, very few excepted, are made up only of three Consonants,
whereas in other Languages there is great confusion, by reason of the many
Letters and Syllables of which their words do consist; and we know that wisdom
is not to be found in confusion, but in order? Concerning this, see Alphabetum
Naturae, page 94, 95, etc.

V. Concerning the Sense of Feeling in Man: Also concerning the Brain, and the
Pith of the Backbone, commonly called by Anatomists the Spinal Marrow.
41 Q. That there is (as it were) a Seed in the Brain of man, and that the said
Seed must be generated there, is it not apparent from the three parts of which
the Brain consists, two of which are in the forepart of the Head, the other
behind; all which unite together and generate one Spirit or Seed, which they
afterward conveigh; by the Nerves, to the other Senses and Members of the
Body? For if in case the Brain were but one only thing, would it not then
follow from thence, that either a man must understand nothing at all, inasmuch
as there would be no Worker nor Receiver, or else that he would understand all
things in unity and perfection; which is not to be allowed, because it is only
one of the incommunicable Attributes of God himself? It is not therefore
necessary, that there must be two, because a spiritual and essential Image can
only be made or generated by, first, a receiving from without, and next, by an
out-working from within, viz. the one to be operative and male, the other
receptive and female? And must not we then suppose the third, viz. the little
Brain (so called) which is placed behind in the head, to be the union of the
other two, like the Womb in a female? And that thus these three parts of the
Brain, do make out the holy number three or Ternary?

And may not we in some measure perceive from hence, what the nature of that
indisposition is which we commonly call a Pose or Cold? Since we see that fools
and mad men also, who want due Apprehension which is performed in the Brain,
are commonly free from that Disease: whereas on the contrary, those that think
aright and study much, or easily apprehend, and have subtle quick wits, when
by earnest meditation they do over-drive their Brain, so as to make more Idea's
than (for the forming of which) they have received matter or spiritual water
sufficient from their Nocturnal Luminary, get thereupon a running of the Nose,
which is as it were a Gonorrhaea of the Brain, by which the said Spirit or Seed
does disorderly slow from the Brain, and consequently makes the man unfit at
that time to have any deep thoughts; even as that man who has contracted a
Gonorrhaea below, is unfit to generate Children.

42 Q When now the hinder-part of the Brain, or Cerebellum, which is the union
of both the other Brains, together with the Spinal Marrow, which in Holy
Scripture is called the Silver Cord (or Pith of the Back) which passes through
the whole Backbone into the Os Sacrum, or Rumpbone, (at the end of which males
have hair growing, because there the spiritual Seed of the Bones is wrought
out) by means of which Spinal Marrow, or Pith of the Back, the spiritual Image
which was formed above in the Head, is conveyed down to the place of
generation, as it is likewise done to the Testicles; just as the breath through
the Mouth and Nose, passes to the Heart, and from thence to the same place of
generation and birth. May not we conclude therefore, that from the Spinal
Marrow almost all Nerves, Sinews, and Bones, as well as all sense of Feeling
and motion, have their derivation of their Being and Original? Forasmuch as
experience does witness to the same, because when a man by growing very crooked
has his Backbone quite broke or intercepted, so as the Spinal Marrow, or
Silver Cord, is utterly separated and cut asunder, or at least totally
compressed, we shall find that the party does, at the very same instant,
wherein the breach or compression is made in the Spinal Marrow, wholly lose all
sense and motion, viz. from the interception of that breach or compression
downwards; insomuch that when a Needle is run up even to the head into the
flesh of that person, he is not in the least sensible thereof.

May not we likewise observe the same from such persons as break or rather
dislocate the Bones of their Neck, who immediately and in a moment thereupon
are deprived of all speech and motion, and lie for dead; but when some body
that is very strong sets his knees against the shoulders of such a party, and
puts his head between his legs, and by a strong and straight extending of his
head, recovereth that dislocation, and makes his Neck straight again, so as the
Spinal Marrow, or Silver Cord, is restored to its former site and erect
posture; then the person is presently restored to his perfect life, speech, and
motion, which he had before.

43 Q. Seeing then that the Neck and Backbone are governed by Sinews, Muscles,
and Nerves, by the means of which all motion is performed, viz. forward,
backward, on both sides, and also of turning round; so that when we bow
forwards, the foremost Nerves, Muscles, and Sinews, are (...) their length
contracted, and the hindmost are extended: And the like happens when we move on
either side, viz. when we bend toward the right, the Nerves, Muscles, and
Sinews on the left are extended; and those on the right side are in their
length contracted: and in like manner it is when the motion turns round. Must
it not follow then, that when any one of these Nerves, Muscles, or Sinews
loses its force, and the body thereupon is overbalanced, and leans or bends
that way; whether then, forasmuch as the weight of the Head, Arms, Breast, and
of the whole upper part of the Body, by reason of the weakened Nerve, Muscle, or
Sinew, is no longer carried in a straight or erect posture or line, but in a
crooked and distorted, this weight causing a leaning of one side, must it not
of necessity make the body more and more crooked, and so consequently by
degrees produce great bunches and protuberances, either in the Back, Sides, or
other part of the Trunk of the Body?

And may not this likewise be the reason why young Children, who are yet a
growing, when they are set to work at great Spinning-wheels, or any other
labor, that makes them sit crooked, do thereupon become crooked and
bunch-back'd?

Is it not also evident from hence, why those who are very crooked and
bunch-back'd, are also shortwinded, not only because the Lungs have no room to
go up and down (which yet is commonly supposed to be the reason of it) but
because the life and motion which passes through the Backbone, cannot have
their free course and circulation, as being hindered and weakened by the
crookedness of the Spinal Marrow or Pith of the Backbone.

Now I having found out an easy way for to cure and restore such as are
crooked or bunch-back'd, and that after the best manner, naturally, easily, and
without trouble; which, upon my direction, has been often performed and
accomplished: whereupon several Friends have importuned me not to suffer so
useful an Experiment to Mankind to be buried with me. In compliance with whose
desires, I have at the end of this Discourse (that it might not make too great
a gap in the sequel thereof) described the Instrument wherewith, and manner how
this Cure is performed; to which I refer the Reader.

41 Q. That the five Senses of man (of which in part mention has been made
before) do concur and meet together in the Head, may not this partly be
inferred from this instance, viz. that when a man stops up his Ears with Wax,
or by any other way, and then takes a long Stick and puts one end of the same
to his Teeth, and the other end of it leaning on a Virginal, viz. on that part
of the Instrument which is near the strings, whilst another plays upon it, he
that holds the Stick between his Teeth, will hear the whole Music most
distinctly and sweetly through his Teeth, notwithstanding that his Ears be
close stopped up? Moreover, the same may be further confirmed, because (as has
been mentioned) a twofold Seed flows down from the Brain of man into the center
or mid-part of the Head, where all the Senses meet, and there becomes divided,
one part of it going forwards toward the Nose, the other backwards to the
Throat.

Is not the same likewise further apparent from hence, that when we use a
Collyrium or Eye-water to our Eyes, (as for instance, Aloes with a little
Copperas dissolved in Rose Water) we presently perceive the taste of the Aloes
in our Throat; from whence we see that there is a continual Revolution of water
from the Eyes to the Throat. The same being yet further demonstrable from
hence, that when men weep for joy or grief, and shed many tears, that at the
same time much water runs down from the Eyes to the Nose and Mouth also.

45 Q. Seeing we have here made mention of the water of the Eyes, may we not
take occasion from hence to enquire for what end and purpose the natural
faculty of Weeping and Laughing was given to Man? And whether or no it were not
chiefly given him for this end, viz. that Man keeping himself betwixt both
those Extremes, might not turn foolish; because we see that when a man by his
imagination does frame to himself an Image, which proves to be according to his
desires, and such as he delights in, he thereupon is pleased and laughs, and
his Eyes give forth their water (proportionably to the excess of his love for
the said Image, which in order to its being perfected, ought to be free;
whereas in this case the party, by reason of his love to the said Image, lays
hold on the same as his propriety) for to drown the said Image, and so take
away the excess of love to it?

And on the contrary, is it not for this reason, that we find that Fools which
have no understanding, laugh very much, by which means they are hindered from
framing any due Images? And will not this likewise be found to be the reason of
their weeping, who are seized with grief and sorrow; for that when they have
lost the beloved Image, which they would willingly have kept as their
propriety, they begin to shed tears, in which the said Image is drowned, and
their excess toward it taken away.

It being a thing of daily experience, that when any one that is in sorrow
cannot weep, his sorrow increases, and the Image that causes it, grows
stronger; so as sometimes the party by means thereof becomes a Mope or Fool,
and sometimes dies for grief: but as soon as the party comes to weep, so that
his Eyes, Nose, and Mouth give forth their water, he thereby is delivered and
eased of his sorrow; and the more plentiful his weeping is, and the more
abundantly his Tears and Mouthwater do gush forth, the sooner is he eased,
forasmuch as the grief-causing Image is deluged and drowned in the said waters.

46 Q. Now that sorrow without tears does often take away the dolorifick Image
and Life together, is not this, alas! too notorious from manifold experience?
And that the very same may be caused by a violent and excessive Laughter
without tears, is not this also matter of experience? For has it not been
known, that young wanton Children playing together, have so long tickled one
another, till by excess of Laughter they have lost their breath, and swoned
away? And some wicked ungodly Soldiers were not ignorant of this, who in the
late German War (which continued thirty years together) when they were minded
to force the Country People to tell them where their Money was, did bind them
fast on a Stool or Bench, and having pulled off their Shoes and Stockings, they
anointed the soals of their Feet with Cream, or rubbed them with Salt, and let
a Goat lick it off again; by means of which tickling motion they were forced to
extreme Laughter, but without tears; and by this means having lost their
strength, they were forced to confess all, and discover to them where they had
hid their moneys.

47 Q. Seeing we have many instances of mad people or Lunaticks, who by chance
falling into the water, and by letting in the same into the upper part of their
body (so as the air in their Lungs has been quite choked thereby, though not
the air which was in their bellies) have been drowned to appearance, and held
by all for dead, who afterward having been laid upon their bellies with their
heads and upper parts inclining downwards, and some body blowing strongly into
their Fundament through a Knife-sheath with the end cut off, or other
convenient Pipe, have thereupon begun to vomit up all the water they had taken
down; and thus have not only been restored to life, but at the same time also
have been cured of their madness, and restored to the perfect use of their
Reason, and continued so.

And for a full and convincing evidence of all this, there is a certain
Physician, who having made this observation out of my Fathers Writings, has
put the same in practice, so as to make a Profession of it, viz. he takes mad
people and binds their hands behind them, and ties their feet together with a
Rope, which he runs through a Pulley, and there by lets down the upper parts of
their body into a Vessel of water, and lets them hang till he think it to be
enough; then he pulls them up out of the water, and blows into their
Fundaments, by which means they void the water they have taken in, which having
drowned the Image of their madness, the said Lunaticks have thereby been
delivered and freed from the dominion of the Moon.

May we not therefore conclude from hence, that when the water of a man's own
Little World, viz. his tears of weeping or laughter (as aforementioned) are not
sufficient to drown the undue Images man has framed, he is then forced to have
recourse to the waters of the Great World?

48 Q. Is it not likewise very observable on this occasion, that a Dog being a
Beast of a very quick scent, has a very cold Nose, which coldness is a main
cause of the quickness of his scent, because the odoriferous emanations from
persons and things, are by the said cold condensed, contracted, and
repercussed, and therefore made the more perceptible. Now a Dog by means of
this his quick scentedness, and the spiritual emanation which continually goes
forth from, together with the love he bears to his Master, is able to trace the
way he is gone, and to distinguish him from all others; which a man cannot do:
for if he had so quick a scent, his Senses would thereby be dissipated and
avocated, and his activity or out-working would be weakened. But Man when he
stands aright, is capable of an higher perfection than this, forasmuch as when
he has perfectionated and wrought out his outward smelling, he then obtains a
spiritual smelling, and the same may be said concerning all his other Senses,
and thus becomes enabled to enjoy and rule over all. So that in this particular
also he far excells a Dog and all other Beasts, in case he will but apply
himself to it, and retire into himself in his Central Spirit. Now it is upon
the same account, as aforesaid, that a Dog does so love his Master, and others
that are his Benefactors, insomuch that he gives up himself willingly to death
for them. And forasmuch as his quick scent makes him to be watchful, and of no
sound sleep, which sleep notwithstanding all Creatures stand in need of, to the
end that the old Images that are in their waters, might be drowned by means of
the overflowing Night-water, and so be renewed and bettered. And is it not
worth our taking notice, that when these internal waters in a Dog, through
diverse causes, as Hunger, overgreat Heat or Cold, are turned the contrary way
and disordered, so that he cannot take his due rest; the Image of Love he had
for his Master, is turned to Enmity; and by this means grows mad, and becomes
shie of the outward water (forasmuch as he is at enmity with his inward water
and the Images formed out of it) so that he hates it, and cannot endure it; and
that because his internal disordered waters are thereby put in motion? And
whilst he is thus distempered, if he chance to bite another Dog, Beast, or Man,
or if he do but touch their skin with the foame of his mouth, immediately the
Spirit of his perverted and disordered waters and Image, does enter into them,
and causes the same disorder in their waters, so that they in like manner
become shie of the outward water.

Furthermore, it has been found by experience, that the best means for curing
this Distemper, is, lightly to burn or cauterize the skin of the bitten man or
beast with a small red-hot Iron or Copper, and by this means to put them into a
fright of fire, or else by plunging them well under water: for thus the outward
Fire or Water-spirit of the Great World, which stands in its due and right
order, will be predominant over and master the disordered Spirit of the Little
World, and turn about and set to right the disordered waters of the same. And
is not this well worth our animadversion and consideration?

49 Q. Does it not appear very probable from all this, that the ancient wise
men amongst the Jews did well understand this effect or operation of the
waters; as who without doubt by a paternal tradition from Moses, or it may be
yet further from Noah, had received and learnt this? Seeing that baptizing or
plunging under water was very frequent amongst them in the Old Testament, until
the time of Christ, and is so even to this day; so as it is plain that this
Ceremony is derived from them. And we find it frequently asserted in the
Writings of their Doctors, that there can be no Repentance, without Prayers,
Fasting, and of Alms, and being baptized or plunged under water.

And that the Jews in Christ's time were of this opinion, does not that clearly
appear from the Questions which their Messengers propounded to John the
Baptist, asking him why that he baptized, seeing that he was neither the
Messiah, nor Elias, nor that Prophet?

Yea, there are at this very day some amongst the Jews, who endeavor to excel
others in Holiness, that do often, yea two or three times a week plunge
themselves under water. Moreover, in all places where Jews dwell, they must
have a place for men and women to bathe in; the women always making use of the
same apart, or by themselves: for after that they have accomplished the six
weeks of their Purification, before they can again cohabit with their Husbands,
the first thing they do, is to go into the Bath. This Bath is a living water or
springing Fountain, into which the woman enters stark naked, without keeping so
much as a Ring on her finger, and by some understanding women is let down so
deep into the same, that the water quite covers her head, for not so much as
one hair of her head must abide above water.

And this the Jews do, to the end that the old remaining Idea or Image might be
drowned by the water, and renewed. This Bath, when made as it ought to be, is
contrived after this manner. First, in some convenient place where a living
Spring is, they dig five or six foot deep; and having made it of a fitting
compass, they wall it round within, and fix a Stone-Table at the bottom of it,
on which the woman that is to be baptized or plunged, does seat her self in the
water, which then (as has been said) covers her head; under her feet is a
Stone-step for a Footstool, upon which when she stands upright, her head is
above the waters, and so comes up by the steps, made for that purpose in the
Bath, out of the water.

Now that after a preceding birth there yet remains in women an Idea of the
said former birth, which afterward may become operative, in case it be not
thus drowned and renewed in the water, do not we find this by experience? Thus
we see that a Fool, so long as he continues in his foolishness, and is not
recovered thereof by being plunged under water, does beget no Children but what
are mere Fools: Is there not ground therefore to fear, that a woman who has
had a Fool for her Husband, has even after his death something of the old Idea
of her deceased Husband abiding with her? And do not we partly meet with an
instance hereof amongst irrational Creatures? For when a young Mare has the
first time been covered by an Ass, and Conception follows, she brings forth a
Mule; and when the next time she is covered with a Stone-horse, she indeed
brings forth a Horse, but yet so distinguished, as that all those who
understand Horses, can easily perceive that the Dam of it the time before was
covered by an Ass; forasmuch as the said Horse retains still somewhat of the
properties and shape of the Mule.

50 Q. Forasmuch as we have here made mention of Baptism or Plunging under
water, it will not be amiss further to observe, that Baptism is to be
considered under a twofold notion, viz. either as particular only, of which
hitherto has been spoken; or as common and universal, as was that of John the
Baptist, who was sent to baptize unto Repentance, and the Baptism of Christ
with the Holy Ghost and with Fire. In imitation of which Baptism of John, it
happened about four years since, that an old pious simple Jew came amongst his
Brethren, who imagined himself (and declared as much publicly to the Jews) to
be sent to baptize unto Repentance, as a Forerunner of the Messiah, for that
the time of the Messiah (as he declared) was near: whereupon several simple
Jews were baptized by him; but the learned and understanding men amongst them,
were not so ready to approve of this his undertaking, or to be baptized by him,
but propounded some Queries to him; to which, when he could not return any
sufficient Answer, he was fain to desist from his further baptizing, and
confess that it was a weakness in him, and that he had been mistaken.

Forasmuch then as according to this instance, there must be a certain ground
for baptizing, we who call our selves Christians, ought in especial manner to
know this ground, that we might be ^ble to give to Heathens and Jews, whenever
they shall demand it, an account and reason of the ^ame.

SECT. III.
Concerning the Outward Members and parts of Man's Body; and lastly, concerning
the Stomach.
I. Concerning the Face of Man.
51 Q. FOrasmuch as we find by experience, that when any person has a Mole on
his ^ace, that the same is also found on another part of ^is body, which bears
proportion with that part of his Face; which is further evidenced from the
^enereal Distemper, which has its seat in the ^ower parts of the belly, but in
its out-working ^oth first seize the Nose and disfigure it: May we not conclude
from hence, that the entire proportion of man's body may be found in his Face?
Concerning which, we might here set down many things, which for certain reasons
are omitted at present.

II. Concerning the Poise and Proportion of the Body of Man.
52 Q. Seeing that man, when he lays himself with his hands stretched out over
his head, upon a stiff-stretched Cord, or upon a narrow board, will find his
true poise directly under his Navel (by which, as his Center, he is fastened to
his Mothers Womb) and that on both sides he is of equal length and weight. In
like manner, when he lays himself down naked on his back, with his hands joined
on his belly, he then finds his poise under the Rump-bone, from whence both his
extremes be of equal length and weight: and when being in this posture he goes
about to raise himself, he finds that his head and feet mount together. And may
not we from hence plainly perceive, the exact proportion and symmetry of the
Fabric of Man's Body?

III. Concerning the motion of the Thighs and Legs of Man.
53 Q. It is likewise observable, that man has two semi-circular Bones, viz.
his Ankles, by means of which he can turn his feet this way and that way,
forwards, and on either side, to the end he might be able to go surely and
safely in any uneven or rough way, and not be in danger of falling. As also
that his Thighs and Legs are of the same length, and move themselves round, or
in a circle. Furthermore, that when a man stands on one Leg, and lifts up the
other, it is at the same time, by means of the Thigh, brought into a motion for
going; and when he lies down, and would turn himself, it must be done by means
of the weight of his Legs or Arms, which likewise go round, and are just of
that length, that when he sits, he can lean upon them, and help to raise
himself. Does not all this well deserve to be weighed and considered by us?

IV. Concerning the Bones of Man.
54 Q. Forasmuch as Man has two hundred forty eight Bones in order to his out
working and motion, and that there are just so many Commands in the Law of
Moses of things to be done, and three hundred sixty five Prohibitions of things
forbidden, which correspond with a like number of Veins, Nerves, Sinews, etc.
which are within the flesh of man, and which, together with the foregoing
number of the Bones, make up the number six hundred and thirteen; to which when
the seven Commands of Noah are added, the product is six hundred and twenty.
Now it is observed, that in the ten Commandments in Hebrew, there are just six
hundred and twenty Letters, so that every Letter, according to this, seems to
contain a Precept, and consequently that the ten Commands comprehend all the
rest, Commands as well as Prohibitions. May not we therefore in some measure
perceive from hence, the reason why our Savior has so expressly asserted, that
not one Iota or one Keraia (point or stroke which the Tongue forms for to
make the sound, and to form and shape the Letters) should perish from the Law
until a^l be fulfilled?

V. Concerning the Analogy and Proportion which the ten Fingers of a Man's
Hands have with the ten Head-Commands of the Law.
55 Q. Forasmuch then as in the ten Commands all the other six hundred and
twenty do meet together and concenter, and that Man has just ten Fingers to
his Hands, which Fingers are the outworkers of the Head or whole Man, that with
them (so far as their activity reaches) he might work out and fulfill the said
ten Commands, principally with the ends of his Fingers, under the Nails, where
his chief and quickest feeling lies, by which he examines and distinguishes
things. Now as it was said before, that a humane Foetas fourteen days after its
conception, has a perfect Body, but without Hands or Feet, so that the Body
produces them as its own out-working; whether this may not be a confirmation of
what was just now said, that the Fingers are the out-workers of the whole Man?
And does not the great Analogy which there is between Man and the Law, plainly
appear from what has been said? And that the right and truly perfect man, does
consist of these Precepts, yea is nothing else but the Precepts themselves;
which is confirmed by Solomon, Eccles. 12. 13. where the words, according to
the original Text, runs thus: Let us hear the head sum of all Doctrine: Fear
God, and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole man.

VI. Concerning the Hair of Man's Head.
56 Q. Forasmuch as the Head of Man is of a round Figure, and consists of six
parts, as above and below, before and behind, left and right side, and that
some of the said parts be covered with Hair, with which a man is born; which
Hair has likewise many excellent properties, by reason of their color,
curling, thickness, etc. Concerning which, much might be said, but for brevity
is past over. Amongst other particulars, it is observable, that when a man has
much and thick Hair on his Head, he commonly is very strong withal. As also
when any have the Hair on the top of their Heads standing upright or staring,
it is an argument of great activity and operativeness, and that such a person
busies himself about all matters; but by reason of the multitude of his
thoughts and conceptions, is not able to work them out perfectly; but when old
age comes on, and that the Hair begins to lie flat, and in process of time to
fall out, he then becomes disposed to work out his former thoughts, as they
revolve in him?

57 Q. Now that there is a great force or strength in the Hair of Man, may not
this in part be considered from hence, that when a man is in danger of his
life, so as all his powers at once are in anguish and suffering, that then his
Hairs rise on end, as is commonly known? As likewise from this instance of a
known young man, whose Beard was not yet grown, who upon his receiving the
Sentence of Death, the day before he was to be executed for Manslaughter by him
committed, had the Hair of his Head turned gray in one night, which continued
so all the days of his life (for he was pardoned, because of the terrible
fright he had suffered in the expectation of death, as was evident from the
change of his Hair) and when afterward his Beard began to grow, the Hair of it
was black, whereas that of his Head continued gray, as was mentioned before.

May not we give further evidence to this from another instance, that when a
man falls into Despair, he bends and turns his Hands from him, contrary to
Nature, and twists and squeeseth his Fingers, as if he had a mind to break them
(as being the Out-workers of his thoughts) and plucks off the Hair from his
Head (which are the upper Roots of Man, and do receive a strong influence from
the Stars, and afford strength to the life of man) and not his Nose, nor any
other part: for Nature understands what the Hair is? And have not we likewise
an abundant confirmation of this power and force which resides in the Hair,
from the History of Sampson? Judge. 16. 17, etc.

58 Q. Again, that a fiery power is in the Hair, do not we perceive this, in
that when some comb their Hair in the dark, a Light or fiery Glance proceeds
from it; and this as well in Beasts as men? There was a certain known Lady, who
by reason of her intolerable Headache, could not endure a Candle in her Room by
night; and she having in a dark night her Head combed by a Waiting-Gentlewoman
that was newly come into her service, who upon seeing a light or fire come from
her Ladies Hair, was sore afrighted and ran out of the Room; but being
afterward persuaded to comb her own head in the dark, she perceived that a
light or fire proceeded from her own Hair also; whereupon she was recovered
from her fright and amazement.

VII. Concerning the Hair which is before on the Forehead.
59 Q. Don't we find likewise by experience, that those who have their Hair
growing down their Foreheads triangle-wise, so as to reach to the midst of
them, are of very quick apprehension; but ordinarily not so steadfast as others?
And may not we from this instance, and from what was mentioned before, conclude
what the Hair of the Head (as it stands in its proper station and order) is in
general, and what use it is of to man? And that it has its peculiar powers and
out-workings? As also that they have an Analogy with, and may be compared to
the Stars of Heaven?

VIII. Concerning the Eyebrows.
60. Q. Forasmuch as we find by daily observation, that when a man has variety
of thoughts in his head, and is in the earnest study of any thing, he does knit
his Brows and wrinkle the skin of his Forehead, in which wrinkles then we may
plainly perceive between the Eyes over the Nose, the Figure of a Balance: and
are not we informed from hence, that the Eyebrows of man have and receive
power for to judge, find out, and rightly to weigh and consider any thing,
which the Eyes have in part taken in and laid hold of?

IX. Concerning the Eye lids.
61. Q. Seeing that we find by experience, that those who by sickness have lost
part of the Hair from their Eyelids, have had their sight weakened thereby, is
it not rational therefore to conclude, that the said Hairs were not alone
ordained to keep out dust from the Eyes, but that they also contribute much to
the sight it self? which we may the rather infer, for that the Eyelids, in
that part where the hairs grow, are gristly, as the Nose and Ears also be, as
was before declared. And accordingly we observe daily, that when a man is
sleepy, his upper Eyelids grow heavy, and sink down; and will it not follow
from hence, that the said gristly substance in the Eyelids, has a peculiar
power of life to attract and give forth in like manner as is found in the Ears,
Nose, and all other Bones whose extreme parts are all vested with such gristles?

X Concerning the Hairs in the Nose and Ears, as well as those of the Beard and
Privities, and under the Arms.
62. Q. Forasmuch as Man has Hairs also in his Nostrils and Ears, and that the
Hairs of every part have their peculiar power and operation, ought we not
therefore to consider whether the Hairs that grow on these parts, which are
ordained to particular sensations, of which they are the Organs or Instruments,
must not in all probability have a ^eculiar operation, and contribute much to
the ^erfection of the said Senses? And may not we ^onclude the same concerning
the Hair which grows on other parts of his body, and is not born with him, as
the Hair under his Arms, of his Beard, Privities, etc. viz. that they also have
their pecu^iar powers and operations? The Hair under the Arms, is it not
probable that they communicate to the Arms and Hands a particular power and
force for to operate or work out any thing? And the like may be said of those
of the Beard and Privities, forasmuch as we see that Youths before they grow
hairy in those parts, have but a weak and womanish voice, (as is well known by
Musicians) but as soon as they grow hairy, their voices become manly, as being
then fit and disposed for the production of Seed; and is it not probable
therefore, that the Hair contributes much to this Operation? Is it not likewise
worth our animadversion (as that which must have its peculiar cause and reason)
that women have no Hair growing in some parts of their body, where men have?

63 Q. And that these lower parts of Man's body contribute much to his Beard and
Voice, is matter of experience; because we see that Eunuchs never have any
Beard, and always a womanly Voice. And may not we partly gather from this
instance, that the Man is properly the Generator of the Word, and is the Chief
and Principal in getting of Children?

XI. Concerning the Skin of Man.
64 Q. Forasmuch as by the help of a Microscope we can plainly discern in the
prepared Skin of a Man, or tanned Hide of a Bufalo, that the said Skins are
throughout, as it were, woven together with many thin nervous Filaments, as
with so many Threads. And moreover, that all the said Filaments do properly
belong to man's make or frame, as with which he is born; and therefore we see,
that when a man loses any of the same, it is not in the power of man to
restore them, or to make Hair to grow there, as before. The said Filaments are
likewise lost, when proud flesh grows in wounds or elsewhere, which in the
Dutch Tongue is called wild flesh, for that the same is not natural, but a
Disease, and is like an Excrecence growing on a Tree, of which several reasons
may be given, which for brevities sake are here omitted. May not we therefore
conclude, that the foresaid nervous capillary Filaments, of which the Skin is
woven together, are not there in vain, but that they serve for motion,
dilatation, and contraction?

65 Q. Moreover, seeing that the foresaid nervous Skin is covered with a thin
and smooth upper Skin, full of little Pores or Sweat-holes, and small Hairs,
through which all the spiritual Powers of the whole man (especially in his
Face, which is an Epitome of, and represents the whole man) do continually flow
out from, and enter, and that in the appearance of Light: as we do see in some
persons that a light fire or shining glance does continually proceed from their
Faces and Skins; and that when in the dark we rub their Skin with a piece of
Cloth, the said Cloth will appear full of light-shining flames, in like
manner as has been mentioned before concerning the Hair of the Head.

Moreover, experience teaches, that in great and dangerous Diseases, the said
upper Skin does peel off, and the Hair of the Head falls (which is worth our
observation) as has partly been mentioned; though we find also that in other
Accidents, yea without any, during the whole life of man, the said upper Skin
does continually wear away and is renewed again, in order to the continuation
of man's life; insomuch as the whole man in all his parts (not so much as the
Nails of his Feet, and Hands, or Flesh excepted) is continually renewed: which
we may perceive by setting a mark at the root of our Nails, for we shall find
that in the time of three months the same will be grown up to the top of them.

The same is likewise demonstrable from hence, that when a man by sickness has
lost the greatest part of his flesh, he recovers the same again in three
months, accounting from the time he begins to recover.

Yea, the very Bones of man, from which the Flesh has its original, are not
exempt from this Renovation: for don't we see, that out of living broken Bones
a moisture proceeds, by means of which they are conglutinated again: Now how
can we conceive that this could ever be brought about, without a continual
Renovation and alteration of the Bones and their moisture? The Seed of man
likewise (which contains in it and comprehends the whole man in all his parts,
the Bones as well as the Flesh) does evidence this: for we see that a Child
that is generated of the said Seed, does not only resemble his Father in shape
and flesh, but also in his bones, from which the flesh is produced. And also
because the Spirit of man does properly dwell in the Bones (which probably was
the reason why Joseph commanded the Children of Israel to take his bones along
with them out of Egypt, viz. that his Spirit might go long with them) which
Spirit is that which forms the Body, seeing it is impossible that a Body, as
such, should bring forth a Spirit; but the Spirit must bring forth the Body:
which Spirit therefore may be supposed to be that Rib of which Eve was built.
And may not we from all this conclude, that the Bones must be renewed as well
as the other parts of man's Body, forasmuch as all proceeds from one and the
same Spirit?

And does it not follow from all this, that the whole man, according to all his
parts (not the meanest or least point excepted) must be subject to a continual
and never-ceasing Revolution?

66 Q. This continual Revolution of Man is not only to be gathered from the
Sickness and Health of man, according to what before has been mentioned
concerning his never-ceasing giving out and taking in; but may likewise be
inferred from other accidents happening to persons that are in perfect health;
amongst which the following instance will, I suppose, not be unacceptable to
the Reader.

A known Friend was on a time carried a Prisoner out of Germany toward Rome,
to be laid up in the Inquisition there; and passing through many great Cities
and places in Italy, in all which the Streets and Houses, Doors and Windows,
were filled with People that flocked to see him, because the report was, that
he was to be burnt at Rome. Forasmuch then as upon this account all eyes were
fixed upon him, as being desirous to eye him earnestly, and to have a full view
of him; and he on the other side, had as great desire to look upon them, as
being free and unconcerned in his mind, so as their imaginative sight could
gain no entrance into him, or be received by him, and consequently all the
central Aspects which they cast upon him, were fain to concenter elsewhere, and
so made up a kind of shadowy Person or Image, which sat with his back toward
him; insomuch that he could not imagine that the People gazed upon him, but
upon the Person that sat before him, at which he was much surprised, because
he did not then apprehend the reason of it.

For further confirmation of this, another person that was a Preacher, once
propounded this Query to the forementioned party; whence it was, that many
times as he was preaching, he had seen a person in his own shape and likeness
standing before him, who, as he thought, preached instead of him: forasmuch as
when his Sermon was ended, he found himself as fresh and lively, as he was
before he had begun to preach. The forementioned party hereupon related to the
Preacher the foregoing accident which had happened to himself, which as he was
doing, these following thoughts opened in him, viz. whether this might not be
the reason of what the Preacher had related to him; that forasmuch as his words
were at that time received by his Hearers and taken root in them, he again
received back from them, the strength or power he had given forth; and thus
seeing his Hearers continually received his image and word, with delight and
satisfaction, and gave forth the same again to him, himself all this while
continuing free and unconcerned, that from all this, it could not be otherwise
but that he must see the back of his image, which his Hearers had made or
framed before him.

XII. Concerning the Stomach of Man.
67 Q. Forasmuch as the Body of Man, according to the testimony of Scripture,
is, and should be the Temple of God, 2 Cor. 3. 13. and Chap. 6. 19. 2. Cor. 6.
16. And that in the Temple at Jerusalem, there was an Altar of Burnt-offering,
upon which many Beasts, etc. was offered: and seeing that all the meat a man
feeds upon enters into the stomach, might not the stomach be compared with the
said Altar? And might it not properly be called an Altar in the Temple of God,
on which all right and well ordered food for the life of man, is to be offered
up?

For seeing that the Stomach is a wise and understanding Purveyor for the whole
body, which must and does continually renew all and every part of it, not one
of them excepted, by a continual circulation in a twofold form of Blood and
Water: may not we for these reasons likewise suppose the Stomach to be the
universal Physician that cures all Diseases; the rather, because we experience
that when the Stomach has lost its strength, no Medicine can be helpful to the
sick? And whether it be not therefore necessary to preserve the same in its
strength and vigor, to the ^end that the whole body may be kept so likewise?
For must not the ferment of the Stomach (which is its own proper fire) do all
that is to be done in order to the preserving of the Life of Man, and no
Strange fire, even as it was forbid to bring any strange fire to the Altar at
Jerusalem? Ought not we therefore in this case to observe to that old Verse,

Principiis obsta, sero Medicina paratur, etc.
And is it not so much the less strange, that (...) peculiar fire should be
found in man, forasmuch as the same was very well known amongst the Jews who
looked upon this fire, when abundantly perceived in or about any person, as a
great Omen (...) Presage of something very extraordinary; according to what is
mentioned of Achitophel in Cabale denudatae Tomo secundo, in tractatu de
Revolutionibus Animarum (which Treatise some years since I got translated by a
Friend, and was not long since printed at Francfort on the Mayn) viz. that fire
proceeded from his Member?

And that such a fire as this is contained in man's Urine, and is preserved in
the water as a close baked and compacted slime, may not we plainly perceive
this by the Phosphorus, which a few years since was found out in Germany, which
is made in this manner: First, you evaporate a great quantity of Urine, until
it become as thick as Honey, and then mix the same with three parts of Sand;
which mixture being put into a coated Retort, and a large Recipient joined to
it with water in it, and the Retort placed in a convenient Furnace, and driven
with a sufficiently strong fire, at last a shining matter comes over, which
after settles it self into a thick substance; and when taken out of the water,
does give light and shine in the dark; and being rubbed upon Paper, does set it
in a light flame.

It will not be thought unreasonable here, for us to enquire, whether from what
has been said, we may not in some sort understand the Analogy and resemblance
there is between that glorious fire which in former times came down from Heaven
upon the Altar at Jerusalem, and the fire which is in Man? And might not we
likewise find out an agreement between the Stomach of Man (the Little World)
and the Grave, which is the Womb of the Woman of the Great World? forasmuch as
in them both all things must perform their Revolutions, in manner as was
mentioned before, when we treated concerning the Earth.

68 Q. Now when all things in the Stomach of man are in good and due order, may
not we conclude that it must then needs communicate health to the whole body of
man, especially to the heart and head? And like as in the Body the Heart is a
more principal part than the Stomach, might we not compare the same with the
most holy place in the Temple? Moreover, as the Temple was open above, and that
the Head of man is placed above, and is the upper part of the body; might we
not compare it to Heaven, whither the smell and savor of the Burnt-offerings
and Incense mounted continually? And when all this is done in its due order,
will it not again come down from the Head as from Heaven, and so perform its
Revolution in order to perfection?

69 Q. Now for the way and means how this right and due order may be kept and
observed in the Body of Man, has not God fully declared this to the People of
Israel by Moses, and ordered the same to be registered in Scripture, as an
everlasting Record, viz. that they should eat no Creatures preduced by
Putrefaction, nor such as be of a ravenous nature; but only clean Beasts that
divide the Hoof and chew the Cud, and revolving so the Meat?

And does not God hereby point out to us, that such Creatures as these were the
next to Man, and the fittest to be enobled into his nature? And whereas the
Beasts amongst the Jews were to be killed, without any affrightment, as much as
possible, to this end their slaughtering Knives were most sharp and keen,
without the least notch in them, and that for this end, that all cause of pain
and fright to the Beasts might be removed, whereby otherwise their blood might
be obstructed?

70 Q. Forasmuch then as Man ought to be a King and Governor in his Kingdom
which is within him in his Heart, must he not (in order to keep good rule by
means of his spiritual upper and under Officers, each in his own place and
order) so rule the whole Body, that all that is in it may be dispensed and
regulated in good order? And by consequence, must not there be many under
Officers, all under the command of the Stomach, which can and must distinguish
what is good or had for man? According as we see in some sick persons, in whom
there is yet some strength of life left, that ofttimes there arises in them an
appetite to some strange thing by means of which, when they can get it, and
feed upon it, they soon after recover* And may not the wonderful healing,
renewing, and out-working power and property which is in these under Officers,
be further discerned in Women with Child, in that those things many time, serve
to procure their health and recovery, which would be the (...) of others if
they should take them.

71 Q. Moreover, may not the extraordinary sensibleness of these Spirits be
gathered from those who have a natural abhorrence and antipathy against many
things: as for instance, those who cannot endure Cheese, etc. how ill they grow
as soon as the smell of it does reach their Nostrils, so that their Stomach by
a peculiar aversion it has from it, is ready to vomit?

And when at any time we go about to cozen them by mixing Cheese with any of
their Meat, (though so as cannot be perceived by them) yet into what disorder
does it cast them? Thus we observe likewise, that excess in eating or drinking,
which makes others sick, does not hurt fools, notwithstanding that the quantity
be very extraordinary; but they can eat and drink whatsoever is set before
them, because they have no apprehension of it.

May not we likewise observe a further evidence of this, in those that cannot
endure Cats, (as having a natural antipathy against them) who as soon as they
come into a place where a Cat is* though hid from their sight, yet are ready to
fall into a swound? And is it not plain from hence, what a great and hidden
power man has in himself, which when excited, can distinguish and discern the
Spirits that come from Bodies, which are concealed from them?

72 Q. Seeing that Man, as the Little World, has everywhere in himself several
fiery Solar, and also cool Lunar Spirits, the union of both which is the cause
of a good order and health; but when the said Spirits, by means of any excess,
are disordered, will not that be the best way of pacifying them, which is done
without the least weakening of Nature? And must not a good experienced Physician
be like an understanding Master of a Ship, who well weighs and considers the
condition his Ship is in, and the circumstances of the Storm; and look to
himself and have a care that he does not do as an unexperienced Master of a
Ship, who not only casts over board what is an overpoise to the Ship, but
together with it the necessary Provisions of Life, and so afterward for want
of the same, must perish together with his Ships Company.

73 Q. When therefore an experienced Ship-Master, who has weathered many
Storms, and has seen many Ships lost, sees a Storm arising, he is not at all
affrighted or dismayed thereat, but keeps all things in good order, as knowing
that God is the Governor of Nature, and does all things in number, weight, and
measure, and that Storms themselves are not without their use and profit.

And ought not likewise an understanding man to consider that Sickness and
Diseases prepare men for Patience and Virtues? In like manner, as a Ship-Master
is not against the Wind, because he knows the Wind to be advantageous to him,
as furthering his Voyage: and ought not a Physician as well to understand the
same? When by means of disorderly Heats and Colds the wind in man is at any
time raised, that the same must be laid and stilled again, and that he must
wait the time when? As our Savior did in curing Peter's Wives Mother, where he
did not proceed, as when he cast out Devils, but only in the same way and
manner as when he rebuked and stilled the raging Waves of the Sea.

Furthermore, like as a Ship-Master when he is at Sea, and has a good Wind
(though not very strong and violent) is satisfied therewith: Ought not so
likewise a man to consider, who finds no Wind in himself, that the Wind is
there, though he does not perceive it, forasmuch as the Wind is his Life; but
that a sensible perception of it is no more needful to him, than a strong and
stormy Wind is necessary to a Ship-Master to advance his Voyage?

And forasmuch as some persons-when they perceive a Wind in themselves, are
ignorant that it is only some disorder of their life, and that the Wind it
self is good for them and their very life; yet afterward when they have learnt
by experience that the Wind, Heat, and Cold, are not hurtful to their Life, but
rather useful and profitable, can we suppose that ever after they will be
against the same, and not rather love it, as the Mother loves her sick Child?
And may not this be accounted the first and best step toward Recovery? And
when such a ground or foundation as this is laid in those that are right
Patients, will not then first the outward Medicaments be received and rightly
applied by Nature?

Furthermore, that the Wind (as was now mentioned) does work in stilness in
Man, without being perceived, can we not infer this from the dissection of
Excrements, viz. that a Wind is made in the Guts, which by degrees thrusts
forth the said Excrements?

CHAP. IV.
Concerning the Revolution of Humane Souls.
1 Q. FOrasmuch as we are informed from Scripture, as well as Nature, that God
is a God of Order, who has created every thing in its certain and determinate
number, measure, and weight, to the end that by a never-ceasing Revolution it
might be still renewed, until it grow up to its full age, maturity, and
perfection, in all the Macrocosm or great World, from above, from the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, and thence down even to the Center of the Earth; and then
again to move and rise up from a state beneath to one above. And seeing that
man is made out of the Great World, and is the Beginning and End of the same,
and continues, as it were, bound and fastened thereunto as long as he is in
this life: and will it not follow then, that in like manner there must be a
continual Revolution in the whole Man, as well as there is in the Greater
World? Might not we also by this means be able from Nature it self, to answer
and satisfy Jews, Heathens, and Turks in Asia, Africa, and Europe, who are
wont to produce weighty grounds in relation to this matter in hand, viz. the
Revolution of Humane Souls? For seeing that our Christian Religion, as it is
the best, so must be the wisest of all others, in order to convince Gainsayers,
and lead them to the perfect Truth: the Query is, how we may be able to
satisfy these People, when in confirmation of this their Opinion, they produce
these following instances and proofs out of the Old and New Testament of our
own Bible; which we will set down here, and illustrate as briefly as may be.

2 Q. Forasmuch as we find in the Old and New Testament, that the first of all
the divine Commands is this: Hear, O Israel, the Lord (...) God is one Lord.
And thou shall love the Lord (...) God with all thy heart, with all thy soul,
and with (...) thy might. Mat. 22. 37. Mark 12. 30, 33. Luke 10 27. Deuteronomy. 6. 4,
5. and cb. 10. 12. Now how can any one love God, when he does not know him* And
how can he know him otherwise than by (...) Attributes and Properties? which
amongst others are these: That he is a Creator of Heaven and Earth, and of all
created Beings. Moreover, (...) Unchangeableness, Goodness, Love, Wisdom,
Justice, and Perfection, which are incontestable and unchangeable, and must be
allowed him without the least question. Now which way can we reconcile with
these Attributes of God, that he wh^ is a wise and perfect Creator, who has
created a things in so wise an order, that they might all at last be able to
attain their full and ultimate perfection, should have created such imperfect
Creatures as Fools and Naturals, Abortives and Monsters, and all those wicked
and barbarous men we find in the World, which kill and afterward feed on one
another, etc? Now to suppose that all these must continue in this their state
of imperfection, would not this run directly contrary to the forementioned
Attributes? But how can this be, that God should work and act contrary to his
own nature and himself? And is there any other way to be found, whereby such
imperfect Creatures should arrive at perfection, besides that very same which
the New Testament points us to, and was by all the Jews and Disciples of Christ
(at the time of his appearance here on Earth) held for an undoubted truth? As
for instance, John 9. where mention is made of him who was born blind, and that
the Disciples on that occasion asked our Savior, Whether this blind man had
sinned, or his Parents, that he was born blind? Where we find that Christ did
not reprove his Disciples for this their opinion of man's Soul returning into
another renewed body, but only answers them, without excepting against their
opinion, and signifies to them the true reason why the said blind man was born
blind; by which means he tacitly confirmed the foresaid Doctrine: which
afterward he himself also openly taught, as shall be more largely showed
hereafter.

And seeing that we read in the Old Testament of so many Manslaughters
committed by the express command of God; and yet that God by reason of his
infinite goodness and wisdom, neither does, nor can do ought in his universal
administration and government of the World, but what must tend to the
inevitable salvation and good of mankind; forasmuch as (according to Scripture)
he has mercy upon all, because he has power over all; and winketh at the sins
of men, because they should amend. For he loves all the things that are, and
hates nothing that he has made: for neither would he have made any thing, if
he had hated it. Or how could any thing have endured, if it had not been his
will? Or how could it have been preserved, if not called by him? But he spares
all, because they are his own, who is the Lover of Souls; and his incorruptible
spirit is in all things. Wisd. 11. v. 24, 25, etc.

From all which, we may take occasion to enquire what the end and aim of God
(in order to the common good of all mankind) could be, in all this killing and
utter destroying of People, but this, that thereby a transplantation in this
way of Revolution, for the melioration and final perfection of men might be
brought about. Wherefore also God in Paradise foretold to Adam. That the day
wherein he did eat of the Tree of knowledge of Good and Evil, dying he should
die: that is, die and die again. Thereby signifying to him, that he should then
enter upon a continual and uncessant dying, and die in all his right
Offspring, until the great Sabbath of this World.

And may we not here take occasion to consider whether this be not one of the
chief points of Scripture, and wherein is contained a singular great mystery of
that Wisdom which hitherto has been concealed and hid from the most in Europe?
And whether our ignorance of the same be not the cause of most of that
Confusion and Contention, which is amongst those who are called Christians, as
for instance, about Praedestination, Justification, etc. And whether all these
Differences and Contests may not be taken out of the way by this Doctrine of
Revolution, when once the same shall be clearly made out, and generally
received?

3. Q. Forasmuch as the Scripture makes mention of Cain and Abel, who were
Brethren and Twins, as the Scripture witnesses, Genesis 4. 1, 2. where it is
said, that Adam knew Eve his wife, and she conceived and bear Cain: and that
she proceeded to bear (without Adam's knowing of her a second time) his brother
Abel. Which confirms, that both the Brothers were born of one only Conception;
of whom Abel, who was born last, was the elder and first conceived, (even as
Thamar's Midwife witnessed concerning Pharez and Zarah, Genesis 38. 28. And
likewise is the reason why we cannot say, that Jacob did unjustly defraud his
Brother Esau of his Birthright, forasmuch as the same did of right belong to
him, as having been first conceived, though he was born last.) Seeing then, I
say, that the Scripture tells us, that Cain killed his Brother Abel, and that
the Lord thereupon demanded of Cain, where his Brother Abel was? It is not
worth our inquiry, whether the Lord by this demand did not hint and signify to
him, that his Brother Abel was in him; which Cain at first was ignorant of, and
therefore answered the Lord, I know not; but presently thereupon called to mind
and perceived that he himself was the Earth that had received the blood of his
Brother, wherein was his Soul. Whereat he being astonished, answered with
wonder and horror, Am I then become my Brothers keeper? Genesis 4. 9.

May not we therefore conclude from hence, that when a man in anger kills
another outwardly as to his Body, that he does it for this reason, because he
cannot endure the being and nature of the other inwardly in himself, and yet
because he cannot kill him inwardly, according to his Soul, therefore the Party
that is outwardly killed, continues inwardly to be his Accuser and Judge, to
the end that by means of a due punishment, he may be brought to right and
bettered? And that thus Abel's Blood, in which his Soul was, continually cried
for Vengeance in Cain, until it was executed; which was, when Cain was killed
by Lamech, (who was the seventh from Adam in the Line of Cain) according to the
common Opinion of the Jews.

4 Q. Seeing that the foresaid Lamech was the first that is mentioned in
Scripture, who had two Wives at once, and that he declared unto them the
Revolution of Man in the words set down in Scripture, it will not be amiss if
we enquire more particularly into the meaning of them. The words are these:
Genesis 4. 23. Hear my voice, ye wives of Lamech, and hearken unto my speech: I
have stain a man to my own wounding, and a young man to my own hurt: Cain shall
be avenged seven times; but Lamech seventy seven times. Which last words, in
the Hebrew admit of a twofold meaning: for besides seventy seven, they may
signify twice seven, or seven and seven. Concerning which, the Jews write,
that thereby is intimated, that Cain should be brought to judgment by a double
seven, or two times seven, viz. by two men, each of which have seven names in
Holy Writ, of which the one was Moses, and the other Jethro. See more of this
in Rabbi Jitschak Loriensis de Revolutione animarum, p. 367. Francofurti, 1684.

Now when we count twenty years (which more or less is the age of a man,
wherein he ordinarily attains his full growth, for to Marry, or go to War:
wherefore the Lord commanded Moses to number those of the children of Israel
that were of the age of twenty years and upward, that were able to go forth to
war, Numb. 1. 2, 3.) and to these twenty years allow one year more for the
getting of a Child, and moreover some weeks for the wives purification, which
will amount to about a year and an half, and when afterward we multiply 77 by
21 1/2, we shall find the number of years from Adam to the Deluge, viz. 1656.
excepting only a small gap, which may be filled up several ways: as for
example, when a man is only entered upon the beginning of any year, he counts
the same inclusively with the other years of his age, notwithstanding that the
said year be not yet ended; but only begun. Have not we reason then to think
that a very particular hidden meaning lies wrapped up in these words of Lamech;
and whether they may not import thus much? when he says. I have stain a man to
my wounding, and a young man to my hurt; that by the man Cain is to be
understood, and by the young man his Brother Abel? And will not this
interpretation lay a fair ground for the opening of many other mysteries in a
due and right order? As amongst other things we learn from hence, that both the
Brothers Cain and Abel did, from the time of their conception, until Cain was
killed, inseparably continue together, viz. Abel in Cain for his vengeance and
punishment. But that after Cain was killed, they no longer continued Twins, but
separated themselves from each other, and by Revolution were afterward born of
two distinct Mothers. Where again we may observe, that Abel, who was the first
conceived in Eve, now became the firstborn of Ada, and was now named Jabal,
and his Brother Jubal, (which denotes the year of Jubilee) and continnes now his
former course of life, being a keeper of Cattle as he was before: whereas Cain
who was the firstborn of Eve, is here the youngest Son of Zillah, and his name
now is Tubal Cain (which signifies the world of Cain) and his exercise and
labor is in the earth, viz. about Minerals and Metals; and his Sister is
Naemah (which denotes Beauty) of whom no further mention is made in Scripture:
but according to the common tradition of the Jews, she and her Daughters did
entice and seduce all men by their Beauty, according to what is mentioned, Genesis
6. 1. That the Sons of God were enticed by the Daughters of men.

But what may be the reason that in Holy Writ after the mentioning of Lamech's
Speech to his Wives, nothing further is declared concerning his being avenged,
nor any account of the Actions of Cain or Lamech's posterity? May not we
suppose that it was, because they were all of them entered upon Revolution? For
how could they any other way have been so often avenged, except that they
themselves were present, and born anew into this World? And did not all of them
afterward perish in the Deluge, and by this means enter into Noah, for to be
revolved in him, in order to their perfection, which they in process of time,
after Christ's Resurrection, according to Gods wise and good Disposal, in part
attained?

And is not this plain and evident from many places of Scripture, particularly
1 Pet. 3. 19, 20. where we are told, that Christ (as the Greek Text does
declare, compared with v. 22.) after his Ascension into Heaven, preached in
Spirit (by which he was raised again to Life) to the Spirits in Prison, even to
the same Spirits who formerly were unbelieving in the days of Noah, while the
Ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is eight Souls, were saved.

Does it not therefore follow from hence, that all those Spirits, whose Bodies
perished in the Deluge, and to whom afterward Christ after his Ascension, in
that Spirit, by which he was raised again to life, and which was poured forth
upon the Apostles, preached in and by them (which Spirits at that time appeared
again in bodies in this world, from the which they could not be separated,
forasmuch as they had not yet attained to their full and final perfection) and
consequently were in a condition to hear the Sermons of the Apostles in flesh)
I say, may we not infer from hence, that all these Spirits entered into these
eight Souls in order to their Revolution, and so consequently were propagated
by them until the time of Christ?

5 Q. Noah now, as who derived his descent from Adam and Seth, was an upright
perfect man, and begat three sons, Japhet, Sem, and Cham, Genesis 9. 24. and Chap.
10. 21. And may not we suppose that in him a new World began, and that the same
day he entered into the Ark for to bring forth a new World, he represented the
Spirit of God, which in the beginning of the Creation moved upon the Waters?

And may we not compare the six hundredth year of Noah's age (in which he
entered into the Ark) with the sixth day of the Creation, in which Man and all
Beasts were created? In like manner, may not Cham his youngest Son, be supposed
to represent Adam; forasmuch as Adam in his Central Spirit, in the Garden of
Eden, by his eating of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, desired through
Knowledge (which is a seeing of the Spirit) to behold his Source and Original,
by which means Adam fell out of the inner into the outward; and so begat Seth
in his own likeness, and not in the Image of God, in which he was created: Now
Cham did the same also, though in a more gross and material manner, when he
gazed upon his Fathers nakedness; wherefore also he was cursed by his Father,
and made a Servant of Servants; whereas his other two Brothers, Japhet and Sem,
went backwards with a Garment upon their shoulders, to cover their Fathers
nakedness, whereupon they obtained the Blessing, as Adam likewise might have
done, in case he had behaved himself as they did, which indeed he ought to have
done in his Central Spirit; viz. he should have gone backwards, and wrought out
the whole Creation, which was created before him (and of which ^he was the
last) viz. from the sixth day to the third, which is the middle of the six
days, and not have gone from one extreme to the other, as from the End to the
Beginning, viz. from Man immediately to the Trees; but beginning from himself,
should have gone through all Beasts backwards, and wrought them out one after
another, and glorified them in himself, unto the very last of them (counting
backwards) which are the creeping things, as the first bestial Life, which had
their Original from the putrefaction of Herbs and Trees. Is not this likewise
the reason why the spiritual Serpent (as being the head and chief amongst all
the spiritual creeping Creatures in the spiritual World of Man) did first speak
in Adam?

6 Q. When after the Deluge, the Children of Noah, who were saved in the Ark,
and in whom all the Souls that lived before the Deluge (except Henoch alone,
whom the Scripture exempts) and perished in it, were ingrafted, had now
propagated and multiplied themselves, until the number of their Children and
Grandchildren was grown very great, and perceived in themselves one Mind^
Speech, and Expression: but withal, considering that this unity of theirs could
not be lasting and constant, but that in process of time they would be divided.
May we not suppose therefore, that from an apprehension of such a Division, and
a^ endeavor to prevent the same, when in their journeying toward the East,
they found a Valley in the Land of Shinar, even a vast extended plain where
they might dwell together; they unanimously (as who were all of one Mind and
Language) agreed to build there a City and Tower whose head should reach up to
Heaven?

And may not this Relation contain this secret and hidden meaning, That they
had a mind to build a City and Temple, according to the pattern which is in
Heaven, and which was afterward showed to Moses on Mount Sinai, and the
description of it given to David, in order to the building of the Temple? But
forasmuch as the right time was not then, nor they the persons whom God had
chosen for this purpose to build him an House and Temple; nor had chosen the
right place, because God had destinated Jerusalem for that purpose; therefore
were they from thence scattered abroad upon the face of the whole Earth.

7 Q. Now by what means those that built the Tower of Babel, were, after their
being scattered over the face of the whole Earth, brought together again and
united, does not the Wisdom of God hint this to us also in Holy Writ? And that
the beginning of this union was brought about in Abraham, as in whom they first
of all, in a spiritual manner did revolve, to the end that (according to the
manifold promises of God made unto him) all Nations of the Earth might be
Blessed in him, who was the Forefather of Christ, by whom the Souls of all
Nations were created. And did not the Wisdom of God, according to the testimony
of Holy Writ, in order to this ingrafting and uniting of all Nations in
Abraham, particularly make choice of three persons, viz. Abraham himself, Sarah
(who was Abraham's Sister by the Fathers side, and of excelling Beauty, Wisdom,
and Piety) and Loath the Son of Abraham's Brother? And does not the Divine
Wisdom in their History, as with a finger point out to us, how by means of
these three persons, first all the head Families or Generations of all the
Nations of the Earth, and by means of these, afterward all others were by
degrees again brought into union, and implanted into the holy Line of Christ,
the universal Head of all Mankind, and living Cornerstone of the whole
heavenly Building? May we not like wise from the said History, when duly
considered, understand how first the Egyptians were implanted into Abraham,
Genesis 12. 15. and following verses; afterward the four Kings whom he overthrew,
next the King and people of Sodom; and last of all the Philistines?

8 Q. Do not we find it plain in the History how the Egyptians became implanted
into Abraham, when Abraham coming as a Prophet into Egypt with his Wife Sarah
(at which time not without a particular Spirit of Prophecy, he desired of his
Wife that she would upon occasion tell others that she was his Sister, that it
might go well with him for her sake, and that his Soul might live because of
her; for God having promised to Abraham, that all Nations should be blessed in
him, this was done by Abraham in order to the bringing all Nations into himself
by means of his Wife Sarah) and King Pharaoh had commanded Sarah to be taken
into his House, as being resolved to make her his Wife; whereupon she became
spiritually impregnated by Pharaoh (as the Ruler over people) through the love
which Pharaoh had imprinted in her; concerning which matter, we have elsewhere
made mention, where we treated of the Conception and Birth of Man, and showed
that a spiritual impregnation must always precede a bodily or carnal one?

9 Q. That the kings which Abraham smote, and those which he delivered, Genesis
14. and in particular the King of Sodom, whom he rescued by venturing his life
for them, and so purchased them with his own life, for his propriety; that all
these, I say, were likewise implanted in him, does not this clearly appear from
hence, that Abraham, upon the King of Sodom's request, did not give unto him
the Souls of men, (forasmuch as they were now become his own) but only the
stuff and outward goods, Genesis 14. 23. and so kept the Souls united in himself,
for that he was now become Lord over them?

And did not all these Souls afterward, by means of Lot and his Wife and two
Daughters, revolve in Abraham? For first they entered into Lot, when he offered
both his Daughters to the Sodomites, for to deliver the two young men out of
their hands. And into his Wife, forasmuch as the (who was a Daughter of Sodom)
when, contrary to the Command of the Angel, she looked back toward Sodom, and
by her desire after, and compassionate love toward her Daughters Bridegrooms,
and the rest of the Sodomites, who then perished, did draw them into, and unite
them to her self, wherefore she was changed into a pillar of Salt. Which
transmutation, forasmuch as it was impossible to natural, does not the Divine
Wisdom by this Salt Pillar show unto us, that the Blood (in which is the Soul)
of all and every inhabitant of Sodom, by means of the said fire being purified,
was turned into Salt, and became united in one Center, viz. the magnetical
compassionate desire of Lots Wife, who by this means was turned into a Pillar
of Salt.

And may we not further suppose, that the said Lots Wife entered into both her
Daughters (as being their Mother) and became united with them, because they had
drawn their Mother, in her compassionate Spirit, into themselves? And as for
these Daughters, were they not afterward implanted in Lot, when they lay with
him whilst he slept, and conceived by him, without and against his will and
knowledge, in like manner as before he delivered his Daughters against their
will to the Sodomites to abuse them? And were not both these passages
superintended by a disposal and ordering of the Divine Wisdom?

Is it not also well worth our Animadversion, why two Angels came to Sodom, and
only one of them ( viz. the Lord) continued with Abraham? And what afterward
became of these two Angels?

In like manner, why Abraham commanded water to be fetched, to wash the feet of
the three men that came to him, and set before them hearth-cakes of fine
flower, with milk, butter, and an he-calf; (which are food fit for a child)
whereas no mention is made that he offered them any thing to drink?

Moreover, what may be the signification of these words, which the Lord speaks
to Abraham, Genesis 18. 14. At the time appointed returning I will return unto
thee, according to the time of life? Whether, I say, this can admit of any
other meaning than that the Holy Ghost did contribute to the conception of
Isaac? And this the rather, because in the 21. Chapter it is said, that the
Lord visited Sarah, as he had said, and did unto her, as he had spoken: for
Sarah conceived, etc. Concerning which much might be here said, as likewise
concerning the Children of Lot's Daughters, viz. the Moabites and Ammonites,
what kind of People they were, and why God upon the account of this their
relation to Lot and Abraham and their wonderful Original, did take care of
them, and expressly commanded the Children of Israel, that in destroying the
other Nations, they should spare these. All which we pass by, to avoid
prolixity.

And as for Lot, who was the third Person that was an instrument of implanting
the Sodomites into Abraham; was not he himself two several ways ingrafted in
and united with Abraham? viz. First by his Birth, as being his Brothers Son,
and then again, when Abraham with the hazard of his own Life, delivered him
together with all the Inhabitants of Sodom, out of the hand of their Enemies.

10 Q. How the Philistines became ingrafted into Abraham? may not this be
easily gathered from the 20 Chapter of Genesis, as being most expressly hinted
throughout that whole Chapter, from the beginning to the end, (which the
inquisitive Reader may be pleased to turn to, and read over, well weighing and
considering the several passages of it) viz. how Sarah became spiritually
impregnated by Abimelech, (the Father of Kings, according to the signification
of that name in the Hebrew) and how all the Births of his House and of his
whole Kingdom entered into her, which may it not be inferred from hence, For
that all the wombs of Abimelech's house were shut up by the Lord, for Sarah
Abraham's wife's sake? Which afterward were opened again upon Abraham's Prayer;
and so were healed and restored by the fruitful and proliferous intercession of
Abraham, with whom they were already spiritually united. This I leave to the
understanding Readers own consideration.

11 Q. Do not we likewise find a plain Argument and Evidence for proof of the
Revolution of Souls in the History of Dinah? Genesis 34. For can any firmer or
surer union and alliance of two different People be imagined, than was that
which was entered upon and concluded, betwixt Jacob and his Sons, on the one
side, and Hamor and his Son Sichem, and all the People of the Land on the other
side, as being ratified by the strong and indissoluble tie of Matrimonial
Union? And seeing that this high and weighty undertaking, which was carried on
with so much earnestness and concern, did to outward appearance come to
nothing: What may we therefore suppose was the cause why the Divine Wisdom
ordered the same to be so exactly and carefully set down in writing, without
omitting of the least circumstance thereto belonging; if there were not some
exceeding great Mystery hidden in Spirit under this History? And what can this
Mystery be else, but the spiritual union, transplantation, and ingrafting of
this People, by means of a conjugal band, and the slaughter which followed
thereupon, into the Tribes of the Children of Israel, especially those of
Simeon and Levi, who had already in their wrath Prophesied and said, That they
would be United and become one People, in case they would be Circumcised, and
who killed them, and took all their Goods, Children, and Wives to themselves?
For that a peculiar providence of God did superintend this whole affair, and
directed all to an end suitable and comporting with the Divine Wisdom and
Design; is not this clear from hence, that God caused a fear and terror to
fall upon the inhabitants of the land, so that they did not pursue after Jacob
and his sons; as we see, Genesis 35. 5.

12 Q. And are not some other passages concerning Jacob and his Sons well worth
our consideration, with referrence to his Hypothesis? As that concerning Judah
(who was the fourth Son of Jacob by Leah) of whose Tribe Jesus was born* how he
raised the seed of both his Sons, in his Daughter-in-Law Thamar; concerning
which mention has been made already?

13 Q. And is not the History of Moses and the Children of Israel alike
memorable? And the Doctrine of Revolution very plainly held forth in the same?
For seeing that God began a new Union in Moses, in order to reveal himself, to
produce a new World, and to settle a new Government, as before he had done in
Noah and Abraham: Is it not on this account that the Wisdom of God, not without
a singular Mystery, represents to us, Exodus 2. 2, 3. how Moses when he was yet
a Child, swam upon the waters in an Ark of Rushes, as before in the Creation,
Genesis 1. it is mentioned that the Spirit of God moved upon the Waters; and as
Genesis 7. 8. Noah saved himself in the Ark upon the Waters, as was formerly
mentioned.

And forasmuch as Divine Wisdom had chosen Moses to be a Leader and Governor
of this new rising Birth; and that no new one can be without a dying of the old
and foregoing: was it not therefore fitting that Moses himself from the very
beginning of the work should enter upon dying, as when the Lord came unto him
and would have killed him, Exodus 4. 24. And seeing that by means of him all the
Egyptians were to be transplanted into the Israelites, and consequently be made
partakers of Circumcision; was not that expression of Zipporah Prophetical,
think we, when she said to Moses, Thou art to me a bridegroom of bloods, and
that because of Circumcision.

Now in order to the production of this new World and Birth; was it not needful
for the old to perish, and that in the Water, as being the first matter;
forasmuch as every new Birth and Creation proceeds from the water, as Christ
himself witnesses, John 3. 5.

Now this great Renovation, as a kind of new Creation, which was to be carried
on for the good and salvation of two Nations, in order to the rising of a new
Life; what was it else, but the transplantation of the Egyptians into the
Israelites? And to the end that the same might be brought about; was it not
necessary for the Egyptians to die before, forasmuch as without the Death of
the old Birth, no such new one can arise, according to the testimony of Christ?
John 12. 24.

And forasmuch as every Birth must take its beginning from a Child-like Being;
may it not have been for this reason, that the Divine Wisdom so ordered it,
that Pharaoh who was the head of the Egyptians and their Center, caused all the
male Children of the Israelites to be drowned, to the end that afterward by the
right of Retalliation the Egyptians might be drowned likewise, and by means of
the drowned Children of the Israelites, be transplanted into their Mothers? For
may not we suppose that the troubled and vengeance-crying spirit of the Fathers
and Mothers, did constantly remain united with their drowned Children (as in
whom their Life was entered) in the water, and was operative there, until the
right of Retalliation was fulfilled and executed upon those that were the cause
of their Deaths?

14 Q. To the end therefore that this right of Retalliation might be fulfilled
upon Pharaoh and the Egyptians, and they drowned likewise; was it not necessary
that an union of the Spirits of both Nations should precede, so as the
Egyptians might be joined and cleave to the Israelites; to the end that they
thereby might be able to draw the Egyptians unto them, as by a magnetical power?

And was not this, amongst other things a mean in order hereto, that the
Children of Israel were commanded to borrow of the Egyptians Jewels of Gold,
and of Silver, and Raiment, to the end that for the recovering of these, they
might be put upon pursuing after the Israelites, their hearts and minds
sticking fast, and cleaving to the beloved Goods and Jewels the Israelites had
taken from them?

Yea, may not yet possible a greater mystery lie hid under the veil of this
outward Narrative? For seeing that here was designed a total and perfect
ingrafting of the whole man, with his three chief parts, viz. Body, Soul, and
Spirit, may not we suppose, that according to a mystical understanding, by Gold
the Spirit, by Silver the Soul, and by Raiment the Body of the Egyptians is
signified to us, viz. that all these three were to be ingrafted into the
Israelites?

Is not this likewise hinted to us, Exodus 3. 22. where God commanded the
Israelitish women to borrow these things from the Egyptians, without making any
mention of men at all? And may not we suppose this to have been the reason; for
that this transplantation in order to a new Birth and Life, could not be
accomplished but by women?

And is not this transplantation further intimated to us, in that God expressly
commanded the Israelites that they should take the Jewels and Raiment (by which
in a mystery was signified the Spirit, Soul, and Body of the Egyptians, as
might be easily made out) which they had borrowed of the Egyptians, and put
them upon their Sons and Daughters; because the Egyptians were (...) enter into
them, and by their means be ingraf^ed into the Lineage of the Children of
Israel?

And is it not clear from hence, that the Sons and Daughters which were
afterward be got and ^orn of the Children of Israel, were even those very
Egyptians which perished and were drowned (...) the Red Sea? And that
consequently the Children of Israel, by bestowing them upon their Children, did
restore to the Egyptians what formerly (...) had only borrowed of them?

And was not Pharaoh himself the King of Egypt, ^he chief means of
accomplishing this great work, (...) his being hardened, for which end God had
raised him, as himself says to Moses, Exodus 4. 21. Chap. 7. 3. Chap. 9. 16. To
which also the Apostle has an eye, Romans 9. 17.

What think we also was the reason why God in order to the delivering of the
Children of Israel, slew all the Firstborn of the Egyptians, both of Men and
Beasts; and thereupon commanded the Children of Israel to sanctify to him all
the Firstborn of Man and Beast, with this express injunction, that when their
Children should ask of them why they did so, they should give them this answer,
That therefore they Sanctified to the Lord every Firstborn, both of Man and
Beast; because the Lord for to deliver them, had slain all the Firstborn of
the Egyptians, Exodus 13. 14, 15, 16. What else can be the kernel of Wisdom and
Mystery that lies concealed under the shell of the History, but this; that God
would thereby signify, seeing that what he kills he makes alive again,
according to the Testimony of Holy Writ, Deuteronomy. 32. 39. Wisd. 16. 13. Tob. 13.
2. that the Firstborn that were killed in Egypt, were in the first place made
alive again in the Firstborn of the Children of Israel?

Does it not likewise seem probable, that the transplantation of those
Firstborn of the Egyptians was chiefly into the Tribe of Levi, because God
Sanctified them to himself, instead of all the Firstborn of Israel, and set
them apart for the Priesthood and Temple service?

What may we likewise think to be the reason (comporting with that Divine
Wisdom which every where shines forth in Holy Writ) why the Women, even all the
Israelitish women, and particularly Miriam the Prophetess, as the chief and
leader of the Chorus, went out with Timbrels and made the Air resound with
their Voices and Instruments, when they saw the dead Bodies of the drowned
Egyptians lying upon the Shore of the Red Sea; and without doubt by this
Spectacle were put in mind of the Gold, and Silver, Jewels, and Raiment of
theirs which they were now possessed of; as likewise that according to the
Divine Disposal they were the causes of their Death? And may it not here be
worth our enquiry whether these very thoughts of theirs might not be a mean, by
which the drowned Egyptians entered into the Women of Israel, and so in process
of time were born of them, in order to their Renovation?

15 Q. Forasmuch as we read, Deuteronomy. 7. 22. that God commanded the Israelites not
by destroy the Heathen People all at once, but by degrees and time after time,
that the Beasts of the Field might not increase upon them, etc. Does not this
seem to bear this understanding, viz. that because the Children of Israel did
only seed on the tame and clean Beasts, whereas the Heathen did promiscuously
make use of the wild Beasts of the Field for food; and that in case the
Heathens had been destroyed all at once, the said wild Beasts would have grown
too numerous, wherefore the command was given to destroy them by degrees that
some of them might remain to consume the Beasts of the Field?

May we not therefore conclude from all this that forasmuch as the said Beasts
of the Field served for food and nourishment to the Heathen they by this means
became ennobled into Mankind and when those Heathens that were afterward
destroyed by the Israelites, they entered by Revolution into them; by which
means an advance and melioration was brought about: First of the Beasts, by
their being ennobled, and then of the Heathens by their being ingrafted into
the Line of the Sons and Children of God; and from thence still to advance
further and further, from one degree of exaltation and melioration to another,
until all at last return to unity again? Thus we se that all the Israelites
that came out of Egypt, Caleb and Joshuah only excepted, did even in like
manner perish in the Wilderness, and did not enter into the Promised Land; but
were fain to revolve several times before they could arrive to a certain step
or degree of perfection.

16 Q. We read further, Levit. 25. That the Land of Canaan was to be divided
amongst the Children of Israel by lot, according to the names of the Tribes of
their Fathers; and that the Law was made by God himself, that the Inheritance
of every Tribe was to abide with it, and could not be alienated or devolve to
another. Upon which account also the year of Jubilee was appointed, (...) which
whatsoever had been alienated was to ^turn to its first owners; to the end that
every ^e being repossessed of the self-same Land, which (...) the first casting
of Lots fell to be the Portion ^d Propriety of their Forefathers, and which
^as, as it were the foundation-root of their ^hole stock, and all the boughs
and branches ^owing on the same; and from whence not one^ they derived their
nourishment and increase, but ^eir very Bodies themselves: I say, that they
might ^gain (as it were) be planted into the same and ^ecome united with it,
and that so by means of their ^oprietary enjoyment of it, the said Land might
^evolve in them (according to the Divine Ordi^nce and Appointment) in order to
its further ^erfection and glorification. And this Inheritance ^hus divided by
Lot, not only Sons but Daughters ^lso, with some restrictions had a share,
according (...) Gods Laws given by Moses. And so it was ad^dged and determined
by God himself, in the case (...) the Daughters of Zelophehad, Number. 27. 36.
viz. (...) to them should be granted the free possession (...) their Fathers
Inheritance (for their Father had ^st never a Son behind him) yet with this
caution, ^^at they must marry into the Family of the Tribe of their Father. And
may not we with ^round conclude, that this was thus appointed, to ^he end the
deceased Forefathers Predecessors and Fathers of these Daughters might by
revol^ing through them be restored again to their own ^heritance, as also for
to show, that in case of the want of Sons, the Souls may revolve through
Daughters?

May not we likewise here be informed of the reason why the Children of Israel
were commanded, that the surviving Brother should raise up the seed of his
Brother deceased without leaving any Heirs? And will it not follow, that the
Husbands which the Daughters of Zelophehad married being of their Tribe, by
their Wives raised up seed to Zelophehad deceased, without leaving an Heir Male
that might perform the same.

17 Q. Moreover, do not we meet with another proof of this Doctrine of
Revolutions in Lev. 18. where certain Rules and Limitations are given by God
himself about Marriages with those that are near of kin, determining what is
lawful and what unlawful in that matter: and when we narrowly inquire into the
ground of the said Rules and Restrictions, must not we conclude, that though it
be wholly natural for men to cohabite with women, yet that God himself set
these bounds, to the end that the order and way of Nature which is appointed
for mankind, might not be neglected, perverted, broken, or removed* And is not
this the greatest and most universa^ Law and Ordinance, which the Creator once
for all has established in Nature, viz. that in all natural propagations there
might be a continua^ processions or going forwards?

Now that in Nature it is so ordered, that Life goes always forwards, and that
Parents do live in their Children, does not daily experience teach us this?
Thus we see that when a Mother finds her sick Child drawing near to death, she
is so highly afflicted and anguished, that she often wishes to die for her
Child? Of which we have examples, that Fathers have offered themselves to be
hanged for their Sons; whereby they gave sufficient evidence, that their own
lives were sensible of, and did suffer what ever happened to their Children.

Now this Law of Nature could never be broken, in whatsoever degree of affinity
or consanguinity Man and Wife might be related together, if (according to the
common opinion) God should for every Birth create a new Soul, and put it into
the Body; for so no such confusion or perverting of the order of Nature could
happen.

Whereas on the contrary, according to our Hypothesis, which supposes many
Souls concentred and united together, every one of which in a due order and
procession must manifest and display it self in many different births and
propagations: would it not sollow, that from such a promiscuous and disorderly
commixture, a great confusion would arise, to the subversion of the order of
Nature? For was it not therefore thus ordained by God, because he is a God of
Order? And must not his will incontestably take place?

18 Q We will here omit many passages and examples relating to this matter,
which might be alleged out of the five Books of Moses, and only make
reflection on some passages in the Ten Commandments.

When we read, Exodus 20. 5, 6. That God will visit the sins of the fathers upon
the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate him, but
show mercy to thousands of them that love him, and keep his commandments. May
it not bear this Sense? That forasmuch as formerly has been hinted concerning
the Conception and Birth of Man, every Child is generated and formed of the
Seed of his Parents, and that each of these Seeds is twofold, viz. Male and
Female, so as the Child is as it were made up of four: Is it not therefore
worth our enquiry, whether or no all out-working must not happen in four
Generations? For do not we observe, that when a Father begins to grow covetous,
the said vicious disposition increases in his Child, and in his Grandchild
arrives to extreme covetousness? And then when this Vice has attained to its
full growth and maturity, the great Grandchild proves a Prodigal and
Spend-thrift, because he has had nothing of the said covetous inclination
transmitted to him; but rather is possessed with an hatred against it,
forasmuch as by means thereof he has been often pressed and forced against his
will, and thus being made sensible of the evil of it; he takes up an hatred
against it, and consequently falls into the opposite extreme, so that he
lavishly spends all what his Forefathers in their Covetousness had scraped
together, and leaves nothing but Poverty to his Child, which Poverty then
occasions that his Child's great Grandchild becomes disposed to grow up from
this humble reduction to a new propagation.

And the same may be said of any other Vices whatsoever. For ought we not
always to keep in mind this great and fundamental Maxim, That God never
punishes for sin but with this aim, that his creature thereby may be amended,
and his Salvation promoted (forasmuch as Sin, which is finite cannot come in
any competition with the infinite Emanation of the Grace of the Creator in his
Creature) He being in the highest degree Righteous and Good; and gives to man
the fruits of his own doing: For man himself works his own suffering and
punishment; but God in and by the same works out and manifests His own Glory.

Would it not therefore prove a very false imagination for any one to think,
that God for every Birth does create a new Soul, and afterward eternally
punish the same for sin (which according to the meaning of some) it could not
avoid, nor was once guilty of? For this can never comport with the infinite
Righteousness and Mercy of God. Nor according to this Supposition can it be
true which is said in Scripture, that we all sinned in Adam; for how could we
sin in him except we had lived and been in him.

Is it not therefore more rational for us to conceive, that the Soul of a Child
prae-exists in its Parents, and takes its original from them; and they being
sinners do entangle their children in their sin, by which means they get a
share in their guilt and punishment? And may not we in this way often be
informed of the sin, by the punishment, and learn the sins of Parents and
Forefathers by the punishments inflicted on their Children? As if we should
suppose a wild Appletree that has two main boughs, should have one of them cut
off, and that a twig taken from the same, should be grafted upon the stump from
whence the bough was cut off; this ingrafted twig now brings forth good fruit,
and the oftener it is grafted the better; because each grafting being a
suffering or dying, does advance it to a better Life: whereas on the contrary,
the branches of the other bough continue as they were, because being without
suffering or dying it cannot be advanced to a new Life? And may not we with
truth infer, that for this very reason, that passage of Gods visiting the
Parents upon the Children unto the third and fourth generation, was inserted
into the second Commandment?

19 Q. If any one here should object, that forasmuch as the punishment of sin
continues only to the third and fourth Generation, (as in which the utmost
farthing is paid, of which our Savior speaks, Matthew. 5. 26. and Matthew. 18. 23,
24, etc.) but the reward of love and obedience to God is promised to thousands;
there seems to be no equallity or proportion between the rewards and punishments
of God? May we not answer this Objection thus? First we ought well to mind that
both of them are bounded within a certain number: And again, that Gods rewards
always exceed his punishing, to the glory and magnifying of his Mercy and
Goodness, which by far exceeds his Severity and Vengeance: In the third place,
that sin is a falling off from God downwards, which in a short time comes to
its end, whereas the recovery and bringing again to God does still mount
upwards and ascend higher and higher to Infinity, because the Divine Glory has
neither end nor limit, and that still nearer and nearer approaches are made to
God in all Eternity. Lastly, for that wickedness must and shall have an end,
because there can be no Eternal or Infinite Will. Wherefore the punishment of
wicked men is not to be looked upon as that whereby the Creature should still
become worse and worse; but as it is in order to the changing of it from Evil
to good, for that when the evil is transchanged, the Good then begins to work
upwards, by innumerable steps of ascension toward God, though it can never
reach so high as to reach his Being or Essence, (forasmuch as it is impossible
that a Creature should become God) but must therefore continue to mount
upwards, and continually attain to more and greater degrees of Glory.

For is not every Creature of God Infinite? Or at least Indefinite, so as no
end or bound can be assigned to the increase and out-working of its power:
Forasmuch as it is a piece or part of man, who is made out of all Creatures,
and is the end of them. Seeing then that man was created in the Image of God,
and that no end or bound is in God; must it not follow, that this creature Man,
and in him all other Creatures must still work upwards and advance in good, to
the utmost degree of possible perfection without all end or bounds? For God
works without ceasing in the Creature through Christ, as our Savior
witnesses, John 5. 17. My Father works hitherto, and I work also.

20 Q. Notwithstanding that many other places of the Old Testament might be
alleged for confirmation of this Doctrine of the Revolution of Humane Souls,
yet for brevity we shall pass them by, and betake our selves to the New
Testament; but there is yet one remarkable passage, Ezekiel. 16. 55. which we
cannot pass by without some observation. The Query is then, that seeing the
Lord there speaks thus: When thy Sisters Sodom and her Daughters, shall return
to their former estate, and Samaria and her Daughters shall return to their
former estate, then thou also and thy Daughters shall return to your former
estate: The question, I say is, how it is possible for Sodom, Samaria, and
Jerusalem, to return to their former estate, without their living again in this
world in flesh and body, as they did formerly? And whether this could be
brought about any other way, than by being born again the common way into this
world?

21 Q. We turn now to the New Testament, in which we find as clear and express
testimonies of the Spirit of God in Christ and his Disciples, concerning the
Truth and importance of this Doctrine of the Revolution or return of Souls, as
in the old, we shall only take a short view of some of the said places,
because in the 200 Queries they have been more largely handled.

The Question is then, how these following Texts of Scripture, Matthew. 7. 2.
Luke 6. 37, 38. Mark 4. 24. may be reconciled, viz. With what measure you mete,
it shall be measured to you again. And Rev. 13. 10. He that leads into
captivity, shall go into captivity: he that kills with the sword, shall be
killed with the sword. Now how can these words be fulfilled, when we see that
many of those who have used violence and unrighteousness, committed Murder and
Mansslaughter, led others into captivity, and the like, do notwithstanding all
this die upon their beds? or how can the just Vengeance of God be satisfied
upon them, if they be not to return again into this World, there to receive a
due reward and punishment for their misdeeds, which in a former life or lives
they have committed, and for which they have not been punished, but are yet
accountable, and therefore must make restoration, payment, and satisfaction?

22 Q. Moreover when our Savior says, Mat. 23. 35, 36. That upon You (
speaking to the Jews) may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth,
from the blood of righteous Abel, unto the blood of Zacharias the son of
Barachias, whom ye slew between the Temple and the Altar. Verily, I say unto
you, that all these shall come upon this Generation. How shall we understand
this? or how can it be supposed, that that generation should have killed Abel,
Zachary, and all the Prophets?

In like manner, how shall we clear the 39th v. of the same Chapter, viz. that
they (to whom Christ there speaks) should not see him from thenceforth, until
they should say, Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord? In case
this be not admitted as a necessary consequence from these words, that the
Souls of the men of that generation, had before been in bodies upon the Earth,
and then committed these Murders, and shed the foresaid righteous blood? And
likewise that the same persons must appear again upon the earth, if ever they
shall say, Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord? Forasmuch as the
Jews hitherto have never said or confessed any such thing.

23 Q. Again, when Matthew. 14. 1. till v. 12. we read, that when it was told
Herod, what the ever Blessed Jesus had spoken and done; he presently supposed (
v. 2.) that this Jesus was no other than John the Baptist, who was risen from
the Dead; whom formerly he had beheaded, as appears from what follows, till v.
12.

When we also find in the Evangelist Mark, Chapter 6. 14. until 29. that he informs
us there with some very express and remarkable words and circumstances
concerning this matter: Were it not well worth our pains once for all to
inspect these and following places, which hereafter shall be alleged, more
dilligently enquire into their meaning. and more maturely to weigh and consider
of them than hitherto we have done? For in the foresaid place of Mark, we are
told at the 15. v. that not only Herod was of that Opinion, that Jesus was
John the Baptist, but that others said that he was Elias, and others again one
of the Prophets. From whence we may perceive, that this was a very common
Opinion, and taken for granted by the King, as well as his Subjects. And we
have the same repeated by Luke, Chapter 9, 7, 8, 9. that some said that Jesus was
John, others Elias, and others that one of the Prophets was risen from the
Dead, etc.

24 Q. Now if any man should object, that these last cited places of Scripture
do not evidence or make out the Return of Humane Souls, but rather the
Resurrection of the Dead; may we not meet him with this answer, That the Return
of Humane Souls was according to the Doctrine of the Jews, taken in a twofold
meaning: to wit, First, when the Soul of a deceased person returns and is
imbodied in a new born Child: And again, when a man dies, and his Soul is
transposed into the body of another man, who at that time is alive, so as the
said Soul becomes, as it were united with the Soul of that person; which state
the Jews call Ibber, or a joining and union of two Souls in one and the same
body. In like manner as it happens to a woman that is with Child, she and her
Child being so linked together, that both of them make up but one body, though
the Souls both of Mother and Child are in the said body, being (as it were)
joined together. As it was with Eliah and Elisha, of which we may read, 2 Kings
2. 9. till v. 15. that the Spirit of Eliah rested upon Elisha. Now these
passages of Scripture now alleged out of the three Evangelists, must be taken
according to the second meaning or acception of this Doctrine of the Jews,
concerning the Return of Souls, and not in the first.

25 Q. Does not likewise what is said of John the Baptist, John 1. 19, 20, etc.
agree perfectly with what was just now mentioned; where the Jews being desirous
to know of him who he was, asked him whether he were the Christ, or Elias, or
that Prophet; as being of opinion, that he was really one of the parties they
had mentioned, or some such like.

And if we compare with this place, Matthew. 17. 10. till v. 13. Shall we not
find that our Savior himself, as well as the Scribes, understood that Elias
must first come? Yea, in the 11, 12, and 13. v. our Savior does plainly
confirm, that John the Baptist was indeed Elias. We may compare with this, what
is said Matthew. 11. 7. till v. 14. as likewise Malach. 4, 5, 6. And will not all
these places make out most clearly, that John the Baptist according to the
Testimony of Christ himself, was really and truly Elias?

But in case it be objected, that John the Baptist himself, John 1. 21.
expressly denied that he was Elias: and how can this be reconciled with what our
Savior says, Matthew. 17. 10, 11, etc. and 11. 5, 6. compared with Malach. 4.
5. that John the Baptist was Elias May not this objection be met with by
saying, that John the Baptist answered the Jews that were sent to ask of him
who he was; that he was not that Elias whom they expected, viz. One that was to
re-establish and set up again the temporal and worldly Government of the Jews.

26 Q. When yet further we take notice, what was the common Opinion the Jews
had of our Savior, Mat. 16. 13, 14, 15. viz. that he was either John the
Baptist, or Elias, or Jeremy, or one of the Prophets. And we find the same
likewise, Mark 8. 27, 28, 29. Luke 9. 18, 19. in which last place this is
added: Others say that one of the old Prophets is risen again.

What think we then may have been the reason why Christ asked his Disciples,
what the People said of him who he was? Shall we suppose it was because he
needed to be informed by them? No, surely he knew very well what the Jews said
of him: For (as it is witnessed in the forementioned place, John 2. 24, 25.)
be knew all things, and needed not that any man should bear wintness of man;
for he knew what was in man. But he was willing (as on another occasion
relating to Lazarus, Joh. 11. 15.) for their sakes to ask them these questions;
that by this means this Doctrine might be imprinted in their minds, and
consequently, that it might be a perpetual memorial and remembrance, for all
times and people to come; by being set down amongst the Testimonies of Holy
Scripture.

As likewise, that it might be a means at any time, when Atheism should arise
and begin to prevail upon the minds of men, then to deliver and disintangle
them from the snares of many confused contentions and jarrings about Gods
Righteousness, Love, Praescience, Praedestination, and other glorious
Attributes of God. And that by this Doctrine of the Revolution of Souls, they
might be helped to rid themselves of the former intanglements; and might come
plainly to see and acknowledge the Beauty, Riches, and agreeing Harmony of all
the Divine Attributes.

For we must here take notice, that the Jews have always esteemed this point,
as an undeniable and eternal firmly established truth, viz. that God at all
times, and in all ways and manners, is perfectly Righteous and Good in all that
he does; and that it never can be thought of him, that in any thing he should
in the least measure deal unbecomingly, and that all judgments and punishments
which light upon any, are therefore laid upon them because they are deserved,
equal and becoming rewards of Sin. When therefore at any time the Righteousness
of God should seem to be impeached by our dark and ignorant reason and
thoughts, will it not then beseem us to take our refuge to this Doctrine and
fundamental Point; forasmuch as the same does evidence to us, all the glorious
Attributes of God, and frees them from great difficulties and absurdities?

27 Q. The following Testimonies taken out of the New Testament, will they not,
being compared with what has been already said, give a further evidence to
this Doctrine? As for instance, John 9. 1. till v. 39. where a large account is
given concerning the man that was born blind, how the same in a wonderful
manner was healed by our Savior, and how his Disciples upon their first
information about the concern of this blind man, asked their Master
(consonantly with this Catholic Doctrine of the Jews) v. 2. Whether he (the
blind man) had sinned, or his parents that he was born blind? And does not this
question plainly imply, that this man had been in Life and corporal Being,
antecedently to this his last Birth? For how could it else in a natural way be
supposed of him; that he should sin before he was born? And that for the same
he was now punished, by being born blind? And does not our ever Blessed and
most wise Savior most wisely answer this question? For he seems to allow, that
this possibly might have been the cause which they propounded and supposed to
be; and therefore does not in the least reprove his Disciples for the
extravagance of these their thoughts, consonant to this Catholic Doctrine of
the Return of Humane Souls; but did much more seem to approve of it, and grant
that this might have been the cause; yea, tacitly to assert the same: But yet
at last shows them, that this Hypothesis was not applicable to the case before
them; for he tells them v. 3. Neither has this man sinned nor his parents (so
as for his or their sin this punishment had betided him) but that the works of
God should be made manifest in him: viz. that this wonderful Cure of Jesus, to
the admiration of the Spectators, and the exaltation of the Glory of God might
be performed upon him: as likewise, that he might serve for a Type and instance
of the great works of Christ, who was come into the World for to open the Eyes
of the Blind.

28 Q. Forasmuch as in the foregoing Questions it has been showed, that the
Revolution of Humane Souls, was not only known amongst the Jews, and
acknowledged for a certain and incontestable Truth; but likewise confirmed by
our ever Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ himself, it is worth our
enquiry, whether by this means a Door be not opened, for a better and more
clear understanding of the intent and aim of our Savior, in all or most of the
Parables he used to propound to the People, as well as his Disciples? As for
instance, the Parable of the unjust Steward, recorded Luke 16. 1. till v. 8.
who when his Master demanded of him an account of his Stewardship, in the
management of which he had not answered the trust reposed in him, and therefore
knew well enough that he must lose his place; does not he most craftily make
provision for his future condition, which he was in the prospect of; concluding
with himself to employ the small remainder of time he had left in his
employment, in providing for, and promoting his own interest, as he found would
be most serviceable to his future condition: and this he did by dealing
friendly with the Debtors of his Lord, thereby to engage them to the like
friendliness and beneficence toward him, when he should be put out of his
employment, even by rebating to them a great part of their debts to his Master,
as may be seen at large in that Parable: In the 9th verse our Savior begins to
open and declare his meaning and aim in this Parable, in these words: And I say
unto you; make unto your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that
when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting habitations. And afterward
further expresses himself in the following verses. Now that the explication of
this ninth verse has occasioned much trouble to the learned Expositors of
Scripture; as meeting with great difficulty in their endeavor of clearing and
explaining the same; is sufficiently known; whereas, if they had well
understood this Doctrine of the Revolution of Humane Souls, would they not have
done it with much more ease? For our Blessed and Wise Master Christ, has not
only in this Parable recommended to us the good use and charitable
communication of these earthly good things which the Divine Providence offords
us, placing us as Stewards over them; but also excited and persuaded us to this
Love and Beneficence toward our Neighbors. For is it not plainly hinted to
us, that when any one lends a helping hand to the poor, to Widows, and Orphans,
or any other that are in distress; that by this means he is taken in, and gets
a place in the Hearts and Souls of those who are freed from distress by him,
insomuch as his Image is so deeply imprinted and rooted in their mind and Soul,
that when this rich person comes to die, he then in and with the said poor,
whom formerly he has delivered from their distress, and into whom he has been
planted, by means of his love and beneficence, comes into Poverty and other
distress, in order to his Purification.

Is it not likewise well worth our Animadversion here, that the greatest Riches
must be changed into the greatest Poverty? And that those Rich persons, who in
this manner enter into the Poor, and being in want with them, are by means of
such their sufferings advanced toward a Spiritual and Heavenly Birth, Growth,
and Increase, and that much more than ever they could have been in all their
former riches and high state? And may not we by this means arrive at the true
and proper meaning of that hard saying of Christ to his Disciples, Mark 10. 23,
24. (and is also mentioned by the other Evangelists) viz. That it is a hard
thing for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven: but afterward adds,
that by a rich man he meant one that trusts in his riches, and Luke 18. 17.
that what was impossible with man was possible with God, viz. in the way and
manner as has been said, when the rich man dies and is born again, or is taken
in into the poor (to whom he has showed himself loving and charitable) who are
yet alive, to bud and bloom anew; and that by means of suffering he may grow up
to a full Heavenly Stature and Proportion.

May we not likewise to this same purpose allege that other Parable of Christ
in the same Chapter of Luke, concerning the rich man and Lazarus? But we will
leave this to the enquiry and consideration of him that is a lover of these
mysteries; and pass by several other places of Holy Writ, pointing to the Case
in hand; and proceed to those testimones and proofs of this Doctrine of the
Revolution of Souls, which we meet with in the writings of the Apostles.

29 Q. If any one will read the 11 Chapter to the Romans with attention, and
exactly weigh and consider the same, making use of his understanding and sound
judgment without partiality or prejudice, will he not thereby be enabled to
find out a true and right explication of many passages in the said Chapter,
concerning the breaking off of the natural branches, and their casting away, in
order to the grafting in of other strange branches, which formerly did not
belong to the Tree; and then the ingrafting again of the natural branches which
before were cut off, as is most expressly declared in the 23d and following
verses: At the 25th verse Paul calls it a Mystery, and v. 26 says, that when
the fullness of the Gentiles shall be come in, then all Israel shall be saved.
Besides several other remarkable passages in the same Chapter, both before and
after the verses now cited; which would prove very dark and hard to be
understood, without being illustrated by this Hypothesis of the Revolution of
Souls. And we may plainly perceive from hence, that this Doctrine was held for
a certain and approved truth by the Apostles.

30 Q. And besides these testimonies, is it not worth our consideration, what
the Apostle mentions 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14. to the end, concerning the Resurrection of
the Dead, etc? And will it not be a difficult thing to find out the Apostles
meaning and sense in those verses, without laying this Doctrine for a
foundation?

31 Q. That we may by way of over-poise draw some arguments from Nature, and
the condition and state of man, we'll propound this Query; Seeing we find that
a child does not come into the World, till he has held out nine months, or ten
Lunar Revolutions in his Mothers Body, as was already mentioned, until he have
attained all his parts and members; and forasmuch as all the works of God are
perfect, must not therefore the Life also, which dwells and operates in Bodies,
have time allowed for to arrive at its perfection by diverse steps and degrees,
even as well as the Bodies of Children stand in need of so much time for to
attain their perfection? And forasmuch as we see that Children when they are
newly born, are like clean white Paper, (that is without all Images) to the end
they may be sit and disposed, every one according to his property, to take in
all objects that present themselves to them, and to work out the same: and
seeing that this out-working is very imperfect in Children; yea, that but very
few are found amongst old people, which have attained to perfection: must not
we then conclude, from the power a man has to obtain the highest perfection
possible in this World, that the said power must at one time or other be
brought into act and perfected? And that in this World, seeing it is very
probable that man must attain his end, where he has had his beginning? For
seeing man consists of many parts, and that during his Life time he does not
only work out some few of them to any perfection, as from his Childhood to his
Youth, from his Youth to Manhood, and from thence to old Age; all which parts
are again multifariously diversifyed, as we may perceive that from one man many
do proceed, and they of different properties. Must not he therefore also have
different times allotted him for the working out of those parts to perfection?
And what other medium can we imagine for to attain to this perfection, than by
dying to their former body, by which means the ungodly are snatched away from
the stage of this World, that they may no further proceed in their wickedness,
but may be prepared to enter into another body, therein to be punished for the
sins of their former Life, and receive the measure they have measured out to
others, in order to their being bettered thereby. Whereas on the contrary, to
the pious and good, a way is made by means of the suffering of Death, for them
to attain to a higher degree of perfection, than yet they are arrived to.

And do not we thus perceive the reason, why men must be several times born
into this World? For by getting of Children, in whom they partly propagate
themselves, they are disposed to receive new Idea's, both good and bad, and
thereby to enlarge their circumference, which is their Kingdom: Good Idea's,
that by working out of the same, they may be advanced to further perfection;
and evil Idea's, that they may subdue and rule over them? And to the end they
may be fitted for the reception of both these, is it not necessary, that by
Death they lose the remembrance of their former Images?

But if we will not allow and admit of this Doctrine of the Revolution of
Souls; then we must assert either that Souls are made perfect in this one Life
(which contradicts our daily experience) or that they never arrive to it, which
is contrary to the Wisdom and Goodness of God? Or lastly, that some where
without this World (where yet they had their first bodily beginning, and were
placed, to the end that therein they might work out their perfection) they
shall attain to perfection; the which for many reasons (for brevity here past
by) cannot be admitted.

32 Q. Is it not likewise well worth our consideration, that even as the hands
and feet are formed the last of all the other members in the womb of the
Mother; so they are the first that die, as experience teaches? And does it not
deserve our serious thoughts, that whereas a Child during the time of nine
months is formed in his Mothers Womb, amidst so many cares, sufferings, and
dangers of Life, and all this (according to the aim of Nature) in order to a
degree of out-working of Life in this World? Now when it happens that a Child
dies with in a day or two after its birth, must not we own that the said Child
did not reach the aim and end of Nature, to which its formation in the Mothers
womb was directed? And though indeed there must be a cause of this sudden
cutting off, yet cannot the said cause be so prevalent and powerful, as is the
Divine Wisdom and Providence, and the aim and mark of the Workmaster himself,
in cutting off the Child's Life, which is, that the Child by means of Revolution
should be wrought out and made perfect, to the end that what has had a
beginning may likewise attain its end.

33 Q. Moreover, when we find that Children in the womb be formed out of Eggs,
of which there are so great a number in every woman, that we do not find one
that bears so many Children as she has Eggs, which she brought into the World
with her: Must not we therefore conclude, that the rest of these Eggs were
created in vain, in case they should not at some time or other attain to their
full perfection? Now to remove this difficulty, must not we conclude, that the
Life of these Eggs does propagate itself another way, to the end that what does
not arrive at perfection one time, may attain it at another? And that therefore
the remaining Eggs must necessarily be revolved in order to their perfection,
at which in the production of them, Nature had directed her intention?

In like manner, what can we suppose to be the reason of that express command
of God, which we read, Deuteronomy. 23. 2. That no bastard should enter into the
congregation of the Lord to the tenth generation; but this, that by means of
ten Revolutions, the evil might be wrought out?

34 Q. If any should Query, seeing that Man is constantly changed and renewed,
from one Life into another; how is it possible that notwithstanding all these
changes, his memory should continue with him? May not we return this answer?
That how great so ever the efflux or emanation from any man may be, yet he
continues still as the General and Commander over all his outworkings and
emanations, only he grows older, that is, approaches nearer and nearer to
perfection, according to the proportion of his work he has wrought out in this
World: and that the Spirits which he has given forth are his remembrancers and
monitors, and still abide with him. And therefore, when a man brings wisdom
with him into this World, is it not a proof that he has attained, and wrought
out the same in another Life or preceding Revolution?

35 Q. But in case it should be further objected: how is it possible that a man
should several times be born into the World, and yet not be able to call to
mind the least of any thing that has passed in the former times of his Life;
may not we return this answer, That the only end of a man's being in this World
is, that he may attain to perfection; and if he attains the same in any of his
Life times (so as he works it out himself) it abides with him, and accompanies
him through all his Lives and Revolutions. And that it is not at all material
that a man cannot call to mind, or give any account of the trouble he has had,
before he arrived so far as now he is come; no more than it is any trouble to
us, or matter of disquiet, that we cannot remember how we first learned to go,
or how many difficulties and accidents we met with in that undertaking? It is
enough for us that we can go now, and upon all occasions make use of our Feet,
without troubling our selves about the circumstances and means whereby we
attained the same at first. In like manner, seeing that man is possessed of all
these things as his propriety; yea, that he is all these things himself; would
it not be uneasy and troublesome to him, to have his head always filled with
these unprofitable Images? And is not this the reason why it is needful for
Man, during the time of his Life, as well as at his Death, to die to many of
these Images, and that in order to his forgetting of those things, which it is
not needful for him to keep in his memory?

36 Q. Forasmuch as we find that the Children of Men are differently gifted,
viz. that some are wise and understanding, others simple and dumb born; we may
put this query concerning those that are wise, viz. Whether or no those Spirits
which come from wise persons, have not heretofore appeared, and acted their
parts upon this Theater? As also whether or no any one can be a Man and a Child
together, and at the same time? Which if it be answered in the Negative, (as
certainly it must) it may be queried further; Whether all Children be alike
fitted and disposed for Wisdom? Or whether there be not a great difference
between them in this respect? Now we know that no body can reach the uppermost
round of a Ladder, but by passing all that are between it and the lowest; and
to pass over all these in the Life of one Body, is not possible. And in case
any one should go about to leap over some of these steps, would he not find
this altogether impracticable? Forasmuch as this would be contrary to the order
of the Creation; yea, would it not be the same as if any one should think from
the first beginning of Childhood, immediately to become a young man, which is
impossible? Is it not therefore necessary, in case a man shall ever attain to
his full perfection, as to the uppermost round of the Ladder, that in order
thereto, he appears several times upon this Theater, and be born again; until
at last through often Dyings and Revolutions, he attain to a perfect conquest
and dominion over Death?

37 Q. Is it not likewise very observable, what we see in the transplanting of
Herbs and grafting of Trees, that the said Vegetables by frequent eradications,
amputations, and transplantations, are meliorated? And that a young twig when
frequently ingrafted into its own stock, becomes thereby much bettered and
advanced; and that every transplanting, cutting off, and grafting, is a kind of
death and suffering? And Man in like manner, being created in this World, must
therein work out his Salvation and Happiness, and that by means of frequent and
reiterated dying. And is it not upon this very account, that Adam, if he had
continued in innocence, would have been able to have wrought out his Salvation
in one only Life? But that now since his fall, it must be otherwise; that is,
in several Lives, or times of Life?

38 Q. Lastly, and to conclude, can it be denied, that all of us proceed from
one Unity? Now if any one pondering this in his mind, should be troubled how to
reconcile the great variety and difference which is found amongst men, with the
uniformity of their Original; would not such an one, in order to the clearing
of this difficulty, find it of use to him to consider the manifold members of
man's body, all of which (though never so different) make up but one man? And
would not he by this means come to understand the true ground of this variety,
which is found amongst men, and acknowledge, that notwithstanding all this,
they are but an emanation from the highest Unity? And when we compare this
body, consisting of many members (every one of which are opperative and working
to a higher degree of perfection) to an Army? Can we make any other inference
from what has been said, but that every Soldier in this Army that has well
discharged his place, and done his duty, which belonged to him at such a time,
is afterward made an Officer, and so proceeds till he comes to be a General?

But if any man should object, that this does too far surpass all bounds of
number, as well as the reason and comprehension of Man: May not we answer this
Objection, by saying, that it is so much the better, forasmuch as this does the
more magnify and set forth the Glory of God, who is, and is styled the Lord of
Hoasts; and has created us after his own Image, that we might bear a
resemblance with him. Upon which account we are likewise called Kings and
Priests, because of the surpassing great increase and glorification of our
Beings, by means of this never ceasing melioration and Revolution?

As also this may teach us to have more certain, proper, and becoming thoughts
of God; forasmuch as one only World is much too little to know God in, and
find him out to perfection? And that therefore there are Worlds without End,
for that we can never come to an end in the knowledge of God?

For whatsoever the mind can comprehend, is less than the mind itself; and
consequently man is much more happy in feeling and perceiving of God, than he
would be in comprehending of him, which is altogether impossible. For there is
another way of perceiving God in man's mind, besides that which is merely
intellectual in the understanding, which when it is felt, the mind loses
itself in the perception of a sweetness which is altogether incomprehensible,
and therefore inexpressible, and does not proceed from man's own will, or from
himself, but purely and alone from God, and surpasses all understanding.

Herewithal I shall conclude this discourse of the Return of Humane Souls, and
hope that therewith I have satisfied the Reader; and my promise at once, which
I made in the Preface to the forementioned 200 Queries, concerning the
Revolution of Humane Souls; to which I for further satisfaction do refer him;
which Treatise upon the desire of a Person of Quality some years ago, I did
dictate to a Friend, who afterward (retaining the Sense) put it in another
Method, he also adding to it several things of his own; which was afterward
published by me, without my name at London above a year ago by Robert Kittlewel
in Fleet Street, over against St. Dunstan's Church, at the sign of the Hand and
Scepter.

Now the promise which I there made, was to this purpose; that in case I should
perceive this little Book to prove acceptable, I would publish two other
Treatises, whereof the one should treat of the same matter, which is the
subject of the said 200 Queries, viz. concerning the Revolution of Humane
Souls, but in another way and method than it was handled there: and the other a
Latin Treatise, whose Title is, De Revolutionibus Animarum, Tractatus Primus,
and Manuscripto haud it a pridem ad nos perlato; ex operibus Rabbi Jitzchak
Loriensis, Cabalistarum Aquilae, Latinitate donatus. This last Tractate I have
caused to be added to Cabalae Denudatae, Tom. 2. Sive Libro Zohar restituto:
and is Printed at Franckfort on the Mayn. Not as if I approved all that is
therein contained (for I find several things there, concerning which I desire
to be further satisfied, and to have my difficulties answered by the Leaned
Jews themselves) but only to the end the said Treatise might be more known,
and consequently also the opinion of the Jews concerning this matter.

The former of these two Treatises, is the same I here expose to the
unprejudiced judgments of all men, as persuading my self, since upon the
request I then made, none to my knowledge has been found, that openly in print
has objected any thing against the said Two Hundred Queries, that the same
has found acceptance, or entertainment at least with understanding and
unprejudiced minds.

Thus then I have acquit my self of my promise; and do now renew to the
Courteous and Truth-loving Reader, my former request; that in case any one
should be found, whom this Discourse might not fully satisfy, as to the main
point it treats of, and is able to produce some thing better and more consonant
to Holy Scripture and sound Reason, whereby as well the Divine Attributes might
be better salved, and the difficulties ^rising about the same more easily
removed, that he would have the goodness in a short and compendious writing
(for Truth needs no amplification) to signify and impart his meaning and
ground with becoming discretion; in full assurance that the same shall be most
lovingly and gratefully accepted by me, as well as all others, who are lovers
of Truth and Wisdom. Moreover, if for the time to come I should chance to meet
with any person that understands my way of speaking, and is disposed to take it
in writing from my mouth, it is probable that for the common good, I may
hereafter endeavor in another Treatise to supply the defects of this (which
will be published in Latin) by enlarging my self upon this point of the
Revolution of Souls, as well as upon the other foregoing matters.

In the mean time, I am not without hope (in case I should remove into another
Land, and that ^^y intended Treatise should be writ in some other language) but
that some Lovers will be found, who may have the Curiosity to Translate it.

AN APPENDIX.
WE observe and see daily, how that young Children, who are void of all Images,
have a continual hunger after Knowledge, which God naturally has planted in
them; and therefore seek to satisfy themselves of every thing they see or
hear. And according as their Life increases in strength, this hunger
increases also, even until they be full grown, at which time they are filled,
and have got seed of their own, and so are enabled to give forth something
again; and therefore are not then so fit as before to receive and take in;
because in this very time of their Age their first Revolution happens, as
wherein they pass from Childhood to Youth, which time comprehends a perfect
Revolution of the Sun of twelve Years, or twelve Circumvolutions through the
twelve Signs of the Zodiac.

And this is the natural reason why the Jews observe this Rule amongst them,
and have kept the same ever since the time of Moses; that when a Boy is twelve
years and a day old, he is then bound to keep all the Commands and Prohibitions
of the Law, which are six hundred and thirteen in number, and together with the
seven Precepts of Noah make out six hundred and twenty. Now if he shall keep
these Commands, it is needful that he first know them, and have learnt them;
wherefore the Parents are obliged in Conscience to inform and cause their
Children to be instructed in the Law given to their Fathers, that they may not
bring the guilt of their Children upon themselves, in case their Children
should not keep the said Commands. But when the Parents have discharged their
duty in this matter, then the guilt falls upon the Children themselves, and
they must answer for it.

And the very same duty is incumbent on Christians in their measure now;
forasmuch as our Savior himself has given us an instance hereof, when he was
twelve years of age, as we may read Luke 2. 46. whose example sure we have
reason to follow. Now it is there said of him, that he was found in the Temple,
in the midst of the Doctors, both hearing them, and asking them Questions, and
that all that heard him were astonished at his Understanding and Answers.

In like manner, Paul also testifies of Timothy, 2 Timothy 3. 14, 15. That. from
a child he had known the Scriptures, and exhorts him to continue in the
doctrine he had learnt: It is also absurd and unnatural to force and tie young
Children, that are full of Life, and desire to know and do all things, to one
only thing, which makes them presently to be weary of, and loath the same, and
is the cause of great disorder. For whereas Children naturally desire to be at
work and in motion, they are commonly forced and plagued, to sit many years
together, as it were in Prison, for to learn to Read, Write, etc. until they
have got into their heads (not without great pains and trouble) many of their
School Books; by which means these Parents who have many Children and no great
estate, are necessitated to use unjust ways, that they may be able to pay for
the Education of their Children, and to keep them at School.

Things being thus, it may be demanded, whether a way might not be found out,
whereby this great mischief and disorder might be prevented, and youth better
educated, without burthening on overcharging of their parents, and for better
service and profit to the Public and Government?

For seeing God himself has naturally planted this hunger in youth, he must
also have ordained natural means, in order to the satisfying of the said
Hunger: Indeed he has given this hunger for no other end, but that it might be
satisfied. And therefore it is worth our enquiry, whether this very hunger
itself will not afford us the truest and best directions for to satisfy the
same, as we see that a Child as soon as it is born, seeks for the Breast of the
Mother, to satisfy its hunger?

In answer to this, I will here set down briefly in part what my own experience
has taught me concerning this matter.

We find that Dogs and other Beasts, which have their peculiar natures and
properties, when we desire to fit them for some service or other, will not be
forced or by violence compelled to the same. We have an instance of this in a
young Water-Spaniel, that is to be taught to take the water, and fetch any
thing thence, who if he beat first forcibly thrown into the water, it makes him
shie of it, and will very hardly afterward be brought to take it; but if the
said Spaniel by degrees, with bread or otherwise be allured into the water,
till he come beyond his depth, and begin to swim of himself, it by this means
becomes his delight, and he longs for the word of command from his Master, to
go into the water. And the same is the case with Children, for neither are they
easily brought to do or comprehend a thing by force, or at least not so well
and dexterously; for Nature in all things will be free and without compulsion.

Wherefore in the education of Children we must first of all observe, and have
a care, not to confound their Senses, and not to force that in through the
Sight, which must enter and be comprehended by the Ear: and also that we do not
separate or divide the Senses, where they ought in concord to agree together,
but that all may be done in good order, with reference to all the Senses.

In this manner, by observing the foresaid Rules, I have experienced that
Children have been taught several Handicrafts at once, and that without any
great pains taking; in order whereunto, the day has been so divided, that
only one hour has been allotted for every Art or Handicraft, by which means
the Children have been so stirred up in their desire, that the more they have
learnt, the more they have still longed to learn; so as they have thought the
day too short for them. And thus after they had every one in order learnt four
Arts, they were come so far, as to be able to look out and learn an Art of
themselves, without being taught and never have had any need of a Master.

I will briefly declare, how I first was led to this way of Practice, and give
some short directions how the same may be further carried on in the Education
of Children.

What regards the Sense of Hearing: I have experienced, that in places where
Music Schools have been kept, that the neighbors Children have only by
hearing them Sing in the School, learnt to Sing, yea, even little Children that
were carried in arms, have uttered their first words with a Musical tone or
harmony. And at Brussels in some places, where the Italians commonly resort,
little Children are found of four or five years of age, whose Fathers are
Spaniards, their Mothers Flemmings, and their Servants French, that can speak
the Languages of all these four Nations.

Again, I have seen that where several Children, Boys and Girls, eight in
number, viz. five Brothers and three Sisters, have been together in one room;
and the Boys have been instructed by their Paedagogue in the Latin Tongue, and
that the common way, by poring upon Books as Grammars, etc. that the Girls,
merely by the Ear have taken in and remembered those Latin Words and Rules,
which their Brothers could not. The reason of which is, because the Girls had
their Ears free, and therefore did more easily apprehend the voice and words of
their Brothers Paedagogue: whereas, on the contrary, it was much more
difficulty to take that in by the Eye, and breaking of their Heads, which they
ought to have apprehended by their Ear, this method being contrary to Nature:
for by their Eye they make to themselves forced and undue Images, which by
means of a voice, would have entered freely, naturally, and rightly formed
through their Ears. Whereas the other way false and dead Images are conveyed
into Children, and take up the room of true and living Images in their
understanding, by which means their understandings and judgments become
darkened, disordered, and quite spoiled.

In the third place, I have known a Preacher who made about twenty persons, men
and women, all poor people, that got their bread by Spinning of Wool, to come
into his House one Hour in a Day (which yet this poor people could hardly
dispense with, to be so long from their labor) and read to them part of the
first Chapter of Genesis, one word after another, first in Dutch, and
afterward in Hebrew, making every one of the said persons to repeat every word
round, and thus he continued for half an hour, reading some verses, and often
repeating the same, and they after him. The other half hour he read in like
manner, some verses out of the New Testament in Dutch and Greek. And as soon as
he perceived that they began to understand somewhat of the said Languages,
being encouraged thereby he continued the same method, until in a short time he
had taught them not only to read perfectly, but also to understand both the
said Languages.

I have also my self often, and especially once for my diversion, taught two
men and two women in eight days time (allowing only one hour a day) to read
Hebrew perfectly, and to understand the first Chapter of Genesis, and
continuing this method for six Weeks together, they have been able to
understand the whole first Book of Moses, in the Original Hebrew. The way I
took to teach them was this: I gave them a Copy of the Hebrew Alphabet in great
Letters, which I made them copy so often, and to express the sound of every
Letter after me, until they had fully taken in and apprehended them: then I
took an Hebrew Bible, either Stephen's Edition in Quarto, or that of Hutterus's
in Folio, both of which are printed in a fair and large Character; and having
placed the same on a round Table, that the said four persons might see the
Characters as well as my self; I began to read to them, pointing with a Fescue
to every Letter, and ordered them to pronounce every word, with a loud voice
after me, first in Dutch, and afterward in Hebrew, and continued so until the
hour was past, with reading and repeating the first verse of the first Chapter
of Genesis. The next day instead of one verse I took three, and in eight days
time (increasing every day two or three verses) they were able perfectly to
read and understand the first Chapter of Genesis.

In this manner then, viz. by constant hearing and pronouncing after me, they
went through the first six Chapters, and repeated the same so often, till they
perfectly understood them: and after this they proceeded and learnt of
themselves. And by the same way Greek may be taught from the New Testament, and
this without any head-breaking at all. When now these women whom I had taught,
perceived not without wonder the great advance they had made in so short a
time, they were forced to confess, that women were fitter than men for to teach
any Language to Children, according to St. Paul's Direction, Tit. 2. 3. 1 Timothy
5. 9, 10. especially if they have first learnt the same themselves, in such a
way as this; though they should not understand it according to Grammar:
Wherefore they also promised me, that in consideration of the pains I had taken
with them, they would as occasion presented, in like manner instruct others for
nothing.

I have furthermore given them directions, how each Mother might teach her
Children to Read, Write, and cast Accounts, and that very naturally, without
trouble, head-breaking, or charges, after this manner: I caused several plates
of Copper or Wood to be made, and in one of them have ordered an Alphabet to be
engraven in running Italian Letters with double strokes, so as an interval of
white is left between them, the body of each letter being of the bigness of a
great Pease, or somewhat bigger: on another Plate the self same letters, but in
a less form; and on the third Plate, yet lesser. The said Plates are now
printed on several sorts of writing Paper on both sides, and each Child
receives one of these papers, and is ordered to fill up the distance which is
between the double strokes of the said letters, with a Pen dipped in yellow Ink,
and to do it as near as they can at one stroke. Now this exercise has put the
Children upon inquiring, what this or the other letter is, and how called; and
when a stop has been put to their further inquiry, by telling them, that it
was too hard for them to understand, their desires to know the said letters
have thereby but been the more inflamed. And thus by means of their questions,
and the answers that have been returned to them, they have, even unknown to
themselves, learnt to know and pronounce their letters. The next day these
Children have been made to draw over these letters again with Red Ink, and the
third day with black Ink; and when at any time they have run their Pen beyond
the strokes, they have been jear'd at for making drunken or staggering letters.
Afterward turning their paper, they have the following three days drawn over
the Letters on the other side, with three several Inks as before; so that one
paper has employed them a whole week.

Now after that the first sort or great Letters have been well and exactly
drawn over by them, they have been put to do the same with the second (...) of
less Letters: and last of all they have had the third or least Letters given
them to draw o^^ for all which, only one hour in a day (...) been allotted.
And after they have been found ready and expert at this drawing over of their
Letters, they have left off this way of Writing.

Upon the first of the three forementioned Papers, besides the Letters, are
likewise set down the Arithmetical figures, from 1 to 10, with double strokes
as was said of the Letters. Upon the second, the Table of Multiplication, in
form of a Triangle; and upon the third some Examples of the four most common
operations of Arithmetic, viz. Addition, Substraction, Multiplication, and
Division.

The several sorts of Ink needful to this intent, may be made many ways; the
simplest and plai^est is to make the yellow Ink, of Saffron and Allome boil in
water; and the red Ink of Brasilewood and Allome boiled in water; and the red
Ink of Brasilewood and Allome boiled as before.

Upon a fourth Plate intended, and to be printed upon Writing-paper with red
Ink, must be expressed the figure of a naked Boy, a House, a Horse, a Dog, a
Tree, a Coat and Breeches, with all their parts, each part distinct, and all
exactly according to a lesser proportional measure: so as for the House, of an
inch may be a foot; and for the Clothes (...) of a yard. And this little
proportional measure must be engraven on the Plate, and printed on the foresaid
paper, with the figures of Arithmetic, to the end the Children may learn with
a pair of Compasses to measure the same, and draw over the said figures of a
naked Boy, House, etc. with black Ink; by which means without any trouble, yea
with pleasure and delight they will be informed of the Principles of
Arithmetic, Drawing, Tayloring, and all other Handicrafts, of Architecture
also, and other Arts that depend upon mensuration; and thus come to understand,
that God made all things in number, weight, and measure; so that thereby they
shall at least reap this advantage, that they will not be so easily deceived or
imposed on.

By this occasion I have found by experience, that it is more natural and
profitable to teach Children to Write before we put them to Read; because
naturally every one does most easily and with pleasure learn to know that which
he has made himself; I having often observed, not without particular
satisfaction, that children of their own motion, would ask others the
signification of the Letters they had drawn over, and by means of a little
information, learn to read of themselves.

And together with this, they likewise learn the figures of Arithmetic, the
Table of Multiplication and the four species or most useful operations of
Arithmetic, viz. they must be put to ask one another Questions, and so
exercise themselves in the Table of Multiplication; and thus they will easily
and without trouble get it by heart, especially where many Children are
together in one Room.

It would be of good use also, when they are busy about any necessary
handy-works which make no noise, that one hour of the day were set apart, in
which a Chapter might be read and spelled unto them, and they made to repeat
every word after him that spelled and reads, still continuing at their work;
and afterward another hour should be allowed in which they might read and
spell the said Chapter themselves; and this to be continued till they be
perfect in reading.

I have also found this a good way to lead on Children to the understanding of
what they read, and to make them read distinctly, and observing their stops,
viz. to represent a Chapter to them as a whole Regiment of Soldiers under one
Commander, in which every Company marches apart, and with an interval to
distinguish it from the rest; so as where a full point is (.) that is a
Captain, and because the interval is supposed to be greater there, a longer
stop of the voice is to be made; and where two points (:) or a point and Comma
(;) that that is a Lieutenant; where a Comma (,) a Corporal: where there is a
note of admiration (!) that is a Chaplain to the Regiment? where a note of
Interrogation (?) a Drummer; and where a Parenthesis () a Messenger that brings
tidings. That every Word is a file of Soldiers, and every Letter a Soldier,
and that at every one of the forementioned Officers, they must hold their
breaths longer or shorter, according as the distance of the files of Soldiers
is greater or less; as for instance, they are to hold their breath long at a
full point (.) at a Colon (:) shorter; at a Comma (,) least of all.

In this manner I have seen with great pleasure and satisfaction, that Children
being by this means excited, would of themselves take notice where a Lieutenant
or Corporal was wanting, and would reprove other Children when they read
without observing their stops.

The other remaining hours of the day, they may be set to some work for their
pleasure and recreation. As for instance, they may turn one hour; in order to
which, they must have a little turning-bench provided for them, which they may
rule with ease, and that by means thereof they be accustomed to keep their
bodies in a due posture, especially their arms, hand, feet, and head, etc. that
all their members may cooperate, and they may readily know to turn themselves
to the Right or Left, and by this means get a true rule to govern and command
all with ease. And when they are thus initiated, they must be instructed how to
turn leisurely thin chips of some hard piece of wood.

Moreover, they must be informed what to do first, what next; and in the third
place, viz. how they are to set their body, how to hold their Iron several
ways, etc. so as they may apprehend and understand it, and may afterward be
able of themselves, by questioning other Artists to learn the said Art
perfectly. Thus they may easily of themselves, and without trouble, imitate any
thing they see, in due number, measure, and order, by counting how one thing is
to follow another.

Another hour we may make them draw the figure of a House upon paper, with all
its parts according to the foresaid little measure, and after make them to
fasten the draughts they have made, upon thin boards of soft Lime-tree Wood.
The thickness of the said Boards is to be measured as before, that they may be
proportionate to the thickness or thinness of the wall, as well at the bottom
as above, exactly answering to the proportions of the great house, which they
take for their pattern and would imitate, and which before has been measured
by themselves with a true great measure. And when the papers which with starch,
or otherwise they have pasted to their thin boards are thoroughly dry, they must
be exactly sawed through in the strokes upon the paper with a thin Saw, made of
the Spring of a Watch, which must not be thicker than the stroke of a Pen, that
so nothing of the draught or measure may be lost, Afterward these Boards must
be joined together, and the floor laid with Beams, Rafters, and Boards, as many
as there ought to be, according to what they had before drawn upon the paper.
Then they must cast up how many nails they need to one Board, and by this means
they will know when they have one floor laid, how many Nails will be required
to all the floors of the house, and so likewise to the doors, etc.

After this they measure and cast up, how many Bricks be in six foot square,
and how many such squares there be in the great house. Also how much Lime they
will stand in need of, which they must cast up before, when a like four square
wall is built, how much Lime and Sand is made use of, and how much one Labourer
can do in one day.

And thus afterward, all the necessary parts, charges and time required to the
said Building, may be easily cast up. By this means Children with ease will be
made to understand Architecture, and the Carpenters craft at once, and will be
quickened and excited, and in time be able to serve themselves and others.

Another hour they may be taught to make narrow Silk Ribbans, and so by
learning this small piece of weaving, they may in time be brought to understand
and work all sorts of more difficult texture.

Now suppose a Schoolmaster should let his Scholars weave Ribbans, or knit
Stockings three hours together, would not he by this means be easily and richly
paid, for all his pains taking and labor about them?

As for Girls they must have their separate and distinct employments, to keep
them active and lively that they may not fall into Sickness, viz. they must
Spin Wool and Flax, Kint, Weave Ribbans, make Laces, Buttons, and whatsoever
else is wrought with a Needle. As also they must learn to Bake, Brew, and Dress
Meat, and are to be placed where they may learn these necessary Culinary Arts;
and by being diligently employed in the foresaid works, they may so order it,
as afterward when they come to years, they may by their diligence and
industry, have provided for themselves a portion against they come to Marry.

Toward evening, the Children and whole Family must meet together in one
place, for an hour, every one having their Bible before them, in some Language
which they understand, no matter what, whether Hebrew, Greek, Latin, or Dutch.
And then after a Chapter has been read distinctly by one of the company, some
verse or part of it is taken (after the Parents have made them cast lots who
shall be the first to choose the said verse or part) and a discourse begun
concerning some Virtue or the like. After this some one or other takes a
Concordance, and looks how many places are found in Scripture treating of the
same matter, and every one of them, either in their order, or as they are
appointed, seek some one or more Texts in his own Bible; and when every one
has his place ready, they from the youngest to the eldest are commanded to
read every one his Text or Texts, and withal to give their judgment upon them,
no matter how simple the same may be; by which both the Children and whole
Family are awakened and quickened, and in time attain to a good understanding
and mature judgment; so as afterward of themselves they are able to propound
questions, and so proceed from one degree to another, till they become wise
indeed.

And this in short is the way which Nature her self points out to us, and by
these and the like ways, the Wise men of old instructed their Children at home,
in order to prepare them for the further instructions in their public Schools,
and that from the very time of Moses, until that of Christ, and the Apostles
also have constantly observed the same.

In the Jewish Church, besides the Temple at Jerasalem, they had two sorts of
Houses in which the Congregation had their public Exercises of Piety* the one
of which was called Beth Hacneseth, or the House of meeting or gathering
together, the other Beth Hammedrasch, or the House of Enquiry. Of these, the
first was the House of Prayer, and the other was the House of Instruction: Both
these are called in the New Testament, (...), Synagogues; that is meeting
places or Schools, without distinction; even as at this day the Jews give the
name of Schools to both these places: though the first of these, be also by way
of distinction, Acts 16. 3. called (...), from Praying; and the other, Acts 19.
19. a School, as being designed for Learning and Instruction.

In their great Cities they had a great number of both these sorts of Houses,
insomuch as at Bitter there were four hundred Batte Cnesioth (according to
Talmud Gittin, fol. 58. a.) and at Jerusalem four hundred and eighty (as in
Jalkut Jesai. 1. fol. 40. d.) from whence we may conclude, that in the foresaid
places, were near as many of the Batte Medraschoth.

Now forasmuch as the several Congregations (which were at least to consist of
ten persons) did meet every Sabbath, Monday, and Thursday, in the House of
Prayer, and there assisted at the public Prayers (which every one of the
people were to conclude with saying Amen) uttered by the Schliach Zibbor, or
Angel of the Congregation. The second thing which was performed in this Hcuse
of Prayer, was the Public Reading of the Scripture, in the Hebrew Text,
performed by seven of the Congregation (of which the first was to be a Priest,
the second a Levite, if any such were present, and the rest common Members of
the Congregation) and thirdly, the Interpreting and Expounding of the Original
Text, into their Mother Tongue, by means of a Methurgeman, or Interpreter
thereto appointed. Where fourthly also, they had often times Sermons preached to
them, which sometimes were delivered to them by the foresaid Interpreter, as
when at any time in expounding a Text, he was pleased to enlarge himself upon
it. As may be seen in the Jerusalem Talmud Biccur, fol. 65. d. Sanhedr, fol.
20. c. and in the Babilonish Berachoth, fol. 28. a. And fifthly, sometimes by
Preachers particularly thereunto appointed; who especially for the sakes of the
women and common people, were to preach publicly, and to move and stir their
hearts. As appears from the Gloss upon Schabbath, fol. 30. b. in the
Babilonish Talmud. Moreover, in this place were there Children also instructed;
as appears from the Babilonish Talmud Berachoth, fol. 17. a. and the Gloss
upon it.

After these exercises they went to the Beth Hammedrasch, which they also often
call Keneseth and Zibbor, where they were instructed by a peculiar Teacher, in
the so called, Oral Law; and partly also in the Ordinances, which are of common
use amongst them, and their secret signification; partly also in the Cabala and
high Mysteries concerning Divine and Spiritual things.

Which Teaching was celebrated in this manner: The Doctor himself did not speak
aloud to the People, but whispered what he had to say in Hebrew in the Ear of a
Minister, hereunto especially appointed, who afterward declared the same to
the People in their Mother Tongue (as appears from the Babilonish Talmud Goma,
Fol. 20. b.) and at these instructions, it was usual for every Talmud Chacham,
i. e. Scholar of the Wise or Learned, or any other of the hearers, though he
were a Merchant or Handicrafts man (for it was usual for the most learned
amongst them to exercise some Handicraft or other) to propound one or more
questions, and request an answer to them from the Doctor; as we may see in the
Babylon Talmud Berachoth, Fol. 67. compared with Luke 2. 46. Matthew. 12. 9, 10,
11. Acts 17. 10, 11.

These Bette Medraschoth, they esteem holier and more excellent than the Batte
Knesioth: because by this liberty of asking Questions, they acquired more
knowledge in the Law, than in the other where they were Hearers only. In
reference to this they used that Proverb, Mibbeth Mickdasch, le beth Medrasch,
from the House of Prayer, to the House of Instruction: And to this purpose also
they applied that passage out of the 84 Psalm, They go from strength to
strength, etc.

These Assembles and Exercises in the Houses of Instruction were never
abrogated by Christ nor his Disciples; but rather confirmed and approved of by
their visiting of them, and teaching in them; of which we have a special
instance, Acts 19. 9. Insomuch also that in the Primitive Church, there was a
particular sort of Officers whom they call Teachers, (...), of whom the Apostle
says, that the Lord had given them, Ephesians. 4. 11. and of whom also mention is
made, Romans 12. 7. 1 Cor. 14. 26. 1 Timothy 5. 17. And the same is also
particularly mentioned by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14. throughout the whole Chapter
as a Command of the Lord and a thing of great necessity and concern, as appears
from the 37 verse of the said Chapter, where he says, If any man think himself
to be a prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things which I
write unto you, are the Commandments of the Lord. And at the 38 verse, But if
any will be ignorant let him be ignorant. Though most of the said particulars,
are now adays alas! not so much as known amongst Christians, much less put in
practice; and which is the only cause of all that ignorance, disputing,
hatred, envy, and persecution which abounds everywhere.

Concerning this way of the Ancient Wisemen now mentioned, much more might be
said, which for brevity we pass by; and shall only for a conclusion briefly
hint one thing more, viz. What the Reason may be why so many Similitudes,
Parables, Figurative Expressions, etc. are found in Holy Scripture, as may be
seen, Prove. 1. 6. and Chap. 25. 2. Eccles. Sir. 39. 1. Math. 13. 34. 35. 1 Cor.
13. 12. Even because the outward man, has only an outward understanding, and
therefore can only understand the outward and not the inward, 1 Cor. 2. 14.
15. And therefore the Scripture was written in this Parabolical way; that we
from thence might take occasion to pass from the outward into the inward, from
the Body and Letter into the Spirit, and by this means become Spiritual.

I have many years since communicated and discoursed the Contents of this
Appendix to persons of several persuasions, to try whether the same would be
received and put in practice amongst any of them; but they all with one accord
told me, that the same was impracticable and impossible, forasmuch as none
would be able to return an answer to all the questions which (in case this way
were introduced) would be propounded, and therefore must needs be the cause of
numberless contests and disputes. By which answer of theirs they tacitly
acknowledge, that they keep the Door fast locked which leads to the Steps of
Wisdom: Without any further considering whether it be likely that our Savior
or his Disciples could leave us any Commands, but what were possible to be
obeyed and put in practice, etc.

Wherefore notwithstanding these discouragements, and in hope, that what has
not been done hitherto, may be done and put in practice hereafter; I have here
briefly set down the same, together with a short Introduction concerning the
Education and Instruction of Children.

As also added Christ's Hundred Commandments, of which by the constant use the
Children may have them, as it were engrafted in them by the careful and loving
Mothers direction to read and write them over daily, instead of their Horn and
Copy Books, that so they may serve them all their Lives time for their true
guides. Which practice the Lord grant may tend to his most Holy Names Praise,
Honor, and Glory.

CHRIST's Hundred Commandments, etc.
1. JEsus said unto him, it is written again, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy
God, Mat. 4. 7. And Jesus answering, said unto him, it is said, Thou shall not
tempt the Lord thy God, Luke 4. 12.

2. Then says Jesus unto him, get thee hence Satan, for it is written, Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve, Mat. 4. 10. And
Jesus answered and said unto him, get thee behind me Satan; for it is written,
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve, Luke 4. 8.

3. And said unto them that sold Doves, Take these things hence; make not my
Fathers House a House of merchandise, John 2. 16.

4. Marvel not that I said unto thee, Thou must be born again, John 3. 7.

5. But the hour comes, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship
the Father in Spirit and in Truth: for the Father seeks such to worship him,
John 4. 23.

6. And saying the time is fulfilled, and the Kingdom of God is at hand: Repent
ye, and believe the Gospel, Mark 1. 15.

7. Afterward Jesus finds him in the Temple, and said unto him, Behold, thou
art made whole: Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee, John 5. 14.

8. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and they
are they which testify of me, John 5. 39.

9. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 5. 16.

10. But I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his brother without a
cause, shall be in danger of the Judgment: and whosoever shall say unto his
brother Racha, shall be in danger of the Council: but whosoever shall say, Thou
Fool, shall be in danger of Hell fire, Mat. 5. 22.

11. But I say unto you, that whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her,
has committed Adultery already with her in his heart. And if they right eye
offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee; for it is profitable for thee
that one of thy members should perish, and not thy whole body should be cast
into Hell: And if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from
thee; for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and
not thy whole body should be cast into Hell, Mat. 5. 28, etc.

12. But I say unto you, That whosoever shall put away his wife saving for the
cause of Fornication, causes her to commit Adultery: and whosoever shall marry
her that is divorced, commits Adultery, Mat. 5. 32.

13. But I say unto you, Swear not at all; neither by Heaven, for it is God's
Throne: nor by the Earth, for it is his Footstool: neither by Jerusalem, for it
is the City of the great King. Neither shall thou swear by thy head, because
thou can not make one hair black or white. But let your communcation be, Yea,
yea, and Nay, nay; for whatsoever is more than these comes of Evil, Mat. 5.
34, etc.

14. But I say unto you. That ye resist not evil: but whosoever shall smite
thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also. And if any man sue thee at
the Law, and take away thy cloak, let him have thy coat also. And whosoever
shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain, Mat. 5. 39. Luke 6. 27, 29.

15. Give to him that asks thee, and from him that would borrow of thee, turn
not thou away, Mat. 5. 42. Luke 6. 30.

16. But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good
to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and
persecute you, Mat. 5. 44, etc. Luke 6. 27, 35.

17. Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven is
perfect, Mat. 5. 48. Luke 6. 35.

18. Take heed that you do not your alms before men, to be seen of them:
otherwise ye have on reward of your Father which is in Heaven. Therefore when
thou do thine alms, do not sound a trumpet before thee, as the Hypocrites do
in the Synagogues, and in the streets, that they may have glory of men. Verily,
I say unto you, they have their reward. But when thou do alms, let not thy
left hand know what thy right hand does, Mat. 6. 1, etc.

19. And when thou prayest, thou shall not be as the Hypocrites are: for they
love to pray standing in the Synagogues, and in the corners of the streets,
that they may be seen of men. Verily, I say unto you, they have their reward.
But thou when thou prayest, enter into thy Closet, and when thou have shut the
door, Pray to thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father which sees in
secret, shall reward thee openly, Mat. 6. 5, 6.

20. But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the Heathen do: for they
think they shall be heard for their much speaking. Be not ye therefore like
unto them: for your Father knows what things ye have need of, before ye ask
him, Mat. 6. 7, 8.

21. After this manner therefore pray ye: Our Father which art in Heaven,
hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy will be done in Earth as it is in
Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our Debts, as we
forgive our Debtors. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil:
For thine is the Kingdom, the Power, the Glory, for ever. Amen. Mat. 6. 9, etc.

22. Moreover, when ye fast, be not as the Hypocrites, of a sad countenance:
for they dis-figure their faces that they may appear unto men to fast. Verily,
I say unto you, they have their reward. But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thy
head, and wash thy face, Mat. 6. 16, etc.

23. Lay not up for your selves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust does
corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal. But lay up for your selves
treasures in Heaven, where neither moth nor rust does corrupt, and where
thieves do not break through and steal, Mat. 6. 19, 20.

24. No man can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love
the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot
serve God and Mammon. Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for your life,
what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body, what ye shall
put on: is not the life more than meat, and the body than raiment? Mat. 6. 24,
etc.

25. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and and his righteousness, and all
these things shall be added unto you, Mat. 6. 33.

26. Take therefore no thought for the morrow: for the morrow will take thought
for the things of itself: sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof, Mat. 6.
34.

27. Be ye therefore merciful as your Father also is merciful, Luke 6. 36.

28. Judge not, that ye be not judged, Mat. 7. 1. Luke 6. 37.

29. For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: and with what
measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again, Mat. 7. 2. Luke 6. 38.

30. And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brothers eye, but
considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Or how will thou say to thy
brother, let me pull out the mote out of thine eye? and behold, a beam is in
thine own eye? Thou Hypocrite; first cast out the beam out of thine own eye;
and then shall thou see clearly to cast the mote out of thy brothers eye, Mat.
7. 3, etc.

31. Give not that which is holy unto dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before
swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rent you,
Mat. 7. 6.

32. Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and ye shall find: knock, and it
shall be opened unto you, Mat. 7. 7.

33. Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye
even so to them: for this is the Law and the Prophets, Mat. 7. 12. Luke 6. 31.

34. Enter ye in at the strait gate; for wide is the gate, and broad is the way
that leads to destruction, and many there be that go in thereat: Because
strait is the gate, and narrow is the way which leads unto life, and few
there be that find it, Mat. 7. 13, 14.

35. Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in Sheeps clothing, but
inwardly they are ravening Wolves. Ye shall know them by their fruits: Do men
gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Mat. 7. 15, etc. Luke 6. 43, etc.

36. And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? Luke 6.
46. Mat. 7. 21.

37. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest. Take my Yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart:
and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is
light, Mat. 11. 28, etc.

38. Let both grow together until the harvest; and in the time of harvest I
will say unto the reapers, Gather ye together first the tears, and bind them in
bundles to burn them; but gather the wheat into my barn, Mat. 13. 30.

39. But go ye and learn what that means, I will have mercy and not
sacrifice: For I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance,
Mat. 9. 13.

40. Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he will send for laborers
into his harvest, Mat. 9. 38.

41. Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for that meat which endures
unto everlasting life, which the Son of man shall give unto you: for him has
God the Father sealed. Then said they unto him, What shall we do, that we might
work the work of God? Jesus answered and said unto them, This is the work of
God, that ye believe on him whom he has sent, John 6. 27. etc.

42. Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, except ye eat
the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you, John.
6. 53.

43. For God commanded, saying, Honor thy Father and Mother: and, he that
curses Father and Mother let him die the death, Mat. 15. 4. Mark 7. 10.

44. Let them alone; they be blind leaders of the blind. And if the blind lead
the blind, both shall fall into the ditch, Mat. 15. 14.

45. Then Jesus said unto them, Take heed, and beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees, and of the Saduces, Mat. 16. 6. Mark 8. 15.

46. And when he had called the people unto him with his Disciples also, he
said unto them, Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up
his cross, and follow me, Mark 8. 34, etc. Luke 6. 23, etc.

47. And Jesus called a little child unto him, and set him in the midst of
them, and said, Verily, I say unto you, except ye be converted, and become as
little children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 18. 2,
etc. Mark 9. 36, 37. Luke 9. 47, 48.

48. Woe unto the world because of offenses: for it must needs be that offense
comes: but woe to that man by whom the offense comes. Wherefore if thy hand or
thy foot offend thee, cut them off, and cast them from thee: it is better for
thee to enter into life halt and maimed, rather than having two hands or two
feet, to be cast into everlasting fire. And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it
out, and cast it from thee: it is better for thee to enter into life with one
eye, rather than having two eyes to be cast into Hell fire, Mat. 18. 7, 8, 9.
Mark 9. 43, etc.

49. Salt is good: but if the salt have lost his saltness, wherewith will ye
season it? Have salt in your selves, and have peace one with another, Mark 9.
50.

50. Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones; for I say unto
you, that in Heaven their Angels do always behold the face of my Father which
is in Heaven, Mat. 18. 10.

51. Moreover, if thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his
fault between thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy
brother. But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more,
that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established. And
if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the Church: but if he neglect to
hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen man, and a Publican, Mat.
18. 15, etc.

52. Then came Peter to him, and said, Lord, how often shall my brother sin
against me, and I forgive him? till seven times? Jesus says unto him, I say
not unto thee, until seven times: but, until seventy times seven, Mat. 18. 21,
22.

53. Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous judgment, John
7. 24.

54. He that believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his belly
shall flow rivers of living water, John. 7. 38.

55. Then said Jesus to those Jews which believed on him, if ye continue in my
word, then are ye my Disciples indeed: And ye shall know the truth, and the
truth shall make you free, John 8. 31, 32.

56. Notwithstanding, in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto
you: but rather rejoice that your names be written in Heaven, Luke 10. 20.

57. What is written in the Law? how read thou? And he answering, said, Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul, and with
all thy strength, and with all thy mind; and thy Neighbor as thy self. And he
said unto him, Thou have answered right: this do, and thou shall live, Luke 10.
26, etc.

58. Which now of these three, think thou, was neighbor unto him that fell
among the thieves? And he said, He that shows mercy on him. Then said Jesus
unto him, Go, and do thou likewise, Luke 10. 36, 37.

59. But rather give alms of such things as you have: and behold, all things
are clean unto you, Luke 11. 41.

60. But woe unto you Pharisees: for ye Tithe Mint and Rue and all manner of
herbs, and pass over judgment and the love of God: these ought ye to have
done, and not to leave the other undone, Luke 11. 42.

61. In the mean time, when there were gathered together an innumerable
multitude of people, insomuch that they trod one upon another, He began to say
unto his Disciples first of all, Beware ye of the Leaven of the Pharisees,
which is Hypocrisy. For there is nothing covered that shall not be revealed;
neither hid, that shall not be known, Luke 12. 1, 2.

62. And I say unto you my friends, be not afraid of them that kill the body,
and after that, have no more that they can do. But I will forewarn you whom you
shall fear: Fear him, which after he has killed, has power to cast into hell;
yea, I say unto you, fear him, Luke 12. 4, etc.

63. And he said unto them, Take heed, and beware of coveteousness: for man's
life consists not in the abundance of the things which he possesses, Luke
12. 15.

64. Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you
the Kingdom, Luke 12. 32.

65. Sell all that ye have, and give alms: provide your selves bags which wax
not old, a tresure in the Heavens that fails not, where no thief approaches,
neither moth corrupts, Luke 12. 33.

66. Let your loins be girded about, and your lights burning; and ye your
selves like unto men that wait for their Lord, when he will return from the
wedding, that when he comes and knocks, they may open unto him immediately,
Luke 12. 35, 36.

67. When thou art bidden of any man to a wedding, sit not down in the highest
room: lest a more honorable man than thou be bidden of him: And he that bade
thee and him, come and say to thee, Give this man place; and thou begin with
shame to take the lowest room. But when thou art bidden, go and sit down in the
lowest room; that when he that bade thee comes, he may say unto thee, Friend,
go up higher: then shall thou have worship in the presence of them that sit at
meat with thee, Luke 14. 8. etc.

68. Then said he also to him that bade him, When thou make a dinner or a
supper, call not thy friends, nor thy brethren, neither thy kinsmen, nor thy
rich neighbors; lest they also bid thee again, and a recompense be made thee.
But when thou make a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the same, the blind,
Luke 14. 12, 13.

69. If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and
children, and brethren, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my Disciple.
And whoever does not bear his cross, and come after me, cannot be my Disciple,
Luke 14. 26, 27.

70. So likewise whosoever he be of you, that forsakes not all that he has,
he cannot be my Disciple, Luke 14. 33.

71. And I say unto you, Make to your selves friends of the Mammon of
unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting
habitations, Luke 16. 9.

72. Take heed to your selves: if thy brother trespass against thee, rebuke
him: and if he repent, forgive him. And if he trespass against thee seven times
a day, and seven times in a day turn again to thee, saying, I repent, thou
shall forgive him, Luke 17. 3, 4.

73. In that day, he which shall be upon the house top, and his stuff in the
house, let him not come down to take it away: and he that is in the field, let
him likewise not return back, Luke 17. 31.

74. And he spoke a Parable to them, to this end, that men ought always to
pray, and not to faint, Luke 18. 1.

75. For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave to
his wife: and they twain shall be one flesh. Wherefore they are no more twain,
but one flesh. What therefore God has joined together, let no man put asunder,
Mat 19. 5, 6. Mark 10. 8, 9.

76. But Jesus said, Suffer little children, and forbid them not to come unto
me: for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 19. 14. Mark 10. 14 15. Luke 18.
16, 17.

77. And he said unto him, Why call thou (...) good? there is none good but
one, that is God (...) if thou will enter into life, keep the Command ments,
Mat. 19. 17.

78. But Jusus called them unto him, and said, Ye know that the Princes of the
Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are great, exercise
authority upon them, but it shall not be so among you: but whosoever will be
great among you, let him be your minister; and whosoever will be chief among
you, let him be your servant, Mat. 20. 25, etc. Mark 10. 43, etc.

79. If any man serve me, let him follow me; and where I am, there shall also
my servant be: if any man serve me, him will my Father honor, John 12. 26.

80. And Jesus said unto him, Yet a little while is the light with you: walk
while ye have the light, lest darkness come upon you: for he that walks in
darkness, knows not whither he goes. While ye have the light, believe in the
light, that ye may be the Children of light. These things spoke Jesus and
departed, and hid himself from them, John. 12. 35, 36.

81. And Jesus answering said unto them, Have faith in God. For verily I say
unto you, that whosoever shall say to this mountain, be thou ^emoved, and be
thou cast into the sea, and shall not doubt in his heart, but shall believe
that those things which he says shall come to pass, he shall have whatsoever
he says. Therefore I say unto you, What things soever ye desire when ye pray,
believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them, Mark 11. 22.

82. They say unto him, Caesar's. Then says he unto them, Render therefore unto
Caesar, the things that are Caesar's: and unto God, the things that are Gods,
Mat. 22. 21. Mark 12. 16. Luke 20. 25.

83. Jesus said unto him, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
and with thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great
Commandment, Mat. 22. 37, 38. Mark 12. 30.

84. And the second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self,
Mat. 22. 39. Mark 12. 31.

85. Saying, the Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses's seat. All therefore
whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do; but do not ye after their
works: for they say, and do not, Mat. 23. 37.

86. And he said unto them in his Doctrine, beware of the Scribes, which love
to go in long clothing, and love salutations in the market place, Mat. 23. 4,
5. Mark 12. 34. Luke 20. 46.

87. But be not ye called Rabbi: for one is your Master even Christ, and all ye
are brethren. And call no man your father upon earth: for one is your Father
which is in Heaven. Neither be ye called master, for one is your Master even
Christ, Mat. 23. 8, 9, 10.

88. And Jesus answered and said unto them, Take heed that no man deceive you:
for many shall come in my Name, saying, I am Christ; and shall deceive many.
And ye shall hear of wars and rumors of wars: see that ye be not troubled, for
all these things must come to pass, but the end is not yet, Mat. 24. 48, etc.
Mark 13. 28, etc. Luke 13. 8, 9.

89. But take heed to your selves, for they shall deliver you up to councils;
and in the Synagogues ye shall be beaten; and ye shall be brought before Rulers
and Kings for my sake, for a testimony against them. But when they shall lead
you and deliver you up, take no thought beforehand what ye shall speak, neither
do ye premeditate: but whatsoever shall be given you in that hour that speak
ye: for it is not ye that speaks, but the Holy Ghost, Mat. 24. 10. Mark 13.
9, 11. Luke 21. 12, etc.

90. In your patience possess ye your souls, Luke 21. 19.

91. Wherefore if they shall say unto you, Behold, he is in the desert, go not
forth: behold, he is in the secret chambers, believe it not, Mat. 24. 26.

92. And take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be over
charged, with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that
day come upon you unawars, Luke 21. 34.

93. Watch ye therefore and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to
escape all these that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man,
Luke 21. 36.

94. If I then your Lord and Master have washed your feet, ye also ought to
wash one another feet. For I have given you an example that ye should do as I
have done to you, John 13. 34, etc.

95. A new Commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another, as I have
loved you, that ye also love one another. By this shall all men know that ye
are my Disciples if ye love one another. Simon Peter said unto him, Lord
whither go thou? Jesus answe^ed him, Whither I go thou can not follow me
now, but thou shall follow me afterward, John 13. 34, 35.

96. If ye love me keep my Commandments, John 14. 15.

97. And as they eating, Jesus took Bread and blessed it, and brake it and gave
it to the Disciples, and said, Take, eat, this is my Body, Mat. 26. 26. Mark
14. 22. Luke 22. 19.

98. And he took the Cup and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye
all of it, for this is my Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many
for the remission of sins, Mat. 26. 27, 28. Mark 14. 23, 24. Luke 22. 20.

99. Abide in me and I in you; as the branch cannot bear fruit of itself,
except it abide in the vine: no more can ye, except ye abide in me, John 15. 4.

100. Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo I am with you to the end of the
world. Amen. Mat. 19. 20. Mark 16. 15.

Here follows the Cure of the Crooked and Hunch-back'd Children, which was
promised in the Second Part, and is performed very Naturally, and without
trouble to the Patient.
FOrasmuch as it is a thing well known, that Women are much more handy about
Children than Men, I have communicated the same to one Mrs. Sarah Matthews,
Widow of Capt. Matthews, and to her Daughter, dwelling both in Capt. Risbie's
Buildings in Limehouse near Ratcliff-Cross, London; and have directed them how
to prepare all things necessary to the said Cure, as judging them fit and
qualified for the same, as well by reason of their great inclination and desire
they had to this Undertaking, as also because I found in them a skill in
Anatomy, very necessary to the undertaking of this employment.

Now in the carrying on of this Cure three things especially are made use of:
First, A Bed, whereon the Patient is to lie at Night. Secondly, A Chair for to
sit on in the daytime. And then, Thirdly, A Mathematical Chair, whereby the
continual decay of Crookedness, or of the Bunch may be measured and distinctly
discerned.


First, As to what concerns the Bedstead, the same must be made of Wood, and
two foot longer than the Patient; and the bottom of it of even and smooth
plained boards, and the head also of the like boards half a yard high, to which
must be fastened a round board of hard Wood, upon the edge of which must be set
at an equal distance the figures from 1 to 16. this round board must be a foot
in Diameter, and a round hollow Nail must be struck through the Center of it,
that by means thereof the head or bolster may be ordered and disposed to
discretion, and must be fastened behind with a Screw, in such manner as that it
may freely turn round; and the Center of it must be exactly of the same height
with the Bolster or Pillow. Moreover, upon this round board must be fastened two
Brass rings or loops, each of them about four inches distant from the Center,
and through each of them must be put a Leading-string fastened to it, which
afterward must be fitted to the Child, being put under his Arms, and fastened
before on his Breast with a Loop and Button, in the same manner as they are
fitted to Children who learn to go. In this Bedstead the Child must be laid
upon a Matras or Quilt, which together with the Bolster must be fastened with
two loops to the Bedstead, which must be made something she living or declining
that is, higher toward the head than at the feet, that the Child who lies in
it fastened to the Leading-string may slip down gently and easily, for the more
gentle the better, for it suffices that the Body by this means be insensibly
and by degrees accustomed to streightness. The forementioned round Board serves
for this end, that the Child may learn to turn himself on that side he should
lie on, until he be accustomed to it; as likewise to keep the Bed-cloaths from
falling down, they are to be fastened to the head of the Bedstead with two
loops or bands.

But here is to be observed that when the Crookedness or Bunch be upwards
between the Shoulderblades, then the Patient must have a string fastened under
his Chin, or somewhere about his Head, and the string drawn through the hollow
Nail, which goes through the Center of the said round Board, and so come down
behind the Beds-head with a fitting weight fastened to it.

But in case the Bunch be in both places, that is, above or between the
Shoulder-blades, and beneath them also, then both the foresaid strings are to
be made use of; though indeed it be impossible so exactly to discribe all
circumstances, and the necessary alterations and aids to relieve them, without
leaving much to the discretion and experience of those who undertake this
Employment.

And in this manner the Child must continue in Bed until ten or eleven a Clock,
for the longer he continues there the better.

The Second thing required is a Chair, whereon the Child is to sit in the day
time, furnished with two weights, hanging by different pullies under the Chair,
for to lift up the Child very easily in his Leading-strings, being the same as
was before done in the Bed.

Thirdly, The Mathematical Chair, which has these properties; that a young
Child from its first infancy, until it be full grown, may conveniently make use
of it and sit upon it, only the Chair must always be placed where there is a
Stove or otherwise warm Room; because the Child must sit upon it the upper part
of his Body naked.

Furthermore, the said Chair is so made, that the party sits upon it firm and
unmovable, and yet naturally too, and without the least uneasiness, according
to and by means of a particular Rule or Register, by which it may exactly and
properly be known, that as a person has once sat on it, he cannot sit
otherwise, but just in the same manner he must sit on it again, though it
should be several years after, and so by means of the said Register, the Body
is to be measured how it grows in every particular part, both in streightness,
length, or weight, and that to the (...) part of an inch, so as the Parent or
other friends may every month measure their Children, and from their own eyes
be satisfied of their growing better. And of this measuring (which is to be
repeated the same day every month) an exact account is kept and set down in
writing, to the end it may be seen how much the party does advance in
streightness from time to time. And all this is performed without the least
trouble to the Children, in so much that the very Disease and Pain which
formerly were occasioned by their Crookedness are thereby removed and taken
away.

Besides the aforesaid means, she uses also very effectually several Ointments,
the Receipts of which as also the Cuts of the aforesaid Chairs and Bed she will
put forth in print hereafter, for the public good, and add all her
Observations.

LEopoldus Divina favente Clementia Electus Romanorum Imperator semper
Augustus, ac Germaniae, Hungariae, Bohemiae, Dalmatiae, Croatiae, Sclavoniae,
Rex, Archidux, Austriae, Dux Burgundiae, Brabantiae. Stiriae, Carinthiae,
Carniolae, etc. Marchio Moraviae, ac superioris and inferioris Silesiae,
Wirtembergae and Theckae, Princeps Sueviae, Comes Habspurgi, Tyrolis, Ferretis,
Kiburgi and Goritiae, Landgrauius Alsatia, Marchio Sacri Romani Imperii.
Burgoviae ac superioris and inferioris Lusatiae. Dominus Marchiae Sclavonicae,
Portus Naonis and Salinarum.

Notum facimus per presents omnibus and singulis, quod, cum Nos, tam ex innata
Coesareae Clementiae bonitate, animique spontanea promptitudine, quam sublimi
Sacrae Imperatoriae Majestatis dignitate, ad quam benigno summi Dei nutu and
providentia evecti, eo clementissime propendeamus, incumbamusque, ut nostrum,
ac Sacri Romani Imperii fidelium incolarum, devotorumque, honor, gloria, salus,
utilitas and incrementa procurentur, propagentur, extendantur, augeantur atque
promoveantur; imprimis autemilli, qui de ipso Imperio, ejusque Statibus
Incolisque, vel Belli vel Pacis tempore, laudabilibus quibusque, and ab insigni
virtute profectis actionibus optime meriti sunt, publica aliqua recognitione
remunerationeque fidelium ejusmodi officiorum, tam ipsi in eadem devotione
conserventur, quam and allii ad similium landatorum, and public utilium operum
exemploramque incitationem, tanto validius excitentur, qui noster affectus and
intentio, omnibus quidem virtutum studiosis in genere favens, ergaillos tamen
specialiori gratia propendet, qui quemadmodum experantiquis Nobilibus Familiis
oriundi, it a propriis ipsorummet virtutibus, prundenterque fortiter and
laudabiliter gestis, honestis atque praeclari^ illis Antecessorum, Majorumque
suorum semitis non s^um insistere, easque sequi; sed etiam aemulatione imprimis
laudabili, illos superare, atque hoc modo Genus, nomen and familiam suam in
sublimiorem Honoris dignitatisque gradum provehere, omni studio conantur.

Considerantes itaque Generosum and Magnificum Nostrum and Sacri Imperii fide
lem dilectum Franciscum Mercurium ab Helmont Toparcham in Merode, Royenbourg
and Oorschot, ante decinnium fere, ad Divi quondam Imperatoris Ferdinandi
Tertii, Domini Genitorii, and Praedecessoris Nostri colendissimi, Agustae
memoriae Caesaream evocatum Aulam, tam ibi, quam postmodo apud diversos
Electores atque Principes Imperii detentum atque occupatum fuisse, intra quod
temporis spatium, ipsum aspirante Divina benignitate, statui salutique publicoe
in conciliandis non nullis sublimibus, and Illustrissimis Ducum Principumque
Familiis componendis sopiendisque plurimis arduis difficilibus and inveteratis
controversiis procuranda, conservanda, stabilienda, propagandaque Pace amicitia
bonaque and sincera confidentia aliisque plurimis modis fidelem, and fructuosam
operam proestitisse, adeoque se ipsum and omnia sua, publicis utilitatibus
quasi devovisse, neque ullum laborem vel difficultatem, itinerum item,
legationum, commissionumque molestiam subterfugisse, neque sumptibus sane non
exiguis, huic operi continue, atque de suo impendendis, se a tam salutari
proposito atque instituto deterreri passum esse. Quibus suis praeclaris ac
Generoso animo dignis actionibus, nobis partim ex propria scientia, partim
aliorum maxim conspicuorum virorum, fideli relatione notissi^is, non immerito
clementissime favemus and applaudimus, idque tanto magis, quod and
Reverendissimus Elector Achiepiscopus Moguntinus favorabli quodam, Nobisque
humilime oblato Diplomate, and praeclara atque gratiosa declaratione,
recognitione, testimonio atque commendatione eundem ab Helmont dignum
aestimavit, uti ex ejus tenore hic verbotenus inserto patet.

JOannes Philippus Dei Gratia Sanctae Sedis Moguntinae Archiepiscopus, Sac.
Romani Imperii per Germaniam Archi Cancellarius ac Princeps Elector, Episcopus
Herbipolensis, and Franconiae Dux. Cum aequitati consentaneum sit, ut qui vitam
suam honest instituerint, non solum modo promoveantur and foveantur, verum
etiam, ubi opus fuerit, honorificis testimoniis muniantur: Nobis humilime
exposuit Nobilis and Illustris Franciscus Mercurius ab Helmont, Dominus in
Merode, Royenbourg, and Oorschot, se ad capessendam Avunculi quondam sui,
Baronis de Merode, atque Aviae ejusdem stemmatis jacentem haereditatem, in
patriam revocari, quod iter sine magno rerum suarum detrimento nec omittere nec
differ potest, sibi quoque non solum utile, sed omnino necessarium fore, si
quibus in locis, in quorum conspectu, and quibus rebus totum decennium, quo a
solo natali abfuit, impenderit, validis and irrefragabilibus testimoniis
demonstrare possit. Nos igitur laudabili ejus desiderio annuentes notum facimus
and Declaramus, Nobis constare and plenissime perspectum esse, praedictum
Dominum ab Helmont december annorum novissime praeteritorum spacium in Romani
Imperii Provinciis and ditionibus non Solummodo honest and laudabiliter
transegisse, nemini gravem sed e contra pluribus utilem se praestitisse,
omnibus gratum singulis acceptum, verum etiam saepius Principum consiliis
adhibitum, Magnatum controversiis componendis, non exigui momenti negotiis
gerendis, Legationibus obeundis aliisque hujusmodi muneribus exercendis, quae
virum and Nobilem and Illustrem ubique decent, feclicem operam saepe
impendisse, quae refer and laudare tantominus dubitamus quanto magis
plaeraeque ipsius actiones in conspectu nostro ita contigerunt, ut alieno ad
morum ipsius integritatem probandam adminiculo non indigeamus. Pro ejus itaque
meritis and virtutibus praesenti nostrae benevolentiae argumento illum
lubentissime decoratum volumus. Et cum jam a majoribus suis, quorum antiqua and
probata Nobilitas, generosam sanguinem duxerit, seque ipsum etiam propria
virtute, quae cultores sui illustrius ornat, abunde excoluerit Eum non tantum
cognatione and affinitate Illustrium familiarum, quibus sanguine conjunctus
est, quos inter Dominos Comites de Merode and Marehionem de Deinsen recensere
licet, dignissimum judicamus, sed etiam quandoquidem in Auitae Margarethae
natae Baronissae de Merode Haereditatis possessione in Ducatu Juliacensi sita,
cum iisdem ut supradictum versatur non incongruum fore, ut Comitis titulo
insigniatur, suosque ejusdem dignitatis habeat participes, atque it a in
imperio Romano, cui non sterilem aut infructuosam operam impendit, sed de quo
optime meritus est, debita virtutis praemia consequatur, nec non imposterum in
ejusdem constanti devotione decentius versari and perseverare possit. In quarum
rerum fidem praesentes litteras has propria subscriptione ac appenso sigillo
nostro firmari voluimus Francofurti ad Moenum prima Maii 1658. Joannes Philipus
El. A. M. Ep. Herbip. (SL).

PRoinde cum Nos ut saepe memoratus ab Helmont non solum ad ejusmodi laudatarum
atque public utilium actionum continuationem extimuletur obligeturve, sed and
notissimorum meritorum suorum susceptorumque atque exantlatorum laborum,
curarum, vigiliarum, itinerum, negociationum, expeditionum, sollicitudinum,
molestiarum maximarum, item impensarum atque sumptu^maliquam remunerationem and
dignum opere precium eximia aliqua publicaque gratitudinis demonstratione
consequatur eoque velut bonorum laborum glorioso fructu and ipse and sui
collaterales and agnati suique aliquando haeredes posterive totaque Nobilis
Familia gaudere possit. Plane inclinati essemus respectu tam saepe dictorum
egregiorum meritorum praestitorumque officiorum suorum quam quod pervetusta and
ab aliquot seculis in Sac. Romans Imperio praecipue vero Augustae Domus nostrae
Austriacae Haereditariis inferioris Germaniae Provinciis notissima Nobilis and
Equestris dignitate splendens familia ab Helmont (ex qua ipsius ab Helmont
Proavum Joannem ab ipso gloriosissime memoriae Imperatore Carolo quinto ob
proeclara fortiaque ejus facta Equestri dignitate condecoratum constat) jam
olim cum non paucis Illustris dignitatis Baronum Comitumque familiis
cognationis affinitatisque jure copulata atque innexa sit: adeoque dictus ab
Helmont qenus ipse suum Maternum e Proavia Margaretha nata Baronissa de Merode
traxerit ipsum suosque consanguineos and haevedes nominatim duas sorores adhuc
innuptas Pelagiam Lucinam, and Olimpiam Claram ejusdemque cognatos Ambrosio de
Meghem and liberis Augustini de Gottignies p. m. Nominatim Lancelot Ignatius,
Joannes, Baptista, Antonius, Nicolaus, Gillis, Lowise, Catharina, Anna, omnes
de Gottignies, ad gradum, statum and dignitatem Illustrium Sacri Romans Imperii
Comitum promovere and evehere, verum cum ille and ipsi ob certas
considerationes ejusmodi Honoris sublimitatem acceptare eaque uti hoc quidem
tempore nondum constituerint, tamen clementissime obtulimus quocunque ipsi
tempore realem collationem ejusmodi dignitatis a Nobis humillime petere eaque
uti, frui atque gaudere tempestivum atque sibi comodum duxerint, Nos in eo
ipsis clementissime gratificaturos, prout Nos nihilominus jam nunc, and ex hoc
quasi tunc illum ab Helmont cjusq: scrores atque praedictos agnates illo
Cemitum Sacri Romans Imperii honor. sessione, voto, gradu, privilegiis aliisque
consuetis emolumentis ac proerogativis dignos atque capaces declaramus, non
aliter ac si eam dignitatem ipsis jam de facto contulissemus.

Interim motu proprio, ex certa scientia and animo be^e deliberato, sano
accedente consilio, ac Caesarea nostra authoritate ejusdem potestatis
plenitudine supramemoratos scilicet ab Helmont duas ejusdem sorores nec non de
Meghem and liberos de Gottignies utriusque sexus in statum gradumque Illustrium
Sac. Romans Imperii Baronum and Baronissarum sublimamus, promovemus atque
extollimus aliisque omnibus S. R. Imperii Principatumque ei annexorum natis
liberis Baronibus Dynastis atque Nobilibus Vexilliferis odiungimus and
sociamus, talesque declaramus, non aliter ac si ab Avis Majoribusq: suis patre
matreque familiisque utriusque latere vere Barons and Baronissae forent.
Volumus etiam ordinamus atque statuimus, ut ex hoc ipso die and deinceps
praedicti ab Helmont Mehbem and Gottignies cum omnibus eorum liberis
heredibusque haeredumque haeredibus atque descendentibus masculis atque
foeminis hujus nominis stemmatis atque Prosapiae genere, atque armis insignibus
semper and omnibus futuris temporibus Nobiles and generosos signiferos five
Liberos Barons and Baronissas ab Helmont and Merode, and respective a Meghem
and Merode item a Gottignies and Merode utpote quae in S. R. Imperii, Ducatu
Juliacensi sita Dynastia horum trium ratione praedictae Proaviae Margarethae de
Merode ex sucessione and cessione communis cum reliqvis ejus nominis Baronibus
and Comitibus Domus and gentilitia ex qua portio competens ipsis etiamnum
debetur se nominare atq: scribere, and pro talibus a Nobis sucessoribus nostris
atque omnibus praesertim S. R. Imperii statibus atque ordinibus eorum
Cancellariis una cum titulo Generosorum ac Magnificorum, Germanice Wohlgebornen
and de Merode agnoscantur, habeantur, honorentur, atque inscribantur,
praesertim omnium gratiarum hnorum dignitatum, immunitatum, emolumentorum
privilegiorum jurium praecedentiae, status authoritatis sessionis, votorum
atque praerogativarum in Imperio aliisque conventibus and Congregationibus
hastiludiis exercitiisque Equestribus beneficiis Cathedralibus Capitulis
Majoribus minoribusve Ecclesiasticis atque secularibus aliisque quibuscunque
honest is negociis actionibusque vel sodalitiis capaces sint revera obtineant
participentque inprimis and facultate Illustria Feuda capiendi, vel iis alios
porro subinvestiendi gaudeant de jure vel consuctudine sine cujusquam
impedimento,

Praeterea Caesareae nostrae gratiae erga praefatum Baronem ab Helmont and
Merode pluribus declaranda ipsi Gentilitia ejus Arma atque insignia novo aliquo
splendore decorare and illustrare eaque ratione praeclara ejus merita atque
virtutes, publicique boni studium denotare and celebrare corumque honorificam
memoriam ad posteros transmittere cupientes, concedimus volumusque ut obscuris
iste nigerque scuti huc usque Helmontici color in anreum permutetur, quique ad
praeclarum and splendidun virtutum ejus testimonium, loco aliorum insignium
notarumque quae scuti areae alias imprimi solent esse potest debetque. Insuper
quoque galeae istae tres aureae and apertae clipei aream bactenus occupantes,
ex eo subla^ ae ipsi scuto superimponantur ita ut media earum cum inreo
tegumento instar pallii hinc and illinc diffluente, antrorsum erecta Regia
insuper Corona aurea insignatur prominentibus ad cassidis latera geminis pilis
vel vexillis minorihus paulo in altum versis quorum sect ae sint simbriae vel
laciniae hastae etiam cum cuspidibus omnes aureae. Porro Clypeum istum duo
Angeli in sigium Pacis concordiaeque ab ipso Barone ab Helmont and Merode pro
virili procuratae tanquam Pacis nuntil dexter aureus cum vestitu nigro and
ramum palmae, sinister vero niger cum vestitu aureo ramum oleae manu
praeferentes sustentent: Prout haec omnia in medio hujus nostri Diplomat is
pictoris industria ad vivum quasi elaborata cernere licet.

Mandamus igitur Universis ac singulis Electoribus aliisque sacri Imperii
Principibus tam Ecclesiasticis quam secularibus, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis,
Ducibus, Marchionibus, Comitibus, Baronibus, Militibus, Nobilibus, Clientibus,
Capitaneis, Vicedominis, Praefectis, Castellanis, Heroaldis, Caduceatoribus,
Civibus, Communitatibus, and denique omnibus Nostris and Sacri Imperii subditis
and fidelibus, dilectis and aliis, ad quoscunque spectat, cujuscunque status
gradus, ordinis dignitatis, praeminentiae and conditionis fuerint, ut saepe
memoratos Barons and Baronissas ab Helmont and Merode, de Meghem and Merode de
Gortignies and Merode, omnes eorum liberos heredesque in perpetuum descendentes
Nobiles Imperii signiferos and liberos Borones and Baronissas cum praedicato
and honoris titulo Generosu^um ac Magnificorum Germanice Wohlgebornen de Merode
agnoscere, nominare, scribere and honorare, ipso^; omnibus gratiis,
privilegiis, honoribus, dignitatibus, emolumentis, juribus atque praerogativis
quae quibuscunque aliis ortu prosapiae Baronibus and Baronissis convenient,
pacate uti frui and gaudere permittant, defendant and tueautur ea nec ipsi
quidque attentare vel fac^re praesumant, vel ab aliis fieri consentiant aut
patiantur ullo modo nisi malint incurrere indignationem nostri and Sac. Romans
Imperii, and certam mulctam centum marcarum auri puri, quarum mediam partem
Camerae nostrae, mediam alteram ipsis dictis Baronibus quisquis his
contravenire ausus fuerit, pendere tenebitur, and nihilominus ipsi nominati
Barons in praedicto honor, statu dignitate liberate prestabunt etiam publica
Authoritate defensi. In quorum fidem praesentes Sigillo nostro Caesareo
appenso, ac manus propriae subscriptione corroboratae atque datae sunt in
Civitate nostra Imperiali Francofurti ad Moenum die tertia mensis Augusti, Anno
Domini Milleciesimo sexcentesimo quinquagisimo octavo Regnorum Nostrorum Romani
primo, Hungariae quarto, Bohemiae secundo, eratque signaotum Leopoldus paulo
inferius Johan. Philip. El. A. M. Herbip. and inferius. Ad mandatum Sac. Caesar
Majestatis proprium: subsignatum Ferdinandus Comes Curtius, sigillatumque
sigillo Sac. suoe Majestatis Caesareae in cerea rubra.

Concordat cum suo Originali, quod attestor. N. Philippi Nots.

FINIS.

