TO THE HONORABLE House of Commons assembled in Parliament at Westminster.

The humble Petition of Robert Heblethwait, sometimes preacher of the word by
authority of Parliament at Great Snoring in Norfolk.

As also a narrative of his grievances concerning the unjust proceedings
against him, of some malevolent spirits of the standing Committee at Norwich,
occasioned by the false and malicious informations of Malignant persons in
Snoring, and elsewhere. And the lesuiticall suggestions and complots of the
idolatrous Delinquent, Edw. Dobbs, with his popish representative Charles
Devil.

Ecles, 3.16. And moreover I saw under the sun the place of judgment, that
wickedness was there, and the place of righteousness, that iniquity was there.

Prove. 27.3.4. A stone is heavy, and the sand weighty, but a fools wrath is
heavier then both, wrath is cruel, and anger is outrageous, but who is able to
stand before envy?

The words of David unto Jonathan when he consulted with him for his safety, 1 Samuel 20.8 Thou therefore shall deal kindly with thy servant, for thou have
brought thy servant into a Covenant of the Lord with thee. Notwithstanding if
there be iniquity in me (if there be misdemeanor in me) shay me thy self (judge
me your self) for why should thou bring me to thy father (why should you
bring me, or leave me to the wrath of your enemies.)

Prove. 31.8, 9. Open thy mouth for the dumb, in the cause of all such as are
appointed for destruction. Open thy mouth, judge righteously, and plead the
cause of the poor and needy.

Zach. 11.last. Woe be to the idol shepherd that leaves the flock: the sword
shall be upon his arm, and upon his right eye: his arm shall be clean dried
up, and his right eye shall be utterly darkened.

London, Printed in the Year, 1647.

To the honorable House of Commons assembled in Parliament. The humble
Petition of Robert Heblethwaite, sometimes Preacher of the Word at Great
Snoring in Norfolk.
Shows,

THat your Pititioner being by the Order of the Right Honorable the Earl of
Manchester, established in the possession and rights of the parsonage of the
said Snoring, has since (by the dislike and unjust proceedings of the
Committee of that County, as also (in further reference to them) by the
prosecution, subornation, and several malicious practices of diverse other
Malignant Persons, by the space of 4. years, and by their joint and several
plots, and contrivances (as may more fully appear in a humble Narrative
hereuto annexed) not only been eiected most frequently from his possession and
officiating therein; but has also (besides their customary seizure of his
Tithes and profits to their own use, as much as in them lay) been scandalizd in
his function, abused in his credit and reputation, engaged in an unnecessary
and total expense of his estate and fortune, and finally (as near as they
could by many unjust and villainous suggestions they have endeavored the taking
away of his very life, to the eternal obloquie and disgrace of Your
Petitioner.

The Premises considered, his humble supplication is, that this honorable
House would be pleased to take into their grave and serious considerations,
your Petitioners sad and distressed condition, and to relieve him against his
oppressors, as the justice of his cause may truly require.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.
The Narrative to the honorable House of Commons, etc.
THat the necessirie, justice and conscience of the Parliaments Arms did
engage me with the first (acording to my interest and calling) both in private
and public, to their abetment and vindication) is a thing to be manifested
with a large and ampie cloud of witnesses, especially in Linne, during the
Siedge whereof, my sufferings by the adverse party were heavy upon me. And
however the malignity and vicious condition of my adversaries, has endeavored
with all possible pains and subtilty, to traduce my credit, abuse my function,
engage me to the expense of that private means which God had blessed me with,
which was an annuity of 30. l. per an. in Linne and debarring me (as much as in
them lay) from the enjoying of that general Salary, to which I was Lawfully
appropriated, and into which I was legally inducted; yet I make no doubt so
clearly to evidence my right and integrity, both in the acquisition and
prosecution of my Title to the Parsonage; as it will not only produce an easy
concession to the truth and justice of my desires; but will also return both
shame and infamy in their faces, who so violently endeavored the procurement
of my utter ruin and disgrace.

To make this appear, requires a look back to the very foundation of my
interest, which did thus commence.

In Deeem. 1643. the right hononrable the Earl of Manchester (being
sufficiently satisfied, not only in my abilities as to the Ministry, but also
in my assured and constant affection to the Parliament, by several testimonies
both of the well affected Clergy, and Gentry in Linne and thereabouts) did
immediately issue an Order for my possession and settlement in the said
Parsonage; which has and will be fully testified by Col. Wanton (a Gentleman
of undoubted credit and repute) In which I had not long enjoyed my self, before
the County Committee did summon me to show cause, why I possessed my self of
the said Sequestration, and officiated and took to my use the Parsonage House,
and Barn of Corn. To which my only answer, was a presentation of them with the
Order of the Conlonel; whereunto they said, that Order was their security, and
thereupon did not only keep it, but also made seizure of the Barn of Corn, yet
did not prohibit me to officiate.

In this beginning of trouble, my only and proper address was to Col. Wanton;
(who after my recital of several passages with the Committee) was pleased to
repossesse me of the Corn, in the threshing whereof I proceeded as before; but
the Committee (being no ways willing to leave their pretension of an interest
therein) after they had sent for me again, desired to know, whether I would
rely on them, or the Col. for my further establishment; to whom I relpyed: upon
the Co. to which though they cried God speed me, yet they seized the barn of
Corn again.

Upon this (my only relief being in the Col.) I repaired to him, who again
advanced me to a repossession of the Corn, and after a strong and tedious
contest in the business betwixt him and the Committee, about June following,
the matter was referred to the Earl of Manchester, who returned the
Arbitration of it totally to the Col. and he again restored me to my former
interest and possession; so that for the present the controversy was ended;
but (in the interim by the misfortune and inconvenience of this contention) the
vast fabric of the Parsonage house submitted to downfall; and the lead thereof
(to the proportion of 6. Tun) was taken away by Col. Wanton, to make into
bullets, for the use and service of the State.

Nevertheless, in March. 1644. (when the Col. left this command in Linne (to
my evident misfortune and disadvantage) the Committee (being willing to revive
their quarrel against the Col. and revenge it for present upon my felt) did
again command my appearance, to show them cause, why (according to the Order
of the said Earl) I had not paid a fifth part. To which when J came
intentionally to resolve them, they waved their summons in lieu whereof they
produced and read an information as related to me, See Order of 8. March, 1644.
The particular Orders related to this narrative are according to the citation
in the margent expressed at full in the end of the Papers.
and signed (as they pretended) by twenty of mine own Parishioners; wherein
they charged me with the seizure of a barn of Corn in 1643. And with the sale
of about 7. Tuns of lead, belonging to the old and ruined Parsonage house, and
whose downfall valued by them at 300. l they did not only lay to my charge, but
did also demand security of me, for the rebuilding of the same. Wherein my
innocence in the occasion, became my justice in the refusal. And because I
could not produce the Col. aforesaid Orders for my possession (by them as
shamefully demanded as detained) in stead of relief, they committed my to the
custody of a Trooper for a month, to my great charge and disgrace, nor would
they suffer me to go home to visit my wife, distressed at the news of their
hard usage of me unless I would set my hand to an acknowledgement of a
forfeiture of 300. l to the Speaker of the house, upon a non return within 5.
days, which I did, and for ought I know, yet remains enforce against me; they
seized my profits to the value of 80. l they turned me out of my Church, not
only unjustly, but disgracefully; and suffered (if not countenanced) the
entertainment of notorious Malignants to officiate (in my vacancy and absence)
in my proper cure.

Upon which commitment (the Earl of Manchesters power being then determined
and expired) In August following (my injuries and indurance being above
sufferance) I made my Appeal to the Honorable Committee for Plundered
Ministers at Westminster; See Order the 4. Aug. 1645.
who having received both information and satisfaction converning my title,
they did nobly and justly confirm me in it; and therewith ordered the County
Committee to return a Narrative, why I stood committed, and from whence the
severity used against me received occasion? which by them was not only
neglected, but in stead thereof Articles of infamy and scandal promoted, under
the political pretension whereof, my repossession was delayed, and my profit
detained until June 1646 since when, (as also before) every slender and
frivolous occasion administered plentiful matter to them, for my further
vexation and imprisonment.

For the proof whereof (amongst the variety of affronts, (especially in that
intervaile from August 1644. See the warrant the 15. July 1645.
until June 1646. Let this one (for brevity) be the evidence and conviction o^
their inveteracy. For presenting my self to officiate on the Lords day by
virtue of the fore recited Order of the 4. of August 1645, the strength of
their spleen was so predominant, and they so remote from any sufferance of me
therein, that rather then fail they revived an antiquated warrant of their own
gained while I was in London, by the authority whereof I was arrested by one
John Flemming, and committed into the only and proper custody of one Nich.
Smith an Alehouse keeper, whose Alehouse for his extravagant and notorious
deboishments I had formerly procured to be put down. Jn revenge whereof, the
fear of my escape, as he pretended, engaged him to secure me with a strong
guard in the next room, but in the interim afforded me a visit, which brought
this comfort only to me, to expect no more favor, then could be prepared in
the Stocks or the Spitle-House. In order to which the very next morning, though
they failed in the manner, they did not in the matter of their calumny; for I
had a Convoy to the Committee, with staves and swords and such revilings, as
might easily prompt me to the remembrance of a more primitive persecution, and
consequently engage me with much more patience, to be silent and yielding to
those reproaches, whose only end principally aimed at was a malicious exposure
of my credit and fortune, into an utter disgrace and falling. Give me leave to
allude to that saying of David. Ps:35.15.23.25. In mine adversit they rejoiced
and gathered themselves together against me, yea the abiects gathered,
themselves together against me, they did tear me and ceased not. Stir up thy
self and awake to my indgement, ever unto my cause, See Order 4: June, 1646.
my God and my Lord, Lee them not say in their heart ah. so we would have it,
let them not say we have swallowed him up.

But to leave this digression (as though they were resolved to deny obedience
to all manner of Rule and orders) and though several orders for repossession
and confirmation did daily issue and were as daily cotemned: In June 1646.
(notwitstanding their pretension of Articles.) Yet the honorable Committee for
plunderd Ministers, did order me possession with the Tithes in Arrears, as
also a stay of prosecution, until the accomplishment of that Order; wherein my
Prosecutors were likewise sentenced to imprisonment. See Order 4. June 1646.
But in that (as in the remainder) their obedience was equal, and my self, as
in the rest as totally defeated, of what was legally awarded me.

Succeeding to this, was their several indictments of me, at the Sessions at
Norwich, their suits at law to exigents, their several procureme^ts of me
under the custody of the Marshal at Norwich, and their neglect or rather waving
of their Articles upon the validity of which they durst not depend; yet (rather
then want an aggravation) they engaged one Devil in my prosecution, upon a
presentation that had reference to the death of Mr. Dobbs the outed Delinquent;
but the pretense of that was so visibly delusive, that the Committee being
convinced, and the said Devil not daring to appear, See Order 13. Sept.; 1646.
I had a dismission and confirmation thereupon.

Yet the practices of this Devil were rather altered then determined. For his
second summons called me (coram) again upon a presumption of a Lapse by the said
Delinquents non residence, which coming to a hearing the 8. of May following,
and Devil neglecting this as the former, it was deferred to the next 11. of
June, and in the interimmy self was ordered to officiate and receive profits:
which day being come, still Devil did play the least in sight; yet with a
natural and fraudulent subtilty, by the advantage of my absence. he possessed
himself by order from the Bishop of the Diocese, and challenged the tithes of
the Parishioners with great threatenings and (to keep me the better from the
hearing of my cause, or the appearing at my cure) the height of their malice,
brake in upon me: for Nicolas Smith (the former recited prosecutor of mine)
being made an instrument for the subornation of one Jo. Atkins of London, his
main part and agency was laid in the prosecution of me upon an indictment at
the Sessions in the old Bailey, for words pretended to be spoken against the
King, two years before the prosecution, for which I was committed to Newgate
the 14. of July last, fined a 100. l. and imprisoned during the Kings pleasure,
and being once confined, there needed no instigation for the reviving of their
Dormant articles, in the strange and unheard of prosecution of which, it is
observable that on the 16 of that instant July while I was absent both in
person and council, was their day of hearing, against the justice of notice or
Summon'; that the Articles were not at all transmitted; that neither a defense
or a cross-examination was at all put in; And that the Narrative (so long
before Commanded) was not returned, which is course should have preceded all
the former charges, by the recited Order of the 4 of August; by which unjust
and indirect proceedings, a Sequestration (The only means to expose me to an
utter impossibility of subsisting) (in a manner tacitly and surreptitiously)
was gained against me.

For the reversing of which, both common equity and my proper interest, became
my civil instigation; in order to which (after 13. weeks imprisonment) upon my
motion to the Committee for plundered Ministers my prosecutors were accordingly
summoned to make their appearance the 9. of November following, See Order. 23.
October.
to show cause why the order of sequestration should not be reversed; wherein as
they neither did not could depend upon other reason, then the Articles
themselves, so the sequenstration was illegally procured, and therefore ought
in all conscience and reason to be made null.

And because upon the Hindg of this, the essence of my cause has material
motion; it cannot be amiss (as shortly as may be) to exhibit my Reasons for
the fuller light, and inforcement thereof.

First the Articles (their only plea) were notoriously false, the witnesses
suborned, and once suppressed; and therefore the sequestration procured upon
them was by evident supprisall, and by the advantage of my imprisonment, as
formerly I have noted.

Secondly, admit the articles true; yet is it justice to reverse that Order,
because it crosses, and is merely antipode to the Custom, the Practice and
Judgment of that honorable Committee.

First, the custom, because their proceedings are in course, and in course
there was a Narrative to precede the Articles in order whereunto (when I made a
punctual complaint of my wrongs) and from the gracious consideration of them
by that honorable Committee a narrative was not only commanded, but demanded
from the Committee of the Country, they through Art or disability neglected the
Narrative, and exhibited Articles; and so consequently not only perverted the
foresaid custom, but by that and their former tedious preventions, perversion,
and anticipations, and. have unavoidably engaged me into the expense of at
least 500 l

Secondly, the justice, because it is the constant practice of that honorable
Committee, to retract and reverse all surreptitious and stolen Orders, upon a
hearing of one side only; upon Council on one side only; or in the absence of
the Defendant. In all which three Particulars it is palpably visible, I was
against my will a wanting; See Order the 29. Ian. 1645.
by the working of their subtilty and confederacy.

Thirdly, the judgment, for when the profits, and the possession of the
Parsonage were violently detained and kept from me; it was he judgment of that
honorable Committee (in my proper right and regard) that notwithstanding the
Articles were objected, See Order 4. June 1646. See Order the 8. May. 1646.
yet present obedience should first be given to their former Orders, for
possession and profits detained. Nor was it the controversy in hand, I being
to show cause only against a title claimed by Mr. Devil, as by order of the 8.
of May appears.

Finally, upon the 16. of November. last, the cause arrived at a kind of hearing,
wherein the Sequestrators (as in the total progress of the business) exalted
their subtilty and industry into all the vatious shapes and evasions, that
could possibly be expected from the utmost cunning of such artificers: for they
had not only made provision of some very strong and powerful friends within
the House for their further encouragement and countenance; but their other
mysteries and inticracies did work in so hidden and obscure means, that
(though the face of truth was palpably ore'clowded) it still supas'd all
possible scrutiny of mice, to tender her beauty and vigor clear, or otherwise
to explicate their other Engines. For in stead of pertinencies to the matter,
they quaintly flew to the questioning of my title, so often resolved, not only
by the recited, but also by many other orders; by a strange putting me upon the
proof of Dobbs his Sequestration; by several mysterious and questionable
testimonies of theirs; and by the utter over ballancing and suppressing of
those more pregnant truths, which I both offered, and had ready for my
vindication. Nay, which heightened my grief, and their Malignancy, the
Delinquent Dobbs (though present there upon command) was not so much as
questioned for his contempts, merely by favor of my adversaries procuring; a
dangerous discouragement to well affected and honest men, and too great a
promotion to such pernicious, turbulent and Anti-Parliamentary spirits. And now
oh the scornful insults of an ungodly and reprobate enemy! Give leave humbly
to advise with Solomon, Prove. 22.10 Cast out the scorner, and contention shall
go out, yea strife and reproach shall cease.

To conclud at length, by their only subtilty, I was constrained to join issue,
to make defense and cross examine; but in regard of the extremity and sense of
my poverty (having expended al my temporal Estate my spiritual being
sequestered, and my Tithes in arrears in my adversaries hands, and more
executions for trespasses, and another prosecution by indictment, for words
against the King (as I am credibly informed, and timely advertised) ready to be
imposed upon me at my first arrival into Norfolk, I am totally disabled for
the present in, and shall be debarred for the future from any further
prosecution.

I confess my rights are granted me by Orders from that honorable Committee
for plundered Ministers, See order 23. Octo. 1647.
but yet with so easy and mild a demand (viz, the Sequinstrators are required
to pay) that my crafty adversaries (inurd to the gain) will rather afford them
their (come then obedience; nay, I am confident, that presuming upon their aid
and protection, which they do expect, and have not wanted from some in the
House it will sooner move their laughter then their fear: having done so
formerly, and told me to my face, they would not give obedidience to the
orders, but bad me in more uncivil language make them useful for my back side.

Notwithstanding all which injustice of their protectors, and all their other
recited policies, circumventions, contempts, opressions and unparaleld severe
dealings with me, they cannot pull down my hope, though they have my fortune,
nor shall they aftright me out of my principles, though they have bereaved me of
my estate. Which are to do the law of my God, and the law of the Parliament of
England even unto death, having already tasted of Banishmens, viz.
Sequestiation, confiscation, viz. seizure of goods, and imprisonment. The law
(I say) of the Parliament of England, smeane that law. 1. in oposition to the
law and personal command of the King, in this distance and estrangement hoth
of person and mind, from his great Council in Parliament. 2. The law in
distinction from the law of will and pleasure. And 3. The law in exposition by
all the learned, radically, fundamentally, and superlatively the law of the
Realm or kingdom of England, viz. Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right.

Now for the present raising both of my hope and fortune and for that duty
which I owe to truth and a good conscience, as I doubt not but to make manifest
the particular charges of misdemeanors in this Narrative, so I fear not by the
serious consideration of them in the judgment and prudence of this Honorable
House, but to obtain that justice from your hands, which will not only resolve
my establishment in my rights, the consideration of my losses, and the
reparation of my credit, but will likewise impose so just a punishment upon my
adversaries, and al their accomplices, as will forever deter them for the future
from all attempts of any such nature or condition.

Robert Heblethwait.

Whereas there are several instances in this Narrative, that have relation in
general, to the Committee at Norwith, it is to be understood only of
particular persons therein, to whom it properly refers, and whom the Autherfor
bears to publish till further order.

The several Orders related to the Narrative are as follow.

At the standing Committee at Norwith, March 8 1644.
Whereas the estate of Edw. Dobbs; of great. Snoring, Cler. parson of the said
town, by order from the Sequestrators, bearing date the 22. of July, 1643. was
seized and sequestered for the use of the State, and thereupon John Flemming and
others had undertaken to pay and answer the State one hundred pounds per an,
for the Tithes only of the said parsonage, which was really worth 120 l per an.
and out of surplasage they were on satisfy themselves for the collecting
thereof, and after wards one Robert Heblethwait, cler. ( before the said Dobbs
was ejected) upon or about the 7. day of December. 1643 by the aid and assistance
of a Troop of Horse, under the command of Cap. Liev. Coxon, by foroe seized all
the goods, seized and turned out the wife and children of the said Dobs out of
possession of the Parsonage and since his coming into possession, has suffered
or caused the trees that stood for defense of the parsonage house to be stubbed
up, and about 7. Tun of lead that was for the covering of part of the parsonage
house, to be taken of carried away, and the planchers of part of the House to
be taken up, and has since his coming made such a devastation, as (by the
testimony of about 20. of the parish) 300. l will not make the parsonage in so
good condition, at it was when he came thither, and since that time he has
preached very seldom, and being called before us, pretends no other title
then his possession given as aforesaid, and his allowance thereof from Col.
Wanton, but shows nothing under the Col. hand to warrant the same. Whereupon,
We do order that John Flemming, and Richard Newton, the forms Sequestrators
shall secure all the profits of the said parsonage in the barn or elsewhere,
and shall allow the wife of the said Dobbs for her and for her children, one
fist part due to her, and out of the four parts remaining, to pay all the
duties due to the Parliament for the said four parts, and provide an able man
to serve the cure, and that until the said Heblethwait shall give security to
answer for the goods seized by him, belonging to the State, and to repair the
wastes made by him in the parsonage house, and pay the arrears due to the wife
of Doobs for the fifth part, he stands committed by order of this Committee.

Signed by several Committees.

At the Committee for plundered Ministers, August 4. An. Do. 1645.
Whereas Robert Heblethwait was by the right honorable the Earl of
Manchester nominated and appointed to the Church of Snoring, in the County of
Norfolk, since when, as this Committee is informed be has been imprisoned,
and other severe courses have been taken with him. This Committee do therefore
desire the Committee of Parliament sitting at Norwich, to make a narriative of
the case depending before them, concerning him, and what proceedings there have
been against him, and for what. And in the mean time, this Committee think fit
and accordingly order, that he shall continue in, and enjoy the said living and
Church, according to the order of the said Earl in that behalf.

Gilb. Millington.

At the Committee for plundered Ministers, Junii 4. Ann. Dom. 1646.
THe cause concerning the contempt of John Flemming, Rich Newton and Nich.
Smith of great Snoring, to the Orders of this Committee complained of by Mr
Heblethwait, Minister of great Snoring in the County of Norfolk, coming into
consideration in the presence of Council on both sides, it appears that
notwithstanding several Orders of this Committee, the said Mr. Heblethwait is
kept out of possession of the said Rectory, and the profits thereof detained
from him,, in defense whereof, it is alleged, that the said Mr. Heblethwait,
has no right to the said Rectory; and that there are Articles of misdemeanor
depending against him, and a day is prayed for the hearing of the whole
business on both sides, notwithstanding Which this Com. think fit, that
obedience be first given to the Orders of this Com. and do therefore certify
the aforesaid contempt to the Com. of Examinations, to the end, that the said
parties may be and stand committed till the possession of the said Rectory be
given to the said Mr. Heblethwait, and satisfaction made for his said prosits
detained, as before said from him, for the better ascertaining whereof, this
Com. do refer it to Sir Antho. Jrby, Sir Will. Masham, and Col. Wauton, or
any two of them, who are desired upon hearing of bath sides, to value and
ascertaine the same, as to justice shall appertain.

Har. Grimstone.

At the Committee for plundered Ministers, Ianuar. 29. An. Dom. 1645.
Upon hearing of council on both sides this day in the cause of M. Heblethwait
Minister of Snoring, in the county of Norfolk, who was put in by the Earl of
Manchester, It is ordered that the former order of this Com of the 6. of
Ianuar. last, whereby the cause is referred to the examination of the Com. of
Parliament sitting at Norwich for the said County, being obtained upon hearing
of one side only, and in the absence of the said Mr. Heblethwait be retracted
and reversed, and whereas it is desired in the behalf of the parish, that this
Com. would examine the cause, and the witnesses therein themselves, this Com. do
think fit and order, that the same be referred to the Com. for the Association,
sitting at Cambridge, who are desired to hear and examine the parties and
witnesses on all sides according to the former order of this Com. of the 27. of
December. last, and to certify the same. And the said Mr. Heblethwait is in the
mean time to enjoy the said Rectory, and profits thereof, this Com. expecting
all due obedience to be given to the former orders of this Com. by the Com. of
Sequestrations, and all other persons concerning the same, and that the profits
taken by the said Com. of sequestration be by them upon sight hereof restored
to the said Mr. Heblethwait.

Gilbt. Millington.

At the Com. for plundered Ministers, October. 23. Anno Dom. 1647.
Upon consideration had of the Petition of Rob. Heblethwait, from whom the
Rectory of great Snoring, in the county of Norfolk is sequestered, for that it
appears to this Com. that the said Mr. Heblethwait was prisoner in Newgate
upon the 16. of July last, when the said cause concerning him, was heard before
this Com. and that he could not be himself present at the said hearing. It is
therefore ordered that Rich. Newton, John Fleming, ana Nich. Smith, the
sequestrators of the said Rectory shall have liberty to show cause before this
Com. on the 9. of November. next, wherefore the said order should not be reversed.
And its further ordered, that notwithstanding the said sequestration, the said
Mr. Heblethwait shall have a proportionable part of the last harvest prosits of
the said Rectorie for such time as he served the cure of the said Church for
that year, and that be shall have all other the tyths and profits of the said
Rectorie, before then due for the time that he officiated the said cure, which
the said sequestrators are required so pay unto him, or to show cause to the
contrary on the said 9. of November. And for that this Com. is informed, that Mr.
Dobbs the former sequestered Minister is entertained into the said Church and
Rectorie, since the said sequestration and officiateth the said cure in
contempt of the sequestration of the said rectorie from him, it is ordered that
the said Mr. Dobbs do make his personal appearance before this Committee on
the said ninth day of Novem. to answer his said contempt at his peril.

William Purefoy.

At the Committee for plundered Ministers September 22. 1646.
Whereas it is averred before this Committee, that Mr. Dobbs from whom the
Rectory of great Snoring in the County of Norfolk is sequestered is yet living,
and that therefore the claim of Cha. Devil Cle. to the said rectory by virtue
of a presentation there of from the patron is delusory, upon pretense of the
said M. Dobs his death, the said M Devil being called makes no appearance
according to order, although the day for hearing was appointed upon his
petition, this Com. do therefore dismiss the said cause, and confirm the said
Mr. Heblethwait in the said Rectorie, and the sequestration thereof.

Gilbt. Millington.

At The Com. for plunderd Minister. May 8. 1647.
The cause coming to hearing between Mr. Devil and Mr. Heblethwait Ministers
of the Word, concerning the Rectory of Snoring in the County of Norfolk
according to the order of the 23. of Mar. last, it is ordered, that the said
hearing be deferred until the eleaventh day of June next, on which day this
Committee do apoint to hear and determine the whole cause on both sides, and it
is ordered, that the said Mr Heblethwait do continue and enjoy the quiet and
peaceable possession of the said Rectory and the profits thereof in the mean
time, and he is discharged from any further attendance upon the said order of
the 23 of March last.

Bt. Knightly.

Whereas a warrant issued from the Committee rquiring Robert Heblethwait Clerk
to appear before the standing Committee sitting at Norwich, and he has refused
to obey the said warrant, these are to will and require you forthwith to
apprehend the said Robert Heblethwait, and to bring him before the Committee
sitting at Norwich, to answer for his said refusal and such other things as
shall be objected against him.

July 15. 1645.
To the chief Constables of North green how, and to the Constables of New
Walsingham, and great Snoring, and to every of them.
FINIS.

