AN ELEGY UPON DR THO. FULLER That most Incomparable Writer, Who Deceased
August the 15th. M. DC. LXI.
ROom for a Saint, set open Heavens Gate,
Here comes the AUTHOR of the Holy State.
See with what Train and Troops he now ascends
Of Blessed acquaintance, and Celestial Friends!
Blessed Ones, he comes to make your number more,
His Life did much, his Death improves your store;
Such modest merit crowds not for a seat,
Bliss covets to be FULLER and complete.
A Cherubs wing has soared him to this Hight,
And Heaven is now in stead of Pisgah Sight:
His Holy War but now is finished,
When the reward of Glory crowns his Head.
Each Tract (like Jacob's Ladder) still did rise,
Directed Souls, and fixed them in the Skies:
There are his Books transcribed and comprised
Within the Book of Life Epitomized:
And if the Herculean Labors found a place
Assigned in Heaven by the Gods, then Grace
So well employed and exercised here
Will shine far brighter in its Glories sphere.
The kinder Parcae yet forbore the Thread
Of that Invincible; till Vice was dead,
And he had quelled the Monsters, and suppressed
All growing Ills, and set the World at rest:
But this our Hercules was snatched from hence
I the middle of his An excellent Piece in folio now in the Press.
Work, while in defense
Of squalid Virtue through Injurious Age
Against monstrous Antiques he a War did wage;
Broke off its Adamantine bonds of Sleep,
The Dusty Marbles could their guests not keep:
Had roused our World again, and Truth appears
Like Stolen Goods, by jarring of the years.
Prodigious Luxury of Cruel Death
To stifle Thousands through His loss of Breath!
Who shall redeem our WORTHIES from the grave
When he is gone who them alone could save? The Worthies general of England is
the Title of the said Book.

Often have we strained Caligula's wish, to make
Death odious for some great and good man's sake
But here how truly sad it fits our Turn
Where Fate is multiplied in FULLER's Urn.
Take then the Triumphs of his Noble Pen
To tell the World the Learned are but Men;
And that the rescue of their worth from Time
Death in his Fate has made acap'tal crime.
But know Illustrious Soul that we do see
Those higher Reasons which transported thee
From the black Art of Dark Antiquity
To the Speculation of Eternity:
Let the Beatitudes there fill thy Mind
While we are content with what thou leave behind;
And if forgetful be, or sparing Fame,
Thy ART of MEMORY shall preserve thy Name.
Sic moeret JAMES HEATH.

LONDON, Printed M. D C. LXI.


