A Ternary of Paradoxes OF THE Magnetic Cure of Wounds.

Nativity of Tartar in Wine.

Image of God in Man.

Lumen de lumine

In ^ermino Concursus



The second Impression, more reformed, and enlarged with some Marginal
Additions.

A TERNARY OF PARADOXES. The Magnetic Cure of Wounds. Nativity of Tartar in
Wine. Image of God in Man.


Written originally by Joh. Bapt. Van Helmont, and Translated, Illustrated, and
Ampliated BY WALTER CHARLETON, Doctor in Physic, and Physician to the late
King.

Suspecta apud plures hujusmodi Sanationis Facilitas, atque celeritas
permanebit adhuc dudum; vulgi enim labile and otiosum ingenium, in arduis ac
insolitis, ad judicia ejusdem semper tenoris promptum, ob facilitatem, ideoque
flaccidum est. Diabolicae enim fraudi tantam restitutionum benignitatem
libentius consecrat, quam Divinae bonitati, humanae naturae conditori, Amatori,
Salvatori, pauperumque patri. Butler. LONDON, Printed by James Flesher for
William Lee, dwellingin Fleetstreet, at the sign of the Turks (...)

To the truly Noble, by the right of Blood, Virtue and Learning, WILLIAM
Viscount Brouncker of Lions, Baron Brouncker of Newcastle, etc.
My very good Lord,
AMong other Disparagements of this life, collected and sum'd up in my frequent
retirements and concentrations of my Mind, my Thoughts have, more then once,
glanced on the exceeding vanity of that Heroic disease, incident to the best
tempered Souls, the insatiate Appetite of posthume Glory. And though I must not
but confess, this originary Fever elemented in the innate Ardor and
Scintillations of those Sparks of Divinity, which now lie raked up in the Mass
or Chaos, of our eclipsed Nature; and that by the light of these secret
Flashes, may be discovered the Immortality of that Semideity, or noble Essence,
for a while immured in walls of Clay: yet when I make reflections on the
unconcernment, and happy insensility of the Soul, once fled home, to an
indissoluble Union with the Soul of Beatitude; as to the trifling affairs of
the swarm of Mortals, here below, and that all Relations to the visible and
perishable World, are lost in utter oblivion, at the instant of her Transition
to the invisible, intellectual, and immaterial: I cannot but smile at the
Delusion of this Ambition, of having our Memories survive our Ashes, and
listing our Names in the Legend of Fame, by the ingravements of memorable and
worthy Actions, as seeming to be no more, then a provident Fraud of impaired
Nature, whereby man is handsomely deluded into the attempting Actions of such
difficulty or danger, as if presented without the specious disguise of Honor,
must appear absolutely destructive, at least to the Tranquillity and sober
Fruition of our selves, if not also to our Conformity unto that Catholic
Maxim, deeply impressed upon the radical Principles of our Essence, Philautie
or Self-conservation. For what individual Knowledge can w^ have of Caesar? Or
what intelligence can he hold with the spirits of those, who sacrifice the most
of Veneration to his Memory? Or did the incense of humane Honor ascend so high,
a^ to approach the Mansion of the Souls of Heroes, divested of Mortality; which
can no more be granted, then that a man on our Hemisphere, should be sensible
of the wagging of a straw in the Antipodes: yet what could the Access of that
Nothing contribute to that state of Blessedness, whose measure is immensity,
wherein to imagine either Defect, Satiety, or Mutation, would be a Conceit
savoring too much of Sensuality, and of bloody advantage to the absurd
Metaphysics of the Alcoran? And how much more noble a plea, to the
immarcescible Laurel, shall that modest head obtain, which, in all Anxieties
and Difficulties of Virtue, drew encouragement only from the simple and naked
loveliness of Virtue; then that fond ambitious one, whose sufferings were
caused by no better a Flame, then the Ignis Fatuus of Applause, and desires
knew no other attractive, but Vain glory.

This Meditation, my dear Lord, as it could never stifle the irradiations of my
Genius, or render me less sensible of the incitements of Virtue, to enterprise
something, that might be grateful in the nostrils of Posterity, when my Dust
shall be offensive: so has it wrought my resolutions to that Stoical temper,
that while I fix one eye of Reason on that domestic Security, and internal
Serenity, which necessarily redounds from the severe practice of Goodness, in
this life; and the other of Faith on that infinite Compensation, ordained to
reward our pious endeavors, in the next: I can comfortably acquiesce in the
secret discharge of my duty to God and the World, at least in the sincerity of
intention: and though I should arrive at such unexpected Felicity, as to be an
instrument, or accessory, either in the discovery of some Magnale in Knowledge,
or in the Contribution of some Benefit, conductive to the repair of the Common
breaches of Humanity; yet I dare confidently hope, I should have no ear open to
the invasion of Popular Euges, nor admit any dream of happiness, in the
estimation of succeeding Ages.

Now, though the too acute Severity of some, may here be furnished with
latitude enough, either to charge this my Theory of Aversation from Praise, on
my being conscious of such Fragility, Lapses and Imperfections of my Pen, as
might conclude, that the best part of my Judgment lies in the politic
Concealment of my Name; or deny me qualified with abilities of reducing it into
Practice: yet I have this Comfort left to take Sanctuary in, that I may
(without engaging your Lordship, into the Patronage of a falsehood) appeal unto
your judicious integrity, for determination, whether my Scepticity, even in
such Notions, as my self has, to the most precise, anatomical subdivision of
each subject, and abstracted perpension of each minute particle thereof (not
much below the accurate Method, invented by the Stoics Plutarchus, in Ep. ad
Phav^rinum, de Frigore Primigenio.
, and lately revived into use by the most ingenious Mons. Des Carts In sua
d^ssertatione de Met^odo Veritatis in Scientiis investigand^, p. 10.
) examined and transmitted to the World, for indubitate and irrefragable
Truths; be not evidence strong enough to make good, that I prefer the
manifestation of any one single Verity, to all other sinister interests, in
this Vale of Error, and therefore should embrace and assimilate the decisive
Contradiction of riper heads, with joy equal to that of benighted Mariners, at
the eruption of their faithful Pilot, the North star, as the Sovereign
Remedy to my former Wanderings. To the other branch of the praesupposed
Scandal, may justly be opposed your Lordships privacie, to my obstinate
reluctance, against the Advisoes of my Honored Friends, urging me to a
public Appropriation and Avowance of some papers, not long since, dispersed
through Europe, without the protection either of Author, or Dedication: as also
my denial of Light, to some Philosophical Enquiries, whose Conception,
Formation, and Maturity (though of inconsiderable value, in the account of more
perfect Learning) cost me the profusion of so much Time and Oil, as if summed
up by the Algebra of Candor, might well have purchased the Charitable
Forgiveness, if not the friendly Approbation of the Reader.

And in the serene darkness of this Latency, I had still remained invisible to
the effascinating Optics of Envy, and celebrated a constant Jubilee of
immunity from the virulent blasts of Detraction; had I not been intempestively
drawn upon the Stage, by the superior violence of two invincible Magnets: whose
potent Alliciency I could provide against by the opposition of no strength, but
such as either a dangerous Rudeness, or indiscreet Morosity must have afforded.
The first, the inexorable Commands of your Lordship and other Persons, of so
much Honor, as Nobility in Birth, Knowledge, and Fortune can contribute; which
led me from the more direct Path of other Contemplations more perpendicular to
my Profession, into this wanton digression, and upon the penalty of the
deprivation of that, which I have good reason to value much above my life, the
place I held in your and their favorable Regard, charged me with the managery
of this small Province, for the space of two months only. And had I withdrawn
my Obedience from such absolute Sovereignty, as, I must acknowledge, your
Lordships and their more learned Spirits deservedly hold over mine: Doubtless I
had inevitably fallen upon that so much to be abhorred rock, refractary
Incivility, and run my self to an eternal loss of those Stars, whose conserving
influence, and vigorous warmth, are so necessary to the Vitality and Growth of
my Studies. Whereas now, in this election, I have adventured only to bear up
against the impetuous torrent of Censure. The other Attractive, the too early
Diffusion of these sheets, and the immature admittance of a multitude to the
acquaintance of them, and the weak hand that Copied them; insomuch, that the
concealment of the Translator, carried the face of an impossibility, without
the joint concealment of the Translation: It being (by an error of Necessity,
the Conformity to the unresistible importunity of those Orbs, to whose motion,
mine is, and must be, subordinate) transmitted to a Community, beyond the power
of Revocation.

Thus much I was concerned to speak, as to the Precaution of Scandal, deductive
out of my Apostasy, from my Resolution of Self-concealment, and the public
avowance of my self for the Father: It remains only, that I endeavor a
Palliation of this bold lapse of my judgment, in stooping your Lordship to so
low a Patronage, as to be Godfather, to this adopted Child.

I ever looked upon Dedications, with the same aspect of neglect, and
presumption of inutility, that I beheld Prologues in the Front of Comedies;
having upon the unhappy Experience of most Poets erected this unrefutable
Maxim, That a good Play may commend a bad Prologue; but the best Prologue
never expiate the Errors, or piece up the defects of a bad Play; and upon a
mature Audit of all the benefits, which the most Elegant, and Judicious Pens
have acquired by this imaginary Refuge, in the Sanctuary of great Names, or
great Judgments, found that the total result amounts to no more, but a
delusive hope of security from the Contagious emissions of that Universal
Basilisk Detraction; whose venom, in a proud confidence of Victory, laughs at
the most vigorous energie of any the most sacred Antidote, and from the
infection whereof, he only can be saved, that dares encounter it with
Contempt.

Again, my faith has long swam smoothly down the current of the Popular
opinion, that Translations praesent the lise of their Text, at as great
disadvantage of Dissimilitude, as the backside of Hangings exhibit the story
interwoven: and are at best, but slender Adumbrations, or pale Counterfeits of
those more lively Images, drawn with more strength of Art, in the Primitive
Phansy of their Protoplast. Nor could I ever be alienated by the Frenzy of
Narcissus, into such a fond dotage of Partiality, as to expect a better Fortune
should belong to the lines, copied by my unaequall Pencil, then what I have
observed to have accrewed to others upon more laudable Transcriptions. This I
would not have rashly extended by any, to an imputation of occult Blasphemy,
against the Venerable* Majesty of our Mother Tongue; out of which, I am ready
to assert, may be spun as fine and fit a garment, for the most spruce
Conceptions of the Mind to appear in public in, as out of any other in the
World: especially, since the Carmination or refinement of it, by the skill and
sweat of those two Heroical Wits, the Lord St. Alban, and the now flourishing
Dr. Brown; out of whose incomparable Writings may be selected a Volume of such
full and significant Expressions, as if uprightly fathomed by the utmost Extent
of the sublimest Thought, may well serve to stagger that Partial Axiom of
some Schoolmen, that the Latin is the most symphoniacall and Concordant
Language of the Rational Soul.

These Diminutions as well of the Epidemick custom of Dedications, as of
Translations in general, and of my own in particular, I have praemised with
design, to manifest my own exceeding Audacity, in consecrating so
contemptible an oblation, as this transcriptive Landscape of Magnetisme, to the
Altar of so much sober Learning; as whoever has the happy honor of admission
to your closet lectures (the only privilege I can be proud of, and be
forgiven) or but with a discreet ear to taste your public Discourses in
earnest, must allow your Lordship to be Master of.

Having thus deves^ed my self of all other praetences, I direct my address to
th^e Plea of those two Cardinal Motives, upon the swindg or rapt of whose
violence, this my bold Error may seem naturally to depend. The first, (and in
troth, the Prime) is your Lordships known Candor and humility; which acquired
by a long and habitual Exercise of Virtue, endows you with an inevitable
propensity, to forgive the Poverty of his offering, whose Wealth is only Zeal
The other, your Animadversion and careful influence bestowed upon each sheet of
this Work, successively, before the Ink could be fully dry: Insomuch, that the
Justice of some might safely escape the imputation of Rigor, should it
determine the Book to be properly your Lordships by a nearer right, then that
of Dedication. This duly considered, I dare put my self upon the trial of
Aequanimity; whether an Alienation of what is rightly yours, to more then a
moity; or an equitable Resignation of the same, to your peculiar use, can best
stand with the Justice of his Duty, who endeavors, by all possible observances,
to make good the title of

Your Lordships most humble and faithful Servant, W. CHARLETON.

PROLEGOMENA.
To the Candid and Ingenuous READER.
The Summary.
1. TRuth and the Rational Soul are Twins. 2. The Souls Beatitude consists in
her reunion to Truth. 3. Three Guides conducting Man to Truth. 4. Their
several ways of direction. 5. The Final Cause of their Manuduction. 6. The
Cognition of natural objects, difficult to the exactest Reason. 7. The
Application of all this, by way of apology. 8. The Hoti of Magnetical Remedies
examined. 9. An example* (...) facto. 10. A second instance, considerable. 11.
The Capital objection against Magnetism Vulnerary, that the cu^e ^s wrought by
the sole power of nature, and not by any concurrent faculty of the remote
Remedy, answered. 12. The first branch of the Solution. 13. Upon every Solution
of Continuity, there is impressed an exotic Miasm* or putrefactive acidity.
14. This alien impression, the sole remora to redintegration. 15. The
extinction of the same, the only means to assist Nature. 16. All Acidity
subject to the power of an Alchahal. 17. The ground of Traumatical Potions. 18.
Vitriol referred to Alchahal Salts, and Vulnerary. 19. The Pedigree of
Helmont'e Drif. 20. Vitriol san^tive at distance* 21. Am Astral quality genial
to some sublunaries. 22. Vitriol to be allowed the like Prerogative. 23. The
second branch of the Solution. 24. The effect of Hoplochrisme not univocall;
but variable, according to the superior virtue of any third nature associated.
25. A second Objection, Quod Agens Natural, ut agat, debet esse applicatum and
approximare ad Patiens, refuted. 26. A Consideration of the infinite extent of
Divisibility. 27. Every Unctuous body emitteth consimilar effluviums. 28.
Sympathy, longimanus. 29. An example of the vast extent of Sympathy. 30. A
second. 31. A third. 32. The result of all, in a Comparative speculation of the
extensive power of Magneticall Remedies. 33. The manner of the Armary Unguents
operation, upon a wound at indeterminate distance, explained in brief. 34.
Acidity, the first degree of Corruption. 35. Tartar made in Wine, by the
fixative power of a Saline Spirit, resident in the Lees. 36. Vinegar caused by
an exhaustion: not by a Congelation of the spirits of Wine. 37. Helmonts
Paradox, that reason is not essential to the Humane Soul, maintained by eight
Arguments.

WEll did the Primitive Grecian give the name (...) unto Truth: whose
Consanguinity, nay Consubstantiality of Essence with the Humane Soul which The
breath of God, by an easy Metaph.
the Divine Philosophy of Moses Genesis 2. ver. 7.
has defined to be the Breath of God, does exactly make out that Etymology.
For so uncessant a Magnetisme, or congenerous Love does the Soul hold unto
Truth, 1.
that she can know no real or permanent satisfaction, in the fruition of any
other object; but, like the Aguish magnetified Needle, reels to and fro, in a
Frenzy of inquietude, distracted twixt various Apparitions, until she lie
parallel unto the Center, or Unity thereof: and having once fixed in that happy
2.
position, she is, by an eternal union, identified or assimilated unto that
twin of her self; and in that mysterious penetration of homogeneal Forms, meets
her Beatitude, which can never know any Defect, of Satiety, Alterity of
Desires, or Remission of Intensity. Now, though the opacity of Original Sin
has so benighted the primitive Clarity of the Intellect, that it deplorably
wanders in the infinite seductions of Error, and cannot recover that direct
path, which leads to the Heaven of Verity, without the manuduction of Divine
Light, in this Wilderness of Sorrow; and though the Optics of Flesh and Blood
are too dim to endure to gaze upon the naked and entire Glories of Truth; yet
has the exceeding Mercy of the Fountain of Light, furnished us with three
faithful Guides, whose Conduct if we precisely follow, we may be reduced to
that advantage of Knowledge, as will afford us a Pisgah Sight, or crepusculous
prospect of her reflexive Beauties, now, and an assurance of being blessedly
engulphed in the Abyss of her Pleasures, in the future. Those three Lines,
perpetually deradiating from the Center of Truth (the eternal 3.
Principle of all Essences, and Soul of all Causalities) are Religion, Reason,
and Sense: all terminated in our Nature. The first leads us by the invisible
Clue of 4.
Faith, on toward the implicit and certain Apprehension of objects above the
reach of the other two. The second brings us about, through the Circumambages
and complex Labyrinth of Discourse; and from the remote dependencies of Effects
upon their particular Causes, ushereth us along by a subalternate Series, or
Gradation unto the Science of their ultimate Approximation and Individuality.
The last by a shorter Cut, or blunter method of Preception, directs to the
immediate and actual Knowledge of the Existence and exterior or manifest
Qualities of Entities; but leaves the second to a laborious exploration of
their abstruser Forms, or essential Quiddities: the repeated Acts of which
apprehensive Power, informed by sensation, make up that body of Knowledge,
called Experience. All which Pilots mutually conspire to steer our Minds,
perpendicularly 5.
toward our satisfaction of the main end of our Creation: the reverential and
fiduciary Contemplation of the Mercy, Wisdom, and Bounty of the Supreme
Essence. But so deeply immersed in Sensuality, are all the wretched Sons of
Adam, that few can ascend so many degrees toward the height of their primitive
Capacity, as with equal and constant paces to pursue the guidance of these
genial Impressions. For if some may usurp the license of Concession, that the
habit of Cognition by Faith does smoothly result from the Idea's of religious
Notions, either insensibly instilled into our infancy, and naturallized by
custom* or enthusiastically acquired, that is by the infusion of Light
Supernatural, without much labor and difficulty precedent: yet none, that ever
felt the weight of Ignorance, and endeavored to struggle from the oppression of
it, through the Anxieties of study, will adventure on an assertion of such
temerity, as that the satisfactory and certain Comprehension of most Natural
Objects, is easy and familiar to our Reason. Since the subtilest speculation
will evict, 6.
that every the smallest piece of the Hexameron Fabric* carries in the narrow
round of its single Ens, Abstrusity sufficient to empuzle the scrutiny of the
most daring and Eagle-eyed Philosophy.

And if Truth be the most desiderable Good, and yet the most difficult to
obtain; as on the one side, I have reason to applaud my vow, of unravelling my
short thread of life, in the constant and eager search of this inestimable
treasure; so have I also opportunity to hope, from all heads of Candor and
Discretion, to receive a Charitable Consideration and Forgiveness of my frail
mistakes and deviations, on the other; especially in my attempts of exploring
the Causes, and manner of some operations of Nature, whose occult Efficiencies
seem rather proposed to exercise, and perplex, then satisfy our desires of
Comprehension. Among which knotty pieces, every intelligent man will readily
account the Theory of Magnetism, or more plainly, the secret power of Natural
Actives, working on analogous and determnate 7.
Passives, by invisible Emanations, or an Influential Energy, transmissive to
remote distance; and more particularly, the Argument of Helmont, in this
discourse. Concerning which subject, I shall, in some part, recede from my
first intentions of Neutrality, to conform to the incitements, and pacify the
importunity of some Friends, in the concise and extemporary delivery of my own
Conceptions: though I stand fully convinced, as well of the vast disparity
'twixt the nerves of my Wit, and the considerable gravity of this Theme; as of
the impendent danger of various censures, arising from the irreconcilable
discord of Opinion in some, and the rancor or livid Prevarication of others, to
both which Hydraes, I must become exposed.

Having premised this preparatory Apology: I shall henceforward chain my
extravagant Pen, to the sole indagation of this admirable (though secret, and
therefore vulgarly despised) Verity; and allow it no wider range then what the
modest rules of a Preface will admit. Wherefore I come directly to the
examination of the Hoti, or matter of Fact.

That Wounds have been frequently cured with more 8.
expedition, and less torment, then usually follow upon the use and daily
renovation of Topical vulneraries; by the Confermentation of the Mumy, in the
blood effluxed, and still retaining to Vitality, with the Balsamical Faculty of
the Magnetical remedies: I must firmly believe, until my Scepticity may be
allowed to be so insolent, as to affront the evidence of my own sense, and
question the verity of some Relations, whose Authors are persons of such
confessed integrity, that their single Attestations oblige my faith, equal with
the strongest demonstration. Among many other Experiments, made by my self, I
shall select and relate only one: and that most ample and pertinent.

Upon an ardent dispute, with a Doctor of Theology, 9.
reverend for his Piety and Learning, concerning the Legitimate use of the
Sympathetick Powder; that I might at one stab destroy his inveterate
Presumption, that the Capital Energy of that Magnetical Remedy, adored for the
sanation of wounds at distance, did proceed rather from the Sophistical
Activity of that Impostor, who gave the first incurable wound unto humanity,
derived by the mediation of an implicit Compact, then from any native and
genuine endowment of the Vitriol: I prevailed with him, to enterprise an
Experiment of the efficacy thereof after this manner. Having furnished him,
both with the Powder, and a cloth distained with the blood of a Gentleman,
freshly wounded, and not yet dressed by any Surgeon: I also directed him in
the Application. At the performance whereof, he made solemn profession, that he
did utterly disavow all Confederacy, immediate or secondary, with Satan, all
expectance of his concurrence, and coefficiency, and all confidence in the
cooperation of intense Imagination: as also, that he adventured on this trial,
only for information of his judgment, whether it lie in the destiny of Natural
Agents, to transmit their Virtue unto, and execute the Commission of their
specifical Proprieties upon objects at distance. However, within few hours, the
Patient (wholly ignorant of the means used) found his blood retired to its
wonted rivulets, and the lips of his large wound perfectly Consolidated. Upon
which admirable success, the Divine, having also happily met with a cure for the
nicety of his Conscience, from a prevaricate Adversary, became a fervent
Proselyte, to our Doctrine of Magnetism: soon after writing his Palinodia, in
these words; Indubitanter credo, Causas Naturales, quanquam nobisignotas,
operari in praefata sympathetica sanatione.

This justification was extorted from a professed Enemy: 10.
a second remarkable Example, I have received from the mouth of a professed
Friend, to the speculation of vulnerary Magnetism; which is right worthy of
recital, as well in regard of the Experimentator, as of the rare effect
ensuing. Sir K. Digby (a noble Person, who has built up his Reason to so
transcendent a height of Knowledge, as may seem not much beneath the state of
man in innocence) immediately before his late exile, was pleased to tell me*
that not many years past, Mr. James Howel (who planted the Vocal Forest)
interceding betwixt two Brothers of the sword, received a dangerous wound
through the Arm: By the violent pain whereof, and other grievous Accidents
concomitant, he was suddenly dejected into extreme Debility and Danger. That in
this forlorn plight, despairing to find ease or benefit, by the fruitless
continuance of Surgery, and fearing the speedy invasion of a Grangraen; he
consulted Sir K. D. who having procured a Garter cruentate, wherewith the hurt
was first bound up, inspersed thereon, without the privacy of Master Howel, a
convenient quantity of Roman Vitriol. That the Powder no sooner touched upon
the blood, in the Garter, then the Patient cried out, that he felt an
intolerable shooting, and penetrative torment, in his Arm: which soon vanished,
upon the remove of all Emplasters and other Topical Applications, enjoined by
Sir K. D. That thenceforward, for three days, all former symptoms departed,
the part recovered its pristine lively Color, and manifest Incarnation and
Consolidation ensued: but then Sir K. D. to complete his Experiment, dipped the
Garter in a sawcer of Vinegar, and placed it upon glowing coals; soon whereupon
the Patient relapsed into an extreme Agony, and all former evils instantly
recurred. And finally, that having obtained this plenary satisfaction, of the
sympathy maintained betwixt the blood extravenated, and that yet conserved in
the veins; as also of the Sovereign Balsamic Faculty of the Vitriol: he took
again the Garter out from the Vinegar, gently dried it, and freshly dressed it
with the Powder; whereupon the Sanation proceeded with such admirable success,
that within few days, there remained only a handsome Cicatrice, to witness
there was once a wound.

Other Cures, so near allied to Miracle, as the former, and no less
conspicuous, have been wrought, with the same Magnetical Balsam, by Sir Gilbert
(...), upon upon many wounded in the Kings Army; chiefly in the Western
Expedition: of which few Gent. Attendant on His Majesty, in that march, can be
ignorant.

So substantial and authentic are these Relations, and so frequently others
also of the same kind are obtruded upon vulgar observation; that I shall think
requisite, to supersede the enrolment of any other evidence conductive to the
illustration of the (...), when I shall have fel'd that Goliath, which I epsy
coming from the Army of the Philistines, to the opinion of the Influential 11.
operation of Magnetical Remedies, to bid defiance to my self, or any other
Champion thereof: that is, the mighty Objection, that the Consolidation of
Wounds, is the sole and entire Work of Nature, performed by the proper Balsam
of the blood, flowing to the part wounded; and that therefore we may seem
grossly deluded in our election of the Cause, erroneously adscribing the whole
Arm of the Energy, to that unconcerned Principle, which indeed has not so much
as a finger in the business. Against this Giant, I shall send only two smooth
stones: and those taken out of the scrip, or single stock of my own Reason.

The first seems to be of weight: and so requires the 12.
Care of more then one minute, to fit it in the sling of my Discourse. I
conceive (with submission to the reprehension of riper Philosophy) that
immediately upon the Solution of unity, in any part, the ambient Aer, of 13.
its own primigenious constitution, intensely Cold, and by Accident also
repleted with the various Evaporations, or Aporrhoea's of mixed bodies,
especially such as are then suffering the Act of Putrefaction, violently
invadeth the part; and thereupon impresseth an exotic miasm, or noxious
Diathesis: which disposing the blood, successively arriving at the wound, to
Putrefaction, by the intervention of Fermentation, caused by some gradual
Acidity (for proved it may be, that the (...) of Corruption, must be Acidum
Extraneum, succeeding upon a desertion of vital Heat) introduced, makes the
same wholly unfit for the Nutrition, and destructive to the Incarnation, or
reunion of the sides of the orifice. Against this Hostile Acidum, Nature
instantly arises in Arms, sends a large supply of Arterial Blood (Vital
spirits I understand none at least in a disjunctive acception) and doubleth
both the strength and number of her Pulses; insomuch that most times, the
overcharged part suffers an increase of Pain and Intumescence, from the
distension of its vessels, membranes and intermusculary Capacities: but finding
her self too weak to expel so subtle and potent an enemy, encamped within her
borders, though she cannot preserve the blood from submission to the tyranny of
this Putrefactive Acidity, in some degree, and so not transmute it into a
laudable Cement, to soder up the disunion; yet she so far hinders (especially
in green wounds) the dilatation of Corruption, that she subdues the revolted
blood into the form of a white Purulent Effluxion, which is therefore to be
accounted an infallible signal, that Nature is not yet evirate, but holds out
bravely, and if relieved in time, will be an happy Conqueress. This Exotic
Acidity, by the forementioned means impressed upon the sides of the Wound, I 14.
apprehend to be the sole Impediment, that defeateth the design of Nature, in
the Redintegration of the Unity of any part, infringed by external violence:
and that 15.
by the rule of Consequence, the only way of Assistance to Nature in this
exigence, is the destruction, or Extinction of that Alien Impression; the
Factor of Putrefaction, by the specifical Counterviolence of some superior
Antagonist. Now Pyrotechnical Philosophy, 16.
and the Mechanic Experiments of Chemistry, have sufficiently instructed us:
that every Acidum is, at first encounter, subdued by any Alchahal, or Lixivial
Salt; as is autoptically demonstrable, in the sudden Transformation of the
Spirit of Vitriol into Alumen, by the inspersion of Mercury dulcified. The same
effect may be also exemplified in the Acid Spirit of Sulphur, which for ever
loses its native Acidity, and in a moment degenerateth into an aluminous
sweetness, at the Conjunction of the Salt of Tartar, resolved into an oil by
Deliquium. For which reason also (as Helmont has profoundly observed In ^ami^*
Blas Humanum nuncupato.
) our Traumatick or vulnerary Potions, which as well in regard of the
Balsamical Plants, 17.
as of the stony Concretion found in the stomachs of Creafish, entering their
Composition, acquire upon decoction, a Lixivial Tincture, or Alchahal; are most
laudable, because in truth most smartly operative, Medicaments, in all wide
Perforations or Incisions of the body: as has been found true, by the
unquestionable testimony of Experience Lege Guidon. pa^. 2. Chirurg. par. cap.
9. Amb^os. Paraeum lib. 18. cap. 28. Joh. Andr* (...) Cruce, de vuln^r. tract.
2. l. (...). c. (...). Fallop. de Vulner. c. 14. Jero. Fabric ab Aquapendent.
l. 2. c. 24. S^mert. l. 5. part. (...). sect. 1. cap. 9.
, and sounds consonant to Reason. Since by reason of their Lixivial Salt, which
doubtless passes the several Concoctions, viribus haud multum castratis, they
stand e diametro, opposed to the Putrefactive Acidity, the Capital Remora that
impedeth the Consolidation of all Wounds and Ulcers. And 18.
whether Roman vitriol may not be justly referred to the Classis of Saline
juices Concreted, or Alchahal Salts, since it must be a parergy here to dispute
it, I shall with industry leave, as well to the experiment of its easy
Eliquation upon the access of any Humidity, as to the decision of the most
knowing Mineralogists Consule Agricolam, lib. 3. de Natura Fossilium, p. 212.
Fallop. lib. 4. de Aquis Medicat. cap. 8. Dioscorid. l. 5. cap. 68.
. Who also have unanimously esteemed it, as the Sacra Anohora, or Panchreston,
for the cure of Cheironian Ulcers, and inveterate Wounds: though the Cardinal
efficacy* and manner of its operation, may well be thought to have continued in
darkness, until of late the light of Helmonts Furnace had the honor of its
revealment. And I am bold to conjecture, that upon this 19.
single hint, of the incomparable Balsamical or Mu^l Vi^t^e of Vitriol, Helmont
first founded the invention of his admired Drif, or universal Medicine; whose
master Ingredients are Sal Marinus, Vitriolum Veneris, and (...) Ad sinem
tract. Butl^*
(...) by the omnipotent Odor, or radial activity whereof, he rashly imagined,
that all irregularities, exorbitances, and excandescence of the humane Archius,
or Vital Spirit, may be rectified, reclaimed, and calmed, and that in a moment.

Having thus brought within the reach of verismillty; that, in many wounds, all
the vigor of Nature cannot suffice to the ejection of that foreign Acor, that
has once made an encroachment upon her tender confines; and that upon the
first charge, the usurper must surrender, at the access of a Lixivial
Traumatick Salt* It remains only that we bring it quite home to our intended
scope, and make a short enquiry, Whether the 20.
Sanative Faculty of Vitriol, may not be conceded so long^manous and extensive,
as to produce the same effect, at distance. And this we must do with exceeding
brevity: in this respect, that this speculation does more properly belong to
our disquisition of the (...), or Causalities of Hoplochrism. I am bound to
believe, that in the infinite Magazine of Nature are to be found various 21.
Agents, no^ obliged to the dull conditions of an immediate Corporeal Contact;
but richly endowed with an Influential or Radial activity* (so have I taken the
liberty to Christen it, in reference to the Cognition and n^er Analogy, betwixt
the manner of the Stars transmitting their Influence, by invisible
Deradiations; and the imperceptible Emissions streaming, in a semi-immaterial
thread of Atoms Hinc corpus Paris, i. e. Naturae universae, el^gantissime
depingitur hirsutum, propter rerum radios; radii enim sunt tanquam Naturae
crines, sive villi, atque omnia se^e v^l magis v^l minus radiosa sunt: quod in
facultate visus est manifestissimum; nec minus in omni virtute and operatione
ad distans. Quicquid enim operatur ad distans, id etiam radios emittere rect^
dici potest, etc. F^. Bacon. de sapient. veterum, fab 6.
(...) from (...) bodies* qualified with this kind of Astral Faculty; which
arriving at a determinate object, though (...) at indeterminable distance,
nimbly operate upon it, to the full satisfaction of the particular end,
preordained in the primitive Intellect of the Creato^*) (...) conceive also,
that Vitriol has a very just title to the prenogative of being listed in the
Inventory of these Astral Natures* and that when the powder thereof is applied
to the blood, effused out of a wound, the Balsamical Faculty of it is not
confined to a mere Topical Operation* but being conducted by the Manial (...)
or (...) (...) of the blood, which undoubtedly, by a Congenerous Magnetism,
holds a certain sympathy with that Fountain, from whence it was derived, (as
is to ^a^ety of satisfaction demonstrated by Hilmont) (...) a stream of
subti^ted Atoms, extends to the individual Wound, and there operateth to the
Deletion or ext^rpation of the Acid Impression, against which ^carrieth a
Seminal Antipathy* If this be thus (...) I may be sooner destitute of leisure*
then substantial Arguments* (...) (...) 22.
force* that it was either Ignorance, or Prevacation, that first contrived this
detractive objection* (...) the dignity of Hoplochristical Remedies* as also,
that Nature (though according to the great Apho^ of (...) (...)* Naturae* sunt
Medicatrices, I allow her to be the prime and proxime Causatrix of all
Sanation; and all Medicaments no more but Auxiliatory, or Adjuvant, by the
modification of excessive preternatural Qualities, and remove of Impediments)
is not always able to play the Chiron to her self, but in this Case, owes much
of the honor of her safety and conquest, to the assistant power, and amicable
coefficiency of the Vitriol. The same also I desire should be understood, of
the Magnetical manner of operation proper to the Armary U^guent, though I
apprehend the Ingredients of that Magnale, to work rather by a Confermentation
of Analogous Mumies united. If I have not thrown this Peble home, nor directly
to the mark: ^was because I had neither time to take full aim, nor elbow room
to extend their sinews of Reason so far, as my self desired.

The other, I am confident, will hit our Enemy in the forehead. If the Effect
of Hoplochrism be not constant 23.
and ^vocal, but does ordinarily confess an Alterity or Variation from Good to
Evil, conform to the friendship or enmity of any Third Natural Agent
associated, at the Arbitrary Election of the Experimentator, that is, if from
the Counter-activity of intemperate Heat, Actual or Potential, of any venenate
o^ deleterious Quality, corrosive and septical Medicament, putrefactive
Acidity, etc. consubstantially applied unto, and confermentate with the Mumy of
the blood, and magnetically 24.
sympathetick Remedy, there immediately arise (...) Reincrudescence of the
Wound, and a Recidivation or return of all oppressive symptoms dependent: then
is it established, beyond the question of any the most Pyrrhonian Incredulity,
that the Sanation of Wounds; at distance, is not rightly adscriptive to the
single power of Nature, converting the blood successively distilling from its
intersected Condu^ts, into a genial Balsam; but more properly attributary to
the confederate virtue of the Unguent or Powder, idiosyncratically opposed to
the essential hostility of that Acid Vulture, which ravenously devours the
Ca^bium, or rorid destillament ordained for the Vegetation and Reunition of the
wounded part. But the Hypothesis is uncontrollable upon the evidence of Sir K.
D. his Experiment, in tossing the life of Master Howel, from hazard to safety,
from safety to hazard, and back to durable safety again, at pleasure: therefore
is the Inference also sound and justifiable. For the propense submission of
Nature, to the fury of a deleterious influence, transmitted from a remote
Enemy, by the mediation or convoy of the Mumial Effluviums, shot from the
extravenated blood back to its vital fountain; does implicitly manifest her
emolument and relief received, by the same invisible transvection* from the
grateful and congenerous deradiations, or individuated Magnetism of a remote
Friend. Since Contraries ever imply the necessary existence each of other.

Another Block there is, at which not only the herd 25.
of Fools, but even the greatest Clerks use to stumble, in their quest of this
Secret. Requisite it is (say they) that every Natural Agent be immediately
applied to its determinate Patient; otherwise, its specifical Activity, though
near so potent and expedite, must be lost in a fruitless expense, and
unsatisfaction of its particular end; but the Sympathetical Remedy is not
topically approximated to the Wound; therefore must it be, either no Natural
Remedy, or a vain and inefficacious one, at best. But this Argument, though at
first appearance plausible, weighs not one grain in the balance of more
exact Reason, against our theory, and may be easily blown out of the way, by
this distinctive Answer. If it be understood, that every Natural Agent ought
immediately, immediatione suppositi, to touch the Patient, upon which its
virtue is proximely to be discharged, but remo^ely, by the mediation of
otherbodies interjacent, by which the Power of the Active is communicated to
the distant Passive: w^ willingly grant the truth of the Major, to be solid and
undeniable, in regard, i^ suffic^h to the support of our Magnetism, that the
Active touch upon the Passive o^ Object proper and remote, immediatione
virtutis. And therefore we cannot but smile at the weakness and incongruity of
the Minor; because the Sympathe^k. Remedy ought immediately* immediatione
suppositi, to touch that subject, upon which its virtue is first received: but
not the part affected, on which the virtue is secondarily and ultimately
received and terminated, by the interposition of accommodate instruments,
whether bodies situate at convehi^ intervals, or continuate by succession of
parts. For thus, by the same extension of a medium, do we warm our hands at the
fire* and the S^ transmits his vigorous influence and heat, to our (...) Globe*
And in this degree of (affinity, are Sympathetical Medicaments allied unto
^lesti ^nfluences* insomuch, that not only the A^, but vast Rocks of Adamant,
Walls, and any the most compacted and opace bodies are subjects qualified to
admit and convoy this Magnetical Virtue, to its peculiar object, no less then
any the most potent Astral Transmission. Upon which ground, if any stick at the
vast and unlimitted extension of that Sphere of Activity, assigned by the
immense Bounty of Nature, unto Sympathetical R^dies; and yet can (...) conc^ an
^finite O^ of (...) unto ^elestial Influxes: he has very great cause, either
to lament his Ignorance of those, or repent his Credulity of these. And I
profess, that if my rude ^ar may have the liberty to judge, Principium Actionis
Sympathetica, est Facultas influentiis affinis, (...) per irradiationem in
objectum sibi appropriatum: sounds as like an Axiom of constant truth, as Idem
Accidens non mig^ de subjecto in subjectum.

Hitherto has my employment been to clear the Prospect, by the necessary
remove of such Doubts, as seemed very much to obscure the resplendent luster of
Magnetism, and render the Excellencies of Sympathetical Remedies imperceptible;
especially to those purblinde Moles, whose imperfect optics could never endure
to ^y into the mysteries of the Intellectual and Spiritual World, but think the
debt of their Creation fully discharged, in a slight and superficial
speculation of the Material, and never were admitted to a nearer privacy with
Nature, then to have touched the (...) of her upper garment. And my now task
should be, to endeavor an ample presentment of the (...), or Causes of
Hoplochristical Sanation. But of this I can here hold forth no more, then a
thin, blew Landscape* or Abridgment: chiefly in respect the more learned pencils
of Bapt* Porta, Severinus, Hortmannus, Kircherus, Cabeus, Rob. de Fluctibus,
(that Torrent of Sympathetical Knowledge) and the choicest flower in our Garden
Sir K. Digby, have already enriched the World, with ample and elegant
descriptions of the manner, how Sympathetically Magnetic Agents transmit their
Spiritual Energy, unto determinate Patients, at vast and indeterminate
distance; and secondarily, because in my precedent Declarement of the
Magnetical operation of Vitriol, I unavoidably fell upon a plain (though
narrow) delineation of the same subject.

Consider we, first the interminable, and almost infinite 26.
Extent of Divisibili^y: that is, with the razor of most acute thought,
redivide the subdivisions of an Atome, and distinctly perpend, how large a
round of spiritual Aporrhoeaes, or Evaporations may be made and maintained by a
very small Body, actually subtiliated, and emitting a continued steam of most
subtle effluviums. Let us remember also, that by a general consent 27.
of all the Secretaries of Nature, and the undeniable testimony of trivial
Experience, every mixed Body, of an unctuous Composition, does uncessantly vent,
or expire a circumferential steam of invisible Atoms, homogeneous and
consimilar, that is of the same identical nature with it self; and for that
reason, efficaciously operative to the same Finality: which minute
subtiliations, wafted on the wings of a convenient medium, interposed betwixt
the accommodate Object and the body exhalant, and so arriving at an analogous
Patient, do immediately discharge their Activity thereupon, and by degrees of
mutation subdue the same to a Conformity^ 28.
or Qualification requisite^ to the Causation of that particular effect,
originally enjoined to the Seminal Entity of the Agent. Then let us stretch our
Intellectuals, to fathom, how immensly long the arm of sympathy must be
conceded, by all that shall observe, how the Contagion of the Small Pox and
Plague Non ra^o, quasi sympathia quadam occulta, integrae familiae eodem
tempore inficiebantur: Imo vidimus non nullas familias longissime a se invicem
dispersas, and in diversis locis habitantes, eodem fere tempore, exitialissimis
hujus tyranni spiculis graviter afflictas, and ^ere deletas fuisse.
Diemerbroeck de Peste. cap. 4. Ita etiam Evagrius, Histor. Eccles. lib. 4. cap.
28. resert, in Peste Antiochena, certas familias prorsus interiisse, salvis
manentibus interim reliquis Urbis incolis. Causa vero dependet ab arcana quadam
dispositionis similitudine, quam inter se habent, quae apta est ad pestem
r^ipiendam.
is frequently darted from one Brother or Sister to another, at the distance of
many hundred leagues, by invisible emissions, or Pestilential Atoms; without
all excuse of intelligence or mutual Commerce by intervenient messengers: as
also of Fear and Imagination. How a Tagliacotian Nose, enfeoffed with a
Community 30.
of Vitality and Vegetation, by right of Transplantation, upon the face of a
Gentleman at Bruxels, has grown cadaverous, and dropped off, at the instant of
that Porters death, in Bononia, out of whose arm it was first exected. And
finally (that we may supersede the 31.
rehearsal of other Naturally magical examples) how carefully good Huswives
avoid the boiling over of their Milk; lest the Atoms thereof subtiliated by
the intense heat of Fire, and roving abroad hand in hand with the Igneous
Atoms, should be attracted by the Cows Udder (for the source or Fountain of
every effusion, acts a magnetical part, and draws to it self the
subdivisions of that same effusion, situate within the Orb of its Alliciency)
and so an Inflammation be caused, by the apposition of the Atoms of Fire
concomitant. And when we shall have thus cast about, 32.
summed up our reflections, and discreetly accommodated the like effects, daily
occurring to the Comparative perpension of Magnetical Vulneraries: we shall
naturally fall upon, and set up our rest in this Conclusion: That the sanation
of Wounds, by remote means applied to the Weapon, or cloth imbued with the
blood, is no Diabolical, nor prestigious, but a mere ordinary effect of Natural
Causes, operating by Magnetism. For very Familiar must it be made unto us, that
the blood effused from a wound, does constantly (until the last act of
putrefaction) hold an influential commerce with and affinity 33.
unto its proper Fountain, yet enjoying a more perfect state of Vitality, in
its native Conservatory, the Veins; and in that relation, does continually send
forth subtle streams, or invisible Emissaries of Mumial Atoms, toward that
Fountain, or grand Source, as Ambassadors, to intimate the faithful
Correspondence and Amity yet maintained: that these Magnetical Nuntii, being
joined in commission and confermentate with the Balsamical Emanations of the
Sympathetick Unguent or Powder* do carry them home to the wound: And lastly,
that the Exotic and destructive Acidity, impressed upon the sides of the
Wound, and defeating the attempts of Nature toward the redintegration and
accretion of the Continuity infringed, may be subdued and eradicated by the
Medicinal Faculty of the Atoms, deradiated from the Unguent, and conducted
along to the wound in the arms of the Mumial Atoms. Since we are of opinion,
that no man, who has but Philosophy enough to examine the Natural endowments
of each single Ingredient of the Composition, as also of the third Quality
resulting from their Commixture of Confermentation: will deny, that the Armary
Unguent, is impregnated with a sanative Faculty; but such as may be too violent
and intense, if the Unguent were applied in body, without the requisite allay
and refraction of previous Attenuation.

Thus (judicious Reader) have you seen me, in very few minutes, run over my
main course of the Reasons of Hoplochrism; wherein, since I may not come so
near to the guilt of Arrogance, as confidently to say, I have won; I freely
submit to your equitable Arbitration for censure, whether I have not contended
fairly, at least, for the Garland of Truth, and far outstript those my two
hotspurred Adversaries, Ignorance and ^resumption. But yet must I become a
further exercise of your Patience, by holding you to the trouble of going along
with me, over two other very (...) Stages* which I am obliged to measure, in
order to my plenary discharge of a rash promise, which the clamorous
importunity of some friends prevailed upon my too flexile genius to enter into*

The first is, to scan over the second Paradox, concerning the Nativity of
Tartar in Wine* Here, I profess, I highly admire the sagacity of Helmonts wit,
in so exactly tracing this obscure Entity, back to its first single
constitutive Principles, hunting through all those gradual mutations, which he
distinctly scented, as well in the Conglaciation of Wines, in cold Climats, as
their Fermentation, in hot, immediately upon their being brought home from the
Press. Nor can it be gainsaid, by any, that the Spirit of Wine, in avoidance of
its irreconcilable Antagonist, Cold, retreating to the Center of its liquor,
does leave the Cortex, or outward round, open to the invasion of Acidity; which
being the first 34.
degree of Corruption (for if we boil any Flesh, that has been but newly
seized on by Putrefaction, the broth thereof will have a manifest sowreness)
and wanting an object, whereon to sat its Appetite of Corrosion and
Dissolution, does instantly dive to the bottom, and there operate upon the
dregs, or residence of Terrenity, subsiding upon a precedent Diacrisis, or
sequestration of Heterogeneities: and so does, by a second ebullition, cause
them to reascend to the Convexities of the Liquor. But whether, the Acid
Spirit, being coagulated in the very act of Dissolution, according to that
Chymick Axiom, Omnis Spiritus dissolvens, eadem action, qua corpora
dissolvit, coagulatur, be the immediate Cause of the Concretion or
Coagmentation of the dissolved and fluctuating Faeces: I confess, I am yet
unsatisfied. The ground of my haesitancy, in this particular, is that upon a
strict and laborious exploration of the Causes of Coagulation, conductive to
Lapidescence or Petrification, in my Dissertation De Lithiasi, of stones in the
Microcosm, I found; that the only Gorgon, or Lapidifactory Principle, to which
all Concreted substances ow their Coagulation, and upon the destruction of
which, they return to their primitive Incontinuity and Volatility, is a Saline
Fixative Spirit, as I have in that discourse sufficiently proved: and therefore
I should rather derive the pedigree of Tartar after this manner. When the Acid
Spirit, immersed in an excessive quantity of Terrenity, becomes evirate, 35.
languid, and insufficient to the volatilization of the more gross, ponderous,
and fixed parts of the Faeces; it is wholly overcome by the predominant power of
the Saline Gorgon, ambuscadoed in the terrestrial Residence: and so immediately
upon this conquest, all the Terrestrial Atoms are fixed, coagmentated, and
ferruminated into a solid Concretion; which is the Tartar adhering to the sides
of Wine Casks.

Here also does my constant Fidelity to Truth, make 36.
me to observe; that if Vinegar be made of Wine, whose spirits are all
Exhausted, by the destructive embraces of Heat, surrounding the vessel, and so
insensibly extracting all radical vigor and essential vitality from the mass of
liquor, propter (...), to be united to a consimilar substance; as seems most
consonant to Experience; then doubtless, that great Privy Counselor to Nature,
Sennertus In libro de Scorbuto, cap. 2.
, has deserved the refuge of that Proverb, Bernhardus non videt omnia, in his
mistake, That Vinegar should be made of Wine, wherein the spirits are fixed or
congelated, by reason of an oppressive quantity of Fixative Salt, arising from
the immaturity, austerity and defective Fermentation of the Must, and not out
of Wine, whose spirits are separated by Exhaustion; and by consequence, must
have miscarried in his design of drawing Spirit of Wine out of Vinegar, which
project he mentioned both in his Chemical Operations, and in his incomparable
Tract, De Consensu Chymicorum cum Galenicis.

My last unwilling task, is the delivery of my suffrage, upon that inscrutable
Paradox, asserted by Helmont in his Discourse of The Image of God in Man, as
the main point he drives at in all that Meditation; namely, that Reason is no
radical, primitive, essential part of the Human soul, but a caduce, spurious
Faculty, accidentally Advenient upon the Degradation of our Nature, by eating
the poisonous Fruit of the forbidden Tree; and by consequence, separable from
the soul, at the instant of her emancipation from her prison of Clay, and
wholly useless to her in her state of restitution to the Clarity of Abstracted
and Intuitive Intellection.

To this opinion (I blush not to profess) I have formerly leaned, as well by
reason of a propensity thereunto kindled in me by a short passage in S.
Augustine Praestantique intellectui (...) actionem, t^quam viro soeminam,
subdidisti. In Soliloq.
, as by finding, in my solitary speculations, a readiness in my belief to
submit to the conviction of these ensuing Arguments. (1.) The Soul lays hold
on her hopes of future Beatitude, with her right hand of Faith, which is a firm
and unalterable Apprehension of objects, 1.
to which her left hand of Reason can never be extended: yea, so far short does
our most advanced and illuminated Reason come of the true Cognition of the
essence of Omnipotence, Infinity, Eternity, etc. that, in every step of our
journey toward the true Elysium, we must quit the dark Lanthorn of Reason, and
wholly throw our selves upon the implicit conduct of Faith. For a deplorable
truth it is, that the unconstant, variable, and seductive imposture of Reason,
has been the only unhappy cause, to which Religion does ow all those wide,
irreconcilable and numerous rents and schisms, in the seamless and indivisible
Coat of Faith, made by men of the greatest Logic, and even such, whose
intenser flames of Devotion had rendered their minds the whitest and most
purified from the lees of Temporal interest: every Faction alleging a
rational induction, or ground for its peculiar Def^ection, from the unity of
Truth; Reason having, in their judgments, erected the rotten and fragil reed of
mere Futation, in the room of the sound and inflexible Pillar of certain and
fiduciary Cognition. (2.) The Mind of man, squared by the rule of Faith,
stands ascertained, that the 2.
form or essence of Verity, is unical, single, and devoid of all Alterity; and
that the Intellect, in its abstracted simplicity, apprehends only the unity
of verity: but Reason is unavoidably obnoxious to the delusion of Multiplicity,
and distraction of Alterity, and therefore unfit to steer the Will, in the act
of Election. Quippe quae (as Helmont, most significantly) facile per linguas,
nunc ad unum, nunc vero ad alterum extremorum, nutabunda flecteretur,
rationesque ubique inveniret, fingeret, substerneret, juxta placita
desideriorum. (3.) The Mind, having once fathomed the extent of her wings, in
Metaphysical 3.
speculations, becomes assured, that after her delivery from the Dungeon of
Flesh and Blood, she shall have all her knowledge full, entire, abstracted, in
one single act; not successive, not extorted by the oblique violence of
premises, not erroneous, controvertible, or dubious: that she shall no longer
groan under the perplexity of framing Demonstrations, by wr^sting, deducing,
inferring, concluding one proposition from another; whether in order to her act
of Conception or Notification. (4.) Where precedeth no Discourse, no 4.
Composition, nor Connection of Premises; there, doubtless, can succeed no
Conclusion, Consecution, or Reason: but the Science of the Premises, is always
more certain, then the Science of the Conclusion (since the certitude of the
Inference, is extracted out of, and does necessarily depend upon the Certitude
of the proposition conceded) and that Science is radically seated in the
Intellect, without the concurrence of Reason, because we find it elder then
the Demonstration. And questionless, this were a fair ground for any able pen
to contend upon; that Reason does not generate, in the Understanding, any more,
then a Caliginous or Spurious Cognition, which we may call a specious Putation:
as also, that the indubitate Science of the Verity of Essences, of the
simplicity of things abstracted, and of first Propositions, or leading notions
in Syllogisms, does not flow from the polluted and tempestuous stream of
Reason; but, indeed, from a more divine, serene, luminous Fountain, the
Intellect, which I may, with Solomon, adventure thus to describe: It is The
breath of the power of God, and a pure influence flowing from the Glory of the
Almighty, the brightness of the everlasting Light, the unspotted Mirror of the
Power of God, and the Image of his Goodness, and being but one, she can do all
things, and remaining in her self she makes all things new, etc. (5.) Let any
Problem in Philosophy 5.
be propounded to ten, or twenty (the number is of no concernment) the most
sage Oedipuse's in the World, and a reason demanded from each apart: and I dare
promise, you shall observe, the variety of opinions will stand in aequilibrio
with the number of Persons; every single head being deluded by the imposture of
specious Reason, and so contumaciously adhering to its particular Apprehension,
that the most modest of them all will be ready to swear, that his Solution has
touched the white and Center of Truth; when, peradventure, not one among them
has ever shot near it. Such a Chameleon is our Reason; and so variously
delusive. (6.) Truth is impressed only upon 6.
the Intellect, in regard, the verity understood, is nothing else but the
adequation of the Intellect to the object; or more plainly, the Intellects
putting on the Form of the thing comprehended (for the Intellect knows
objects in the reality of their distinct Essence, and is therefore
interchangeably certified of the Nature of things, by the things, themselves:
Since the Esse of things is, of it self, ever true, and their Essence and the
Essence of Truth; are homogeneal and identical) and therefore the Intellect,
which is in a manner carried forth to a Conjunction with the abstract Forms of
objects, is always directly true. Now since the Imagination, or its laborious
Faculty, Reason, is a certain oblique and circulatory way of intelligence,
wyerdrawn through the devious meanders, and complex paths of Discourse; but not
by the immediate Metamorphosis of adequation, or Protean shifting of its own
Form, into the Form of the thing apprehended: therefore is the way of Cognition
by Reason, Fallacious and Nonscientifical. (7.) Whatever sounds but analogous
or 7.
affine, that does Reason positively judge, consonant and homogeneous to Verity:
when yet Reason and Truth are infinitely Disparate, as to the roots of their
Essences. For Verity is, Ens reale, verum: But Reason is, Ens mentale,
problematicum, and only plausible, or apparent; and hence do our
Metaphysicians account of En^ rationis, no more then Non-ens, as deriving its
geniture from no more substantial a Father, then Imagination, and its
production, from the wanton and inconstant womb of Putation. (8.) Many wise
men, great 8.
Scholars, and extremely tender, in the point of their Allegiance to the
Church, have thought it no dishonor to their Creation, nor Diminution of the
(...), or transcendent dignity of Humane Nature, to opinion, that the Faculty
of Discourse, though in a greater degree of obscurity, may be attributed to
brute Animals. I presume, this hard saying will, by the unisone vote of the
multitude, be soon condemned to relish more of the Philosopher, then the
Christian, and so be exploded for Contagious and Ethnical. But that indifferent
Ear, that shall have so much patience, as to hear St. Jerome relate his story
of the Testimonio St. Anthonii, per B. Jeronymum descripto, Paulus
Anachoretarum primus, in Divorum numerum est relatus. Ejusdem quoqu^ relatu,
Faunus l^gitur Animal loquens rationale: Imo Deum Naturae and Christianorum
cognoscens, cole^s, and supplicans Antonium, ut pro se atque suis Deum oraret.
Constat inprimis, hunc Faunum non fuisse hominem ^x monstrosa figura: neque
Cacodaemonem, quod hic adeo superbiat, ut ne quidem, si sciret se salvari posse
prece, v^llet rogare, ut aliquis pro se oraret, neque se prosterneret pro
impetranda venia*
Faune, or semi-humane Monster, that having vocally acknowledged the true God,
embraced the Christian belief, received the symbols of the same, and earnestly
desired the mediatory Prayers of Anthony, the Anachoret, conversed a long time
with him, in the Wilderness: shall observe the Arithmetic of Bees Mu^s
, in computing their Hives morn and even, having no other method of directing
themselves each to his proper home, but the number of their particular
Commonwealth, which when they miss, upon a transposition of them, they stray
and are lost in their mistake of entering another Hive; And finally shall to
these evidences, annex the serious Lecture of that eloquent Legate Hieron.
Rorarius, in his two Books, Quod animalia Bruta ratione utantur melius homine,
and other Writers on the same Argument; will, I doubt not, arise fully
satisfied, that a well tempered Enquiry, Whether the Power of Ratiocination, be
not in common to some Beasts, as well as to man, though Imperfectiori modo,
cannot misbecome, though not the Pulpit, yet the Study of the most rigid Divine.

These, I say, were the Temptations that first drew me into a belief, that the
Power of Ratiocination seemed too low and trivial an Endowment, to make out the
Imperial Prerogative, of man's being created in the Image of God; though at the
same time, I could not but make a strong reflection upon my own Frailties, and
there inform my self, that I wanted not cause to despair, of ever being so
happy, in this life, as to become enabled, by study, to husband my share of
Reason, to the best use, and utmost improvement of its capacity. But my second
thoughts are more wary, and hold it a part of Prudence, to suspend my positive
assent unto this nice Particular; as well in respect, this dispute would better
beseem the Metaphysical Speculations of the School Divine, then the gross and
corporeal disquisition of a young Physician: as also, that I have observed
Sculls of the largest capacity, most subject to Scepticity; especially, in
Notions relating to the Condition of the Soul, when strugled from the eclipse
of Flesh. To which may be added, that absolutely to determine pro or con, on
this debate; though it may manifest the fineness and subtilty of his wit, who
can handsomely set Reason against her self, and wound her at heart with arrows
stolen out of her own quiver; yet must it be, a bold usurpation of the privilege
of Death, to whose decision properly doubts of this kind belong; that being
the universal Moderator, that will sat our Curiosities, and in a moment,
determine all our Controversies.

(...), Arist. W. CHARLETON.
London, the 2. of November. 1649.
In Elegantissimam Triadem Tractatuum Philosophicorum Doctis. Van- Helmont de
Magnetismo, Tartaro, and Anima; AD. GUALTERO CHARLETON Clarissimo Chimiatro
Londin. Anglico Idiomate cum notis donatorum: Hoc, in amicitiae tesseram, apud
Belgas discessurus, Epigramma Operi suo praefigendum reliquit: P. de Cardonnel.
DOcta Trias! Magnum Sophiae quae condis elixir,
Quod puto Termagnum vel latuisse Senem:
Eia avibus prodi laetis; Te fama secundet
Prospera, suffragiis intemerata suis.
Digna Trias Cedro; Phoebi Lauroque perenni,
Digna vel invitos conciliare Sophos:
Aonidum munus sacrum, doctaeque Minervae,
Cui nil posse addi Fama putabat iners:
Addere Suada Novos, o Charletone, Lepores
Ausa tamen Calami est Dexteritasque tui.
Alter diceris merito nunc omnibus Allus ad Her. m^m Trismeg. and vocab. Gr.
(...).
Hermes;
Et tua jam summis proxima Laurus erit:
Quaque Theophrastum evexit Germania laud,
Helmonti in Belgis.
Batavis gloria quanta fuit:
Tam debere Tibi Britones se jure fatentur,
Vtiliora illis qui Monumenta paras.
V. KAL. VIIBRIS. AERAE CHRIST. MDCXLIX.
Alexandri Rossaei Epigramma In Politam hanc Translationem Anglicam Triuim D.
Helmontii Tractatuum, A Domino Gualt. Charletono, M. D. Clarissimo emissam.
QUae neque Phillyrides, nec noverat ipse Melampus,
Jasidesve senex:
Nec qui Paeoniis castum revocavit ad aur as
Artibus Hippolytum:
Nec qui inter Danaos Doctor Podalirius olim
Artis Apollineae
Noverat; haec nobis Sermon Helmontius Heroes
Tradidit Ausonio.
Quamvis illi omnes potuere expellere morbos
Art Machaonia:
Non tamen hi rerum causas novere latentes,
Quas docet iste Liber,
Quem puro Sermon and vocibus edidit Anglis
Charleton Jatricus.
Herculeas rerum vires, animamque reclusit
Splendidiore face:
Et velut Alcides, reseravit Tartara nobis;
Non Acheronta tamen.
Hic Phoebo est charus, sed long charior esset
Si Peripateticus.
ALEX. ROSSE.

To the Learned Dr. Charleton, on his elegant Translation of some most select
pieces of Helmont, accompanied with his excellent Notes, candid Animadversions,
and opportune Enlargement.
HElmont, though dead, is now revived. Your Pen,
Like Aesons Bath, instill's fresh youth again,
Into his pale and elemental Clay. His Tomb,
By your fair Midwifery, becom's a Womb:
From whose now re-impregnate sperm, He
Buds forth into a second Infancy.
Your Sheets new swath him (Sir) where he appears
More vigorous in this youth, then in his years.
We Are now convinced, that Sympathies combine
At distance; that dispersed Mumies twine:
That Nature, on one string, like coupled Beads,
Her Rosary of twisted Causes threads.
Since what of those he first asserted true,
Gathers new strength, and Argument from you.
Those active Flames, which thawed your Brain, do thence
Espouse his widowed Earth, with Heat and Sense.
Those Spirits, which that public Mint of the Blood,
The Liver, back retails to th'purple Flood,
Still through their azure Limbecks, and entrust
New Sap, and Verdure to his withered Dust.
Sure, when the Soul of Helmont shook away
The Frippery, and Luggage of her Clay,
She seemed to steal into your Breast; and there
To fix herself, as in her second Sphere.
Yet lest two inmate Souls, both so immense,
They cannot be unactive, chained in Sense,
Or close immured in walls of Flesh, should rent
Uncircumscrib'd, the brittle Tenement:
They virtually diffuse themselves, and come
Into this Book, by an Effluvium.
Within whose Pages, they will joint Tenants dwell,
As in some nere to be demolisht Cell.
And when the Wardrobe of your Dust shall be
Dispersed themselves into more Dust then ye;
This to your Names (from Times impressions safe)
Shall stand at once, both Urn and Epitaph.
Thom. Philipot.

OF THE MAGNETIC CURE OF WOUNDS. (...).
The Summary.
1. FAscination, Sympathy, and Magnetisme differ. 2. The Sympathetick Unguent
one, the Magnetic another. 3. Mumie what. 4. Philosophy immediately subject to
the reprehension of reason only. 5. The difference of Law and Philosophy. 6.
From an ignorance of the Cause, Magnetism ascribed to the Devil. 7. Who the
interpreters of Nature. 8. Why Chymicks only fit to unridle the mysterious
oracles of Nature. 9. He is tacitly guilty of pride, who from an ignorance of
the cause, believes a Natural effect to be Diabolical. 10. Who are the Devils
Flatterers. 11. Magnetisme no new invention. 12. The Armary Unguent. 13. The
intention, scope, ingredients, and manner of the application of the Unguent,
good. 14. The Unguent, why not unlawful. 15. Nor superstitious. 16.
Superstition, what. 17. Why the manner of the Unguents operation, unknown to
the Censor, concludes nothing against it. 18. Magnetisme what. 19. Some effects
of the Loadstone. 20. The Magneticall cure of (otherwise) incurable diseases,
perfect. 21. Milk burned, dryes up the breasts. 22. Vitrioll destroyed by
Magnetism. 23. Mumie operates from Italy, as far as Bruxels. 24. The Carline
Thistle, in the shadow, attracteth wonderfully. 25. The same numericall disease
may change subjects. 26. From Magnetism flowers follow the Sun. 27. Mumiall
Philtres, how they may be magneticall. 28. The secret mystery of the blood is
the Chymist's Loadstone. 29. Herbs, how, and why magneticall. 30. Asarabacca
and Elder, magneticall. 31. An implicit compact, the refuge of the ignorant.
32. Sympathy praesupposeth sense. 33. The Mumie of a dead brother, long since
impressed upon a chair, yet magneticall. 34. A Sapphire, in magnetisme, rivals
the Unguent. 35. A Sapphire, by the touch of one Carbuncle, cures many others.
36. Why the grand Praelates of the Church wear caerule rings. 37. Man has a
magnetic virtue. 38. A Zenexton, or Amulet, against the Plague. 39. Necessary
it is, that one and the same Accident pass from subject to subject. 40.
Magnetisme a coelistiall quality. 41. A thief or murderer, and an honest man,
or woman, yield the same moss. 42. Whence, and what the seed of the moss. 43.
The fruit of the aer. 44. The moss, a production of fire. 45. In the moss
also is the back of the magnet, the scope being changed. 46. God, in miracles,
follows the course of Nature. 47. God, by relics, approves the Magnetisme of
the Unguent. 48. Supernatural Magnetisme warranteth natural. 49. A lock of
the moss, worn in the forehead, is defense against a sword: but of the stole
of Saint Hubert, against the biting of a mad dog. 50. A lock neatly inserted
into the forehead, is a praeservative, during life, from the biting of a mad
dog. 51. Pepper degenerateth into Ivy. 52. How we are to judge of persons. 53.
Paracelsus the Monarch of Secrets. 54. Every thing has its peculiar heaven.
56. Whence every natural inclination. 57. Whence diseases are astrall in man,
and portend foul weather. 51. Whence diseased men have a foreknowledge of
tempests. 59. What causes the flux and reflux of the Sea. 60. Whence the winds
are stirred up. 61. The heavens do not cause, but only denounce future
events. 62. Every seminall Entity, has its own peculiar firmament, and the
virtue of its influence. 63. The Vine, not the stars, troubles the Wine. 64.
Antimony observes an influence. 65. The Loadstone directs it self, but is
not attracted, to the pole. 66. Glass, magneticall. 67. Rosin, magneticall.
68. The power of Garlic over a Loadstone: and why the same over Mercury. 69.
The power operative on a distant object, is natural even in sublunaries: and
magneticall. 70. Every Creature lives, suo modo: by the peculiar information of
his own essential form. 71. What the Unguent can attract from the wound, at
distance. 72. Every Satanicall effect is imperfect. 73. Why Satan cannot
cooperate with our Unguent. 74. What may be called, the will, and fancy of
the flesh, and of the outward man. 75. A twofold Ecstasy. 76. The ecstatique
virtue of the blood. 77. Corruption educeth that dormant virtue into action.
78. The essences of things not subject to Corruption. 79. The design of
Spagyricall putrefaction. 80. The Cause of Magnetisme in the Unguent. 81. The
heart attracted by treasure, magnetically. 82. The original of Necromancy. 83.
What man is, in the notion of Animal: and what in the notion of the Image of
God. 84. How an Eagle is invited by the magnetism of a Carcass. 85. How the
blood, in the Unguent, is allected to its treasure: and why Eagles flock
together to a Carcass, magnetically. 86. Sensation Animal, and Sensation
Natural, different. 87. The effects of Witches, impious. 88. The power of the
Witch, is Natural: and what that power is. 89. Where in Man, the magical
power is seated. 90. Whether man has a dominion paramount, over all other
Creatures 91. Why a man is endowed with a power of acting, per nutum. 92. The
magical faculty of man, what. 93. This magical activity lies ambuscadoed in
man, several ways. 94. The inward man, the same with the outward
fundamentally: but materially diverse. 95. What is the Vital spirit: its
science and endowment. 96. In a Carcass, extinct by a voluntary death, there is
no inhaerent spirit. 97. The division of spirits according to the doctrine of
Physicians. 98. The Soul operates in the body, only per nutum, magically. 99.
In the body, the Soul operateth only by a drowsy, so^olent beck, or
restrained intuition: but out of the body, by a nimble, and vehement. The
knowledge of the Apple, eclipseth the knowledge magical. 100. The beginning of
the Cabal, drawn from dreams, divinely infused. 101. The defect of
understanding in the outward man. 102. How far the power of atan extends in
Witches. 103. What are the true and proper works of Satan. 104. Sin took away
the endowments of Grace, and obscured those of Nature. 105. The end of the
pious exercises of Catholics. 106. The grand effect of the Cabal. 107. Two
subjects of all things. 108. Man has a power of acting, as well by spirit, as
body. 109. What kind of ray, or effluvium, is transmitted from a witch, to a
brute. 110. How a Witch may be discovered. 111. How the spirit of a Witch may
be captived, and bound fast in the heart of a horse. 112. The intention
depraves a good work. 113. The Virtue seminall, is Naturally Magical. 114. The
cause of the Cruentation of a murdered Carcass, in the praesence of the
homicide. 115. Why the Plague a frequent concomitant of seidges. 116. Works of
mercy, to be done upon the distressed, though only in order to the avoydance of
the Plague. 117. Plagues arising from revenge, and exsecrations of men dying
under oppression, most fatal. 118. Why the carcases of malefactors were to be
removed from the gibbet. 119. Why excrements can be no authors of a Plague.
120. Why the blood of a bull is venomous. 121. Why the fat of a bulis made an
ingredient into the Sympathetick unguent* namely, that it may be made an Armary
Unguent. 122. Why Satan cannot concur to the Unguent. 123. The basis of Magic.
124. When vanities and impostures are reputed for magic. 125. A good magic in
holy Writ. 126. What may be called true magic. 127. The cause of the idolatry
of Witches. 128. The Excitators of magic. 129. Satan excites it imperfectly.
130. Whence beasts are also magical. 131. The dominion of Spirits fostereth
contention and love. 132. Man, why a microcosm. 133. The mind generateth real
Entities. 134. That real Entity of an ambiguous, or middle nature, betwixt a
body and a spirit. 135. The descension of the Soul, causes a conformative
Will. 136. The cause of the fertility of seeds. 137. Why lust does in a manner,
alienate us from our mind. 138. A Father, by the spirit of his seed, does
generate extra se beyond the limits of his own body, in a subject suddenly
removed to distance. 139. What spirit that is, which is the Patron of
Magnetism. 140. The will does transmit a spirit to the object. Unless the will
did produce some reality, the Devil could have no knowledge of it and unless
it sent this produced reality forth from it self, toward the object, the devil
being absent, could never be provoked thereby. Where therefore the treasure is,
thither does the heart of man tend. 141. Magnetisme done by sensation. 142.
There is a plurality of sensations in one single subject. 143. From the
superior phansy commanding it. 144. Why glasse-makers use the powder of
Loadstone. 145. The Phansy of Attrahents changed. 146. Inanimate creatures,
endowed with Phansy. 147. Why some things eaten, introduce madness. 148. Why a
mad dog biting a man, causes madness. 149. The sting of the Tarantula causes
an alienation of the mind from reason. 150. Why beasts defend not themselves
against the biting of a mad dog. 15^. The sympathy betwixt objects removed at
distance each from other, is done by the mediation of an Universal Spirit,
which governing the Sun, and other celestial orbs, is endued with exquisite
sense. 152. The imagination, in Creatures enriched with an Elective Faculty, is
various, arbitrary, and unconfined: but in others, of the same determinate
identity always. 153. The first degree of power magical, dwells in the
forms of the three grand Principles, viz. Sal, Sulphur, and Mercury. 154. The
second is by the Phansies of the Forms of the Mixtum, or integrall Composition:
which being destroyed, the Principles yet remain. 155. The third arises from
the Phansy of the Soul. 156. What beasts are endowed with magical power, and
can act beyond the circumference of themselves, per nutum only. 157. The
fourth degree of power magical, is from the excited intellect of man. 158. The
word Magic, is analogous, and appliable to many things, in a third relation.
159. Every magical power, stands in need of, and is improved by Excitation.
160. What may be said a subject capable of Magnetism. 161. How Magnetism
differs from other Formal Proprieties. 162. The superfluous humors and
Excrements of the body, have also their Phansy. 163. Why Holy Writ does give
the attribute of life, rather to the blood then to any other humor in the body.
164. The seed inhaeriteth the Phansy of the Father, by traduction: Whence
Nobility has its original. 165. The skins of the Wolf and sheep retain a
Phantastique enmity, of their former life. 166. What the Phansy of the blood,
freshly added to the Unguent, can do. The manner of the Magnetisme in the
Unguent. 167. The difference betwixt a magneticall cure done by the Unguent,
and that done by a rotten egg. 168. The grand mystery of humane Imagination,
the foundation of Natural Magic. 169. The Intellect impresseth the Entity, it
self created, upon the external object: and there it really perseveres. 170.
How to make powerful pentacles or magical Characters. 171. The Phansy, by a
nail, as by a medium, holds captive the spirit of the Witch. 172. If Satan can
move a body, without any corporeal extremity: why cannot the inward man do
the same? and why not rather the spirit of the Witch? 173. The virtue of the
Unguent, not from the imagination of its Compounder: but from diverse simples
married into one Composition. 174. The Author makes profession of his Faith.

IN the eighth year of this age, there came to my hands an Oration declamatory,
made at Marpurge of the Catti, wherein Rodulphus Goclenius (to whom the public
profession of Philosophy was lately committed) paying his first fruits to the
University, endeavors to make good, that the cure of wounds, by the
Sympathetick, and Armarie Unguent, first invented by Paracelsus, is merely
natural. Which Oration I wholly read, and sighed, that the history of natural
things had fallen under the protection of so weak a Patron. The Author,
nevertheless, highly pleased himself with that argument of writing, and with a
continued barrenness of probation, in the year 1613. published the same work,
with some enlargement. Not long since, I also met with a succinct anatome of
the forementioned Book, compiled by a certain Divine, savoring more of a
fine-witted Censure, then a solid Disputation. Whereupon my judgment, what ever
it were, was much desired; at least, in that relation, that the thing invented
by Paracelsus, nearly concerned him, and my self, his disciple. I shall
therefore declare, what I conceive of the Physician Goclenius, and what of the
Divine, the Censor. The Physician in the first place, proposes, and with
ostentation promises to prove, the magnetical cure of wounds to be purely
natural; but I found the undertaker insufficient, to perform so weighty a task;
in regard he no where, or at best but very slenderly, makes good the title, or
his own large promises. Collecting, hence and thence from diverse Authors, many
rhapsodies or gleanings, by which he conceives he has, to ample satisfaction,
proved, that in the inventory of created natures, there are certain formal or
essential virtues, which men term Sympathy and Antipathy; and also that from
the concession of these, the Magnetical Cure is merely natural. Many things, I
say, borrowed from the Egyptians, Chaldeans, Persians, Conjurers, and
Impostors, he has amassed together into this one discourse, that thereby he
might evidence and confirm that Magnetism, which notwithstanding, himself was
wholly ignorant of. With design, partly, that by a delightful entertainment of
those minds that are eager in the quest of novelties, he might seduce them
from a direct progression to the mark; and partly to raise them to an
admiration of the Author, who seemed to have read, and ransacked not only
vulgar, but also all other more rare and antique writers.

For which consideration, the Physician does very absurdly confound Sympathy
(which erroneously, and under various notions he very often introduces) with
Magnetism; and from that concludes this to be natural: For I have observed this
Vulnerary Unguent to cure, not only men, but horses also; with which our
Nature holds not so near an affinity (unless we grant our selves to be Asses)
that from thence the Sympathetick Unguent should deserve to be accounted common
to horses, as well as to us.

With the same absurd indistinction, he also confounds Sympathy with
Fascination and Ligation, and both with Magnetism; namely, with great anxiety
and travel of mind, he crowds together upon the Stage, in one Scene, without
any distinction, all secret, and more abstruse effects what ever; that being
destitute of reasons, he might thereby support his own Magnetism. I will by an
example difference Fascination from Sympathy, and both from Magnetism. A Dog
holds an Antipathy 1.
(for Sympathy and Antipathy are both daughters of the same Mother) with a Hen;
for he preys upon her, and she flies from him; but when she has newly hatched
her Chickens, and excluded them from the protection of their shells, she boldly
assaults, and puts to flight a dog; though of himself very courageous; to wit,
the soul of the Hen, by fascination, chaining up the soul of the dog; the
former Antipathy, disparity of weapons for guard, and great ods of strength
affording no hinderance to the action: But in this, Magnetism is no where to be
found.

Moreover, what other instances the Physician inserts, concerning Impresses,
Characters, Gamaheu, or Magical Images, Ceremonies, and such like, for the most
part, vain observances, are but random shots, wholly impertinent to the present
scope, and rather stagger the doctrine of Magnetism, by rendering it suspected,
then support or advance it. But of these positively to determine any thing, is
a task not suitable to my wit.

Goclenius furthermore wanders from truth, and indeed with no less temerity
then ignorance; fondly dreaming from the prescript of Paracelsus, that the
weapon, wherewith the wound was inflicted, if rolled up in the weapon salve,
did work the cure on the wound. For in vain is the weapon, or point of the
sword anointed with the Armary Unguent, prescribed by him, unless it be
distained with blood, and that blood be first dried upon the sword. For to
Paracelsus, the Sympathetick Unguent 2.
is one thing, in respect of the blood effluxed out of the wound; and that
Unguent, wherewith arms, which have received no tincture of blood, are to be
emplastrated, clearly another; and for this reason, he Christens the former,
the Magnetic, and Sympathetick, the latter, the Armary Magnetic Unguent:
Which therefore (and to good purpose) receives into its confection, besides the
ingredients essential to the former, Honey, and Bulls fat.

In fine, Goclenius, to humor his own genius, has altered the prescription of
Paracelsus; affirming, that the Usnea, or moss, is to be selected only from
the skulls of such, as have been hanged. Of which his own, and grossly erroneous
invention enquiring a reason, he blushes not foolishly to imagine, that in
strangulation the Vital spirits violently retreat into the skull, and there
constantly shroud themselves for some time, until the moss shall, under the
open canopy of the Air, grow up, and periwig the Cranium. Paracelsus has
expressly taught the contrary, and by multiplied experience we are confirmed,
that Usnea gathered from the skulls of such, who have been broken on the wheel,
is in virtue no whit inferior to that of men strangled with a halter. For truly
from Animals there is not drawn the Quint Essence (in regard the principal, and
paramont 3.
essence perishes together with the influent spirit, and life) but only the
virtue mumial, that is, the originary, implantate, and confermentate spirit,
safely remaining, and in an obscure vitality surviving, in bodies extinct by
violence.

What other things Goclenius has delivered, of remedies to repair a ruinous
memory, as we cannot but declare them, in no relation, congruent to the scope
intended; so also we nothing doubt to prove them mere pageants and impertinent
flourishes.

Betwixt our Divine and Physician, there is at all no dispute de facto, about
the verity of the fact; for both unanimously concede the cure to be wrought
upon the wounded person: The contention lies only in this, that the Physician
asserts this Magnetical Cure to be purely Natural, but the Divine will needs
have it Satanical, and that from a compact of the first inventor. Of which
censure, in his Anatome of our Physicians discourse, he alleges no positive
reason; conceiving it sufficiently satisfactory, if he, on the score of his own
solitary judgment, abolish it, though he subjoyn no grounds for the abolition;
that is, acquiescing only in this, that he has removed the feeble and invalid
arguments of the Assertor; which, in sober truth, is a matter of no diligence,
no learning, and of no authority to erect or establish belief. For what avails
it, to the procurement of faith, from no stronger evidence, then the futility
of specious reasons, urged by some ignorant head, to give a definite judgment
on the thing it self? and to declare it impious, if himself has not so much as
in a dream thought upon any one petty reason, for the support of his sentence?
What if I, being a Laick, should with course and untrimmed arguments, commend
Presbytery, and another reject my reasons as unworthy and insufficient, will
the order of Priesthood it self be therefore rejected? Of what concernment, I
pray, is the ignorance, or temerity of any one to realities themselves? In the
Court of Truth, Philosophy submits 4.
not it self to naked and single censures, unless there also concur a
considerable gravity of the Censors, fortified with firm and convincible
reasons.

Wherefore I, who have undertaken, in opposition to our Divine, to make good,
that the Magnetic Cure of wounds, is the single, and ordinary effect of
Nature; in the first place, think Goclenius worthy to be excused, if without
success he has sweat in the indagation of the grand and approximate Cause of
this rare effect. What wonder, when our Divine makes public confession, that
himself is utterly ignorant of that cause, and only for that reason refers it
to Satan, as to the Author and master-wheel in this abstruse motion: For such
is the infirmity of our delapsed nature, that we are destitute of the knowledge
of the most, and most excellent things. And therefore, to palliate this defect
of our understanding, we, though not without some tacit reluctance within,
obliquely wrest many effects, whose efficients are beyond the ken of our
bleareyed reason, to the sanctuary of ignorance, and refer them to the
Catalogue of Occult Qualities. For who, among Divines, ever had a plenary and
demonstrative knowledge of the true and proper cause of Risibility, or any other
Formal propriety: For example, of the heat of fire. Do not thou fall upon
that Fallacy, Petitio Principii, an absurd begging of the question, if thou
answer, that extreme heat belongs to fire, because it is of the essence of
fire? In truth, the Essences of Forms, in regard they are unknown to us, a
priori, from their Causalities; therefore also is the original, or pedigree of
Formal proprieties, wholly abstruse, jejune, and undiscovered; and where we
perceive any Formal passion subjoyned, the mind, as if tired with vain
scrutiny, soon cease from the disquisition of it, and reposeth it self,
sitting down contented with the empty notion, and bare name of Occult
proprieties. Go to, I beseech thee, does the Anatomist, our Censor, happily
know the reason why a Dog swings his tail when he rejoices, but a Lion when he
is angry; and a Cat, when pleased, advances hers in an erect posture? What
therefore, when himself cannot give a reason for the motion of a tail, will he
so much wonder, that Goclenius has given an improper and insolid reason of
Magnetism? and from the refutation of that, presume that he has more then
sufficiently demonstrated that sanation of wounds to be Satanical, which is the
genuine effect of Magnetism? Far from us be so great temerity of censure.

Come on then; why do thou call that cure Dibolical? 5.
Insooth, thou ought to have annexed the reason of thy censure, unless thou
expectest it should be denied by others, with the same facility, wherewith thou
affirmest it to be diabolical. Lawyers require only the affirmative confirmed;
but Philosophers both parts, that the ignorance or protervity of the Nogant
party, may not appear greater then that of the Affirmant. Do thou happily
maintain the Cure to be Diabolical, because it cannot be clearly understood (by
thee) that there is any natural reason for it? I will not believe, that from
thy own infirmity, thou may deliver so idle and stupid a sentence of the
virtue of it. For thou well know, that the imbecility of our understanding,
in not comprehending the more abstruse and retired causes of things, is not to
be ascribed to any defect in their nature, but in our own hoodwinkt
intellectual^.

Proceed therefore; whence have thou assurance, that God, in his primitive
intention, has not directed this virtue Magnetical to the benefit of the
wounded? Show us your Commission; has God elected you the Secretary of his
Council? Certainly, however you may waver in your belief, you shall in
conclusion find, that amongst you Divines, the Magnetic 6.
cure can be accounted Diabolical for no other reason then that the shallowness
of your judgment cannot comprehend, nor your Function admit it to be natural.
What wonder, that no Divine has ever scented these subtilities? for after the
Priest 7.
and the Levite had both passed on to Jericho, there succeeded a Samaritan, a
Lay man, who deprived the Priests of all right of disquisition into the secret
causes of things. Whereupon Nature from thenceforth summoned not Divines to be
the Interpreters 8.
of her nicer operations, but adopted Physicians only to be her darlings, and
none but such, who instructed by Pyrotechny, examine the proprieties of things,
by sequestring the impediments or clogs of virtues ambuscadoed in their grosser
materials, such are their crudity, venenosities, and impurities; that is those
briars and thorns every where, from the first Malediction, inoculated into the
creatures in their spring or virgin estate. For since Dame Nature (the
Proto-Chymist) her self does every day sublime, calcine, ferment, dissolve,
coagulate, fix, etc. Certainly we also, the only faithful interpreters of
Natures Oracles, do by the same helps and advantages draw forth the Essential
qualities of things from the dark prison of their materials, and bring them to
the Meridian light of reason.

But the Divine, that he may be able to discern what is prestigious, from what
is natural; it is requisite, that he first borrow the definition from us, lest
the Cobbler shamefully adventure beyond his Last: Let the Divine enquire only
concerning God, but the Naturalist concerning Nature.

Assuredly the goodness of the Creator was largely diffused on all the works of
his hands, who created all things for the 9.
use and benefit of ungrateful man: neither admitted any of our Divines as an
Assessor in his Council, how many, and how excellent virtues he should endow
his Creatures withal. In the interim, I am wholly unsatisfied how he can be
excused from the sin of Pride, who because he comprehends not the natural
cause, as measuring all the immense works of God by the narrow extent of his
own head, does therefore audaciously deny, that God has bestowed any such
virtue on the Creature; as if man, a vile worm, had fathomed the power of God,
and were privy to the designs of his Council. He estimates the minds of all
men by his own, who thinks that cannot be done which he cannot understand.

To me, seriously, it appears a wonder in no respect that God has, besides a
body perfectly resembling the Loadstone, bestowed upon his Creatures a noble
virtue also, which our reason can explicate by no other term then that of
Magnetism. Ought it not to suffice, to the indubitate concession of Magnetism,
that only one single example (I shall hereafter bring in others, numerous and
apposite) be introduced, of the natural efficiency of that stone, according to
the model or pattern whereof, even other endowments, variously distributed
amongst the creatures, may be clearly understood? What, because the thing is
new, paradoxical, and above the reach of your understanding, must it therefore
be Satanical also? Far be it from us to conceive so unworthily of the Divine
Majesty of the Creator; nor indeed ought we thus to court or gratify the
Devil, by transferring this honor upon him; for what can 10.
ever affect him with a more full delight, then that the glory of good works be
ascribed to him, as if he had been the grand Author of them?

That material nature does uncessantly by its secret Magnetism, suck down forms
from the breasts of the superior Orbs, 11.
and greedily thirst after the favor and benign influence of the celestial
Luminaries, you willingly concede; and moreover, that the stars in exchange
attract some tribute from inferior bodies, so that there is a free commerce,
and reciprocal return from each to other, and one harmonious concord, and
conspiracy of all parts with the whole universe: And thus Magnetism, in regard
it is vigorous and pregnant in every thing, has nothing new in it but the
name, nor is it paradoxical, but to those who deride all things, and refer to
the dominion of Satan, whatsoever falls not within the narrow circle of their
own understanding. In good truth, this kind of wisdom is never to be found by
him that seeks it with derision.

But I beseech you, what of Superstition has the Armary Unguent? whether
because it is compounded of the moss, 12.
blood, mumy, and fat of man? Alas! the Physician uses these inoffensively, and
to this purpose the Apothecary is licensed to sell them. Or perchance, because
the manner of using and applying the Medicine is new to you, unaccustomed to
the vulgar, but admirable to both; must the effect therefore be Satanical? Sub
due your passion, and calm your rage, ere long you shall be more fully
satisfied.

For the manner of its application, contains in it nothing of evil. First, the
intention is good and pious, and directed only 13.
to a good and charitable end; namely, the healing of our sick, languishing
neighbor, without pain, without danger, and without the consumption of his
purse: And do you call this diabolical? In fine, the remedies themselves are
all mere natural means, to which we shall in the progress of our dispute, by
convincing arguments demonstrate, that this generous faculty was peculiarly
given by God himself. Our wishes are that your self had, by so firm evidence,
ratified your negative position, viz. that God, the supreme Good, did not, in
the Creation, confer upon the ingredients of the Unguent, any such natural
virtue, and mumial Magnetism.

This Magnetical remedy can, on no side, be laid open to the 14.
encroachment of suspect; since, both in the confection and use, it has no
superstitious rites performed, it requires no mysterious words, no characters,
or impresses, no prestigious ceremo^ies, or vain observances conjoined: It
presupposes no planetary hours, or punctilioes of constellations, it prophanes
not sacred things; and what is more, it forestals not 15.
the imagination, requires not a confidence, or implicit faith, nay not so much
as bare leave or consent from the wounded party; all which are ever annexed to
superstitious cures.

For we account that properly to be Superstition, when men 16.
rely upon the single power of an implicit faith, or imagination, or both
concurring, above any particular virtue, which of it self is not sufficient, or
by the primitive intention of the Creator, not destined to the production of
that particular effect. By which it is clearly manifest, that our Magnetic
cure has none the smallest tincture of Superstition. Do thou therefore, O
Divine! great with a sarcasm, with design at least to detect and deride the
Devil, make an experiment of the Unguent, that so thou may destroy and
totally abolish that implicit compact with him; nevertheless thou shall, volent
or nolent, without either direction from, or obedience to thy will, find the
same effect result from thy application of it, that usually does upon ours;
which does not at all succeed upon the conjunction of superstitious causes.

Whoever reputes the Magnetical Sanation of Wounds to 17.
be Diabolical, not because it is performed by unlawful means, or directed to
an unwarrantable end; but because in the manner of its operation, it progresses
in a path, which his reason cannot trace: He also convicted by the same
argument, shall either give the quidditative and peculiarly express causes of
all those admirable effects of the Loadstone, which in the sequel of my
discourse I am to mention; or confess, that those 18.
rare operations of the Loadstone, are the impostures and the legerdemain of
Satan; or shall compulsively concede with us, (which indeed will be the safer
way) that in nature there is a Magnetism, that is, a certain hidden property,
by this appellation, in reference to the conspicuous and confessed prerogative of
that stone, distinguished from all other abstruse, and to common heads unknown,
qualities.

A Loadstone placed upon a thin small Trencher of wood, floating on water, does
instantly in one determinate point australize, 19.
and in the other septentrionate. That extreme, which by its verticity regards
the Southern Pole, when by touch it has impregnated a piece of steel or iron,
will immediately steer it to the North; and the other extreme which looks upon
the Northern Pole, having invigorated a needle of steel, will incline it to the
South. By its Septentrional point, which is its belly, it attracts iron or
steel to it; and by its Australe end, which is its back, it thrusts iron or
steel from it. The Aquilonary side, by friction of the point of a Compass
needle, positionally from the right hand to the left, endows it with a vertical
or polary faculty, whereby it is directed to the South: But if the friction be
ordered in a quite contrary position, from the left hand to the right, the
direction of the point of the needle will also be contrary, and near to the
North. Thus also the Australe side of the Loadstone, according to the variety
of locality, or position in friction, varies the polarity. Nay, what carries a
nearer face of miracle, if a Loadstone by its affriction has invigorated and
excited a piece of iron, with a magnetical activity, that is, a power to
attract another piece of iron; the same new made Magnetical iron, if inverted
upside down, and in that Antipodean position, a second time, rubbed upon the
Loadstone, will, in the same moment, be divested of its magnetical infusion,
and clean forget its lately acquired power of attraction. All which various and
admirable effects of the Loadstone, thou may, if thy judgment relish them,
find made good by multiplied observations, by William Guilbert, not many years
past, a Physician in London, in his Book De Magnete: Of which subject no man
ever writ more judiciously or experimentally; and by whose industry, the
variation of the Compass may be restored. The needle, which now points directly
upon the North, coming under the Equinoctial Line, staggers to and fro, hovers
from Pole to Pole, and in a trembling unconstancy fixes on neither: But once
brought over the Meridian, nimbly wheels about, and fixedly applies it self to
the South. I shall annex this Medical virtue of it: the back of the Loadstone,
as it repulseth iron, so also it retrudeth the gut, by reason of too wide an
expansion of the process of the Peritonaeum, prolapsed into the Scrotum, cures
the Enterocele or intestine rupture, and likewise all Catarrhes or destilments,
that have a private affinity, or analogy with the nature of iron. The
iron-attracting faculty, if in a composition, married to the mumy of a woman,
then the back of the Loadstone applied to her thigh, on the inside, and the
belly of another imposed upon her loins, about the lowest spondil of the back,
will safely prevent an abortion threatened; but on the contrary, the belly of
one Loadstone applied to her thigh, and the back of another to her back, will
both wonderfully facilitate her travail, and expedite her delivery. All which
various operations of the Loadstone, our Anatomist is obliged to illustrate, by
reasons, drawn ae priori, from the fountain of their distinct and determinate
efficiencies, and expound to us the subtle manner of the progress of each
cause, in the production of each several effect: otherwise, I shall by a parile
argument of ignorance, conclude, that these in like manner, are also mere
illusions of Satan, and no effects of Nature.

I shall now infer some certain examples of another Magnetism, cousin-german to
the former; that so with our judgment better informed we may at length come to
the positive reason, and clear refutation of all the objections of our
adversaries. What can I do more? I my self will contrive reasons for you, which
you have not at all urged. You may argue thus; Every effect either immediately
proceeds from God, the sole Operator, and so is a miracle; or from Satan, and
so is prodigious; or from natural and ordinary causes, and so is merely
natural; but Magnetism is neither a miracle, nor a natural effect; and
therefore Satanical. I answer; Though I might, with great facility, declare
this enumeration delivered, to be invalid, in regard the inward man has a
power of activity, by none of the forementioned ways, (which, in the pursuit of
our debate, we shall largely, and to ample satisfaction, treat of) yet however
we now with a dry foot, pass by the assumption, making it our chief task to
deny and subvert the inference, namely in that part, whereby it is asserted,
that the effect is not natural. For, by the rules of orderly and artificial
disputation, that was first to be made good, that we might not fall foul upon
that elench, Petitio principii, a precarious concession of that Thesis, which
is yet questionable and undetermined; but in this point, our Censor has yet
been, and ever will be defective, to affirm the effect not to be natural;
unless he thought, that a bare affirmation is equivalent to a confirmation, and
that to have substituted his single authority in the room of reason, was
evidence strong enough to silence doubt, and procure credence. For there are
many effects natural, which yet do not ordinarily happen; namely, such as are
rarely incident. Wherefore to gratify our Anatomist, I shall all along the
tract of this exercise, not only maintain the affirmative part, but also
perspicuously commonstrate it by reasons, and ratify it by examples. For so
the mighty argument, even now urged, will fall by its own weight.

There is a Book, imprinted at Franekera, in the year 1611. 20.
by Uldericus Dominicus Balck, of the Lamp of life. In which you shall find,
out of Paracelsus, the true Magnetical cure of most diseases, as of the
Dropsy, Gout, Jaundies, etc. by including the warm blood of the Patient in the
shell and white of an Egg, which exposed to a gentle heat, and mixed with a bait
of flesh, you shall give, together with the blood, to a hungry dog, or swine,
and the disease shall instantly pass from you into the dog, and utterly leave
you; no otherwise then the Leprosy of Naaman did, by the exsecration of the
Prophet, transmigrate into Gehazi. What, do you account this also Diabolical,
thus to have restored our languishing neighbor, by the Magnetism only of the
mumial blood? however, he is perfectly and undoubtedly recovered.

A woman weaning her child, to the end her breasts may the 21.
sooner dry up, strokes her milk into a fire of glowing coals, and thereupon
her paps suddenly grow flaccid, and the fountain of her milk, is stopped. What,
does the devil suck and drain them?

Has any one with his excrements defiled the threshold of thy door, and thou
intendest to prohibit that nastiness for the future, do but lay a red-hot iron
upon the excrement, and the immodest sloven shall, in a very short space, grow
scabby on his buttocks; the fire torrifying the excrement, and by dorsal
Magnetism driving the acrimony of the burning, into his impudent anus.
Perchance, you will object, that this action is Satanical, in regard the end of
it is revenge, and the laesion of the party, which offended us; but assuredly,
the abuse of such powers depends on the liberty of man's will, and yet the use
is no whit the less natural.

Make a small table of Bismuthum Consule supplementum insra.
, and on the one extreme, 22.
place a piece of Amber, on the other, a piece of green Vitriol; the Vitriol
will in a moment lose both its color and acidity. Both which are familiarly
observable in the preparation of Amber.

This one experiment, of all others, cannot but be free from 23.
all suspect of imposture, and illusion of the Devil. A certain inhabitant of
Bruxels, in a combat had his nose mowed off, addressed himself to Tagliacozzus
Alii scribunt Taliacotius.
, a famous Surgeon, living at Bononia, that he might procure a new one; and
when he feared the incision of his own arm, he hired a Porter to admit it, out
of whose arm, having first given the reward agreed upon, at length he dig'd a
new nose. About thirteen months after his return to his own Country, on a
sudden the ingrafted nose grew cold, putrified, and within few days, dropped off.
To those of his friends, that were curious in the exploration of the cause of
this unexpected misfortune, it was discovered, that the Porter expired, near
about the same punctilio of time, wherein the nose grew frigid and cadaverous.
There are at Bruxels yet surviving, some of good repute, that were
eyewitnesses of these occurrences. Is not this Magnetism of manifest affinity
with mumy, whereby the nose, enjoying, by title and right of inoculation, a
community of life, sense and vegetation, for so many months, on a sudden
mortified on the other side of the Alps? I pray, what is there in this of
Superstition? what of attent and exalted Imagination?

The root of the Carline Thistle (which is the White Chamaeleon 24.
of D^oscorides) plucked up when full of juice and vigor, and contemporate with
Humane Mumy, does, as it were by an operative ferment, exhaust all the natural
strength and courage of a man, on whose shadow thou treadest, and infuse it
into thee. But you may account this praestigious, because Paradoxical; as if
the same identical Leprosy were not traduced from Naaman to Gehazi; and the
same numerical Jaundies transplanted from the patient to a dog. For a disease
25.
is not under the Predicament of Quality; but all the Predicaments are found in
every particular disease. Since indeed, it may be lawful to accommodate names
to things, but not things to names.

The Heliotropian or Solisequous Flowers are wheeled about 26.
after the Sun, by a certain Magnetism; not for his heat, whose comfort they
may long after; for in a cloudy and cold day they imitate the rhythme of the
Sun; nor for his light, are they the Lacqueis of the Sun; for in the dark
night, when they have deserted him, they face about from the West, to the East.
You will not account this Diabolical, in regard you have another subterfuge at
hand; namely the harmony of superior bodies, with inferior, and a faculty
attractive, purely celestial, and no way communicable to sublunaries. As though
the Microcosm, unworthy this heavenly prerogative, could in his blood and moss
observe, and correspond to no revolution of the Planets.

I might here, with pertinence, discourse of Philters, or amorous Medicines,
which require a Mumial Confermentation, 27.
that the affection and desire of the mind may be forcibly drawn, and rapt on
to one determinate object. But on a sober consult with thought, it seems more
advised, to supersede that theme, when I shall first have mentioned this one
observation; I know an Herb, commonly obvious, which if it be rubbed, and
cherished in thy hand, until it wax warm, you may hold fast the hand of another
person, until that also grow warm, and he shall continually burn with an ardent
love, and fixed dilection of thy person, for many days together. I held in my
hand, first bathed in the steam of this loveprocuring plant the foot of a Dog,
for some few minutes: The Dog, wholly renouncing his old Mistress, instantly
followed me, and courted me so hotly, that in the night he lamentably howled at
my Chamber door, that I should open and admit him. There are some now living in
Bruxels, who are witnesses to me, and can attest the truth of this fact. For
the heat of a man's hand warming and resolving the plant, I say not a bare,
simple and solitary heat, but excited and impregnate with a certain effluvium,
or emanation of spirits natural, does peculiarly determine and individuate the
virtue of the plant to himself; and by this ferment communicated to a second
person, does by Magnetism allect the spirit of that person, and subdue him to
love.

I omit the cures of many diseases, which the Arcanum, the 28.
mystery of humane blood, does Magnetically perform: For unless the blood, yea
the very sanies or purulent effluxions from Wounds and Ulcers, the Urine, and
that subtle effluvium, which by insensible transpiration evaporates through the
pores of the skin, did continually exhaust, and carry with them some part of
the vital spirit; and unless these had also some participation of vitality, and
conspiracy with the whole body, after their remove from the whole concretum:
Undoubtedly the life of man could not be so short. For indeed this is the cause
of our intestine calamity, and that principle of death we carry about us,
ambuscadoed in the very principles of life.

The Herbs Arsemart or Water Pepper, Cumfry, Surgeons Sophia or Flixweed,
Adders tongue, and many other 29.
of the Vulnerary tribe, have this peculiar endowment; that if, when cold they
are steept in water (for an Oak felled, when the North wind blows, will grow
verminous and rotten, if not instantly sunk under water) and then applied to a
Wound or Ulcer, until they grow warm, and after buried in a muddy uliginous
Earth; when they begin to putrify, they then operate upon, and draw from the
Patient, whatever is evil, superfluous, and hurtful to him. And this the Herbs
perform, not while they grow in the earth, nor so long as they remain in their
primitive and pristine form (for necessary it is that the grain be mortified,
that it may bring forth fruit) but in the putrefaction of their Corporeities,
for the Essential virtues being then as it were released from the prison and
impediments of the corporeal matter, do put forth and freely execute that
Magnetism, which otherwise had lain dormant and enchained, and according to the
contagion and impression received from the wounded or ulcerated part,
powerfully suck out much of the remaining evil, though seated deeply and at
great distance in the body.

If any one in gathering the leaves of Asarabecca, shall 30.
pluck them upward, they will perform their operation respectively, and purge
any third person, that is wholly ignorant of that positional traction, by vomit
only; but if in gathering they be wrested downward, they then will purge only
by stool. Here at least can be no suspect of superstition; for what need I here
to mention any thing of Imagination; when your selves concede, that by the
power of imagination nothing can be acted upon a third object, especially where
that third object is utterly ignorant of the position, which the decerpent
used? Will you again take hold of the sacred anchor of ignorance, 31.
and accuse this secret of an implicit Compact with Satan? But herein lurks no
vain observance; chiefly when the decerptor shall have, the assument being
wholly inscious of the position, plucked off the leaves, either upward or
downward. Doubtless, besides Asarum and the extremities or clusters of Elder,
no other Cathartick Medicines are enriched with this propriety; for they, in
what position soever collected from the plant, do ever operate univocally: that
is, either constantly upwards, or constantly downwards, according to the
destination of their gifts. But in Asarum, in the integral plant, there
sensibly appears a Magnetical propriety; and so it does variously endow its
leaves, according to the sense of their decerption. That not only plants, but
also almost all created 32.
Entities, have a certain adumbration of sense, or obscure sensibility, they
largely declare as well by Sympathy, as Antipathy (which presuppose, and cannot
consist without sense) maintained amongst themselves; which satisfactorily to
manifest, shall be the subject of some succeeding lines.

A second Fit of the Gout surprised a Noble Matron, of my 33.
acquaintance, after the first paroxysm had gone off, and left her; and
thenceforward the Gout, by an unwonted recidivation, and periodical recourse,
infested her without remission, for many months together. But she not
apprehending whence so violent and unexpected a return of the disease had
happened to her; at length she rising from her bed, as often as the fury of the
fit, by intervals, somewhat remitted, reposed her self in a Chair, wherein a
brother of hers, many years past, and in another City, cruelly tortured with
the Gout, was wont to sit, she instantly found that from thence the disease did
awake, and afresh invade her. This effect likewise is, on no pretense whatever,
to be ascribed to Imagination or doubt; since both these were much younger then
the effect. But if it happened that any third person subject to the Gout sat in
the same Chair, to him there succeeded not any reincrudation of the disease.
For which reason, the mumy of her dead brother deservedly rendered the Chair
suspected of contagion; which penetrating through all her clothes, did to the
sister only, and not to any other podagrical person, excite those frequent
refluxes and paroxysms, which otherwise had slept, and not invaded her. The
cause truly was the Magnetism of the brothers mumy, infected with a prodagrical
miasm or tincture, effluxed from him, and impressed upon the Chair,
determinately operating on the uterine mumy of the sister; and that a long
tract of time after his funeral. I beseech you, what can you discover in this
of any implicit Compact, with our grand adversary Satan?

A Sapphire enobled with a deep coerule tincture, if it be applied to, and a
small time rubbed upon a Carbuncle, whereby 34.
the Plague pathognomonically discovers it self, and after a while be removed,
the absent Jewel then cease not Magnetically to allect and extract all the
pestilential virulency, and contagious poison from the infected party; provided
that this be done, before the Patient has suffered too great a prosternation
of spirits, and decay of strength. Physicians therefore use (which to us much
advances the reputation of Magnetism) gently and slowly to draw a circle with a
Sapphire, round about a pestilential tumor: To this end, lest the venom
exhaling, should in that part, where it insensibly evaporates, exspatiate and
dilate it self to a wider range, and so in that circumferential expansion
infect some noble part adjacent. For in that place where the virulency exhales,
magnetically attracted from the infected body as it were through a trunck, or
conduit-pipe, all the round or circle instantly grows black, and at length
torrified into an Eschar falls of: the heart, in the interim, being preserved
from the fatal contagion. Nor is there any postern door left open to evasion,
by objecting, that we are to conceive the poison attracted to the Carbuncle, in
the same moment, when the round was drawn about the place, or at least then
critically conquered by the internal champion of life, the heart; and not to
attribute it to any Magnetism of the Sapphire removed at distance. But however,
the sick will give in their testimony, that they did not perceive any relief in
the instant of the Saphires touch; but a good while after: The poison indeed,
gradually, by little and little, departing from the body, by the Magnetical
attraction. Yea, the place it self will afford a more certain and satisfactory
evidence on the behalf of Magnetism; for it grows not black and torrid in the
minute of, or by the affriction of the Sapphire; but many minutes after, being
immediately combust by the pestiferous, that is Arsenical, vapor, in that one
path, and no other, expiring from the Centrals. For where the venom does
continually exhale, the venomous radii being congregated and bound up into one
Gone or pyramidal point, there it is of necessity that the part suffer extreme
violence, grow black, and be torrified; which effects, as they are performed in
successive motions of time, so also they inform us, that the virulency does
successively breathe forth, in obedience to the Magnetical alliciency of the
absent Gem.

Your reply perchance will be, that every Agent does require a certain, and
limited duration of its impression: that the Sapphire did not benefit the
Patient in the present, but left behind it an impression, which was by degrees
to subdue the remainder of the Plague; but not that the Sapphire did attract any
thing at all, after its remove from the Carbuncle. Here you shall observe, that
every Agent of Nature does act in an instant in the first moment of
congression, unless there be some obstacle or remora of disobedience in the
Patient; but in the body infected there can be no impediment from reluctance,
or stop of reaction, since it longs for a relief with all expedition, and in
expectation of it, uncessantly pants and labors in all veins of the body.

It would be clear another thing, if the Sapphire were first to suffer
preparation, concoction, or alteration, that so from the concretion there might
be educed the imprisoned Agent, which should afterward diffuse and spread it
self through all parts of the body. But when the Sapphire conserves its native
integrity, and continues undissolved and incorrupt, it requires only a certain
determinate time for this, that it may, by the touch and mediation of the mumy,
associate and unite its own influential ray to the pestilential vapor, and so
captive it, that afterward being withdrawn, it may forcibly command it from
the heart. To this association and marriage, I say, that there be a convenient
alligation of the virtue Saphirical to, and as it were a Conglomeration with
the venom, there is required a determinate measure of time (grant the eighth
part of an hour) wherein the Compass line may be drawn about the pestilential
Bubo. For if there were only some bare, single impression of the Sapphire,
which constantly adhering to the place after the touch, should by little and
little conquer and eradicate the venom, within the precincts of the body; and
no Magnetical alliciency of the absent stone: There could no reason be found
out, why that particular place of the circle, should be benegroed and
torrified, nor why the virulent exhalation should not range in a larger
circumference then the cicumdate line. What is more, if many Carbuncles freshly
show themselves in diverse places at once; yet that only Carbuncle, 35.
which was circumscribed with the Sapphire, undergoes combustion and
denigration, all the other sinking down again, and vanishing insensibly. And
therefore, I beseech you, what impression attractive can the Sapphire leave
behind it, after its remove, if not a Magnetical one? Principally, when the
Attractum does imply an inseparable relation to the Attrahent; and so
transpositively.

Yea, if the Sapphire should from its self transmit any virtue into the sick
body, after twice or thrice using, it would inevitably be subject to diminution
and decay of power, (for so the hoof of the Elk, by often use of it, to suspend
and resist the invasion of Epileptick paroxysms, by degrees becomes evirate and
despoiled of all activity) that faculty, which is impressed upon the Carbuncle,
being exhaust and spent; which manifestly in the Sapphire falls not out alike;
for so much the more excellent and efficacious a Sapphire is esteemed, by how
much the more frequently it has sucked out the venom of the pestilence. It may
be you will answer, that the Sapphire does generate a new third quality in the
Patient, by reason whereof it begins to attract and drain the poison, that way
only; and that although the Sapphire be then removed, yet that nature
nevertheless, once encouraged and invited into action, ceases not to persevere
in the expulsion, and maintains that Crisis, through that passage only, where
the poison first began to be expelled. First, we enquire, whether the Sapphire
does attract by a first, manifest quality (imagine heat) or by a formal
magnetical propriety? But this Magnetical essential faculty requires not any
previous generation, or result, of a new quality, within the body; but only
the conjunction of its virtue attractive, to the pestilential aer, so that it
may perform its office of attraction. From whence the inference is; that the
attraction is performed by the absent Sapphire. This assumption holds clearly
good, because every natural Attrahent does attract adse, to it self; for to
this end only does it attract. For which reason, a new third quality,
generated in the body, would rather attract the virulent exhalation
concentrically and inwards, and could by no means be invited outward, by an
excentrical attraction.

Our second enquiry is; whether the Sapphire may not have generated, and emitted
a virtue from it self, and impressed that virtue on the skin only? For neither
can this stand; since then, it would not be necessary, that a circle should be
drawn about the Carbuncle, with the Sapphire; but it would be sufficient, that
any other more remote and commodious part of the skin be touched; which, by the
suffrage of experience, is absolutely false. Our third query is, whether the
Sapphire happily can unlock and expand the pores of the skin? and whether Nature,
on the single stock of its power, could not have made use of its own expulsive
faculty, without the attraction of the Sapphire? If we say, not; then the
Sapphire cannot be allowed to attract, but only to have assisted and
corroborated the expulsive faculty. But this opinion is soon subverted by the
effect; in that no place suffers combustion, either without or beyond the
round; and also because the other Carbuncles, beginning to bud forth, do at the
same time sink away and vanish, though never touched by the Sapphire. Since
indeed, if only the expulsive faculty were corroborated, that would expel the
venomous fumes every way round, and could not be restrained to any one certain
and elect place.

Fourthly, Nature had already, before the admotion and affriction of the
Sapphire, giving sufficient testimony of its own valor and ability, in expelling
the Carbuncle singly and of its own accord. Whence also it appears a gross
falsity, that Nature once excited and rouzed up to expulsion, by the saphirical
infusion, does afterward persevere in, and stoutly maintain that critical
motion; since observation assures us, that frequently the Sapphire is but slowly
applied, and comes too late, to assist the beginning of the expulsion. For
which considerations, notwithstanding any thing you shall be able to oppose, it
is of absolute necessity, that the pestilential venom is magnetically
attracted by the absent Sapphire.

Will you therefore, that the natural magnetism of the Armary Unguent be more
plainly and amply discovered unto you? or will you disparage and calumniate the
noble alliciency of the Sapphire; and also write to the Calumniator? you will (I
suppose) judge it to have much more of reason and solid truth to comply with our
faith; that as death, wounds, diseases, slaughters crept in, and made
encroachments on humane nature, by means of the Devil, from whom nothing
proceeds but mischief: So also that every good gift comes down from the Father
of lights. It being a position universally assented unto by all men: That that
must be good, which neither the subject, nor the object, nor the means, nor the
end proposed, can accuse and convict of evil.

Hence was it, that the ancient Prelates of the Church were 36.
wont heretofore to wear rings enricht with a Sapphire; the use and excellent
virtue of that precious stone being, for the major part, hardly understood
among them. For to whomsoever the charge of souls is committed, to them also of
equity, and duty, it belongs to visit and be assistant to the infected with the
plague; the dark mist of ignorance, in our days, obnubilating and eclipsing the
knowledge of the most excellent pieces of Nature; in whose room have succeeded,
an affected spruceness of language, a vainglorious trimness of the windy and
dead letter, and a confident, presument garrulity. Which may be the subject of
our serious sorrow, but more of our wonder; that all mechanique Arts do daily
receive advancement, and ascend by the degrees of new discoveries, nearer
toward their perfection; but the study of Philosophy only stands ever
perplexed and discouraged with unjust censures, and now is in its Apogaeo, or
retrogradation. I have dwelt the longer upon this subject, the Sapphire, in
respect it contains a case, in all points alike, and wholly quadrant to that of
the Armary Unguent.

In this particular, therefore, Man also has his magnes, or domestic power of
alliciency; whereby, in time of the plague, 37.
he draws in, through the invisible pores of the skin, the pestilential Atoms
exhaling from the infected. For Nature, which at all other times is wont to
admit nothing but wholesome and alimentary juice and with great diligence and
exactness to sequester that juice, from the inalimentary and excrementitious
parts of it; at this time, yielding and wholly submitting to its magnes,
greedily sucks in the pestiferous aer, and invites death into the inmost closet
of life. Ediametro contrary to this intestine magnes, Providence has furnished
us with another peculiar, antagonistical magnes (this we insert, that our
dispute may not become barren and fruitless, in any one part of it, namely the
Sapphire, or a translucid piece of Amber; which rubbed to calefaction upon the
seven planetary pulses, (those on the jugular Arteries, on the handwrists, near
the instep, and on the throne of the heart) and hung about the neck instead of
a Periapt or Amulet, are too hard for the humane magnes, conquer and destroy
his attraction, and by that superiority of attraction, become the most certain
Amulets and Counterpoysons to the fatal contagion of this plague: Otherwise, if
there precede not a requisite confriction of the Pulses, they are altogether
invalid, and of no efficacy. For those things, which in their primitive
constitution were a Sapphire and Amber, having from the affriction changed their
family, first lose their originary appellations, and are afterward called a
Zenexton, 38.
or preservatory Amulet against the pestilence.

Will any man, think you, account these effects Diabolical; and attribute them
to a covenant made with Satan?

It is sufficient, that we have introduced a few, but select, satisfactory, and
pertinent examples, whose case holds a perfect analogy, and even proportion
with that of the Armary Unguent; we shall now seasonably turn our selves to
your Arguments.

You argue Goclenius of ignorance of the doctrine of Aristotle, in that he
insinuates that the same numerical Accident can pass from one subject to
another (my wish is, you had been as able at probation, as you are at
refutation) namely, that this also is an assertion of huge pertinacity, to
conceive, that a Cicatrice or scar in a dead body is not identically the same,
it was in the man yesterday living. For in vain do we honor, and pay an humble
and fiducial veneration unto the 39.
relics of Saints; if nothing but that simple, impossible matter, which the
disciples of Aristotle dream of, can remain, and not some accidents constantly
continue in the corrupted body, which were heretofore in the living. Behold!
whither a paganical error may precipitate those, who improvidently carp at
others. I say, to imagine that to be absolutely impossible, which is absolutely
necessary, is the part of the most absurd and grossest ignorance: For example,
that light, from the body of the Sun even down to the earth, in a more swift
motion then the twinkling of an eye, through all the smallest Atoms of the
air, does produce new species, and those species produce another stock and
supply of species of light. This properly is to be blind in Sunshine; for if
we had not diffused upon us the identical light and vigorous influence of the
Sun, but only the thousand, of thousands of millions, species of light and
virtue solary; no sublunary could have growth or vegetation, nor could ever any
fire be kindled by the refraction and union of its beams. For the species of
species of light, since in reality of essence they are no more light, then the
species of colors are really colors, they can never be of activity strong
enough to produce fire. For my part, seriously I cherish and applaud my self
for that ignorance of Aristotle's doctrine, of which Goclenius is accused as
rude and illiterate. Does not the needle of the Mariners compass, through a
firm glass, closely sealed up with melted soder (in which there can be no pore
or crany discovered) steer it self to the Artick pole? and is it not attracted
to a piece of iron placed within the orb of attraction, the pole during that
seduction, wholly neglected? Wherefore the same numerical Accident, streaming
in one continued radius from the Loadstone into the aer, passes through the
glass, and perhaps goes as far, as to touch the pole it self. And Magnetism
likewise is a Celestial quality, of near affinity 40.
to the sidereal influences; neither is it confined to any determinate distance
of place; as neither is the Magnetical Unguent, of which our dispute.

You smile, because Goclenius chooses for an ingredient into the Unguent, that
moss only, which is gathered off the scull 41.
of a man of three letters Fur.
.

Nor in this truly is there any ground for your conjecture, that in the herb
there lies a snake in ambush, any vain touch of superstition couch't. For if a
Jesuit, put to death by strangulation, or any other kind of martyrdom, be
left sub dio, in an obedient position to receive the influence of the stars;
yet his head will yield the same crop of Moss, equivalent in use, and equally
ripe, with the head of a Thief: since the Seminality of the moss drops down
from Heaven upon Mount Calvary. For sometimes there distills a frothy dew, which
is called Aurora; and after that, a more tenacious Viscid Mucilage descends,
which is called Sperma siderum, the seminal emission of the stars; sometimes
the Heavens have shower'd down clouds of Frogs, Spiders, Locusts, and other
such insects, which in their descent became solid, tangible, and vital 42.
substances: in other mountainous places the prodigious clouds have rained milk
and also blood; frequently also there is found lying upon stones and bones a
white bituminous matter, sweat from the celestial orbs, which turns into moss.
This candid substance, in some places, where it petrifies and is 43.
changed into stone, induces a crustaceous surface, or parget upon stones; in
other places it degenerates into a moss.

To this Classis of Meteors we are also to refer, the Dew, 44.
Manna, Throni, Thereniabin, Nostoch, Nebulgea, Laudanum Quid velit Author per
haec nova and inaudita nomina, ex cabalistico. Paracelsi vocabulario mutuata*
explicatum invenies infra, in nostro supplemento.
, and other such aereal productions. Though these partake more largely of the
substance of aer; while, in the interim, the originary principles of the moss,
growing upon sculls, are of a higher and more noble pedigree, the seminary
excretions of the stars; and are called by Hermetical Philosophers the flowers
or fruits of the Celestial Orbs. By these the prudent have attempted and
achieved many notable designs; and indeed, they being enriched with the favor
and continual influence of the Heavens, want not the ground and foundation of
excellent and generous faculties. The moss therefore of a scull, since it has
received its seminality from the celestial orbs, but its Matrix, conception,
and increment from the mumial and medullary substance of the scull of man; it
is no miracle, that it has obtained excellent Astral, and Magnetical virtues,
far transcending the common lot of Vegetables; although herbs 45.
also, in the capacity of herbs, have their peculiar Magnetisms: I will insert
an observation of my own; A certain Soldier of a noble extraction, wore a
little lock of the moss of a man's scull, finely enclosed betwixt the skin and
flesh of his head; who in friendship interceding betwixt two brothers, that
were fighting a mortal duel, unfortunately received so violent a blow with a
sword on his head, that he immediately fell to the earth. With which blow his
hat, and hair were cut through, as with an incision knife, even to the skin;
but he escaped without the smallest wound, or penetration of the skin. I need
not anticipate, your selves may without much difficulty guess, to what cause
the guard of the skin may be justly ascribed. It has not been the custom of
my genius, to perplex and rack my mind, with uncertain conjectures; since
indeed lightning, of far greater violence then a sword, if it ever touch a Bay
tree, does yet never discharge it self upon a Sea Calf, or Horse, whose snafle
is anointed with the fat of a Sea Calf, nor ever falls upon that stable, whose
door posts are emplastered with the same fat. The experience is trivial and
frequent. But I pass lightly over this scene, and resign it to others; so soon
as I shall have mentioned one other example, like the former. In Arduenna Est
stola S. Huburti, in arca, sex diversis clavibus obserata, a diversis quoque
clavigeris custodita. Quotamus autem praescindunt stolae illius partem,
remanente interim stola semper integra, ab octingent is jam and amplius annis.
Nec est imposturae locus, quod nesciatur body, an stola sit ex bysso, lana,
lino, vel bombace, adeoque nec posset quotannis nova substitui. Praescindunt
autem de stola partem, ut filamentum singulis demorsis a rabido, intra cutim
frontis incarnent. Inde enim aliud miraculum. Quod qui semel suscepto filamento
e stola, per ritus suos convaluit, potest alteri demorso differe terminum, and
sopire rabiem adventantem, per quadragenarias, idque in annos aliquot, dum
tandem suo commodo adire queat S. Hubertum. Ea tamen sub condition, ut
tantillum si quis supra 40 dies expectet, nec prorogationem termini ante
impetraverit, confestim in rabiem incidal deploratam. Haec Mystagogus omnibus,
quotquot devotionis ergo peregre sunt prosecti, hospitibus; elat^ supercili^,
praedicat. Sed viris emunctioribus potius olent fraudem, quam veritatem
Christianismo dignam.
Saint Hubert is worshipped with solemn and public veneration, whither all
people bitten by any mad dog speedily address themselves (as elsewhere others
flock to the shrines of Saint Domirus and Bellinus:) there the Flamen or Priest
burles a small lock of wool, from the stole or upper garment of the Saint,
which is artificially enclosed within the skin of the forehead of the patient,
bitten by a mad dog; and from thenceforth for ever he can be no more wounded or
smitten, by any mad, or wild beasts whatever; for the sacred magic of the
lock is the shield, that secures from the violence of enraged teeth, and
renders the wearer invulnerable. 46.
Your answer will be, that this extraordinary effect is done by an immediate
miracle of God, cooperating with sacred relics. Well, grant it be a miracle;
yet that God in the production of miracles, does, for the most part, walk hand
in hand with Nature, and in a manner oblige himself to an observance of, and
conformity with her customs and rules, these Patients of Saint Hubert do
plainly evidence by their lock of wool. For that uncircumscribed Omnipotence,
whose power is limited by no law but that of his will, who can do all things by
the single efficiency of a Fiat, does sometimes make use also of natural means.

Thus let the sweat in the Sudary, or Stove of Saint Paul, be also a Magnetical
Unguent; but the sweat of the sick persons, or the insensible effluvium
exhaling from them, be the blood of the wounded, sprinkled upon a piece of
wood, and put into the box of Unguent; immediately all harm and evil depending
on the wound, is from all parts of the body attracted magnetically. And this
effect is by so much the more powerfully 47.
wrought, by how much more efficacy the supernatural magnes is endowed withal.
For in both, truly, there is the same reason, and the same manner of the causes
operation; the difference lies only in this, that in the material world, the
effect succeeds upon a requisite conjunction and co-efficiency of corporal
means, the blood and the Unguent; but in the supernatural, by a holy magnetism,
arising from the sacred relics of the Friends of God, which in this relation,
undoubtedly deserve our venerable esteem. That these miracle-producing 48.
relics might in the manner of their operations, by a nearer similitude
approach to the nature of the Magnetical Unguent, God, the soul of mercy, moved
with compassion toward our frail and calamitous estate, has in some of them
called up a fountain of oil, perpetually pouring forth streams of Balsam: To
this end, that every where relieved and supported by magnetical remedies we
might for certain be assured, that the Magnetical cure of wounds is received
from God, and both in the supernatural and natural world does proceed in an
equal order of causes, in an equal pace and manner of operations, and by the
conduct of the same Director and Guide. Hence is it, that fresh and new
relics work more, and more noble miracles when they are carried about, or
applied to the Patient by the touch; because it is of unexcusable necessity*
that the magnes be first rubbed, touched, and stirred, if we will have it to
attract.

I return to thee, O Usnea! the noble issue of celestial seed: 49.
for whosoever has enjoyed a convalescence from the Hydrophobia, by the lock of
wool, and other pious rites observed, is not only himself for ever after
protected from a rabid dog; but, what is far more noble, he can grant to any
other person bitten by a mad dog, a supersedeas to prorogue the time of the
Venoms energy, for many months, until the Patient can, with convenience, take
a journey to the shrine of St. Hubert; the poison in the mean time charmed into
an inactivity, and 50.
the fermentation of the humors suspended. Nature has also granted another
magnetical magnale, cozen german to the former. The Zinzilla (which is an
excrement of the Diaphragma or Midriff, degenerating into an inflammation and
Apostem) when once it has like a Zone In exemplari Elzeviriano legit^r, instar
Jonae: sed ex incuria typographi literam I pro zmutatam esse conjeci; eo quod
metaphora Jonae, civitatem Niniven circumambient is, e nimis longinquo esset
petenda.
, environed the chest of the Patient, becomes fatally destructive; but it is
safely and with great celerity cured, if the place be outwardly, though but
slenderly, anointed with the blood of another, who has once recovered from the
same disease. For he who has once recovered from that disease, has not only
obtained a pure, balsamical blood, whereby, for the future, he is rendered
secure and free from any recidivation of the same evil; but also infallibly
cures the same affection in his neighbor, and by the cutany external contact of
his own blood, by the mysterious power of Magnetism, transplants that balsam,
and conserving quality into the blood of another.

You may object; if the Magnetism, or grand magnetical arcanum, lie only in
the Usnea; then all other ingredients of the composition are fruitless, vain,
and unnecessary. Physicians soon salve this doubt, by replying; that some of
the ingredients are efficients paramont, and principal; others of inferior
virtue and subordinate; some are conjoined as impediments, to obtund and
refract the violence of contrary intense qualities; others as spurs, to excite
the dormant; and others to advance and promote the weaker and less active
Magnetism, to a higher and more noble entelechy. And that these reasons support
the necessity of a multiplicity of simples, in the confection of the unguent.
On this consideration, as it was a flat impertinency to argue, that if the
usnea, chiefly comprehend the magnetism, then is man, to no purpose,
exenterated to furnish the Unguent with some other ingredients; so also would
it be a direct absurdity to plead, that if the usnea, on the single stock of
its own endowment, be not enriched with sufficient magnetism; nor the fat, nor
the blood, etc. therefore will not that magnetism, which we attribute to the
unguent, also be found in the whole composition; since single ingredients
cannot impart that virtue to a composition, which they formerly did not contain
in their primitive constitutions and simple natures. I must ever now and then
be compelled to act your part, and contrive arguments and cavillations for you,
against my self. But however, it had been your duty, formerly to have been
instructed from vulgar and rustic experiments, that in a compound medicine
there does frequently emerge and result a new third quality, which was never
before, in Mores etiam animalium pro locorum qualitate differ^e, venenaque
serpentum, vel mitiora, vel asperiora effici, asserit Stagyrita, de hist.
Animal. lib. 8. cap. 29.
the least measure, couched in the single essences of the ingredients. For
example, it would become you to have observed, that neither Vitriol nor Galls
are sejunctively black; but married in the composition of Ink, they immediately
beget a perfect deep black.

You may again object; if the Usnea has acquired its magnetism from the mumial
virtue of the bones, and the seminal influence of celestial orbs: then, of
consequence, may the same be gathered, not only from sculls, but from all 51.
other bones of the sceleton. But this illation is also ridiculous; for Nature
her self confesses a subjection and conformity to the condition of the soil;
and for that reason, Pepper new gathered transplanted into Italian ground,
degenerates into Ivy: Hellebore set in the Tridentine The City Trent, on the
North side of Italy.
fields, quite loses its purging faculty; and Poppies with us are wholly
devoid of any deleterious or deadly quality, however our Country be ten times
colder then Thebes The Metropolis of Boeotia, in our age called Stibes or
Stiber, situate in longitude 50. in latitude 38.
it self. Therefore the usnea varies in its efficacy, according to the various
soil, or matrix of bones, wherein it is conceived and nourished. For if
lightniug melt money, the purse remaining untouched, and of ten companions
sitting close together, choose one out of the middle, and strike him into
ashes; and this happen not casually, or by chance, but by the permission of
that Providence, which will not have so much as one leaf drop uncommanded from
the tree; and by whose only power, all virtues are founded and established; it
can seem no wonder also, that one distinct magnetical seminality of usnea be,
from the celestial spears, distilled upon the scull; and a second seminality,
of another peculiar classis, upon the other bones of the Sceleton. Only the
bone of the head is of excellent use against the Epilepsie; but so are not any
of the other bones. Then, to conclude, all the brain is consumed and dissolved
in the scull, by the continual irroration and imbibing of which precious liquor
(I mean that of the brain) the scull acquires such virtues, which we have
discovered to be wanting to the other bones

I have sufficiently known the customs of contradicents. For when they have
nothing more of moment to allege against the thing disputed of, they become
the more contumelious, break forth into reproaches, and fall foul upon the
person of him, that is their adversary in opinion. Wherefore it may be, some or
other will exclaim, that Magnetism is some new fangle, invented only by
Paracelsus; but that he was a lewd, dissolute, and ignorant fellow. And again,
if there had been any such excellent virtue in nature, it could not have
remained in darkness, and undiscovered to so many ages, and its revealment have
been suspended till the advent of Paracelsus.

As concerning the reproaches, and scurrilous subsannations of many, shower'd
down upon the head of a man, that was the Ornament of Germany: I answer, that
they are empty, vain, and below a sober thought, and do no more, then render
the assertor of them more indign and contemptible then before; as one that
earnestly endeavors to condemn, not only the living, but the dead also. For
there is no reason why I an unequal Orator, who have undertaken the Encomium of
no man, should fall upon the praise of him for those things, which his own
monuments hold forth to the world, concerning his learning, wisdom, and
divinely infused endowments; but I come directly to balance the invective
arguments themselves. This Objection therefore is barren of any thing but
pride, since it insolently dares to assume the condemnation, not only of the
living and dead, but even of God himself; namely, that he ought not to have
infused the knowledge of so divine a secret into Paracelsus, but some other
person (some Jesuit perhaps;) nor to have manifested so great a consonancy and
harmony of Nature, in the days of Paracelsus, but much earlier, in the infancy
of the world. But I beseech you, why came Ignatius Loyola so late, and in the
evening of the world, to be the founder and establisher of a Society, so useful
and profitable to the whole world? Why did he not spring up, and appear many
ages sooner? Alas! wretched man, whither do thou hurry thy self by
presumption? Is not God the free and unconstrained giver of his own benefit?
and does not he delight himself in an undeserved donation of it? Himself has
vouchsafed to bequeath us a touchstone, 52.
by which we may give infallible judgment of the persons of men; namely, that
we shall know them by their works. But what the works of Paracelsus were, and
how much greater then all expectation of Nature, and the mordacity of
malevolent tongues, his own Epitaph, by the most illustrious, and most reverend
Prelate, the Bishop Principe Salisburgensi.
of Saltzburg, appensed to that well deserved Monument of his, does in despite
of envy, sufficiently declare.

THE Epitaph of PARACELSVS: Engraven in stone, at Saltzburg, in the Hospital of
Saint Sebastian, on the erect Wall of the Temple.
COnditur hic Philippus Theophrastus Aliis Philippus Aureolus Paracelsus, ut
idem Helmont. in tract, de lithiasi.
, insignis Medicinae Doctor, qui dira illa vulnera, Lepram, Podagram,
Hydropisim, aliaque insanabilia corporis Contagia, mirifica art, sustulit; ac
bona sua in pauperes distribuenda, collocandaque honoravit Alii erogavit, vel
ordinavit: ut Adamus Melchior, in vitis medicorum German.
. Anno 1541. die 24 Septembris, vitam cum morte mutavit. HEre entombed is
Phillipus Theophrastus, a famous Doctor of Physic, who by his wonder-working
Art took away those mortal wounds, the Leprosy, Gout, Hydropsie, and other
incurable contagions of the body; and ordained his goods to be distributed and
given to the poor. In the year 1541. on the 24 day of September, he made an
exchange of life for death.

Paracelsus, therefore, is so far from having deserved ill, in 53.
that he has revealed Magnetism, unknown to Antiquity; and in the room of that
study of Natural wisdom, which with great barrenness is taught abroad in
public Schools, introduced another more solid and real one, which by the
Analysis and Synthesis, the diacritical resolution of heterogeneal, and
syncritical conjunction of homogeneal bodies, is made probable, and brought
home to a familiarity with our sense, and yields a more wealthy harvest of
knowledge; that thence he has rather, by a just title, won the denomination of
the Monarch of secrets, from all his predecessors; unless with those that
malign him, we, as ignorant Judges, discommend all his good actions, and
disparage those benefits, he accumulated upon pious uses. I am thus a man, (i.
e.) this is the prerogative of my humanity; all things appear cheap and light
in the balance of my reason, that pretend to a dominion over my belief, by no
stronger title, then that of Custom only. Since there is nothing, that
enshrowds our minds in a greater mist of error and seduction, then that we are
conformed to Custom, out of an easy and ungenerous credulity, submitting our
assent to rumor, and the dreams of the multitude. We are therefore gallantly to
attempt the emancipation of our faith from the tyranny and pedantism of popular
tradition, to pursue the liberty of our intellectuals, and to enjoy, not
enslave the habilities of our judgment.

You may again plead, that in Sublunaries there is no influential virtue, that
can be paralleld to the impressions of Superlunaries; but if you shall stumble
at this stone, you will at the same instant fall upon the reprehension of all
those learned men, who have taken the direct path to Philosophy; since they
have rightly observed to us, that in inferior bodies there is an inference or
tribute delivered down from superior, and reciprocally an analogy or
resemblance of inferior in celestial bodies. Do not Herbs, Animals, and
diseased men foreknow and presage the future mutations of times and seasons?
Are we not to expect so much the harder Winter, by how much the deeper cave or
lodging the Frog has scraped in the earth, to harbor himself in the succeeding
Winter? For from this ground proceed the Meteorical Auguries; not indeed, that
those prophesies of weather arise from the too early and yet future motion of
the stars; in regard, it would then follow, that that motion must cause this
presagous sensation, long before its own contingency.

Far be it from a sober head to dream so palpable an absurdity, For the
firmament does only denounce future events; but has no hand in their
Causation. But indeed, every single created nature contains its peculiar heaven
within the sphere of its 54.
own dimensions, and holds within it self the rotation or revolution of that
heaven, dependent on its seminal Entity, in whose spirit (which comprehends the
Caelature or Idea of the whose, in landscape) there is comprised its own
peculiar heaven, and moreover its own ascendents. Nor is there, why you should
conceive, that we by this doctrine, stagger and demolish the Fabric of
Astrology; but rather that we elucidate, and render it more bright to the
prospect of our understanding; since truly every single seminal ens contains
its own heaven, and by that relation holds a Syzygia, or conjunctive interest
of the other sidereal heavens. But the motion of the universal heavens, in
regard it is the most known and most common, does govern, and according to the
rule of it self direct the particular heavens (suffer me to borrow that name,
since I want another more proper and convenient) of single inferior Creatures.
This properly is the cause of every natural inclination; and when the single
creature, by the persuasion and seduction of its own domestic heaven, becomes
exorbitant from the motion of the universal heaven, as the most common rule,
immediately there succeed irregularity, acrasie, confusion and defects. For a
sheep without a guide, looses himself 56.
in the devious paths of error. And from this conspiracy and conjugation of the
motion of the universal, with that of every 57.
particular heaven, is it, that diseased men carry an Almanac 58.
in their bones, presage foul weather, and the future mutations 59.
of seasons; but not those that are sound. For if the 60.
Sea did flow and re-flow by the direction of the Celestial, that is the
pyromantical, or fiery Moon only, and not of its own hydromantical, or watery
Moon; and if the winds were stirred up by the command of the Celestial Mercury
only, and not of their own Chaomantical star; truly there could be no
Provincial Venti regionales. sunt enim (...), Venti communes, and (...),
particulares seu Vernaculi; ut Hippocrat. lib. de Aere and locis.
winds in any quarter of the earth, but (since there is but one single Mercury,
and one single Moon in the whole Arch of heaven) the same wind would constantly
blow alike through all the world; and the Sea would in all places flow, if not
at the same time, yet in the same rhythme, or interval of tides, which our
modern Navigation disproves. It is enough therefore, that we have here, by way
of digression, made it appear, that in every single seminal entity there is
comprehended a virtue celestial, and enormantical Depending upon a forain
motor, for a regularlty of motion.
, which does yet excite it self, and is regulated by the orderly motion of the
celestial orbs, distilling an impression upon it; so long as it will not be
accounted refractory and exorbitant. And that the Firmament also does not cause
future accidents, unless by a remote interest, and that too but by first
qualities 61.
only, as it were acting the part of a Cook; but otherwise does signify and
loudly proclaim the handy works of God. But that every particular Creature does
in its seminal Entity, 62.
possess a particular firmament; by the mediation of which, superior bodies
symboliz^, and hold a reciprocal correspondence with inferior, obliged thereto
by the law of friendship and philanty or desire of self-conservation. From all
which we may now at least collect, that there is a Magnetism, and powers
influential, every where implantate in, and proper to natural bodies; which
powers who so excludes from the scene of Sublunaries, does seek to shelter
himself in a rotten Sanctuary.

You will further urge, that we are to come yet nearer to the main point, nor
is it yet placed above doubt, that in Sublunaries there is a quality that holds
a parity to the impression of Superlunaries, and such a one truly, which can
transmit it self to an object removed at large distance; which notwithstanding
is presupposed in the Armary Unguent; and so that Magnetism is indeed a virtue
celestial, but yet in no degree of emulation, to be ascribed to Sublunaries,
much less to the counterfeit weapon-salvo. But what else, in the main, is this
(I beseech you) then to deny Magnetism, without or besides Magnetism? For if,
in an universal notion, we call every influence of sublunaries reciprocally
transmitted from each to other, a Magnetism; and if in defect of a more proper
and distinctive Etym^n, or adaequate denominative, we christon that occult
coaptation and requisite connection of Active and Passive, whereby an absent
Agent does operate upon an absent Patient, by influence, by an invisible
emanation and intercourse of virtues, whether it be done by attraction or
impulsion, a Magnetism: Seriously, whoever denies the influential power of
Sublunaries mutually transmitted and entertained each by other, to be performed
by Magnetism; and requires an instance to be given him to the contrary; in
sober truth he requires a flat absurdity, a Magnetism (forsooth) without
Magnetism, and knows not well, what he would deny, or what demand.

Since in earnest I have held forth examples of the Fact, in Sublunaries, and
brought upon the stage very many and very apposite instances, as that of the
insititious or engrafted Nose, of the Sapphire, of Arsmarte, Asarum, and most
other Herbs. But you deny (I sufficiently know, because you know it not) either
that those effects, mentioned in the list of examples, do not at all succeed
upon the coaptation and marriage of such and such causes; or else you will
affirm those effects to be caused by the sole power of the Devil. And that it
is not agreeable to the custom of Naturalists, to argue from bare Authorities;
but that it becomes us Defendants, to come up, with those that strive against
us to handy-blows, namely to experience. Do you make trial therefore, and call
any of the recited examples to the touchstone of experiment, that so you prove
us guilty of falsehood; if you cannot, then at least come over to our side and
believe them. For it is an action of insolent petulancy for any, therefore to
deny the contingence of that fact, which is every where so trivial and
frequent, that it can hardly escape the observation of any, because (forsooth)
himself never found, nor indeed ever endeavored to find it good upon
experiment; and of a far more unpardonable insolence, to ascribe that effect to
the Devil, which in most pieces of the Creation is purely consonant to Nature,
as shall hereafter be made good; and that too, for one single fault, because
(in faith) the secret manner of its production from the confederacy and
co-efficiency of natural causes, can by no means sink into the head of our
Censor. A Censor, who presumes, that by the subtilty of his own vast
intellectuals, and the study of Aristotle's Physics, he has exactly surveyed
the great round of Nature, fathomed the Moon, and to a hair taken the just
dimensions of all pieces of the Universe. A Censor, I say, who though upon a
severe scrutiny he can discover nothing of superstition, and nothing of
unconformity to any divine or humane laws in the Unguent; (...) (...) does yet,
only because the manner of its application to the weapon seems paradoxical to
him, highly cry it down as unlawful, condemn and detest it as impious, and
accuse it to contain some strange and horrid interest of the Devil. But what in
the manner of its application (I beseech you) do you stumble at? Verily because
the sword, or splinter of the weapon distained with the blood, is emplastered
over with the mumial and Magnetical unguent; because the blood once
extravenated, or effluxed out of its proper conservatory, the veins, loses
its interest of vitality, and can observe no concordance with that blood, which
is yet conserved and cherished in the veins; and because he does not believe,
that the action of the unguent can be extended to an object at large distance
removed. But return to your self, good Sir, for ere long you shall both
understand; and firmly believe it, unless your pertinacity render you incapable
of instruction. For we will make it our business now, for your information, to
call the action of Magnetism to the bar, and by the evidence of Meridian
truths, convince the ignorance and stupidity of its adversaries.

For I will now show, that there is, without that Classis of things and herbs,
which you have undeservedly suspected, a mutual influence and commerce of some
certain pieces of Nature, by effluvium or emanation of spirits; and that this
concordance is observed between objects at very great distance removed each
from other. The Vine, when it is in the flower, 63.
perturbs and causes a kind of sickness (for so Vintners term it) in the Wine.
You will excuse that this conturbation is not caused by any violence or
impression of the Stars; when we solidly prove the contrary. For if the Stars
did immediately occasion the germination and efflorescence of the Vine, and
also the turbulency and sickly fermentation of Wines in their Vessels; it would
of necessity be, that both those effects should happen every year, in one
determinate, appointed, and definite moment; which observation concludes to be
false. For sometimes the Vine emits her flowers, and the Wine is troubled
before the solstice, and in the same Country, not until another year, long
after; but the Sun and all the Chorus of fixed Stars constantly, only some few
minutes of difference allowed, return to the same point of heaven, once every
year; therefore would the Vine flower, and Wines suffer a conturbation always
at one and the same set time. But if you seek an evasion, and shall rejoyn,
that other Planets, beside the Sun, which possess not annually, about the
solstice, one constant and equal position or situation in heaven, are the
causers of this languor in Wines; only in this relation, that the motion of
the superior Orbs is most common, as to which all subordinate and particular
heavens are to conform, all Vines would for the plurality of them flower in the
same year, in all places at once; which is false upon the testimony of
experience. For as there is a Nature Astral conferred upon, and implantate in
the ground, so also the same particular Nature is inserted into the Vine; which
particular Nature does per se, by its own domestic power (no otherwise then
the Earth has, from the fructifying benediction of the Creator, received a
power of germinating per se) produce the flower, fruit, and seed, and conform
and dispose it self to the rhythme of the most general motion of the Celestial
Orbs. Men positively affirm further, that Wines are never perturbed in those
Regions, in which no Vines grow; wherefore the flower of the Vine, and not the
motion of the Celestial Spheres, does perturb Wines, and that many hundreds of
miles from thence; but truly, so much the more powerfully, by how much the
nearer the Wines are to the Vine, that produced them.

I gratefully applaud those studies, that contribute toward the advancement of
the Commonwealth of learning; and 64.
highly honor him, who discovered, that vulgar Antimony, in its preparation,
does, though in an obscure manner, conform it self to an influence.

I expect no more, but to have the same measure returned to me, which I deliver
to others; when I shall to plenary satisfaction make good, that there is a
certain influential power ordinary and familiar to sublunaries, which knows no
confinement or restraint to any local distance; and in order to the more
vigorous and substantial support of Magnetism 65.
declare, that the Loadstone does of its own accord, by the swinge of a native
inherent verticity or polary directive faculty, steer it self to the Pole, but
is by no means attracted by the Pole. For one Loadstone in a lateral variation
defects to three, another to six, seven, and eleven degrees from the Pole; but
none (for what I could ever discover) does in a direct line lie parallel to the
Axis of heaven, and punctually point upon the Pole. Therefore if the Loadstone
were attracted by the Pole, it must receive that convulsive influence, either
from the Pole it self, or from some other Star adjacent to the Pole; but not
from the Pole it self, in respect every Attrahent does attract toward it self
by a direct, and not by an oblique line: wherefore if the Loadstone were
attracted by the Pole, it would in a just level point upon the Pole; and so the
result is, that Loadstones (at least according to what solid and multiplied
observations have taught me) suffer no attractive force, or vertical invitement
from the North-star, nor from any other neighboring Star. For since the whole
Asterism of Charles his Wain knows no Sabbath, but is ever wheeled about by a
perpetual circumrotation; if it did at all attract, it would occasion a
perpetual inquietude, and uncessant revolution of the Loadstone, by reducing it
one while many degrees toward the East, and another while as many degrees
toward the West, and every twenty four hours sometimes elevate it toward the
Zenith, and anon depress it toward the Nadir; which experience positively
contradicts: Wherefore the Loadstone ows its polarity to a natural inherent
faoulty, flowing from its own seminal Entity, and not to any forain alliciency,
or attractive influx transmitted from the North-star. But that otherwise the
Loadstone may, by its own instinct, be elevated toward the Zenith, we have
upon ocular demonstration found it true, by a certain Instrument invented by
Guilielme Guilbert (the glory of which excellent Diagramma hujus instruments
extat in lib 4. de Magnete.
invention Lodovicus Fonseca has lately endeavored ^o ravish and arrogate to
himself, in the presence of his Catholic Majesty) which, by the spontaneous
elevation of the Loadstone in a brass Ring suspended by a thread or small wier,
shows not only the latitude, but also the altitude of the Pole, in all places
of the Earth.

Laboring your reason to find out a way of evasion you will thus contend for
the prerogative of the Pole; that the Pole does indeed attract the Loadstone,
but according to the various and certain material disposition of several
Loadstones, it does allect them not in a right line toward it self (for such
is the condition and will of the Attrahent) but to some other place situate in
vicinity. The substance of which is; the Pole truly invites the Loadstone to it
self in a direct line, but the Loadstone becomes refractary, and comes not in a
direct line, by reason of some unknown impediment, (which you term a certain
peculiar disposition of it) existent in the Loadstone, which is superior in
power to, and vigorously resists that traction of the Pole; although the
influential alliciency of the Star, at the distance of so many thousand miles,
arrive at the body of the Loadstone entire, and without the least decay or
diminution of vigor. You perceive, how much truth you have granted to your
subterfuge? and how, though by compulsion, you affirm that in the Loadstone
there dwells a certain (you call it certain, which indeed to you is purely
imaginary, and to all men else wholly uncertain) motive disposition, besides,
and superior to the attraction of the Pole; which yet at the same time, you
peremptorily deny the Loadstone to possess? which in the balance of reason
carries this weight: the Loadstone is endued with a domestic Pilot, a
directive faculty, which guides it to some determinate place, but is not at all
attracted by the Pole.

Driven from this starting hole, you fly for refuge to some other Celestial
Attrahent; seated in vicinity to the Pole; by replying, that the Loadstone is
attracted, and does not direct it self, by any internal polary virtue;
attracted not by any one particular and determinate Star, or point of Heaven,
but by a certain Circle or Zone, at a near distance, environing the Pole. I
answer, That this evasion is far fetched, for this imaginary Circle must be
extended to the latitude of eight degrees at least; namely, from three to
eleven degrees* for I have observed some Loadstones to fufill that large
variation. Wherefore if there were a power of attraction equally inherent in
all parts of this Circle, one and the same Loadstone would continually vary,
and in the same hour deflect, now to three, and anon to eight or eleven degrees
from the Pole, or Central Star; which is a falsehood manifested upon frequent
experiment. Therefore, to help out this Chimera, there must be conceived many
lesser Orbites or rounds one within another, in a Circle of so great latitude;
every one of which subalternate Zones must select and attract its particular
Loadstone. Which being conceded, you inevitably fall again into the same
pitfal; namely, that the Loadstone contains within it self a certain
disposition or elective power, whereby it should conform to the traction of one
round, rather then of another; and by consequence, when you have stretched your
absurd conceptions to the highest pin of fancy, there will be nevertheless a
motive virtue, or native verticity in the Loadstone.

Yet we have not a clear prospect into the nature of this abstrusity. If the
Pole did attract the Loadstone, the attraction must depend either upon the
elemental and material temper, or upon the specifical form of the Loadstone;
but a Glass; 66.
wherein the Magistery of Loadstone has been prepared, though never so much
washed, and cleansed by often rubbing, does acquire a polarity, and for ever
after conform it self positionally to the two Cardinal points of Heaven; by
reason of an impression, by invisible aporrhoeas or emission of magnetical
atoms, without any corporeal remains, communicated to ^he Glass. Steel also
once excited and invigorated by the contact of the Loadstone, how often soever
rinsed and polished, does yet inherit the Magnetical infusion, and point out
the Pole. Which two distinct bodies, since they neither have a parity of
temper, or homogeneity of forms betwixt themselves; nor hold any proportionate
analogy of temper, or identity of form, with the Loadstone: carry with them
evidence clear enough to satisfy a rational belief, that the Pole can attract
the Loadstone for neither of those two ends; namely, affinity of temperament,
or cognation of essence. You may rejoyn, that immediately upon affriction,
there succeeds a participation of the substance of the Loadstone in the
porosities, or atomical incontiguities of the steel, or spondils of the glass.
A miserable excuse! for the rosin of the Fir tree, is of 67.
it self, by an internal Gorgon, coagulated into the hardness and solidity of a
stone, which having undergone this petrification or lapidescence, does allect
iron to it self, no otherwise then the Loadstone. Here your dream of the
corporeal participation of the Loadstone vanishes.

The Loadstone only by the affriction of, Garlic amits its 68.
verticity, and neglects the Pole, conserving to it self, in the Haec de
Allectivae virtutis Magnetis, ex allio ei affricto, consopitione, aliorum
potius ex relatione, quam side autoptica, scripsisse, merito censeatur
Helmontius. Sienim experientiam ^ac de re semelsalem consuluisset, primo
iindubitanter reperisset aspectu, quod nedum ferrum, igne reverberiicandens,
and mox succo allii extinctum, haud obscuram nihilominus verticitatem, ex
terra, acquirat, australemque versorii, magnete invigorati, extremitatem strc^e
sat suos in amplexus rapere possit: ast etiam, quod dens magnetus, succo allii
alte imbutus, ferreos acus, codem succo, usque dum crassiorem rubiginem
contraxcrint, inebriatos, prompte se (...) allicere valeat.
mean time, its peculiar form, material constitution, and all other dependent
proprieties. The reason, because Garlic is the Loadstones proper Opium, and by
it that spiritual sensation in the Magnet is consopited and laid asleep; which
sensation, we have in our precedent discourse, manifested to be the sole and
cardinal cause of the act of all formal proprieties. Verily, that alliciency of
the Pole must be extreme weak and of inconsiderable energy, which passing
through so many and so immense orbs of heaven, and striking through great and
firm buildings, and thick walls, cannot yet be of power sufficient to pierce
the thin juice of Garlic, or the fume of Mercury: the material radix, or
temperamental foundation, and also the specifical form of the stone, remaining
unimpaired and inviolate.

A Magnet swimming freely upon a calm water, in a small boat of cork, hoiseth
sail, and gives one broad side to the North, and the other to the South.
Therefore if this positional conversion were occasioned immediately by the
solicitation of the Pole, only the Northern side of the Stone would be
constantly courted and drawn by the North Pole; which is apparently false upon
the test of experiment. For if a Magnet has impregnated and magnetified a gad
of iron with its North side, it does not, according to the law of its own
propriety, dispose and incline that iron to the North, but to the South,
although the atomical powder or dust of the stone adhere to the iron; but on
the contrary, if it has excited and spirited iron with its South side, then it
converts that iron to the North. Again, the Magnet with that part, whereby it
formerly applied it self to the North, on t'th^r side the Equinoctial line
tackes about, and faceth the South.

Yet further let us purs^e this Argument. A Magnet floating in a skif or
shallop of Cork, on a quiet pond, if the Boreal quarter of it be violently
ravished from its own beloved position, and turned about to the South;
immediately, as if wheeld about by some counter-violence, it readdresseth to
its old mistress the North. For which reason, if the Magnet were by an
influential line from the Pole, drawn back again to the Pole, and this return
did not proceed immediately from the spontaneous direction of the stone; of
necessity, by that convulsion of the Pole, the whole skif would be towed and
haled to the North bank of the Pond, which never happens; for both the Magnet,
and its Shallop, by the acquisite direction of the Septrentrional side, stand
still upon the water and remain unmoved. There is therefore inherent in the
Magnet an influential virtue, which being not obliged to the propinquity or
contiguous admotion of its object, is, after the nobler manner of celestial
influences, freely and without interruption or languor transmitted so far as to
the Pole it self; since there is a spontaneous eradiation, or emission of
atomical radii from the body of the Magnet to the Pole. And thus, when there
has been found and presented to the view of reason, only one influential
virtue in sublunaries (conced it 69.
in the Loadstone) diradiating, and in one continued thread of atoms arriving
at an object seated at remote distance, which cannot upon any pretense be
ascribed to Satan; it will also be sufficiently demonstrated, that there may be
many other influential proprieties equivalent to this of the Magnet, wholly and
purely natural, as in the forecited examples, and the Armary Unguent.

Now since the Magnet or Iron excited by the Magnet, do by instinct of their
own pilot, and the spontaneous direction of themselves convert to the Pole;
there must of necessity be conceded some certain* Quality eradiated and
extended from the body of the Magnet to the Pole; which, in regard we assuredly
know it to be done without any Corporeal effluvium, we denominate a spiritual
quality; in this particular dissenting from our Divine, who places a Spirit in
irreconcilable difference to all corporeal nature, as an essence wholly
preternatural. But Physicians oppose a Spirit against the more gross compage,
or more material and less rarefied substance of a hody. And in this distinctive
notion we say, that the light of the Sun, the influx of celestial bodies, the
narcotical ejaculation of the Torpedo, the fatal optic emission of the
Basilisk, etc. are qualities purely and wholly spiritual; why, because they are
darted at and strike upon an object at great distance, not by the communion or
association of substantial evaporation; but are, as by a medium of
imperceptible light, deradiated and shot from their Subject to a fit and
determinate object.

These things thus conceded and made indubitate by arguments of reason and
experiment, it is sufficiently manifest, that our Divine, when yet he
understood not Goclenius, has nevertheless carped at him, and indeed many
times when he deserved it not. (1) Because Goclenius placed a spiritual quality
in so course a lodging, as a corporeal unguent. (2) That he affirmed the
influential alliciency of a magnetic body to be derived to its appropriate
object, through a medium or vehicle, as light is deradiated from the globe of
the Sun. (3) That such spiritual qualities are, by the mediation of a certain
sensation of the universal or mundane spirit (the grand and sole causant of all
sympathy) transmitted to a remote and determinate object. This Archeus or
universal Spirit our Divine interprets to be some Cacodaemon, some cursed
genius, but by no law, that I understand, except that of his own licentious
judgment; since in real verity, it is a more pure and vital breath of Heaven, a
Spirit which comprehends and cherishes within it self the Sun, and all the herd
of lesser Stars, a mind or intelligence which diffused through all the limbs
or parts of this great Animal, the World, does inform and regulate the whole;
and so by a certain commerce, communion, and conspiracy of otherwise-discordant
parts, and an harmonious marriage of the distinct virtues of single essences,
does order and govern the vast engine of the Universe, according to the
unanimous consent of all, who have read and commented on the true History of
Nature. To example, the Solissequous 70.
flowers sensibly observe the travel of the Sun: and the Sea conforms to either
Lunestice, and swells her obsequious tides high in the full, but shrinks them
low again in the Wane of the Moon. In sum; all Creatures by their life, (let
us, the masterpiece, and abridgment of all, do homage to the Majesty of that
King, to whom all things live) essence, existence and sensation visibly attest
the majesty, liberality, and presence of the great Creator. For which
consideration, our Divine is deservedly to be checked, in that he has, with
insufferable audacity, thrown rebukes at our Physician, whom yet he understood
not, writing in a philosophical style. For such a piece of difficulty was it to
observe a mean in all things.

You enquire of us what can be attracted from the body of the wounded party?
and how any attraction can be performed by the absent Unguent? But in troth I
might, without injury to the modest rules of disputation, return, that when
your self shall fully resolve us, for what reason the Loadstone does attract
iron, and convert it self to the Pole; then shall I also satisfy you, how and
by what means Mumy can, by the mediate efficiency of Mumy, work a cure upon
another Mumy, which it has touched upon: but in regard we have substituted our
selves to relieve the insufficiency of Goclenius in this particular abstrusity,
we shall, in the sequence of our discourse, by a didactical or scientifical
Analogism Ratio que ab evidenti rei obscurae cognitionem affert. Haec
ratiocinatio fit comparatione and praeceptione causarum efficientium per
similitudines. ut Galen. in lib. ad Thrasybulum.
demonstrate unto you, by what means the Magnetical attraction of the Unguent
is performed, if at least I shall to satisfaction inform you, what can be by
the Unguent attracted from the Wound. We are to observe therefore, that in a
Wound, there succeeds not only a bare solution of continuity, or disunion of
the part; but also that there is an exotic or forain quality, whereby the lips
of the Wound being enraged and provoked to a certain excandescence, by and by
grow tumid and apostemate, yea, the whole body from thence becomes afflicted
with Fevers, and a grievous syndrome or concurse of dangerous symptoms: for
thus an Eg, whose shell 71.
is but slenderly cracked, soon putrefies and turns adle, when otherwise it
might have been a long time conserved. Now this extraneous and peregrine
quality the Armary Unguent immediately sucks out of the Wound, whereupon the
lips of the Wound, being at length oppressed and impeded by no Accident, are
delivered from all pain and sickly aestuation of spirits, and suddenly hasten
to accretion, incarnation, and consolidation. Nature her self is the sole
Chiron, that by the Sovereign balsam of the vital blood does reunite the
severed parts, and soder up the incontiguity: the Physician is only her
servant to be assistant to her in the remove of those impediments, which
otherwise might oppose and infringe the power of her action: nor does the
Medicine deserve the attribute of Sarcotical, or by its own virtue regenerate
flesh in a Wound, but then to full satisfaction of our hopes executes the
commission of its faculty, when it has removed those accidental remoraes that
did retard and hinder the operation of Nature: all which impediments the Armary
Unguent, upon its own single stock of power, does securely and effectually take
off and banish.

Your rejoinder will be, that the Armary Unguent, in probability of reason,
ought not to exhaust the forementioned quality, rather then the natural vigor
of the body, and strength of the veins: and that the blood, since it continues
incorrupt in the Unguent, ought to procure health, and not any indisposition,
to the wounded party: according to the example of the Carline Thistle above
mentioned. I respond, that there is a plurality and variety of Magnetisms: for
some attract Iron, some Straws, some Lead, others Flesh, the purulent effluxion
of Wounds, etc. and the Magnetic endowment of some consists only in this that
they can only extract the pestilential Atoms from the centrals of an infected
body, etc. Yea, if you shall annex the sanation in our Unguent to your own
Argument, your own weapon will wound you.

For from thence, that the genuine effect of the Unguent is to cure perfectly,
speedily without pain, without cost, danger, and decay of strength: Hence, I
say, it results a manifest truth, that the Magnetical virtue of the Unguent is
simply natural, and proceeds from God, and not from Satan. The reason thus; if
Satan did cooperate to this Cure (according to your assertion) the chr^ ^ould
of necessity be imperfect, attended with great amission of strength, an
universal languor and enervation of the body, manifest hazard of life, a
difficil, and at best a tedious convalescence, an alienation of the 72.
mind, a laesion of some more noble faculty, and success of some notable
misfortune. All which events as they are ever annexed to Diabolical cures: so
are they never observed to follow upon a cure wrought by our Unguent. Our
appeal lies to Experience, for so many as ever received a cure by the Unguent
will freely give in their testimony on our side. Now Satan is no Oracle that
delivers truths, no Counselor to good, unless with design to insinuate his
delusions the smoother, and cannot but betray himself by this, that he never
long continues in the truth, he so speciously pretended: for always, when he
has been an instrument of any good, constant to the hostility of his nature, he
in the close tempers his favor with a larger allay of evil. And in troth the
same method would he according to the custom of his malicious friendship, have
observed in the Unguent had he been interessed as an Author or Fautor, either
as Principal or Accessory: at least this remedy would then have failed and
become 73.
evirate, when the wounded patient is rescued from the jaws of death, and
reprieved from the Gates of Hell, who otherwise, tainted with the mortal
contagion of sin, would by reason of his dangerous wound have poured forth his
soul together with his blood; unless perchance you seek to evade by saying,
that Satan in that Crisis, that punctilio of danger, suffered a change of his
cruelty into compassion, divested himself of his essential and inveterate
enmity, and put on the good Samaritan, nay, fell not only to commiserate, but
even dress the wounds of humanity; and that he has acquired some interest,
some jurisdiction over the wounded patient, himself leaves doubtful and open to
dispute, in that he preserves him by the Magnetical Unguent, whom he had rather
should perish. It may be that Satan is in your esteem now held a strict and
punctual observer of his word and bargain, and no longer a turncoate,
fraudulent dissembler and perjured impostor. Besides, we positively deny, that
your supposition can carry weight in the balance of truth, that the blood once
extravenated continues incorrupt, and conserves its interest of vitality; but
rather that it is deprived of all community, and participation of life, and
immediately undergoes some degree of corruption; but that it obtains only a
Mumial vitality. To this purpose conduces the corrupted, and yet magnetical
blood in an Eg. Wherefore I pass by the absurdity of your objection, since it
has been so bold as to wrest the Magnet of the Unguent to another intention,
then that which the wise bounty of God, in the primitive decree of his counsel,
ordained it unto.

The Positive Reasons of Magnetism more nearly brought home to our knowledge, by
Metaphysical and Magical principles.
OPportunity now invites us to discover the grand and approximate cause of
Magnetism in the Unguent: First, by the consent of mystical Divines, we divide
man into the external, and internal man, assigning to each distinct part the
powers of a certain mind, or informative principle; for in this disjunctive
acception, there is a will competent to flesh 74.
and blood, which properly is neither the will of man, nor the will of God; and
our heavenly Father reveals some things to the inward man, and some things are
revealed by flesh and blood, that is, the outward man, in the single and
abstracted relation of Animal. For how can the adoration of idols, envy, and
other such branches arising from the root of Corcupiscence, be justly listed
amongst the works of the flesh (since they consist only in the imagination) if
to the flesh also there did not peculiarly belong an Imaginative faculty, and
an elective will?

Again, that there are miraculous Ecstasies competent to the inward man, is a
tenet true beyond the dispute or haesitation of a Sceptick. And that there are
also Ecstasies in the outward man, is unquestionable by the most impudent
infidelity: Yea Martin Delrio, an Elder of the Society of Jesu, in his Magical
Disquisitions brings in a certain youth, in the City Insulis, rapt with so
intense and violent cogitation, and ardent desire to see his mother, that as if
transported by an high 75.
Ecstasie, he saw her many leagues distant, and returning again to himself
perfectly remembered all things his fancy met with in this more-then- Pisgah
Vision, and reported many signs to attest his real and presential visit of his
mother.

Many such examples occur to our quotidian observance, which in conformity to
our purpose of brevity we with industry omit. But that this desire did arise
from the outward man, namely, from flesh and blood, is most certain; for
otherwise the soul once disliged and enfranchised from the body, can never,
unless by miracle, be again reunited to it. Therefore in the blood there dwells
a certain Ecstatical power, 76.
which, if at any time it shall be excited by an earnest and ardent desire, is
able to transport and on the immaterial wings of fancy waft the spirit of the
outward man to some determinate object though at vast distance removed; but
this Ecstatical faculty lies dormant in the outward man, as in potentia, in
hability; nor is it deduced into act, unless first rouzed and excited by the
imagination accensed and exalted by fervent desire, or some other art
equivalent to affection.

Moreover, when the blood has undergone some gradual 77.
corruption, then and not till then are all the powers of it, which before lay
locked up in potentia, and slept in an unactive hability, awakened and called
forth to action, without any praevious excitation of the imagination: For by
corruption of the grain, the seminal virtue, otherwise drowsy, torpent and
steril, springs forth into the act of fertility. For since the 78.
essences of things, and their principles of vitality know no obedience to the
tyranny of corruption, by the dissolution of the inferior harmony, the
separation of their corporal Heterogeneities, they awake into a vigorous
activity, and freely execute the commission of their faculties. And from hence
is 79.
it, that every occult propriety, the compage of their bodies being, by certain
praevious digestions (which we call putrefactions) once dissolved, as it were
emancipated from the bondage of corporeity, comes forth free, expedite, and
ready for action. Wherefore when the Wound, by the ingression of the offensive
aer, has admitted an adverse and extraneous quality, 80.
from whence the blood immediately aestuates and ferments in the lips of the
Wound, and otherwise is converted into a purulent matter; it happens that the
blood in the Wound freshly made, does, by reason of this exotic quality,
suffer some degree of putrefaction (which blood then received upon the weapon,
is emplastered with the Magnetic Unguent) by the mediation of which gradual
putrefaction, the Ecstatick power of the blood, formerly latent in potentia, is
drawn into act, which because it holds a commerce and secret friendship with
that body, from whence it was effluxed, by relation of its hidden ecstasie;
hence is it that this blood constantly carries an individual respect and
determinate amity to the other blood yet running in the veins of the same body.
For then is it, I say, that the Magnet sets it self a work in the Unguent; and
by the concurrence and mediation of the Ecstatick power (for so I christen this
quality, in defect of a more convenient Epithet) sucks out the noxious
tincture from the lips of the Wound, and at length by the mumial, balsamical
and attractive virtue acquired in the Unguent, the Magnetism is consummate, and
the Cure perfected.

Lo now you have the true and positive reason of the Natural 81.
Magnetism in the Unguent, deduced from Natural Magic; to which the Soul of
Reason, and Light of Truth is pleased to assent, in that sentence, Where the
treasure is, there the heart is also: For if the treasure be in Heaven, then
the heart, that is, the spirit of the internal man is fixed upon God, who is
the true Paradise, who only is the life of eternal life. But if the treasure
be laid up in transitory and fading things: then also is the heart and spirit
of the outward man chained to things that must perish and confess their dust.
Nor is there cause why you should infer any mystical signification, or second
intention by understanding not the spirit, but the cogitation and 82.
naked desire, for the heart: for that would sound frivolous and absurd, that
wherever a man should place his treasure, in his cogitation, there also would
his cogitation be placed; and Truth it self interprets this present Text
literally, and without enfolding any mystery or deuteroscopy; and by an example
annexed manifestly shows the real and local presence of the Eagles with the
Carcass. And in this signification also the spirit of the internal man is said
to be locally in the Kingdom of God (which is very God himself) within us: and
the heart or spirit of the external man locally dwells about its treasure. What
wonder, that the astral spirits 83.
of fleshly minded men should, long after their funerals, appear wandering about
such places, as their treasures are hidden in? by which apparitions the whole
Nectromancy Nectromantia est species quaedam manganiae, qua defunctorum manes,
vel potius daemones sub eorum specie larva^i, strygum incantationibus excitati
ad revelanda arcana ex orco evocantur: ut temsore Saulis, and Sexti Pompeti
apud Lucanum.
of the Ancients emancipated itself. I say therefore, that the external man is
singly an Animal governed by the reason and will of the blood: but in the
interim, not barely an Animal, but also the image of God. Let Logicians
therefore hence observe, how defectively and improperly they use to define man
from his power of ratiocination. But of this subject more largely elsewhere In
tractatu ejus de Venatione Scientiarum.
.

For which consideration, I shall in this place opportunely insert the
Magnetism of Eagles to Carcases newly slain: for Fowls of the aer are not
endowed with so much acuteness of the sense of smelling, that by the nostril
they can receive an invitation in Italy, to come and feast on dead bodies in
Africa. For neither can an Odor be diffused to so vast a circumferential
distance, since both the great latitude of the Sea interposed must of necessity
hinder, and the elemental propriety of the Odor, subject to diminution and
impairment in so long a tract of aer, forbid so huge an expansion of the Atoms
streaming from the odorible Body; nor is there any ground whereon to build your
conception, that birds can by their sight discover carcases at so large
distance, especially when they lie Southward, behind some high Mountain. But
what need is there for us, by the tedious force of words, to inculcate the
Magnetism of Fowl; since God himself, the Alpha and Omega of Philosophy, has
in express terms decreed the process of intercourse or commerce betwixt the
heart and its treasure, to be the same with that betwixt Eagles and their prey
of dead bodies: and so on the contrary, interchangeably? For if Eagles were
carried on to their prey the Carcases, by the same incitement of appetite,
whereby all Quadruped 84.
Animals are goaded on to their pastures, assuredly he would have said in a
word, that Animals are directed and congregated to their food by the same
motive, that the heart of a man sallies forth and invades its treasure. Which
would contain a most gross falsity: for the heart of man progresseth not to its
treasure, with design to devour it, and sat it self therewith, as Animals are
by the swinge of appetite rapt on to their food. And therefore the comparison
betwixt the heart of man and the Eagle holds not good in the final cause or
attractive, for which they tend to desire of fruition: but in the manner and
process of tendency, namely that they are equally invited, allected, and
carried on by Magnetism really and locally to their determinate objects.
Wherefore the spirit and 85.
will of the blood effused out of the wound adhering to the weapon, and
together with it embalmed in the Unguent, instantly tend and egresse toward
their peculiar treasure, the residue of blood yet running in its proper
conservatory, the veins, and enjoying a community of life with the inward man.
But the Pen of Divinity in a peculiar Elogy writes that the Eagle is allured to
the Carcases of the slain: because he receives his summons and invitation from
the originary, implanted, and mumiall spirit of the carcass; but not from any
odor exhaling from the body under the arrest of putrefaction. For this Animal,
in assimilation appropriates to himself only this mumiall Spirit: and hence
is it in Sacred Writ said of the Eagle, My youth shall be renewed like an
Eagle. In regard the renovation of its youth proceeds not from the bare eating
the flesh of a carcass, but from an Elixir or essential extract of the spirit
balsamicall; exquisitely depurated and refined by a certain singular
digestion, or concoctive faculty proper only to this Foul: for otherwise Dogs,
Ravens and Pies, would also receive an equal benefit of rejuvenescence; which
experience assures us to be false.

You will say, we have traveled far indeed to fetch home a reason to support
and illustrate our Magnetisme. But what will you infer hereupon? if you
confess that what seems far remote from the capacity of your intelligence,
must also to you seem far fetched; truly the book of Genesis teaches us, that
the Soul of every living creature dwells in the blood of it, as in its proper
mansion. For in the blood there inhabit certain noble and vital powers,
which, as if they were endowed with animation, cry loud to heaven for revenge,
yea from the hands of Judges here below, demand vindictive justice to be done
upon the homicide: which since they cannot be denied to be natural Citizens of
the blood, I see no reason, why any man should reject the magnetism of the
blood, and unjustly reckon its rare and admirable effects among the ridiculous
acts of satan. I will say this further, that men which walk in their sleep, do
by the conduct of no other Motor or guide, then that of the Spirit of the
Blood, that is of the outward man, walk up and down, clime walls and
praecipices, and perform many other actions difficult and impossible to men
awake: I say, by a magical virtue natural to the outward man. That Saint
Ambrose was visibly present at the exsequies of Saint Martin, though corporally
at home in his own Chamber many Leagues distant. Yet he was visibly present at
the celebration of his holy brothers funeral, in the visible spirit of the
exterior man, and no otherwise: for when many holy Fathers of the Church have
seen the transaction of many secret and distant things, this has been
performed without the circumscription of time and place, in that ecstasy which
is only of the internal man, by the superior powers of the soul, collected
and twisted into unity, and by an intellectual vision, but not by a visible
presence. For otherwise the soul is never divorced from the body, unless in
earnest once and ever, and then is not capable of a reunion until the
resurrection: which reconnexion notwithstanding is otherwise familiar and
natural to the spirit of the outward man, divorced pro tempore in some ecstasy.

In so great a Paradox it can hardly suffice to erect a firm 86.
building of belief upon one single pillar of reason: wherefore we conceive it
our duty, to frame a second basis for the more substantial supportment of our
doctrine of Magnetisme, and to advance to the explanation of that mysterious
cause, by which this Magneticall alliciency is performed also betwixt bodies
devoid of animation, not by any Animal, but a certain Natural sensasion.
Which that we may more seriously enterprise, and solidly perform, we are
obliged by way of praeparation to praemise an enquiry, what Satan can of his
own power contribute to, and by what means he can coopeperate in the merely
nefarious and impious actions of Witches and Conjurators: for from hence will
it clearly appear, to what particular and just cause, whether Natural or
Diabolical, every effect arising from abstruse originals, ought properly to be
ascribed. And finally, what kind of spiritual power that is, which tends to
and arrives at an object removed at large distance: or what is the action,
passion, and velitation or reactive encounter betwixt Natural Spirits: or
wherein consists the superiority and praerogative of man, above other inferior
Creatures: and by consequence, why our Unguent compounded of human Mumies,
should also cure the wounds of horses. I shall explain the matter by an example.

Let us therefore grant a witch, who can vigorously torment 87.
an absent man by an image of wax, by imprecation, incantation, or only by
some praevious touch (for in this place we have nothing to do with Veneficious
Witches, properly called Sorcerers, in regard they execute their malice, and
destroy only by poison, which every common Seplasiarie and petty Apothecary
can imitate) that this action is Diabolical, no man will doubt. However it
pleases us to distinguish, how much Satan, and how much the Witch can
contribute to this mischief.

The first Supposition.
First, you shall take notice that Satan is the sworn and irreconcilable
enemy of mankind, and so accounted by all, unless any please to esteem him a
friend: and therefore that he does most readily, without any the least
haesitancy or negligence, attempt and procure what mischief soever lies within
the reach of his malice or power against us.



The second supposition.
Next you shall observe, that although he be a mortal adversary to Witches
also, in so much as it is essential to him to maintain a most destructive
hostility against all the Sons of Adam: yet in respect they are his confessed
slaves, and sworn Subjects of his own black Kingdom, he never, unless against
his will, and by compulsion, detects them, never betrays them into the hands of
the Magistrate, nor exposes them to the scorn and reproaches of other persons;
and that for three reasons. (1) Since he is the Grandfather of pride, he very
well knows, that by the detection of his favorites there is much detracted
from his reputation, authority and dominion. (2) Since he is an insatiate
Nimrod, an implacable persecutor of souls, he is not ignorant, that by the
punishment and flames, which justice inflicts upon his Zanies, many other men,
else willing and prompt to list themselves in his regiment, and fall under his
jurisdiction, are discouraged, deterred, and quite averted. (3) Because he
often observes many a Witch, whom with an obtorsion or wresting round of her
neck, and secret stopping of her breath he could heartily wish to destroy,
converted by her punishment, to become an Apostate from him, and repenting at
sight of the flames, and by this means snatched out of his clutches.



From the former of our propositions I conclude, that Satan, if he were able
singly by his own power to destroy man, whom the guilt of mortal sin has
made obnoxious to the tyranny of death, would upon no motive whatever be
induced to suspend and procrastinate the execution or his destructive malice:
but he does not, therefore he cannot destroy him. But yet the Witch does very
frequently murder man; and hence also it is clear, that the Witch has a power
to destroy him, no otherwise then an assassine has a power, at the liberty of
his own will, to cut the throat of him that is fallen into his hands: and
therefore in this detestable action there is a certain power peculiarly
belonging to the Witch, which depends not upon Satan; and by consequence Satan
is not the principal efficient and grand executor of the homicide; for
otherwise, if he were the prime executor, he could in no respect stand in need
of the Witch for a Coadjutrix and Assistant; but would ere this time, by his
own single power, have cut off and swept into the grave the greatest part of
mankind. Most miserable and deplorable indeed were the condition of the
posterity of Adam, which should lie in subjection to so horrid a tyranny, and
stand obnoxious to the fate of his arbitrary cruelty: but we have the Almighty
Preserver of men, more faithful in his mercies toward us then to subject the
works of his own hands to the arbitrary dominion of Satan. Therefore in this
impious act there is a certain power clearly 88.
peculiar, and natural to the Witch, which proceeds not from Satan.

Moreover, what the nature, extent, and quality of this Magical (yet natural)
power of the Witch may be, we must exactly explore and gravely consider. It is
manifest in the first place, that it is not any Corporeal strength of the
masculine sex; for there concurres not any forcible attraction of the members
of the body, and Witches are for the most part old, feeble and impotent women:
Wherefore of necessity to the production of this notable mischief there must
concur some other power, of far more vigor and activity then the strength
of the body, and yet purely natural to man. This power therefore must be
ambuscadoed in that part, wherein 89.
we most nearly resemble the Image of God. And although all pieces of the
hexameron Creation do in some relation or other repraesent that most sacred
and venerable image of the Creator: yet in regard man does most elegantly, most
properly and most exactly reflect that shadow of Divinity, therefore does the
image of God shine more transcendent in man, and as Lord Paramount bear rule
and exercise dominion over the repraesentative Divinity of all other Creatures.
For happily by 90.
this praerogative all created Sublunaries are made subordinate to his
royalty, and prostituted at the feet of his Sovereign will. Wherefore if God
execute his will, and produce real effects per nutum, intuitively, and by the
single efficacy of his 91.
word: then man also to make good his title of being the true mirror or
repraesentative of the Deity, ought to enjoy a power of doing some actions per
nutum. For neither is that new, paradoxicall or troublesome to our faith, nor
peculiar only to God himself: since Satan, the most vile and abject of all
Creatures, can also move solid and ponderous bodies from place to place at
pleasure, only per nutum: for he has no corporeal organs, no extremities,
wherewith to touch, locally move, or assume any new body to himself. No less
therefore 92.
ought this privilege to belong to the inward man, in his spiritual capacity;
if we allow him to bear the image of God, and that no idle and unactive one.
If we name this faculty magical, and this appellation sound harsh, and
terrible in the ears of your ignorance, I shall not quarrel with you, if you
please to denominate it a spiritual vigor or energie of the inward man: for
we are not at all sollicitous about names, but ever with as direct an eye of
reason as I can, I look upon the reality of the thing it self. This magical
power therefore naturally resides in the inward man: whether by this title you
93.
understand the soul or vital spirit of man, is now indifferent to us: since
the inward man does hold a certain correspondence with the outward in all
things, which commerciall influx, 94.
thriving and as it were glowing with a fervor of activity in a peculiar
manner, is an appropriate disposition and proportionate propriety. On which
ground it is necessary, that this active faculty be disseminated and diffused
through the whole compositum of man: but indeed in the soul, more intense and
vigorous, and in flesh and blood, far more remiss and languid.

The Vital Spirit in the throne of flesh and blood, that is the 95.
outward man, sits Viceroy to the Soul, and acts by her commission: and is the
same plastic spirit, which in the seed comprehends, contrives, and models the
whole figure of man, that Magnificent structure, limms out all the lineaments
and accurate adumbration of the parts, and understands the praedestinate ends
of all its designs and undertakings: which as 96.
Praesident and guardian accompanies the infant from the first moment of its
conception, to the last of its dissolution: and which although together with
the life it bid adieu to the body, yet some little remains, as if strongly
united unto and confermentated with the corporeal mass, for a while sojourn
in a Carcass extinct by violence. But out of a dead body, whose lamp of life
languished and went out of its own accord, both the implantate and influent
spirit depart hand in hand together. For which reason Physicians distinguish
this spirit into the originary, implantate and inhaerent, or Mumiall, and the
influent 97.
or acquisite vanishing together with the former life: and afterward they
again dichotomize or subdivide the influxive spirit into the natural, vital
and animal: but we in this notion bind them all up together in this one term,
the vital spirit, or inward man. The Soul therefore, by essence wholly
spiritual, could by no means, move, inform, and 98.
actuate the vital spirit (which truly carries something of corporeity and
bulk) much less excite and give locomotion to flesh and blood; unless some
natural, yet magical and spiritual, power inhaerent in the soul, did
stream down from the soul, as from the first motor, upon the spirit, and so
descend to the body. I beseech you by what way could the corporeal Spirit obey
and execute the command of the Soul, unless it first receive commission and
ability from her to move the Spirit, and afterward the body? But against this
Magical Motrix you will instantly object, that indeed there is such a natural
power, but her wings are clipped, she is restrained and confined within the walls
of her own tabernacle, the body, so that she cannot extend her authority and
influence beyond the circumference of it; and therefore although we give her
the proud name of Magical, yet we cannot escape the guilt of wresting and
abusively applying that Epithet, since the true, genuine, and superstitious
Magical power desumes not her basis from the Soul; in regard the Soul her
self is devoyd of all ability to move, alter, or excite any the least thing at
all, without her own orb of activity, the body. I answer, that this Vigor and
natural Magic of the Soul, which acts extra se, beyond the dimensions of her
self, by virtue of the image of God, does now lie raked up and obscured in
man, and being impoverished in its force of excitation, is grown unactive,
somnolent and stupid, ever since the praevarication of Adam (all which
particulars we shall hereafter, in convenient place and order commonstrate)
which power, however it be charmed into a lethargick inactivity by the opium of
original sin, and drunk with the narcoticall fumes of concupiscence, within
us: yet it retains force sufficient to perform all its requisite offices in
the body. This science therefore and Magical power in man, acting only per
nutum, intuitively, 99.
grew dormant and evirate, from that minute the Science (or rather nescience)
of the Aple was drunk in: and while this malignant Counter-science of the
forbidden fruit (that is, of flesh and blood, of the outward man, and
darkness) grows up and flourishes, the more noble Magical power withers, is
ploughed up and buried in the rubbish of sensuality. But in regard ever now and
then the science of the aple is suspended and chained up in the leaden fetters
of sleep: hence it is also, that sometimes our dreams are prophetical, and
that often God himself vouchsafes to make a nearer approach and familiar visit
to the sons of men, in dreams or abstracted visions of the night: for when the
interior magic of the Soul stands unmolested and free from any disturbance of
the Science of the interdicted fruit, then and only then does the intelligence
keep holy day, enjoy an halcyon Calm, and freely diffuse its self through all
its royalty: for thus does it, when it demergeth it self into the inferior
and subordinate faculties, safely conduct and lead along those that walk in
their sleep, over such horrid praecipices, where the strongest brained man
awake durst not adventure to clime.

Whereupon the senior Rabbis of the Jews affirm, that the Cabal Cabala vel
Cabalia, idiomate Chald^ orum est occultissima scientia, quae divinitu, una
cumlege Moysi traeditasertur, non scriptis, sed vi va voce, and patribus
a^riculariter traducta asserentibus etiam Rabbis Hebraeis, cujus Persae
diligentissimi cultores atque praefossores extuer^nt. Grae cireddunt (...).
was originally conceived in sleep: namely when 100.
the science of the Aple was wholly consopited. The intellectual act of the
Soul is ever clear, enjoys a constant Jubilee of calm serenity, and continues
in some sort perpetual; but so long as the principal Agent has not
transmitted its power so far as the limits of Sense, this kind of action is
not diffused through the whole man. For we who are wholly employed and taken up
with the exercise of our sensitive Faculty together with our Carnal
intelligence, are perpetually (oh misery worthy a deluge of tears! distracted
and impetuously hurryed away from the use and benefit of our more celestial
and Magical science, and held captives rather in the crepusculous and
owle-light of congnition, then in the Meridian of truth. Nor do we the
inhabitants of Egyptian darkness understand our own intellection, until
there succeed a certain mutual traduction of the several faculties, a
successive delivery of the image of the object from each to other, and until
as it were certain angles of actions, propagated by diverse agents, concur and
become complicated about the Medium. 101.


Now Saran excites this Magical power (otherwise dormant, and impeded by the
Science of the outward man) in his 102.
vassals: and the same awaked into activity serves them in stead of a sword, or
instrument of revenge in the hand of a potent adversary, that is the Witch. Nor
does Satan adfer any thing at all to the perpetration of the murder, more then
the bare excitation of the somnolent power, and a consent of the Will, which in
Witches is for the most part subject to his compulsion: for which two
contributions, the damned miscreant, as if the whole energy of the act were
soly attributary to himself requires by compact, a constant homage, a firm
and irrevocable oppignoration, and devout adoration at least, and frequently a
surrender of the very soul into his possession. When intruth this power was
freely conferred upon us by God, our Architect, and is no more then purely
natural to 103.
man. For those praestigious acts and impostures, the effascination by the
optic emission of the eyes, the false disguises of Witches in borrowed shapes,
and other delusions of this kind, are only derived from the legerdemain of
Satan, and his proper acts. And for this reason all the operations of this
Montinbanco, this Hocus-pocus, are merely ridiculous pageant delusions and
counterfeit apparitions, by the praesentment of forms that delude the sense;
because the God of mercies permits him not to enjoy any greater range of power,
but holds this mischievous Leviathan by a hook in his nostrils: but on the
other side, the Witch does by the magic of her own natural faculty perform
real and impious effects. Since that by sin, 104.
not the endowments of Nature, but of Grace, were obliterated in Adam, no man
disputes: and that these gifts of Nature, although they were not totally
cancelled and lost, yet remained eclipsed and as it were envelloped in the
obscurity of a midnight sleep. For as man from that unhappy moment, wherein he
forfeited his primitive Sovereignty, became inevitably obnoxious to the same
fate of mortality together with his fellow creatures: so also were all his
heroic and imperial faculties withdrawn behind a cloud, and so oppressed with
the opacity of fleshly lusts, that ever since they stand in need of excitement
and eduction from that Cimmerian umbrage. And to the procuring and advance of
this excitation, abstracted 105.
Contemplations, fervent and uncessant Prayers, taedious vigils, macerating
Fasts and other acts of mortification, are strong and praevalent conducements;
that by these spiritual antidotes the Lethargy of flesh and blood being
subdued, men may obtain this faculty renewed into its primitive agility, and in
a calm requiem of spirit offer up their addresses to that pure Essence, which
requires to be worshipped no other way, then in purity of spirit, that is, in
the zealous abyss of the Soul, the profundity of the inward man.

To this purpose also mainely conduces the practice of the Cabal, which may
restore to the Soul this her natural and 106.
magical praerogative, and rowze it up from the slumber and enchantment of
Carnality.

I will explain my self yet farther, like a Mathematician, by Examples, and
assume the very operations of Witches: which although of themselves they are
full of impiety and horrid mischief; yet they grow upon the same root
indifferently disposed to the production of good or evil fruit, namely upon
this Magical faculty. For it proclaims not the majesty of Free Will, or the
tractate of it, if we from thence collect argument concerning a thief, an
assassine, a whoremonger, an apostate, or Witch. Grant therefore that a Witch
kill a horse, in a stable removed at good distance: there is some certain
natural power derived from the spirit of the Witch, and not from Satan, which
can oppress, strangle, and perish the vital spirit of the horse. Grant that
there be two subjects 107.
of diseases and death, and that one of these is the body wherein every disease
takes up its quarters: and because all Entities discharge their activities on
this, as the most passive and flexible, men have conjectured, that the other
spiritual dominion was derived immediately from Satan: but the other is the
impalpable and invisible Spirit, which is constituted in a capacity of
suffering every disease, perse, in its own solitary nature. The Spirit once
invaded by any foreign hostility, and subdued to the obedience of passion, the
body also cannot but submit to compassion and deuteropathy; since every action
is terminated in the body (for the mind after once it is adliged to the body,
always flows downward, as when the Palate is misaffected with pain, the
tongue always tends thither, on the design of relieving it) but on the
contrary, the body may often be assaulted and entered by the force of a
disease, and yet the spirit remain exempted from sympathy. For there is a
classis of diseases only material, which arise singly from a material
tincture. So various and numerous are the occasions of death, that, when we
have taken the just dimensions of our frailties, we shall find no ground left
us, to erect any structure of pride upon. The act therefore of the praevious
touch of the Witch is purely natural: although the excitation of this magical
virtue depend upon the auxiliary concurrence of Satan, in as near an interest,
as if the Witch had cut the throat of the horse with a sword, which Satan had
put into her hands. This act of the Witch is natural and 108.
corporeal: as the other praecedent act is natural and sprituall. For indeed
man does naturally consist no less of a spirit, then a body: nor is there
reason, why one act should be accounted more natural then the other; or why
the body, the courser part of man, should be allowed a power of action, but the
spirit, the more noble and celestial part, (in its relation of being the
Image of God) accounted idle, unoperative, and altogether devoid of any
activity peculiar to it self: yea the Vital spirits, in most exact propriety
of language, are the immediate actors of sensation, motion, memory, etc. but
the body, and dead carcass cannot, in any respect whatever, own those
faculties: wherefore every action stands more relatively and properly regardant
to its Agent, then to the body, which at best is no more then the transitory
lodging of the Agent.

And thus it is evidenced, that there passes a spiritual radius, 109.
or gleame of magical virtue, from the Witch, to the man or horse appointed
for destruction, according to that Axiom: That no action can be done, without
a due approximation of the Agent to the Patient, and a reciprocal unition or
marriage of the virtues of each, whether the admotion or approximation be
corporeal or spiritual: which by an example ready provided to our hand we can
both prove and illustrate.

For if the heart (which is the presence chamber of the vital spirit) of a
horse slain by a witch, taken out of the yet warm and reaking carcass, be
empaled upon an arrow, and 110.
roasted upon a broach, or carbonadoed, immediately the vital spirit of the
witch, without the intervention of any other medium, and anon the whole witch
(since not the body, but only the spirit is capable of sensation) becomes
tormented with the unsufferable pains and cruelty of the fire; which truly
could by no means happen, unless there praeceded a conjunction or reciprocal
intercourse of the spirit of the Witch, with the spirit of the horse. For the
horse after strangulation retains a certain mumiall virtue (so I call it,
whenever the virtue of the vital nectar, or blood, is confermentate with the
flesh) which is the originary, implantate spirit, such as is never found
resident in bodies, that are extinct by voluntary deaths in any chronique
disease, or other ataxy, irregularity, or disruption of the inferior harmony,
that is the temperament of the body: to which the spirit of the Witch is
associated, as joint commissioner. In the reaking and yet panting heart
therefore, the spirit of the Witch, before it shall, by the dissolution of the
praecedent conspiracy, or divorce of the united spirits by putrefaction, have
returned back into her bosom, is imprisoned and held captive, and the retreat
of it praevented by the arrow transfixed, and by the torrefaction of both
spirits together: and hence comes it 111.
to pass, that the witch is afflicted and thrown into a horrid agony in her
sensative spirit. This effect admits a change, or 112.
double construction, from the intention of the experiment. For if revenge be
the motive or incitement to the experimentator, then is the effect
unwarrantable and inconsistent with the charitable rules of Christianity: but
if an honest and conscientious design, to compel the Witch to detect her
self, to betray her to the justice of the Magistrate, to procure security to
our neighbor and our selves by the remove of so impious, blasphemous, and
nocuous a vassal of Satan, that the greater glory to God, and peace and
benevolence to men, may redound from the discovery; then undoubtedly the effect
cannot be disallowed or condemned by the most rigid, precise, or puritanicall
judgment. We are not to conceive, that all the spirit of the Witch sallyed
forth, and transmigrated into the heart of the Horse (for so the Witch her
self had perished, fallen into an eternal swoune) but that there is a certain
univocall participation, or identicall traduction of the spirit and vital
light of the Witch: in an equal analogy to the Plastique spirit, or sole
delineator and architect of the most curious and magnificent fabric of man,
which in every distinct emission of the geniture or seed is covertly
ambuscadoed and propagated, sufficient to the procreation of a numerous issue,
the originary spirit of the father yet remaining unimpaired, and conserving its
individual integrity. For in sooth that participation and inheritance of the
vital light 113.
is magical, and a rich and fruitful communication of the specificall essence,
by the fertile virtue of that benediction, delivered by the Protoplast of all
seminall forms, Let all Animalls and Vegetalls bring forth seed, and hence is
it that one individual seed produces ten myriads of other seeds aequivalent,
and as many seminall spirits comprehending the whole specificall essence, by
the same mysterious way of traduction, whereby one Tapor is lighted by the
flame of another. But what the proper nature of this Magneticall spirit, and
what the Magical entity begotten in the womb of fancy may be, I shall more
largely declare in the process of our discourse: For it becomes me to retreat
from my digression, and now to progress in that path, which directly leads to
our intended scope.

Nor is there any pretense of reason, why any should conjecture, that this
reaction, or rebound of magical power upon the heart of the Witch, is only
imaginary and a chimaera of licentious phanfie, or a plainly superstitious and
damnable imposture and delusion of Satan; since by this token the witch is
infallibly detected, and volent nolent compelled to appear in public, which in
one of our praecedent suppositions we have sufficiently demonstrated to be e
diametro, opposed to the intention of Satan: for the effect holds constantly
good, and never fails to succeed upon experiment, as having its fundamental
causalities laid in reason and the spiritual nature of the inward man, but not
at all built upon superstitious supporters. Has not many a murdered carcass,
by the operation of the same magneticall spirit, suffered a fresh cruentation
upon the Coroners inquest, in the presence of the Homicide, and very often
directed the Magistrate to a just and infallible judgment of the crime,
although the blood, before that minute, stood congealed and frozen in its cold
rivulets? The reason of this life in death, this plea of the grave and loud
language of silent corruption, which has empuzled the 114.
anxious disquisitions of many subtle heads, we conceive to be thus: in a man
dying of a wound, the inferior virtues, which are mumiall, (for these are not
subject to the restrint of our will, and operate not in conformity to the di^
ates of reason) have deeply impressed upon themselves a certain Character of
revenge: and hence is it, that at the approach of the assassine, the blood
whose fountain death had sealed up, begins a tumultuation and ebullition in
the veins, and violently gusheth forth, being, as in a furious fit of anger,
enraged and agitated by the image or impresse of revenge conceived against the
murderer, at the instant of the souls immature, and compulsive exile from the
body. For indeed 115.
the blood after death retains a peculiar sense of the murderer being present,
and enjoyes a certain, though obscure, kind of revenge: because it has its
peculiar fancy: and for this reason, not Abel himself, but his innocent
blood cries loud in the ears of divine justice for revenge.

This also is the cause, why the Plague is so frequent a concomitant to
seidges, and why the beleaguered see the revenge of their dead acted upon their
enemies by the surviving Magic of their friends blood: for the magical spirit
of the inward man, in the heat of the encounters and sallyes, has conceived a
character and impression of revenge, and sometimes the defendants, especially
th common Soldier, being by want and other extreme miseries reduced to
desperation, and man and wife, conjoined as well in death as life, falling into
the cold arms of the grave, bequeath heavy imprecations and maledictions to
the surviving Officers, who engaged them in the calamity, and might, had their
charity been but half so weighty as their wealth, have relieved their famine:
by 116.
which earnest curse, there are more strong and durable impressions engraven on
the sidereall-spirit of the dying man (chiefly of a great bellyed woman) which
survive the funeral of the body. This posthume spirit (call it Ghost if you
please) immediately after death taking a vagabond progress in the lower region
of the air, applies it self to the contrivement of such spiritual means of
revenge and ruin, as lie within the sphere of its activity, and having once
designed the way, most readily advances to execution. And Plagues of this
original are most fatal, as well in the universality of contagion, 117.
as destruction, sparing no sex, age, or constitution, but impartially blasting
all, as if immediately shot from the quiver of incensed Divinity. But our pen
is tender, and fears to divulge the mysterious cause, why such spiritual
plagues scorn to obey the empty and frustaneous help of corporeal remedies:
for to reveal the reciprocal connection of mumies, and the concordance of
their interchangeable and cooperating faculties, might prove unsafe and
offensive to vulgar heads, in regard of the whole Nectromancy of the Ancients
was originally founded on this basis. For the same reason also God in the
Levitical 118.
Law severely prohibited the suspension of the bodies of Malefactors upon the
Gibbet, expressly commanding their remove before the Sun went down upon them.
You will answer, that Camp-plagues are generated from the odious and 119.
unwholesome nastinesse of the Soldier, and from the unburied excrements of
men, and entrails of beasts, polluting the air with putrid and malignant
vapors: but to this erroneous opinion we oppose the example of Coriars,
Tanners, and such who employ their industry in the sordid manufacture of glue,
made of skins dissolved by putrefaction, for all these are observed for the
most part (so far are they from being obnoxious to the infection of the
Plague) to enjoy the blessings of health and longavity; so conspicuous and
admirable is the finger of Divinity in the spirit of the Microcosme.

Do you desire to be informed, why the blood of a Bull 120.
is toxicall and poisonous, but that of an Ox, though brother to the Bull,
safe and harmless? the reason thus, the Bull at the time of slaughter is full
of secret reluctance and vindictive murmurs, and firmly impresseth upon his
own blood a character and potent signature of revenge. But if it chance, that
an Ox brought to the slaughter, fall not at one stroke of the Axe, but grow
enraged and furious, and continue long in that violent madness: then he leaves
a depraved and unwholesome tincture on his flesh, unless he be first recalmed
and pacified by darkness and famine. A Bull therefore dies with a higher flame
of revenge about him, then any other Animal whatever: and for that
transcendent excandescence, his fat (but by no means his blood, lest the
humane blood in 121.
the unguent be subdued and overawed by this exotique tincture of the Bulls
blood) is an ingredient wholly necessary to the composition of the Armary
unguent, where the weapons, which made the wound, are not besprinkled with the
blood of the Patient.

For if we expect a perfect cure from the dressing of the weapon, truly the
moss and other its fellow ingredients will prove insufficient to work a cure,
when the weapon is not distained with blood effused from the wound: Since there
is required a more violent and efficacious, namely, a taurine, impression, and
an aereall communication of florid honey. 122.
And thus have we, to the satisfaction of the most incredulous and
prejudicate, made it out, that the admirable efficacy of the Unguent ought to
be imputed, not to any auxiliary concurrence of Satan (who could perform the
cure without the use of honey and Bulls blood) but to the communion of Natural
qualities, by the energy of the posthume Character of Revenge, remaining firmly
impressed upon the blood and concreted fat.

Our Adversaries will whisper, and secretly exult, that the power of our
Magnetical Unguent could have hardly been supported, but by Analogical
Arguments drawn from the abstruse operations of Witches, from the impostures of
Satan, and the spiritual magic of the invisible world, which is a science
only imaginary, of no solid concernment or weight in the balance of reason,
and a dangerous, if not damnable, error. Nevertheless, not any sinister
obliquity or perversion of truth, nor any indirect design in us, by specious
similitudes to impose upon the weaker credulities of the illiterate: but the
gross ignorance of others, and the deplorable condition of humane fragility,
which by the propensity of our vitiated nature more readily inclines to evil,
more nimbly apprehends evil, and is more familiarly instructed by evil, then
good, has compulsively directed our pen to observe this method in the
explanation and probation of our thesis. However, what we have represented in
this scene concerning Satan, and his familiar Zany the Witch, affords no
encouragement or ground for others to hope a perfect conformity or resemblance
of the power of our Unguent with that of Witches; for neither the spiritual
faculty of the Unguent, nor the ecstatique fancy of the blood, are excited by
the manuduction or impulsion of Satan. The mark we shot at was, that there is
inhabitant in the Soul a certain Magical Virtue, infused by the primitive
bounty of her Creator, naturally proper and of right belonging to her by that
just title, that Man is the image and noble effigies of the Deity; and that
this virtue is qualified with a celestial activity, and semidivine prerogative
of operation, that is, a power of acting per nutum, intuitively, spiritually,
and at vast distance, and that too with much more vigor and efficacy, then by
any corporeal helps and assistance. The reason briefly and plainly thus; the
soul is the diviner particle, and more noble moity of man, far overweighing the
body both in dignity of essence and extraction: therefore also is the activity
competent to it spiritual, Magical, and of superlative validity. That the Soul
by the dictates of this Virtue, which has suffered a consopition and abatement
of its primitive agility by the counter-magick of the forbidden Apple in
Paradise, does regulate, manage, and move only her own peculiar body: but the
same being exsuscitated and awakened again into action, she extends her
dominion beyond the narrow limits of her earthly cloister to an object at
distance, and becomes so longimanous as to operate only per nutum, by
intuition conveyed through convenient mediums: for upon this point is founded
the whole basis of Natural Magic, but in no respect upon the 123.
brittle and sandy foundation of Benedictions, Ceremonies, and vain
superstitions; for these vain and impious observances 124.
were all introduced by him, who has ever made it his study, to conspurcate
and defile the best things with the sophistication of his tares. And in this
sense we have not 125.
trembled at the name of Magic, but with the Scripture understood it in the
best interpretation: and yet we have allowed it, to be indifferently employed
to a good or evil end, namely by the lawful use or abuse of this power. And so
126.
under this term we comprehend the highest ingenite cognition of natural
things, and the most vigorous power of action, equally natural to us with Adam,
not wholly extinguished nor obliterated by original sin, but only obscured and
as it were consopited, and therefore wanting expergefaction and excitement. And
therefore we declare, that Magnetism is not exercised by Satan: but by that
which has 127.
no dependence upon Satan: and consequently that this power, which is
peculiarly connatural to us, has been abusively fathered upon Satan, as if he
were the sole patron and promoter of it: that this Magical Faculty lies
dormant in us, charmed into a somnolent inactivity by the opiate of the
primitive sin, and therefore stands in need of an Excitator 128.
to promote it into action: Whether this Excitator be the Holy Spirit by
illumination, as the Church commemorates to have happened in the Eastern Magi,
and frequently 129.
happens in many devout persons even in our days: or Satan, for some previous
oppignoration and compact with Witches; in whom this excitation is wrought as
by a Coma Coma vigit, by others Typhomania and sopor delirans, is a symptom or
depravation of the internal senses, wherein the sick are oppressed with an
inexpugnable propensity to sleep, and yet cannot, by reason of various images
and phantasms crowding into the imagination, and perturbing their slumbers.
Vid. Sennert. in Institut.
vigil, or Catoche Catoche, or Catalepsis, is (...) violent symptom of the
Animal Faculty, wherewith who is surprised, remains deprived of all sense and
arbitrary motion, and rigidly congealed like a statue in the same posture,
wherein he was first in^aded, Consule Jul. Caesar. Scaliger. Exerc. 3 12. Hoc
admirandum sane symptoma, ex eo oriri videtur, quod sensorium commune, sive
Conarion, and interdum etiam parts ei vicinae, multis occupentur humoribus,
dum reliquum cerebrum ab iis minus est affectum. Hinc enim nullus objectorum
motus ab anima in hoo affectu percipi potest: and spiritus in cerebr^ saetis
copiose quidem geniti, sed determinationem in alias parts non accipientes, in
cosdem musculos, in quos antea erant determinati, perpetuo sl^t, corpusque in
eodem statu retinent. Nullo autem modo a Congelatione spirituum, quod vulg^
Medentum docet, fieri potest: Illa enim cerebri subsidentiam, ^er vorumque
compressionem, and hinc Apoplexiam potius iaduceret.
, and is therefore imperfect in regard of the manner, evil in regard of the
end, obscure in regard of the means, and nefarious in regard of the Author: nor
does the versipellous or Protean impostor endure that the Witch should know
this power to be her own natural endowment, on purpose to hold her the more
strictly obliged to himself, and lest the exercise of so noble a faculty, once
excited, should be employed to any other atchieveme, but what is impious and
destructive to mankind; and so he keeps the reins in his own hand, nor can the
Witch know how at her own pleasure to excite this dormant Magic, who has
wholly prostituted the freedom of her Spirit to the will of another tyrant.
That man of himself, without the auxiliary concurrence of any foreign
Causality, can where and when he please, by the practice of the Cabalistique
Art, awaken and excite this grand Virtue into action: and such who have
attained to this renovation of their impaired nature, are honored with the
title of Adepti, Obtainers, or Acquirers, the select vessels of God, whose
wills stand in humble and full conformity to the dictates and advisoes of the
Holy Ghost.

That this Magical Virtue is also naturally inherent in 130.
the outward man, namely in flesh and blood; but yet in a far less measure, and
of a more feeble energy: yea, not only in the outward man, but even in Brutes,
in some proportion and of inferior vigor (for so the Book of Moses has
positively observed unto us, that the soul of every beast is lodged in its
blood, and therefore he deservedly forbids it to be listed in the bill of
humane fare) and perchance in all other created natures; since every single
entity contains, within the narrow tablet of its own nature, an adumbration or
landscape of the whole Universe; and on this hint the Ancients have left it on
record unto us, that there is a God, that is an universal Entity, in all
things. That this Magic of the outward man, no less then that of the inward
man, does want excitation: nor does Satan excite any other Magic in his base
miscreant vassals, then that of the outward man; for in the interior closet of
the Soul is seated the Kingdom of God, to which no Creature has access. We
have further demonstrated, that there is a mutual connection between spiritual
Agents, and 131.
that spirits as they combat, which we have shown in the example of the Witch,
so also they hold a friendly and amicable correspondence each with other, which
we prove by the testimony of Magnetical experiments, and proper arguments, for
the fascination and ligation of souls, as in the amors of David and Jonathan,
etc. Finally, we have stretched the sinews of our reason to manifest, that man
enjoyes a dominion paramount over all other corporeal Creatures, and that by
his own natural Magic he can countermand the Magical virtues of all other
sublunaries: which royal prerogative and predomination some others have
erroneously and abusively transferred upon the power of charms and
incantations. By which Hierarchy we have to satiety of satisfaction, made it
manifest, that all those admirable and abstruse effects are wrought, which the
rustical and too corporeal Philosophy of others has ascribed to the dominion
of Satan.

That those who are ignorant of most things we have delivered, should yet
remain dubious and unsatisfied in many things, is necessarily certain:
wherefore we have determined to make a summary rehearsal of all: chiefly that
so what we have spoken in the former part of our dispute, concerning the duello
or conflict of spirits, and the reciprocal amity or mutual conspiration of
their united virtues, may receive the clearer explanation. It is a task worthy
our sweat and oil, to discover and handsomely define the arms, militia, and
encounters of spirits, and their Commonwealth: in order whereunto we are with
great sobriety of judgment, and acuteness of reason, to perpend the example of
a pregnant or great bellied woman, who when she has intently and with violence
of desire fixed her mind upon a Cherry, immediately there is impressed upon
the fruit of her womb the model, or pourtract of the Cherry, in that part,
whereon the ingravidated woman laid her hand. Nor does there remain only a
bare and idle figure of a Cherry, and a spot or maculation of the skin* but a
certain real production, which buds; blossoms, and ripens in its due season,
at the same time with other trees, the signatures of color and figure passing
gradual changes till it come to maturity. High and sacred, in good troth, is
the power of the microcosmical spirit, which without any arboreal trunck
produces a true Cherry: that is flesh, by the sole seminality and conception
of Fancy, qualified with all the proprieties and virtue of a real Cherry.
Hence we understand two necessary consequences. The first that the seminal
spirits, and in some latitude of acception the 132.
very essences of all creatures do lie ambuscadoed in our nature: and are only
educed and hatched into realities by the microcosmicratical Fancy.

The other, that the Soul in the conception of thought 133.
does generate a certain idea of the thing conceived in the mind: which as it
before lay concealed and raked up, as fire in flint; so by the concitation of
Fancy it does produce a certain real idea or exact pourtraict, and an
essential determination, in every part responding to the quiddity of the
Cherry, which cannot be a mere quality, but something like a 134.
substance, of an ambiguous essence between the body and the spirit, that is
the Soul. This production is so far spiritual, that it is not wholly exempted
from a corporeal condition; since the actions of the soul are terminated in the
body, and the other inferior faculties subservient to her: nor yet so far
corporeal, that it may be circumscribed by dimensions, which is only proper to
a seminal Entity, as we have formerly related. This ideal Entity therefore when
it falls from the invisible and intellectual world of the microcosm, it then
puts on corporeity, and then first becomes subject to be circumscribed by the
determinate dimensions of Locality and Numeration. The proper object of the
intellect is an abstracted, naked and pure essence, subsisting of itself; and
not an Accident, by the consent of Practical, that is Mystical Divines. This
Protheus, the intellect, does thus as it were cloth and apparel this conceived
essence with Corporeity. But in regard every operation of the soul, whether
external or internal, has its fieri in its own proper image: therefore can not
the intellect discern and know, the Will like and select, and the Memory
recollect and recogitate, unless by images* and this same image of the object
the intellect does cloth in corporeity: and because the Soul is the simple
Form of the body, which readily converts and applies her self to every member,
therefore cannot the intellect entertain and harbor two images at one and the
same time, but successively first one and then another. And thus the Soul
wholly descends upon the intellect, and the yet-tender and embryon image 135.
newly conceived and impressed, and afterward forms the cognition of the
peculiar essence into a persistent and durable image, or ideal Entity. The
mind being once polluted by the leprous miasm, or contagious tincture of sin,
soon became obnoxious to the wrath of God; and because this was at once
deturpated and depraved, being divested of the Nobility of its primitive
condition; therefore Death found an entrance upon our nature, not by the
original decree of the Creator, but by the degeneration of man delapsed into
filthiness and impurity, and ungenerously degrading himself, by reason of this
ideal entity now arrayed with comparative corporeity; which corruption and
turpitude, with deplorable fertility springing up in every the most venial
peccadillo, we must extenuate and mortify by showers of poenitential tears in
this world, or too late bewail in the next. This entity therefore, while it
remains in the forge of the intellect, is but lightly and slenderly
characterized, nor does any where, but in a pregnant woman, receive a more firm
consistence, which in the masculine sex it never obtains but by the Will; more
familiarly thus, the Agent Intellect always procreateth an ideal Entity, or
semi-substantial pourtraict of the essence of an object; but clothes it not
with corporeity, unless by the immediate action of the Will, great-bellied
women only excepted. Sin therefore, whether we allow it to be a reality, or
non-reality, at least a consent and propensity to evil, can never be committed
without the real production of this kind of Entity, and the assumption and
indution of it. And this 136.
truly has ever been the Cause of the foecundity of seeds: for the Fancy,
excited by the orgasmus or heat of lust, produces a slender reality or ideal
entity, which when the soul has clothed with corporeity (for the action of the
mind, while it remains immured in walls of flesh, always tends downward and
outward) it instantly diffuseth this new ideal entity into the liquor of the
seed, which without this impregnation had still continued barren and devoid of
any Plastique power: which action is performed as it were by an alienation of
the mind, the will being ravished, by the true Magic 137.
of the outward man, into a kind of short ecstasie, in which there happens a
communication or bequest of a certain Mental light to the entity descending
into the body or mass of seed.

Whenever therefore the Cogitation draws the sense and will into consent; so
often is there hatched and incorporated a filthy, spurious ideall entity: by
which production the will is said to be confirmed: and this ideall entity with
all expedition rangeth through the body, whithersoever it is sent on an errant
by the will: and by this means the will now moves the arm, now the foot,
anon the tongue, and so all other parts.

Again when this entity is disseminated upon the Uitall Spirit, on a design
of love, relief, or harm to any object, then it wants no more then a slight
and easy excitement from the auxiliary hand of God, of the Cabalistique Art,
or of Satan; that so the portion of the spirit, which is impraegnated with the
ideall entity, may sally abroad and atcheive the enterprise enjoined it by the
will. Thus every male projects 138.
his seed at distance from the dimensions of his body: which seminall emission
carries along with it that foecundity, which it drew from the infused entity,
and executes its procreative commission beyond the trunck of the individual
protoplast. Undoubtedly bodies scarce make up a moity of the world: but Spirits
possess a full mediety, and indeed the major part of the world. And therefore
in this whole Context, I call Spirits the Patrons of Magnetisme: not those that
are sent 139.
down from heaven do we mean, much less those that ascend from the horrid
Abyss below; but such only which have their original, and existence in man
himself: for as fire is, by excussion, kindled from flint, so also from the
Will of man, by a kind of secret scintillation, something of the vital
influent spirit is desumed, and that something assumes an ideall entity, as its
ultimate form and complement. Which perfection once obtained the Spirit, which
before was purer and more refined 140.
then the aethereall aer, becomes subtilitated like light, and assumes an
ambiguous or middle nature between Corporeal substances and incorporeall. But
it is sent ambassador whithersoever the Will directs it, or thither at least,
whither the innate infallible science of spirits does command it, according to
the intentions and scopes of the taskes to be performed: the ideall entity
therefore, being now ready prepared for its journey, becomes a light
(understand it in some latitude of sense) and shifting off corporeity,
confesses no restraint or circumscriptive laws of places, times, or
dimensions. And this refined and exalted semisubstance is neither the Devil,
nor any effect, nor any conspiration of his: but a certain spiritual action of
the inward man, plainly and purely natural and haereditary to us. This
mysterious wisdom who ever entertaineth with that solemnity of judgment and
praeparation of nature and unpraejudicate thought, which becomes the gravity of
a mind greedy of magnalities, shall easily understand, that the material world
is on all sides governed, regulated, and coerced by the immateriall and
invisible: and that all corporeal created natures are placed at the footstool
of man, as being subordinate to the regality of his will. And this very thing
truly is the Cause, why even the mumie, the fat, the moss, and the humane
blood, namely the Phansy naturally existing in them, in the Unguent, should
domineer over the blood of a Dog, of a Horse, etc. shed upon a piece of wood,
and buried in a pot of the Unguent.

Yet we have not said enough concerning the Magnetisme of the Unguent: We shall
therefore now pursue a hint, which 141.
we started in our praecedent lines. That the Magnetisme of the Loadstone and
other inanimate Creatures is performed by a certain Natural sensation, the
immediate Authrix of all sympathy, is a truth unquestionable. For if the
Loadstone direct it self to the Pole, it must have a certain knowledge, lest
it become 142.
subject to deviation and error in its direction: and how, I beseech you, can
it have that requisite knowledge, if it be not sensible of its own local
position? In like manner if it convert to iron placed at great distance, and
neglect the Pole, of necessity it must first know the situation of the iron.
Wherefore the single Magnet is endowed with various senses, and also with
imagination: nor will it be enough, that it be provided of sensation, unless
we also add the provokement and goads of occult friendship and Philauty or
self-love; and so that the Loadstone is endowed with a certain Natural
phansy, by the power of whose impression all Magnetismes in the whole Catalogue
of Creatures are performed. For 143.
by one phansy it is directed to iron, and by another to the Pole; for then is
its virtue diffused only through a small space of the aer to the object near
at hand: but that Phansy is changed, when it praevents an abortion, restraines
the impetuous flux of Catarrhes, or hinders the falling down of the intestine
in a rupture: and by a third phansy, different from both the former, does the
Loadstone attract any thing of glass melted by fire: for any the smallest
fragment of a Loadstone injected into a good quantity of glass, while it is in
decoction, of green or yellow turns it into perfect white. For albeit the
Loadstone it self be of a deep (though something 144.
shadowed) sanguine tincture, and be wholly destroyed and consumed by the fire
that dissolves the glass: yet notwithstanding while it retains any relict of
its vital essence, it exhausteth the tincted liquor even from the candent
glass, and devoureth the tincture of it: and thus we discern, that the
attraction of the Loadstone is not determined only to iron; but also extends
to that aerial part, which otherwise could not, without great difficulty, be
divorced from the body of the glass: and to this purpose is it commonly used
by Glasse-makers. The phansy of Amber delights to allect 145.
strawes, chafe, and other festucous bodies, by an attraction, we confess,
obscure and weak enough, yet sufficiently manifest and strong to attest an
Electricity, or attractive signature: for married to the mumie of our bodies,
it appears superior to the humane Magnet, draws counter to it, and by that
interest entitleth it self to the dignity of a Zenexton, or preservatory
Amulet against contagion. But Amber mixed with Gummes, its imagination being
then transplanted, attracteth the Venom and bullets out of wounds: for the
pleasure and desire of attraction is varied on either side, that is according
to the various contemperation and allay of the humane mumie, and of the Gummes.
But alas! What wonder can it be (unless amongst those, who being ignorant of
all things, 146.
foolishly admire all things (that inanimate creatures should be enriched with
an imaginative faculty? when that infinite Essence, who is all life, and the
very Soul of Uitality, has created all things in perfection, and so
praevented all expectation of deficiency and inutility in the least piece of
his handyworke: nor can the subtilest Curiosity find out any one piece in the
innumerable list of Creatures, wherein the reflex of his Divinity is not
conspicuous: for the spirit of the Lord fill's the whole earth; yea this
expression, that he comprehends all things, carries the emphaticall and
significant force of the word. Do we not believe that there was a large stock
of malignant science ambuscadoed into the forbidden fruit? and that our unhappy
Protoplasts, together with the aple, swallowed down that science, and received
it into the very entralls and profundity of their nature? and does not this
science praesuppose a phansy peculiar to it? For thus some simples induce an
Amenty or short alienation of the reason, others cause a constant madness, or
Maniacal fury: not by a distraction of the brain, or a dissipation of the
Animal spirits (for then the strength and vigor of the maniacall persons
would of necessity suffer impairement and decay, which never happens, but
rather on the contrary they become much stronger and almost invincible) but
indeed, by the exotic and distractive 147.
phansy of those peculiar simples introduced, which overmasters our phansy, and
subdues it to full obedience, sometimes only pro tempore, as in periodicall
deliriums, phrensies etc. and sometimes for ever, as in Lunaticks and Maniacks
or Bedlams.

Does not the rabies or madness of Dogs by this means 148.
transmigrate into men? the Maniacall phansy of the Fury being transplanted
into the slaver or salivous froth of the dogs tongue, which soon conquers and
triumphs over the blood of any Animal, into which it has insinuated it self,
through any the most slender puncture of of the skin? for then the primitive
and genuine Phansy of all the blood in the wounded body surrenders up its
inferior power, becomes subordinate, and compulsively assumes the A derivative
from Hydrophobia, a fear of water, which is a symptom of the Animal Faculty,
or alienation of reason introduced from the peculiar propriety of the venom of
a mad dog. The reason of this strange accident Physicians refer either to the
occult quality of the venom, by secret and specifical ^ermentation of the
blood subduing the imagination to this absurdity; like as the sting of the
Tarantula, operating chiefly on the seat of reason, the brain, alienates the
Fancy, and so infatuates the mind, that the patient dances to death, if not
cured by harmonious music; or to the imagination of the patient, from the
remembrance of the occasion of his harm, a dog, perpetually fixed upon and
troubled with the image of a dog, so that he conceives the apparition of a dog
in the water, or liquor presented to him, and therefore abhors to drink it.
Examples of this are recorded by Aetius, Tetrab. 2. cap. 24.
Hydrophobical fancy of the Exotic Tincture: from whence, in excess of time,
comes a Binsical Death, (i. e.) from the sole disease and exorbitancy of the
mind, the Magical virtue of the Dog being excited and exalted above the
nonexcited, but somnolent Fancy of the Animal. By the same mysterious
traduction, in all respects, is the Fancy of the Tarantula impressed upon
man, by a slender thrust of his sting, and the wounded suffering an immediate
alienation of their reason, fall into a violent fit of dancing, and capering
high levoltoes: only the poison of the Tarantula differs from that of the mad
dog in this particular, 149.
that this operateth by a magical power excited, and so by magic truly, and
without the favor of a metaphor, so called; but that acts by a magical power
non-excited and somnolent, as the same difference is undeniably manifest in
Monkshood, Aconite, etc. deleterious plants, which are speedy 150.
and inevitably destructive, in very small quantity: in regard, no Animal
endeavors to secure or defend it self against the biting of a mad dog, since
the magical power of his excited fancy being diffused, is binding and
obligatury, against which neither the teeth, nor horns of any beast can make
the least prevalent resistance; which cannot be affirmed of the Venom of the
Tarantula.

In the outward man therefore, as also in all his fellow Animals, the Magical
power is latitant, and as it were consopited; nor is it capable of excitation
only in man, (though we confess, with greater facility, and to higher
achievements) but even in many other Animals, consorted with man at the
Creation. Again, it suffices not, that the Spirit of one individual maintain
and observe this law of concord and monomachy 151.
or duello with the Spirit of another individual: but moreover there dwells a
certain universal or mundan spirit in the whole world, (i. e.) in all things
within Trismegistus Circle, which we Christen the Magnum magnale, which
exsisteth the universal Pander of all sympathy and dyspathy, the invisible
Mercury or common Intelligencer, and the Promotor of all natural actions; and
by whose mediation or convoy the Magnetism is, as by the most convenient
vehicle, transported and wafted to an object at vast distance. This is made
good by an autoptical demonstration; for if upon the miniking of a tuned Lute
you place a slender straw, hanging with a doubtful extremity (i. e.)
equilibrated in the aer, and at convenient distance in the same room strike the
minikin of another Lute, when there succeeds a consonance in the eighth note,
you shall see the straw to tremble; but when the notes concord in an unison,
then the minikin of the untouched Lute, impatient of delay, will quaver, caper
for joy, echo the same aer, and by a nimble subsultation throw off the
offensive straw. What, will you impute this effect to Satan, and make him the
Fiddler? Now you shall never observe the straw to rebound from the string,
though all the strings of the other Lute be unanimously, strongly, and near at
hand played upon; for it is not the bare and simple tone that compels the
untouched string to quaver; for then every tone would cause the same effect;
but it is only the universal spirit, the Common Mercury, inhabiting in the
middle of the universe, and being the faithful executor and adjutor of all
natural actions, transports, promotes and causes the Sympathy.

But why tremble we at the name of Magic? since the whole action is Magical;
nor has any natural Agent a 152.
power of activity, which is not emergent from the fancy of its peculiar
form, and that magically too. But in regard this fancy in bodies devoid of
voluntary election is only of a determinate and limited identity: therefore
have some vulgar heads erroneously and dully imputed the effects of such
restrained bodies, not to the fancy of them, but a Natural propriety; out of
an ignorance of Causes substituting the effect in the room of the Cause. When
indeed every Agent does operate on its proper object, by a praesensation or
distinctive foreknowledg of it, whereby it is directed not to discharge its
activity rashly and at random, but only on its own peculiar object. For the
diffusion or emission of activity necessarily succeeds the sensation of the
object; and the effect results from an excitement of the fancy, by
transmitting of the ideal entity, and conjoyning it with the radius or gleam of
the passive entity. And this, in our dialect, has ever been the Magical action
of natural bodies; yet in most accommodate language and just propriety of
denomination, this Magical and phantastique activity belongs principally (if
not solely) to Creatures ennobled with a power of election. I shall muster up
the Creatures, and guide our disquisition 153.
through every Classis of them. All formal proprieties flowing from the forms
of the three universal principles, Sal, Sulphur, and Mercury, or the salt,
Unctuous fat, and liquor, whereof every body is composed, and into which it is,
by corruption of the corporeal harmony, again resolved; and the Mercury or
liquor is so often diverse and differently qualified, as there are different
species of compound bodies, which same variety of impregnation we are to
conceive also of the other two, Sal and Sulphur: All specifical proprieties, I
say, are derivatory from the phansies of these forms, which in regard they are
very corporeal, and deeply immersed in the bosom of Elements, therefore are
they called Formal and occult proprieties, out of a gross ignorance of the
forms, which in another (and in troth more Philosophical) acceptance are
Magical effects produced by the fancy of the said forms: but (we confess)
less noble, and more corporeal, yet abundantly satisfactory to those ends,
which, by the primitive destiny of their Creation, they regard. To this series
154.
belongs the subductive virtue of Cathartick or Purgative, the somniferous
faculty of Hypnotick or dormitive medicaments, etc.

Besides these there are other nobler Proprieties, taking their original from
the fancy of the forms of the whole Compositum: and these are diffused
through and inherent in the whole Compositum, by reason of the Form of it; such
are the Magnetism of the Loadstone, the virtue of Tinctures, and all specifical
and appropriate Medicaments; which are occasioned by reason either of the whole
homogeneous neixture, or the particular form of some integral part, but not of
any single or divided principle: such as these are naturally inherent in the
trunck, leaves, root, and fruit of plants, and not in any one of the three
principles diacritically separated from the compage or conjuncture. Thus also
Antimony, while it remains in its primitive form, and native integrity, is
enriched with noble and excellent qualities, which it could never aspire unto
in its solitary and divided principles. But these are also closely enshrowded
in Corporeity; and therefore the natural magic lies covertly ambuscadoed and
obscure in them, and has been thought wholly attributary to Nature, by an
unjust and unadvised distinction of Nature from Magic, opposing the former e
diametro to the latter, when in sober verity they are both one and same, though
commonly received under distinct appellations. Thus the leaf of a rose has a
distinct virtue, which the stem, or yellow just in the middle of the rose has
not: and that virtue arises not to the leaf from the three Grand principles
united, or any one of them paramont in the conjuncture; but immediately
resulteth from its Vital Form, which, when it is destroyed, amitteth its
primitive, and acquireth other secondary virtues; as in example, a grain of
Corn in its primitive vitality nourishes, but when degraded from that first
life, it fructifies. Thirdly, there is another Magical power proceeding from
the fancy 155.
of the life of the integral compositum: and this is implanted in bruites and
the exterior man; which being spiritual, is more absolute in sovereignty then
the former, but yet not advanced to the zenith or highest pitch of energy,
though sometimes by much excitation, and a strong fancy introduced by a real
entity, it ascend to a very great height of activity, and by a near emulation
rival the true Magic of the inward man. Again, the Soul of every Brute
enjoys a power of 156.
creating a real entity, and of transmitting the same, by the mandate of the
Will, to an object at very large distance: of this sort of magical bruites, are
the Basilisk, a dog, many fishes described by Olaus Magnus, etc. such also is
the virtue inhabitant in the blood of many Animals: and hence does Holy Writ
deliver expressly, that the Soul so journs in the blood though extravenated,
though decocted on the fire, yea, and (for ought can be alleged to the
contrary) though totally altered by corruption. Finally, there is also a
Magical 157.
virtue as it were abstracted from the body, which is wrought by the excitement
of the interior power of the soul: and from this arise most potent
procreations, most noble impressions, and effects of supreme vigor and
efficacy. For (in troth) Nature 158.
in most of her operations plays the Magician, and acts by the energy of her
own fancy; and since this activity is by so much the more potent, by how much
the more spiritual; therefore is the term or appellative of Magic exactly
analogous and concordant.

Of all which gradually different species of magical virtue, 159.
there is hardly any one that stands not in need of excitation. For that of the
lowest Classis requires excitement and eduction, by some previous warmth, or
gently fomenting heat, by which there is educed a certain vapor, or spiritual
effluvium, by reason whereof the fancy restrained in a profound sleep, and
drowsy inactivity, is awakened into action, and then begins a mediatory
encounter between the corporeal spirits, which is of Magnetism, excited by a
precedent touch. But that of the highest Classis, such as belongs to bruits and
men, receives excitement from an intellectual conception; and that of the
inward man is not at all excited, unless by the Holy spirit, and by his
excellent gift, the Cabal; but that of the outward man, by strong imagination,
by assiduous and intense speculation, yea, and in Witches by Satan. But the
magic of the extravenated blood (wherein the soul has taken up her quarters)
which lies lurking only in potentia, is excited and invited into act, either
by a more strong imagination exalted, conceive it of the magician making use of
the blood as a medium, and fixing his newly accensed entity thereon; or
conceive it by the ascendent fancy of the Armary unguent, the excitatrix of
the proprieties latent in the blood; or by a previous destination of the blood
to corruption whereby the Elements are disposed to separation, and the Essences
(which know no corruption) and the Essential phansies, which lay obscured in
the potentia of the proprieties, sally forth into action.

The fancy therefore of any subject whatever has obtained 160.
a strong and vigorous appetite to the spirit of its peculiar object, in order
to the locomotion, attraction, expulsion, or repulsion of it: now in this, and
no where else, we acknowledge Magnetism, as the natural magical endowment of
that subject, conferred upon, and firmly implanted in it, by the wise bounty of
God.

There is therefore a certain formal propriety segregated 161.
and manifestly distinct from the Sympathetique and abstruse qualities, in this
particular relation: that the fancy, which is the motrix of those qualities,
does not directly tend to the Locomotion, but only the Alteration of the
object. And thus, though we grant, that every Magnetism be either
Sympathetical, or Antipathetical; yet notwithstanding the inversion will fail,
that every sympathy must be Magnetical.

But we retire from our digression to the grand mark our intentions level at.
By this time (I conceive) it is clearly understood, that there resideth a
fancy and magical appetite, not only in the blood, but even in the
superfluous humors, meats, and excrements; since the various and numerous
progeny of diseases affords convictive manifestoes of it. For pregnant women
labor with an absurd and ridiculous appetite to strange and unusual meats, and
Cachectical Virgins, 162.
by a natural oestrum or libidinous fury of the exorbitant womb, do with
extraordinary celerity (though not without great inamoenity and paleness)
digest what ever they long for: but indeed, not from reason of similitude of
substance, nor from any consanguinity of humane nature requiring that
particular meat, their irregular appetite so ravenously covets; but seduced by
the exotique fancy of the vicious humors, accumulated in the vessels of the
womb, and restagnated or belched up into the stomach, which over-mastering the
true and natural appetite, goadeth them to this absurdity; by the expulsion of
which noxious impurities, we have frequently cured such perversions and absurd
appetites; or else we have mitigated and composed them, by permitting the
irregular and frantic fancy of such humors to sat it self by fruition. In
the blood therefore there inhabiteth a peculiar fancy, which in regard it is
of more 163.
vigorous energy therein, then in other things, therefore does Divine History,
in a singular and emphatique Elogy, call the blood (though strongly decocted,
and ready cooked for the table) the Mansion of the soul. And in regard this
fancy of 164.
the blood is capable of traduction, and may be devolved to posterity; for this
reason is it, that the manners, gestures, conditions, and genius of the
Grandfather are revived and become resplendent in his issue, long after the
resolution of him into dust. Nobility took its first rise from well-deserving
Virtue. hence most nobility be without just merit, suspected to be increased by
the continued and successive propagation of the family, unless the heroic
inclinations and virtues of gallant ancestors, obscured by mortality, might,
with probability of hope, be expected to find a resurrection, and shine again
in their ^late posterity. Again, does not the enmity 165.
conceived betwixt the Woolf and sheep remain firmly impressed upon their
pelts? Wherefore the fancy of an Animal, pervicaciously surviving death, is
impressed not only upon the blood: but also whoever sleeps under the coverture
of a blanket made of the skin of a Gulo or Glutten (a beast of incredible,
because insatiate, voracity, very common in Swedland) is forced continually to
dream of feasting, hunger, voracity and the ensnaring of wild beasts,
according to the natural condition of that animal, while it was living: and
thus, only by an external coverlet. the fancy of the beast, which during
life so journed in the skin, is devolved and traduced unto a man, that sleeps
beneath it. And thus also, by the ministry of the Fancy of the blood comes
it to pass, that the blood extravenated, being received upon the sword or
weapon, is introduced into the Magnetic Unguent. For then the fancy of 166.
the blood; before unactive and somnolent, being by the virtue of the
magnetical unguent excited, and there finding the balsamical and medical virtue
of the unguent* earnestly covets the newly-induced quality to be communicated
to it self throughout, and from thence, by spiritual magnetism, to exhaust and
drain out all the foreign quality, that had invaded the wound: which when it
cannot sufficiently perform upon the single stock of its own strength, it
implores the aid of the most of the blood, fat, and mumy, which by coalition
degenerate into such balsam, that by no other means, but its own fancy,
becomes medical, magnetical, and also attractive of all the foreign quality out
of the body, whose fresh blood, abounding with spirits, is applied unto it,
whether it be the blood of a man, or any other Animated Creature. The fancy
therefore is reducible and ecstatical from part of the blood freshly and
immediately after the effusion brought unto the unguent: but the magnetical
attraction, begun in the blood, is perfected by the medical virtue of the
unguent. But the unguent does not attract the evil and depraved tincture or
inquinament of the wound, unto it self, and so put on as much contagion, as was
enclosed in Pandoraes box: but only works a salutiferous alteration on the
spirit of the newly effused and freshly applied blood, makes it medical,
balsamical, and rouzeth up its dormant virtue: whence there results to it a
certain medical and magnetical virtue, which makes a speedy return to the body,
from which the blood issued forth, with full commission and power to cure its
cousin german, the spirit of the blood yet flowing in its proper conduits,
throughout the whole man. For it sucks out of the wounded party, the exotic
and dolorous impression, diminishes it by a medical power, exileth it; which
medical virtue, being the puissant conqueress of the evil, is partly excited in
the blood, and partly ingenerated in the same by the unguent, that is by the
spirit of the unguent, upon the magic of its fancy (i. e.) its created
endowment, thus exercising imperial power, and efficacious sovereignty, over
the spirit of the blood. In another case, the blood enclosed in an egg shell,
putrefying with all its vigor about it, and so as it were redeemed from the
bondoge of corporeity, and the spirit delivered from all impediments, by 167.
previous putrefaction, becomes attractive, by the mediation of the mumy of a
dog, and really transfers that disease, which was before seated in the fancy
and astrality of the excrementitious impurities in the patient, into the dog
that devours it; for no other reason, but this, that the magnetism cannot be
advanced to perfection of operation, without the intercession of the balsam of
the unguent. We have observed, if it happen that the wounded party has
received many wounds at once, that it suffices to have the blood effused out
of any one of the wounds; and that by the single application of that blood, all
the other wounds are cured together: because that blood observes a
correspondence and sympathetical concordance with the spirit of the whole man,
and from the same educeth the offensive extraneous quality, communicated not
only to the lips of the wound, but also to the whole body; for from one wound
there ordinarily is kindled an universal fever throughout the whole body of man.

Hitherto have I suspended the revealment of a grand mystery; 168.
namely, to bring it home to the hand of reason, that in man there sits
enthroned a noble energy, whereby he is endowed with a capacity to act extra
se, without and beyond the narrow territories of himself, only per nutum, by
his single beck, and by the natural magic of his fancy, and to transmit a
subtle and invisible virtue, a certain influence, that does afterward subsist
and persevere per se, and operate upon an object removed at very large
distance: by the discovery of which sole mystery, all that we have hitherto
treated, concerning the ideal entity, conveyed in the arms of a spiritual
emanation, and sallying abroad to execute the mandates of the will, concerning
the magnetism of all Creatures, proceeding as well from humane fancy, as from
the native and peculiar fancy of every thing, and also concerning the magical
superiority of man over all other sublunary bodies, will receive illustration,
and shine bright in the eye of our understanding. It Is a meridian truth, too
clear to be eclipsed by controversy, that of steel there may be made a needle,
which invigorated 169.
by the confriction of a loadstone, does point out the pole to Seamen: but in
vain is the steel hammered into a needle, and placed at free range in the
navigatory Compass, to level at the north Star, unless there has preceded a
fit and requisite affriction of the loadstone. Which assertions since they
sound loud enough to pierce the ears of the deafest incredulity, it remains
convenient, that we frame and qualify a Mariners needle, solo nutu, only by
the magnetism of our fancy, and magic of intuition. On the anvil therefore,
whereon the steel is hammered into a figure of a needle, let the north point be
chalked out, and that in a strait line: then stand you, when you play the
Vulcan, with your back to the north, that so when the steel is beating under
the hammer, you may draw it out into a needle toward your self and the north:
I say therefore, that such a needle, thus positionally and intuitively framed,
will acquire a vigorous polarity, and punctually observe the north Star,
without any foreign impregnation or magnetical infusion, and indeed without any
variation, to which the ordinary needles invigorated by the loadstone are
subject, which carries with it a very great mystery. Moreover that needle,
which is made upon the foresaid line, by chance, and without the knowledge or
intention of the Fabricator, continues bare steel, devoid of all verticity, and
directs not to the pole. Hence is it a natural Consequence, that the
imagination of the Fabricator, in the very moment of the needles nativity, when
the glowing heat of the fire is somewhat abated, and the steel but obscurely
red, does impress this magnetical faculty into the steel needle, as a
convenient and appropriate subject. Not that the celestial orbs do, in that
punctilio of time, infuse the verticity; for then it would descend and be
impressed upon the steel, without the intention, consent or observance of the
smith; which cannot satisfy experience: for if the Stars did transmit their
influence at some certain hour, and in some determinate position, then might
the Characteristical and sigillary science of the celestial orbs be allowed to
put on triumphant wreaths, which we pass by.

But that Constellation which descends upon the steel (and 170.
it may be upon every magical image and seal) is derived from the Microcosmical
Heaven, that is, from our own Olympus: vain and unsuccessful therefore have
been those Magical seals and pentacles, which were not framed and configurated
by the magician in an high ecstasie and exaltation of his fancy: for all
inferior Entities and Phansies are compelled to do homage to the transcendent
magic of ours, by which prerogative Sapiens dominabitur astris, a wiseman
shall regulate and countermand the influence of the Stars, to the dominion of
whose scepter the Parent of Nature has subjected whatever is contained in the
vast Amphitheatre of Heaven. What we have here alleged concerning the fancy
impressing a verticity upon the steel, as we have learned from the authentic
testimony of many judicious pens, and from our own frequent experience: so may
it be confirmed ten thousand times to the observation of any whose curiosity
shall incline him to the easy trouble of the experiment. Thus the leaves of
Asarum, and the tops of Elder, submit and conform unto the fancy of the
decerptor, who impresseth upon the plant, and the plant upon the leaves a
magnetical virtue, which in operation shall justly respond to the position of
the hand that gathered them: when otherwise, the leaf being decocted (as the
needle heat again in the fire) and given in a potion, the virtue of the fancy
impressed upon it would of necessity perish, if the Magnetism were not
cherished and maintained from the integral plant. That the blood of any Animal
decocted and ready cooked for the trencher, does yet contain the soul of that
Animal, is true: but that virtue does not depend upon the impression of humane
and foreign fancy, but arises immediately from the proper endowment of its
own fancy. By the same reason also does a dart thrust through the heart of a
horse, killed by the execrable magic 171.
of a witch, bind up and hold captive the vital spirit of that witch, and
twisteth it together with the mumial spirit of the horse, that so both may be
torrified together, and by that torment, as by a sharp goad, the witch may be
driven to betray her self: and that at length, by the justice of the
magistrate, the base miscreant, detestable to God, and pernicious to man, may
be eternally exiled from the conversation of mortals, and cut off, according to
the Law of God. For if the operation be determined to any external object, the
magical soul does never attempt it without a convenient medium: and for this
reason she makes use of the dart or nail transfixed through the heart.

Now this position, that man is endowed with a power of acting, per nutum, or
moving any object at remote distance, being proved by convictive evidence: it
is also sufficiently confirmed, by the same natural example, that this
transcendent energy was conferred upon him by the wise indulgence of his
Creator; and therefore, by the Charter of his Nature, does justly belong unto
him. Their conjecture has ever had a 172.
strong hautgoust of absurdity, who have hitherto conceived, that Satan has
moved, altered, and transported any thing, and really applied Actives to
Passives in locomotion, only per nutum; while they have taken for granted,
that the Devil was the first and grand Motor in the forementioned motions, that
by those corporeal extremities requisite to contaction, he could violently
snatch away, transmit, or any way move, at least an aereal body (which they
fondly imagine) though destitute of a soul. Absurd, I say, is it to believe,
that Satan since his exile from the presence (I mean, the merciful influence)
of Divinity, and fall from the glory of his own essence, does still retain a
magical dignity, whereby he can really act upon any natural subject, and
produce what effect soever he please, only by intuition, because in the
primitive excellence of his once Angelical nature, he received such an
endowment: but that the same prerogative was taken from, and ever since denied
unto man, and given to the Devil, the most vile and despicable of Creatures:
and that if there be any such real effects performed by man, they are to be
ascribed to a servile compact with the devil. Open the eyes of your reason: for
Satan has hitherto proudly triumphed in your so great and so dangerous
ignorance, with so high content, as if you had made his altars smoke with the
grateful incense of glory and dignity, and divested your self of your own
native prerogative, pulled out your own eyes, and offered them in sacrifice to
him.

We have said, that every magical virtue does lie dormant, and want excitation:
which holds perpetually true, if the object, upon which the energy is
discharged, be not nearly disposed and qualified to admit it, if the fancy of
it does not promptly conform unto the impression of the Agent, or also if the
Patient be equal in strength, or superior to the Agent. But on the contrary,
where the object is conveniently, proximly, and obediently qualified to
entertain the magical influx, as steel is to receive the magnetical infusion of
a loadstone: or plainly weak, and conscious to it self (as are the homicide,
adulterer, theif, and witch) there the patient, without much excitation, the
sole fancy of the outward man being deduced into action and adliged to any
convenient medium, at the first assault surrenders its self, and obeys the
Magnetism. I say, the magician ever makes use of a medium: for thus, unless a
pregnant woman has extended her hand to her own thigh, forehead, or buttocks,
the infant in her womb shall never be stigmatized in his thigh, forehead, or
buttocks. Thus do the words or forms of Sacraments ever operate: because ex
opere operato, from the work performed. But why exorcisms do not always succeed
in their operations; the defect is not in God, but only because the unexalted
and dully-excited mind of the Exoreist does blunt the edg of the Charm, and
render the words invalid and ineffectual. For which reason, no man can be a
happy and perfect Exoreist, but he, who has learned the art to excite the
Magic of his own fancy; or by practice can do it ecstatically, without that
knowledge.

It may be you will say, that our Armary unguent acquires no other magnetical
virtue, then that which redounds to it from the fancy of him that compounds
it: you are mistaken. However, should we allow you that error for truth, your
cause could receive no support or advantage thereby; since then you would
implicitly confess the effect not to be ascribed to Satan. So the Unguent
would not be magnetical from any innate and natural fancy peculiar to it
self, but from an external adventitious inspiration, namely the fancy of the
Compounder, impressed upon it: since there can be no nearer medium of the
foresaid Magnetism, then humane blood with humane blood; truly, the blood
alone, as the most proportionate and predisposed subject would suffice to the
composition of the Unguent, and all the other simples ingredient into the
confection, would be frustraneous and unnecessary, especially the blood of a
Bull and honey, where the cure is to be performed by applying the salve to
weapons not distained with the blood of the Patient, which is manifestly false
by experiment. Finally, the Magnetism of the Unguent would then be general; in
respect the Confectioner may, by the wild and 173.
universal range of his Fancy, intend to make the impression, uncertain,
undeterminate, and extensive to the wounds, not only of man, but of all beasts
whatever. What if the Compounders fancy were not fixed upon a dog; must the
Unguent therefore have no virtue to cure the wound of a dog? Away with such
idiotism, such ridiculous dotage. What has Bole Armeniake, what Line seed oil,
what Honey, and in fine what has the blood of a Bull, of peculiar disposition,
or determinate respect to the wound of a horse, or man; that upon them only,
as upon the most proper medium, and not upon any other things, the Fancy of
the Confectioner should be impressed? and yet if these were secluded the
Composition, the Unguent would be barren and devoid of all power and vulnerary
efficacy. The Natural fancy therefore of the Unguent is the sole and grand
cause of the Magnetism, and the immediate and proper cause of the Cure: but not
the imagination of the Component.

Behold! you have our (understand true, Christian) Philosophy; not the frantic
sophisms, or idle dreams of Ethnicks. Be cautious, I beseech you, that you
bring not me into censure, who have been your self more forward and rash in
censuring others. I am yours, and a Roman Catholic: who have cordially and
firmly determined in my self, to 174.
mediate or write nothing, that may be contrary to the Word of God, or the
fundamental Articles of the Church. I well understand the constellation of my
own genius, and know my self born, not to allow or foment contentious debates,
not to write Comments on, or defensive Apologies for the pens of other men;
wherefore, what I knew, I desired, with a freedom becoming a Philosopher, to
communicate to the world.

I shall annex only this one clause: Whoever attributes to the Devil an
effect arising from Natural Causes, so created by God, and so conferred upon
the Creatures: he does alienate the honor due to the Creator, and ignominiously
(others might say blasphemously) apply it unto Satan: which (under your favor)
if you shall strictly call under the test of your Anatome, you will find to be
express idolatry. My earnest prayer to the fountain of all Clemency, our God
and Father of Mercies, is now, and ever shall be, that he would be pleased to
look, with the eye of compassion and forgiveness, upon those errors and lapses
of our understanding, which from our native, not stubborn, ignorance, and
humane fragility we have contracted.

Amen.
THere are three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy
Ghost, and these three are one: (And anon speaking of the Humanity of Christ)
there are three which bear record in Earth, the Blood, the Spirit, and the
Water, and these three are one. To us therefore, who have the like Humanity, it
is no wonder, that we contain Blood and a Spirit of the like unity: and that
the action of the Blood is merely Spiritual. Yea for this reason, in Genesis it
is not called by the name of Blood: but dignified with the appellation of a Red
Spirit.

Withdraw therefore, whoever thou art, from thy incredulous pertinacy, and
ingenuously acknowledge another Spirit in the blood, besides the Devil: unless
thou will dare to oppose thy misinformed Faith to the Book of Truth.

The Translators Supplement.
NEmo huc Geometriae expers ingrediatur, was the Motto which the semi-christian
Philosopher, Plato, caused to be engraven on the porch of his Academy Marsil.
Ficinus, in vita Platon.
: implying not only the exact measure of lines, but also the Geometry of a
man's self, the dimensions and just extent of the passions and affections of the
mind, to be the previous qualification necessary to any, that should hope to
benefit by his Lectures. And Nemo huc Philosophiae expers ingrediatur, shall be
our inscription in the front of this Translation; understanding by Philosophy,
the ample knowledge not only of the Elemental and visible World, but also of
the Intellectual and Spiritual; not only of the more plain and obvious tracts,
wherein Nature progresseth to the production of ordinary effects; but even
those obscure and unfrequented paths she walks in, when she advances to
Abstrusities and more mysterious Magnalities; together with that acquired
Candor of judgment, and habitual Equanimity, which as well emancipateth the
understanding from the pedantick tyranny of subscription to all that is read, if
but disguised in the specious dress of probability, and ushered in by Antique
Authority; as it inclines the reason to a sober assent, and modest conformity
to such Assertions, which carry the face of judicious Enquiries, and serious
majesty of Truth, though they be presented at disadvantage, under a cloud of
Novelties, or Paradoxes. Nor can we fear that this our device, or impress, will
be suspected of impertinency, by any that shall do so much right to their own
judgments, as to conced, that a Reader thus qualified, must be the only he,
that can survey, understand, censure, and enrich his head with the subtler
speculations, and profound Dihoties of our more then ingenious Helmont; while
it is of confessed necessity, that the gross ignorance of some must obscure,
and the prevarication of others pervert the prospect of these splendid (though
Heterodoxical) Notions, and Natural (though spiritual, or magical) Causalities,
which his finer pen has drawn, in landscape, upon this tablet, The
Magnetically-Natural cure of Wounds.

Now though the pensive Consideration of the incapacity (some would have said,
Barbarity) of the numerous multitude, on one side, and of the deplorable
inflexibility of the leading part of learning, more then a moity of Scholars
being swallowed up in a deluge of Presumption and Prejudice, on the other,
might in some measure excuse our despair of finding many heads of this
sovereign temper, wherein sufficiency in knowledge ought to have received the
just allay of Candor, and non-adherence to Antiquity; yet may we not incur the
odious praemunire of singularity so far, as not confidently to hope, that our
worthy Author will fall into the hands of some, whose unbyassed intellectuals
will smoothly run him over, and gather so full satisfaction from many of his
Experiments, that Gratitude her self will prompt them to confess the sacrifice
of Honor deservedly due unto his memory.

And upon this evidence of Hope, we are bold to promise our self supportment
for our resolutions of not attempting either any Comment on, or Defense of
those Metaphysical (understand only Ideal and abstracted) conceptions, and
novel Hints, rich aspersed upon these sheets; such as that of a Fancy, or
Natural sensation, by the Charter of their Creation, properly pertinent unto,
and inseparably inherent in all mixed bodies, though devoid of Animation, and
power of voluntary election; and this not only single and of determinate
identity, but multiplex and various according to the diverse predisposition and
capacity of the object, whereon they discharge their activity; that of the
magical prerogative of man, or that transcendent endowment, whereby he is
empowered to act per nutum, by the sole virtue of Thought or Spiritual
intuition, upon an object removed at vast distance, by means of an ideal
entity, formed in the womb of more attentive Imagination, and transmitted by
the Will; that of the fatal Consopition of this Hierarchy, or semi-divine
Faculty of the soul, by the Opiate or Counter-magick of the Forbidden Fruit;
and the resuscitation or excitement of the same, by the onfranchisement of the
inward man from the eclipse and oppression of Corporeity, in Enthusiasms,
Raptures, and Ecstatical Contemplations, etc. Since the known poverty of our
Reason could not but throw infinite disparagement on the wealthy harvest of
his; nor the access of our plenary assent, or vindication, confer any thing at
all of estimation to fulfill the Authority of his Name, or determine the
establishment of his Positions for solid and unrefutable Truths. Wherefore in
conformity to the advisoes of some riper heads, to whose friendly decision we
humbly submitted our hesitancy in this point, together with the concurrent vote
of our own thirteenth thought, we have stood resolved, neither to dim the
luster of our Authors sense, by the interposition of our Boeotian Boeoti enim,
apud antiquos, stol^ditatis and stupiditatis nomine male audierunt, de quo
Horat. in Epist. Boeotum in crasso jurares cere natum.
interpretation, or melancholic enlargement; nor make our pen guilty of so
uncivil encroachments on the liberties of the comprehensive Reader, as to
preoccupy his head, with the abortive results of our shallower scrutintes, or
prevent his more ocular disquisitions and maturor anim adversions; but so far
to assist younger capacities, as to endeavor the explanation of some unfrequent
idiomes, and uncouth terms, which the Author seems to have borrowed from the
Cabalistique Vocabulary of Paracellus; annexing only, for satisfaction of the
more illiterate, the more select, and less superstitious Forms, or Prescripts
of the Magnetic Armary Unguent.

In the mean time, in order to our avoidance of scandal, as we cannot smother
our wishes, that the ardor of debate with his opponents, Father Roberts, the
Jesuit, and Goclenius, the Physician, and the eager quest of reasons to make
good his theory of Magnetism against future Assailants, had not seduced his
gravity to stumble upon some few Examples, whose constant verity Experiment may
have just cause to question, or sober Philosophy, at first sight, smilingly
refer to superstition: so we cannot but sigh at the apprehension of our own
want of abilities to sustain so considerable and weighty a task as the due
perpension and mature disquisition of some abstruse notions, which the conciser
pen of our Author has only hinted, per transennam, and so proposed to the
more deliberate discovery of some worthy Enlarger. For (to omit others of less
value) upon that one cardinal pin of Magnetism, or the Magical virtue of
Naturals, it seems to us, that the whole speculation of those three grand
Arcanaes, whose obscure and yet inscrutable Causalities have captived the
greatest Wits, in all ages, in a labyrinth of perplexed and uncertain
Enquiries. (1) The Original and cognation of Forms; (2) The causes of Sympathy
and Dyspathy, or of idiosyncritical Friendship and Enmity or aversation; (3)
And the so universally magnified Power of Imagination, necessarily depend. To
the clear and satisfactory solution of which Problems, whoever is ordained, by
the exceeding benignity of his Constellation, will perform a work of highest
benefit, and unparalleled merit to the Commonwealth of Learning, will advance
his memory to so high a pitch of Honor, that 'twill be accounted humility in
him to look so low as Caesar, and shall have our free Vote, that his statue
cannot be uncivil, or ambitious, if it take the right hand of Aristotle's in the
Vatican. But alas! this must be a work of Time, Pyrotechny, and many heads
cooperating. And therefore the wide and almost irreparable encroachments, which
the late deluge of Barbarism has made upon the studies of our own ingenious
Nation, and ominously threatened to most Seminaries of Arts and Sciences in
Europe: together with the general contempt of severe Philosophy, amongst those,
whose wealthy Fortunes might sustain the charge of Experiments and foreign
Explorations requisite to the laudable achievement of so magisterial a piece
of knowledge, may probably encourage our fears, that it may be late ere
posterity be blessed with its revealment, nay, perhaps not until the whole
material World be ready to confess the Chemistry of the last day.

Having hitherto seduced the mind of our Reader, into a short prospect of
those few pieces, which our devout Zeal to the advancement of the knowledge of
Natures choicest Magnalities has inflamed us to desire in a larger draught;
and presented him the slender summary of what our Supplement intends: a
longer digression cannot but tacitly scandal the weight of our Theme, and
rudely disoblige attention. Wherefore, we return to the direct discharge of our
undertakings: the interpretation of some Fanatique words, which in the opinion
of Grammar know no signification, because no Etymology, nor can the greatest
Philologer deduce from any original higher then the Babel of Paracelsus; and
the supply of the Antiquity, and Forms of the Magnetical Unguent.

Bismuthum, in the dialect of Hermetical Mineralogists, 1. Bismuthum.
admits of a double signification. For some accept it for a simple, and list it
in the inventory of Marchasites or Fire stones, taking it to be no other, then
that which the Noble Geber called Magnesia, and the shops Black Lead: Vide
Caesal^in. lib. 2. de metal. cap. 54.
others intend by it a compound made by the hand of Art, and that of two sorts:
The first, when upon melted Tin, the Chemist affuseth Mercury, and makes
thereof a fragil substance and snow-white mass; Dornaeus in diction^. Para^ls.
the other a mixture of Silver and Mercury, which submits to the first
assault of fire, as easily as wax, and is of exceeding whiteness, which we
conceive to be the true Magnesia Philosophorum. But we had rather incline to
the autoptical testimony of the judicious Doctor Jordan, In his Book of Natural
Baths, and Mineral Waters.
who renders Bismuthum to be in English, Tinglass, or the steril Marchasite of
Lead. Now Marchasites are the immature materials of metals, and vary according
to each several and distinct species of metals: Libavius in syntagma^. Arcan.
Chymic. lib. 2. cap. 24. in commentar. ad finem.
and hence doubtless Paracelsus took occasion, in the separation of Elements
from Marchasites, to compare the golden Marchasite to Gold, the silver one to
silver, Talck to Tin, Bismuthum to Lead, Zincum to Copper, Cadmia to Iron,
Stibium to Mercury, etc. Consule Paracelsum in tertio Archidox.

Throni, or Tronos and Tronossa, in the wild Language, or 2. Throni.
rather Canting, of Paracelsus, implies a rorid Meteor, or Celestial dew, being
a species of Manna, in sweetness, density, tenacity, and whiteness, far
transcending all other: generated by the Mercury of the middle region; infusing
its astral seminality into the fertile matrix of the Aer; and wholly separated
and refined from all Sulphur and Salt This delicate extract of the Stars is in
good plenty found, if we regard the time of its distillation, in the spring and
entrance of harvest, when the Sun begins to leave the torrid Negro, and make
his more temperate courtship to the starry Virgin: if the place, in most
Eastern Countries, upon the leaves of Trees and Herbs.

Thereniaben, or Tereniabin, means the same, which the more regular and
orthographical pen of Aristotle has properly 3. Thereniaben.
named (...), mel aereum, vel roscidum; an oleaginous kind of wild honey, not
confected by the Chemistry of Bees, but distilling from the Retort of the
inferior Aer, upon Meadows, Campaniaes, Trees, and Herbs. This delicate
collation the civility of the Planets entertaineth us with, in the months of
June, July, and August, as if they intended the refreshment of the laborious
swain, exhausted by the heat of Summer and sweat of Harvest. The Ancients
called it Threr, if we may credit the traduction of Dornaeus, in his comment
upon the distracted meteorology of Paracelsus.

Nostoch understands the nocturnal Pollution of some plethorical and wanton
Star, or rather excrement blown from 4. Nostoch.
the nostrils of some rheumatick planet, falling upon spacious plains, fields
and sheep pastures, of an obscure red or brown tawny, in consistence like a
gelly, and so trembling if touched: which the philosophy of the clouted shoe
affirms to be the ruins of a Star fallen. Some there are, says Dornaeus, In
dictionario Paracelsi.
who by Nostoch intend Wax: but by the favor of a metaphor.

Nebulgea we English a Salt, or Nitrous exudation and destillament 5. Nebulgea.
from the clouds; by the deliquium of the colder aer resolved into an unctuous
liquor, and descending upon solid and stony bodies; which suffering induration,
by the exhalement of its aqueous parts, assumes solidity, and by the interest
of exact similitude and cognation, does more then pretend unto the dignity of
celestial Nitre.

Laudanum, if the same that all the Druggists of Europe 6. Laudanum.
call Ladanum, is the Woodfeer, or liquid spumous exudation of the shrub
Cistus, or Ledon, growing in great plenty in the Island Cyprus, which the
Natives, (unless the sith of time has lighted upon that custom, since the days
of Dioscorides) In lib., 1. cap. 110.
use every Spring to gather from off the long shaggy hairs of the thighs and
beards of Goats, feeding among and brushing themselves against the stalks and
leaves of the plant, and after due clarification and percolation thereof, to
conserve in convenient pots: But if, in the account of Helmont, a kind of
aereal meteor, or production arising from the coition and conspiracy of some
seminary celestial influx with fit and proportionate matter, the fat
evaporations of Plants; we confess that after a tedious search of Paracelsus,
Severinus, Dorneus, and other^ his interpreters, we cannot receive positive
satisfaction concerning its name, nature, manner of generation, or specifical
difference, but must acquie^ce in a contented ignorance of what it is.

We dare not countenance error, or stifle our own habilities of disquisition,
so far, as not to take notice of the incogitancy, or partiality of our Helmont,
in ascribing the honor of the invention of Hoplocrism, or the Cure of Wounds by
unction of the weapon, to his Master Paracelsus: When we stand confirmed, upon
evidence of substantial and convictive Arguments, that this secret is much
younger then Paracelsus, as bearing no date of its revealment beyond those
years, wherein he had long confessed his dust, and experimentally confuted his
own arrogant Treatise of the art of spinning out the thread of Man's life to a
length equal with the clue of Time, and making our vital Oil of the same
durable and invincible temper, with that which maintains the flames of
Eternal Lamps Prodit Porta, lib. 12. Mag. natural. cap. ult. in ag^o Patavino,
non procul ab oppiao Atestino, repertam suisse urnam sictilem, intraquam crat
altera urnula and intra eam lucernula adhuc ardens, qua rusticis manibus
unprudenter prosu^a and rupta, mox evanuit slamma. vide ^tiam C^sium de minera.
lib. 3. cap. 7. Sect. 20.
. For first, upon strict (and in troth tedious) lecture of all the leaves of the
extant Works of Paracelsus, we cannot meet with any the least mention of it:
nor indeed the grave Libavius before us, as he solemnly professes, in
Apocalypseos Hermeticae, part priore, and cap. ultim. And to those, who have
appealed to posthume Manuscripts, and gloried in their inheritance of some
Papers bequeathed to the secret custody of Opporinus, his Amanuensis; we must
with smiles rejoyn, that a sober and well ordered belief can as soon swallow
down the monstrous figment of the Book of Adam, Consule Libavium in examine
Philosophiae no^ae, an magia Paracclsica possit probari, etc. c. 6. page 5.
which the impious credulity of Magicians does confidently deliver to be given,
by the Archangel Rhaziel, unto him, immediately upon his exile from Paradise,
and contrition for his sin, and from Adam devolved to Seth, from him to Enoch,
from him to Noah, thence to Sem, afterward to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Levi,
Caath, Amram, Moses* Joshua, and so down to the Prophets and holy Seers
successively; whereby they were in a moment illuminated, the veil of sin
withdrawn from the eye of their reason, and all those mountains of fleshly
lust, which hindered the prospect of the intellect, l^lled, so that they beheld
Nature face to face, and freely gazed upon all her beautiful parts, in the
nakedness of their Essences, and Forms divested of all corporeity. Again,
though an Argument drawn from the printed sheets of Paracelsus be of no
considerable validity, in regard he is so ridiculously subject to
self-contradiction, through all his works, that a witty Adversary might easily
beat him out of the Schools with his own weapons; yet it may be lawful for us,
from the masterpeice of his pen, his tract of Surgery, to collect some
proof, that he was wholly a stranger to the doctrine or practice of
Hoplochrism. For in that discourse, reducing all the several kinds of
Vulnerary remedies to a constant method, he is positive, that there is no other
Curation of a wound, but what is performed, either by means of the Natural
Balsam, or by the apposition of Brassidella upon the green wound, or by
Magorreo; the first of which is Natural and the same that all rational
Physicians allow, the second Brassidellical, so denominated from the Herb
Adderstongue, or Ophioglossum, which he was pleased to nickname Brassidella,
the third Magical, for Magorreo, in the interpretation of Dornaeus, is
Medicamentum Magicum: and who can find amongst these differences any room for
the intrusion of the Sympathetical Armary Unguent? Lastly, if the exceeding
Candor of any, willing to palliate this lapse of our Helmont, recur to
Authority, and transfer the guilt upon Baptista Porta (from whom, in
probability, this erroneous tradition was derived down to our Century) who
fathers the invention upon Paracelsus, in these words: Unguentum Armarium,
Graecis (...) dictum, olim a Paracelso Maximiliano Caesari datum, and abeodem
expertum, maximeque carum ab eo habitum, quamdiu vixit, ujus aulae nobilis mihi
communicavit: We shall modestly ret^n, that so incredulous and independent a
pen, as was Helmonts, (whose genius scorned sapere ^x alieno commentario, and
seems constellated rather to confute, then subscribe) could hardly be so
incircumspect, as not to discover the gross mistake of Porta, in the point of
Chronology. For what he affirms of Paracelsus his communicating the prescript
and use of the Unguent, to Maximilian, Emperor of the Romans, is easily
confuted as well from the Annals of Salteburg, as the History of Paracelsus
life, written by the learned and faithful hand of Melchior Adamus In Libr. de
vit. Medic. Ge^man^.
, from both which posterity may receive ample satisfaction, that Paracelsus was
fast luted in his grave, and resolved in terram damnatam, in the reign of
Charles the fifth, about the year of Christ's Incarnation, 1541. Now Maximilian
was made Caesar, after the death of Ferdinand his brother, in the year, 1565.
Wherefore to reconcile Porta's story to his computation of time, we must conced
a possibility of regression ab inferis, and allow Paracelsus, as in his life
time to have descended to the Abyss below, out of curiosity to dispute with
Avicen^, and returned victor over the pale Philosopher; so also after his
death, full twenty four years, to have ascended to the Court of Maximilian, and
presented him the form of the Sympathetical Unguent. Nor can the assertion of
Crollius (who drank as deep of the spitle of Paracelsus, as his predecessor
Porta) that this secret was first imparted to the King of Bohemia, be made
good: Since Maximilian obtained not the Scepter of that Kingdom, until the
year, 1562. as we are instructed by the almost omniscient Libavius, whose pen
has been large upon this subject, in Apocalypse. Hermeticae part. prior. cap.
ultim.

But whoever was the true Father of this modern production, should he obtain a
parol from the grave, and return again to converse with men, we may with reason
doubt that he would hardly now know the Minerva of his own brain; but would
borrow that exclamation of Hercules returned from his Avernal expedition, Unde
tam foedo obsiti paedore nati? quae clades domum gravat? so much has the
squalid disease of Reformation disfigured it, and varied that originary
comeliness, which was restrained to a determinate number of select ingredients,
into as many uncouth dresses, as the licentious Fancy of every Commentator
thought fit to present it in, every second hand adding, abstracting, or
altering what simples it pleased. For in Libavius his contest with Crollius and
Severinus, about the Dihoti of Hoplochrism, we sinde no fewer then thirteen
several and different Forms of the Magnetic Unguent enumerated; and in the
private studies of many Noblemen (who have thought their Cabinets infinitely
enriched with this Jewel, and valued it equal with that precious tri^le, the
Countess of Kents Powder) we have seen many other dissenting from the original
in all, but the title. So that while some have usurped the liberty to multiply
the simples, and run through the whole series of Vulnerary remedies: others
have contracted the whole Magnetical Energy into one single mineral; as may be
exampled in the so much magnified Sympathetick powder, that wears the name of
Sir Gilbert Talbot, which we assuredly know to be nothing but Roman Vitriol
calcined with Promethean Ignem aethcrea domo subductum, vocat Hor. lib. 1.
Ca^min. Od. 3.
Fire. In this we are tender not to have the sincerity of our thoughts exposed
to the danger of misapprehension. Wherefore to provide against mistake, we
profess in the ears of the world, that we have not, in this our dislike of
innovating the receipt, tacitly been injurious to the just freedom of any
judicious pen, in making sober enquiries, profitable enlargements, and modest
corrections of any piece delivered down from the hand of more ancient Learning;
for the happy industry of our Forefathers has not precluded, but opened the
door of Exploration, and our sight must needs be confessed weaker, if standing
upon their shoulders we see not farther: nor confined the Magnetical Virtue to
that just number and quantity of Simples, found in the primitive composition of
the Unguent; for we cannot be destitute of valid reasons to assure us, that the
fame admirable effect might arise from many other Vulnerary medicaments, as
well in the operation of their single Essential Forms, as of the neutral
Quality resulting from their conjunction into one compound Salv^: but only
insinuated our wishes, that every sick Fancy might not be tolerated to
exercise an arbitrary power of innovation over such well composed Medicines,
which by the constancy of their effects sufficiently assert the maturity of
their first contrivers knowledge, and manifest their own perfection; as also
that the Adversaries to the Doctrine of Magnetism had wanted that advantage and
encouragement of contradiction, which the unnecessary variety of prescripts of
the Armary Unguent has unadvisedly given them. But our proper business is to
furnish the Reader less acquainted with the Books of Physicians, with the
faithful Copies of the most ancient, authentic, and rational descriptions of
the Sympathetick Unguent: with industry omitting those, which seem to offend
the nostrils of more precise Philosophy with the ingtateful smell of
Superstition.

The Prototype or Original of the Unguent, vulgarly imputed I.
to Paracelsus; but in probability contrived long after his death, by the hand
of Barthol. Corrichterus De hoc enim constat, quod de herb^m lectione multa
superstiosa commentus sit: vtluti, ut Card^ benedictus catarrho^sistat,
sodiendus in vigilia Johan. Bap. ^ost solis occasum retiocedendo: and tunc
sorlasse ad aulam Maximil venit illud quoque V^tum ^itulo Paracelsi.
, Physician to Maximilian the second, in whose Court it was first divulged and
practiced, is thus drawn.

Of the Moss grown on a humane skull two ounces: Mumy half an ounce: Humane fat
depurated two ounces: Oil of Line seed twelve drachmes: Oil of Roses, and Bole
Armeniack, ana one ounce. Mix them, and by frequent agitation incorporate them
into an Unguent. Into which a splinter of wood, or the weapon stained with the
patients blood, is to be immersed: the wound, during the time of its sanation,
being defended from the injury of aer, bound closely up with clean swathes, and
mundified with the urine of the patient. But to the efficacious confection of
the Armary Unguent, to cure a wound by unction of the instrument of the harm,
though not distained with the blood, we are to admix to the former, of Virgin
Honey (we should rather choose the best Mel Atticum, or Honey of Athens, for
its excellence worthily esteemed by the Ancients) two ounces: the fat of a Bull
one drachme. And this we conceive to be the same, which our Helmont intended:
as the observation of every diligent Reader cannot but collect.

Baptista Porta, in Magiae Natural. l. 8. c. 12. compoundeth it, of the Moss of
an unburied Cranium: the fat of man, 2.
each two ounces: Mumy, Humane blood each half an ounce: Oil of Line seed, and
Turpentine, each one ounce: Bole Armen, as much. Incorporate all these, in a
clean Marble Mortar, into an Unguent: whose use and effect exactly correspond
to the former.

The most magnified (because, indeed, most difficult and ceremonious) method of
compounding the Unguent, described by Oswaldus Crollius, in Basilica Chymica,
together with a Panegyric of its excellencies, runs thus:

Of the Fat of a wild Boar, and a Bear (the elder the Beasts, the more
efficacious their fat) ana four ounces. When these Fats 3.
have been, for the space of half an hour, decocted in good red wine, they are
to be effused into pure, clean, cold water, and the floating unctuous substance
to be skimmed off with a convenient instrument, but the ponderous residence in
the bottom to be ejected, as excrementitious and useless. This done, of the
fairest Earthworms, frequently purified in white Wine, two sextaries Civili
viz. mensura, quarum una est librarum circiter sesquitrium aut trium: alias
sextarius est imciarum ostodecim, and respondet cambaro Rotemburgo tubarino.
: Let them be torrified in a well vernished earthen pipkin, in an Oven close
luted, provided they burn not, and then be finely pulverated: Of this powder
one ounce: the brain of a wild Boar exsiccated: red odoriferous Sanders: Mumy:
the Bloodstone; ana one ounce. Finally, of the mossy periwig of the skull of a
man, destroyed by violent death, sheared off in the increase of the Moon, and
her existence in a propitious house of Heaven, of Venus, if possible, but on no
condition of those two malevolent Planets, Mars and Saturn, the quantity of two
Nutmegs. To all these decently pulverized and searced conjoyn the foresaid Fat,
and confuse them, according to the art of the Apothecary, into an incomparable
Unguent, to be conserved with extraordinary diligence in a Glass or Gallipot,
closely sealed up, and if it grow dry, with long keeping, to be remollied and
humectated with Virgin Honey. All this is to be performed while the Sun is
quartered in Libra.

Somewhat different from all these is the Composition of Oswaldus
Gabelchoverus, recorded in Practica Germanica: 4.
which contains of the Fat of a Septennial Boar, and Bear, each, one pound:
afterward melted in boiling red Wine, and affused into cold water, for the
better depuration and collection of them: of the powder of a Bloodstone, half
an ounce: of red aromatical Sanders, six drachmes: of Earthworms prepared with
wine, two drachmes: of Usnea, a great quantity: Married all together into an
Unguent, by an artificial hand. The use is the same with the former of Crollius.

No less variation, as well in the number, as quantity of the 5.
ingredients, may we observe in that famous description, which Pancratius
Gallus, chief Physician to the Duke of Saxony, in great privacy, communicated
to Libavius: it being confected of the Fat of a Male Bear, and wild Boar, in
the quantity of two ounces apiece; boiled and clarified in red Wine: of red
Saunders, Bloodstone prepared, each two drachmes: of Earthworms cleansed in
Wine, one ounce: of Usnea two drachmes: of the dried and powdered roots of the
greater Consound, or major Cumfry, and Colcothar, each half an ounce: Commix
them exactly, with a silver spatule, into an Unguent.

The Translator's Landscape, Or Abstract of HELMONTS Theory of Magnetism.
I AM satisfied, that Sympathies combine
At distance: that dispersed Mumies twine.
That our Souls act per nutum; when awake
From that Enchantment, the first sin did make:
And that this native Magic of the mind,
Is the sole Devil and Witch; if once refined
By Ecstasie. That Reason's but the Brat
Of Sensuality; and is lost with that.
That none can chain up Astral Energy,
Or circumscribe Radial Activity:
And Magnetism extends its arm as far,
And potent, as the most triumphant Star.
That Earth has Heaven in it. That Atoms may,
At vast remove, their Virtual Forms display.
The Heat and Cold are languid Agents, when
Seminal Tinctures (though obscure to men)
Are brought in play; for these, like Angels, cure
Only by the touch invisible, procure
Natural Miracles, and easily in an hour,
Cicatrize Wounds, that scorn Surgeons power.
That nice Divines, who scruple at this Art,
Commit implicit Sacriledg; and impart
Gods honor unto Satan: while wise Zeal
Call's it safe Natural Magic thus to heal.
All this I now assent to; but invite
Each wiser head, to make me's Proselyte.
My Mercury is not fixed: my Virgin Faith
Scorns to submit to what an Author says,
Barely because he said it. To enquire,
To doubt, is to advance our Judgment higher.
For I Have been told, That Knowledge most does lie
Enshrined in Skeptical Neutralitie.
W. C.

THE Nativity of TARTAR in WINE.
The Summary.
1. AFishing for Whales. 2. The spirit of Wine, depressed by cold, retires to
the center of its vessel. 3. How Vinegar differs from Wine. 4. Wine in the
superficies of a vessel, why less generous. 5. The Concretion of Tartar in
Hogsheads. 6. How it affixes it self to the sides of a vessel. 7. It is
coagulated in fixing. 8. The premises are made good. 9. The error of a Chymick
Axiom. 10. The reason of Wine coagulated in Tartar, holds no analogy to that
of Excrements coagulated in the Microcosm. 11. The difference betwixt Tartar,
and the Stone concreted in the body of Man. 12. Tartar not altogether, or
truly, the excrements of Wine. 13. A grand error of Paracelsus. 14. Tartar of
Wine totally differs from any coagulated recrement in diseases. 15. A second
lapse of Paracelsus. 16. Why Tartar is not incrustated on the Lees, in the
bottom of a vessel. 17. Wines distinguished by their Tartar. 18. Tartar neither
Wine, nor the dregs of Wine. 19. Why an Alcale, or Lixival Salt, extracted from
Wine, or Tartar, does dissolve Tartar. 20. The dregs of Wine, in some part the
material of Tartar. 21. How ill the resemblance holds 'twixt Tartar, and
coagulations in the Microcosm. 22. Tartar to be referred to coagulated Salts,
not to Stones, or excrements.

BEfore I attempt the explosion of that necessity, which Paracelsus vainly
imagined to himself, of the constitution of Tartar in all aliment, for the
discovery of the causes of most chronick diseases; and that the folly of that
fiction may be more clearly demonstrated, I have thought good, to premise an
Enquiry into the original of Tartar in Wine: Since from thence (according to
the new belief of vulgarity) most diseases derive their Causes, and borrow
their Appellations.

The Cantabi (now Biscons) natives of a Province in Spain, 1.
before their conversation with the Hollander, in a voyage for the fishing of
Whales, being on the coasts of Groenland (which Modern Travelers conceive
lost) among the vast Quicksands, called Atalayae, surprised by intense cold,
had their decocted Wines, of themselves generous and excellent, frozen to Ice.
Instructed by this exigent, they beat off their hoops from their vessels, and
exposed, to the open aer, the naked conglaciated Wines; with design, that the
residue of Liquor might be totally frozen: This accordingly succeeding, they
boared the Ice, and at the Center of it found a clear, transparent Liquor, of
the color of an Amethyst, being the pure spirit of Wine, a fiery and vital
essence, incapable of conglaciation. This discovery taught them understanding;
for they drank the Ice, melted at the fire, restoring to it a small quantity of
this essential vital Nectar. The story is introduced for this end, that hence
it may be observed, That the spirit of Wine, by a natural tendency, flies from
cold, as from his proper enemy; and gently withdraws itself, from its former
mansion, into the Center of the Wine. But on the contrary, Wines are therefore
exposed to the heat of the Sun, that they may grow Acide, and the spirit
exhaling, leaves behind it a flat, cadaverous substance, devoid of spirit and
life, which is Vinegar. But since it is far more noble and useful, that the
spirit of Wine should retreat into the Center, then perish by exhalation,
therefore has necessity, for the conservation of Wines, hinted the invention
of cold, deep Cellers. The Austrian Wines still operating on themselves by an
uncessant, tumultuous heat of Fermentation, are, for the most part, gross and
viscid. For which reason, the Cellers at Vienna are ordinarily dug to no
less then a^undred foot in depth. The Spanish Wines also, would suffer the same
restless ebullition, and conflict betwixt their Heterogeneities, were they not
prevented by the admixture of a Lime, which the Spaniard calls Hiesco, at the
very instant of their flowing from the Wine Press. Whence results it a clear
and unquestionable truth, that the spirit of Wine, in cold 2.
Cellers, retreating from its adversary, cold, returns to the heart of the
Liquor, as to a safe refuge, and there conceals it self. Wine, therefore, in
the cortex, or outward circumference of it self, is less generous, as having
fewer spirits, then in the middle, or inmost retiring room. Hence it is a 3.
necessary consequent, that as, by reason of the exhalation of spirits, Wines
set in the Sun, grow acide, and phlegmatic; so also, proportionably, the
exterior Cortex of Wine in a cold Celler, must be more acide, then the
Centrals. And thus, when the musts of Wines are freshly brought in from 4.
the Press, lodged in Storehouses, and have suffered Fermentation, the spirit
by and by flying from cold, concentres it self; and therefore the superficies
of Wine, having already entered some degree of Acidity, immediately begins to
operate on the dregs, floating on the yet troubled and unclarified mass of
Liquor. For an absolute impossibility it is, that there can be any the least
Acidity; which having once met with a proportionate object, does not
immediately begin to operate on it. This really is the Law, and unavoidable
necessity of Naturals. By example. Vinegar, how flat and weak soever, having
once touched upon the stone concreted in the head of a Creafish, vulgarly (but
erroneously) called Crabs eye, can by no means contain it self, but must
immediately act, to the dissolution of it, and resolve it into a clear,
diaphanous Liquor. The Acidity of Wine, having once sated it self on the dregs,
and spent much of its activity, by degrees, inclines 5.
it self to coagulation. But coagulate it cannot, without a conspiracy with,
and assistance from the Fracid Odor of the vessel, impregnate with a spirit, or
power of Fermentation; whereby it may, in some measure, admit of putrefaction.
And for this only reason, is the Coagulation made at the sides of the vessel,
to which it affixes it self; according to that familiar Chymick Axiom: Omnis
spiritus dissolvens, eddem action qua corpora dissolvit, coagulatur: Every
dissolvent spirit is it self coagulated, in the same action, wherein it
dissolves other concreted bodies. The more acide Wine, therefore, in the
extremities of it self, dissolves the dregs; and 6.
at the same instant, the acide dissolvent spirit is coagulated, together with
the newly dissolved faeces, and soon applies it self to the nearest side, or
concave of the vessel. And this, lest both (the dissolvent and dissolved) might
not be hindered from coagulating; but on one side, at least, they might not be
environed by Liquor: And thus, by this progress and succession of natural
motions, there is affixed a new production 7.
of Coagulation, Tartar. Observe also, that before the complete act of
Coagulation, there is no existent Coagulatum; and therefore the acide spirit in
the verge of the mass of Wine, having newly dissolved the dregs, in a moment,
before the act of coagulation finished, seazes on the vessel, and by a Cement,
or glue, native and proper to it self, there fixes, and constantly adheres.
Otherwise depressed by gravity, it would immediately sink to the bottom. And
this new Entity, thus coagulated, is the Tartar of Wine; of which our Discourse.

That these are sober, solid truths, we have clear and demonstrable 8.
evidence from Vinegar it self. For Wine insolated to a calefaction of the
vessel, may produce Tartar; but Vinegar never. And yet Wine and Vinegar are one
and the same matter, differing only in those qualifications, heat and cold; in
the former, indeed, with Tartar, in the latter without it.

From the premises, there breaks forth a considerable truth; that our
forementioned Axiom, by Chymicks concluded of 9.
eternal verity, grossly fails in that it makes the dissolution of any concreted
body, to be done in the instant of time, and numerical action, with the
coagulation of the spirit dissolvent. For if there intervened not, in some
short interval of time, a diversity, and succession of motions, the Coagulation
could not soder it self to the circumambient planks of the vessel, as is there
affused by liquefaction; but would of necessity, if it were coagulated at the
instant of dissolution, sink down to the lowest region, in the form of a simple
coagulation, and not cement it self to the walls of the hogshead. But on the
other side, in the bottom, the peculiar region of the Lees, there is never
found any Tartar. Here also accurs to our serious consideration, a second and
more weighty verity: 10.
that the Analogy, or resemblance, which the vulgarity of Physicians conceives,
betwixt the Tartar in Wine, and those preter-natural Coagulations in the body
of man, is erroneous, vain, and altogether impertinent; and therefore the name,
history, manner and end of Coagulation of Tartar in Wine, are foolishly and
unfitly accommodated to the causes of diseases. All which I shall demonstrate
to ample satisfaction, when I come to discover that grand and popular delusion
of the Existence of Tartar in our meat and drink. Allowing to Wine only a
fertility of Tartar. For that we acknowledge to be no Alien, no son of an
exotic mother, from the concurrence of foreign principles, intruded into Wine,
having its production contrary to, or besides the ordinary and simple nature of
Wines: neither owing its original to the adjuncts of the primitive Malediction
delivered in Paradise, by divine providence, for the expiation of those Crimes
committed by man, in the heat and distraction of Wine. Again, neither is the
Tartar of Wine ever coagulated by any originary activity, or power of
coagulation, proper to its own nature (though Paracelsus dreamt so:) but then
undergoes Coagmentation, when the circumferential Acidity of the Wine, has
newly exhausted much of its Energy, and wasted it self, by a profuse operation
on the dregs. That is, the Active being swallowed 11.
up in the embraces of the Passive: the Acide spirit imbibed, and subdued to
obedience, by the freshly dissolved Faeces; then, and not till then, contrives
and sets about the act of Coagulation, not with design or power to make a real,
true stone, but a counterfeit, such as afterward may be again dissolved in hot
water, as an Acide salt in liquor, which for that reason, the vulgar call
Cremor Tartari. All which do very ill correspond with those preter-natural
Coagulations in the bodies of men: and yet they are, in a drunken fiction of
Paracelsus, by an imaginary analogy of essence and identity with Tartar, in all
meat and drink, grossly obtruded on the faith of vulgar Physicians, wholly
overrun by that epidemick, lazy, evil, subscription. Here also we are fallen
on a third Magnale or Violentum. That Tartar is not an excrement of 12.
Wine, unless on one part, which is the dregs dissolved: which truly Paracelsus
was not ignorant of, who does very frequently extol the Medicinal faculties of
Tartar, far above those of Wine it self, as inheriting many more and nobler
endowments. Wherefore he very absurdly refers Tartar of Wine, by an identity of
essence, and formation, to the same 13.
Classis of Entities, with those solid Concretions in diseased bodies; which
yet, in many other places, himself concludes to be a mere excrement, yea, the
sorrowful fruit of that curse of the Earth, pronounced by God, in Paradise,
Briars and thorns shall thou bring forth, and calls, Ens Cacedonium, in puro
saphyrico ente rerum. The Tartar of Wine therefore, and that which is erected
in the Schools, for the material cause, and foundation of most Chronick
diseases, if any such were in reality of Entity, can keep no concord in their
Original Forms, even according to the doctrine of Paracelsus himself, if we
accept the former, as a preternatural production, directed, by the destiny of
its being, to the generating diseases, as to its proper end. And thus also,
has he most impertinently, and at best, but by the favor of a Metaphor,
reduced the 14.
causes of diseases to Tartar: Since they no way agree, either in their matter,
efficient, manner, or cause of Coagulation, in the term of the Coagulatum,
Object, or Originals. For neither gravel, nor the stone is capable of
dissolution in boiling water; as the Tartar of Wine is. This usurpation
therefore, of name and propriety, is wholly metaphorical, rash, and frivolous;
and an assertion tacitly injurious to divine wisdom and providence, by
polluting the purity of all sublunary creatures, 15.
with the bold imputation of a Curse, as if in the totality of their natures,
they were nothing but Compositions, amassed out of the seeds of Tartar. And to
so high a pitch of impudence has this error flown, that men dare imagine
Tartar in the very marrow of Animals; which yet they allow incoagulable, nor
did ever Paracelsus find any where, but in his own wild imagination. And so
the result of all is, that he falls upon a manifest contradiction, making
Tartar to be no Tartar, that is incapable of Coagulation: so that, not only
every coagulable and solid body, but also every liquid substance, that is every
created nature, subject to the influence of the lower orbs, would be nothing
but Tartar, by divine Vengeance, destined to the punishment of the first sin.
No sooner has the Must suffered Fermentation, parted with its former
sweetness, and assumed the perfection and dignities of Wine, but the whole Mass
of Terrenity, the Lees, falls to the bottom of the vessel; and then begins the
new made Acidity of the Wine, in the circumference, to execute its power
dissolutive, on the earthly residence in the bottom.

For the more essential portion of the Wine, the spiritual Nectar, by a gentle
and gradual concentration, crowding into the middle, forsakes the protection of
the superficial round of the Liquor: This done, and the extremity of the Wine
thus destitute of Vitality and radical heat, soon grows acide, and not meeting
with any fit object near it, whereon to discharge its activity, but only the
dregs in the lowest region of the Wine, immediately assaults them, and by
degrees dissolves them: And thus the Acidity is both confirmed and enlarged.

But since every Acidum, by reason of its corroding Energy, does operate in a
perpetual Ebullition: hence is it, that that Acidity, which had dived to the
bottom, when it has operated on the Lees, does reascend from thence, and fix
it self in a higher mansion, the circumstance of the vessel. And for this 16.
cause, is the generation of Tartar done, by successive, gradual, and slow
motions. For the same reason also cannot Tartar be concreted and affixed to the
bottom; hindered by that inquietude, and tumultuation of perpetual Ebullition.
Hence is it, that rich and generous Wines, being not easily subject to 17.
this destitution of spirits, unless on an assault of intense cold, do not soon
grow acide, nor yield any considerable quantity of Tartar.

But old Rhenish Wines easily pall, grow sick, and loose their grateful and
vigorous taste; in regard their activity of eagerness is, for the most part,
devoured by their Lees; and yet they continue wholesome and friendly to the
stomach, in that their spirits are not exhausted to an equal proportion of
their dregs and acidity. But red French Wines, unless nourisht by their Lees,
(which for this effect, Vintners call, the Mother, or Nurse of Claret) dissolve
their own Tincture, continually preying on it by their subtilty and eagerness.
And this is the cause, why Claret Wines, if not very rich, and excellently
vigorous, at the age of two years grow pale and discolored. For the Tincture
of Wines, is a substance familiarly subject to separation. But strong,
generous, and spiritual red Wines, in that they more slowly grow acide, hold
good to the age of many years. On the contrary, small White Wines, if not
sequestered from their Lees, in short time, grow flat and cadaverous. For their
Lees drawn off, their Acidity wanting a proportionate matter, to employ its
corrosive faculty upon, the Wine continues good, sprightful, firm, and in its
primitive integrity. From these experiments, we 18.
naturally collect, That Tartar, in the acception of its entire nature, is no
longer either Wine, or the dregs of Wine; but a Neutral, or third Nature,
resulting from the conjunction, and coefficiency of both. That this is thus, is
demonstrable from the Mechanic experiment, that a greater quantity of Tartar
may be dissolved in ten ounces of Rain water, then in two hundred of Wine,
though never so much stirred in boiling. The reason belongs to the Acidity of
Wine to which the Tartar ows its Coagulation.

To conclude; six ounces of the salt of Tartar, will dissolve seven ounces of
crude Tartar; because the Lixivium, or 19.
Lee of that Salt imbibes and sucks up the Acidity of Tartar. That Tartar
consists of the Lees of Wine, and not Wine only, we need no other eviction,
but that experiment of Printers, 20.
who indifferently use Tartar or the Lees of Wine, for the Master ingredient in
their Composition of Ink: the same effect arising from either, on good reason,
preventing the election of either, and confessing a plain consanguinity, if not
an identity of the Causes. Again, in distillation, they both belch up one and
the same Acide Odor, and yield one and the same Oil. Only Tartar is not
dissolved in cold water: because the ^aeulent and earthy substance of the dregs
does so closly environ and shroud the Salt, that the cold water is not of force
sufficient, to transfix that counterscarfe, or penetrate the atomical parts of
the Concretion, and by consequence, not to dissolve it.

Now since Tartar has its originary principles and nativity, 21.
no where but in Wines, grown lightly Acide, by a desertion of spirits, flying
from circumstant cold, to the Centrals of the Liquor: Hence let the so much
illuminated (that is infatuated) Disciples of Paracelsus be instructed, how ill
the speculation of Tartar does quadrate, even with those diseases, for whose
sake chiefly it was first invented and embraced. For plain it is, the stone
concreted in the body of man, can never be dissolved in boiling water; as
Tartar commonly is. For which consideration, Tartar is more justly to be listed
in 22.
the number of Salts, or Juices coagulated by Salt, then of Stones: e diametro,
contrary to the doctrine of Paracelsus.

The Image of GOD; OR, Helmont's Vision of the Soul, Englished.
The Summary.
1. THe fear of God, the beginning: and Charity, the end of Wisdom. 2. Man made
in the Image of God. 3. Three sorts of Atheists. 4. A wish of the Author. 5.
The intellection of the mind, intellectual. 6. The intimate integrity of the
mind suffers from caduce faculties, without the passion of extinction. 7.
The action of the mind scarce perceptible in us. 8. Atheists of the first
Classis deride the image of God, in man. 9. Atheists of the second Classis,
have lately sprung up. 10. The Atheistical ignorance of such is manifested. 11.
A variety of vital Lights. 12. How the mind differs from Angels. 13. An
intellectual vision of the Authors. 14. All optation vain, without God. 15. The
misery of the Author. 16. A vision of the soul, separate from the body. 17.
That the mind has a figure. 18. The mind an immortal substance, representing
the figure of God. 19. A vulgar error, concerning the Image of God. 20. The
error of such, who conceive the Image of God to be seated in the ternary of
faculties. 21. The doctrine of Taulerus opposed. 22. The Image of God never yet
discovered, nor positively described, because incomprehensible. 23. The mind
subject to damnation, only by accident. 24. After death, is no more Memory, or
Reminiscence. 25. The will was superadded to the mind, accidentally, after its
Creation. 26. In Heaven, the Will is useless and frustraneous. 27. In Heaven
the Will appears no power, or Faculty: but a substantial and intellectual
essence. 28. If the Mind be the Image of God, this was anciently known to
Plato. 29. The definition of the Mind. 30. Reason not the Image of God. 31.
The Authors opinion. 32. These two Quiddities lie obscured in the soul, by
reason of the corruption of our nature. 33. The love of the soul is excited
only by an Ecstasie; nor otherwise in these calamities of Nature. 34. A
precision of the Intellect. 35. An Objection solved. 36. That triplicity, or
ternary of diverse Faculties in the Mind, is expressed also in every systeme,
or composition of the world. 37. A more noble and exact similitude, then that
of a Trinity of Faculties, requisite to make out the Image of God in man. 38.
The description of the Mind, rehearsed. 39. How the Mind may survey it self.
40. The original of the Imagination, constitutive. 41. The Mind understands
far otherwise. 42. The prerogative of the Mind. 43. An explication of living
love. 44. The discrepancies of intellections in Mortals. 45. Why that amorous
desire, or divine Love, cannot cease in Heaven. 46. The description of that
desire. 47. How sin may be harbored in the desire of the Mind. 48. The love of
the Mind is a substance, even in men, that have not yet confessed their dust.
49. How great a cloud of darkness is drawn over the primitive splendour of the
Intellect, from the corruption of Nature, by the original sin. 50. The Image of
God, defaced and demolished in the sons of perdition.

WIsdom begins at the Fear of God; and the Fear of God begins at the meditation
of death, and eternal life. But the end of Wisdom many conceive, with 1.
the Stoics, to be the knowledge of a man's self; but I account the ultimate end
of wisdom, and the Crown of the whole course of our life, Charity, which alone
will faithfully accompany us, when all other things shall have deserted us. And
although self-cognition, in our opinion, be only a medium to the fear of God;
yet from that, must our Tractate concerning long life, assume its beginning; in
this relation, that the cognition of life presupposes the cognition of the
Soul, since the life and soul (which we have more then once intimated) are
Synonymaes. It Is of Faith, that man was created, of nothing, after the Image of
God, into a 2.
living Creature; and that his mind shall never perish; while, in the mean
time, the Souls of Bruits suffer annihilation, so soon as they cease to live.
The weighty reasons of which difference I have declared, in my discourse of the
Original of Forms. But hitherto is it not manifested, beyond dispute, wherein
that similitude of Man with God, our Archtype, or prime exemplar, does consist.
For in the Soul alone, many determine this majestic Pourtraicture. I shall
deliver what I conceive; yet under an humble protestation and subjection to the
censure of the Church. Thus it is. The Original of Forms being, in some degree
of comprehension, already known; it is just we make a grand enquiry concerning
the Mind of Man. But, seriously, no cognition is more weighty then that,
whereby the soul comprehends her self: Yea, and hardly is any more profitable;
in this interest, that Faith does establish her foundation upon the
unperishable, and indelible substance of the Soul. I have found, indeed, many
demonstrations, concerning this verity, divulged in Books: but none at all
propter quid, touching the Cardinal Quiddity, in relation to Atheists, denying
one single, and from all Eternity constant, Deity. Plato, insooth, has decreed
three orders of Atheists. (1.) A first, which believes no gods at all. (2.) A
second, which indeed does admit of gods; but such as 3.
are incurious of our condition here below, and idle contemners of the trifling
affairs of Mortals. (3.) A third, which although it believe, that there are
gods, and such as are both knowing and observant of the smallest occurences in
the World; yet imagines them so exceeding merciful, that they are flexile, by
the finger of the weakest prayer. And this kind is most frequent among
Christians, and even such, who profess themselves the most perfect in our days:
and on this presumption, they dare any thing, and believe Religion to be no
more but an engine of mature policy, to coerce the people, with the terror of
Laws, the obligation of Faith, and the penalty of Hell. For these impose heavy
burdens on the shoulders of others, which themselves touch not with one of
their fingers; drain the purses of their disciples, prostitute Heaven for money
to dying men, and continually intrude themselves into secular affairs, in
regard they opinion, that Religion cannot subsist without State Policy. My
highest wish should be, that they had once, though but in a moment, tasted what
it is to understand intellectually; that so they might perceive sensibly, as it
were by the touch, the immortality of 4.
the Mind. I confess, I have not invented rules or a method, whereby I might
be able to illustrate the intellect of another man. I protest therefore justly,
that such who ever study, making disquisitions concerning truth, but can never
attain the knowledge of it, in respect, being puffed up with Learning, they have
no Charity, do foster secret Atheism. But this one mystery I have learned, That
the mind does not at 5.
all understand by the mediation of the Fancy, nor by figures and images;
unless the miserable, and afflicting discourse of Reason be annexed; but when
the Soul comprehends her own nature, Reason falls off from her, and the image
of her self fails her, by which she might represent her self to her self:
therefore the Soul can, by no means, apprehend her self by the discourse of
Reason, nor by Images. For after that I had known, that the verity of an
Essence, and the verity of the Intellect were one and the same: I certainly
knew that the intellect was a certain immortal Entity, far removed from all
frail and perishable things. The Soul, indeed, is not perceived; yet we firmly
believe her to dwell within us, not to be idle, not to be weary, nor afflicted
with diseases. Therefore sleep, madness, and ebriety, are not symptoms of the
immortal 6.
soul suffering exorbitancy; but the attendants of life and only passions of
the sensitive Faculty; since bruits also frequently endure the same passions.
For just it is that the immortal Being owe these disturbances to her adligement
to caduce and mortal things. For as the mind inhabiteth within us, and yet is
not perceived by us: So neither are her continual and uninterrupted operations
subject to sensation; because if they were sensible, verily they could not have
been spiritual and merely abstracted. And although it appear to us, that we
understand nothing by the total sequestration and abstraction of discourses
from all things corporeal, which can fall under the comprehension of our sense,
mind, and intellect; and that in the very beginnings of our Contemplations:
yet really, the Soul does, all that while, act by her own insensible way, and
by an efficacy wholly spiritual: which I thus understood. The penitentiary very
often does not sensibly perceive the effects of his contrition, and with groans
deploreth 7.
that his insensility: yet being asked whether he would willingly commit a sin,
would perchance answer, that he had much rather die. Insensible therefore is
the operation of the soul in penitence and confession, being the supernatural
effect of Faith: because the intellectual actions are derived from a higher
principle, and are clients of a more noble and indesinent Magistracy. And on
this ground Mystical Divines lay their Doctrine, That the soul does more
effectually operate, and in her operations more benefit her self, in faith
alone, without discourse and cogitation; then he who prays in a multitude of
words, and by tedious discourses exciteth compunction in himself. But happy he,
who has obtained that excellent endowment, to perceive these insensile
operations of the soul, and by secret emanation to reflect them upon the
operations and powers of the sensitive Soul; since such frequently leave their
impresses upon the whole after life, and excite the memory, in faith operating
together with grace, for the future.

The Libertines of Christianity, and Atheists of the first 8.
Classis deride this Article of our Creed, as if the Image of God, in us were
only imaginary, and it a mere traditional fiction that man was fashioned after
the similitude of the Deity. But other Atheists of the second and third sort
believe, not only that we are created in the Image of God; but feign also that
in our nature there is an identity with the essence of the immense, 9.
uncreated Divinity; and that man does differ from God in substance no
otherwise, then a part does from the whole, or that which had beginning from
that which is nonprincipiate; but not at all in point of Essence, or internal
propriety. Which besides the Blasphemy, does comprehend very many and gross
absurdities. Since whatever once began is in that very notion a Creature; and
it does tacitly involve 10.
an imperfection in God, to be able to create extra se, without the limits of
his own nature, any thing in substance equal to himself: Since truly from
Philosophy it is evident beyond doubt, that all the parts of an infinite are
infinite, of necessity. The Creature therefore cannot be in substance more
infinite, then it has been in duration equal to its eternal principle: and
much less is the Soul of man a part of the Divine substance, or essentially
like unto it; which in power, magnitude, duration, glory, wisdom, etc. in her
self, and of her self, is a mere nothing. If therefore she was not made out of
God, much less out of her self; but out of nothing. Infinitely therefore do
they wander from truth, who believe a quiddity of the Divine Image implanted in
the Soul, by an identity of substance: when they are distinguished each from
other by infinite disparity; yea, the soul would at length, of her own accord,
be again resolved into that nothing, from whence she began, unless she were
constantly conserved in being, by the Divine goodness. Seriously, the damned
souls might wish to be resolved into their primitive nothing, which the Divine
Justice does conserve in Being. The Soul, indeed, from the minute of her
creation forwards to the future, has an eternal permanence; not from her own
essence, but from her native eternity, freely conferred upon her by the bounty,
and constantly conserved by the providence of her Maker.

Suffice it therefore, that the Soul be a spiritual and vital substance; and a
luminous Creature. And since there are many 11.
kinds and species of vital lights, this light of the mind differs from all
other vital lights, in this, that it is a spiritual and immortal substance; but
all other vital lights are not substances Formal, though they be Forms
substantial; and therefore, by the Chemistry of Death, they are reduced into
their ancient nothing, no otherwise then is the flame of a Tapor extinct. But
the Mind differs from Angels; in respect it is framed in the similitude and
representative figure of the eternal 12.
God, for the soul has that light and luminous substance from the gift of her
Creation, since she her self is that vital light: but an Angel is not that
substantial light, nor has he any light genial and inherent to his essence,
but is only a mirror of the increated light; and so in this particular falls
short of the excellence and perfection of the Divine Image. Otherwise an Angel,
since he is an incorporeal spirit, were he luminous from the right of his own
essence, would express the Image of God more perfectly then man. Moreover,
whatever God does bestow more love upon, that is more noble: but he has loved
man, much more then the Angels; for not to the redemption of the Angelical
nature did he assume the figure of a Cacodaemon, as the thrice glorious Lamb of
God, the Savior of the world, assumed the nature of a Servant. Nor can this
Doctrine be staggered by the opposition of that, The meanest in the Kingdom of
Heaven is greater then John the Baptist: For the Son of Man is not inferior, in
dignity of essence, to the Angels, though he was pleased to become a little
lower then the Angels; for in the calamitous condition of his life, he was made
a little lower then the Angels, as also was John the Baptist. And for this
reason, an Angel is constantly called a ministering Spirit: but is no where read
a friend of God, the Son of the Father, the delight of the Son of Man, or the
Temple of the Holy Spirit, wherein the thrice glorious Trinity takes up his
Mansion. For that is the majestic prerogative of the Divine Image, which the
Light Eternal does impress upon every man that comes into this world.

In the year 1610, after a long weariness of contemplation, 13.
that I might acquire some gradual knowledge of my own mind, since I was then
of opinion, that self-cognition was the complement of wisdom, fallen by chance
into a calm sleep, and rapt beyond the limits of reason, I seemed to be in a
Hall sufficiently obscure. On my left hand was a table, and on it a fair large
Vial, wherein was a small quantity of Liquor: and a voice from that Liquor
spoke unto me: Will thou Honor and Riches? At this unwonted voice, I became
surprised with extreme amazement. I walked up and down, seriously considering
with my self, what this should design. By and by, on my right hand, appeared a
chink in the wall, through which a light invaded my eyes with unwonted
splendour: which made me wholly forgetful of the Liquor, voice, and former
counsel. Then pensively returning to the Vial, I took it away with me; and
attempted to taste the Liquor, but with tedious labor I opened the Vial, and
assaulted with extreme horror I awakened. But my ancient intense desire of
knowing the nature of my soul, in which I had panted uncessantly for thirteen
whole years together, constantly remained with me. At length, amidst the
anxious afflictions of various fortunes, when yet I hoped a Sabbath of
tranquillity from the security of an innocent life transacted, in a vision I
had the sight of my soul. It was a transcendent light, in the figure of a man,
whose whole was homogeneous, actively discerning, a substance spiritual,
Crystalline, and lucent by its own native splendour. But enshrined it was in a
second nubilous part, as the husk or exterior cortex of it self, which whether
it did emit any splendour from it self, I could hardly distinguish, by reason of
the superlative fulgor of the Crystalline spirit inshrowded within it. Yet this
I could easily discern, that there was no sexual impress, but only in the
cortex or shrine. But the mark of the Crystal was light ineffable, so reflexed,
that the Crystal Image it self became incomprehensible: and that not by
negation or privation (since these are terms only accommodate to our
imbecility) otherwise then this, that it presented a majestic Ens, which
cannot be expressed by words; yet so finely, that you could not have
comprehended the quiddity of the thing beheld. And then was it revealed unto
me, that this light was the same, which I had a glimpse of twenty three years
before. And these things I saw by an intellectual vision; in my mind; for had
the eye of my body once beheld this resplendent excessive object, it would for
ever after have ceased from vision, and consta^ly have celebrated a blind man's
holy day. And thus my dream discovered unto me, that the beauty of the humane
Soul does far transcend all conception of thought. At that instant I
comprehended thus much, that my long desire of seeing my soul was vain and
fruitless; and thereupon I did acquiesce. For however beautiful the Crystalline
14.
spirit did appear; yet my soul retained nothing of perfection from that
vision, as at other times she was wont to do after an intellectual vision. And
so I came to be instructed, that my mind, in this somnial vision, had as it
were acted the part of a third person; nor was the discovery sufficiently
satisfactory to compensate so earnest and insatiate a desire of exploration.

But as to the Image of God impressed upon the Soul; according to my slender
capacity, I confess, I could never conceive 15.
any thing, whether a body, or spirit, whether in my fancy, or the most pure,
and abstracted speculation of my intellect, which in the same act of
meditation, did not represent some certain figure, under which it stood
objected to my conceptions. For whether I apprehended it by imagining an Idea
probably correspondent to its essence, or whether by conceiving that the
intellect did transmute it self into the object understood; still it occurred
unto my thought invested in some figure. For although I could familiarly
understand the mind under the notion of an incorporeal and immortal substance:
yet could I not, while I meditated upon the individual existence of it,
consider the same devoid of all figure; yea, nor so, truly, but it would
respond to the figure of a man. Since when ever the soul being sequestered does
see another Soul, 16.
Angel, or Cacodaemon, requisite it must be, that she perfectly know, that
these are presented to her, to the end she may distinguish a Soul from an
Angel, and the Soul of Peter from the Soul of Judas. Which distinction cannot
be made by the sense of tasting, smelling, hearing, touching; but only by the
proper vision of the Soul; which vision necessarily implies an alterity or
difference of figure. Since an Angel is so far restrained to locality, that at
once he cannot possess two different places: in that also there is included as
well a figural, as a local circumscription. Thence I considered the mind of
man figurated after this manner.

The body of man, accepted under that distinct notion, 17.
cannot give to itself the figure of a man; and therefore has need of an
external Sculptor or Delineator, which should be secretly ambuscadoed in the
material mass of the seed, and descend upon it from above. Yet this, in so much
as it is of a material condition, and far below the fineness of a spiritual
nature, cannot derive the plastic or conformative virtue no more from it self,
then from the gross mass of the body: necessary it is therefore, that there be
some precedent or elder principle, which must be wholly and purely immaterial,
yet real, and operative, to which may be justly attributed the power of
figuration or delineation, by a sigillary impression upon the Archeus, or
Regent Spirit of the Seed. The Soul of the Genitor, therefore, when it descends
to visit and relieve the inferior faculties, and makes a progress to survey the
Seed, in a paroxysm of carnality, does upon the mass of seed, engrave and
adumbrate the impress and figure of it self, (which; in sober truth, is the
only cause of the foecundity of seeds) and thence is that comely and
magnificent structure of the Infant. Otherwise if the Soul were not figurated,
but the figure of the body did arise spontaneously: a father maimed in any one
member could not beget a son but maimed in the same member; in regard the body
of the Generant has lost its primitive integrity, and is become imperfect, at
least in the implantate spirit of that member. If therefore the figure be
impressed upon the seed; undoubtedly it must receive that image or model from
some other more vital and elder principle, alien to it self. But if the soul
impress that figure upon the seed, she will not counterfeit an exotic, or
strange image; but accurately pourtray the similitude of her self. For by this
means also Beasts, by the souls modelling of her own picture, constantly
maintain their species. And although the mind of man, if we relate to its
original, far transcend the Laws of Nature; yet by the same method or way,
whereby it first entered the portal of Nature, was incorporated and associated
to her, it is constrained to progress in traduction, and is constantly adliged
to the observance of her rules and prescriptions; in this respect, That the
progress and end of vital generations is always univocal.

Nor otherwise could it want many and gross absurdities, that so excellent an
operation, as is the generation of man, should be performed without the consent
and cooperation of the Soul. Which if it be thus, it is also of inevitable
necessity, that the foecundity be given to the seed by the Soul, by the
communication of its figure, and other vital determinations requisite to
specification. Which verily does not come to pass otherwise, then by the
sigillation or engravement of the Soul upon the seed, whereby the matter of the
seed does obtain a requisite maturity and adumbrated figure: that at length it
may acquire from the Creator the formal light of life, or soul of its species,
whose similitude is expressed in the figure.

Moreover, we apprehend it as matter of Faith, that our soul is a spiritual
substance, that shall never know annihilation: 18.
the fabrication of which substance out of nothing belongs to the Almighty
God alone. Who since he has vouchsafed to adopt only the soul of man to the
Image of himself: it appears also a genuine consequence, that the immense and
ineffable God is also of humane figure; and that by an argument drawn a
posteriori, if arguments be of any validity in this incomprehensible subject.
Since the body is like wax, whereupon the impression of the image of the Soul
is imprinted: but the Soul has her image and essential perfection from him,
whose stamp or similitude she wears. But on consideration that the body of man
does frequently become 19.
subject to mutilation and monstrosity; hence have most Divines conceived that
the glorious Image of the Deity is wholly consistent in the Rational Faculty:
not at all considering, that the representative Divinity of man does in a more
perfect and proxime relation consist in the Soul, and so in the Body formed
after the exemplary character of the Soul; nor perpending, that the Rational
Faculty is but Handmaid and subservient to the Intellect, no part at all of its
essence, nor adliged to it by the inseparability of union, or identity: which
we have to satisfaction demonstrated in our Treatise, of the Venation of
Sciences. Now if any error be in the confirmation of the body, in the womb of
the Conceptrix: that error is not adscriptive to any imperfection of the Image
of God; but to the incapacity of the material principles, and other external
causes, invading the Plastic virtue of the seed, and perverting its exact
delineation of the parts. But the more Learned number of Christians does hold
it of Faith, that the Soul does proximly express the Image of the Trin-une God,
in the univocal simplicity of her substance, and the Trinity of her Faculties,
namely, the Intellect, Will, and Memory. Which analogy ever sounded, in the
ears of my reason, so ridiculous 20.
and empty as an old wives dream; and improper to make good the proxime,
singular, and excellent reflex of the Godhead in the Soul: since the term,
Image, does include a similitude of Essence and Figure, and not only a bare
parity of numbers. Again, if the Soul, in her substance, represent the thrice
sacred Deity; but the Intellect, Will, and Memory reflect the Trinity of
Persons: necessary it is that these three faculties are not proprieties, or
accidents of the Soul; but the very univocal substance of the mind; or else,
that the pourtracture does ill quadrate and respond to the Prototype, or prime
exemplar, whose image it is believed to be. I considered moreover, that not
only the mind of man, but even the whole man was framed after the Image of
God; and that it was a bloody absurdity to compare the persons of the Trinity
to the Memory, or Will: since no person of the most Holy Godhead, can in any
latitude of resemblance, represent the Will, nor the Will the Person, none the
Memory, or the Memory none; as also that no one, separated from the other two,
can hold any analogy to the Intellect. And then, that the three faculties of
the Soul are ever accepted under the notion of Accidents: but, insooth,
Accidents fall short of expressing the Image, in any nearer relation, then the
naked Ternary of Qualifications, heaped together upon the substance of the
Soul. In which sense, the Soul does express the Image of God far less, then any
the smallest piece of wood: which by retrograde Analysis or resolution of it
self into its primitive Entities, holds forth, Sal, Sulphur, and Mercury:
and not only (as the Mind in the forementioned similitude, credited by the
vulgar) three diverse proprieties, or a naked Ternary of accidents. For every
Wood has three several substances, comprised under the unity of the
concretion, distinct in the supposed Essences of their principles; but
concurring in the composition of the whole, they make only the single
substance of Wood.

Taulerus has divided the Soul, not into three faculties, but two distinct
parts, viz. the inferior or outward, which by 21.
peculiarity of appellation he denominates the Soul; and the Superior or
inward, which he entitleth the profundity of the Soul, or Spirit; in which he
affirms the Image of God to be comprehended, since therein is seated the
Kingdom of Heaven, and therefore the Devil can obtain no access unto it. And to
each of these parts he has assigned several acts and proprieties mutually
distinct each from other. But alas! this holy man expungeth that simple
homogeneity of the Soul, wherein she ought principally to express the
similitude of the Deity: or at least has hitherto denied the Image of God to
be propagated and diffused through, not only the whole man, but even through
the whole Soul. Verily, the ears of my Faith are not easily open to this
Doctrine of the Duality of the immortal Soul; nor the alterity of those two
parts: especially when in her essence, the Soul ought to resemble the Image of
the most simple Divine Nature. I should much rather assent, that the mind of
man does carry the resemblance of the most immense Godhead, in the most simple
unity, and indivisible Homogeneity of spirit, under the symbol of immortality,
of indissolution, and identity, beyond all connection or alterity. Wherefore my
assertion is, that the glorious 22.
Image of God is neither separate, nor separable from the Soul; but the very
mind is the very Image of God, fully so intimate to the Soul, as the Soul is
to her self, that is, the Image of God is the Soul of the Souls essence: and
for that reason, that no sober head can conceive or express any the least
analogy essential betwixt the supreme increated Ens, and the soul of man; since
the nature of Divinity is wholly incomprehensible, and the most subtle thought
can never find any character of identity and unity with God, impressed upon
the mind, whereon the similitude should be founded. Sufficient it is, that the
mind is a spirit, dearly beloved of God, homogeneous, simple, immortal,
created after the Image of the immense Deity, a single Ens, to which death can
add, and from which Death can detract nothing that is proper and genial unto
it in the essence of its simplicity. And in regard the 23.
Soul, in the primitive constitution and destination of its essence, is
participant of beatitude: therefore is damnation supervenient to it by
accident, besides the originary decree of Creation, by reason of a succeeding
defection.

This Semideity, the Soul, thus nobly enriched with science, 24.
when once enfranchized from her prison, the body, does then for ever suspend
all use of memory, and no longer makes use of the tedious induction of
Reminiscence, intuition of place, or duration; but being single, in that
homogeneal simplicity comprehends all things. For which reason, should any
Memory remain to the Soul, after her flight from Earth, it would of necessity
be not only frustraneous and useless, but burdensome: when it must eclipse her
transcendent actual intellection. And from Reminiscence must arise the same
inconvenience; since that can never be invited into act, but by the
circumambages and complex discourse of Reason; and therefore it possesses no
room in Eternity; where in the full prospect of verity, without being subject
to declination, defatigation or defect, the soul stands exalted far above the
necessity of Recognition. The inference is, that the Soul must be constituted
in beatitude (understand, in her primitive destination) without the conjunction
of the forementioned Ternary of Faculties; and so in that analogy cannot
resemble the Image of the incomprehensible Deity, for the sole representation
whereof she was created. Yea, upon a more intimate scrutiny, I do not find the
Memory to be any singular and distinct power of the Soul: but only the bare
manner of recognition. For such, who have shallow memories, to relieve this
infirmity do, by the help of the imagination (Vicegerent to the intellect)
contrive for themselves an artificial memory, and that far more retentive then
otherwise their natural memory could have been.

Moreover, the Will also takes an eternal farewell of the Soul in death: why,
because it is not essential, but accidentally 25.
advenient to the Soul. Since God, so soon as he had finished his Creation of
man, constituted him in the absolute power of his own Free Will; which in sober
truth, according to my apprehension, does plainly import, that the Will is not,
by any peculiar manner, essential to the Soul, from the first of her Creation:
but only annexed to her, by way of concession, or trust, as a talent to the
hand of a servant; to this end, that man might have free power to choose what
path best liked him, to unravel his life in. Otherwise I deny not, but in the
whole scene of things, there can be no one more pernicious then a free and
unregulated will, as being that only, which introduces all variance and
discord betwixt God and man. This faculty, therefore, must be for ever exiled
from the beatitude of Eternity: for the liberty of willing being taken away,
the will it self does also of necessity perish; and of what use can the power
of Volition be, when there is no longer remaining any occasion to will? And on
this basis the Schoolmen found their doctrine, that in Heaven the will is
confirmed, or rather wholly evacuated by death: that is, the beatified Souls in
Paradise, have no power to will, nor will to will, but what is conform to the
will of the highest; and those who are complete in Charity and Glory, retain no
power of willing any thing which is not of Charity. The Will therefore expires,
when the liberty of Volition is dissolved; and by sequel, the Will can be no
essential, but temporary and caduce power of the Soul; since it cannot be of
use or advantage to that Soul, which in the consummation of beatitude and
highest fruition, has suffered an utter evacuation of desire and hope: when it
can no more be deduced into act, but must be a bare optation, which cannot be
admitted in the 26.
state of bliss, where is a full satiety and abundant possession of all
desiderable good. Sufficient let it be for us; by the power of Volition in this
life, to thesaurize, or make provision for the life to come.

Now after this transitory power of Volition is abolished, 27.
in the next life there springs up, and manifests it self, a substantial
Will, in no respect an alien to the intellect and essence of the mind; and
therefore having a being absolutely distinct from the accidental and variable
Will. For as the Imagination is aliened in Phrensies, distracted in
perturbations of the Animal Faculty, and eternally suspended at the disunion of
the Soul and body: even so is the power of Free Will for ever abrogated by
death. And thus I came to believe, that the Image of God in man is seated in
the spiritual substance of the Soul; and not in the ternary of its Faculties.
In a word, the Analogy stands thus. God is an Ens increate, single,
incomprehensible, eternal, infinite, omnipotent, good, a supersubstantial Light
and Spirit. But the Soul is a Creature, single, indivisible, dependent,
immortal, simple, and from the date of her creation eternal, a substance
spiritual and lucid. Finally, in God 28.
there can be no accidents: but all and every one of his Attributes are the
very indistinct and most simple essence of the Divine Spirit: which Plato his
Parmenides in some measure understood. And so the Soul, since she is the
representative of God, does also admit no accident in her nature: but her whole
substance must be a simple light, and the very intellect. For as smoke
ascending from flame, is in figure and matter the same thing with flame: even
so the Soul is the naked, pure, and simple intellect, and the luminous shadow
of the increated light. So that as the eye does behold nothing more truly, and
more 29.
nearly then the Sun, and all other objects by the Sun: even so the beatified
Soul understands nothing more nearly then that light, by whose eradiation she
is illuminated, and upon which she does totally and immediately depend. And as
the eye of our body cannot endure to gaze upon the excessive luster of the Sun:
so cannot the Soul by intellection comprehend the glorious Essence of God, much
less while, in this vale of ignorance, she stands obliged to the obscure
mediation of her transitory Faculties. Otherwise the intellect, emancipated
from the thraldom of flesh, does by the act of intellection acquire the figure
of the object understood; in so much as it transformeth it self, by
commigration, to that unity of Light, which penetrateth, and by penetrating
invigorateth it with beatitude. And thus the Soul does principally and
primarily contemplate the immense Nature of God, in the act of intellection;
and for this end was she created the true and real representative of the Divine
Essence.

They who opinion the Image of God to be seated in the rational faculty of man,
depend upon this Argument. The 30.
Law is the Image of God; but this Law is engraven upon our Souls, by Reason:
therefore, is the Soul the Image of God, as she is only rational. But such
consider not, that according to the intent of this Sophism, the Soul, indeed,
would contain the Image of God; but yet the Soul her self would be the Law it
self essentially. Which absurdity is too palpable to escape the observation of
any, who shall but perpend, how much the Law and the Soul differ in the
suppositionality of Essence: and that the constitution and engravement of the
Law succeeded the Creation of the Soul. Verily, I abhor metaphorical locutions
in serious and abstruse subjects. As if these words, God created man in his own
likeness, would naturally bear this only interpretation, that God gave man the
use of reason: and that such who enter this scene of mortality, with native
idiotism, or a durable infatuation of reason, about them, have forfeited their
plea to this grand prerogative of mankind, the Image of the immense Deity.
Again, to impute the Image of God to Reason, is to profane and blaspheme the
Sacred Majesty of God, as I have amply declared in my discourse of the Venation
of Sciences: When there is no adequation of reason to God, no comparison
betwixt a transitory and uncertain faculty, and an eternal omniscient
substance. But omitting the opinions of other men, I shall presume the liberty
to declare my own.

The Intellect has a Will coequal, and substantially united to itself; not
such as may be accounted a power or accident: 31.
but the very light intellectual, a substance spiritual, an essence spiritual
and indivisible, only distinguished from the intellect by suppositionality,
not reality of essence. Beside these, I find also in the Soul a third native
propriety, which in defect of a more proper appellation, I name Love, or
constant Desire; not of acquisition, possession, or fruition: but of
Complacency: which is equally essential to the Soul with the other two, the
Intellect, and the intellectual Will, and equally simple in unity of substance.
Which Ternary of proprieties meet in the single and indivisible substance of
the Soul, and make one perfect unity. But this Love is no act of the will
singly; but proceeds from the intellect and substantial will together, as a
distinct and glorious act: for even in this life, we may love those things,
which our understanding concludes not to be amiable, and which our will
advises us not to love: and frequently we love objects, that transcend the
comprehension of the understanding, and will, as in an Ecstasie both the
intellect, and will are suspended, and consopited, during the abstraction of
the mind, for so long have they resigned their scepter to Love. Nor is this
Love a passion: but an Essence dominant, and an Act glorificant. The Will
therefore, and Love, of this 32.
place, hold no community at all with the sensual and transitory will of man,
or of flesh and blood: in regard they are essential titles, by which (in our
great poverty of words) we endeavor to demonstrate, wherein the mind of man
does represent the Image of God: forasmuch as the intellect enfranchised from
the body does intuitively understand, intend, and from the abyss of the mind,
love God, in one entire and never-discontinued act of love, or desire of
complacency, according to the simplicity of her substance. But so long as we
sojourn in walls of flesh, we come not so near beatitude, as once to use our
substantial and purely Intellectual intellect; but most of our obscure
cognition of any Entity is derived from the information of Fancy, which, as
Viceroy, usurpeth the throne of the intellect. For (as before) in an ecstatical
rapture, the intellect, will, and memory keep holiday, and are as it were lost
in a somnolent inactivity; the ardent act of Love only remaining vigorous and
operative: yet so distinct from the three former, that it cannot subsist
without the intellect, and substantial will; since, when the Soul is totally
homogeneous in her substance, she would plainly lose that her absolute
simplicity, if any one of the three could subsist without essential dependence
on the other. Love therefore, while the other two proprieties continue bound up
in an Ecstatical slumber, does as it were ascend to the superficies: or rather,
in terms of nearer similitude, the other two are as it were imbibed and
overwhelmed in Love. While we sojourn in the Tents of Kedar, in this vale of
misery, Love is elder then Desire; because it is a passion of the Amatory
Faculty, which proceeds from that suppositionality of the Soul (which is true
love indeed) and represents the idea or resemblance of the corporeal Faculty:
and hence is it, that all the affections are, by invincible propensity, rapt on
to irregularity and confusion. But in the Citizens of New Jerusalem, this Love
knows no priority, or distinction from Desire: neither is it a Faculty, nor
Habit, nor Act of willing, nor subsisteth without the Intellect.

And thus the Intellect is a formal Light, and the very substance of the Soul,
whose Cognition is perfect by intuition, without 34.
the help of eyes, which discerns, wills, and desires, in the unity of it
self, whatever it comprehends within it self, and judges by volition. Nor
does it then any longer remember by a repetition of the species, or in age of
the object once known; nor is it any more induced to the cognition of an
Essence, by circumstances: but then becomes the only and exact cognition of
all intelligible objects, and the intuitive aspect, within it self. Yet so,
that it knows one object more presentially then another, while the Intellect
reflecteth it self upon the objects understood, in the distinct Unity of
Verity: even as it frequently happens in the artifical Memory, where that
recordative memory is no distinct act from the inductive judgment of the
intellect. And will this not be more genial and proper to the mind, when once
delivered from the tedious, turbulent, and complex way of understanding by the
imagination? Nor can the stability of these our assertions be shaken by this
objection, that frequently in exorbitances of 35.
the Brain, the Memory does perish, and yet the Judgment continue firm and
sound; and on the contrary, the Judgment does suffer impairment and desolation,
and yet the Memory conserve its integrity and tenor, as many Drunkards
perfectly remember all passages as well before, as in and after their Wine: in
regard these are Heterogeneal Faculties of the sensitive Soul, seated in
distinct provinces of the body, and subject to intension and remission
according to the exact and irregular temperament of the Organs. And to
inanimate Creatures also, according to our observation, there undeniably 36.
belongs a kind of imperfect and obscure cognition of their particular
objects: as also a blind sense and dull affection of the most convenient and
adaequate; which Creatures have, for this determinate election of their
determinate objects, lately acquired the name of Sympathetical: and this dark
perception of the most accommodate objects, serves them in stead of the sense
of Vision, and faculty of reason. Besides this, there is also implanted in
these inanimate sympathetical Creatures a certain Virtue, or Vital endowment,
of infallible valor, and energy; as to those ends ordained by the Creator.
There is also a third power conferred upon Creatures of this qualification,
resulting from the conspiracy, and coefficiency of the two former: which
sits as a silent Counselor, and dispenses commands to them, either to
advance toward the amiable and ^eneficial, or retreat from the offensive and
harmful object. In which the most blear-eyed reason cannot but behold a certain
natural sensation, or affection of determinate objects: yea, and what is more,
a dislike and aversation. Which Climax, or threefold degree of nonintellectual
cognition, is more manifest in the most stupid sorts of Insects, as also in
Fools and Mad men; who are no subjects to the prudent scepter of the Intellect,
but subordinate to the doller advisoes of sense, and conform to the
provocations of only visual light. And yet in these there is moreover a second
power, or act of their virtues specifical and functions vital: for the only
exercise whereof they were ordained. And thirdly, there is comprehended in them
a far more conspicuous act of Address or Application, and Aversation or
Avoidance: which arises from the instinct of their Forms. All which natural
proprieties do yet more powerfully declare themselves in sensitive Creatures:
for to these belongs a certain sensitive Imagination, with a gradual
discourse of obscure reason, which supplieth their defect of an Intellect, and
is more or less resplendent and conspicuous in every single species: so that
sagacity, voluntary election, and memory in such fall under the apprehension of
a comparative intellect: their objects being yet changed, according to the
variety of matter, propense to variations, distinctions, and singularities.
Moreover, in such there is an emanative or effluxive power collaterally annexed
to their virtues; whereby their Souls are more or less propense to the
exercises of their element, benign, and wholesome, or wild and destructive
endowments, or qualities essential. And finally, they are enriched with a
native desire of complacency, of abhorrence or dislike, and of concupiscence,
immediately ensuing upon their consideration of the good or evil of the object:
which power or propensity is so firmly counited to the sensitive soul, that it
seems almost impossible to observation, that any man should at once see two
strange persons together, and not instantly become more affected to one then
the other. And these things, which are sufficiently operative even in merely
Corporeal and inanimate natures, of confessed efficacy in sensitive, and in
both admit of more or less acuteness, according to the obedient or refractary
predisposition of the recipient: cannot but be, for the same reason, of more
clarified and sublime energy in man.

Finally, it is not the sense of our thoughts, that the Image of God in man
should fall under such gross disparagement, as 37.
to be considered as dependent on any Ternary of Faculties; which naturally
belongs also to other inferior natures in this scene of the world. Because
the dignity of the Image of the most glorious Jehovah is not, in any the
largest latitude of Analogy, participated by any other Creature whatever: since
the Divine Image is peculiarly radicated in the humane Soul, and equally proper
to it with its very essence: but all other proprieties of the Soul are not of
the essence of the Mind; but productions and subsequent acts. Nor can it stand
with the Majesty of the Divine Image, to be desumed from so poor an original as
qualities; for the proprieties and excellencies of all other created forms
concur, and are as it were colliquated or melted together into the essence of
the Soul, by virtue of the Divine Image. But if these be accounted as
attributes and productions: that must be charged upon the miserable manner, and
customary abuse of understanding, according to the capacity of the Vulgar. For
in equitable truth, 38.
the mind is one single act, pure, simple, formal, homogeneous, and
indivisible; in which the Image of God does subsist proximely and essentially.
So that in this Image, all faculties do not only lay aside the nature of
Attributes: but also collect and bind up their suppositionalities into an
unity indistinct. Why, because the Soul is a certain substantial light within
her self; or a substance so lucid, that in suppositionality of essence, it
cannot be distinguished from the very light: and her intellect is so the light
of the Mind, that the very Mind is the mere lucid intellect. And in this
self-light the 39.
Mind, once uncaptived from the opacity of flesh and blood, does wholly and
intimately survey it self, and understand its own nature: and therefore has no
need either of brain or heart; in which material Organs, the substance of the
Mind does seem to stoop unto the assumption of the progeny or stock of
proprieties; that is, the Soul is diffused or emissively expansed into several
transitory Faculties. To speak more plainly; in the body, when the Intellect is
abstracted in speculation, it makes use of corporeal Organs, to which it is
obliged: and assumes a certain Virtue qualitative, called Imagination; which
from the conjunction or society of the power fantastical, and concurrent
splendour of the intellect, suffering some 40.
degradation in the Organs, springs up, by a certain combination, into the
forementioned qualitative Faculty. And hence comes it to pass, that this
Faculty grows weary by long and intense Imagination, seems wholly
vanquished by difficult, knotty, and abstruse meditation, and frequently
submits to dementation or madness: nay, as the observation of Physicians
tells us, with one nights pensive study, and anxiety of thought, the hair of
young heads has put on the silver Livery of old age. But the mind, once
emancipated from the pedantism of flesh and blood, is never weary with
continued intellection. Moreover, the Imagination in this life is not only
subject to lassation: but from the magazine of it self has not any
intellective species, which it has not drawn in from sensible objects. And
therefore the Intellective Faculty, which concurreth and cooperateth with the
fantastical function of the Sensitive Soul, follows the constitution or
temperamental disposition of the Organ, and arbitrary dictates of the Sensitive
Life: no otherwise then in Naturals the effect follows the weaker part of
their Causes. But the Soul, whatsoever is requisite for Cognition,
Commemoration, or Volition, either for one single act, or many, 41.
has wholly from it self, and borrows it from no other foreign Causality
concurrent. For the good substantial Will of a Soul advanced to beatitude,
arises not from the object understood: but from the radical goodness of her
own Formal love, which is, indeed, no proper passion of the soul, no habit, no
propension, nor any quality; but a substantial act of goodness, by which the
blessed Soul is substantially, univocally, and homogeneally, not qualitatively
good. And this prerogative it enjoys, because it is the Typical Image of
Divinity. 42.
But bodies, of their own accord, perpetually fall into the attributes of
forms, heterogeneity, vicissitudes, and at length into dissolution. Therefore
Love or Desire of the Mind, is no function of the Appetitive faculty: but is a
part 43.
of the substantial Mind, or rather the very Mind it self, flowing from the
Intellect and Will. Which three are, by the hand of the Creator, married
indissolubly into an eternal unity, in the purest and most absolute identity
and simplicity of substance. Yet in Mortals they are separate and distinct, as
well in respect of the necessity of Organs, and disparity of functions; as the
collateral society and conjunctive operation of the Sensitive Soul: Since now
we frequently desire those things, which the Intellect judges not desiderable,
and the 44.
Will would wish never to enjoy. But necessary it is that such things, whose
operations are different, should be also different in the root of their Beings,
by a manner of distinction, whereby each single nature is separated from
others: in the Mind truly by a Suppositionality relative: in the Sensitive
Soul, according to the corporeal and qualitative nature. And therefore that
amorous desire of the Mind, is the radical essence 45.
of the Soul, consubstantial and coaevous to it. So though in Heaven be a
satiety and perpetual fruition of all desiderable good: yet does not this
desire of the Soul therefore cease, which is a constant study of Complacency:
nor does it more infer a passion into the Mind, then Charity it self; since
Love and Charity are in the Soul radically one and the same thing. Otherwise
should this desire cease, and the ardor of Love suffer extinction, either a
satiety or insensility of fruition would instantly spring up; which cannot
consist with a state of full beatitude, and would infer discord upon the calm
and constant harmony of a Soul once admitted into the Chorus of Saints
triumphant. And thus this Desire is the incendiary that does both kindle and
maintain the flames of interminable delectation, 46.
and joys insatiate and inextinguishible; in which consideration the Soul
wears the resemblance of the Holy Ghost the Comforter. Now manifest it is, that
in the Mind, the Intellect, Will, and Love are substantially counited: but in
the sensitive Soul, their operations are distinguished, according to the
determinate alterity of Faculties and their Organs; when we understanding many
objects, we do not desire, and desire many we hardly understand, and such
indeed as our will, if let to the swinge of its own native propensity, would
decline the enjoyment of; as in example, we will what we desire not, when we
willingly submit to the 47.
stroke of the Executioner: and desire what our will abhors, when we call for
the dismembring saw of the Surgeon, and gladly embrace the horror of
amputation. Whence it comes to pass, that sometimes the Will gives laws to the
desire; and on the contrary, frequently the desire usurpeth the scepter and
commands the Will: So that these two Lords mutually vanquish and succeed each
the other, by vicissitudes. Which Civil War must so long continue in these our
walls of flesh, as the sensitive Soul draws and engages the Intellect, and
the body draws and engages the sensitive Soul, into a multiplex and various
ataxy or irregularity of division. And from this intestine Duello arise those
absurd desires of objects impossible to be obtained, and wishes of things in
the present tense, which the unalterable Grammar of Time has made in the
preterperfect, and excepted from ever being declined in the future.

But this Desire, enshrined in the substance of the Soul, must be of the
essence of the Mind: Otherwise he could not commit a sin, who looked upon a
woman to lust after her, before the plenary consent of the Will. Our desires
therefore are elemented and coined in the mint of mortal and caduce faculties;
which seated in the Sensitive Soul, rival the operations of the immortal and
rational: whose objects are many times rejected by the Will as inconvenient and
ungrateful. As to the manner also, the desire, in this life, operateth one way,
and the Will another: and in the narrow circle of a day, sometimes the desire
precedeth the Will, and anon again the Will gets the start of the Desire,
and one subdueth the other successively, that the victor may restrain and
coerce something distinct from it self: and this wholly in the transitory
faculties; because each arises from the concupiscence of the Sensitive Soul.
But in the glorious denizens of Paradise, 48.
this excellent Love, or amorous Desire, feels a resurrection and brighter
ascension, as being the luminous substance of the Soul: for there is nothing
desired, which is not also the full object of the Will: and that is collected
into an unity, as well in regard of the act, as of the substance: although
Volition and Optation seem two diverse branches expansed from one root; which
far transcendeth the manner and method of intellection in those, who have not
yet confessed their dust.

Lastly, in man is situate the Kingdom of God, that is the very Deity it self,
by whose perpetual splendour all things are collected into the unity of verity.
The Image of God therefore is primarily in the mind of man, whose very essence
is no other then the very Image of God. Which Image falls not under the
comprehension of the most subtle thought, nor can be expressed by any the most
significant words, in this vale of ignorance: in regard it is the mirror of the
incomprehensible Divinity; and hence also is it, that the soul while immured in
this cloister of flesh, cannot reach the knowledge of her own nature, but must
remain a stranger to it self.

But in the Cortex or shrine of the Mind, the sensitive and vital Form, this
Image of Divinity is visible by reflection, as 49.
being relucent in the Faculties: yet suffering a great allay of splendour from
the opacity of the body; because obumbrated by the cloud of brutal generation,
and infected with mortality and pollution by the inquination of our nature fallen
from its primitive purity: by reason whereof the body has not received the
Image, but at second hand borrowed only the Figure of the Deity. But alas! the
miserable Mind, devolved into outward darkness, as it has divorced it self
from 50.
an unity with the Light uncreate, and infringed the originary energy of this
Image of Divinity: so also has it lost the primitive light of that Image, by
the bold appropriation of it as justly proper to it self by the title of merit;
so that ever since the fall it can understand, will, or love no object besides
it self, and in order to it self. For the damned shall arise from the dead
unchanged: because their bodies, in the resurrection, shall receive their
determinations from their souls, which since they appear with all their
depraved affections, reflected only on themselves, after a corporeal manner;
they shall not, in the resurrection, represent the Image of God, being as it
were suffocated within them, unless in that corporeal similitude derived from
Adam, the Protoplast, by the means of generation; that is, they shall have no
more of the Image of God, then what is weakly and darkly reflected in the
figure of the body. Lastly, the Soul (understand only such, as is excluded the
New Jerusalem) being once fallen, by the horrid Cataract of death, upon the
privation of those assistant Faculties, the Imagination, Memory, and Will; does
for ever after understand, will, and love all objects, by a blind
apprehension, addicted only to it self. For it knows its own immortality,
becomes sensible of its damnation, and with secret murmurs complains of it,
as an act of high injustice done upon it. Because all the bent and scope of its
love is only to defend its excuses for sins, secretly to recriminate upon the
hand of Justice, by palliating the guilt of Crimes, as if committed in the days
of ignorance and innocence, with great fragility of nature, many crafty wiles
and treacherous invitements of our three Adversaries, the World, Flesh, and
Devil, and the defect of Grace sufficient to encounter such forcible
temptations: and that an eternal punishment (as far beyond all patience to
endure, as all flux of time to end) cannot according to the laws of Justice be
due for a momentany transgression. And at this it burns with blasphemous rage
and furious hatred against God: chiefly because it is too well ascertained,
that the judgment can never be reversed by any replea of error, nor the arrest
taken off by any reprieve, till the impossible period of eternity; all hopes of
evading the uncessant scourge of Gods wrath being for ever cut off in despair.
Thus the impossibility either of evasion or cessation being as long lived as
Eternity, the Caitiff soul, plunged in a deluge of desperation that shall never
know an ebb, from the first minute of her disunion from the body, passes into
an abyss of horror; where shall be no piety, no compassion, no consolation, no
relaxation, and no redemption or revocation. To which sad truth we may add,
that since the intellect does naturally transform it self into the idea of the
object understood (which the ancient Ethnic Philosophers well knew, and
elegantly blended under the parabolical fiction of Proteus) that is, into the
full similitude of those cursed Devils and Spirits created for revenge, that
are ever objected unto it: Hence is the Soul contiually possessed with an high
hatred of God, and his blessed Army of Saints and Angels; together with
desperation, malediction, damnation, and the vindictive tortures of those
infernal executioners. O may the Mercy of Omnipotence, upon the sole motive of
his own infinite goodness and clemency, vouchsafe to break those snares laid in
all the paths of our life, to precipitate us into this misery, that must find
neither remedy, release, nor end.

Amen.
FINIS.

