A GUIDE To the GODLY, OR, The daily MEDITATIONS of RETURN HEBDON Gentleman,
who for his conscience, (through the tyrany of the Bishops) suffered many years
imprisonment in the King's Bench, and their remained till death.

BEING Very useful for Instruction of all those that desire to walk in the
paths of JESUS CHRIST.

Left to Mrs. TRASKE, who not long since for the same Judgment died in the Gate
house, and published by a friend of hers.

Psalm. 145.2. Every day will I bless thee, and will praise thy name for ever.

IER. 6.16. Inquiring for that good and old Way, to Walk in it that they may
find rest to their souls.

Printed in the year. 1646.

To the Reader.
LOving Reader, I suppose it is desired, that something should be spoken,
concerning the Author of this Book, in what way, and with what earnestness,
it pleased God he did attain: to the truth of these Mysteries in divine
knowledge concerning himself; he was a Gentleman's Son of Fashion, in the
Town of Holmeshurst, in the County of Sussex; but he being stirred up, and
desirous, rather to live a retired life, with little enjoyment of this world,
that he might enjoy more of God; desired to leave both Father and Mother, and
means, and being afterward a prisoner, for the Commandment of Gods sake, by
his desiring to rest on the seventh day, according to the Commandment (which
the world calls Satturday) who dyed about 23. years since; but he remained
about eight years in prison, in which time he gave himself to continual
study, in fasting and prayer, and it has pleased God, that he diseased, has
left as a pledge to his friends, some of his labors. Therefore some who having
the knowledge of him, and of his manner of life, while living, desire ^o print
some of his works; for the good of all whom it shall please God to give power
to seek him in truth: inquiring for that good and old way, to walk in it that
they may find rest to their souls, Jerem. 6. verse 16. and if this shall be
received, it may be encouragement to print more.

Farewell.
The 6. day of the week.
1. THE Christians that leave all mortal things to follow Christ in Communion
of his sufferings, are in him the salt of the earth, as Luke 14.26.33, 34, 35.
with Mat. 5.12, 13. They have salt and savor in themselves, when they are
enabled to endure the fiery Trial, Mark 90 49.50. with 1 Pet. 4.12, 13. and
in this constancy, they shall both save themselves, and all that hear them, 1 Timothy 4.16. Notwithstanding as salt they spend, and consume themselves in
sufferings to death that others through them may be acceptable to the spirit of
God; but if any of those which profess to suffer as Christians be unsavory,
that is, have not strength to continue constantly to death, they are worse or
less profitable, then that people which they should season; for after they
leave their testimony and sufferings, they are the most contemptible and base
before God and man.

2. They which shine forth in the Gospel of Christ to immortality, as Mat.
5.14.15. with 2 Timothy 1.10. and go unto God through the resurrection of Jesus
Christ. 1 Pet. 3.21. these are those lights of the world, that out of their
common estate of mortality, do shine and give light to immortality in the power
and authority of Christ; but if any that profess themselves to be such lights,
and yet are under the bushel, compass, and authority of the worlds authority,
they are hypocrites; for as men will not light a light to put it under
darkness: so neither will the Father of lights, give the world such a light, as
shall be put under the authority of darkness. Col. 1.12.13.

3. I have considered from the temptation of our Lord Jesus, that the Devil
has but two spiritual temptations (beside his carnal authority in men)
namely, first, to mortality, or secondly, to transgression.

1. His first temptation is to seek mortality at his word; for being in such a
place: as where it seems, there was all stones and no bread, he would have
moved our lord to save his mortal life, by a miracle; but our Lord gives him
to understand his mind, that he was careful only to persuade the immortal
life, and so turns the temptation upon the tempters pate: as if Jesus should
say, if I should turn these stones into bread: so as the Country were all
bread, yet the bread cannot sustain man; but that he must dye for the sin of
Adam: therefore is not necessary to seek the brea^ of mortality; but the bread
of Immortality, etc. An^ thus the Devil is resisted: when a man suffers n^^
his belly to be his God; that is, when he is n^^ drawn in cases of necessity,
to leave the love of th^^ immortal life, and in his spirit, and whole desire
dot^ not seek the bread of a mortal life: this temptat^^^ on our Lord
avoided, and the Angels afterward ministered unto him, Mat. 4.

2. The Devils second temptation is to transgress the word of God in this
kind, he tempted (...) Lord twice with two several temptations, and (...) he
had tempted him with 200. they had all tende^^ to this end, namely, by all
means to seek if (...) could make him guilty of sin; for seeing by the si^^
temptation, that his mind was wholly to the spiritual and immortal life in
the word, and that (...) could not get him to look on the tree of good a^^
evil, he knows that there is no other means (...) cut man ost from the
eternal life in God; but (...) cutting him off from the unity and obedience
which is by doing the word that came out of (...) mouth of God: which thing
when he could not (...) but still our Lord kept himself from transgressi^^ any
thing that came out of the mouth of God, a^^ was written, he could not be
ignorant of the kno^ledge of the will and law of God: as by transgr^^sing, the
conscience in transgressing had been d^^led, the Devil had no other means of
temptati^^ and therefore departed from our Lord. Mat. 4. Luke 4.

4. I consider also whereupon the assurance of a man's standing constantly
consists, namely, in the daily growth and increase of spiritual graces in the
inner man, as 2 Pet. 1.8.10. with 2 Cor. 4.15.15. For all that set their minds
with Christ in Heaven on immortality, will daily treasure to themselves in
Heaven, which with more and more draw their hearts from mortal thoughts: so as
they may lay assured hold in this estate, upon eternal life, as Mat 6.19, 20.
with Luke 12.21.31.33.34. with 1 Timothy 6.19. From whence also on the other side
we must note, that all that after their profession of Christ in truth, do fall
away, are such as begin to be sluggish and idle in their service of God, and
from that fall to mind earthly things, which if they do, it is manifest, that
their light or profession of immortality, is darkness and foolishness, in
seeking to be rich unto themselves in mortality: their ^ight is darkness,
their profession of one thing, and minding another is hypocrisy, and
wickedness before God, and the deceit of men, their riches is their poverty,
as Rev. 3.17. their heart and mind is ^s far separated from God in Christ, and
from hol^ing him the head, a^ the Heavens are from the ^arth. Therefore such as
by their own negligence and default, do suffer Satan to inspire them with
mortality, do more and more separate from the assurance of immortality, and
from Christ, till they become worldly and mortally minded, and then they have
only a bare good conceit of themselves in propriety; but in any trial they
will fall away to save their souls under the authority of darkness, and for the
love thereof, deny to lose their souls in the profession of Christ, yea, they
will blaspheme that way of Christianity, and so become the greatest enemies of
the Cross of Christ, when yet with their lips they will give him a Judas
kiss, and say, hayle master, and profess his word with their mouth; but their
deeds and devises are with his enemies of the power of darkness to betray him
and his, Phil. 3.17, 18, 19. with Luke 22.47, 48, 53.

Sixthly. The true Christians in all their sufferings sight not for mortal
salvation; but they despise such salvation for the Savior, Heb. 11.25. with
12.2.

6. John 15.1. etc. is showed the true state of Christianity by the vine. If a
man cut the vine-tree, the better the branches grow. Thus the Father cutting
the vine, Christ in the mortal life he sprang both in the power of his
immortal life, and thereby the branches bring forth fruits to him that only
has immortality, 1 Timothy 6.16. The fruitful branches that are purged by his
husbandry, and chastised in love, (as Heb. 12.) do by their sufferings bring
forth more fruit to immortality: and to the divine nature of God; but if the
husband man do for some cause neglect to cut or purge the mortal parts, it is
known that the branches that so run out without chastisement, do in time come
to be wild, that do bring forth bitter fruit as bastards, and thereby procure
to be cut of from the true vine planted to give fruits unto immortality.

7. According to Esa. 29.21. Compared with the prosecution now of Christians, I
understand how a man is made a sinner against God, by a word, etc. ensnared
thus: the Emperor is exalted for good, certain Laws are set down: that if a
Christian say thus or thus, he shall suffer death; their Judgment sits, the
Christian is ^nquired of, and examined, that by his own word spoken, he may be
taken and snared in their law, and so executed as a sinner. This is direct
contempt of God and Christ. This is the estate of all spiritual inquisitions
of old.

8. The doctrine of Christ's body and blo^d, Ioh. 6.53, etc. is a hard saying to
a carnal mind, but to him that knows to break the hardness thereof, it is
spirit and life; 63. For as the word is made flesh like us, as Ioh. 1.14. with
Phil. 2.7. to suffer death with us and for us: so we are made the word in him,
to suffer with him and for his testimony; and thus we eat his flesh, when we
apply his flesh to have Communion in the suffering thereof in love: and we eat
the word when we have it of him and keep it; as Joh. 8.47, 51. And thus he is
the food of immortality which nourishes the Devine nature in man, to every one
to whom he is communicable both in flesh, and spirit; for the word is now both
flesh, spirit and life; Ioh. 6.54, with 63. Therefore it cannot be, but that the
flesh of man which has the spirit of Christ must needs be quickened, and not se
death as a curse, because the word is spiritual and cannot be made void; for
according to the word, he which eats natural bread is quickened mortally for
the time of a day etc. much more shall he live to immortallity, and to God that
applies to himself the body and spirit of Jesus Christ: the manifestation of
which life of Christ is effectual to every true member of his body, in that
such are made of God to some end in the flesh; Namely, that by the life of the
flesh in Christ Jesus, which is yet of no being before God, they may confound
whatsoever has a being of the world, and in the mind or spirit, Christ is made
unto them from God wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption; 1
Cor. 1.24 -- 28 -- 30. Whereby it is plain, that every one that in true love
of God holds community in the flesh and sufferings of Christ, has from God
the participation of the same spirit of Christ to every use. He is chaste as he
is chaste, He is righteous as he is rigteous: 1 Ioh. 3.3 -- 7, with 4.2. What
such do one earth it is confirmed in heaven etc. because the same spirit of
Jesus Christ which is in heaven lives in them, and so he speaks an does the
things on earth by the ministry of such chosen and holy vessels. Ioh.
20.22.23. Matt. 18.18.2 Cor. 13.3.5. Act. 9.15.16.

9. If one should ask me, whether I can know a man in whom Jesus Christ is
crucified? I answer: yea very well by the Word; for if his spirit be in him
then he walks so as Jesus Christ walked. 1 John 2.6. he has the same mind to
suffer in the flesh Phil. 2.5. 1 Pet. 4.1. yea in his mind he is dead and
crucified to the world. Romans 6.2 and 7.4. Gal. 6.14. and his mind is in Heaven:
so his Conversation is heavenly. Col. 3.1.2. Phil. 3.20.

The 1. day of the week.
1. BEing grieved and careful, least by speaking of mysteries to sinful and
ignorant people, the truth of our Lord God should be profaned, and the way of
truth evil spoken of. Therefore I have desired wisdom, to give to every one
according to their estate, and this is proposed unto me according to the word,
namely, to keep those 3. degrees.

1. If any seek the living Lord, this the word says, go sin no more, John
8.11. for every transgression of a negative Law, is a sin against God, and
dishonor to our Creator. Lev. 4.2. Therefore all that seek peace with God, must
remove the evil of their thoughts, and works from before his Majesty, and they
must cease to do evil, Esa. 1.16. and thus they are to repent, confess, and
forsake all former sins either against the word of God, or their neighbors,
Mat. 19.17, 18, 19. For turn over to 1.2. Then if they have peace with God,
and are made righteous from doing evil in the world; they are to seek the
Ministry of reconciliation, that they may be reconciled unto God, in the Body
and Communion of the sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in this they are
to talk upon them the decree, Act. 15. to keep in the love of the body of
Christ, wherein they shall learn to know, what is the good and acceptable, and
perfect will of God: that they may do it as they see the servants that are
joined to his body, to do, and in this estate they are to walk in the light of
those which are perfect members in the body of the sufferings for Christ Jesus.
John 3.19, 21. with Heb. 13.7, 8.

3. Now if any are able to hold the word of the new Testament, in the enmity
against the world, then they present their Members as weapons of righteousness
unto holiness. Romans 6.19. wherein they are to do the will of God in their own
persons and to walk worthy of the mysteries of holiness which they take unto
themselves, in the Law of separation. 2 Cor. 6.16.17.

2. In the Law of the love of the Creator. Isa. 56. 6. Heb. 4.3, 4.

3. In the Coeincorporation by Baptism into the body and death of Christ. Romans
6.3. etc. Col. 2. 6 -- 11, 13. These degrees are of necessity to be of speed,
that none may presume to come into the service of the only true God without an
evident calling, and preparation for so holy a work.

2. I conceive the wedding garment, to be the true and perfect love of God in
Christ. thus, There are 3 undevidable gifts, whereof if one fail all the other
cease from Christ. viz. 1 Faith. 2. Hope and 3 Love. 1 Cor. 13.13.

1. Faith is the substance of all the invisible promises which we hope for,
whereby we believe that we shall enjoy them as certainly as if we did now enjoy
them in sight, sense, and feeling, Heb. 11. 1.2. hope is the means whereby we
are saved, and preserved; notwithstanding all morral temptations, to wait in
patience; for what our faith apprehends but cannot see it, with mortal eye,
Romans 8.24.25. 35.1 Pet. 1.5.1 Cor. 2.9.10.

3. Love extends it self beyond all; for as the exercise and manifestation of
it, is in the keeping of the Commandments which concern both our Lord God,
and our neighbors, Mark 12.29.30. 31. so this love is stronger then all, yea
then death, and it only is worthy of the wedding feast; for hereby all
pleasures, friends, wife, yea, and life is hated in respect of this calling, to
the wedding supper and Communion of Christ in immortality; whereas all that
love other things more then this Communion do justly perish in their false and
mortal love, and those which presume to come with a heart, and a heart, that
is without this perfect love in the marriage of the son of the blessed, are
all justly cast out for profaining the pure and immortal love with an unclean
and mortal lust Mat, 22, 2, etc. with Luke 16. etc. to 26. Ephesians. 5.23, ^o 32.2.
Cor. 3.5.4.

1. All that live in common or open sins do live without God in the world and
these are unworthy of the love of the righteous; for they will be a reproach
unto such men: wherefore it is of necessity, that first all sinners do so know
God, as not to sin against his presence, and word, and to have a good report
for their conversation in the world before, they can be reconciled to God: so
as to be joined in common love with the righteous in Christ.

3. I understand from John 3.8. That there is a twofold wind or spirit.

1. The one is called the common wind, spirit, or air; whereby all flesh do
breath, and live the natural and mortal life, as Wisd. 7.1. with Genesis
7.21.22, 23. The unclean or common spirit has the authority of this air, and
he works in all that have their conversation in the lusts of the flesh, etc.
Ephesians. 2.2.3.

2. The other is called the holy wind of spirit whereby such as are begotten
from above by the spirit do breath and live the spiritual and immortal life,
John 3.3.5.8 1 Pet. 1.3.23.1 Cor. 2.15.12.16.

This holy wind is the spirit of truth which the Lord Jesus gives to all that
he calls and chooses out of the world, which works in all Children that
walk after that holy wind, minding the things that are above in Heaven, after
the life of immortality, John 14.17.26. Romans 8.1.14. Col. 3.1, 2.

4. All the world is dark, and is laid in wickedness, and for this their sins
are condemned and dead in the Law before Christ Jesus came, when he came in the
flesh, he was the light of the world, and all that by the discovery of that
light, hated their evil works, did come unto the light, and love to walk in
it, doing the truth, that their works may be manifested to be done in God; but
on the other side, there were and are another seed that have enmity against the
light, and the Children of light, and these will not come unto the light, but
hate the light, because they love their own evil works of darkness: this
light then is the confirmation of their former condemnation without any remedy,
John 1.5.9, with 3.11, to 21. with 8.12, 24.

5. The work of God for salvation is proposed by the house of God, 1 Timothy 3 15.

All that sin against the Law of the house are enemies to God, Ezeck. 43.7 to
11.12. All that are reconciled in their minds, and will no more sin against
God by transgressing the Law of his house, do first desire and make peace with
any of the servants of God that keep the house: After this admittance, they
have freedom to converse with the household servants, and to learn the orders
of the house, and may see the service and God, and behold their faith and godly
conversation in love, but yet as strangers they are, not employed in any
service of God to do as his servants, neither may they dare to presume or be
admitted thereunto.

If any do desire to draw near unto the Majesty of the Lord of the house as
servant, he must be admitted according to the Law of the house in that kind,
and from that time he must do all the will of God, as the other servants do.

6. The men of this worldly authority, when they have Christ, or any of his
Christians under their hands in torments, do boast against them to save
themselves, thinking that none can save our of their hands; but this is the
gate of God, whereby the righteous do go unto God in Heavenly peace, Mar.
50.30, 31. Psalm. 118.17.20.

The 2. day of the week.
THere is come into my mind, a sight of darkness and light, and how the
Children thereof are profitable or unprofitable to themselves, how they
treasure to themselves hatred and wrath, or love and good pleasure from the
only true God: Thus the darkness is this world, and the au^hority of darkness
is the tyrannizing authority over the truth: The light is the Law of the world
to come, the authority thereof is Christ, in the authority of suffering for
well doing. The Children of darkness are they which live after the course of
this present evil world, and the glory and authority thereof; these go into
darkness continually till they come thither, they spend every day without any
other then mortal profit: so they pass away the year, and it goes into
darkness without comfort, at length they have consumed the length of their
Age, and then they go into darkness without so much as worldly good: These are
shut up in darkness, kept unto the Judgment of the Lord, who shall render to
them according to their unprofitable and evil works.

The Children of light are they which exercise themselves in the Law and light
that shines to mortality, eschewing evil and doing good: as if they were
always with the Father of lights, and enlightened to treasure to themselves
for the time to come.

Those go into light continually, every day adds unto their strength, and
they profit in the true riches which preserve the man of God to an immortal
life: the day and the year they spend in the light, going to immortality, and
the time fills up to their comfort, and consumes their evil sorrow and
sufferings for the light sake in this world; when they have spent their time,
all their labors go with them, they go out of this world, as a good Servant to
be refreshed, and rewarded for his good service, their immortal soul is
gathered into Paradise and joy; way ting yet for the day of Judgment and
Redemption of the body, when according to their good works, they shall be
crowned with unutterable and immortal glory.

Thus the Children of light do so number their days, and spend their time: as
that they may apply their hearts unto wisdom, and to receive the honor and
glory thereof; whereas the Children of this world, as a bird that rejoices in
the bait before the snare turn over and take it: so these rejoice in their
temporary pleasures and mortal joys, until the Judgment of the Lord
overtake them in their rioting as a snare, out of which they shall not nor
cannot escape. Luke 21.28.35.

2. It is appointed from the beginning as the only way to immortality, from
mortality, that righteousness here should suffer in inseculer conflicts, which
conflicts whosoever refuse thereby to save their mortal life, do loose the
immortal life, and that justly because they fear man more then the maker of
man, Mat. 10.28. to 39.

3. As treasure is distributed to the poor by the hands of men: so the
treasure of the spirit of Christ is communicated to the poor, which live in
the world by the distribution of the poor to whom it is committed.

The 3. day of the week.
I Have seen how the Children of this world study Athisme, or to live without
God, in that whereas the Godly study to retoine God in all their knowledge by
doing the work of the word in all obedience to it, as to God. Rom 1.28. Jam.
1.22.25. with John 1.1. These of the world on the other side will not have God
in all their thoughts; but as ungodly do make void all ungodliness and
conscience of God above, and mind only the fear of men, and the love of this
present world: so as they keep their Conscience sanctified toward men, to
shine forth only from themselves to others, though in words they profess to
know God and Christ: yet all their thoughts and practices do manifestly show,
that they do deny to know God, as he is in spirit and truth, to live in all
good Conscience to him, as all do that hold the power of the word, is it is
from the authority of the living God, and not from men, as it requires
obedience of all; without respect of Pope, Prelate, Emperor, King, Prince,
Noble, Ignoble, Jew, Gentile, Bond or Free, Male or Female?

2. The trial of Christians by torments to death, is to discover the man of
God, that is the hidden man of the heart, which in Christ is renewed again in
knowledge, righteousness, and holiness, which as the power and spirit of
Christ, the word does show it solfe more lively in the sufferings of the
mortal body; for whereas the persecutors are deluded to think that there is no
immortal soul in man; but that their souls and bodies shall dye together:
these Christians by their faith in the estate of immortality, ^o put a
wonderful difference, in that there is in them a mind and spirit to overcome
all the pains and torments of their body, and to triumph over all the power
and authority of men and mortality: which does evidently show, that in such men
the divine nature of Christ in immortality is distinct from the humane nature
of mortality, as death is distinct from life; which spirit and divinity of
Christ, as it does sustain them to suffer death, so it shall raise from death
every body that is sanctified by its abiding within it.

3. The sufferings of Christ do also put difference between those which worship
and serve God in spirit and truth, and those which worship him in word or
outward form; for whereas all men in the world have God without them, and the
power of God without them; yea, and the heathen to show the mouth of man's
heart, do make Gods to look upon without thom, and do within themselves
retain the wisdom, power, and authority of their Gods, and that without or
against the true God, and his Law or authority on the other side the
Christians, only have the living God, his word, power, and authority within
them; and wheresoever, or in what estate soever they be, they carry their God
within them, and their heart is to him as the Arc to hold his Law, and their
body to contain his glorious essence so far as every one is capable of it, and
this part or distribution of the spirit of God to every body, does witness and
testify to the Conscience, together, with the invisible and inconceaveable
Majesty of the spirit of God above, that they are of the seed and Children of
the living God in immortality, whereby also they may serve God in truth without
any legal form or visible worship in place or company. The manifestation of
this is first within every one to do according to the diverse effects the reo^:
in so much as if it be so that many do meet together which have the gift of
the same spirit, the more there are, the greater is the presence and power of
God, that even the place does shake as the glory of the one invisible Majesty
of God, inspiring and expiring the several effects of the essence of Gods
spirit

4. I have understanding of the power of God in the word, which says: that if
thou shall confess with thy month the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thy
heart, that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved; for with the
heart it is believed unto righteousness, and with the mouth, it is confessed
unto salvation. Romans 10.9.10. And thus I propose it: There are all manner of
Torments proposed, and threatened to be inflicted upon whomsoever shall confess
the Lord Jesus to be Christ the Judge of all, if none dare to confess with his
mouth what he believes in his heart, for of the torments he goes back from
Christ; but if any see the prize in immortality, namely, Jesus the Authoux and
perfecter of that faith raised from the dead, and believes in his heart, that
if he suffer death with Christ, God will also raise him by Christ to life, this
faith will encourage a Christian to enter the conflict in the love of Christ,
and without fear to confess to his name: If after they enter combat with the
seed of the serpent, are at length vanquished by intolerable pain, and are
not able to endure the agony and conflict of Martyrdom, they loose the glory of
their confession; for they are to hold the confession of their faith constantly
unto death without wavering: But if they look to the end of the conflict, and
set their eyes on the resurrection of Jesus, they by the power of his love,
will hate their mortal life, and think it long before they can come to knock
at the gates of death; whereof he has the keys to receive such into life Rev.
1.18.

5. These sufferings of Christ are of absolute necessity, to enter in life and
immortality; for by means of the Serpent, we have put on the old and sinful
man, which is mortal by reason of the lusts of deceit. And therefore in Jesus
Christ we must put off this body of sin by death, that we may put on the new
and spiritual man, which is immortal, by reason of this love in the truth.

6. The necessity of chastisements in Christ are showed by a Schoolmaster: The
Child naturally hates his book, and would never learn it, except the Master
did by his presence and chastisements keep him to learn.

The Child is the Christian, the book is to learn Christ, Ephesians. 4.20. the rod
are men in authority, the Schoolmaster is the Law, or the heavenly Father,
discovering our miserable and mortal estate by the Law of his presence; And as
a Child: so a Christian, if he should not learn obedience by what he suffers,
would soon grow wild and vain, such as are worldly Christians, that in time
are grown so proud, as to blot the book and tear it, to despise and burn the
rod and to correct, control, contradict and defy the good Master.

The 4. day of the Week.
I Have observed the course of Religion in the world, and I find that another
word and authority does alter the Religion: As in Christian Religion the word
or Law of the Church is Christ manifest in the Scriptures, and Doctrine from
the beginning, The authority thereof is from Heaven manifested in power to hold
the words against the authority of men. The Sea or seat to govern according
to this world and new Covenant, is the Lord Jesus, his 12. Apostles, and all
that are built upon them, having the same word and spirit: their conversation
is love, meekness and humility toward others: so as he which is most poor
and humble in the flesh, is endued with most authority in the spirit of
holiness: their faith is in immortality after this mortality, according to the
Communion in the Resurrection of Jesus Christ the head of the whole Church of
true Christians.

If now there stand up another man that takes upon him the Christian Religion,
and the maine of Jesus Christ, and the apostolic Sea, if he bring in any other
word, he brings in another Christ, he al^ereth the Religion, if another
authority of carnal force to impose his word upon the Consciences of men, he
opposes Jesus in his spiritual authority which works in the heart
invisibly: if he under the name of Christ enforce other Christians by
oppression to do contrary to any word, or any jot or title of the Scriptures
delivered by the foundation of the Christian Church, he is an Antichrist, he
denies the Father by presuming to possess the Conscience of man which he made
with his word, and he denies the Son in denying the word and the power
thereof. The Conversation of such, is also contrary to the suffering
Christians, being putt up with mortal pride, to exalt themselves one over
another, in the flesh and pride of life. Their faith is also contrary in that
it is fixed on mortality; wherein they rejoice and are confident of the durable
estate in the pleasures of sin. And thus the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ
immortality, is in all things perverted under the color of his own name, and
of his own word and Ordinances to mortality, and wickedness greater then
paganism.

2. It is observed that in process of time after the much blood of the
Christians had brought forth the world to be Christian, from that time the
Church of Christ ceased to be visible of the world, and the world blinded it
self under the name of the Church of Christ which cannot so be for Ecclesia,
the Church of Christ consists of the people, that in all times are called out
of the world to the unity of spirit, now the world cannot be called out of it
self; Therefore the true and spiritual Christians are hidden to the world,
under the feighned and carnal Christians, yet the Church is as visible in it
self now as it was, viz. when Christians suffer joyfully under worldly
Christians, for the same cause of the Word, Commandment and Faith of
immortality as they did in the beginning.

3. Men deny the Catholic Faith, when they labor to comprehend it under their
carnal authority: For the Catholic Faith, must needs be granted from the name
of it, to be both universal and spiritual: If then it is such a Faith, as is
to extend to all the ends of the earth, such as withstand it, or hinder the
spreading thereof by their wisdom and power, do deny that the Faith should be
universally obeyed and so Catholic.

Again, s^eing Faith is the only work of the spirit of truth, which
spiritually works in all men alike. If anyby carnal authority do hinder the
spiritual work of Christ, they fight against the spirit and Faith of Christ to
be preached to all nations, for the finishing of the Body and Church of
Christ: And thus some that profess themselves to be of the Catholic Faith of
the Church may deny it yea fight against both the faith, and the universality
thereof.

4. If prayers and tears are the weapons, defense and authority of the true
Church of Christ, as all grant: then fire and sword must needs be the weapons
and offensive authority, whereby the kingdom of Antichrist is discovered in all
places.

5. It is a horrible thing to behold the Creator without Christ the Word; For
he teaches with terror of death for transgression of the Law: but he that
seeing his estate to be thus before God, and goes to Christ and learneth
obedience in the word, and in the death of Jesus Christ, shall in him have
boldness to stand before the throne of his gracein immortality.

6. A truth may be preached and yet made utterly void by worldly practice, as
the popish Christians holds: That whatsoever the law says, the Gospel
confirms; and whatsoever the Gospel says, the same is agreeable to the law:
That as Moses was the giver of the old law: Christ is the giver of new and a
more perfect law: They devide the whole law into three parts. 1. the law of
Nature, the law of Moses, and the law of Christ, and that the Gospel is
revealed for no other cause, but to show to the world more perfect counsels
and precepts then were in the old law, and a more perfect justification by
doing them. page 27.2. out of Fox Ch^on.

That inward concupiscence and vicious affections not breaking out in us with
consent of will, are no mortal nor dammable sin, but only fomes peccati; And
that this concupiscentia in us, is no depravation of the higher, but of the
lower parts of man, etc. page 26. b. These things may have a good construction,
simply from the word and spiritual authority, but as it is of them, the truth
there of is not only made void, but used for a pretense of mischeivous madness;
For it is certain that Christ came to confirm all things written in the Law and
the Prophets, and by his Priesthood to bring in that perfection, which was
before wanting in the law. Heb. 7.11.18, 19. And it is true that in the
Christians after baptism, the flesh lusts against the spirit, as Gal. 5. 17.
and it is autophoron, indifferent, and as natural as to eat: which
concupiscence remain for an occasion of watchchfulnesse in the spirit to subdue
it, and to check it, that it never be approved of in heart as to prevail so
far, as to beg a desire in the heart, contrary to the law which says, thou
shall not desire thy neighbors wife, or his goods etc. but the spirit keeps
the flesh under in such sort as that it cannot prevail to do sin or consent to
sin. Joh. 3.9. Gal. 5.24.

7. A true doctrine may be made void and confused in respect of time with
aforegoing doctrine, as the Protestant Christians hold. That as all men coming
by Adam are condemned originally before they grow up to commit any sin against
the law: So all men be saved originally, being regenerate by faith in Christ,
before they do any good work of charity or any other gooddeed. Fox p. 26. b.
This may have a favorable construction if time be put between the mortal
generation and the immortal; so as the natural man come to know his
condemnation in mortality, and prepare his heart to receive the immortal seed,
whereby to be regenerate from above, which from that time begets and
enlightneth the mind unto a lively hope, through the resurrection of Jesus
Christ from the dead.a. 1 Pet. 1.3. 23. with Joh. 3.

But whereas these two contrary generations are confounded in one name, in the
baptism of Infan^s the doctrine of regeneration is quite extinct and abolished
under a form of words; Fox. 24. b. thus, as (say they) sin and death came
originally by the disobedience of one to all men of his generation by nature:
So righteousness and life come originally by the obedience of one, to all men
regenerated of him by faith and baptism, Romans 5. Here is a deceit of salvation
from a child. For sin and righteousness have their contrary operation, as
Romans 5.21. with 6.13.20. And so have death and life: Now if sin and death come
originally from the generation of man, and the child is made capable only of
this first original estate in sin and death, then how can an Infant that has
but one original estate in the condemnation to sin and death, have also
another estate in the regeneration to immortality, before he has so much
understanding to know his natural estate, in sin, death, and mortality, or
before he be able to sin, or to do any evil in act: This is confusion of two
Doctrines in one, whereby sin is put for righteousness, death for life,
Generation for regeneration, and condemnation for salvation, and by this
means, men have only a natural estate in effect, and a spiritual estate in
conceit of vanity; whereas by Christ we discern the time of a man's life in his
original sin and the fruits thereof, and the the time of a man's life, after
Baptism into the death of Christ, of his righteousness and. good fruits, which
arise from the regeneration.

8. A Doctrine may be well distinguished in word, and yet confounded in the
work of the power of the spirit made void and deficient in any work; thus
distinction is made between the mortal part, and the immortal part in man: A
regenerate man consists of two men, (as a man may say) of the old man, and of
the new man, the nature of the old man is clean contrary to the nature of the
new man: as being earthly and corrupt with Satan's seed; the nature of the new
man being heavenly and blessed with the celestial seed of God, in what he is
an old man, he is a sinner, and an enemy to God, in what he is regenerate, he
is righteous and holy, and a friend to God the seed of God preserving him from
sin; so that he cannot sin as the seed of the Serpent: One man therefore which
is regenerate, well may be called always just, and always sinful, just in
respect of Gods seed, and his regeneration; sinful in respect of Satan's
seed, and his first generation; betwixt these two men therefore there is
continual conflict and war most deadly; Thus says Mr. Bradford in Fox P.
1655. This Doctrine it may be truly applied, but with it is mixed contrarities,
which confound this, and make it of no force; for there he brings in the
comparison of Goliath, and such David the old man is perfect in his birth, an
one as was Goliath: the new man is like a little Child, such an one as was like
little David; for his birth is not perfect, until the day of his general
resurrection. The old man therefore is more strong, lusty, and stirring then
the new man, because the birth of the new man is but now begun, and the old man
is perfectly borne; The flesh and old man by reason of his birth that is
perfect, does often for a time prevail against the new man (being but a child
in comparison) and that in such sort, as not only others; but even the Children
of God themselves, think that they be nothing else but old, and that the spirit
of God is lost and gone away, as the Sun hidden by the Clouds, yet after
appears again, etc. such are the deceits of Antichristian Doctrines, that
none should discern the Children of the Devil, that count sin, from the
children of God that cannot count sin, and therefore we have an express word
to try and discern them by their spirits, 1 Ioh. 3. and 4.1. etc. Diverse
reasons may be showed from this confusion, of a true Doctrine to confirm the
truth, and confute the falsehood by it self.

As first, If there be deadly enmity between the old and the new, a contrary
and dis-joyned nature in either, if once the old man get the victory again by
any means over the new, it is to be feared, that he will make himself sure
enough in the condemnation, as that he shall never recover himself to live by
repentance, as Heb. 6. 4. to 8.

2. If the flesh should prevail against the spirit, then Goliath does overcome
David, and the spiritual and new man in Christ is slain, and who can save it:
And many absurdities will arise.

3. But seeing that which is borne from above after the spirit of Christ, is of
the spirit, and that which is after the flesh is flesh, distinctly as are flesh
and spirit; mortal and immortal distinct, the least part of that immortal
spirit must needs be stronger then the strongest felsh of the body, for it is
stronger then all the fleshly power of the world, 1 Ioh. 4.2.4.

4. Again, the new man after it has a being in a man, is increased daily in
the regeneration, but the old man dies daily in his generation, therefore that
regenerate an which grows daily gets the victory to day, is better able to
overcome to morrow. 2 Cor. 4.16.

5. Thus the comparison is made true, for David how little or young soever, he
was well able by the power of his God to kill for ever the man of flesh that
had none but mortal defense, and that before he came so near as to encounter
with him, for he fought for the hope of Israel,.

6. Again, the comparison of the Sun shadowed with black clouds, in not to
this purpose, for we grant thus much, that they have not always the
Sunshine, but have sometimes heaviness and temptations in the flesh, which
being overcome, the comforts return from above: but expect man can prove that
the light of the Sun is overcome in its course of the contrary darkness,
otherwise then in the order of the day and night, it confirms that the Son
of righteousness never cease to shine more or less, and all times
sufficiently testify to the conscience that the Sun gives light through the
clouds, to keep darkness from the understanding, till the day be ended by death.

7. And where it is said in conclusion that the birth is not perfected until
the general day of his resurrection: this absolutely denies the former, and
the nature of regeneration, namely, that he is regenerate and a new man, for
one cannot be a man till he be borne. Therefore the new men must needs have a
perfect birth, before it can be a new man, and so before the resurrection. For
after Beptisme, this new man which is now created in body, is in his account
risen from the dead, and living together with Christ, Cel. 2.11.12. Romans 6.3.
to 11.

All which shows the power and truth of the regeneration, that where divine
nature does live as does a renewed mind, the flesh of that man must needs be
kept, that Satan shall not touch that body to overcome the divine nature, so as
to yield the members of that man to the service of sin unto death, 1 Ioh.
5.18. Romans 13.16.23.

By this Doctrine we may distinguish in word and deed, and know every one by
their fruits, for the word and spirit of Christ is the same in operation in all
that are adopted. Men are! not the children of God to day, and of the Devil to
morrow, as they might be under the worldly justifications, but all they which
are perfect in heart, whom the Lord loves, are obedient to death, and he loves
to the end.

9. It is manifest that the wedding garment is to love the marriage more then
all goods in the world, or then ones own life. If any be found to presume to
come to the weding without this perfect love, and he be convinced to want it,
he is condemned of his conscience as guilty, and God does condemn him, and
execute him by himself, as he did Ananias and Saphira for they not having this
perfect love which was required, but a heart to love his money in part, was
thus executed, for he was silent to death, Mat. 22.1. to 12. Acts 5.1, etc.

10. Among the Christians that are joined to the Lord Jesus Christ to show his
death, there is in love a twofold communion, the one less and farther off, the
other great and near to the Lord. The first is communion of goods, Act. 4.32.
The next is communion of sufferings, as in one body and Church of Christ, 1
Pet. 4.8.13 -- 16. with I Ioh. 3.16.

Now in this brotherhood, if any have the good of this world, and do not
communicate in love to him that has need, it is impossible that he can have
that love of God to lay down his life, blood, for his brother, that will not
lay down daily as his common food to sustain him, 1 Ioh. 3.16, 17. Therefore
it is the judgment of the holy spirit, that whosoever is false in the common
communion of goods, cannot hold the love in the holy communion of the body and
blood of the Lord, and therefore the holy Spirit does give us to understand,
that it is better for the man that does lie and dissemble in the common
communion, and more for the glory of God, that such an one should dye by the
hand of the invisible God in the first offense, then that he should live longer
to blaspheme and deny the love of the Lord that made him, when he should com
tobe tried for his love, how he does hold the communion in the death of Christ,
as Acts 5.1. to 13.

11. This common communion is natural, and is as food given to one part, as to
the mouth, or distributeth the good and efficacy thereof to all and every of
the members of the same body: yet it must be left free to the will of the
possessor, and not in bondage under the sear of carnal compulsion; for this
is coutrary to the nature and hody spirit of love: but if a man see the
necessities of the body, and sell any thing, the money remains free at his
voluntary disposing in love, ( Act. 5.4) Or if a brother have much good in the
world, he gives as the sees good in love of the immortal good and life, James
2.8 -- 12. 1 Ioh. 3.17. with 23. This Commandment to love one another, the
Lord gave especially to his Disciples, and every one is to try his own heart
how this love remains in him, and the judgment of this Law is left to his
spirit, so as every Christian that suffers want is to possess his soul in
patience, of poverty, sickne^, or imprisonment, toward his brother, as toward
his neighbor in this respect, and not so much as to desire any of his goods,
but leave his heart to the motion of the God of all mercy and love.
Notwithstanding on his part it shall be required, that detaineth that which is
fit. As if by the example of others own purpose and promise to sell and to
bring the price of the sale to the distribution of the whole body, and he lie
against the holy spirit wherein he promised and detained a part, and yet say
that there is all, this is a sinand a great breach of the love and truth of
Christ, as Act. 4.32.36, 37. with 5.2, 3.8, 9. or if one have much good, and
yet detain it from one Member that wants, this his hardness does discover to
all the brethren that such a churl^ has a dead faith, and no love of God; and
to be such an one as is unprofitable to the body of Christ in any kind, and
therefore such are known by the word of Christ, to deny Jesus and the Communion
of his Body, and so being divided from the natural and true love of the Body
that suffers; they will be scone of the Brethren to fall away of themselves,
as leaves from a tree.

The 5. day of the Week.
I Consider the estate of the Church of Christ in unity, universality, and free
consent, that Jesus Christ is the head thereof, and is gone before, as a
husband goes before his wife by sufferings; the place whither he goes is the
Kingdom of Heaven which cannot be entered into, but by the death of the flesh,
1 Cor. 15.49, 50. the door whereby we follow him is death and hell, whereof
Christ has the keys, Rev. 1.18. the power and authority of these keys is
given to every one by mane through Jesus Christ, who in love to his Father,
having power to lay down his life, had in himself also power or authority to
take it again, and this Commandment he received of his Father, John 10.17, 18.
Therefore having in himself the keys of the Kingdom of heaven: as being
Christ the Son of the living God, he gave them to Peter, to whom the Father
of Christ gave to know and acknowledge Jesus to be his son, as Mat. 16.16 to
19. The authority of these keys is proper to every one that has the testimony
of Jesus; by virtue whereof he opens a door through death, to follow his
Mister Jesus into the Kingdom of his Father: this door every one that is
constant to death, does open in the eyes of all that see his constancy,
according as Stephen the first Martyr does declare, even before his death, that
others might offer violence to enter into it, Act 7.55 56. And seeing these
keys are so effectual toward God in the love of Jesus Christ. Therefore
Peter by name, and so whoseever is sealed by the same holy spirit of promise,
has by virtue of these keys in Christ, authority also toward men before
their sufferings, that whatsoever he or any one that is apt and able to hold
the confession of Jesus to be Christ, by authority of the keys, has also
authority to bind or loose according to the Word: so as whatsoever such do bind
or loose, must needs be confirmed in heaven, where Christ that gives the
keys, is with his Father, Mat. 16.16.10 19. John 20.21, 22, 23.

1. Men now boast against the Jew, that the Law is not of faith, and that faith
is now come, and therefore (say they) we are no more under the Law, but under
grace, as Gal. 3.12.23.25. with Romans 6.13. This boasting against the Jew, is
not carnal, but spiritual against God, who gave them the Law, and this
turns to the shame of all such as so boast, and yet do worse things then they
did: as appears by the word, faith, for the Law, while it is holden under the
authority of men, in the glory of a present and mortal state, is of sight
which fears men, and not of faith, which only fears and apprehends the
authority and power of the invisible God by the spirit of Christ: so as all
that are holden under the fear and authority of men, are of faith no more then
the Jews, yea it may be under the Law more and worse then they, as being
without the knowledge of the true God, and so of necessity, without any faith
of God; for whosoever has faith, believes that God is present with him, and
sees his thoughts and actions, and therefore will not dishonor his presence
in which he lives, by counting sin against him, though no man sees; whereas
the infidel that walks by sight under the law, has only respect to the
fear, authority, and judgment of Magistrates, and therefore when they can sin
in secret, or without fear of bodily pain, or worldly shame, they do sin
without and fear of God or Conscience of the judgment to come; whereby
appears that all that live by the Law of faith, do fear to offend without
the fear of men, and that are of faith, they will in meekness and fear show
to infidells what the life of faith is, both by word and example, that they
also may know God.

The 6. day of the week.
1. IT is a misery to have ones body at liberty by the procurement of men, and
ones mind and conscience in perpetual prison, by ones own Act.

2. There is a twofold justification arising from the Law: the one of works
under the Leviticall Priesthood, the other of faith under the Priesthood of
Christ Jesus. The former justification is only if sight, and by report of men,
and it was effectual to justify the slosh before the King, and the authority
of the Kingdom, according to this justification, was Zachary and his wife,
righteous before God in this life, Luke 1.5.6. but this Law made none perfect
and pure in Conscience before the spirit of God, Heb. 9 8. to 14.

Therefore of necessity, upon the defect of this first justification, arises a
perfect justification which is of the Kingdom of God, Mat. 6.33. This
justification is of faith, in spirit and truth, according to the spiritual
Priesthood of Jesus Christ, which is effectual, to justify the heart and
spirit of a man: so that in conscience of the work of the spirit (whereby the
justifications of the Law, is fulfilled in us, Romans 8.3.4.) we have boldness
to come to the Throane of the grace of God in the Heavens, Heb. 4.14, 15 16.
which freedom no unclean person, or secret sinner can have; but only such as
being condemned of men, have good Consciences toward God: so as they can
willingly suffer in the mortal blood, that so they may come to be present with
the Lord, for the justification of their spirit, 1 Timothy 3.15.16.

3. In the power of Christianity there is a twofold knowledge at the gate, the
one of Christ, Rev. 3.20. the other of the Christian, Mat. 7.8. The gate
stands as an interstitium, or interposition between immortality and
mortality, and it is called the gates of Hell, and of death, which are the many
tribulations, through which the Christians must enter into the Kingdom of God,
Act. 14.22. with Rev. 7.14. and they are the diverse torments, Heb. 11.25,
36.37. and whatsoever authority the Divill and his seed in mortal bodis have
from the power of death to sever the mind and spirit of the Christian from
Christ, Heb. 2.14. with Mat. 16.18. through this gate Jesus Christ the head is
entered into the Kingdom of Heaven, and from death is living in immortality,
Luke 24.26. Rev. 1.18 Christ therefore being in the state or immortal glory,
knocks on the farther side of the gate, calls to his spouse that are in
suffering estate of mortal shame to come away to him from mortality, to
immortality.

On this hither side of the gate, the spouse or Church, which are every
suffering Christian in the truth, do knock when they sigh in their
^^ibulations, being oppressed and grieved; desiring that mortality may be
swallowed up of life, and wishing hart^ly, that they might be out of mortal
bodies, and be present with the Lord, which is best of all, 2 Cor. 42.4.6.8.
Phil. 1.23. And thus we may understand how earnestly Christ the husband knocks
at one side, calling the Christian his wife, and we may consider how lovingly
the wife also knocks at the other side, beseeching him to draw her, and indue
her with power to put off the mortal clothing, whereby she is yet holden in
this world from him, that so she may overcome all the power, principalities,
and authorities which do keep them from the full enjoying of love, not that
Christ can come to his spouse again into a mortal and cursed estate; but that
she having the earnest of his spirit, may follow him through the straightest
gates to his glory, in an immortal and blessed estate: And as many as are thus
gathered unto Christ from mortality, are the Church of the first borne, written
in the Heavens, and their spirits are perfected; all which at the time of the
judgment of Christ, shall receive that Kingdom of God, which cannot be moved,
Heb. 12.22. to 28.

4. It grieves me to hear such as think themselves to be spiritual and
Christians, to boast in a carnal and mortal Bondage, after the worldly
elements of the heathen; whereby they are enforced to eat swines flesh, as a
thing necessary to eternal salvation, and to justify themselves in defiance
of God, his holy spirit and word; whereas in Christ the lawful meats which
were sanctified to an holy Use for sacrifice, profited not to purge the
Conscience from sin, nor to justify before the holy God of Israel, Heb. 9.8.
etc. These therefore are much deceived, and blinded in mortality, and reprobate
to every good work, as Tit. 1.15.16. until they are by the light of the word,
enlightened to immortality, and by the grace of God the savior which has
appeared unto all men, are by chastisement taught what to deny, how to live,
and for what to wait, Tit. 2.7. to 14.

5. From the fulfilling of this word, I will have mercy and not sacrifice, Mat.
12.7. Hos. 6.7. is showed what the Lord rejects, and what he now requires in
Christ. If any man bring to God an offering, or be envious against a brother,
or neighbor, for Gods sake, as he thinks; first he rejects the offering,
for that it is the gain of oppression; as if God should say, I gave thee life,
and commanded thee not to defraud or oppress; therefore I will not ^obery for
an offering, if the goods be lawfully gotten; yet God rejects him, saying, I
commanded thee to be merciful, and to love thy neighbor, and the stranger as
thy self, which thou have not done: this Offering, and more then this, is by
my will due to the poor, and so none of thine: therefore I will not have
neglect of the poor, or transgression for an Offering. If the Offering be
lawful, and free from sin, against the poor; yet the Lord says, I will not
now have thee to offer thy goods in sacrifice, but that with them, thou extend
mercy to all that are in want of thy mercy. If a man do thus serve God in his
goods, yet offend in his person, in being hard hearted to his brethren, that
confess and desire forgivness of the trespass against him, if he yet bind
and will not loose the sin, the Lord will say unto him, except you forgive men
their offenses, Mar: 11.25.26. neither will the heavenly Father hear thee, to
forgive thy sins, Mat. 6.14.15. All which shows that it is in vain, or a
procuring of judgment for any man to go to the Lord, by faith in Christ, and
his heart not perfect in mercy and love to his brother, that he sees with his
eyes, 1 John 4.20.

The first day of the Week.
1. THe ear receives the word, as the mouth eats meat: The bread which the
mouth eats is no bread, nor the life which bread sustaineth is no life, in
respect of the bread of an immortal life: therefore the holy spirit calls
mortal man to eat of the true food for to live, which is done by hearing to
obey the word; for thus their soul shall live, etc. Isai. 55.(...).etc.

And thus we eat the bread of God which is come down from Heaven, and thus we
are communicants in the body and blood of Christ for life, when we hear, and do
the word of God, and be made obedient in the fellowship of his sufferings, John
6.27.33.35. etc. this hearing is the same with believing, as John 6.47. etc.
and this is the immortal eating; for not every one that hears and
understands the word, eats or believes to life; but he only that so
tastes the word with his ear, as that he obey and delight in it from his
heart to do the work thereof, in spirit and truth, and knowledge.

2. From the presence of Gods being with us, we have faith as Heb. 11.6. with
Reu. 1.8. For as we believe his presence to be such in his visitation, that in
him we live, move, and have our beings so likewise in his inspiration; whereby
we are instructed to avoid all ways of error and heresy, and are guided
into all truth: so also by his being with us in spiritual presence, we are
kept by his power from all evil of this world, and are likewise rewarded with
the blessing of his presence, because we wait on him, to seek him diligently,
and to serve him with all our heart in love.

This his presence requires faith in his guidance, protection, and
preservation, as in the mind, so in the body, that no evil shall come to us
from him; whether of the Plague, or otherwise, as Psalm. 91. Those which sin
against his presence, and have not the love of God in them, do lie open to the
hand of his destroying Angel; but whosoever have good Consciences toward his
presence with us, and love his name, if we should now fear the fears of worldly
men, we dishonor the presence of the living God, we bewray our infidelity in
his presence, which is all sufficient to keep us, that the evil one shall not
hurt us, or if we are faithful in his presence, that has all power in his
hands: so as a sparrow cannot fall without him, nor a hair of our heads
perish; but h^^^ his al-seeing spirit, if we are thus perfect in hi^ love,
without fear or doubting of our safety when destructions, and distracting
distresses a^^ in the world, though notwithstanding in this life all things
come alike to us: so as we are taken i^ the Plague, etc. yet we shall see that
the hand (...) our Master is present in it for our good, either to try our
faith in his presence, and to make us mo^^ perfect in love, or else out of his
fellow-feeling of our reproach and misery, which we endure in this life, he is
pleased to give us rest from our sufferings, and to bring us to himself, from
the bondage of mortality; for the blessings and promises of peace or long life,
is of faith, and cannot be fully enjoyed by sight in this world; while the
woman (which is the Church of Christ's presence or any member thereof, wherein
his presence i^ manifested) is persecuted, and afflicted in this present evil
world.

3. Having observed the natural evil of man's heart, infected by the evil and
common spirit o^ the Prince, of the authority of the air, by the operation
whereof, they are naturally inclined either fulness of eating and drinking, and
in the abundance, or in the want of houses, Sheep, Cattle, gold, silver, or
other pleasures of life, to be lifted up in forgetfulness of God that made us,
or to be cast down with worldly sorrow, and in these estates to leave the Word,
Law, and presence of God to seek after our own hearts till destruction do
utterly break the evil heart: I have seen ^he only means, whereby a man may
possess his ^wn heart, to rule it, and make it subject to his spirit; namely,
by hearing, obeying and keeping his evil heart of the mortal soul subject to
the ^^bukes and chastisements which our Creator ^oth inflict: that enduring
the pain in our flesh, ^ur spirit may thereby know the fear of his presence
in punishment, and thereby learn wis^om in the obedience of his Son Jesus
Christ, whom he has proposed to us, and made a light ^o immortality, the
harder the strokes, or the ^reater our afflictions are, the more earnestly we
^ay cry, and the nearer we may draw unto his Majesty. Prove. 15.30. to 33. Heb.
12. So as when among all estates of men in the world, whether ^ewes or
Gentiles, we see troubles and amazements, fearing death, and seeking to save
their ^^fe, we shall find that only with the suffering Christians, is peace
without fear of death; be^^use these according to the Law, and example of
christ, do possess their souls and mortal life in ^^tience, under the death
that man is able to kill ^^em with. And therefore when the Kingdom of God
comes to the terror of the worldlings, ^^ese shall lift up their heads,
because now their ^edemption is come, Luke 21.19. etc. to 36.

4. The Lord Jesus foreseeing how hardly men should be drawn to acknowledge him
to be the Christ, and being acknowledged how easily men would be seduced by
false prophets, and false Christ's to deny him: Therefore, first he proves
himself to be the Christ that Moses did write of, who by miracles did confirm
the truth of every jot and tittle of the Law, and the Prophets, as Mat.
4.23.24. with 5.17.18, 19. etc. whereas false Prophets under color of
miracles, did teach transgression of the Law, as Deuteronomy. 13.1. etc. and 17 2.
etc. with 18.13. etc. And accordingly out Lord reaches us to try the
Preachers, which after him should come in his name, as under the name of Jesus
Christ, and Prophets of God, thus; if they call Lord, Lord, and in his name
prophecy, and in his name cast out Devils, and in his name do many miracles:
yet if under pretense hereof, any of them do work lawlesnesse, that is, do
transgress, and also teach men to transgress any the least of all the
Commandments in the Law of God: these and all such are rejected and accursed
of the Lord, and judge of the world, as false, and deceivers of men, Mat. 5.19.
with 7.15.21. 22.23. whereby we see how fearful a thing it is, to forsake the
Law and the Prophets, for in that estate we are without all means to know
Jesus to be Christ in truth, without any knowledge to try deceivers; but remain
as men deceived, and deceiving others, and can by no means come to the true
knowledge of Christ, till we believe the writings of Moses and the Prophets,
John 5.39. 46.47. which who so believe, and do the will of our Father which is
in Heaven, and then call Jesus Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
Mat. 7.21.

5. A man may prophecy of a truth, and yet apply spiritual things to a
carnal sense. As Caraphas fearing the Romans should come and destroy them all:
for Jesus the King of the Jews said, it is expedient rather that one dye, them
all; whereas God intended the spiritual and eternal salvation by his death,
John 11.47. to 53. Fear enforced the Jews to do what they did.

6. From the opposition of the authority of men, against the authority of God
in Christ, we may see the bondage under men by the Law, and the liberty of the
Law in Christ, in things indifferent: as it is lawful to the Nations to remain
in the presence, or to be circumcised upon occasion, in liberty from bondage o
the worldly authority, Act. 16 3. with Gal. 2 3, 4 Romans 2.25.26. It is lawful
to marry, to not to marry, 1 Cor. 7. 28.36.38. with 9 5. It is lawful to eat
lawful meat, or it is lawful to abstain and to fast, or such like. But this
liberty man be occasion of evil in respect of the different authorities: It a
man fear the authority of men, and will be circumcised in bondage to their
Priesthood, he is fallen from the liberty of Christ, and has denied the faith
in his Priesthood, Act. 15.1. etc. Gal. 5. 1. etc.

If on the other side, a man fear other worldly authority, and make
circumcision in the liberty of the Gospel to be sin; such do deny the liberty
wherein Christ has made them free, to use it for their advantage in the
Gospel, Act. 16.1.3.

So as in this thing of Circumcision, if one be compelled to be circumcised, he
is brought in bondage to men, and bound to observe the worldly elements, Gal.
5.3. If a man stand fast in the liberty, neither to be Circumcised, nor to
remain uncircumcised, in subjection to men, he holds the truth of the Gospel,
Gal. 2.3.5. with 5. 1 Act. 16.3. otherwise, if the word be not holden in
freedom of spirit, it will be an occasion of evil under the bondage of men:
And on the other side, it may be occasion of evil, under the authority of
Christ, when it is not hold on as a thing indifferent; namely, when men
justify themselves, or think themselves the better for doing, or not doing it;
for Circumcision is nothing, nor perpuce is nothing, but the keeping of the
Commandments of God, 1 Cor. 7.18.19.

So if Marriage be exhibited under the worldly authorities, it may bring the
parties into bondage; likewise, if lawful meats be forbidden by the Doctrines
of Devils, we are to maintain our liberty in Christ, in assurance, that though
we suffer death, yet he will raise us again according to his priesthood, 1 Timothy
4.1. etc. 10. Always with this respect in the Law of liberty, that there be no
justification of condemnation on one side or other, in lawful meats; but to
judge indifferently, that he which cates is not the better by it, neither is he
the worse which cates not. 1 Cor. 8.8. wherefore in all such indifferent things
every man is to have respect to his own Conscience before God, and to the
present estate and Nation, wherein he is either Jew or Gentile, that he be
without offense, but to use his liberty, not for any occasion to his own flesh,
but to the profit of others, in such sort, that whether any eat or drink, or
what other indifferent thing soever they do, they may do all to the glory of
God. 1 Cor. 10.23, 32.33, 31.

The second day of the Week.
I Have observed in Christ how the old man of the flesh does naturally bring
forth the new man, begotten in the spirit of truth, thus; After that the heart
has conceived the immortal seed which is from above: so as for joy hereof, it
estrange (...) self from mortal vanities, by and by the Lords of this mortal
flesh, will show their authority, and they will labor with all their force and
wits to destroy this good conception, that they may again rule the heart: in
this estate the mortal body of a man is as a woman in travel, which cries
out, not to be eased of the pain, but to bring forth the fruit of her womb,
and this in Christ is the travel of a Christian, he has conceived the mind of
Christ, and for this cause is persecuted, and suffers all things, until from
out of the greatest torments of the heart, he is able to deliver or bring forth
the spirit of that immortal seed unto Christ, whose it is, Esa. 26.13 17. 18.
Mat. 27.46. with Luke 23.46. Heb 5 7.9.2 Cor. 4.6. amp;c. with 5.2.4 5.

2. Further is noted in what respect the Church of Christ, a woman, and the
wife of Christ, because from the beginning she has conceived in her heart the
seed of God, which is the Word Christ, and thus she has traveled with shadow
of Christ till her time was fulfilled, that she should bring forth the spirit
and truth of Christ, which was when Jesus Christ, being made one flesh with the
Church, she by his divine nature gave up the word, law, and truth of God
perfected into her husbands hands; so as the carnal Church is now delivered
from that law and labor which was committed and required of her, for she has
now in Jesus Christ brought forth the spirit of holiness to God, by the death
of the flesh, and in the resurrection of of the spiritual man, to the
immortal life of God, her spiritual husband; Jesus Christ then, which the
Church of God having suffered the pain of travel to death, and being risen
from the dead, and exalted to glory as Lord and Christ, is made the head of his
Church in a more near and familiar manner, even as a man that going to take a
wife, manifests the secrets of his hearty love unto her in way of espousals,
who after his departure, returns again to her in way of marriage, and gives
his own spirit, as Job. 14.16. 17.18 -- 26. Acts 2.33 -- 36. This immortal
seed therefore being freely communicated in the love of Christ, is gladly
received of the Church, and of none other, which travelleth in subjection to
Christ her husband, to perfect that birth of the spiritual and immortal man, of
whom she has conceived immortal and spiritual seed, and thus is she become
bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, in love; which union in Christ, is
confirmed to every soul of man, that in their several age or nation, are so
beloved of God in Christ, that as an husband he should give of his immortal
seed; so as every one that conceives it in a good heart does know both the
union, and her husband: unto whom every such heart does increase that seed of
the new and immortal man daily, and in grows by the obedience and death of
the lifeblood, unto a lively hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ
from the dead. For such is the love of every good heart that she in her proper
body will tenderly respect, to preserve that word of the living God, which she
has willingly conceived in her mind and heart, so as no cares shall choke,
nor reproaches dismay, but that her body shall bring forth to her husband that
Word which abides for ever, 1 Pet. 1.3.4 -- 22, etc.

3. This word of God, in what body soever it come in the love and communion of
sufferings in Christ Jesus, is the salvation of the same body to that immortal
life in glory with Christ, for whereas the persecutors that would adulterate us
from our husband, their dead shall not live, neither shall their ghosts be
raised again, notwithstanding our bodies which have dyed to bring forth the
spirit of truth, shall be raised to immortal truth of our head Christ, ( Esa.
26. 13 -- 18.19.) when being sanctified in the truth, with him we shall be
perfected in one, with our Father, and our Lord Christ Jesus, John 17.19 -- 21.
etc.

4. It is a wonderful wisdom to consider in Jesus Christ, how the Lord by his
mercy does call the world to judgment: for in that he has sent his Son into
the world, with mercy toward all that show mercy, and in it he executes the
justice of his Law on none by the Law. It is most manifest, that all that out
of their own heart do judge and condemn, showing no mercy to sinners, do by
their own justice in the Law, procure the Lord to enter into judgment with
them, for their judgment without mercy. And thus we may see how the Law was
given by Moses, and sin was required by pesent justice: but grace and truth
is by Jesus Christ, he requires sinners to sin no more, and they shall not
be judged for their sins past, and every one to show mercy, and they shall
find mercy, Math. 18.21. to 35. if not, but that men will despise the grace of
God toward them, by judging and condemning their fellow servants, they are
inexcusable before God, their own measure shall be measured to them, they have
denied to show mercy, therefore mercy shall be denied to them, Romans 2.1. to 5.
Luke 6.37.38.

5. The cause of falling from the love of God is the evil of the heart,
whereby men dissembled with men; for when men retain the nature of swine, and
yet will be washed, without doubt they will return to their filthynesse. Or
dogs by nature will turn to their kind, as 2 Pet. 2.22. Or evil trees
cannot but bring forth evil fruit, whatsoever they show at first: Whereas
good, simple, and perfect of heart, that has received the good seed, will
bring forth fruit to perfection. When the tree is of a good nature, it cannot
but bring forth good fruit, Math. 7.16, etc. The branch that is in Christ is
fruitful to the Father, and it is more fruitful, Ioh. 15.1. etc. The new man
that is once borne again from above is renewed daily, 2 Cor. 5.17. with 4.16.

Men that are imperfect, and wavering minded will look forward, and then
backward, Luke 9.62. Iam. 1.8. Whereas perfect men, forgetting the things
behind, do stretch forward to the things before, they press hard to the
mark, etc. Phil. 3.13.14.15. All that are perfect in love and mercy toward
the Brethren, the grace of God, and his love, and mercy remains firm to them.

6. There is great difference between the repentance under the Law of works,
and the repentance under the Law of faith. They after the Leviticall Law were
borne holy according to the carnal Commandment, and were instructed in the
Law of God, from the breasts, and whenever they sinned, they repented, and
were justified by the works of the Law; and because their conscience was never
freed from the weakness of the flesh, they fell commonly into sin, and
repented; and this was the course of the obedient men, such as of David, till
they came to know the free justification of God by faith: whereas the true
repentance after the Priesthood of Christ does cleanse the Conscience from the
guilt of all sins past, and does perfect them from that mind of the flesh,
so as sin does no looger reign in their mortal body; but in this
justification by faith in Christ, they present themselves to God, as living
from the dead, and their members weapons of righteousness to God, Hebr. 9.9 --
14. -- Romans 6.2. -- 12.13.

The third day of the Week.
THe mysteries of the Kingdom are showed by the Parable of a Sower, Luke 8.10.
etc. with 5.

The Sower is the Son of man, and the seed is the word of God, inlightening
to immortality. The Deceiver is the Devil, both as he is a spirit, and as he
has the authority in men of this world, which as vessel, or a bed, do cover
and darken the light of immortality in this world under mortality. The men that
hear the word, are of four sorts. The first sort of hearers, are only
hearers, and no doers; these deceive themselves in the vain knowledge of the
word: for the Devil and the World take away the word from the heart, that they
cannot believe the truth of it, in such sort, as to reform their lives, and to
fulfill it in their obedience, that so they should be saved: but as an hard way
has seed, and shows it, as to allure the fowls of the air. So a^ hard^^d
heart and worldly mind, as Matthew. 13.15. May have knowledge by the word, but
they only boast of it in a common profession after the mortal life, whereby
they may be made the better instruments for the Devil to possess such hearts
commonly to serve every lust as turn and to be subject, even as for a man to
walk in a hard way at his pleasure: these are such as know, but believe not.

2 The second sort are such, as receive the seed in stony ground. These do
both know and believe the Word so, as with joy to do it very hastily; for as
the stony ground does make the seed to spring forth soonest, so these take the
Word quickly, with joy, as Mat. 17.13.5.20. Matt. 4.5. but have no strength of
heart to hold the word constantly in the faith, hope, and love of immortality,
but when the mortal Authorities come upon them, and afflict them with the Sun
beams of their torments, and chastise them as a Father, for that they would
forsake them, and their mortal glory, to embrace a vain base word (as it
seems to them) without any wordly society, honor, or pleasure. And thus
wordly men being offended at the Word, do rage against these sort of people
that with such joy received it; whose hearts also being not prepared for these
trials, do faint under the burden, and all their knowledge, faith, and
obedience to the word is by force of the hard persecution, disdained to be any
longer believed in their heart, and as stony ground it is able to bring the
fruit of the word to no further perfection; therefore they now submit their
heart to the power that oppresses from without them, by which all their former
light is concluded in darkness.

3. The third sort are such as receive the seed amongst thorns: These also are
such as know and believe for a time; but they nourish an enemy to the word
within them, namely, worldly cares, desire of riches, and the pleasures of this
mortal life which may seem to sustain, and to give honor and credit to the
word; but in the end it will quite chocke the faith, hope, and love to
immortality, as that such will fall away of themselves, wholly to embrace this
present world: the reason is, because these were never perfect in love, nor
sound in the faith; but having a heart and a heart, the deceits of sin which
are in the world through lust growing naturally in the heart will soon exalt
such men in pride of knowledge to fall into the condemnation of the Devil
secretly: For thus much does the parable import to them which know it, that the
seed which fulleth among thorns, does by help of the thorns in some part of
the seed, spring up to be taller and longer, yet at length the thorns take
away the natural being of the corn, so as it perishes as a man whose breath
is stopped: if the thorns, riches, and pleasures of life be cut down and fall
from him, he is seen to fall of himself as a tree, that being decayed at the
root, is overswayed of the top, and the fall thereof is greater, by how much
the weight of the branches is heavier: This is the estate of those which
receive the word of Christ with the glory of the world, and pleasures of s^^s,
the greater show it makes the greater shame, it brings in the end, and the
greater condemnation in the word, and none of these can bring forth fruit to
perfection.

4. The last sort of men are like good ground, These receive the word as the
Children of wisdom, and the Children of light: they know and believe the word,
and with reverence, they prepare the heart that it be gentle, perfect, and
simple, as worthy to receive it being careful, that what they know and
believe, they may hold both in profession and practice, constantly and with
increase: wherefore this good ground brings forth fruit in patience, Luke
8.15. The reason is, because of the contrariety of the evil one, either in
worldly authorities, or in the lusts of the flesh, which hate the word and
Gospel of immortality; for he that receives the word of truth withal his
heart and full resolution to suffer with Christ the saver thereof, this man can
never fail: In persecution of the word, he has prepared his heart to suffer,
and so he continuath constant unto death, and he wins, by holding the word,
the Crown of an immortal life. In all other temptations which are in himself,
together with the world, he denies himself after the honor of this world, he
hates his own soul to satisfy it with the lusts thereof, he suffers in the
flesh, and so cease from sin, 1 Pet. 4.1 etc. patience makes his heart soft
to give rooting to the word, the harder the persecution of men, the softer the
heart is to nourish the immortal seed, and to bring forth the fruit thereof in
the perishing and death of the mortal flesh, choosing rather to lose his life,
then lose the word of God, patience makes his heart heard to resist the Devil
and all his deceits and temptations: he is open hearted, faithful and perfect
in love to the Lord, by whose word he holds the assurance of immortality with
him; but he is close shut to obey the worldly vanities, he hates to think of
their wicked courses in mortality. This is the estate of those which are able
to endure the try all, and to walls perfectly in the love of Christ: the more
their oppression is from without, the greater is their obedience from the
heart, the more their temptations are, the greater is the trial of their
faith, which works the more patience: The more patience they possess their
souls with, the more perfect the work of wisdom is, until they be perfect and
entire, defective in nothing, Iam, 1.2.3, 4, 5.

Of all sorts of Christians that have heard the word of Christ: these only that
suffer as Christians in patience of the good word, are able to bring forth the
fruit thereof unto perfection.

2. This is the miserable estate of the men of this age, that while they think
to fly from death, they fall into it, for flying from the patience of the word
of life, they run after their own thoughts to save their life in mortality;
when they in so doing, lay themselves open to all miseries in this world, and
do even feel the terrors of the second and immortal death, while they are
yet living, and yet are forced to run into it.

The fifth day of the Week.
THere is great opposition of Christians in this world, all which in may dream
I divided into 2. sorts, the one terrence, humain, and baptized under the
authority of men, to live according to their several Laws and Corporations
after the power of a mortal life. The other Christians are coelestical,
divine, and baptized under the anointing and authority of the only true God,
to live according to his holy law in their mind, looking through the
resurrection of Jesus, unto that glorious life in immortality.

2. Having observed how such as profess themselves, preachers of light, are
darkened in the world by leaving the express word, and wisdom of Christ, to
follow mortal vanities; I am drawn to discover their folly, that they can no
more help a man to go the way of immortality, then a natural blind man can
direct a man in the way of a mortal life. And therefore being in themselves so
blinded with the God of this world, it is mischievous madness for them to
presume to speak what they know not, thereby to deceive others, or else by
their authority of blindness to hinder them, which being ignorant of their
blindness, do enquire of them the good old way; but it is safe for blind men
to confesle they are blind, that all that err and have eyes, may enquire of
others that do see: It yet they will make themselves Preachers of light and
immortality, they must be discouraged to the false Preachers, that instead
thereof, do indeed preach darkness and mortality, as to deceive others of the
ways of life.

3. I understand that the Christians are not Ministers of the letter, as 2 Cor.
3.6. because that were to take upon them the carnal authority of the Scribes
and Pharisees, who are charged with that, Mat. 23.2.23. yet to deliver the
spirit and truth contained therein.

The sixth day of the Week.
I Had a sight of the love of God in man, and the sencible understanding
thereof was wonderful In mine eyes. Man being by sin deprived the glory of
God, wherein Adam wa created, is now by the evil spirit become subject to the
body of the sins of the flesh, to sow to the flesh, and of the flesh to
reap mortality. And to restrain man from sin, God gave his Law, and gave
power to condemn accordingly, to the chastisement of the flesh, and to death:
Yet the heart of man is naturally so evil, that this authority in evil minded
men's hands cannot reform the mind, that so man should yet please God in
mortality. Therefore lest mankind should be swallowed up in death for the
sins of the flesh, the Son of God by whom the world and man was made,
became flesh, that in the love of God, he might teach us in the flesh by the
mediation and direction of his spirit manifested in the flesh, the truth of
salvation in suffering death in the resurrection of the flesh, and in the full
restoring to glory: yet flesh and blood is weak and cannot follow him in this
hard and strait way. Wherefore the Lord of glory, condescending to man's
weakness, has given his holy spirit into the world, which being Gods spirit
might redeem men from the earth in the death of Christ, who being departed in
sight, has sent his own spirit to teach men, and to guide them into all truth,
how they should learn obedience in the sinful flesh, how to put off the
carnal man of mortality, and to put on the spiritual man of immortality, how
to mortify the carnal actions of the body to the holy spirit of Christ, and
for to perfect the mystery of suffering in the flesh, this word and spirit of
Christ Jesus does give his Christian menwisdom how to suffer under the evil
authorities of the world to death, and so to pass on in the way of Chirst to
immortal life. And as in the course of nature our mind was catyed wholly to
live after the lusts of uncleannessse, so being converted to God by the power
of this spirit, which works in our hearts mightily, our mind is carried
wholly to live after the will of that holy spirit; so that in this way we have
no more to do, but to discharge our selves of cares and pleasures of this
world, and to be delivered from the body of death, which is after the old man;
that we may be presented in the new man to him that is now invisible, and that
only has immortality.

2. The word of the holy Scriptures is more perfect then the inspiration
without a plain word; therefore who so resists the spirit of Christ
manifested in express words, does resist all means of salvation: for Christ
came and gave his word to be made so plain with his lifeblood, that now no
man can more sensibly apprehend the image and nature of God and Christ, then by
the letter, which we by reading do conceive in our mind; so as though a man
walk according to all that is written, and yet deny one little direction, this
man resists God, with open face, this one word which he despises to do, it
will cut him off from the life of the Christian and for this one thing the
peace and protection of Almighty will go from him, so as he will be in fear
night and day, and evil may come to him suddenly, out of which he cannot
escape, because the word of God is against him, the least part whereof is
stronger then that min can quiet, or justify his own heart against it; for it
may be concluded, that what man soever will not yield obedience to an express
word, will not follow the inspiration of God, moving his conscience without an
evident Scripture, either to do good to others, or evil to his flesh for
Christ's sake.

3. It is great hypocrisy for men to preach the honor and glory of the Cross
of Christ, when they tkemselves fear, or refuse the condemnation of the
Cross, in the testimony or martyrdom of Jesus Christ.

The first day of the Week.
1 THe Lord Jesus Christ devideth himself into three parts, Ioh. 14.6. saying,
I am 1. The way, 2. The truth, 3. The life:
that whosoever suffers for any of these, does suffer for Christ's sake. 1. The
way is the devision of the Christians from the glory and authority of the
worldly Priesthood, to follow him in spirit and truth according to the
invisible authority of his Priesthood. 2. The Truth is the Law, Psalm. 119 142.
whose perfection as it is spiritual, every Christian acknowledges and suffeth
for it. And in this sense, it may be said, that John Baptist his blood was shed
for Christ, insomuch as he suffered for the testimony of the truth, or
spiritual law, against turpitude in unlawful marriage. 3. The Life, is the
immortality after the death and resurrection of the Body: If the carnal
authority do by their force withhold this life mortality, and enforce to take
the Gospel in a mortal state; in this case, the faith or Jesus Christ is
suffered for, in the confession of his glory to be enjoyed in immortality, and
not in this present life.


2. I have meditated how the fear of God-Lord is the beginning of wisdom to
the Nations that are not under the Law. When by any means any of them come to
have any thing to do with the Lord; he first requires them to fear his Name,
which is to depart from evil, pride of mind, and every way which is contrary
to his Word; This fear works a knowledge of his invisible and terrible
presence; that as a man will not sin against his Law, so he will not presume
to partake of his service,, and holy things, or any of his Mysteries, until
this fear have wrought a reconciliation, and peace of Conscience with God, in
such sort, as he so apprehends the immortal Lord in his mind, that he
inclines to love him, and to desire his Law in his heart or mind, and to make
an everlasting covenant with him in the mysteries of Christ. Whosoever of the
Nations that has his heart thus purified by faith, willingly to take upon him
the yoke and Law of Christ in love, is accepted of God, as a son to partake
of the mysteries of his holiness.

3. Whether we ought yield to a man's private opinion, thus far as not to
offend him in doing what he misliked. Offenses arise, either in respect of the
authority of God, or of man. In respect of God, the offense does rise from the
world, or any of the world, when they do offend any that believe in Christ,
and do hurt them in contempt of the authority of the Word of God, Matthew.
18.6.7.

Again, offenses arise between the servante of God, when the authority of his
Word is denied by transgressing the law thereof in any thing.

Offenses arise in respect of the authority of men, when the authority of Jew
of Gentile is publicly provoked by trangressing their Commandments, or
blaspheming their divine worship, Act. 19.37.

Again, off^^ce is also given by the Christian if he offer any violence, or
carnal force, or use any evil words against a man that is otherwise persuaded
then by the word of Christ, that walks after his own heart, neither
according to the Law of God, nor the course of the Commonwealth In this case,
as I offend him not by evil word or deeds, so I am not bound to do as he dot^
that I may nor offend him, but let him follow h^^ will, and I will follow the
law of righteousness otherwise, in this I may be brought in bondage a private
man's conceit: I may harden him in error, and partake in his folly. And at last
(...) should be drawn to offend both the authority (...) God and man, by
favoring every one that are ^^ven up to a reprobate sense.

The second day of the Week.
THe justifying of a sinner in the blood of Christ is the act of the spirit of
Christ, and it has 2 parts.

1. The acquitting of all sins past, that the sinner have no fear or
conscience of guilt or punishment for them, Romans 3.25. and this is applied by
the merit of his blood.

2. The preserving from all sin by the power and spirit of Christ: so as the
evil one cannot touch him by prevailing against the man, whom Christ has made
righteous, to move or carry him to do any sin; but on the contrary he shew^th
forth the righteousness of God in Christ, by ^he says of Jesus; whereby he
communicates in ^he sufferings and blood of Christ in his own ^ody.

The third day of the week.
JEsus is truly a door to his suffering Christians on this manner: that when
they through many tribulations are brought to death, then through his presence
they enter into life; for as it is by fight in a door, whereby men enter into
other places: so when we come to death, there are two doors: the great door
opens to pass into the torment of the second death, the straiter door
opens to pass from death to eternal life, and this door and way is Jesus,
to all that suffer death in the testimony of his name.

The fourth day of the week:
I Cannot but admire the wisdom of the only true God, who having put enmyty
into the world, so as of necessity offenses are taken against his holy people,
to condemn them according to their worldly wisdom, and carnal authority, has
also given a Law in Christ, according to which he will just^fie his Children
against the condemnation of me^, as Romans 8.33. As if our heavenly Father should
say, I have given you my Law, and I have given you my Christ to become flesh,
that he might be a perfect guide and redeemer of you, from the bondage of
mortality in this evil world, so as the subject may know his duty to his
Magistrate: the son to the Father, the servant to his Master: it every one do
thus walk according to my word, in their several estates and degrees, and yet
your superiors do take offense as you, for not obeying them rather then me, I
will justify you in what you do in Conscience of my law; fear not their
condemnation, but learn obedience in the flesh, as Christ Jesus my only Son
has showed you, and look unto the throan of my judgment sent which I have
appointed, and know my righteousness in the love of Christ, and come unto me
from mortality and bondage; for by constancy to death, you and every one of
you, shall evercome and be more then Conquerours, and you shall condemn then
for sin, that have condemned you for sinners, in hatred of my word, and of my
Christ, which I have given to be a light unto the world, whom with you they
have killed.

2. In the estate of enmity between God and man, that repentance which men
teach is apostasy from God; for when a man yields obedience to the word as
the Servant of God: If the authority of man do compel him to repent of this
his obedience, in any matter wherein the word of God requires obedience, and
this man does repent under the fear of man, and blaspheame the service of God
as wicked, and magnify the service of man, as holy and righteous: it is
manifest from antiquity, that this repentance is the worldly wickeknesse
against God; for whosoever in oath with them says, destroy the wicked, says
in effect to destroy all Christians that live godly in Christ, and all the
servants of God both great and small, because these only are the wicked in the
evil worlds account, and these that are righteous, are their spiritual
enemies: so as whosoever sees not this enmity to avoid it, as not to have
Communion of enmity with the world against Christ, is yet guilty of the curse
with the seed of the Serpent.

The fifth day of the week
IT is noted, that he which preaches the Cross of Christ must do it
sincerely, not, scaring the shame and death of the Cross, in the Communion of
his sufferings; but there are those which preach the Cross of Christ, in enmity
of the Cross, in that they go back from Christ crucified, to follow their
profit or pleasure in this mortal life. These also set up a Throan of Judgment
in enmity against Christ, by authority whereof, they keep men from looking to
the Judgment if Christ: so as it is of necessity for every man to discern
these two Throans of Judgment; for if a man fear the Judgment of mortality, he
is darkened from seeing the Judgment of immortality; but if he truly see the
Throan of Judgment settled in Heaven, he will be enlightenned, not to respect
the humain Judgment of men on earth.

The fifth day of the week:
1. THe shame and reproach of Christ and his Christians is, that they are men
without honor in the world, and suffer all things as base men: Therefore they
which follow him in the honor of the world, and in power to defend themselves
from oppression, are not under the shadow of Christ's Cross, for these count it
a great shame to suffer as a Christian constantly to death.

2. It is noted from 1 Samuel 15.22.23. That it is a worshipping of false God, to
break the Commandment of God for any worldly or carnal respect whatsoever.

3. The unclean meats forbidden in the Law, note out how abominable the Idol
and false Doctrines of Devils should be unto us, to obey them in our souls:
who so observes the Law, may escape what it discovers as death.

4. It is noted that Christ made an end of the Law, when he took revenge and
desire of judgment out of men's hearts, that they should not now require eye
for eye, and go to judgment one with another; but on the contrary to forgive
each other, and so to go to God, beseeching him to forgive them: and thus in
all cases, to judge themselves and not others for sin.

5. It was the wisdom of God, that his own Son Christ should come in poor
state, that none might be allured with worldly glory, nor terrified with
mortal terrors; but that who so receive him, may be known to follow him in
true love, more of him, then of themselves.

6. Evil Shepherds of men's souls, keeping the word in their own authority, do
as if a Shepherd, pretending to feed the flock, should keep the sheep from
the pasture, and from safe feeding, and agree with these for a part, and with
the wolf for the skin, and yet ask wages for their service.

The sixth day of the week.
1. AS the eye is the light of the mortal, so he mind is the light of the
immortal man: The eye is simple when is clearly sees by the light of the
world, the mind is simple when it is clearly enlightenned by the Word and
spirit of Christ, which is the ^^ue light to immortality: the mind kept under
men's authority is as a man blind-folded.

2. If it be Church-robbery, or s^criledge to take vessels and goods,
consecrated to holy uses, what is it, to take the holy word it self out of the
Book, which is sealed in the blood of Christ.

The first day of the week.
COncerning the works of the Law, Romans 3.20. I have this understanding, that
seeing that is certain, that none can be justified by the works of the law,
namely, by the justifications holden in the ministry, mediation and Priesthood
leviticall, constituted under the fear and authority of men: Then we may
conclude, that all the service under any worldly authorities, though it may
seem far better then that of Rome, yet it Will be found only to
condemnation, and cannot justify as to purge the Conscience from dead works,
to serve the living God; for as these were the works of the Law of God in the
worldly holiness, and authority of justification by men, so are these of other
Commonwealths, the works of their Law constituted in their feigned holiness,
and justifications by their own authority. And if that of Israel, could not
cleanse the Conscience, surely, all Religions of men's devising, do make vain
man more vain, and harden the heart to commit sin in enmity of the word of God.

The third day of the week.
1. FRom Ephesians. 3.15. is apparent, that as a householder is over his Family, so
the heavenly Father is over his Family, which consists of all his Creation
both in the Heavens, and upon the earth: Therefore his good servants are
careful, that Christ (of whom all this family is named) may dwell in our
hearts by faith, looking to his invisible presence, being rooted and grounded
in love, both toward the Father and his Son, who is over the Family in
immortality, and also toward each other, even as Christ loved us, when he for
our instruction, became an household Servant, and learned obedience as a
Servant, that by his example we might be armed with the same mind, so to love,
and so to be obedient, Ephesians. 3.15 -- 177. Phil. 2. and thus to keep the unity
of the spirit of Christ, for the increase of his body and Church to a perfect
man, that then he may come and receive us unto himself in immortality, when we
shall see him as he is, Ephesians. 4.1 John 3. but woe to the folly of such as will
not acknowledge the Father nor the Son, as they are over their house, but
suffer their own reprobate sense to dwell in their hearts, and that walk by
sight of the world, and not by Faith, and not only are disobedient themselves;
but also compel others to rebel against the Mr. of the house: Let hot my soul
touch with them that do thus despite the spirit of grace, and provoke the good
man of the house against their own souls.

2. It is evident, that though a man do keep all the Law and Commandments of
God, yet he is unprofitable, Luke 17.10. wherefore there is some excellent
thing required in Christ in the state of perfection, as Mat. 5.20. to 47.48.
with Luke 6.20. to 32. etc.

3. It must be granted, that they which keep the Commandments of God to the
end, shall inherit life according to the promise in the Lawyer in such a life
God is not glorified in Christ his Son; for in this estate men are defective,
and want that one necessary thing, without which they may fail of the grace of
God, namely, the perfect love of Christ wherein all worldly things are put
away, with the love thereof, and that only for the love of Christ to follow him
for the Kingdom of God, Luke 18 18.-22.-29. with Mat. 19.17. etc. Mark 10.

The sixth day of the week.
I Have received to put difference between the Church gathered according to the
letter in Moses, and the Church gathered according to the spirit in Christ: the
legal Church is from the earth, the spiritual Church is from Heaven: The
Church by the Law were and are to be gathered from all places of the earth,
unto Jerusalem here beneath; but the Church which is called by the spirit of
Jesus Christ, are delivered from this world, and are gathered from mortality
unto the City of the living God, to heavenly Jerusalem: Therefore as earthly
Jerusalem is the mother of all those which are after the righteousness of the
mortal seed: so Jerusalem which is above, is the mother of all the suffering
Christians, which are borne again of the immortal seed through Jesus Christ,
the word of the living God, and which remains for ever, Heb. 12.22.23. Gal.
4.26. 1 Pet. 1.23.

The first day of the Week.
FRom Psalm. 91. I have considered a preservative against the plagve of Death,
thus;

There was, is, and always shall be a twofold people in the world, the greater
part are after the seed of the Serpent, and the remainder after the seed of the
Woman: between these two peoples there is enmity, and a perfect separation in
the Word. Over these there is a twofold government, or spiritual authority.
Over the greater part, which are the childen of disobedience, is the Devil.
Satan, or the old Serpent, that first deceived our parents, who is by his
government the prince of the authority of the air, Ephesians. 2.2. his power
wherewith he afflicts, are the spiritual things of wickedness in heavenly
places, Ephesians. 6.11.12

The throane of his people is the throne of misery, or perverseness by
authority, whereof the frame being wicked, mischief by a Law, and murder, and
condemn for wicked the righteous and innocent souls, which patiently suffer
persecution and death under them, for their conscience, of the service and word
of their Creator, Psalm, 94.3. -- 20.21. -- Romans 8.36. Mark. 4.17. Over the
poor afflicted people is the protection of the most high, and the shadow of
the Almighty, Psalm. 91.1. who since they were separated out from their
persecutors, under Moses the fraithfull servant of God, are known manifestly
to bear the reproach of Christ. Hebr. 11.25.26 -- This people are in one name
called the Israel of God, G^l. 6.16. which is not of any, whether Jews or
Gentiles that trust under a carnal and visible authority; but of all that come
to put their confidence under the wings of the God of Israel, as Ruth did, Ruth
2.12. These people are known by that they serve, and declare the praises of the
great name of God, the Creator, every Sabbath day, Psalm 92.1. Luke 4.16. And
for their Creators sake they are hated and afflicted of all other people;
Therefore the God the Creator, being the judge of the earth, does render
vengeance to the proud and wicked people, that afflict the people of his
heritage, whom he teaches and instructs out of his Law, and also speak
proudly against him the God of Jacob, Psa. 94.1. etc.

According to this judgment, all the world is made subject to God, and guilty
of death by the Law in Christ Jesus, and none can be justified from sin, and
so freed from the guilt of death, by any works under any worldly or carnal
authorities, Romans 3.9. -- 19.20.

The spiritual things wherewith the Prince of the authority of the air does
invade, or bring men to death, are declared in the Law to be especially three.
The first, is the snare of the hunter. The second, the Pestilence. The third,
the Keteb, or destruction, Psalm. 91.3 -- 6.

First, the snare of the Hunter is sin, the reward whereof is death, Romans
7.23. All therefore that sin against the God of their life, as the children
of the Devil are subject to all the curses in the Law of God, 1 Ioh. 3.8. Gal.
3.10.

Secondly, the second spiritual thing, that from hence does manifestly invade
men is, the Pestilence, or plague of death, which is a sickness, call debir, a
thing destroying. It is taken with the common air which is corrupted and
poisoned with the crying sins of the most people in the mother city, and into
whomsoever this poisoned air enters, it poysoneth the life, and soon kills
the body, except it have issue out of the body.

3. The other deadly destruction to the body, is called bitter destruction,
Dent. 32.24. which as an evil spirit, seiseth upon the body, and works
torments in the joints and sinews; which disease, some learned men call,
Ophisthotonos, a strange and vehement disease in the neck, when by the
stiffenesse of the nerves, the neck is strained backward to the shoulders, and
kills a man within four days: and therefore it is said to destroy at noone.
Psalm. 91.6. because thou may see a sound body thus suddenly tormented before
thine eyes, and thou can see nothing but the evil done.

These three evils the Lord Christ inflicteth upon his adversaries, for the
redemption of his Israel from destruction. Wherefore the Apostle Paul applying
the salvation in Christ, 1 Cor. 15.54. to 57. with Hos. 33.9. -- 14. sets
down five degrees, (as those which can read the original text may see.) 1.
This Keteb, bitter destruction, he calls the victory of hell. 2. The
Pestilence is called the sting of death. 3. The cause of this plague he
affirms to be sin. 4. The power of sin to be the Law. 5. The victory which
the Christians have received over all these evils, is of God through Jesus
Christ our Lord, 1 Cor. 15.54, etc. Hos. 13.


From hence we come to apply this preservasative against the plague and
destruction; Who is the man whom the Lord will deliver? him that God has
separated as Israel, Exodus namely, him that knows in his conscience the only
true God, from all other Gods, and that he himself dwells under his
protection, and delights under his shadow, Psalm. 91.1. -- 14. Ioh. 17.3. This
knowledge of God is discerned from all false knowledge by that, he which has
it keeps the the Commandments of God, 1 Ioh. 2.4. So as he which knows the
true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, is united to the body and Church
of Christ, and knows him in spirit from all false Christ's, or devils; as a
woman knows her husband from all other men; and therefore of all that do thus
discern and know God in Christ, he is the Savior of their bodies, Ephesians.
5.23. This man shall be kept in all his ways, Psalm. 91.11. For seeing it is
the truth in Christ, that all that are borne of God do keep themselves so, as
the evil one touches them not with any just accusation of sin, as 1 Ioh.
5.18. with 3.9. It must needs follow that God their Father will deliver them
also from any deadly disease which is executed for sin. This temporary
salvation, is applied only by Christ, and his Christians; not against carnal
wickednesses, but against spiritual evils; namely, that these plagues shall
not come without cause unto them, Psalm. 91.9. For seeing Christ was baptized to
suffer death by the seed of the world; and seeing his Christians are baptized
into the death of Jesus Christ, to show his death in resisting sin, till he
come to judgment, i^ must be granted as a truth, and applied for the glory of
God in Christ, that no accidental death from him shall prevent any faithful
Christian that he should not live to glorify God in the martyrdom of Jesus:
but this is the man tha^ shall be preserved to see a thousand fall on o^^ side
by the plague of death, and ten thousand (...) the other side, yet it shall not
come near him, only he shall behold it as the reward of God (...) wicked men,
Psalm. 91.7.8. Psalm. 15. This is the preservation of every perfect man, whose
faith overcommeth the evil of the world, whose hope is God the Creator, and
whose habitation is the most high: Psalm. 91.9. and not of him only, but of
all, whose love is able to cover their sins, so as he require of the Lord life
for any weak one that has sinned, and the sin is not a sin unto death, 1
Ioh. 5.19.20. For thus is his boldness for his friends, also by warrant from
the Law, which says unto him, and the plague shall not come near in thy
tabernacle, Psalm. 91.10, which is not understood of any worldly dwelling, as
under the Law, but of the several persons, who with him do bear the reproach
of Christ in some kind in enmity, that do come out of the sins of the City,
by not partaking with her sins: these also may have faith, that they shall
not partake of the plagues of the City, Rev. 18.4. Neither can any conclude
from the Law, that all which live in and under the Law, dye of the plague, do
dye to the second death; for the plague of it self is only a bodily execution
from God to the first death. For when both King and people do in the fear of
the true God, confess and forsake their sin, which is the cause thereof,
from the anger of God, and in obedience do give themselves to fall into his
hands, and rely upon his great mercies, in this case; all that dye of the
plague we leave them to the mercy of the Lord, by whose death the King, and
all that remain, may more earnestly beseech the Lord, to remit his hand, 2 Samuel 24.

Wherefore every one that can truly apply the God of Israel to be his shadow,
Christ, his Law and truth, to be his shield and buckler, and has in himself
the baptism of Christ; by virtue whereof, he has always within him the
request of a good conscience calling unto God through the resurrection of Jesus
Christ (1 Pet. 3.21.) this man has the faith of God in him, and therefore does
not fear any evil of the day or night, Psalm. 125. neither does he flee as
those that are conscious of their sins against God, but remains as sure as
Jerusalem, which is above, and is the mother of all the true Children of God:
For the rod of wickedness shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous. This
is the work of faith, whereby they pray in faith to be delivered from the evil
one, and are delivered, Mat. 6.13. whereas the faith of all that serve Idol
Gods is a deceit, and the prayer of the sinner is abomination, and will work
infidelity and terrors from God, as their consciences do testify, that they
may repent of their sins, and be reconciled unto the true God in truth.

2. This assurance is to all Jsrael in the Law, under the sign of the blood of
the passover; sprinkled out on their upper door posts whereby they were
assured that the destroyer should not, or could not hurt the poor, persecuted
and oppressed for their desire of liberty, and freedom of body and mind, to
serve the living God, as Exodus 12. Heb. 11.28. which was true in this thing to
save the persecuted Isreal from the mortality of persecuting Egypt, and is but
a figure or shadow of that faith, which the spiritual Isralites have, that
know in themselves that Christ their pass over is killed for them, (1 Cor.
5.7.) for these desiring also to serve that one only true God, are also
persecuted; wherein being chastized of the Lord in the communion of the
sufferings of Christ, they do show and declare this death before the Lord, and
one with another, which who so do it in love, cannot but know that the
condemnation of the world is nothing to them, as to condemn them for the sins
of the world, which are pardoned to them in the death of Christ, from the time
of their baptism of repentance, for the forgivness of sins, if they walk
worthy of this calling, and continue constant and faithful in this Communion
unto death, 1 Cor. 11.25. to 32. Mark. 1.4. with Heb. 9.14. Rev. 2.10.

The third day of the Week.
1. I Understand that I put on Christ, when being baptized into his death, I
put on his death upon my mortality, to show it in my sufferings to death, and I
put on his immortality upon my mortal mind, and in all things have the mind of
Christ to guide me in my life, and to give me to mind only the things that are
above with him in immortality.

2. I am instructed to put difference between the teaching under the law, and
under the authority of Christ: The Law commands obedience upon pain of death,
saying, thou shall not do thus or thus; or thou shall do thus or thus; but
Christ says, thou shall love the Lord thy God, etc. thou shall love thy
neighbor, etc. so that a man is first taught so truly to know the true God, as
to love him, and when he has obtained this love, then he does willingly all,
whatsoever he has commanded, and also he rejoices in the Law of Christ, which
is the bond of perfection.

The third day of the Week.
I Consider the reason of doing miracles from the word: that whosoever has the
word of God in him to do it, and to suffer for it in the spirit of Christ, he
has the word with him, to effect whatsoever he desires of the Father, in the
name of Christ, John 15.7.5.

The fourth day of the week.
IN the Common wealth of Israel, there is the enmity of the Creator: There are
the men of the worldly authority, that justify themselves, and condemn and
persecute the true prophet, and the obedient Children of Syon, the mother City,
and God justifies them against their accusers: There is the fear of men, and
the fear of God in separation: There is the Law of God holden in the worldly
authorities, and the Law within the faithful in opposition: The worldly men
make to themselves a light, and walk in it, condemning the oppressed, as if
they being separated from them did walk in darkness without light. Thus
carnal Israel in all things walk by sight in a visible worship of God,
persecuting and despising all that submit not to their glory: whereas the
spiritual Israel, though they seem to this world, as living in darkness,
and dishonor, without the scare of men, and without the Law given by Moses,
yet it is far otherwise in spirit and truth, for God their God is a light
unto them, they fear God and obey him, and they are not without the Law of
God, but the Law is within them: And these only are the redeemed of God the
Lord, as Esa. 50.51.1 Cor. 9.20.21.

2. In a general enmity, Babel oppresses ^srael. And God has purged and
chosen Jsrael in affliction, and has given his glory unto him and will be
glorified in him Esa. 47. and 48. and 41.9. and 42.8 with 46.13. and 49.4.

3. Abraham and Sarab are a type of God and Sion: the barrenness of the one is
compared to the solitariness of the other, and the delight and comfort of the
one is signified to be fulfilled in the other, Esa. 51.1. etc. 54 --

4. If the way of Christ were, that his people should so low him in the life of
the flesh to immortality, then men would perish in their have: but seeing he is
gone before in reproach through death to life, all that follow him in this way
of suffering death in the flesh do walk soberly, and make no haste; but go
out so as the Lord Jesus is gone before them, Esa. 52.11.12 -- and 53. with
Luke 9 22.23. -- 2 Timothy 1.10.

The fifth day of the Week.
AS I understand carnal Adultery, and Fornication in the flesh; so I apply
spiritual Adultery and Fornication in the spirit, from Esa. 57.3.5. etc.

If the worldly authoritie^ make to themselves gods, and do worship to them,
they are men that engender with gods in such a place, verse. 5. etc. and all
that go with them commit whooredome against God their maker, either as
Adulterers that have the authority of a man, or Adulte^^ss^^s that willingly
submit to mortal shame. And so further we may conceive, that what man or woman
soever has in them the spirit or authority of Idols, or other gods, if they
enforce others to agree to their spirit, they are tyrannous over the
conscience, and are as they which ravish the weaker to their filthy lusts. If
any of these privately do allure any to consent to their spirit, and to submit
to them in prayer and spiritual worship of God; these deceivers, or any one of
them, with many, or but with one that is allured, has committed the act of
spiritual whoredom with the mind of all that are subject: Therefore it
stands us upon, both to shun all Idol worship in public, and to try all
spirits that we shall be subject unto, in private prayer, or submission in
conference. For by submission in conference with the unclean spirit, Eve and
the whole world is deceived, and so it is manifest that whosoever humbles
himself an another desire in prayer, is become one spirit with him that
prayed, and thereby is defiled (if he have a^ common spirit) by the word, that
from what he in his prayer, conceived to be God, entered as seed of the
unclean spirit, into the heart of all that in unity received the spirit of
that prayer a Wherefore it is as necessary to know the God, only one true God,
and the one spirit of holiness in Christ Jesus, as it is for a maid on wise
to know her own husband from all Adulterers, and that they be one spirit with
him only, and not weak to any other that wait to deceive and abuse to vanity.

The sixth day of the week.
THere are communicants of the body of Christ in showing his death, by
suffering death till he come. And there are communicants of Devils, or
serpents, in showing their pride, by killing the righteous blood, as 1 Cor.
10.16. to 21. and ^^. 26. -- with Math. 23.33. -- 35.

All that continue perfect and single hearted in the word of Christ, have his
word and presence to keep them from the evil of the world, until they have
finished their testimony, and have showed his death, Ioh. 17.14, 15, etc. with
Revel. 11.7.

But if any communicate outwardly in profession of Christ crucified, and
discern not his body killed in the enmity of the world, so as to show
themselves a member thereof, by manifesting Christ's death in their death, and
their death to be for Christ's cause, 2 Cor. 4.9.10.11. These coming short of
communicating in the spirit of Christ, in not discerning the presence of his
body, both to suffer in the flesh, and to sustain in the spirit, may fall into
sickness, weaknesses, yea, and into death among those which dye of the
plague, after the condemnation of the world: but if in this plague of the world
we discern our own weaknesses, our ignorance of his invisible presence, to
save, or to kill, and our readiness to go back from showing his death by
diverse worldly or carnal temptations, moving us to save our sonles, from
following Christ that dyed by suffering for us, for which causes we may be
left to the evil of the world, and do now confess our sin against Christ,
and our readiness to deny the faith of Jesus, and do take our sickness,
weakness, or danger of infection with the sin of the world, as a
chastisement for our profit, as 1 Cor. 11.29 30.31.32. and learning obedience
under the present hand of our Lord, resolving to renew our Covenants in his
communion, and do thus with simple hearts pray to the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, by the spirit of holiness in his resurrection, all things will work
that we may live to glorify God our Creator, in the love of his Word, and may
be preserved to obtain that crown of life, which is in the Martyrdom of
Jesus.

The first day of the Week.
THere is a corporal idleness, which is the way of deadly sin, as Ezech.
16.49. And there is a spiritual idleness, which is the way of apostasy from
Christ, as 2 Pet. 1.5. to 8. Now the common Professors, and such as have the
authority, and glory of the world, know no Idleness but bodily idleness, and
when they urge men to labor, they compel to bodily labor, in a worldly
calling for riches, or to get the meat that perishes: but how to labor for
assurance to make their calling and election sure, they are blind. Wherefore
seeing corporal labor is but a type or example of true Christian labor in
the mind; all that so much urge labor in an outward calling, and confound the
labor in inward calling, as a thing inferior to the type, these are deceivers
of men's mind, and to be avoided, Mark. 8.36.

The sixth day of the week
J Understand by that in Romans 3.5. to 8, How God in judging the world, brings
wrath upon man for their sins. If man does repent, and turn to God; tho
unrighteousness and the lie, according to which he walked before his
conversion, does now commend the righteousness and truth of God; thu^, in that
he which was unrighteous, is not now to be judged according to what he was;
namely, a sinner, but the righteousness of God is to be commended in him;
because that he which was a sinner, is now righteous, and will do no evil, no
not though good may come of it: and the lie of him which was once deceived,
makes the truth of God abound to his glory, thus in that he which was a liar,
does now walk in the truth, and convinces the world of Gune.

The first day of the Week.
JN this plague I have considered the enmity of God, Iam. 4.4. How from the
beginning, since mankind was divided upon the earth, the judgment of God the
Creator, and the judgment of men are contrary; In that evil men sit on earth
to judge God in his word and people, Romans 3.4. and on the other side, God
sits invisibly on his thraone, judging the men of the world in
righteousness, Psa. 9.1 Chro. 16.14. 2 Chronicles. 6.30. The judgments of men are
in sight, but the judgments of God are seen of his people by faith, and they
discern how God he kills men by the plague, etc.

According to the judgment of men, Christ and all his people have their
tempration under the authorities of men, Luke 22.28.

According to the judgment of God, the whole world has its temptation coming
from God, Rev. 3 10.

From whence we may gather in truth, that seeing these two judgment seats are
so contrary, and the people that are separated to put difference so contrary;
the people of God are so far from partaking of the judgments of God upon the
people of the world, as the people of the world are far from the judgments
of men in the sufferings of Christ. Notwithstanding, if any of the people that
are separated to God do sin secretly, or openly, he judges them by plague,
or other curses, and so kills them like wicked men of the world, as Levit, 26
25.25- Number. 16.11. -- 46. with Rev. 2.21 -- 23.

2. I consider that it proceeds from the efficacy of the resurrection of
Christ to justify from sin, Romans 4 25. with 1.4, and 5.1 -- 19.

And all that do not apprehend the truth of Christ, raised from the dead, they
are yet in their sins, 1 Cor. 15.17.

All that condemn us for doing the Law, in the righteousness of Christ do
judge the Law, and do in effect say that the Law is sin, as Romans 7 7. whereas
all that do the Law, confirm it to be holy, just, and good.

The third day of the week.
BY observing the power of God, present t^ help, I have compared salvation
from the plague (or other such curses) by the faith of Jesus, to that salvation
from the bi^ing of Serpents, when by faith they looked to the Brazen Serpent,
and to ^he word of our God for help, as Number. 21. with Ioh. 8.14.15.

That whosoever can by the word within him, apply the communion of Christ,
either in his own body, by suffering, as a Christian, or in true love and mercy
with any that so suffer; If any such are smitten, or infected with the plague,
and they presently pray in faith to Jesus the King of Israel. looking to his
power, authority, and immortality, together also, to the fellowship of his
sufferings here on earth. I am persuaded that the plague shall have no more
power over their bodies, but they shall be preserved to glorify God, in the
love of the Church of Christ, as they desire: but they must be mindful in
every danger presently to look up to Jesus, whom God gave to save the world,
and they must look, or pray in faith, of his name and of his judgment, Joh
3.16.17.18.

The fourth day of the week:
I Have considered that they which have the Martyrdom of Christ, God truly
known to them in their own sufferings, have the communion of the Son of God,
Jesus Christ in whom they are wonderfully enriched in all speech, and in all
knowledge, 1 Cor. 1.5, to 9. with 2.1.2. --

The fifth day of the week:
I Have considered the wonderful price of man's purchase, and the reason of our
being Gods own peculiar body in this price given, thus Christ having given
himself for the life of the world, and being gloryfied from the sufferings in
mortality, has obtained to give his holy spirit to those which follow him in
the new birth, Ioh. 14.16 -- 26. with Act. 2.33.

All therefore that deny themselves in their sins, and bring their bodies
subject to God, so as he accepts of their body for a Temple, by the gift of his
Holy Spirit; these are now bought with this price of the holy Spirit which is
of God: Therefore seeing the spirit which is in the body, is one with God in
Christ, it is manifest, that not so much as the body is any man's own, but it
is Christ's which lives in it, 1 Cor 6.19.20 17. with Gal. 2.20.

And thus every man that in the Baptism of Christ, has received the earnest
of his Spirit, as 2 Cor. 1.22. and 5.5. Ephesians. 1.14. Is bought with the
precious blood of Christ, in that by the death of his flesh, he imparted the
Word of the living God, which remains for ever, according to the Work of God
in the resurrection of Jesus, (...) 1 Pet. 1.18. to 25. So as now he must give
his body, which is thus bought from the earth, and from earthly men, to follow
the holy Spirit of Christ, whithersoever it shall guide his body till death.
Ioh. 16.13. -- with Revel. 14.3.4.

The sixth day of the week.
IN my sleep by night, I was instructed in the righteous judgments of our
God, by comparing them with the judgments of men, thus. There are diverse
States of government in the world, and these all have their Religion several
under their own authority. If any of these Kingdoms do send forth their
spiritual authority to condemn and execute all within their Dominion, which
(as they term them) are Heretics, Schismatickes, and Rebels against the
present religion or worship of God, constituted by their Authority: at the
publishing of this judgment, all that are guilty in their Consciences do flee
and hide themselves as from men, whereas all that are faithful in that
Religion, and devour in that will worship, do not scare but are more bold and
confident under the power of that God, knowing that every man shall be examined
by name, whether he be Heretic; if he be so found, it is examined, whether
he will repent, and conform to their will, and not one shall perish without
good trial.

Such is the estate of the Kingdom of God our Creator, in the authority of his
Christ, those of the world whose hearts condemn them of rebellion against the
World, and will of Majestistie, and do fear, and shift to put off his
excention, whereas all that repent, and are reconciled to him in all things,
and know the reason of his judgment, are safe from fear of the evil which is
sent against those which are from their Maker. For if men be so just, as nor to
condemn one that is no rebel, or that will repent: how shall we think that
the executioners of the judgment of God in the plague, war, or famine, are
careless to destroy any one without great cause.

The first day of the week.
I Have grieved, to consider how men are deceived by the authority, or God of
this world: in that they bring all, both God and Christ, Spirit and Word,
subject to their judgment, a These. 2.4. So that whosoever pray in spirit,
subject to their spiritual authority, they pray but to what they are servants
unto, which cannot help, because it is the fear and authority of mortal man,
to whom such spiritual service is done, the only true God and his Christ is
despised, the power and wisdom of man is exalted in their hearts, therefore if
man do not hear and help, there is not God to hear, except it be to
require vengeance for the abuse of his name and word.

2 I have considered, that they which use the word of the holy Scriptures,
translated or preached in worldly glory under moral authority, their estate is
far more inexecusable, then they which never use that word in way of prayer,
praise, thankesgiving, or spiritual worship, because these do not so
blaspheme God in Christ, as to give that honor unto man, the creature, which
is due to the Creator, as the professors do.

3. I have observed, how the wise men of this world do destroy their wisdom
by their authority, For in any doctrine of Religion, they will propose the holy
Scriptures to be then wisdom and ground of truth: but if their doctrine be
opposed by any, then they leave their wisdom and slay to their au^hority for
help: which shows that their wisdom is but a pretense, and that their
authority is the pillar and ground of their Church.

4. I have noted also the deceit of man's mind, that not what he professes, or
pretends in word to be his God and Christ, is so to him, but what he minds
in his heart under such a pretense: As if a man profess^ the only true God, or
preach the Lord Jesus Christ, and indeed do mind another word or authority
then of God: or do seek meat for his belly under the name of Jesus Christ: in
these cases it is not what he speaks, but what he imagines, minds and
seeks indeed, which is his God: and for the obtaining of the desire of his
mind, he denies God in deed, and all power of godliness.

5. Whatsoever spiritual service or worship men perform as to God, their
reading, prayers, cryings, howlings, tears, and assembling in Idol Churches
are all turned into sin, while they know not God, but give that service to
the World or Authority of men, which is only due unto God the Creator of all
men, according to his Word and Will, manifested from the beginning in Christ.

The fifth day of the week.
THe building and maintaining of the heathen Idol Temples, has been in enmity
of the Temple of our God in Israel, but now they are in contempt of the Temple
of Christ, which is his body endued with the holy Spirit Therefore all that
partake of I doll-temples do seek their life and honor in the flesh, under
the Persecutor, and thereby turns the back in contempt of the reproach of
Christ: they all deceive themselves in the flesh; they seek to save themselves
by the authority of the Devil to kill; whereas to deny their service is to
deny ones self; for they will spoil one of all.

FJNJS.

