A Hellish Murder Committed by a French Midwife, On the Body of her HUSBAND,
Jan. 27. 1687/8.

For which she was Arraigned at the Old Bailey, Feb. 22. 1687/8. and Pleaded
GVILTY.

And the Day following received Sentence to be BURNT.

LONDON, Printed for R. Sare, at Grays-Inn-Gate, and published by Randal
Tailor, near Stationers' Hall. 1688.

Introduction.
THE late Barbarous Murder of Denis Hobry, (what with Malice, Prejudice,
Credulity and Mistake) has put more Freaks and Crotchets into the Heads and
Minds of the Common People, then any Story of that size perhaps ever did in
this World before: But as Fancy, Error and Invention, have No Bounds in the
matter of Number and Variety, so with a respect to the Quality of These
Extravagancies, it would be no less Frivolous, on the Other side, to Encounter
the Passions, and the Dreams of the Multitude with Formalities of Council and
Reason: for the Exceptions are too Many to be taken Severally to pieces, and
they are too Trivial (even all together) to be worth the while of a Serious
Thought. And yet how Vain, and how Impossible soever, a Full, and a Distinct
Answer to so many Spiteful and Groundless Shams and Misunderstandings, may
appear to be; there is something yet to be done, methinks; (though but in a
Complement to Common Curiosity and Satisfaction) and the shortest way of
clearing all Difficulties, will be to Publish to the World a Plain and a Naked
Narrative of this whole Affair; as it is Delivered, and set forth in the
Enformations Themselves, that have been given in Evidence upon This Cause;
which I can the better undertake, for, in regard that they have all passed
through My Hands. This Course will settle all People Right, that have a Mind to
be set Right; and there is no better way in Nature to Rectify the
Misapprehensions of Things, than by setting forth Matter of Fact just as it
WAS; which at the same time, serves to Prove unanswerably how it was NOT. Only
a word or two of Introduction by the way.

Upon the first Rumor of this Horrible Murder, there were Two Journey-men
Joyners taken up, and Committed, upon Suspicion of having laid the Body where
'twas found; but they proved themselves upon Enquiry, to be very Honest Men.
It Is true They passed that way; They were seen thereabouts; Witnesses Examined:
and Unhappy Circumstances enough for a Ground of Jealousy: But afterward, upon
the Seizure of the Midwife, and unquestionable Proofs against her, (beside her
Own and her Sons Confession) the Coroners Inquest Met, according to an
Adjournment, and sat upon the Body, Feb. 8. 1687. where they acquitted Mary
Potron, and the Two Joyners; but Mary Hobry (the Midwife) was found Guilty of
the Murder of Denis Hobry, as Principal; and John Desermeau (the Midwifes Son)
was found Accessory after the Fact.

At Hicks-Hall, Mary Hobry had a Bill found against her, Feb. 22. 1687. for
Petty-Treason and Murder, as Principal; and on her Arraignment the same Day at
the Old Baily, she Pleaded GUILTY; but the Court with all possible Tenderness,
let her know the Danger and the Consequence of her Confession, and offered her
yet the Liberty to Depart from her Plea, and take her Trial, if she thought
fit; but she still Persisted in her Confession.

There was, after this, Another Bill found at Hicks-Hall on the same Day,
against Denis Favet, and John Favet, Frenchmen, and Brothers) as Accessories
before and after the Fact; and likewise against John Desermeau (the Son of the
said Midwife) as Accessory after the Fact.

Upon their Trial at the Old Bailey, they were All found NOT GUILTY: But the
Matter had such a Face however, that the Court thought fit to put the Two
Brothers to find Sureties for their Good Behavior.

The Woman's Confession has Prevented the Public Notification of the Foulness
of the Cause, that would otherwise have been made, by a Printed Account of the
Trial: So that it remains only to supply that Disappointment by True Copies of
the Following Enformations, which would have been the Foundation at last (in
case she had put her self upon her Defense) for the Court to Proceed upon.

Midd. and West.
The Enformation of James Richards of the Parish of St. Margarets Westminster,
Victualler, taken upon Oath, Feb. 3. 1687/8.
SAYS, That this Enformant being in Company about Four or Five a Clock in the
Afternoon, Yesterday, with Mr. Yard, and another Person; there was a Discourse
about the Dead Body that was lately found; wherereupon Mr. Yard was saying,
that there was a Friend of his missing, and that he was afraid, This was the
Man; having heard his Wife Often say, that she would Murder him, or Dispatch
him, or to that Effect. This Enformant thereupon putting it to the said Mr.
Yard, if he could make good what he said; Whose Answer was, that he could make
it good; Upon which, this Enformant advised the getting of an Officer to
Apprehend the Woman; The Third Person Answering, that to Morrow-morning would
be time enough. But this Enformant said, it was a Case would bear no Delay, and
that therefore he was resolved to Enform with all speed; to which they Agreed:
And this Enformant going then out of the Room, Mr. Yard followed, and told this
Enformant, that the Thing was too true, and that the said Woman had told him as
much; but Promised within some few Days to tell him more. Upon this, the
Enformant got a Constable, and went as an Assistant to the Apprehending of the
Woman, whom they found at a House in Phaenix-Alley, and so she was taken into
Custody, and Committed.

James Richards
Jurat' Die and Anno supradict. coram me

Roger L'Estrange.



Midd. and West.
The Enformation of Philip Yard of St. Martins in the Fields, Cook, taken upon
Oath, Feb. 3. 1687/8.
Says, That this Enformant becoming known to the Family, and to the Person of
Dennis Hobry in Paris, many Years since; and having of late been several times
in his Company here in England, where his Wife (a Midwife) was present, became
also known to the said Midwife, whom this Enformant has heard within the
Compass of Two Months last past (speaking upon a modest Recollection of his
Memory) menacing and reviling the said Dennis Hobry more then Forty several
times, Calling him Dog, Drunken Villain, and other the Fowlest Words of
Reproach; And saying over and over upon several Occasions, I must kill him, and
will kill him, though I be Hanged for 't, speaking the Words in French, C'est
un Chien; C'est un Yvrogne, etc. Il faut que Je le Tue, quoy que Je devrois
estre pendue.

And says particularly, That upon Thursday in the last Week, about Two or
Three a Clock in the Afternoon, being at the House where her Daughter Lodges,
she the said Midwife took occasion to fall into a Violent Passion against her
Husband, and brake out into Passions of Threatening to Kill him, in manner as
above recited.

And says, That on the Day mentioned in the Paragraph next above, the Wife of
Hobry, breaking into Violences of Discourse as abovesaid, desired this
Enformant to take No Notice of any thing she had said, whatever should happen.
This Enformant demanding, what she meant by that Thing that he was not to take
Notice of: She replied, of her calling her Husband Ill Names, and the like.

And says, That Three or four days after what is abovesaid, this Enformant
went to the Lodgings of the said Hobry, and Asked where he was; they made
Answer, they had not seen him for several Days. This Enformant reflecting at
that Time upon the Bloody Menaces of this Woman toward her Husband, of the
Thursday before; And that this Enformant could hear no Tidings of the said
Hobry among All his Acquaintance; This Enformant had an Apprehension within
himself, that she might have done him a Mischief.

On Wednesday Morning, being the Next Day, this Enformant went again to the
Lodging of the said Hobry, to Enquire after him, and hearing no News of him
yet, this Enformant Advised them to open the Door, for fear he might have
carried some of the Goods into France. But the People of the House would not
open the Door, because the Midwife that Lodged there had the Key.

This Enformant went the same Day to the Lodgings of the said Midwife's
Daughter, where the Mother there waited for an Opportunity of speaking with her
in Private, and took the Occasion at last to go out of the Lodgings with her;
and walking in the Street. This Enformant said after this manner to the said
Midwife, Hark ye; You spoke dangerous Words the other day concerning what you would
do to your Husband; Have you done as you said you would? For the People have
been looking every where after him, and there is no such Man to be found: I hope
it is not the mangled Body that they talk of to be murdered. No (says she) it is
not that Body. This Enformant said further to her, Why, how could you go to
Work to Dispatch a Man that you are not able to Grapple with? Oh, (says the
Woman) he put me hard to it: but I will not tell you to day; it is not a thing to be
talked off in the Street: This Enformant replying, Why, We speak French; No
body understands us. Well! (says she) Let it alone for Five or Six Days, and
I Will tell you. This Enformant pressing her again to tell him, till she Swore
she would not.

And says, That the said Midwife going toward Phoenix-Alley in Long-Acre,
where this Enformant left her, she the said Midwife said to this Enformant in
French, Bouche Clos; or in English, Not a Word.

Philip Yard.
Jurat' Die and Anno supradict. coram me

Roger L'Estrange.



Midd. and West.
The Enformation of Julian Coze, of the Parish of St. Annes Westminster,
Gardner, taken upon Oath, Feb. 9. 1687/8.
Says, That being in Company upon Thursday Last in the Evening with one Yard a
Frenchman, he the said Yard told this Enformant, that he would never see the
Parisian more, (speaking of Dennis Hobry.) This Enformant asking him, What made
him say so? To whom Yard replied, that Hobry's Wife had told him as much:
Whereupon this Enformant reflecting upon the manner of speaking, and upon
Hobry's being from his House for some time, and no News of him, He this
Enformant proposed the charging of a Constable with her, which was done that
Night accordingly; and this Enformant was Assistant to the Seizure of the said
Mrs. Hobry.

Julian Coze.
Jurat' Die and Anno supradict. coram me

Roger L'Estrange.



Midd. and West.
The Enformation of Henry Fuller, of St. Margarets Westminster, taken upon Oath
Feb. 17. 1687/8.
Says, That being told by James Richards a Victualler, in Long-Ditch, that
there were Two Frenchmen at the said Richard's House, that were speaking
something about the Murdered Body, and that one of them said, the Woman,
suspected for the Murder, had as good as Owned it; This Enformant being in the
Office of a Constable, agreed with the said Richards to go to the Lodgings of
the said Woman, and Apprehended her upon the Suspicion: Whereupon, This
Enformant, and the said Richards, taking one Philip Yard along with them, and
another Person then in the Company, went to the House where the said Woman
Lodged, but missing her at Home, went according to Direction to the Last in
Phaenix-Alley, where they took her into Custody. This being betwixt Eleven and
Twelve at Night, upon the Second of this Instant February: And not finding a
Justice of Peace up, Delivered her up to the Gate House 'till next Morning.

Hen. Fuller.
Jurat. Die and Anno supradict. coram me

Roger L'Estrange.



The Enformation of Christopher Austin, of St. Paul's Covent Garden, Shoemaker,
taken upon Oath, Feb. 3. 1687/8.
Says, That being the Servant of John Yzember, (or some such Name) a
Shoemaker living at the Golden Shoe in Phaenix-Alley, Long-Acre; the Mistress
of this Enformant being ready to fall in Labor, sent her Prentice Richard to a
French Midwife, living in Castle-street, to come and Assist her: the said
French Midwife coming to the Mistress of this Enformant, and she not presently
falling in Labor as she expected, she desired the Midwife to stay that Night
with her, for she did not know how things might fall out. The Midwife staid
accordingly, and went away the next morning; this was some Day last Week, but
this Enformant does not remember what part of the Week. The Midwife aforesaid
came several times after this, to enquire how it was with this Enformants
Mistress; and particularly, came Last Night to the House, and Supped there, and
desired to Lodge there, because she did not know what Occasion there might be
for her: This Enformants Mistress agreeing that she should be there that Night:
The Midwife went accordingly to Bed toward Eleven a Clock. There came a
Constable to the Door, just about the Watch, crying Eleven; when Richard, this
Enformants Fellow-Prentice, Asked Who was there? To which, no Answer being
returned, this Enformant called again and again, Who Is there? If you do not
Answer, you shall not come in. Upon this a Frenchman asked in English, if
Madame, meaning the Midwife, was within? but this Enformant does not remember
the Name. Upon this, the said Richard above-spoken of, spoke in French to the
French Midwife, and told her, that somebody called for her to go to a Woman's
Labor; whereupon the Midwife went up to this Enformants Mistress to fetch the
Keys: So this Enformants Mistress went down along with the Midwife, the said
Midwife desiring that Richard might go along with her, and carry a Light. Upon
this, the Boy got up, and the Midwife opened the Door, a Frenchman entering
first, and bidding the Constable come in; who, upon coming in, showed his
Staff, the Midwife seeming Surpised. Hereupon, one of the French^'d the
Midwife, Where her Husband was? who An^ that she left him in Bed last Thursday;
the Frenchman Answering, that if she left him in Bed, it was with his Arms and
Legs cut off: The Midwife, upon these Words, delivered up her self before they
laid Hands of her, and Desired them to make No Noise, but to go Civilly along
with her. This Enformants Mistress Then did bid Richard ask what the Matter
was? To which, a Frenchman made Answer, that he would swear, that she walked up
and down the Room when she had Cut off one Limb, and then Cut off the rest in
her own Bed. Upon giving an account hereof to this Enformants Mistress, the
Constable Commanded the Frenchman Last above mentioned to Assist in Carrying
her away; This Enformants Mistress giving order for a Piece of Link to Light
them along. And upon Discourse among them, the Frenchman that Spoke of what he
could swear, told the Midwife that he was taken upon Suspicion, and that if he
were Called, he must Impeach her, and tell the Truth: The abovesaid Richard,
speaking to This Enformant of some Blood in the Bed, by which it was discovered.

And says, That the Prentice, Richard before spoken of, said to This
Enformant, That This Murder if'twere Twenty Year would be found out at Last,
and This in the Hearing of the Midwife, who made No Answer. And the said
Richard told This Enformant further; That his Master saying in the Hearing of
the Midwife, that if he knew who it was that did it, he would be the first that
should tell on it, adding that he never heard of such a thing in his Days;
Hereupon the Midwife said, she saw the Limbs brought from the Savoy in a Sack.

This Enformants Mistress upon the hearing of the Story gave Hard words to the
Midwife, and called her Villain, saying if she had Imagined such a Thing she
should never have come within her Doors.

And moreover, that the Prentice abovementioned, told This Enformant that he
Heard the said Frenchman say, that she had formerly Threatened to kill her
Husband.

The Mark of C Christ. Austen.
Jurat' Die and Anno supradict' Coram me

To. L'Estrange.



Midd. and West.
The Enformation of Richard Kirkham Servant to John Yzember, Shoemaker of the
Parish of Covent Garden, Taken upon Oath, Feb. 1687/8.
Says, That a French Midwife passing by the Name of Madam Desermeau, came Last
Night to the House of This Enformants Master, stayed Supper there, and was to
have Lodged there; and That This Enformant heard his Mistress say, That the
said Midwife desired she might stay there All Night; being Under some
Disappointment at home.

When the Key of the Street-Door was Taken out, and About the Hour of Eleven,
there was a knocking at the Door; And an Enquiry after a French Midwife, Naming
the Person; and This Enformant said she was There: And upon Further Discourse,
the Person at the Door said he came from one Mrs. Richards in Shandois Street.
The French Woman Scrupled at going to Strangers; but however she would Fetch
the Key; And being come down, and one of the Persons that knocked being let
into the House, the French Midwife would have had this Enformant to go before,
to see what was the matter. This Enformant went to the Door then, with one
Richards, being one of those that knocked at the Door, who immediately made a
Sign, and a Constable and two others came in; and upon their Entry, One asked,
which it was? To which, a Frenchman, one Yard, replied, This is the Woman,
pointing to the Person: Whereupon the Constable showed his Staff, and took her
into Custody. This Enformants Mistress being Frighted at this, Asked What the
matter was? To which the Midwife replied, Quelque Drollerie: Or in English,
Some little Waggery. This Enformant's Mistress pressing more and more to know
the Business: And some body asking the Midwife Where her Husband was? She made
Answer, that she had not seen him since the Thursday before, when she left him
in Bed. And being asked, If she had not seen him since? She said, No: and, in
French, that he was a Vagabond, and she knew nothing of his ways, or to that
Effect. It was Replied, She must find him out: And her Answer was, How should
she find him out, that did not see him once in six Months? One of the
Frenchmen made Answer, that he would be found: This Enformants Mistress asking
thereupon, (as mistrusting the Business) Where he was, or what was become of
him? Some One of the Frenchmen replying, that he was dead, and cut in pieces;
and that by her own Hands, in her own Room, and in her own Bed. This Enformants
Mistress speaking furiously to her, Traitresse! Que vous ayez Commise une Crime
si Noire! Traitress that thou art, to be Guilty of so black a Crime! No, Madam,
(says she) I am Innocent; And so they Carried her away; and at Parting, Well,
(said this Enformant's Mistress) I believe I shall never see you more.

The Mark of R Rich. Kirkham.
Jurat. Die and Anno supradict. coram me

To. L'Estrange.



Midd. and West.
The Enformation of John Izember, of the Parish of St. Paul's Covent Garden,
taken upon Oath, February 3. 1687/8.
Says, That this Enformant has known a French Midwife, by the Name (to the
best of this Enformants memory) of Desermeau, for about five years last past,
she having laid this Enformants Wife of several Children.

And says, that about Ten or Twelve Days since, the Wife of this Enformant
sent for the said Midwife, being, as she thought, ready to fall in Labor. The
Midwife came accordingly, and the Wife of this Enformant desired her to stay
all Night, to see the Event of that Illness: She stayed, but the next morning
this Enformant's Wife finding her self better, the Midwife went away, but came
day by day afterward to Enquire how 'twas with her.

And says, That the said Midwife came Last Night to the House of this
Enformant, saying, that she did not care for lying at home that Night; and so
she Supped with this Enformant, whose Wife told him, that she had agreed she
should Lodge there that Night. About Eleven a Clock, the Midwife came up to
this Enformants Wife, and asked her for the Key of the House; saying, that
there was some body knocked to call her to a Woman's Labor; but she did not
know the Voice, and had a mind to see who it was: This Enformants Wife
thereupon going down with her to open the Door. After which, this Enformants
Wife told this Enformant, that the Midwife said I do not care to go Alone with
that Man, (speaking of one of the Company) Pray let your Servant go along with
me. Upon this, a Frenchman that was already Entered the House, called in the
Constable. And this Enformant, upon the Subject matter of this Clause, refers
himself to the Testimony of his Wife, from whom this Enformant had the Relation.

Jean Izember.
Jurat. Die and Anno supradict. coram me

To. L'Estrange.



Midd. and West.
The Enformation of Mary, the Wife of Tobias Hope, of the Parish of St. Martins
in the Fields, Sawyer, taken upon Oath, Feb. 3. 1687/8.
Says, That a French Midwife, of whose Name this Enformant cannot give a
perfect Account, Lodged in the House of this Enformant for about Three Months
last past; And that within the Compass of that time, (but the precise time
uncertain) a Person that the said Midwife said was her Husband, came and Lodged
with her, and went (as this Enformant was told) into France, about a Month or
Six Weeks since, (to this Enformants best memory;) And that he returned again
to the House of this Enformant about Three Weeks since; and that this Enformant
has not taken Notice of his Lodging in the House for about Ten or Twelve Days
since.

But that some time last Week, this Enformant Asked the said Midwife how it
came to pass that he did not Lodge in the House, and where he was? The
Midwife's Daughter, in the Presence of the Mother, telling this Enformant, that
he heard there was a Warrant out against him, and he durst not come; saying
further, that he was to go with a Lord into New England for Three Years: And
the Daughter saying, that her Husband did Work for that Lord, and that her
Husband would give the said Midwife's Husband Thirty Shillings to Cloth him,
and 'twould be a good Riddance of him. The Daughter Adding, that the Mother
should keep out of the Way till he was gone. And the Mother likewise came
Yesterday morning to the House of this Enformant, and said, that Now he was
gone, for which she was Glad with all her Heart, and that she came now to Lodge
there again.

And says, That the Midwife and her Daughter came to this Enformants House
upon Last Tuesday morning, and paid this Enformant Eight Shillings in part of
Rent; and the Mother desired this Enformant to let her have a pair of Sheets;
but this Enformant put her off 'till Saturday, and she rested contented.

At the Time next above mentioned, this Enformant Asked the Midwife and her
Daughter, whether they had seen the murdered Body? The Midwife replied, No,
No, she did not love any such Sights. This Enformant taking Notice of a very
outrageous Quarrel betwixt them, Advised the Woman to have a care what she did
to her Husband, being afraid it might go further. The Enformant refers her
self upon the Particulars above, to the best of her Memory.

The Mark of Y Mary Hope.
Jurat. Die and Anno supradict. coram me

To. L'Estrange.



The Enformation of Elizabeth Beech, the Daughter of Mary Hope abovementioned.
THis Enformant says upon Oath, That the whole matter in the above-written
Enformation of her Mother is true to her Knowledge.

And says, that there is a Lock put on to a Backdoor of a Low Room where the
Midwife Lodged, which had only a Bolt before; and that this Enformant knew
nothing of it till this morning.

The mark of E Elizabeth Beecb.
Jurat. Die and Anno supradict. coram me

To. L'Estrange.



Midd. and West.
The Enformation of Maria Anne Rippault the Wife of Claude Royer, of the Parish
of St. Giles's in the Fields, Goldsmith, Taken upon Oath, Feb. 20. 1687/8.
Says, That This Enformant was told about a Fortnight or Three Weeks before
the Murder of Hobry was spoken of, that the said Hobry was returned out of
France; about which time, the reputed Wife of Hobry, came to the Lodgings of
This Enformant, and Discoursed to This Enformant in the Presence of this
Enformants Mother to the Effect following. Mon Coquin de Mary est encore Vne
fois Revenu de France; and in English, This Rogue My Husband is come back out
of France again. My Cousins are stark mad upon it, but we have Complotted, or
laid our Heads together, how to get quit of him. This Enformant replying, why,
what will You do? How will You get quit of him? the other making Answer, You
shall hear more of That 'ere it be Long. And so she went her way.

And This Enformant being Interrogated, if she had had any Discourse formerly
with the Wife of Hobry concerning the Cousins before spoken of; she makes This
Answer, That the said Wife of Hobry having Assisted This Enformant about five
or six Months since, in the Office of a Midwife; among other Discourses said to
This Enformant to the Purpose following, These Cousins of Mine are good
Husbands, and Industrious Men, and there are enough would Marry them, but we will
keep them to our selves, for My self and my Daughter. (who both of them had
Husbands at the same time.) This Enformant Asking her how she could think of
Marrying Those Young Fellows to her Self and her Daughter, when they had
Husbands already? The Wife of Hobry replying, Oh Never Trouble your self for
that: I'ay des ruses de diable pour nous en defaire; In English, I will find
out as many Tricks as the Devil himself but we will get quit of him. This
Enformant being at that Time Indisposed, does not recollect any thing further
Material in that Discourse.

But This Enformant says further, That the Wife of Hobry came to This
Enformants Lodgings upon Thursday next after the finding of the Body, about
four or five a Clock in the Afternoon, with the Younger of the Two Cosins
before spoken of, whose Name, as This Enformant remembers, is Favet: This
Enformant asking the said Woman, He bien! vous vous estes desfaite donc de
vostre Mary; In English, Well! You have got quit of Your Husband then? The
Woman Answered Ouy: and the Young Favet (or Cousin) stood a little while, Pale,
and Surpised, but recovering Himself: Ouy (dit il) nous l'avons envoyee aux
Maroquins; and quand il reviendra il nous apportera des Diamands; In English,
Yes (says he) we have sent him into the Indies, and when he comes back again he
will bring us Diamonds; speaking the words Smiling, and in a way of Raillery.
And hereupon, the Wife of Hobry and Young Favet being about to go away, This
Enformant asked them whether they were going? The Woman made Answer, We are
going Home, speaking of the House where Hobry Lodged.

And further says, That upon Thursday above mentiond, about Eleven or Twelve
at Noon, the Mother of This Enformant said to her to This Effect, Here has been
This Morning the Wife of Hobry, who tells me, that she is now got quit of the
Rogue her Husband; and that she hus sent him away to the Indies. This
Enformants Mother Asking her How she had sent him away to the Indies? She said,
That they had made him Drunk with Brandy, and put him on Board, and that the
Elder Favet had lent her Two Guinneas to give to the People to say Nothing of
it. Hobry Pursuing her discourse how she had told her Two Cosins, that she
should be the ruin of them in Taking their Money, To which she received for
Answer, That if she got but quit of her Husband, they could earn more Money.

And This Enformant calls also to Mind that she has heard the said Hobry
say, several Months since, many Times, That she would be the Death of her
Husband, and that she had it several times in her Thoughts to Strangle him, and
put him into a Common-shore, near at hand to her Lodgings, but that it was too
Little, for she had Measured it; and she was Resolved to Cut him in Pieces, or
to Dispatch him some other way.

Mari-Anne Rippault.
Jurat' Die and Anno supradicto Coram Me

To. L'Estrange.



Midd. and West.
The Enformation of Joan Rippault, of the Parish of St. Giles's in the Fields,
taken upon Oath, Feb. 20. 1687/8.
Says, That she has many times heard the Wife of Dennis Hobry exclaim against
her Husband, calling him Drunkard, and Lewd Names; and that within the Compass
of Five or Six Months last past, she this Enformant has heard the said wife of
Hobry, say (meaning her Husband) that she would kill him, and that she has had
it in her head to Kill him, and cast him, dans l'Esgoust, that is to say, in
the Common Shore; but that upon measuring the Passage, she found it was too
narrow for him.

And says, that the said Wife of Hobry telling this Enformant at a time
uncertain, (but since Hobry 's last Return out of France) that the Villain her
Husband was now returned out of France, and that her Little Cousins (speaking
of the Two Brothers that passed under the Name of Favet) were very much
troubled at it; but saying withal, (speaking of the Two Brothers) We have been
advising together how to get rid of him.

And says, that upon Thursday, in the Week when the Body was said to be found,
the said Wife of Hobry came alone to this Enformant in a Low Chamber, saying
after this manner to her, My Daughter has bid me come and tell you something
concerning my Husband; This Enformant asking what it was; the other replied, I
have sent my Husband to the Indies, and I have given Fifty Guinnea's to put him
aboard, and to send him away: This Enformant asking her if she had so much
Money; she replied, Yes, she had gathered it together, saying over and above,
That a Kinsman of Hobry had helped to make him drunk, and so got him aboard:
And without the help of Hobry's Kinsman, I could have done nothing. I borrowed
two Guinnea's more of Le Grand Cousin for People to keep Hobry quiet in the
Ship if he should be troublesome; pursuing this Discourse, and saying further,
that she told the Two Brothers, this drawing of Money from them would be their
Ruin: To which one of them replied, Get quit of your Husband, and we can get
more Money.

And further, that the Wife of Hobry came toward the Evening to the Lodgings of
this Enformant, with the Younger Favet in her Company, to whom the Daughter of
this Enformant said somewhat to this purpose, Well! You have got clear of your
Husband then? The Wife replying, Yes, we have sent him for the Indies, and the
Younger Favet, saying thereupon, We have sent him to the Maroquins to look for
Diamonds.

Jane Rippault.
Jurat. Die and Anno Supradict. coram me

To. L'Estrange.



The Enformation of Claude Poullet of Long-Acre, Enammel-Painter, taken upon
Oath, Feb. 20. 1687/8.
Says, That about five Months since, this Enformant heard the Wife of Hobry
talking Bitterly against her Husband to Mademoiselle Mary-Anne Rippault, among
other matters, in Words to this Effect, I have had it several Times in my
Thought, to Strangle that Husband of mine, and to throw him into the
Common-Shore, before my Door; but I have taken measure of the Place; and I find
it is too little to receive the Body, unless I should cut him all to pieces:
But I must do it some other way.

C. Poullet.
Jurat. Die and Anno supradict. coram me

To. L'Estrange.



Midd. and West.
The Enformation of Margaret Vasal, of the Parish of St. Anne Westminster,
taken upon Oath, Feb. 6. 1687/8.
Says, That Yesterday was Sennight, Dame Hobry a Midwife came after Mass to
the House of this Enformant, being formerly known to this Enformant, and asked
to Dine with her: For she was loath to go home to Dinner, because there was some
body she had no mind to see. She staid Dinner, and told this Enformant that she
was going into the Country the next day to lay a Lady of Quality; this
Enformant telling her she would lose those in the Town that had occasion to
make use of Her: Hobry Answering, That would make amends for all. Hobry had at
that Time a little Office of our Blessed Lady in her hand, and thereupon told
her this Enformant, that it was the first Present that Hobry had made her; upon
which Words she fetched a Deep Sigh; and told this Enformant, that her Husband
had threatened to Dispatch her in Three or Four days.

After this, Ah my dear Lady, says she, I know you well enough to be a Person
that I may trust my Life in your hands. This Enformant asking her immediately,
How your Life? Pray will you explain your self; You Fright me: What Is the
matter? Well, says Hobry, Upon pain of Eternal Damnation, lift up your hand,
and promise you will never discover it, but keep it as secret as if'twere under
the seal of Confession: And fetching a deep Sigh, I have murdered that
miserable man, she cried. This Enformant calling out to her, Miserable Wretch,
what have you done, and bid her be gone; Hobry begging Advice what she should
do; this Enformant bad her be gone; she would have nothing to do with her;
Hobry crying out, She was Lost, She was mad, and other like Words of
Desperation; this Enformant seeming not to believe her: Hobry told her, that
she had strangled him with his Crevat.

Hobry told this Enformant further, that the Landlady of the House came into
her Chamber, and asked if it were not a Shame that her Husband should be abed
at that time of day? Hobry telling the Landlady that he had been out Late, and
bid her let him lie a-sleep, whereupon the Landlady went away.

And further; Hobry told this Enformant, that she had declared the Murder to
her Two Cousins, and begged their help to carry him away; but they told her
that for the whole World they would have nothing to do in it: And upon this,
Hobry went away crying.

And that upon Thursday Last, about Nine in the Morning, Hobry came again to
this Enformant, and this Enformant spoke softly to her, O thou wretched
Creature, art thou not content to murder thy Husband, without cutting him to
pieces! Hobry replying to this Enformant, that She had not cut him to pieces.
And in Proof of it, she said, That This was a Lord, with several Rings upon his
Finger, and his Head was found in the Park: But she said further, that she had
caused him to be Buried by two of his Particular Friends; and that the doing of
it cost her Fifty Pieces, and there was an End of him: but for her own Part,
she was a lost Woman.

This Enformant told her, 'twas impossible for her to Bury her Husband, and no
body to take Notice of it, for she could not carry him out alone; But she said
Yes, he was Buried, and that in Three or Four days she would tell her where he
was Buried.

Margaret Vasal.
Jarat. Die and Anno supradict. coram me

To. L'Estrange.



Midd. and West.
The Enformation of James Lorraine, of the Parish of St. James Westminster,
Surgeon, taken upon Oath, Feb. 3. 1687/8.
Says, That about Three Months since, this Enformant had some Discourse with a
French Midwife, and asked her what was become of her Husband? She made Answer,
she would give a good deal to have him Drowned or Killed.

And further, that on this Last Wednesday he went to the House where the said
Midwife Lodged, and missing of her Husband, left a Chalk upon the Door, of
Direction, where Dennis Hobry might come to this Enformant; and according to
the Appointment of the abovesaid Direction upon the Door, the Wife of the said
Hobry came to this Enformant, of whom the said Enformant inquired, What was
become of her Husband? Who Answered, That he was afraid of an Arrest, and
durst not show himself: This Enformant Answering, that he would show him where
he should be safe, and try to make up the Business; the said Midwife Answering,
that she would bring him Word the next morning. On Thursday morning (Yesterday)
the said Enformant met her at Chapel, who asking again after her Husband,
received for Answer, That he was gone to the Indies, and he should never see
him more.

This Enformant asked her this Morning before two of his Majesty's Justices of
Peace, what was become of her Husband? she said, She could not tell him; but
Such a One would give him a particular Account of it, mentioning a Person, whom
this Enformant took to be Yard.

And says, That this Enformant being Interrogated if he knew any Mark about
the Body of Dennis Hobry, to Distinguish him particularly from another Man?
This Enformant says, That he remembers that he had a Scar upon One Hand, and
since the Delivering of the said Evidence, He This Enformant has been to see
the said Body and Limbs, where they lay Exposed, and told Sir Robert Clark, one
of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace, with the Officer that showed the Body,
and other Persons that were there Present, that if This was the Body, and Those
the Limbs of Dennis Hobry, there would be found a Scar upon such a Part of the
Hand; and upon the Sight of the Limbs, there was a Scar to be seen upon the
right Hand, as This Enformant had told Sir Robert Clark and Others before, who
likewise saw the said Scar with This Enformant.

Pet. Lugg. J. Lorraine.

Jurat' Die and Anno supradict. Coram Nobis

To. L'Estrange.



Midd. and West.
The Enformation of Anthony Matson, Beadle of the Dutchy-Liberty in the Strand.
Says, That by the order of Mr. Thomas Harris, High Constable of the Hundred
of Oswalston, This Enformant caused Night-Men to come and search the House of
Office belonging to the House of Mr. deFresneau, near Exeter-Change, where this
Enformant attended accordingly; and saw the taking up of a Head out of the said
House of Office, in a Cloth, about a Fortnight since; which This Enformant
Carried to his own House; and there Caused it to be Washed, and afterward by
the order of the High-Constable Carried it to a Body at St. Giles's Bone-House.
This Enformant having had the said Head in his Custody all the While, from the
taking it up, to the Delivery of it to the said Bone-House.

Ant. Matson.
Jurat' Die and Anno supradict' Coram Me

To. L'Estrange.



Midd. and West.
The Enformation of Giles Malvault etc. And Mary Hope, Taken upon Oath, Feb. 6.
1687/8.
THEY say Jointly and Severally, that having been up at St. Giles's Church
together, to see the Head of a Man that lies there Exposed; They These
Enformants Declare that they knew the Person of Denis Hobry, Reputed the
Husband of a French Midwife, and that they Know That to have been the Head and
Face of Denis Hobry.

Giles Malvault. The Mark of cH Mary Hope.

Jurat' Die and Anno supradict' Coram Me

R. L'Estrange.



Midd. and West.
The Examination of Mary the Wife of Lewis Pottron of the Parish of S. Giles's
in the Fields, taken Feb. 3. 1687/8.
THat she, this Examinate, was at the House of Mr. Hope, where her Father and
her Mother lodged, upon Wednesday last, and her Mother likewise in Company, she
and this Examinate going thither together: And that this Informant went thither
to pay some Money owing for Rent, there being Twelve Shillings due, and Eight
Shillings paid. And this Examinate says, That she was not there Yesterday.

And says, That this Examinate went to the House of the said Mr. Hope, upon
Monday last in the Morning, and that her only Business was to see her Mother,
and that there was no Discourse of her Father.

And says, That upon Tuesday, the Mother of this Examinate, was about Noon,
(as this Examinate remembers) at the Lodgings of this Examinate, telling this
Examinate, That there was a great Noise in the Street about a Dead Body that
was found, saying, It was a sad thing; and this Examinate answered, That she
had heard of it too: And that this is all the Examinate remembers of the said
Discourse.

And says, being interrogated, If she, this Examinate, ever spoke of her
Husband's allowing Thirty Shillings to her Father-in-Law Hobry, to buy Clothes,
or to that Effect, and that if the Money were lost, it would be a good Riddance.
This Examinate says, That she said nothing to that Purpose.

And this Examinate being asked, if she gave her Opinion for her Mother not to
appear 'til her Father-in-Law was gone; This Examinate positively denies her
having said any thing to that Purpose.

And says, being interrogated, When she last saw her Father at his Lodgings at
Mr. Hopes, That it was upon Sunday last was Sennight.

And being interrogated, If ever she saw her Mother in any other Lodging when
she lay from Home; says, That she has not heard where her Mother Lodged, at
any time since her lodging with Mrs Hope; but only once or twice, as she
believes, in Phoenix-Alley.

The Mark of X Mary Pottron.
Die and Anno supradict' coram me,

To. L'Estrange.



Midd. and West.
The further Examination of Mary Pottron, Feb. 5. 1687/8. Says,
THat this Examinate has several times heard her Father-in-law Denis Hobry,
say to this Purpose; That he would be the Death of this Informant's Mother: And
has likewise heard her Mother say, That Denis Hobry had often threatened it;
but that this Examinate never heard her Mother speak of any purpose she had to
kill her Husband.

And says, That this Examinate has not seen the Dead Body of her Father;
neither was she any ways Consenting or Privy to any Violence upon him; but that
she has observed her Mother to be very much Disordered in her Mind for about a
Week last past. And that she, this Examinate, asking her Mother what she ailed,
received for Answer She was not well.

And being interrogated, If she, this Examinate, knows one Matthew Darney a
Joyner, or one David Foster a Joyner also: She, this Examinate, makes answer,
That she knows neither the One nor the Other.

The Mark of X Mary Pottron.
Capt' Die. and Anno, supradict' coram me,

To. L'Estrange.



Midd. and West.
The Examination of John Desermeau, Servant to Martin Dubois, of the Parish of
S. Clement's Danes, Weaver, Feb. 3. 1687/8. Says,
THat upon Monday Morning last, the Mother of this Examinate came to his Master
to have him Home with her, to speak to one that she could not understand, this
Examinates Mother not understanding English; and about Nine or Ten a Clock,
this Examinate went with his Mother to her Lodgings; but the Man she spoke of
did not come.

This Examinate stayed at his Mothers Lodgings about half an Hour, and went
then to Covent Garden, where this Examinate staid 'til Seven or Eight a Clock
at Night, where he spoke to no Body; but about that Hour returned Home to his
Mothers, and saw his Mother, and staid about a quarter of an Hour, and then
went and lay under a Stall over against the Rose Tavern all Night. About Seven
a Clock in the Morning, he went again to his Mothers, where he saw his Mother,
and saw his Sister also that Morning, meeting her in New-Street in the Strand.

Capt' Die and Anno supradict' coram me

To. L'Estrange.



Midd. and West.
The further Examination of John Desermeau, Servant to Martin Dubois, etc. Feb.
5. 1687/8. Says,
THat the Mother of this Examinate (Mary Hobry) has said several times, That
she was afraid her Husband would Kill her, and that he Threatened her several
mornings, when he had been all night at a Debauch.

And that upon Monday last, the Mother of this Examinate fetched him from his
Master home to her Lodgings, where she told this Informant that his Father was
dead, and he must help to carry him away; showing the Body (as it lay upon the
Bed) to this Examinate; who said he would not help her, and asked her, why she
did such a Thing? Whereupon she said to this Examinate, as at other times, That
she was continually in fear of him, and asked this Examinate what she should do
with him; and hereupon this Examinate offered to go away, but she hindered him
from going out, and then she would have this Examinate help her to Quarter the
Body, which this Examinate refused, and did not so much as touch it, but went
away into the the next Room, his Mother saying she would do it her self then;
so she took a Knife, and afterward brought the Head into the other Room, where
this Examinate was: Going back again, and cutting off the Legs, the Arms, and
the Thighs, and bringing them into the Room one after another; this Examinate
pressing to be gone, but she bad him stay, and not leave her alone. After this
she put the Body in a Rag, and took it up with her Peticoat, and, after several
Refusals to help, and to go along with her; This Examinate went with her at
last, she saying she was loath to go alone, upon which she went away with the
Body into Parker's-Lane, and there threw it behind a Dunghill.

After she was rid of the Body, she went back and took the Thighs, and carried
them to the Savoy, and put them into the House-of-Office, and from thence
returning, she carried the Legs and Arms to the same place, this Examinate
going along with her.

And after that, she went back for the Head, and propounded the putting of it
into a Common-House-of Office; this Examinate telling her, that he was afraid
to meddle with it, his Mother replying, That if she should be taken, he would
be in no danger, because he did not touch it. From thence she went back again
and went to Bed.

This Examinate being Interrogated, Whether he ever heard how his own Father
came by his Death, and whether his Mother had ever been Questioned about it? He
makes Answer, That he has heard it said by some, that he died of a Wound; by
others, that he died of a Natural Death; but never heard any thing of it
Charged upon his Mother.

And says, That upon Monday last this Examinate asked his Mother if his Sister
knew of his Fathers being Dead, who made Answer, Yes she did: And says, That
he knows not any such Person as Matthew Darney, or David Foster.

The Mark of X John Desermeau.
Capt' Die and Anno supradict' coram me

To. L'Estrange.



Midd. and West.
The Examination of Mary Hobry, of the Parish of S. Martins in the Fields,
taken Feb. 4. 1687/8. Says,
THat this Examinate was Married to Denis Hobry about four years since; and
that after the Solemn Marriage of the Church, he the said Denis Hobry, with
Curses and Imprecations denied the said Marriage, and and cast all sort of
Infamous Reproaches upon this Examinate: This being the occasion of all his
Outrages, because this Examinate would not submit to a compliance with him in
Villainies contrary to Nature. In the miserable Condition above spoken of, this
Examinate lived for the space of Three Months, under Beatings and Revilings,
going every day in danger of her Life.

This Examinate being brought to Desperation by this miserable Usage, retired
into a Private Chamber, and left him, living very close for a matter of Four
Months, when her said Husband going into France, she appeared abroad again, and
followed her Affairs. This continued for about Two Years, he being most of the
time in France.

After this Examinate had been Two years Married, and Suffered, and Parted as
above, her said Husband came Three or Four times to her, making large Promises
how good a Husband he would be, and how kindly he would live with her; and in
fine, desired that by all means they might live together again, declaring that
he had Confessed his Sins to Almighty God, and that he would be another Man. To
which this Examinate yielded, upon Condition that he should declare the same
before a Priest and Two Witnesses, and own, That this Examinate was his Lawful
Wife: which Declaration was Made and Signed before Father Gaspar, and Entered
in Writing upon a Register.

This Examinate had not been above two or three days with him again, before he
began to use her as formerly, and continued his Ill-usage for a matter of two
Months upon the same Subject and Occasion as formerly. About that time he went
away into France, and carried all away that he could, to the wearing Clothes
and Necessaries of this Examinate. After Three Months stay, he returned again,
and upon the same Instances and Promises as before, this Examinate submitted to
accompany with him again: And this way of Life this Examinate led from time to
time, till this last unhappy Separation, her Husband continuing in the same way
still, of Leaving her, and Coming again, and using her Ill.

This Examinate finding herself in this hopeless Condition, and under frequent
Temptations of putting some violent end to her Misfortunes, she rather chose to
make Trial if she could prevail upon him to agree to a Final Separation, and
pressed it upon him several times with great Earnestness; but he still refused it
with Outrages of Language and Actions, telling this Examinate he would be the
Ruin of her.

This Informant finding herself without Remedy, in a Distraction of Thoughts,
and under the Affliction of Bodily Distempers, contracted by her said Husband's
dissolute Course of Life, her Frailty was no longer able to resist the
Temptations of dangerous Thoughts; sometimes this Examinate was thinking to go
into some other Part of the World and leave him; and other while she was
tempted to think of Extremities either upon her Husband or upon Her self; and
often told her Husband plainly, That she would Kill him if he followed that
Course: This Examinate having lamented her Condition to others of her
acquaintance, and telling them she was not able to live this course of Life,
and that Mischief would come on it at last. But after all these dangerous Words
and Menaces, this Examinate upon Recollection, bethought her self of the
Horridness of the Sin, and by God's Grace was diverted from executing so wicked
a Resolution.

And says, That this Examinate was transported about two or three Months
since, to that degree of Rage and Impatience, that she took a Knife once with a
Resolution to Kill her Husband, but retracted and did not go forward with it.
And that she took the same Desperate Resolution again, a matter of fifteen Days
after, proposing both times to do it in the Night; but by the Grace of God she
was then again restrained.

And says, That she this Examinate told her Husband in the Morning, both these
times, the Resolution she had taken over Night to Kill him in his Bed; but he
made slight of it, and told this Examinate she durst not do it.

And says, That on the very Evening before this Examinate's Husband went last
into France, this Examinate spoke to her Husband to this effect; Hobry, you are
now going into France, pray bethink your self and lead a better Life; for when
you come back again, if you Treat me as you did formerly, I do not know what
Extremities you may Provoke me to. Whereupon he promised this Examinate with
dreadful Oaths, that he would be a good Husband to her.

The Husband of this Examinate returned out of France, and came to this
Informant's Lodgings about three Weeks since, when this Informant received him
after the following manner, saying to him, Hobry, you are welcome, and pray
will you change your course of Life now, that we may live Comfortably together.
Yes (says he) upon condition you will put me in Clothes, and furnish me with
what I want. (He having got Money in France, and spent it to the last
Farthing.) This Informant told him she could not supply him at that Rate, for
Times were hard, and she had much ado to Live and pay Honest Debts. This
Examinate's Husbands replying to this effect; If you do not do as I say, I will
be a worse Husband to you than ever I was. This Examinate told him she did not
know what she should do with him, for his Barbarous Usages had made her Mad.
And his way was, so often as he asked any thing of this Informant that she
could not supply him with, he would abuse her, and say he would make her repent
of it. And this Examinate has been told by one Yard, that her Husband said in
his hearing, That he would be the Destruction of her. This was the Course of
Life this Examinate led, till this Thursday last was Sennight; upon which day
this Examinate had no Thought of offering any Violence to her Husband, but went
to Bed about her usual hour, Ten a Clock, leaving the Fore-door open for him
when he should come home.

About Five in the Morning, the Husband of this Examinate came in, outragiously
in Choler, and more than half Drunk. This Examinate was a-sleep, till her
Husband Waked her with a heavy Blow with his Fist upon her Stomach, and said to
her, What! you are Drunk? This Examinate Answering, No; you are Drunk, you would
never come home at Five a Clock in the Morning else; you have been among base
Company. He made this Answer, I have been among Bougres and Rogues, that have
made me Mad, and you shall pay for it; whereupon he gave this Examinate another
violent Blow upon the Breast: With That, this Examinate turned from him, and
fell a weeping. And this Examinate declares in the Presence of Almighty God,
That she had not as yet any Purpose or Thoughts of attempting upon his Life.

While this Examinate was weeping, her Husband took her in his Arms and Pressed
her so hard, that she could not fetch her Breath, and that the Blood started
out of her Mouth. Immediately upon this, he attempted the Forcing of this
Examinate to the most Unnatural of Villainies, and acted such a Violence upon
her Body in despite of all the Opposition that she could make, as forced from
her a great deal of Blood, this Examinate crying out to her Landlady, who was
(as she believes) out of distance of hearing her. This Examinate told him, I
will immediately Rise and Complain to the Neighbors: Whereupon he took her
Forcibly by the Arm, and threw her down upon the Bed, being before siting-up to
rise; and after this, Bit her like a Dog, etc. -- this Examinate saying to him,
Am I to lead this Life for ever? Yes, and a worse too, ere it be long, you had
best look to your self, and upon these words he fell a-sleep.

Upon this Respite the Examinate lay in Torments both of Body and of Mind,
thinking with her self, What will become of me? What am I to do! Here am I
Threatened to be Murdered, and I have no way in the World to Deliver my self,
but by Beginning with him; and immediately upon these Thoughts, this Examinate
started up and took one of his Garters, which was de Fiscelle, or Pack-thread,
put it double about his Neck et la noua en serrant de toute sa Force, and so
tied it, and drew it as hard as she could, de sort qu'il en estoit Estrangle
dans un quart d' heure, sans beaucoup de Resistance. Insomuch that he was
Choked with it in a Quarter of an Hour, with little resistance. The Body
rested there till Monday, only this Examinate took off the Pack-thread within a
Quarter of an Hour after his Death; and in hopes that he was not yet Dead,
repenting with all her Heart, that she had been guilty of such a Heinous Sin,
and tried Brandy to bring him to Life again.

Upon Monday Morning, Jan. 30. 1687/8. this Examinate went to the House of
Monsieur du Bois, living in the Strand, to desire him he would give leave for
the Son of this Examinate to go home with his Mother, upon occasion of speaking
with an English Man, that this Examinate could not Understand, her Son speaking
both French and English: the Youth being an Apprentice to the said Dubois, and
of Age, Thirteen Years and an half. This Examinate took her Son with her home
to her Lodgings, in Expectation of the Englishman before spoken of, who did not
come.

This Examinate fetched her Son on purpose to have his Assistance about the
conveying away of her Husband's Body; and this Examinate told her Son of a
great Calamity that was fallen out; which the Child was very much surprised at,
and being showed the Body, ready to sink down at the Spectacle. But this
Examinate put the Boy to an Oath forty times over, to say nothing of it; and he
swore he would be torn in Pieces first: And asked this Examinate, Mother, What
will you do? shift for your self, and go out of the Land, for if you are once
taken you will never get off. This Informant answering, She had no Money for a
Voyage, and she could think of no way better than to cut off the Quarters, and
disperse the Parts in several Places, so as People should not know whose Body
it was: Besides, That she her self could carry them off, and dispose of them
much better, her Son saying, That he was afraid to meddle with the carrying of
them.

This Examinate hereupon, about Four or Five that Afternoon, having taken a
Resolution of cutting off the Quarters to make it more Portable, took a Knife,
and first cut off the Head, after that the Arms; and then the Thighs, and last
the Legs, some Drops of Blood coming from the Neck, but very little or none at
all from the rest.

The Quarters being cut off by Eight in the Evening, or thereabouts, this
Examinate bethought her self how to convey them away; and first took up the
Body which she put into a Piece of Linen, and carried it before her in her
Petticoat: The Examinate passed through Castle-Street into Drury Lane, and
thence into Parker's-Lane, and so among the Dung-hills, and there left it, her
Son following, to give notice if any Body came.

The Body being thus disposed of, this Examinate, with her Son, went back, and
took the Thighs in a Linen Cloth; this Examinate carrying them likewise, and
her Son following in like manner, as before; and this Examinate threw them into
a House of Office at the Savoy, and immediately went back with her Son again,
and fetched the Legs and the Arms, her Son following her to the Savoy again,
and put them also into the House of Office.

The Quarters being carried away, as above, and only the Head remaining, this
Examinate advised with her Son, What they should do with the Head? who advised
her to throw it into the Water: But this Examinate was then afraid it would be
found and known: And said, She would rather cast it into the House of Office of
a Friend of hers, meaning De Fresneau, a Fringe-Maker, over against the Savoy,
to which Place she went accordingly, her Son following her, and cast it into
the Second House of Office, there being two belonging to the Place.

And says, That upon Tuesday Morning last, Mary Potter (or Pottron) the
Daughter of this Examinate, came to this Examinates Lodgings, and in Discourse
said something to this Purpose, What is become of Hobry, where is he? Yard says
he is gone for the Indies. This Examinate made Answer, That she had not seen
him for Four or Five Days. The Examinate put her Daughter off at first, but
came soon after to tell her the Truth of the Matter.

And says, That this Examinate, thereupon, told her Daughter the whole Truth
of the Matter, as is reported above; her said Daughter ready to fall down at
the hearing of it; and transported with Astonishment, asking this Examinate,
What they should do to keep it Private; this Examinate charging her to say
nothing of it; and the Daughter replying; That she would be burned first, but
that if it were any other Person than her Mother, she would discover it her
self; but since her Mother was concerned, she would never open her Lips of it.

And this Examinate being interrogated, How it came to pass that she, this
Examinate, being of the Communion of the Church of Rome, came to throw the
Quarters of her Husband into a House of Office at the Savoy, which was a way to
bring so great a Scandal upon the Religion she professed, by laying the Murder
at the Door of the Professors of that Religion? This Examinate makes Answer,
That she had no Thoughts in what she did, as to that Matter, more than to part
the Limbs and the Body, and hoped the Water might carry them away.

And being interrogated, If any other Person whatsoever, beside the Persons
herein named, was privy to this Practice upon her Husband, or assisting to the
Conveying away of the Body; this Examinate answers, That there was no Person
privy to the Secret, nor any Person assisting to it, besides the Persons within
mentioned.

Jo. Ridley. Mary Hobry.
Capt' Die and Anno, supradict' coram me,

To. L'Estrange.


I have heard the Information of Mrs. Mary Hobry, consisting of Two Sheets and
one Page, read in English, and have signed the Papers, and do hereby declare,
That I have truly Expounded them in French to Mrs. Mary Hobry, according to the
best of my Knowledge.

Jo. Ridley.


J'avoue que ce qui est cerit sur ces deux feuilles de Papier, and une page,
est veritable; selon ce que Monsieur Ridley me l'a expliquee, en Francoise.

Marie Hobry.



POSTSCRIPT.
Here Is a Just and a Punctual Account of all the Informations, in the Cause of
Mary Hobry; and I do here Appeal to the Informants themselves, That I have
dealt Heartily and Conscientiously, both in the Publishing and in the Taking of
them. Nay, to prevent the uttermost Spite of Envy and Calumny, they had almost
all of them, as many Witnesses to the Fairness of them, as the Room would hold,
where I took them: And so far from Extorting any Evidence, That the Mother's
and the Son's, were purely Confession. The Woman, it is true, was examined in
Private, for fear of any unseasonable Discovery of what she might declare: But
before I put so much as one Question to her, I rendered her so particular an
Account of the Points in Evidence against her, that she gave her self for Lost,
without any Hope, either of an Acquittal, or of a Pardon; and so frankly told
me from Point to Point, the whole Series of the Narration, as it is here set
down. But still that which stuck with other People, stuck with Me: That is to
say, How all this could be done without Accomplices. Now the Boy's Story lay as
yet in the Dark, and his doubling in his Tale, gave manifestly to understand,
That there was a Mystery still Vndiscovered. He denied all upon Friday. Upon
Saturday, his Mother declared her self. Upon Sunday the Boy denied all again,
'till upon the Hint given him, of his dining with his Mother; her drawing the
Curtain of the Bed, and showing him the Body of his Murdered Father, upon that
Monday when the Body was quartered; he fell a Weeping, and told an orderly
Story, without any Mincing of Matters, from the very Act of quartering him, to
the disposing of the Body, the Limbs and the Head, into those Places where they
were afterward found. This Relation of his is so agreeable to his Mother's, in
the Order and Manner of it, that it is almost impossible to be False: And to
any one that duly considers the Bulk and Weight of the Trunk of an ordinary
Man, without either Head, Arms, Thighs or Legs, a Woman's carrying such a
Burden in the Truss of her Petticoat, will be found no greater a Wonder, than
he shall see ten times over in oue Days Walk betwixt the Old Exchange and
Westminster.

In the Woman's Story, I have done all the Right that Honestly I could to the
Compassionable Condition of an Unhappy Wretch, but without Extenuating the
Horror of the Wickedness. I have, since that time, Inquired into the Humor and
Character of the Husband; and his Acquainance report him at all hands to have
been a Libertine and Debauchee to the Highest Degree, but Drunk or Sober,
without any Malice. This is, in Fine, an Impartial Report of the Case. It falls
to the Midwife's Lot to Suffer Alone, but if she had stood her Trial, so that
the Evidence against her had been left to take its Course, it would not have
gone much better with some of her Companions, than it did with the Miserable
Creature her self.

THE END.

