Iter Boreale, the Second part, RELATING The Progress of the Lord General Monk,
Calling in the Secluded Members, their Voting King CHARLES the Second home, his
Joyful reception at Dover. and his Glorious Conduct through London, to His
Royal Palace at White Hall. By T. H. a Person of Quality.
To the Tune of When first the Scottish Wars began.
GOod people all hark to my Call,
I Will tell you all, what did befall,
And happend of late;
Our Noble valiant General Monk
Came to the Rump, who lately stunk,
With their Council of State,
Admiring what this man would do,
His secret mind there is none could know,
They dived into him as much as they could,
George would not be won with their silver and gold.
Another invention then they sought,
Which long they wrought for to be brought,
To clasp him with they,
Quoth Vane and Scot, I Will tell you what,
We Will have our Plot, and he shall not,
We Will carry the sway;
Let Us Vote him a thousand pound a year,
And Hampton Court for he and his Heir,
Quoth George indeed you are free Parliament men,
To cut a thong out of another man's skin.
They sent him then with all his hosts,
To break our Posts, and raise our Ghosts,
Which was their intent,
To cut our Gates and Chains all down
Unto the ground, this trick they found
To make him be shent,
This Plot the Rump did so accord,
To cast an odium on my Lord,
But in this task, he was hard put unto't
'Twas enough to infect both his horse and his foot.
So when my Lord perceived that night,
What was their spite, he brought to light
Their knaveries all.
The Parliament of forty eight,
Which long did wait came to him straight
To give them a Fall,
And some Phanatical people knew
That George would give 'em their fatal due;
For indeed he did requite them again,
He pulled the Monster out of his den.
To the House our worthy Parliament,
With good intent they boldly went
To Vote home the King,
And many hundred people more
Stood at the door which waited for
Good tidings to bring
But some in the House whose hands were in blood
In great opposition like Traitors they stood,
And yet I believe, it is very well known,
That those that were for him were twenty to one.
They called the League and Covenant in,
To be read again to every man,
But what comes next,
All Sequestrations null and void,
The people said, none should be paid,
So this was the Text,
For as I heard all the people say,
They voted King Charles the second of May,
Bonefires burning, Bells did ring,
And our streets did echo with God bless the King*
Our General then to Dover goes
In spite of foes or deadly blows,
Saying, Vive le Roy,
And all the Glories of the Land,
At his command there they did stand
In Triumph and Joy.
Good Lord what a Sumptuous sight 'twas to see
Our good Lord General fall on his knee,
To welcome home his Majesty,
And owned his Sacred Sovereignty.
Then all this worthy Noble Train
Came back again with Charlemain
Our Sovereign great,
Lord Mayor in his Scarlet Gown
With His Chain so long went through the Town
In Pomp and State,
The Livery men each side the way,
Upon this great Triumphant day.
Five rich Maces carried before,
And my Lord himself the Sword he bore,
Then Vive le Roy the Gentry did sing,
For General Monk rode next to the King,
With acclamations shouts and cries,
I thought they would have rend the Skies.
The Conduits ravished with Joy,
As I might say, did run all day
Great plenty of wine,
And every Gentleman of note,
In's Velvet coat that could be got,
In glory did shine,
There were all the Peers and Barons bold,
Richly clad in silver and gold,
Marched through the streets so brave,
No greater pomp a King could have:
And thus conducted all along
Throughout the throng til he did come
Unto White Hall,
Attended by these Noble men,
Bold Hectors kin, that brought him in
With the General,
Who was the man that brought him home,
And placed him on his Royal Throne,
'Twas General Monk did do the thing,
So God preserve our Gracious King.
FINIS.
LONDON Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun in Ivy-Lane 1660.


