Imprimat.

Aphorism, Chymic.

Th. Witherly, Praeses Coll. Med. Land. Censores.
Pe. Barwick, Jo. Elliot, Rob. Pit, Joh. Bateman,



One Hundred Fifty Three CHEMICAL APHORISMS. Briefly containing Whatsoever
belongs to the Chemical Science. Done by the Labor and Study of Eremita
Suburbanus. Printed in Latin at Amsterdam, October. 1687.

To which are added, Some other Phylosophick Canons or Rules pertaining to the
Hermetick Science. Made English and published for the sake of the Sedulous
Laborers in true Chemistry; By Chr. Pack, Philo-Chymico-Medicus.

London, Printed for the Author, and are to be Sold by W. Cooper at the Pelican
in Little Britain; and D. Newman at the Kings-Arms in the Poultry, 1688.

To all the Lovers OF THE CHEMICAL ART.
Gentlemen,
ABout a Month since, I received among some other things, those 153 Chemical
Aphorisms, from Amsterdam, where they had been newly printed in Latin, for
which end they had been lately transmitted from Vienna, as appears by the
Author's Epistle to his Friend. When I had perused and well-weighed them, with
that little Judgment I could, I thought that I could do nothing more grateful
to the Sons of Art, than to Publish them in English, which I have done with all
the care and exactness I could.

The other 157 Phylosophick Canons I have taken from Bernardus G. Penotus a
portu Aquitano; where they are inserted with 115 famous Cures of Paracelsus,
together with Pontanus his Epistle, and some other Phylosophick things, and
printed in the Year 1582. Which together make up a Compenatum of the Chemical
Art, and may serve the Studious for a vade mecum, or small pocket Companion,
with which he may converse in his retirements. That it may be both pleasant and
profitable to the Disciples of Hermes, is the only desire of,

Gentlemen, Your ready Servant, Chr. Pack.
From my House, at the Sign of the Globe and Chemical Furnaces in the
Postern-street, near Moorgate. December. the 8th. 1687.
The AUTHOR TO HIS FRIEND.
YOU see here, my highly-esteemed Friend, part of a certain Excellent Writing,
digested into brief Aphorisms, as a Compendium of all those things which
Philosophers are wont to observe, about the great Work of their Stone: Not that
all things are here expounded which belong to the Complete Description of the
Physical Tincture; for there are more things yet behind, with which the Author
intends to adorn it; inasmuch as he has determined to fortify these Aphorisms
which he has here emitted, from the Authority of the Principal Philosophers:
in which Work he will accurately explain the Similitudes, Figures, and other
obscure and confused manners of speaking, which every where occur in the
Writings of Philosophers. That so at length those things which hitherto have
been delivered too intricately, and confusedly by most Writers, may appear in
some Methodical Order. Nevertheless, the principal scope of this Author, is not
so much to expose or set forth his own Inventions, as to reduce the valuable
Sayings of others into order; which he willingly submits to the Judgment and
Examination of those, who have made a greater Progress in the Art than himself.

But although I know this to be the purpose of the Learned Author, nevertheless
I choose rather to transmit this little work to you, imperfect as it is, that
you may weigh it, and cause it to be printed, then that the Sons of Art should
any longer want this small help; that it may give a light to those who err and
go astray in the midst of darkness.

And that the Author may judge from the event of this his labor, whether it
will be worth his Pains to emit the whole Work to the World. Farewell my good
Friend, and let me continue to have a place in your Favor.

Dated at Vienna, the 2d. of September. 1687.
CLIII Chemical Aphorisms; To which ^ay be Commodiously referred whatsoever
belongs to the Chemical Science.
Aphorism I.

ALchymy is the perfect knowledge of whole Nature and Art, about the Kingdom of
Metals.

Aph. 2. Which by reason of its ^^cellency, is called by many other ^ames.

Aph. 3. And was first invented by ^^e Alchemus, as some think.

Aph. 4. And in all times has bee^ so highly esteemed by Philosophers, by
reason of its great Utility.

Aph. 5. That the Adepti being moved with Pity, would not altogether conceal it.

Aph. 6. Nevertheless, they have delivered it but confusedly, enigmatically,
and under Allegories.

Aph. 7. Lest it should fall into the hands of the unworthy.

Aph. 8. But that it should be known to its own Sons only.

Aph. 9. With which Sophisters should have no Commerce.

Aph. 10. Wherefore this Scienc^ is the Gift of God, which he bestows on whom
he pleases.

Aph. 11. Either by the Revelatio^ of a faithful Friend; or by illuminating the
Understanding of the Enquirer.

Aph. 12. Who seeks it by Prayer, diligent Reading, profound Medtation, and
assiduous Labor.

Aph. 13. Therefore it behovet the Studious of this Art, to be of a ^ure heart,
entire manners, steadfast to his purpose, and a Religious keeper of Secrets.

Aph. 14. And moreover, that he be endowed with a good Wit, health of Body, and
a plentiful Fortune.

Aph. 15. Because this Art requires the whole Man, being found out, possesses
him, and being once possessed, freeth him from every long and serious business,
causing him to disregard all other things, and to repute them as foreign and
strange.

Aph. 16. The parts of Alchym^ are two, viz. The Theory, and the Practice.

Aph. 17. For, seeing that Art can do nothing about Metals, except it imitate
Nature;

Aph. 18. It is necessary that the Knowledge of Nature should precede the
Knowledge of Art.

Aph. 19. Alchymy therefore, in respect of the Theory, is a Science (...)
hereby the Beginnings, Causes, Properties and Passions of all the Metals, are
radically known; that those which are imperfect, incomplete, mixed and corrupt,
may be transmuted into true Gold.

Aph. 20. Seeing that the final cause in Physic co-incideth with the form, the
Principles and Causes of Metals are their matter, form, and efficient cause.

Aph. 21. The Matter of Metals is either remote or proximate.

Aph. 22. The Remote is the Rays of the Sun and Moon, by whose Concourse all
Natural Compounds are produced.

Aph. 23. The Proximate is Sulphur and Argent vive, or the Rays of the Sun and
Moon determined to a Metallic Production, under the form of a certain humid,
unctions, and viscous Substance.

Aph. 24. In the Union of this Sulphur, and Argent-Vive, consists the form of
Metals.

Aph. 25. The which, seeing that it is various, according to the various manner
of the mixture, and the degree of Decoction, hence arise various Metals.

Aph. 26. Nature only effects this Union in the bowels of the Earth, by a
temperate heat.

Aph. 27. From the Union of this Water immediately flow forth two Properties or
Passions, common to all the Metals, viz. Fusibility and Extensibility.

Aph. 28. The Causes of a Metallic Fusibi^ity are, Argent-vive, as well fixed
as volatile; and a volatile Sulphur not fixed.

Aph. 29. The cause of Extensibility is the viscousity or toughness of
Argent-vive, whether fixed or volatile.

Aph. 30. Metals therefore are Mineral Bodies, of a close and compact
substance, and of a very strong Composition; fusible, and extensible under the
Hammer, from every Dimension.

Aph. 31. Which are commonly reckoned six, viz. Gold, Silver, Tin, Lead,
Copper, and Iron.

Aph. 32. Of these, two are perfect; viz. Gold and Silver.

Aph. 33. The other four are imperfect.

Aph. 34. Of which, two are soft; viz. Tin and Lead;

Aph. 35. And two hard; viz. Copper and Iron.

Aph. 36. The Perfection of Metals consists in the abundance of Argent-vive,
and the Uniformity of the Substance, or perfect union of the principles, which
is performed by a long and temperate Decoction.

Aph. 37. Hence slow various Properties or Passions, by which the perfect
Metals are distinguished from the imperfect.

Aph. 38. Of which, the first is, That the perfect Metals easily receive
Argent-vive, but refuse Sulphur.

Aph. 39. The second is, that they are not burnt, nor inflamed, but suffer the
Examen of the Cupel, and of the Cement; or, at least, of the former.

Aph. 40. The third is, that the parts of which they consist, to wit, the moist
and dry, cannot be dissipated, severed, or broken by the Fire, which dissolveth
all things.

Aph. 41. The fourth is, that they suffer the greatest Extension of all the
Metals.

Aph. 42. The fifth is, that they are the heaviest of all the Metals, Lead only
excepted, in respect of Silver.

Aph. 43. The sixth is, that being heat fiery hot, they send forth a Sky-colour
or Celestial Splendour; neither are they melted before they have been some time
fiery hot.

Aph. 44. The seventh is, that they never contract Rust.

Aph. 45. The Imperfection of Metals consists in the abundance of Sulphur,
and the nonconformity of the Substance; or in the imperfect mixture of the
Principles, by too short, or a sudden and intemperate Decoction.

Aph. 46. By so many Properties or Passions as slow from the Water, the form of
the imperfect Metals is plainly diverse from the Properties of the perfect
Metals.

Aph. 47. The first of which is, that the imperfect Metals easily admit
Sulphur, but not Mercury; except so far forth as they differ but little from
it, by reason of their imperfect Coagulation; of which sort are Tin and Lead.

Aph. 48. The second is, that they are burnt and inflamed: Nor do they endure
the trial of the Cupell and Cement.

Aph. 49. The third is, that their Essential parts ( viz. the moist and the
dry) are dissipated and separated by the Fire.

Aph. 50. The fourth is, that they are less extensible than the perfect Metals.

Aph. 51. The fifth is, that they are lighter than the perfect Metals, Lead
only excepted in respect of Silver.

Aph. 52. The sixth is, that being heat fiery hot, they either contract a
blackness, or a shining whiteness; and are either melted before they come to be
red hot, or afterward slower than the perfect Metals.

Aph. 53. The seventh is, that they contract Rust.

Aph. 54. Gold is a Metal most perfectly digested, of a yellow color, mute,
and shining; the heaviest of all the Metals, sustaining the trial of the Cupel
and Cement.

Aph. 55. Silver is a Metal less perfect than Gold, but more perfect than the
rest of the Metals; digested, of a pure whiteness, clean, sounding, and abiding
the Cupel.

Aph. 56. Tin is a soft Metal, imperfectly digested, white, shining with a
certain Blewness, somewhat sounding, and is the lightest of all the Metals.

Aph. 57. Lead is a soft Metal, imperfectly digested, livid, mute, and heavy.

Aph. 58. Copper is a hard Metal imperfectly digested, of an obscure redness,
livid, and sounding.

Aph. 59. Iron is a hard Metal, imperfectly digested, of an impure whiteness,
livid, and growing black, and sounding much.

Aph. 60. All the Metals therefore are of the same Original, and arise from the
same Principles.

Aph. 61. Neither do they differ among themselves, except in the quantity and
quality of their Principles, and their mixture, according to the various degree
of their Coction.

Aph. 62. Whence it follows, that the imperfect Metals have a Disposition of
receiving the form of the perfect metals.

Aph. 63. Provided they be freed from their Sulphurous and Hetrogeneous parts,
which are the causes of their imperfection, by a perfect Decoction.

Aph. 64. Either by Nature alone, in the Bowels of the Earth, in process of
time.

Aph. 65. Or by the same Nature, in an Instant above the Earth, by the help of
Art.

Aph. 66. By the projecting of a Medicine, which in a moment penetrateth and
tingeth, the imperfect Metals being melted, and Argent-vive being made hot.

Aph. 67. Which transmutation of the imperfect Metals, into perfect; that it is
not only possible,

Aph. 68. But also true;

Aph. 69. Is confirmed by the common opinion of Philosophers, and by Experience.

Aph. 70. And therefore the Stone or Medicine of Philosophers, by which this
Transmutation is made, ought to have in it self the form of common Gold or
Silver.

Aph. 71. For if it should want that, it could not actually introduce it.

Aph. 72. Every natural Compound is distinguished from other natural Compounds,
by its own particular form, being really and actually distinct from all other
forms of diverse natural Compounds.

Aph. 73. Hence, among all Substances which are determined in one of the three
Families of Nature, to wit, the Vegitable, Animal, and Mineral; there is
nothing found but common Gold, which actually contains in it self the form,
qualities, accidents, signatures and properties of common Gold.

Aph. 74. Wherefore common Gold only will be the only Subject, from which the
form of Gold ought to be taken, for the Composition of the Stone of
Philosophers.

Aph. 75. Common Gold is only simply perfected by Nature; that is, it has no
greater perfection than it self wants, as it is Gold.

Aph. 76. And therefore cannot communicate its perfection to other imperfect
Metals.

Aph. 77. Therefore if we labor in that, that common Gold should introduce the
form of common Gold into the imperfect Metals, for their perfection, it is
altogether necessary, that the common Gold should be made more than perfect;
that is, that it acquire more Aureity and Virtue, than is required for the
single perfection of common Gold.

Aph. 78. No natural Compound can be made more perfect, unless it be again
subjected to the Operations of Nature.

Aph. 79. And as often as it is subjected to those, so often it acquireth a
more perfect form in its Species.

Aph. 80. Which, that it may be done, it is necessary, to resolve it into a
matter like to that, of which Nature has most nearly produced it.

Aph. 81. For naturally, there is no new Generation made, without a previous
Corruption.

Aph. 82. And seeing that common Gold, as we said above, has its nearest rise
from an unctious and viscous Humidity,

Aph. 83. It is manifest, that it cannot not be made more than perfect, except
it be first resolved into such its first matter.

Aph. 84. Every natural Agent assimilateth to it self the Patient, either in
substance, or in quality.

Aph. 85. Therefore, to resolve common Gold into a humid, unctious and viscous
substance, there is required an humid, unctious, and viscous Agent.

Aph. 86. Not any one, but one that is homogeneous, and of the same Nature with
Gold:

Aph. 87. Such a one as has eminently the form of Gold, or may obtain it by a
new Specification and Determination, when it particularly insinuates it self
into common Gold.

Aph. 88. For, seeing that it ought naturally and radically to mix it self with
the Principles of Gold, and to penetrate the Gold through every the least part
of it, so that after the mixtion, no separation can ever be made;

Aph. 89. After which manner, things heterogeneous can never unite themselves.

Aph. 90. And moreover, that it be more subtle, more active and spiritual than
common Gold; and therefore the first matter of Gold;

Aph. 91. Seeing that nothing can be naturally dissolved, but in that, and by
that, of which it is compounded.

Aph. 92. Whence we conclude, that no Vegitable, Animal, or Mineral Substances,
which are not of a Metallic Nature, (such are Stones and Salts) by any
Artifice of Depuration, or Preparation, or Subtilty whatsoever, can make Common
Gold more than Perfect.

Aph. 93. Neither also Metallic Spirits, which are not of the nature of Gold;
such are Sulphur, and Arsnick, and other lesser or middle Minerals, which are
any way compounded of those, although they are more subtle, and more active
than Gold.

Aph. 94. For, seeing that it is spoiled of every Sulphur, therefore it does
not admit the said Spirits.

Aph. 95. Although the Virtue and Efficacy of Mineral Spirits be so great in
the Kingdom of Metals, that they cannot be altered, but by those only.

Aph. 96. Therefore that common Gold, by its resolution, may be made more than
perfect, to the end, that it may bring the imperfect Metals to perfection; it
is highly necessary to have recourse to a Metallic Spirit which is of the same
nature with Gold, and therefore can unite it self with it.

Aph. 97. But seeing that, from what has been already said, that common Gold
is nothing else but a pure Argent-Vive, perfectly digested by Nature in the
Mines of the Earth.

Aph. 98. It follows, that it is to be dissolved and rendered more than
perfect, by no Spirit, but by Argent-Vive alone, crude and indigested.

Aph. 99. But not the common Argent-Vine, nor that of Bodies, which is drawn
from Metals,

Aph. 100. Although Gold has a ^reat friendship with those Argent-vives.

Aph. 101. [For those, seeing that they come very near to the Nature of Gold,

Aph. 102. They are the only Subject of a Passive Transmutation.

Aph. 103. In which Nature has ceased to operate equally as in Gold.

Aph. 104. Therefore seeing they are not the first matter of Gold,

Aph. 105. They cannot act upon it.]

Aph. 106. But by the Argent-vive of Philosophers; to wit, that unctious and
viscous natural Humidity only, which is the root of all the Metals.

Aph. 107. Which Metallic seed, seeing that it is no where obvious to our
Senses in Mines;

Aph. 108. And to create a Seed is not in the power of man, but of God only:

Aph. 109. From what has been said, it is necessarily inferred, that there
ought to be some Mineral afforded, which may furnish us with this Mercury of
Philosophers.

Aph. 110. Which, seeing that according to the Premises, it ought to augment
the Tincture, Fusibility, and Penetration of Gold;

Aph. 111. And among Minerals there is none found which can perfect the color
of pale Gold, and facilitate its Flux, and render it more penetrating, but
Antimony only.

Aph. 112. Therefore that appears to be the only Mineral, of which, and by
which, the said Mercury may be obtained.

Aph. 113. For, seeing that Antimony cannot communicate more Tincture to Gold,
than the natural perfection of Gold requires,

Aph. 114. And Gold, as has been already said, ought to be more perfectly
Tinged by the Mercury of Philosophers.

Aph. 115. This Mercury cannot be had of Antimony alone;

Aph. 116. But by it, as a Medium, from other imperfect Metallic Bodies, which
abound with the Tincture of Gold;

Aph. 117. Of which sort there are found only two, to wit, Mars and Venus.

Aph. 118. Whence we conclude, That of Antimony, and by its help, of Mars also,
and Venus, our Royal Menstruum is to be elicited, by the work of Art and Nature.

Aph. 119. Antimony, Mars and Venus, consist of Sulphur and Mercury.

Aph. 120. Sulphur, as we have said, is averse to the Nature of Gold, by reason
of its unctuosity, adustive and impure terrestreity.

Aph. 121. Wherefore the said matter of our Menstruum, before all things, is to
be purged from its combustible Sulphur,

Aph. 122. That only its Mercury may serve for our intention.

Aph. 123. This Mercury, without further Preparation, being projected upon
Gold, does not adhere to it with profit, but like other Mineral Spirits flies
the force of the Fire, and leaves the Gold unaltered, and unclean, or carries
it up with it self,

Aph. 124. By reason of its earthy, feculent and fugitive aquosity, which is
yet in it.

Aph. 125. Therefore, that of this Mercury, the Mercury of Philosophers, may be
made, which can unite it self with Gold, and render it more that perfect; it is
altogether necessary, that it should be depurated, and freed from its Feces.

Aph. 126. No natural Compound can be perfectly purged without its dissolution.

Aph. 127. And every Dissolution of a natural Compound, is terminated in the
moisture of which it was made.

Aph. 128. Therefore, seeing that ^he matter of our Menstruum is Me^allick;

Aph. 129. And therefore, as is manifest above, arises from an unctious and
viscous humidity.

Aph. 130. It is required for its perfect Purgation, that it be resolved into
such an unctious and viscous humidity.

Aph. 131. This dissolution of the matter, requires its previous Calcination.

Aph. 132. For seeing that naturally no dry thing is dissolved into a moist,
except Salt, or that which by the force of fire has contracted the like nature.

Aph. 133. Our matter is first to be calcined, that it may be rendered fit for
solution.

Aph. 134. The total Dissolution of no dry Body already dissolved into a
Liquor, can be perfected, or a dis^^ion of its Essential parts be made, ^^thout
its putrefaction.

Aph. 135. Wherefore this ought to be done to the matter of our Menstruum, for
its complete Depuration, equally as to Gold, for its plusquam perfection; as we
have said above.

Aph. 136. But every moist bod^ is corrupted and putrified in a ligh^ or gentle
heat.

Aph. 137. Hence our matter being resolved into a moist, viscous, an^ unctious
Substance, is to be farther promoted and disjoined by digestion*

Aph. 138. That the subtle part^ may be elevated from the gross, an^ the Pure
from the Impure, by Subl^mation.

Aph. 139. For the perfecting thos^ Operations, Nature affords us only two
Mediums, viz. Fire and Water.

Aph. 140. The Combustible an^ Volatile parts are separated by Fire

Aph. 141. But the Earthy and Feculent by Water.

Aph. 142. In the said Phylosophic^ Sublimation of the Mercury, and it^ union
with Gold, by various Solutions and Coagulations, the Practice of Alchymy
consists;

Aph. 143. That thence may result (...) Catho^ick Medicine, most potent in
perfecting the imperfect Metals, and in restoring of all diseasy bodies
whatsoever.

Aph. 144. Which Medicine is commonly called the Stone of Philosophers, because
it resists the Fire.

Aph. 145. And for other reasons it is also called by other various Names.

Aph. 146. From the Premises, the Chemical Excellency is rightly defined, to
consist of Metallic Principles, exalted by various Phylosophick Solutions and
Coagulations, unto the highest degree of Perfection.

Aph. 147. For seeing that Nature alone in the Mineral Kingdom, proceeds no
further than the perfection of common Gold,

Aph. 148. It is to be assisted by Art, that it may render it more than perfect.

Aph. 149. Therefore the Practice of Alchymy in general consists of two
Operations; to wit, the preparation of the Mercury of Philosophers; and the
Composition of the Elixir or Medicine.

Aph. 150. Which although the are not very difficult,

Aph. 151. Nevertheless, they ar^ not always without their perils an^ ill
success.

Aph. 152. Not to be avoided, bu^ by Industry, and an expert, couragiou^ and
prudent Artist.

Aph. 153. Nor do the said Operations require any great Charge o^ Cost,

To the Lovers of Hermetick Studies.
ALL the Books of Philosophers, which treat of the abstruse Hermetick Medicine,
are nothing but a Spagyrical Labyrinth, in which, for the most part, the
Disciples of Art fall into various Ambages and Deceits; so that even to this
day, there are but very few who have found a true end. For if in this Labyrinth
some easy Way has showed it self to the Erring and Straying, which seemed to
extricate and lead them out, presently some impassable corners have occur^ed,
which keep them in a perpetual Imprisonment. So, if in the Writings of
Philosophers, manifest and easy Ways sometimes offer themselves, which at the
first sight seem to the Searchers to be plain according to the Letter,
presently unwary Operators, being deceived by the open ^ords of Philosophers,
are involved in ^nnumerable Deceits. To this may be added, That many
Pseudochymists deceive many by their specious Frauds an^ Cheats, dispersing and
selling up an^ down lying Operations and Processes, i^ which they promise
Golden Mountains (...) the Credulous; sowing Tares and bidding them expect
Wheat. Wherefore I being moved with Compassion, have here offer^^ these Rules,
which are full of Physic^ Reasons and Truth; in which you ha^^ the whole Art
perspicuously depicted, as (...) a Writing-Table. Examine and wei^^ them
thoroughly, fence your Opinion w^ firm arguments, and then you cannot e^^ For he
that without judgment believe^ every Sophism, is willing to be deceived. (...)
The true Art is hidden under many Co^rings, by which the unwary are easily
c^founded. Therefore, before you begin (...) work, weigh well, and prudently
consi^^ the natural Causes of things; or else^ter not upon the matter. It is
better (...) employ your time in diligent Meditat^^ and profound Judgment, than
to under (...) the Punishment of a foolish and incons^rate Temerity. --
Farewell.

B. D. P.

Some Phylosophick Rules or Canons, concerning the Stone of Philosophers.
What we seek, is either here, or no where.
Canon I.

THat which is nearest to Perfection, is the more easily brought to Perfection.

2. Things Imperfect cannot by any Art put on Perfection, except they be first
purged from their feculent Sulphur and earthy Grossness, which is mixed with
their Sulphur and Mercury; the which a perfect Medicine performs.

3. To render the Imperfect fixed, without the Spirit and Sulphur of the
Perfect, is altogether impossible.

4. The Heaven of Philosophers resolves all the Metals into their first
matter; that is, into Mercury.

5. He that endeavors to reduce Metals into Mercury, without the
Philosophic Heaven, or Metallic Aqua-vitae, or their Tartar, will be greatly
mistaken, because the Impurity abounding in Mercury, from other Dissolutions,
is even discernable by the Eye.

6. Nothing is perfectly fixed, which cannot be inseparably joined with that
which is fixed.

7. Fusible Gold may be change^ and turned into Blood.

8. To render Silver fixed, it is neither to be resolved into Powder, o^ Water,
for that is radically to destroy it; but it ought necessarily to be reduced
into Mercury.

9. Luna cannot be transmuted into Sol, except it return into running Mercury
(but by the physical Tincture) the same is to be judged o^ the other Metals.

10. The imperfect Bodies together with Luna are brought to perfection, and
converted into pure Gold, if they be first reduced into Mercury; and that by a
white or red Sulphur, by the virtue of an appropriate Fire.

11. Every imperfect Body is brought to perfection by its reduction into
Mercury; and afterward, by decocting with Sulphurs in an appropriate Fire: For
of those are generated Gold and Silver; and they are deceived, and labor in
vain, who endeavor to make Gold and Silver after another manner.

12. The Sulphur of Mars is the best, which being joined to the Sulphur of
Gold, brings forth a certain Medicine.

13. No Gold is generated, but what was first Silver.

14. Nature compoundeth and cocteth her Minerals by a gradual process; and so
from one Root only procreateth all the Metals, even to the Ultimate end of
Metals, which is Gold.

15. Mercury corrupts Gold, resolves it into Mercury, and makes it volatile.

16. The Stone is compounded of Sulphur and Mercury.

17. If the preparation of Mercuries be not taught by some skilful Artist, it
is not to be learned by the reading of Books.

18. The preparation of Mercury for the Philosophic Menstruum, is called
Mortification.

19. The Praxis of this great Work exceeds the highest Arcanum of Nature; and
except it be showed by Divine Revelation, or the Work it self, by an Artist, it
is never obtained from Books.

20. Sulphur and Mercury are the matter of the Stone: therefore the knowledge
of Mercuries is necessary, that a good Mercury may be taken, by which the Stone
may be the sooner perfected.

21. Indeed there is a certain mercury hidden in every Body, being fitted
without other preparation; but the Art of Extracting it is very difficult.

22. Mercury cannot be converted into Sol or Luna, and fixed, but by a
Compendium of the Abreviation of ^he great Work.

23. To congeal, to fix, is one Work; of one thing only, in one Vessel.

24. That which congealeth and fixes Mercury, that also tingeth the same, in
one and the same praxis.

25. The degrees of Fire to be observed in the Work, are four: In the first,
the Mercury dissolveth its own Body; in the second, the Sulphur dries up the
Mercury; in the third and fourth, the Mercury is fixed.

26. The matters being radically permixed in their profundity, through their
most minute parts, are afterward made inseparable, as Snow mixed with Water.

27. Diverse Simples being put into putrefaction, produce diverse others.

28. It is necessary, that the form and the matter be of the same Species.

29. An homogeneous Sulphur is of the same Mercurial nature, which produces
Gold and Silver; and this pure Sulphur is gold and silver, although not
discernable by the Eye in that form, but inasmuch as it i^ dissolved into
Mercury.

30. There may be a certain fixed Unctuosity extracted from gold, with out a
Phylosophick Dissolution of the Gold into Mercury, which serves instead of a
ferment generating Sol and Luna; and that is performed by way of abreviating
the Work, which Geber calls Rebis.

31. The metals being resolved into Mercury, are again reduced into a body, a
small quantity of the Ferment being admixed, otherwise they always retain the
form of Mercury.

32. The Heaven or Tartar of Philosophers, which reduces all the metals into
Mercury, is the metalline Aqua-vitae of Philosophers, which ^hey also call
their dissolute Feces.

33. Sulphur and Mercury consist ^n the same homogeneous nature.

34. The Stone of Philosophers is nothing but gold and silver, endowed ^ith an
Excellency and more than ^erfect Tincture.

35. Sol and Luna, in their own ^roper species, have no more than that is
sufficient for themselves, which it behooves to reduce into the nature and
power of a Ferment, by ^reparation, and to digest, whereby ^he mass may be
multiplied.

36. The chief Extremities in Mer^ury are two, viz. too much Crudi^y, and too
exquisite a Decoction.

The words in the Original are nimis exquisita; but the word nimis, I judge,
should have been minus; foras^huch as that agrees well with Crudi^y, no Crude
subjected being well de^octed.]

37. Philosophers observe this for a maxim; that every dry thing whatsoever
quickly drinks up a moisture of its own species.

38. The Calx of Luna being altered, hastily drinks up its own Mercury; the
Philosophers Foundation of Minerals.

39. Sulphur is the Anima, but Mercury the matter.

40. Mercury is stayed or detained by the Sulphur of imperfect Bodies and is
coagulated into an imperfect Body, and passes into the same metallic species
of the imperfect Body by whose sulphur it was congealed and concreted.

41. To make Sol and Luna of the imperfect bodies, by sulphur, is altogether
impossible; for nothing ca^ give or afford more than it has.

42. The Mercury of all the Metals is their Feminine seed, and their Menstruum,
being brought so far by the Art of a good Operator: For by the projection of
the great Work, it receives and passes through the qualities of all the
Metals, even unto Gold.

43. That a red Tincture may be elicited, the Mercury is to be animated with
the Ferment of Sol only; but for the white, with the Ferment of Luna only.

44. The Work of Philosophers is perfected by a very easy Labor, and
performed without great Costs, and that at any time, and in any place
whatsoever, and by all men, provided they have the true and sufficient matter.

45. The Sulphurs of Sol and Luna stay or retain the spirits of their own
species.

46. Sol and Luna are the true sulphurs, sperms, or Masculine seeds of the
Stone.

47. Every thing which has a power of retaining and fixing, ought necessarily
to be stable and permanent.

48. The Tincture which gives perfection to the imperfect Metals, flows from
the Fountain of Sol and Luna.

49. Whosoever take the Sulphur of Venus, are deceived.

50. There is nothing given to Venus by Nature, which is necessary to the great
Spagyrick Work, or that can serve for the making of Sol and Luna.

51. Note, that Gold converted into Mercury, before its Conjunction with the
Menstruum, can be neither Anima, nor Ferment, nor Sulphur, nor does it any way
profit.

52. The Work being brought to the end, may be rendered fiery, by Reiteration.

53. In the Abreviation of the Work, the perfect bodies ought to be reduced
into running Mercury, and a dry Water, whereby they may rightly receive a
Ferment.

54. The Preparation of Mercury, which is performed by sublimation, (being
adhibited after revification) ^s better than that which is done by Amalgamation.

55. The Anima cannot impress ^he form, except the spirit Intervene, which is
nothing else but the Sol tur^ed into Mercury.

56. Mercury receives the form ^f Gold by the mediation of the Spirit.

57. Sol being resolved into Mer^ury, is the spirit and anima.

58. The Sulphur and Tincture of ^hylosophers design one and the same ^erment.

59. The Mercury of the vulgar is ^endred equal to all the Mercuries of ^odies,
and comes very near to their ^^keness and nature.

60. A Ferment renders Mercury ^ore ponderous.

61. If the common Mercury be not ^nimated, or wants an anima, it ^ffords
nothing of moment, either to ^he universal or particular Work.

62. Mercury being rightly mortified, is then impressed with an anima.

63. Sol may be prepared into a Ferment, so that one part may animate ten parts
of common Mercury; but this Work has no end.

64. The Mercury of the imperfect bodies stand in a medium between the common
Mercury, and the Mercury of the perfect bodies; but the Art of extracting it,
is very difficult.

65. Seeing that the common Mercury, by projection of the Stone, is changed
into Sol or Luna, therefore it may ascend higher, be exalted, and rendered equal
to all the Mercuries of bodies.

66. Common Mercury animated, is a very great Arcanum.

67. The Mercuries of all Bodies are changed into Gold or Silver, by an
Abreviation of the Work.

68. A moist and gentle heat is called by the Name of the Egyptian Fire.

69. It is worthy to be noted, that Luna is not the mother of common silver,
but a certain Mercury, endowed with the quality of the Celestial Luna.

70. Metallic Luna is of a masculine nature.

71. The Mercury of the vulgar, through coldness, puts on the nature of a
barren Woman.

72. The Mercuries of Semi-minerals resemble the nature of Luna in likeness.

73. All things whatsoever are produced of Sol and Luna; to wit, of two
substances,

74. Male and Female; that is, Sol and Mercury grow together into one

75. Common Mercury without Preparation, is remote from the Work.

76. Four of Mercury, and one of Sol; that is, of the ferment, Constitute a
true matrimony of male and female.

77. The Solution is performed, when the Sol is resolved into Mercury.

78. Without Putrefaction no Solution is perfected.

79. Putrefaction endures, and extends it self even to whiteness.

80. The great Secret is the mundification of the Spirit, whereby the Menstruum
is prepared, for by it the Gold is resolved.

81. Mercury resolves Gold into a Water of its own form; that is, into a
running Mercury, as it self is.

82. Dissolution is the beginning of Congelation.

83. Sol being converted into a running Mercury, remains in the same form for
a little time.

84. The Ferment dries up the Mercury, and renders it more ponderous,
retains and fixes it.

85. The Sol of Philosophers is called their Fountain.

86. The matter is converted by the power of Putrefaction, into a Pultis or
Lute, which is the beginning of Coagulation.

87. There is a certain Compendious way, by which the Sulphur is taken from Sol
and Luna, whereby ^very Mercury may be fixed into gold and silver.

88. The matter ought never to be ^emoved from the fire, nor suffered ^o cool,
otherwise the work will be ^estroyed.

89. When the matter attaineth ^he color of blackness, then it is ne^essary to
give the second degree of ^^re.

90. The lotion or washing of Phi^osophers, is a similitude; for the fire ^lone
performs and perfecteth all things.

91. The Venom and Fetor is taken away, without the addition of any thing, by
the force of the Fire, which alone performs all things.

92. The Fire, by its acute and penetrating Virtue, purges and cleanses an
hundred times more than any water whatsoever.

93. In the generation and vegetation of any thing whatsoever, the heat being
extinct, death presently invadeth the growing matter.

94. The Spirit is heat.

95. The matter being brought to whiteness, cannot be corrupted and destroyed.

96. Every Corruption of matter is impressed with a deadly Venom.

97. The Glass or Vessel is called the Mother.

98. The virtue of Sulphur is not extensive beyond the term or limit of a
certain proportion, neither can it exceed unto an infinite weight.

99. This question is to be observed, Wherefore the Philosophers call their
Menstruum the matter of the stone?

100. Sulphur meriteth the name of the form, but the Menstruum, of the matter.

101. The Menstruum represents the lesser and lower Elements, viz. Of Earth
and Water; but Sulphur ^^e two superiors, to wit, Fire and ^^ir, as a
masculine Agent.

102. If you should break and Egg^^ell, so that the Chicken should come ^^t, it
could never be hatched, nor ^ome to perfection: In like manner, (...) you open
the Vessel, and the mat^^r shall feel the Air, you can per^^rm nothing.

103. The Calcination which is ^ade with Mercury, in a Furnace of
^everberation, is better than others.

104. The Philosophers manners (...) speaking are studiously to be noted, ^^r
by sublimation they understand ^^e dissolutions of Bodies into Mer^^ry by the
first degree of Fire; the ^^cond Operation follows, which is ^^e Inspissation
of the Mercury with ^he Sulphur; the third is the Fixa^^on of the Mercury into
a perfect and absolute body.

105. The number of those which ^rr, is infinite, who do not allow Mercury as
it is in its own form, and ^malgamated with the Calx of the perfect bodies, to
be the subject and matter of the stone.

106. The white Medicine is brought to perfection in the third degree of Fire;
and this degree is not to be exceeded in the preparation of the white Medicine;
for if you do otherwise, you will destroy the wor^ for the white.

107. The fourth degree of Fire brings forth the matter Red, where appears
also diverse colors.

108. The work after it has attained the degree of whiteness, no^ being
carried on to a perfect redness, remains imperfect, not only for the white,
but also for the red Tincture; therefore it is left dead till i^ ends in a
perfect redness.

109. After the fifth degree of Fire to perfect it, the matter acquireth new
Virtues.

110. The Work has not attained perfection, except the Medicine shall be
incerated, and rendered fusible, like Wax.

111. The Work of Inceration is ^erfected by a double or triple quan^ity of
Mercury, to that which gave ^he Stone its Original.

112. The Inceration of the white Medicine is performed by the white ^ater,
without the animation of the Mercury by Luna, but the Inceration ^f the red
Tincture is done with Mer^ury animated with Sol.

113. It suffices, that the matter after Inceration remain like a Pultis ^r
Paste.

114. Repeat the Inceration till it will bear a perfect Proof.

115. If the Mercury with which ^he Medicine is incerated, being con^erted into
Fume, shall fly away, it ^vaileth nothing; wherefore do not manage it ill, for
the matter by that means will go backward.

116. The medicine being rightly ^ncerated, will explain to thee that Enigma,
of the King returning from the Fountain.

117. Sol being reduced into his first Water or Mercury, if he shall be
refrigerated or cooled by the help of common Mercury, the work perishes.

118. Philosophers take the matter prepared and cocted by Nature and reduce it
into its Prima materia; forasmuch as every thing returns into that from which
it has its Original, even as snow is resolved inseparably in water.

119. The wise men reduce year^ into months, months into weeks, and weeks into
days.

120. The first decoction of Mercury which Nature performs, i^ the only Cause
of its own singl^ perfection, beyond which it cannon ascend of it self; for it
behooves to help its simplicity, by sowing ou^ Gold in its proper Earth, which
i^ nothing else but a pure Mercury which Nature has a little, but no^
perfectly digested.

121. But in the second decoction of Mercury, besides the first of Nature, the
virtue of the Mercury is multiplied ten-fold.

122. And the Stone is made of Mercury by reiterating the Decoction, Sol being
admixed, for by this means the male as well as the female are twice decocted.

123. Sol ought to be put to Mercury, that he may be dissolved into Sulphur,
and then cocted into the stone of Philosophers.

124. Every Philosopher in all times contemplated Mercury, when nevertheless he
neither knew nor understood it.

125. Every Mercury of whatsoever Original, being rightly taken in a due
manner, exhibiteth the matter of the stone.

126. Every thing from which Mercury may be elicited, is the subject of the
Phylosophick medicine.

127. Whosoever takes or understands the writings of Philosophers, according
to the Letter, is grievously deceived, when they affirm their Mercury to be one.

128. One Mercury exceeds another, in a greater heat, dryness, decoction,
purity and perfection, which ought to be prepared without the corruption and
loss of its form, and to be purged from all its superfluities, in which the
treasure and secret of the stone consists.

129. If the preparation of common Mercury were known to the studious of
Philosophy, Nota been.
they would have no need to search after any other Mercury of Philosophers, nor
another metallic and mercurial Aqua-vitae, nor another Water of the stone;
because the preparation of vulgar Mercury contains all those things in it
self.

130. Every Mercury of Metals and Minerals may by successive degrees be cocted
and exalted unto the quality of the Mercuries of all the other bodies, even to
a solar body, and thence be deduced to the degree and virtue of what metallic
body you please.

131. Common Mercury before a Legitimate Preparation, is not the Mercury of
Philosophers, but after preparation, it is called by the name of the Mercury of
Philosophers; containing in it self the true way and method of extracting the
Mercury from the other Metals: And it is the beginning of the greater Work.

132. Common Mercury being prepared, is taken for a metallic Aquavitae.

133. The passive Mercury and Menstruum ought by no means to lose the External
form of Mercury.

134. Whosoever uses sublimate, or calcined, or precipitated Powder, instead
of running Mercury, (for the Completing the Work of Philosophers) erreth, and
is wholly deceived.

135. Whosoever resolves Mercury into a clear water, for the perfecting of the
Phylosophick Work, erreth grievously.

136. To compose or make Mercury of a Limpid water, is in the power of none but
Nature.

137. In the great Physical Work, it is necessarily required, that the crude
Mercury should resolve the Gold into Mercury.

138. If the Mercury be reduced into water, it dissolveth the Gold into water:
And in the work of the Stone it is highly necessary, that the Gold should be
dissolved into Mercury.

139. The Sperm and the Menstruum ought to have the same external form.

140. It is the Doctrine of Philosophers, that it is necessary for us to
irritate or stir up Nature; therefore if the Menstruum be dry, it will be in
vain to hope for a Solution.

141. The seed of the Stone ought to be taken in a form like and near to the
metals, and which comes very near to metals.

142. It is highly necessary to take a seed of the Phylosophick Medicine, which
resembles common Mercury.

143. It is the secret of all secrets, to know the Mercury and matter to be the
Menstruum of the Stone, and the Mercury of the perfect Bodies to be the form.

144. Mercury by it self only, affords nothing of moment to generation.

145. Mercury is the Element of Earth, in which the Grain of Gold ought to be
sowed.

146. The seed of Gold is not only put into a multiplication of its quantity,
but also of its virtue.

147. A perfect Mercury requires a female for the work of generation.

148. Every Mercury arises from and partaketh of two Elements; the crude of
Water and Earth, that which is concocted of Fire and Air.

149. If any man would prepare and exalt Mercury into a Metal, let him add a
little Ferment to it, that it may be exalted to such a metallic degree as he
would have it.

150. The great Arcanum of the whole Work is the Physical Dissolution into
Mercury, and reduction into the first matter.

151. The Dissolution of Sol ought to be perfected by Nature, not by the work
of the Hands.

152. When Sol is conjoined or married to its Mercury, it will be in the form
of Sol, but the greater Preparation will be in the Calx.

153. It is a Question among the Wise, Whether the Mercury of Luna, being
conjoined with the Mercury of Sol, may be taken instead of the Phylosophick
Menstruum.

154. The Mercury of Luna is of a masculine nature, but two males can no more
generate than two females.

155. The Elixir consists in this, that it be elicited and chosen from a most
pure Mercury.

156. He that desires to operate, let him work in the Solution and Sublimation
of the two Luminaries.

157. Gold gives a golden color; Silver a Silver color; but he that knows
how to tinge Mercury with Sol or Luna, has arrived to a great Arcanum.

FINIS.
HEre thou have (friendly Reader) those Phylosophick Canons, without which,
whosoever thou art, thou will hardly attain thy wished End: If thou receive
these Hermetick Fundamentals with a grateful mind, and exercise thy Self in
this Theory with a pious Meditation, time may hereafter bring forth the Praxis
of those Rules, not that imperfect or maimed one, which I have showed to some,
but Entire and Complete, confirmed by many Arguments, and solid Reasons. In the
mean time,

Farewell.
POSTSCRIPT TO THE READER.
WHereas I have Lately published Proposals for the Printing of all the Works of
that indefatigable and highly-experienced Chemist, Glauber, in one entire
Folio. And, whereas there are diverse of his Treatises in the German Tongue,
which never were printed in Latin, which I had not by me at the time of
publishing the said Proposals and Specimen; so that I could not insert their
Title Pages in the Specimen, as I did of the rest. Now, having obtained the
said German Treatises, and procured them to be translated by a fit and able
Hand, I have thought good (having this opportunity) to insert them at the end
of this little Book; First, that all the Lovers of Chemistry may know what to
expect more than the 44 Treatises, whose Titles are in the Specimen; and
secondly, forasmuch as Glauber wrote those last in his later days, when he had
arrived to a great Experience of Things, and was willing to be more Open and
Plain than in his former Writings; those Last Pieces of his seem to be of
another strain, and to teach many things very openly, which the Adepts have
either wholly concealed, or at the least have delivered so abstrusely, that
very few have been able to understand them; So that, if I mistake not, that
Theory of the Hermetick Medicine, which is contained in the 153 Aphorisms very
regularly, though concisely, may, without much difficulty, be put into Practice
by the assistance of some of the following Treatises. That Glauber before his
death was Master of some Phylosophick secrets, I verily believe by his manner
of Writing; and himself professes in one of his last Writings, speaking
concerning the secret Fire of Artephius, That he could now, sitting still in
his Chamber, do more with an Egg-shell, than heretofore with all his Furnaces
and Glasses. But, to detain the Reader no longer, the Treatises I speak of are
entitled as follows.

I. The Third Century,

Containing the Discovery of many Chemical Secrets.

II. The Fourth Century,

Shows 1. How to extract Gold out of Granats. 2. To make the Mercury of Wine.
3. To make the Mercury of Metals. What the Anima of the greater and lesser
World is. That all superfluous Egestions of Nature, afford a volatile Salt.

To separate Gold from Silver on a Cupel.

A Tincture out of Metals.

The Tincture of Gold and Sulphur.

To make Gold red.

A Cement to graduate into.

To dulcifie all Corrosives.

Sal Mirabile, or a sweet graduating Spirit, useful for the exalting of Metals.

The Phylosophick Work.

Sulphur, the father of all Metals.

The Universal Coagulater is a Sulphur.

Demagorgon is the Grandfather of all things.

The Vital Spirit and Radical moisture is the Life and Growth of all men.

III. The Fifth Century

Shows the greatest Particular, and the cheapest Universal.

IV. Of Elias the Artist.

Or who this Elias the Artist is, and what he is to reform or amend in the
World when he comes, viz. The true Spagyrick Medicine of the ancient Egyptian
Philosophers, which has been lost for a Thousand years, and which he will
again restore, renew the same, and gloriously illustrate it with many New
Inventions, lay aside much smoaky working, and show to the present erring World
a nearer and better way, by which with more ease and less Charges than
hitherto, good Medicines may be obtained.

V. The Second Appendix to the Seventh part of the Pharmacop. Spagyrica.

In which is handled the further Use of the Secret Sal-Armoniack, for the
meliorating of the meaner Metals, and especially of the profitable extracting
or separating of Gold out of Silver and Tin; with an Information subjoyned, how
by the means of the mercurial Water of Tin, the Tinctures may be extracted in
quantity not only from Gold, but also from Mars and Venus; and precious as well
as Common stones; and that, as it were, in a moment, without Fire or Charges.

VI. The Third Appendix to the Seventh part of the Pharmacop. Spagyrica.

In which is treated of the yet-further Use of our Wonder-working Alcahest, or
most secret Sal-Armoniack, and in particular, how the Tinctures may be
extracted out of Sol, Mars, and Venus, and out of all Precious and Common
Stones; and how the said Colors may again be introduced into other white
Metals and Stones, in order to color the same permanently, and meliorate them.

VII. Of the Animal Stone.

Wherein is demonstrated, That there is a Mineral Virtue hid in all things, and
particularly in all Animals whatsoever, but most of all in man; and that
consequently the stone of Philosophers may be prepared of them.

To which is added, the way of fixing Mercury by means of the natural
superfluities and Excrements of Animals, in order to the obtaining a true
Phylosophical Tincture.

VIII. Of the Three Secret Fire-Stones.

Or, the three most Noble stones generated by three secret Fires. And,

First, Of the Stone of Philosophers, which is prepared by the secrot Fire of
the Wise.

Secondly, The upper and lower Thunder-stone, how they are generated above by
the Meteorological Fire, and below by the secret Artificial Fire. And,

Thirdly, How the Lapis Ignis, or Fire-stone of Basil-Valentine, is to be
prepared out of Antimony by Art. And how those three most Noble Stones of the
World are to be used in Medicine and Alchy my.

IX. The Purgatory of Philosophers.

Or, A Treatise concerning the Purifying Fire of the wise men; with which the
Philosophers cleanse their Mineral, Vegetable, and Animal subjects, and exalt
them to the highest degree of Purity, in order to prepare Universal Medicaments
from them, for the Bodies of Men and Metals.

Which Purgatory Fire is called by the ancient Philosophers Ysopaica, that is
to say, the Art of washing by Fire.

Together with a subjoyned instruction, how by means of the Salt of the World,
out of all Metals and Minerals, a living Mercury may be prepared in quantity.

X. Of the Secret Fire of Philosophers.

By which they not only brought to maturity their Universal Medicine, but also
fixed particularly all the Inferior Metals, into good Gold and Silver, with
great profit.

XI. A short Exposition upon the Hellish Goddess Proserpina, the Wife of Pluto,
viz.

What the Heathenish Phylosophick Poets, as Ovid and Virgil, etc. understood
thereby. And how by the help of this Proserpina, the Animae or souls of the
mortified metal-lick Bodies are carried out of the Chemical Hell into the
Phylosophick Heaven.

These are the Treatises of which I could not give a particular Account in the
Specimen, and which being added to those there exhibited, make in all 55
Treatises, which will amount to a large Volume in Folio, in which are also many
Cutts; which is all ready for the Press, and wants nothing but a sufficient
number of Subscribers to give it Breath in the English Air. I have spared
neither Pains nor Cost to serve my Country in this Work; and I hope there will
not be wanting so many Generous Souls, who will concur with me (by subscribing
to it) to render it effectual.

The Terms of Subscription are as follows.
THat whosoever shall pay to Christopher Pack, at the sign of the Globe in the
Postern-street, near Moorgate; or to William Cooper, at the Pelican in
Little-Britain, Bookseller; or to Dorman Newman at the Kings-Arms in the
Poultry, Bookseller; the sum of Twenty shillings, in manner following, shall
have one Complete Book in Quires, viz. Ten shillings in hand, and Ten shillings
more upon the delivery of the said Book, which is intended to be published in
Trinity-Term next. And for the Encouragement of those who shall subscribe for
six Books, they shall have one Book, when printed, presented them Gratis.

The Specimen may be had at any of the three places abovementioned, as also of
diverse Booksellers in and about London.

Advertisement.
MYographia Nova sive Musculorum omnium (in Corpore Humano hactenus repertorum)
accuratissima Descriptio, in sex Proelectiones Distributa. Nomina singulorum in
suo quaeque Loco, situque Naturali, in Aeneis Musculorum Iconibus exarantur:
Eorum item Origines, Insertiones, and usus, Graphice describuntur, additis
insuper ipsius Authoris, and aliorum Nuperrimis Observationibus and Inventis.

Opera and studio Joannis Brown, Serenissimi Caroli secundi, Britanniarum
Regis, nec-non Nosocomii Regalis, quod est ad D. Thomae, Chirurgi Ordinarii.


