Paradoxical ASSERTIONS AND Philosophical PROBLEMS. Full of Delight and
Recreation for all Ladies and Youthful Fancies.

BY RH



Lucret. lib. 1. Ne mea dona tibi, studio disposta fideli,
Intellecta prius quam sint, contempta relinquas.
London, Printed by R. W. and are to be sold by Charles Webb, at the Bores-Head
in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1659.

To my Honored Friend, Thomas Norton in Blackfriars, D. D. P.
SIR,
THese following Paradoxical Assertions, long since written by the Author for
his Youthful Pastime and Delight, are now made public for the Recreation of
others also. The great Friendship you have had and still preserve with the
Author, may make a just Claim for you to any of his performances. But though
your modesty will not challenge a priority of Dedication, nor do these
Joco-seria of his need any Patronage: Yet that Kindeness and Humanity which for
his sake you have freely expressed to me, is of it self without other respects,
sufficient to embolden me to this presumption, and to subscribe my self,

SIR, Your very obliged Servant at your command, R. W.

Errata.
In the Paradoxicall Assertions.

PAge 33. line. 21. read Scars. p. 34. l. 16. r. Correctors. p. 41. l. 24. r.
interre. p. 46. l. 3. r. habens. p. 48. l. 7. r. We see. p. 50 l. 22. r.
Ferdinand. p. 52. l. 26. r. Calphurina. p. 53. l. 2. r. Tanaquils. p. 54. l. 7.
r. Messalina. p. 55. l. 2. r. unicam. p. 61. l. 19. r. Lunacy. p. 71. l. ult.
r. imperitarint.

In the table of the Problems, read Botanick, and Hermetick.

In the Problems, page 2. l. 11. r. Sterquilinious. p. 7. l. 7. r. renverse. p.
14. l, 12. r. the cool Stones. p. 24. l. 9. r. Botanick. p 25. l. 17. r.
Botanist. p. 27. l. 6. r. to. p. 33. l. 8. r. Change, Burse, or Coffy-houses.

The Contents of the PARADOXICAL ASSERTIONS.
THat Women ought to Preach as well as Men. That there are more Worlds then
one. That Physical Purgations kill more then they cure. That there is no
pleasure in the Coition with a Man's own Wife. That frequent Fires in a
Metropolis to consume the dwelling Houses are necessary. That next to a Man the
Louse is the noblest Creature. That the famous Art of Printing is the worst
that ever was invented. That Imprisonment is better then Liberty. That Kings
ought not to have Monuments. That he that has but one Eye sees better,
farther, and more, then he that has two Eyes. That Women should follow the
Camp. That Constancy to one Messalina, is a Solecism in Nature, and a greater
sin then Fornication with many. That the deepest Scholars are the shallowest
Asses. That he that has no Enemies is most miserable. That it is better to be
the Head of a Private House, then the Tail of a Noble Family.
Paradoxical Assertion 1.
Concionari tam Faeminis quam Viris licitum. That Women ought to preach as well
as Men.

IT were a hard Chapter to impose Silence on Women; or to say more plainly,
'twere madness to think they can be Pythagoreans, unless Pythagora's Soul by
his way of Transmigration could creep into, and masculate their Female Bodies.
Nay, it might be thought repugnant to Reason also, to suppose that Woman, who
are flesh and Blood, as Men are, should be as mute as Fishes.

Aesops demure Cat transformed into a Woman, so soon as a Mouse appeared,
forgot her new Nature, and instantly meawed: so let but a Question be started
in the Parliament of Women, and it is an even lay, they will all be Speakers. Well
then, that they may make use of their Tongues, the most agil and best member
they have, and for that very purpose given them, must be by all allowed fit,
since they never took Hippocrates his Oath, nor indeed could ever any yet
oblige them Silence. For if the Tongue be the proper Instrument of Rhetoric to
exhort and work upon the Hearts and Ears of any Auditory, why not the Tongue of
a Woman, who is the perfection of Mankind; whose majestic Eyes command
Attention, whose smiling attractive looks win and charm the Affections; whose
smooth and stately Foreheads seem to awe men into obedience; whose Lips (which
are the doors of Eloquence) breathe nothing but Harmony: and in fine, whose
Angelick Faces, speak both Peace, Hope, Joy, and Happiness, even when they
themselves are most silent?

But you will object, that though the power of their Rhetorical and Harmonious
Countenances is really effective to dehort or animate, dissuade or captivate
their attentive Auditors, and draw all their eyes and hearts together, as it
were, into a purse-net, yet are they scarce fit to meddle in Sacred affairs, or
of capacity enough to preach, expound, and set forth the deep mysteries of
Divinity You Will farther object perhaps, that they are ignorant, by reason they
have not studied or seen the Academies, nor conversed so much with learned men,
whose rational Discourses might have better instructed them.

To this I answer, They are of the long Robe also, and spend most of their time
in dressing their Heads especially, and that there are few wise Women, but do
converse with men, and that frequently; either by traversing Cases of
Conscience when that pricks them, or opening the case when full of intricacy,
or by displaying the Body of Divinity, in orderly spreading the Limbs, and
dividing each part of the Text, and handling each natural member thereof with
as much dexterity and cunning as can be desired. As for Controversies, who more
versed in them then they? For Schooling, School-Points, and moot questions, who
more studied in them then they? And as for Degrees, though they commence not
from, or amongst the Muses, who are all Female too) yet in all public places,
who mind, study or take them more, or who observe more their degrees of
gradual pre-eminence? Nay, as some of the Disciples vainly questioned amongst
themselves, who should be greatest in Heaven? So no doubt but they believe or
hope at least, that their Heralds will marshal and place them according to
their Husbands ranks and qualities in the other world also: That they are
honorable and worthy of their degrees is undeniable; only whether they have
arrived to a competent degree of Learning, is the Dispute now in question

And I pray who need doubt it? their first Mother Eve did eat of the Tree of
Knowledge, and that same Knowledge has been as it were ex*traduce, derived
from her, attributed to, and propagated in that cunning Sex particularly ever
since.

Indeed in this learned Age who is ignorant? Where so many Teachers are, who
can want knowledge? When Laymen do preach, why not Lay-women? when blue Aprons
can hold forth, why ought not the white Aprons, those gentle flags of Peace and
Innocence be set up and displayed? Examine their occult qualities, and you will
soon acknowledge, that who ever bears the Bell away, yet they will ever carry
the Clapper, which speaks for their interior parts, and ever proclaims them
most worthy. Weigh but their deep knowledge in Naturals, their profound
experience in Physic and Metaphysics, and set Sololomon aside, (who got his
wisest knowledge too, as may be presumed, by his frequent converse with that
Sex) you shall find more wit and cunning in some Women, then you shall
perceive in most Men. For observe it, besides him, and those few that came out
of the East, how few wise men are recorded in the Scriptures? But for wise and
holy Women, how many?

Again, if Witches (who are generally reputed wise Women) may fill up the
number, (though Holy Writ mentions but one famous, that of Endor) yet with how
many such Sages does this latter and wiser Age swarm, even to amazement? And in
holy Story how many Prophetesses were there? I dare say, far exceeding the
number of the Prophets, the small ones and all put together.

But what need I look so far back? Though Epiphanius upbraided Marcion, that he
suffered Women to baptize; and though he derided the Romanists that they made
Women Bishops, yet have we not had Pope Joan of Mentz sitting supreme in the
Apostolic Chair, poizing the Crosier with as much infallible judgment,
uncontrollable reason, and with as much gravity and cunning experience as other
Spinsters do handle their Distaff? The pregnant Church then big with miracles,
implored the aid and Midwifery of a Woman-Bishop; and may she not now again
grown big with another Tympany of Heresy, rely on the skill of another Juno
Lucina? How diligent were these famous Empresses Eudoxia and Pulcheria courted
and solicited by the Pope for the establishment of Easter? How did Pelagius
strive by his frequent Letters to win the Empress to his side? How considerable
were Women then in Church Affairs? And as Iulia in public Coins had the
honor to be styled the Mother of the Army, of the Gods, the Senate, and her
Country; So why may not the learned Women of this age (if they but live
unmarried, without a head, like Queen Elizabeth) hope in time again to become
heads themselves, and Nursing-mothers of the Church?

For tell me, where should Learning reside but in such count and ornate heads?
Where should the Kernel of Knowledge dwell, but in such sage and polite Shells?
Where should the saltness of Wit that seasons our souls borrow that
sarcasmatical tartness they have, but from their powdered Locks, ingenuous
Tiara's, and gay Embelishments? And though I will not use this as an Argument
further, then as daily experience proves it in the negative; yet we may
generally observe, that there are not so many natural Fools of that Sex, as of
the other, though it be termed the weakest.

All Anatomists have observed, that Cor in homine, Lingua in Faemina, is
ultimum moriens; the Heart of a Man, and the Tongue of a Woman has the last
motion: which vigorous life in that nervous member does sufficiently
demonstrate, that Nature, who made nothing in vain, did intend that the Woman's
Tongue should not be idle, but be ever employed for the benefit of Mankind, as
from whom we do all indeed first learn our Mother Tongue, For since Truth it
self goes naked, where should she be found but amongst Women, who in imitation
of her go almost naked also; and keep their Pulpits ready both for Lay and
Clergymen to preach in.

To conclude then, Speak they may, and teach too, but that ought to be the
Catechism to their Children at home; they may do neither in the Church: and do
things decently and orderly they ought, as that they may best do in their
Closets and Dairies.

Paradoxical Assertion 2.
Plures sunt Mundi. That there are more Worlds then one.

A Sophister amongst other Theses, maintained this, Non esse nisi unicum
mundum, which position his opponent sophistically confuted out of our Saviors
words in St. Luke, where the ten Lepers being cleansed, and but one returning,
Christ expostulates after this manner, Nonne december facti sunt mundi? If
therefore, said the Argumentator, it be true which Christ has averred; then is
the Position false, and there are ten Worlds. The ingenious Moderator instantly
confuted this fallacious Argument out of the Context, where Christ adds, Sed
novem, ubi sunt? Non est inventus nisi his unus. Where are the nine? There is
none found save this one. The re-party was as smart and quick-witted, as the
other fallax was idle and frivolous. But I shall not need to bring such vain
impertinent arguments into the field to maintain this Problem, since upon very
good grounds and reasons I shall evidence that there is, another World, to wit,
in the Moon, and shall make that World appear as clear as the Sun it self to
any man of Reason and Judgment; that is not Moon-blind, or pertinaciously
obstinate.

Let not any man therefore conclude me Lunatic or mad in asserting this Novel,
before he has weighed my Arguments in the equal scales of an unprejudicate
understanding. For let the indifferent and unbyassed Observatour look but into
the bottom of this Well, where this truth has lain so long hid, and he shall
clearly see in the serenity thereof, if not another world besides this one
reflected; yet at least a World of Reason, by the help of which Reason, he
shall draw out thence many more Worlds then this Orbicular Globe of Water and
Earth which we tread on.

Well may I therefore conclude that great Victor of the World, Alexander, most
ignorant, (though Aristotle was his Tutor) as well as most unhappy and
miserable, in wishing there were more Worlds to conquer, who never knew or
dreamt of any other World, save this he lived in.

And in truth so may I conclude of all other profane Worldlings, like unto
him, who fix and set up their Herculean Pillars here, supposing a Ne plus ultra
here on earth. For had that mighty Nimrod of Kingdoms lived but till now in
this Speculative Age, I should not only have convinced him of this Plurality
of Worlds; but by Demonstration, and that without the help of Galilaeo's
Prospectives, have showed him one more in the Moon, besides this, or that other
hereafter.

Origin was of opinion, there should be more worlds successively one after
another; fearing, says Bodin, God should be idle: or as Plato suggests, lest
Mankind being destroyed, God should want Praise and Sacrifice. Ridiculous
Conceits! It Is a plurality of Worlds at present I contend for.

Every Child can see the Man in the Moon; and shall not Men of riper Judgment
and clearer Eyesight see and conceive more men there, and believe also that it
is habitable? Do not those dusky Spots there plainly represented, perfectly
resemble the Earth, whilst the white and brighter parts there are the Sea, as
Plutarch, Thales, and Pythagoras affirm? How manifestly does a Melancholy
Astrologer discover Hills and Dales there, and the like Promontories and
Concavities? If the Sun then be the Center of the World, the Earth a Planet
moved about the Sun, the Planets inhabited, each having his particular fixed
Center, and they all dancing in a Celestial Chorus and Harmony about the Sun:
If they be of that infinite vastness and distance one from another, as that our
World to one there should appear but as Punctum indivisibile, small in respect:
as all our Copernical Heaven-Lopers and Neoterick Astrologers affirm, as
knowingly, as if they had used Icaromenipus his wings in Lucian, to have flown
thither, and seen what was done in Heaven. Why may there not be then infinite
Worlds? Why may not an Infinite Cause (as God is) cause and produce Infinite
Effects? Job insinuates as much; Who shakes the Earth out of her place. Well
may we then admit of Brunus infinite Worlds and Suns; of Keplar's Lunar
Geography; and believe with Campanella, Galilaeus, Origanus, etc. that the
Earth has motion, is a Planet, and shines like the Moon, to these Lunar
Inhabitants. Is not the World then in the Moon's face, as plain as the Nose in
a man's face? -- Credat Iudeas Appella.

Besides, Is there not a World of Knavery, Bribery, Simony, Falsehood, Deceit?
etc And is not man himself another Microcosm, the exact Epitome of the Greater
contracted into a lesser form? Since then every man is a World, and in that
little World are concentred a world of Fancies, Imaginations, Thoughts, etc.
then certainly we may conclude, that there are a World of Worlds, besides this
one material Orb of Air, Earth, and Water which we breathe in.

Paradoxical Assertion 3*
Plures tollit Medicina, quam attollit. That Physical Purgations kill more men
then they cure.

A New Physician had need of a new Churchyard: I dispute not who kills safest,
the Galenist, or the Paracelsian. It Is all one whether a man dye by a Steletto
or by a broad Sword. Yet I say, no doubt but God has appointed the Means as
well as the Cure, though but few know the right Cause. For the Lord has
created Medicines of the Earth, and he that is wise will not abhor them. I
honor the Physician with the honor due unto him, for, in the sight of great
men he shall be had in admiration.

But you will reply, What shall become of Poor men that cannot entertain them?
Marry at that distance, best; admire their Confidence only, and have least to
do with them; for such only are Healthiest and Happiest. Where do they live
longer, then in the Orcades, Forest of Arden, Norway* etc, or Sounder, then
there where the name of Physic is not once heard of?

Quot Themison aegros Autumno occideret uno? Nay, they are rewarded too for
their murders: they are the Common Executioners: their Art (if one) is but
Conjectural, full of Imposture, the Devil Apollo the Inventor of it: and if
success follow, it is by Chance, not their Cunning: or Nature had done it
without them. Many Diseases they cannot cure at all, as the Stone, Apoplexy,
Strangury, Gout, etc.

Tollere nodosam nescit medicina podagram. What wise man then, like the tender
Lady or rich stall-fed Citizen, would be so jealous of his Health, that if his
Finger or Head but ache, or a Stitch vex his Side, will straight consult the
Physician, aggravate his slender Malady, make himself sick with Conceit, as his
Doctor with impertinency, stir up a silent Disease with frequent Purgations,
purge his Soul out of his Body, and kill himself, in fine, in right earnest?
What is this but to provoke Nature, stir a Jakes, trouble the Humor, and not to
discuss it; or at least make a strong Body weaker, as by often brushing fine
Cloth is worn thin; to play with Death, or rather to fight with it; to tempt
God, and to tire out our frail bodies with Physic, when Nature alone is the
best, safest, and wisest Physician. A Jove principium. Prayer and a bunch of
Figs, and that but outwardly applied, prolonged Hezekiah's life fifteen years.
With this Pan-pharmacon alone, Luke the Evangelist cured all Diseases.

And though our Savior would work by means, and cure the Blind man with Clay
and Spittle; yet how often was his only Fiat, or, Be thou whole, the
Restorative? No matter then whether Hippocrates or Paracelsus administer, Paul
or Apollo, it is God that gives the increase of Health the Blessing.

As Paracelsus therefore adscribes Hippocrates fortunate Cures, not to his
Skill so much, as to the peoples strong Conceit of his Worth and Skill: so am I
persuaded that many Patients, through the strong Fancy they have of the Doctor,
(let the Remedy be never so ordinary) and by Gods help together, recover. The
Physicians modesty with the Patients patience work it out sooner, then the
desperate practices of Mountebank Quacking Harpies, who to get a Fee will purge
the Purse to be sure, and prescribe Death to the next comer; or, like Tinkers,
stope one hole, and make two for it. Change of Air (which alone cures rotten
sheep) or Linen do refresh, and often change the sick from the worse to the
better. Misere vivit, qui Medice vivit. A man had as good be buried alive, as
observe the strict nice Rules of our severe Lessians and Galenists.

The Physician here is the only Disease, or worse. Their Method is a Torture.
First, Phlebotomy. A preparative Clyster. Then a Purge, Vomit, Phlebotomy and
Clyster repeated. And then a Purge, a Purge, a Purge, till nothing is left
either in Purse or Body, This causes that Cacochymia they observe in the
enervated body. And then indeed Remedium omnium malorum, Death follows, the
certain Cure of all Diseases.

In the cure of an Ague, the very shame of all Physicians, what can Aesculapius
prescribe better then Exercise and Sweating, which a laboring man cannot avoid?
What cures a Surfeit, Quartan* etc. like fasting? For the small Pox, a careful
Nurse to keep the Patient in, and to drive them out, is best: Experience tells
us, they only dye that tamper; for where one miscarries of it in the Country,
twenty dies of it in the City, though visited by the whole College.

I approve not of Magical Charms, Exorcisms, Holy Water neither, that is to
drive out one Devil with another worse. Nor of the Turks obstinacy, to neglect
the Means, because their Days are numbered. No, every man is a Fool or
Physician to himself at least, and best knows the Regiment of his own Health,
and what is most hurtful. Let him but shun that, and use but these three,
Prayer, Fasting, and Patience, and the Cure is done: and never Purge but in
cases of great necessity.

Paradoxical Assertion 4.
Nulla est in Conjugali Coitu Voluptas. That there is no pleasure in the
Coition with a Man's own Wife.

IN defending this seeming Paradox, I shall not assert any Opinion Heterodox to
Theological Truth, or Logical Reason. I approve not of a plurality of Wives
with the Turks now, or none at all with the Benedictin Monks, or Jewish Esseni,
who both supererogate in a fruitless Chastity. I commend not the Irish
Divorcement once in use, who like the Syracusian in a tempest, when the ship
was to be exonerated of the weightiest things, threw his Wife first overboard;
take any occasion to put away their Wives.

I shall not excuse Adultery upon our Saviors mild reprehension of the Woman
in the Gospel; nor argue with our Profaner Wits, who because they are inhibited
lying with another man's wife, conclude it lawful thence for a man to lie with
his own man's wife. No:

Odi prophanum vulgus and arceo. I hate being evil for company; or by such an
ingenuous fallax, like that old Sophister Satan, to cozen my self and others
with such Jesuitical Sophisms into direct Atheism. I shall neither with the
C^thari condemn second Marriages, or with Pope Siricius his false Gloss on the
Text, They that are in the flesh cannot please God; thence draw this literal
and Carnal Conclusion, that they that are married but once also cannot please
God.

No, Marriage is honorable, and the bed undefiled. It is Ecclesiae seminarium,
and necessary for the propogation of mankind. I find not only the blessed
Virgin and the Disciples, but Christ himself a Guest at those Hymenaeal
Ceremonies, and honoring them with his first Miracle in Cana. I find in the
Old Testament, God the first Priest marrying the first Couple: and in the New,
the Mother of God, before espoused to Joseph, overshadowed by the holy Ghost in
that wonderful Mystery of the Incarnation. I find it honored again in the Old,
by that stupendous preserving of Eight Married persons in the Deludge, and by
Paring the rest of the Creatures then in Couples.

And in the New, I find the whole Trinity Blessing and Confirming it, by
espousing the Church, and resembling his Love and her Espousals, to a Marriage
here on earth, by knitting himself to her in that Mutuality with an everlasting
union. Since then God himself delighted in propagation, by that sacred Product
of the three Persons in the Trinity, thus multiplied though coeternal. Since
we are bound in imitation of, and obedience to him, being but his Tenants for
life in this world, to keep the same in continual repair* And since it was Gods
first Word of Command, Bring forth and Multiply, God forbid but we should obey
him in this law of lawful Multiplication: yet not to divide our selves amongst
many Women, as it was permitted the Patriarchs, since change too often
frustrates propagation: nor to Multiply into Religious Monasteries with the
Benedictin Monks, without any Mothers at all.

I confess indeed when I consider the prerogative of Virgins to whom with
Elias, Elizeus, and John Baptist, Heaven is given; as one said, Marriages
replenish the earth, but Virginity Paradise; as I am a mere natural man I can
find no reason, why Adam should have wooed Eve, a small weak piece of himself:
for reason rather tells us, the weaker should expect and sue for support from
the stronger.

But when I consider that the woman was formed of the Rib of the man, and that
so probably the man believing he missed something, was occasioned to seek for
that lost part, and being so ^ear to join her again to his side. And when I
again consider, that God had given her to man as a fit ^elper, I must conclude,
that Women are both necessary and good, (for all that God made was good* and
therefore useful, Nature producing nothing in vain) and therefore cannot
believe them such necessary evils, as many have too severely styled them. Yet I
say they are necessary also, that is, for such as have not the gift of
Continency (for of too evils the least should be chosen.) But that he that can
abstain from the world, the flesh, and the devil (as in a wicked woman all
three are concentred) I shall ever h^ld to be the wisest, holiest, and freest
from worldly cares, and consequently the happiest man.

But suppose that unruly Asmodeus cannot be cast out by Fasting and Prayer, as
we are bound to believe it may; I know you will then say, a Wife is the only
lawful Plasma to assuage that bilious humor.

It Is true, Omnis repletio ^equirit (...)* Thus Physically I agree, that Women
may be good, and consequently necessary: but in a Metaphysical sense clean
contrary. For Bona, mag^ carendo quam fruendo, sentimus. The tired old man in
Aesop, casting down his burden at Noon, called for Death; but when Death
approached, he wished him for nothing he said, but to help him up with it
again. As it follows not therefore, that though Death which was the Privation
of that Burden, was ill, the Burden therefore was good: so we must not
therefore on the contrary conclude, that a Wife which is the privatio^ of that
Burden of fleshly infirmity, is good, b^ cause the Burden is evil.

The Astronomers tell you, that whereas amongst the other Planets, Conjunction
creates the most perfect Amity: yet the Sun only on the contrary is good by
his Aspect and Influence, and evil by his Conjunction. I shall thus endeavor
to make it evident, that women are best at distance, and that there can be no
perfect pleasure in the Fruition of any woman, much less of one's own wife,
with whom he is yoaked and bound, with Honorable and Golden, it is true, but
with perpetual Chains and Fetters.

I shall appeal to any Enamoreto but newly Married, whether he took not more
pleasure in the Acquist of his Mistresses Bon^es graces before Marriage, then
afterward in the dull cropping of her Virginal flower? whether he was not more
de^ighted with his amorous courtships, stolen kisses, chaste embracements,
mutual glances, and ^omplacent treatments in wooing and pleasing her, than
afterward in displeasing of himself, perhaps by a too late repentance? Whether
he took (...) more true content in adoring a Coelia, than ^n undoing a Maid?
Whether he took not more pleasure in Weaving innocent true-love-knots, than in
untying the Virgin-zone, or knitting that more than Gordian-knot, which none
but that in^cible Alexander, Death, can untye? Before, he was free, as the Air
he breathed in: now he is ^akel'd and confined. Before, he might delight his
optics in the pleasant prospect of Natures variety, and the best of her
curious workmanship, the fair Ideas of several ravishing Female beauties, the
contemplation of whose Divine perfections would transport a man to Seraphick
ecstasies: now he must pore but on one single object as in a glass, seeing no
face but his own, and Narcissus-like, fall in love with that which is but his
own shadow. Before, he might Travel the World in delightful observations of
foreign Climates and Affairs: now he must be confined and only conyersant in
the Domistick Rules and Oeconomies of his private Family. Before, he might walk
up and down like the Grand Seigniour in his Seraglio and Garden of pleasure,
smelling and plucking each Flower he liked to make up a complete Pos^e of
Delight; now he must sat that smelling faculty with but one single Flower*
which if it happen to be a Rose the Odoriferou^ Quintessence of all Arabian
Perfumes contracte^ into one perfect savor; yet we know how soo^ those
Fragrancies expire with often blowing on and like the richest and strongest
Odours, which make but the Head ache at last, they either bree^ a Satiety or a
Nausea.

I might add further, that that pleasure which comes unexpectedly on each
side, does enhanc^ the price thereof, since stolen pleasures are ev^ the
sweetest, whilst the frequency of delight l^sens it and blunts the appetite.
The inexpectancy of new found Treasure heightens the value; whilst what is got
by long sweats and continual labors ceases to be pleasures, (whose property is
to be short and sweet) and so becomes but a voluntary and tedious drudgery.
Cibus a venatu suavissimus: That Venison which is hunted and killed with most
company, and got with the purchases of our own Art and Industry, joined with
pleasant strife in the retrive (which gives all the appetite and edge to the
Gusto) certainly tastes best, and is most pleasant.

I would fain know, what pleasure any man can take in touching his own flesh;
what titillation or delight in feeling his own Pulse. And I pray is not a man's
wife his own flesh? They are una caro, two Souls in one Body, or rather two
Bodies combined into one Soul. There cannot therefore be the same Emotions, the
same Palpitations, the like vigorous Fancies or such strong Efforts in one and
the same single person and flesh, as may be raised and cherished in two
stranger parties linked together only with the straws of hot affections and
the Charcoals of sudden desires.

If then the sensual pleasure (which is the foolishest Act of a wise man) is
less with one's second self, than with a stranger, and indeed but* Brutish with
any; I would fain know what other content or benefit, besides the bare portion,
a man can reap from his married wife. For admit ^he be Cha^t (which is a virtue
sufficient and singular in a wife) yet with how many other imperfections do
they daily Teem? With how many little faults and follies do they (at least most
of them) labor?

Adam had his tempting Eve, Moses an hasty Zipporah, Job a Blaspheming impious
Wife, Samson a lascivious and perfidious Dalilah, Ahab a painted Iezabel,
Ahasuerus a disloyal Vashti, Ananias a sacrilegious Sapphira. And wife Solomon
confessed, that in the Chorus of all his Wives and Concubines, he found nothing
but vanity and vexation: A good Woman is va^a avis. The virtuous are thin set,
the bad like ill weeds grow every where. A bad Wife is more troublesome than
the Irish-Sea, or a Quartan Fever. This made the Devil after he had divested
Job of all his Goods, Children, Friends, Allies, Health, Wealth and all, to
persecute him yet more, by leaving him his wicked Wife to vex and torment him.

Why should any man then, since Marrying is but Marring, woo^ for that which
may prove most probably his woe? Why should any man get the Banes asked for her
that may prove his Bane? Why should a man labor for her whose only Blessing
is but labor and Travail, and whose only Hopes are to be saved by the sweat
of her Husbands Brows and Childbearing? As for the pleasure in that sensual
Act: alas it is so far beneath the thoughts of an understanding sober Man, so
mean and below the pitch of an elevated mind, that no man in his collected
temper can believe he takes any perfect satisfaction from those dull fruitions.

Besides, when I consider how more then Bestial the frequent use of that
Venerial act (for hardly any Creature but Man is so lustful as to copulate with
the same after the first Coition) I am ashamed, that a rational man should so
infrigidate and enervate his Body, dry up his Brains and his Humidum Radicale;
so deviate from the chief Rule of Marriage (which was first instituted for
propagation only, and not so much to quench our Carnal lusts) and so
apostatize from his Reason by an unreasonable and frequent acting that folly,
which he himself, when it is done, is chiefly ashamed of.

Paradoxical Assertion 5.
Inc^ndia in Metropoli sunt necessaria. That frequent Fires in a Metropolis, to
consume the dwelling Houses, are necessary.

I Am not of kin to the wandering Jew, no Welsh Mounteineer, or Peripatetick; No
Egyptian or Scythian Travellour, who lives like the Nemades in a perpetual
motion: I neither affect the Cynicks Tub, nor the Holland Skippers Scutes: I do
not altogether affect the Field and Hamacco's, though I am no stranger to
Martial affairs and Night-Centinels: But am a real friend to all Civil
Societies and Commonwealths: Although my discourse may seem Quixot-like, to
overthrow Cities, depopulate Countries, and threaten all their ruins: And
though I appear at first aspect like him, terrible, in this doubtful Notion,
yet I doubt not but out of this flinty Paradox, I shall strike fire enough to
lighten any man to the truth of this bold Assertion, though not enough to
consume any the least City or Town Corporate, (although some of the latter
might better be spared.)

Our law therefore in this particular I conceive too severe, which inhibits a
man upon pain of death to set fire to his own house: As for example, If my
House be ill-favored, old, rotten, and decayed; and consequently dangerous
either to be lived in, or to be pulled down, should I not rather fire it
quickly (if it stand alone especially) then endanger any man's life in the
demolishment thereof; and build a better, fairer, and more substantial one in
the room thereof?

Observe but where the greatest Fires have raged in any Country, Town or City,
if fairer Structures, larger Streets, and more stately and convenient Edifices
have not been raised, Phenixlike, out of their ashes: whereas old Mansions
dawbed and patched up so long like Theseus ship, (of which not a Rib it had at
first building was left) and repaired so much, that to make the Houses the more
honorable, they must be propped up with Supporters to keep the Tenements from
falling; look like the Augean Stables, full of dirt and rottenness; or like my
Grandsires old Grange, venerable for nothing but Antiquity. Some streets in
London are built so narrow, that Neighbors at home may shake hands; as they
are built in Spain, Italy, and France, to divert the Suns scal^ing Rays: but
in our Northern Coasts, a fair, straight, broad, open street, as at
Southhampton, best befits our ^lime.

What matter were it then if some of our rotten, poor, half-thatched Cities
were burnt, and stately ones erected in their rooms with Galleries, as at
Westchester: or Arches and Piatza's to the street, as at Damascus, P^dua,
Bolog^a, and Ber^a in Switzerland. Did not Erostratus build himself up a Name,
by burning down the Temple of Diana? And does not Charity, grown cold now a
days, however yet warm her self by these and the like frequent fires? whereas
without such sudden and unexpected occasions, she would even freeze and starve
to death.

Besides, Observe but how every Creature naturally desires to get out of his
house of Restraint; for our Houses are but as our Inns to lodge, not to dwell
in. The Snail as soon as it can creep, leaves its shell: the Chicken as soon as
warmth does hatch it, quits its marble Tenement: and even Man himself is soon
weary of the Womb he has lien a while enclosed in; and when able to walk,
delights more in the open Fields then in his Closet.

The Turkish Ship-thieves I confess barbarously set fire on the Houses by
nights in their populous Cities, that by the light of them they may the better
run away with the Goods which were in them. And the Janissaries under the color
of preventing farther mischief, pull down a many more of the neighboring
Cottages, that thereby all may have the better opportunities of ^ealing.
Therefore in Constantinople, Adrinople, Grand Cairo, etc. buildings are the
sleighter, by reason of the frequency of those fires, made purposely more
often, then by chance, though too often fathered on the Persian Spies.

Nero indeed (as Platina reports) only because he liked not the structure of
Rome, set it on fire; or, because he would have the Burning of Troy represented
unto him, (his cruel fancy worked so high) for at the same instant (a merry
Gentleman no doubt) he was playing on his Harp the Destruction of Troy, whilst
he beheld with delight the woeful spectacle.

Hatto Archbishop of Mentz, another cruel Firebrand, calling the half-starved
people into a Barn in time of a Famine, burnt them altogether therein, with
this profane jest, These are but Rats,

-- Fruges consumere nati. good for nothing but to devour Corn. But his tyranny
was punished the same way, he being bitten and eaten up by Rats himself soon
after; And butcherly Nero's Body being found dead, was buried after under the
Gate Flaminia, where Devils haunted it and the place in flames of fire.

Thus I conclude then, Where such horrid Ruins are purposely made by malicious
designs, the Incendiaries, who are Nigro carbone notandi, are worthy of greater
and more lasting flames. But when Gods immediate hand does it, either by
Lightning, to purge the infected Air; or by other casual Accidents permits it
for our punishment; the Judgment may enlighten us to behold the frailty of our
earthly Mansions, and Gods Justice, to whose Providence we are to submit: And
may be useful also to mind us of the Day of Judgment, when all shall be
consumed in fire, except the Bodies of the Wicked, that must ever broil in
everlasting flames.

Paradoxical Assertion 6.
Homine excepto, Pediculus est Animal Nobilissimum: That next to Man, the Louse
is the Noblest Creature.

Whether this noble Animal be bred of the Flesh, as Aristotle does affirm; or
of the Blood, as Theophrastus, it matters not. This we all know, that whereas
Man is created of Earth, this is formed of Man; that is, of his Blood
concocted; (as most believe) and therefore is of a more noble Offspring, by
how much Man is more noble then the Earth he was made first of. The Isle of
Man, is this our Brothers Native Country; and in the chief and Noblest part of
this Island has this Princely Creature fixed his Emperial Seat of Residence,
the Head; so that the nearer he is to the Brain (whose intellectual Faculties
make man a rational Creature, and distinguish him from the Bruit Beasts) the
nearer, I say, he is to Reason and Society, the two natural properties of man;
and by Consanguinity may justly challenge Reasons Prerogative, before either
the Serpent, Ape, or Elephant. Thus flourishing in the Head of Man he becomes
the Head of all Cattle. For

Plebs habitat diversa locis. Why should any one then doubt to compare this
Minim with the noblest Prince, when he is not only his daily Guest, but
domestic Companion? And since the Almighty power of the most Great God is most
eminent, even in the least things, Pharaoh's Magicians could confess, that
there was the Finger of God in creating these little Vermin: (yes, and was not
his whole hand in it too?) whereas by their enchantments they could but faintly
imitate Nature, and parallel Moses indeed in some of his wonders, but not at
all in this smallest production.

Observe his generous disposition in his Sedate constancy of Affection,
scorning to leave his frie^ in his worst of fortunes, but will faithfully
accompany him from the Court even to the Camp or Prison.

I appeal to all the Societies of Mendicant Friars, the only chief Patrons of
this humble Regiment of Nits and Lice (which stuff like the Israelites clothes
is everlasting) whether they would quit these loving wretches for the company
of the greatest and proudest Monarch's.

Noscitur ex socio, qui non dignoscitur ex se. You may judge of the Humility
and Constancy of this Creature by the company he most consorts with: so of his
Sagacity and Temperance, being abstemious like them in drink, feeding
sparingly, and but seldom stirring out of his Cell or Cloister. Every thing is
better by how much it communicates it self to the good of others. The Moon,
Planets and Stars are brightest by their proximity to the Sun: so does this
Animal by vicinity partake of the mind, wisdom, prudence policy and intellect
of man only. For no Beast is averse from the company of this Polypus, but the
Ass, that dull and silly Creature, who is least acquainted with Discretion,
and whom Naturalists affirm, they never knew. Observe again the Gravity of his
deportment, in his Spanish March, Pian Piano, (as a learned Geographer not
unwittily compared the Spaniard to a Louse, the Frenchman to a Flea, the
Hollander to a Cra^*louse. etc. Nor are the comparisons odio^s, ^ not skips he
away like the coward Flea at the a^lt, but boldly like a man looks death in the
face.

Corpore parvus erat Tydeus, sed maximus armis. Thus much for his valor.

Observe now his wonderful and strange creation. For whereas Nature produces
no one thing but by the corruption of another: as the Peacock is formed of the
corruption of the Egg, the Be^ out of the corruption of the Ox, Snakes out of
Stone-horse hairs; Worms, Fleas, and other Insects out of Piss and Dung; yet on
the contrary these two noble Animals, the Phoenix and the Louse, are divinely
formed: the one engendered of a Nit, and the other raised out of his Parents
most glorious ashes. Besides, what greater sign or better argument of health is
there, then when these lusty Forerunners bring the happy tidings that the
Enemy, the Disease is slain?

Nay, they are health it self, being experimentally good for sore or blood-shot
Eyes, and medicinal in many diseases, the Jaundies especially. This made
Archimedes amidst his deepest Speculations, run naked out of the Bath, and cry,
(...), I have found it, I have found it, with admiration and joy. Thus does
this beast become an example to us of Patience particularly, (which is beyond a
similitude, for that does but currere quatuor pedibus, whereas this walks
majestickly on six;) and therefore might be of kin to the Muses, and to the
best of their Heroic Offspring, the golden Hexameter. But the truth is,
Pediculus could never stand well in Latin Verse, or hang on those Romans Poets;
the Dutch, and French, and some of the Minor Water-Poets, only converse and
are acquainted with him.

For his Gentility then there is no doubt; his noble Extraction is already
known, his Pedigree may be drawn from before Tubal-Cain^ time, since the
universal heat which the Arabians supposed the Creator of all things first
inspired him. Nor need he reckon Legs for Arms, since all the Welsh Heralds
will confess, that the Lowses belongs to the most ancient Coats: and the Royal
Family of France powders their Coat with nothing else but Fleures de Lis to
this day. Since then this noble Creature sticks faster to the French Kings
Coat, then it can to a Peasants threadbare one; and of all the Creatures
sticks closest to Man, even to the very skin; I may safely conclude, That, next
to Man, the Louse is the Noblest Creature.

Paradoxical Assertion 7.
Nulla Ars inventa fuit Imprimendi Art perniciosior. That the famous Art of
Printing is the worst that ever was invented.

Whether the Germans first borrowed this Invention from the Chinese, or
whether amongst the Germans (who undoubtedly lay best claim to it) John
Gutenberg the Knight of Mentz, or John Fust a Moguntine, was the first Inventor
thereof, it matters not: this is certain, that since the time it was first
known experimentally, (which was Anno Salutis 1466) there has been more
dissension in Learning and Religion, throughout all Christendom, and more Wars,
the necessary Sequels of those Jars, then were known in the Primitive, nay, for
all those fourteen hundred years before.

The multiplicity of these fire and tow Papers once inflamed, have almost
consumed the Church. And its scarce still visible, were all occasioned either
through the frequencies of the Press, (which speedy device to blazen Rebellion,
even propagates and adds wings to it) or through the grand Mistakes and many
Errata's in false Printing, that have bred so many Animosities in the Refuting,
and Trouble in the Correcting.

It Is confessed, by this Art alone all the rest are made more familiar, and
knowledge in some respects is acquired at less expense of time and money;
because I believe indeed few now a-dayes will give three hundred pounds for
three Books of Philolaus, as Plato did. By these ingenuous means I grant also
we are somewhat freed from those gross Errors which crept into the Text,
through the unskilful hands of either ignorant or negligent Writers.

But observe now on the other side, how by Printing, each Volumn begets
another, and they also swell with so many Errata's, that the very Corrector of
the Press stand in need sometimes of most Correction.

Observe how we are now forced to spend more time in cracking the shells, in
opening the knotty Languages of Latin, Greek, Hebrew, etc. to pick that Kernel
of Knowledge thence: which precious time the Ancients more cautiously spent in
the study of things, which were written for the most part in their own Mothers
Tongue. Each man was then a walking Library himself: but now we have thousands
of Vaticans, and hardly a man walking in them, they are so stuffed with the
variety of Books which does delight indeed, but hurts the Ingenie.

What an Ocean of Ob's and Sol's has School Divinity of late produced? What a
Labyrinth of inextricable, nay, unprofitable Questions, full of Cavilling and
Metaphysical Terms, which if ever understood, edify not, only puzzle? Again,
how many unnatural Controversies and bitter Reparties have filled the Heads and
Pens of Modern Writers, even to the making a Schism in Christ's Church, or a
Rent at least in his once seamless Coat? How have these undutiful sons of the
Church, as Cham did his Fathers, so they laid open their Mothers Nakedness? How
have these seeds of Pertinacy propagated since the Infancy of Religion to these
very times? Nay, how much bath this Controversal Obstinacy about Niceties and
shadowie Ceremonies,

Cuneum in fa^a, or Nodum in scirpo quaerendo, hindered the progress of
Learning, and the advance of other more beneficial Sciences? Did not the late
Coal from the Altar, blown up from a Spark to a Firebrand, by one indeed, set
such a fire in the Church, that it has since burnt up almost all her
Patrimony, and God knows when it will be quenched, perhaps not so long as any
Fuel is left. This Salt spirit of Contradiction, this Acrimonious and
Scorbutic Humor rubbed and stirred up by the Itch of Disputation, and that in
Print too, has (as a Wise man observed) bred the Churches Scab. And where
there is one such Mangie Bell-weather, the Flock will all soon prove Scabby and
Infected.

Paradoxical Assertion 8.
Incarceratio Liberate potior. That Imprisonment is better then Liberty.

I Have read of a Parisian, that in sixty years stirred not out of the Walls of
that famous City, (a Prison large and glorious enough I confess) but when the
King had confined him within that Circuit during Life, then, and not before,
the old man most desired to expatiate, and thereupon with grief dyed: So that
it is not the Confinement, but the imposed Restraint that makes Imprisonment so
irksome. The voluntary sequestration of the Anchoret sweetens his Solitude and
close Immurement: and it may be only the forced Servitude and Restraint of
more Volatile Spirits that makes their lives seem tedious.

It Is true, Robert Duke of Normandy imprisoned by Henry the First his younger
Brother, pined away for grief: And Francis the French King taken by Charles the
Fifth, was (as Guicciardine reports) melancholy even to death, and that in an
instant. And Iugurth that valiant Commander, after a few days Imprisonment at
Rome, dyed. I grant, that to such high flying souls that have lived abroad at
the height of jovial Exultation and Sensuality, to be debarred on a sudden of
their former career of Pleasures, cannot but be irksome, at first especially,
perhaps mortal. No doubt but Valerian, Bajazet, our Edward and Richard the
Second, felt the smart of such tyrannous Confinements. You may sooner tame a
Lark, or reclaim a Swallow, then such high flying Fancies. But to a Stoical
temper, to an austere, stayed, and reserved person, Imprisonment is Liberty.
Such a man being nunquam minus solus, quam cum solus, and never more at ease,
then when thus confined. To a Scholar, that can sit and travel all the world
over in a Map, nothing so pleasant as Retirement: his Brains travel in
Contemplation though he be fixed in his Cell: he can behold the Chorographical
and Typographical Delineations of the remotest parts and Cities, turn over
every stone, and build Castles, etc. and never set foot over his Studies
threshold.

How renowned is King Ptolomy for that learning he acquired whilst imprisoned
by his Disease? With what delight did our wise King James contemplate Bodley's
fair Library at Oxford, expressing his affection to learning in those Pathetick
words, If I were to be a Prisoner, said he, and might have my wish, I would
desire no other Prison then that Library, and to be Chained together with so
many brave Authors and dead Instructours.

What shall I say of Caesar's retirement to Capreae? And of the Emperor Charles
the fifth, his quitting his Imperial Diadem to embrace the peaceable quiet of a
Monastic life? How are the Kings of China for States-sake Cloistered up, that
they never come abroad? How are the Spanish, Turkish, Italian Dames locked up in
their Closets by their jealous Husbands? and ours scarce suffering themselves
to see the Sun, only to preserve their Beauties? With what content are they
mewed up in Stoves in Muscovia, and in Caves in Green-land and Island half the
year together?

You Will reply, Their confinements are voluntary which sweetens and gilds the
Pill of Bondage and Servitude. But what unparalled Calamities do the Indian
and Turkey slaves in Mines and Galleys endure, condemned perpetually to
drudgery, Hunger and Blows, and chained to their misery ^an's hope of Delivery?

All this I say is nothing to a cheerful Heart and Patient. The Ship the rich
Merchant sails in, is no less a Prison, then the Captives Gally. Set aside the
Spanish Inquisition, (which tyrannizes over the Soul as well as over the Body)
and is therefore more injurious; I see not, I say, that suggested misery in
that or any other sort of imprisonment, which a wise, humble, and patient
spirit cannot overcome and lessen, nay, turn it to his advantage and content.

By Imprisonment how many lewd riotous men are brought home? how many Vagrants
settled? how many dangers and tentations avoided? it being the only means to
mortify and master himself, and his greatest enemies, the World, the Flesh and
the Devil?

Our whole life is but a continued Incarceration. Imprisoned we were in the
Womb, and then in our Mothers Arms and Cradles: from thence translated to
Schools or Shops under the tyrannous Lashes of severe Masters and Governors:
thence confined to a College: or if abroad, we live but in an Island: or if
put forth into the world, that is but a larger Prison, as it was to Great
Alexander. Our soul, that is imprisoned in a vile Body of sin, and that body (as
St. Paul's was) is often in misery and durance; in which Bands he delighted as
much as in the Rehearsal, and writ most of his Epistles.

Since then this life, though but a perpetual slavery and imprisonment, is yet
sweet to us all, and more desirable than death, which is our only liberty, and
frees us from all the Iron shakels and weighty chains of our Sins; I may safely
conclude, That imprisonment is in many respects, to a Christian, better then
Death or Liberty.

Paradoxical Assertion 9.
Impar Regibus Monumentis inhumari. That Kings ought not to have Monuments.

Marmoreo Licinus Tumulo jacet; at Cato parvo; Pompeius nullo; credimus esse
Deos?

THis was the Poets foolish complaint of old: as if Pompey left not a name
bigger than Licinus, the freed man, his Marble Tomb: or as if the dust of Kings
could be distinguished from a Peasants, or were of more worth, or more to be
regarded.

Ramises his Obelisks, Hadrian his Moles, the Egyptian Pyramids and tall
Labyrinths, the Roman Mansolea and stupend Monuments of Ninus, which was nine
Furlongs in Height and ten in Breadth, of Porsena of Lais; what do they all
signify but the pride, and the vain glory of the Builders, and the frailty of
this world, whilst they together with their rotten Carcases are all now hudled
but into one confused heap of dust.

-- Monumenta fatiscunt,
Mors etiam saxis nominibusque venit.
I find none erected in Scripture for Patriarch, King, Prophet, or Apostle,
besides that exemplary one of Lots Wife.

Jacob I grant was buried in high solemnity: and Joseph's Bones, after four
hundred years preserving, were transported into Canaan: and I read that devout
men carried St. Stephen to Burial: but who knows of Moses the Prototype and
Leader of the people, his Sepulcher to this day, whilst he lies Buried
obscurely in the Valley, lest the Israelites perhaps might have adored his
Shrine: And Christ himself the King of Kings, and Son of God, had not Joseph of
Arimathea bought him a Sepulcher, and that but a plain one too, only for the
miracles sake of his Resurrection, doubtless had lien as meanly and as
obscurely buried.

A heathenish superstition prompted some Nations to inter their friends bodies
in their own, by eating them; accounting that humane inhumane Sepulcher the
most honorable. The Persians besmeared their Corpse with wax: as the Egyptians
Embalmed them with Gums and Spices: the Magi buried none but such as had been
torn by Beasts, their whole bodies they did condite with Art to cousen the
Worms, as they thought, and laid them up in Charnel Houses to perpetuity. But
what did Cyrus the Elder? He gave express command, that no Coffin of Gold or
Silver should confine his body; but that it should be without pomp laid into
the Earth, whence it received, with all other Creatures, both Birth and
Nourishment. It was the custom I confess to bury their Kings anciently on the
tops of Hills: and the Roman Princes statues were reverenced like so many
Deities: Nay, Christian Kings have their Coemeteries: the Vatican for the
Popes; the Aescurial for the Kings of Spain; St. Dennis for those of France,
and Westminster for ours of England.

But Quorsum haec? To what purpose is all this waste? All this cost and state
is needless, when it often happens, that the want of a Monument or Statue, does
best preserve the memory of such as are memoratu dignissimi.

Id Cinerem and Man's credis curare sepultos? James, the fourth King of the
Scots, by wanting a Tomb, gained this never dying Epitaph;

Fama Orbem replet, mortem sors occulit: at tu Desine mirari quod tegit ossa
solum.
Si mihi dent animo non impar fata Sepulchrum, Angusta est tumulo Terra
Britanna meo.
With no less ignoble an Epitaph sleeps that ever renowned Emperor Charles the
fifth, Carolus Quintus, Hic jacet intus. Ora pro eo bis aut ter, Ave Maria and
Pater noster. And is remembered with no better inscription then this Motto
added, Plus ultra.

So Saladine with all his Victories rested in a Grave; ordering a Sheet to be
advanced on a pike after his Death, a Herald proclaiming before it; Saladino,
Syriae, Iudaeae, and Aegypti, etc. Regi: Ex omnibus Victoriis, Tropaeis,
Opibus, Thesauris, nihil nisi hoc reliquum mansit.

With what sacred pity is King Stephen in our Chronicles remembered? Whose
Bones after four hundred years rest were laid naked by those unhallowed persons
that plundered his Leaden Coffin, and by them Barbarously thrown into a River?
Nor can the memory of William the Conqueror dye, though his restless Bones
also after-four, hundred years entombing at Cane in Normandy lost it by the
Barbarity of Chastillions Soldiers. Thus the Mouse may play with the dead
Lions Beard, and the most honorable may by such Hiaena's who dig up their
Graves for the dead bodies be after death dishonored. Which frequent instances
point unto us the sudden change of this worlds glory, the equality of the
dead, and the ambitious folly of those that think before they have left a good
name behind (which is the best Chronicle and most lasting Monument) to build
themselves eternal Thrones, Statues and Columns in the Grave, where all things
perish and are forgotten* Sepulchri mitte super vacuos honores.

To what purpose then are so many spacious Monuments erected, when the parties
are either after one Age forgot, or the Fabric is soon demolished by violence,
or must at least by all-devouring time be swallowed.

When C^iton asked Socrates how he would be Buried? I think said he, I shall
escape you: but so much of me as you can take, bury it according to the Laws.
No matter, in which of the elements the body lodges, so long as the Soul rests
in Abraham's Bosom. It is the Virtue we leave behind, or rather carry with us,
that is immortal. A good Fame is the best Odor, and a good Name is a precious
Ointment, which will condite our bodies best, and preserve our memories to all
eternity. Such a lasting Monument as this would better have preserved our Eight
Luxurious Henry, then Wolsey's half finished Monument at Windsor, which neither
his own Posterity, nor any of his successors since thought it worth the while
to perfect. Poor Lazarus as he had the starry Heaven for his Canopy, so was
that his Tomb: though he was fed at the door amongst the Dogs, yet he lay
buried in his Mothers Lap, attended hence with his own Innocence, and a Guard
of Angels.

It is not then Esogiums, Panegyric Orations, Dirges, Epitaphs, Heralds,
Mourners, Obelisks, Obsquies, or Mausolaean Monuments, so well as their own
Coins wherein they are effigiated, can eternize Princes. Let them live exemplar
Monuments. Let their Prince-like Acts and Actions write their Epitaphs, and be
their chief Monuments, since only Virtue, Post funera vivit; and

-- Caelo tegitur, qui non habet urnam. For doubtless that man's Bones on the
North Churchyard rests in more quiet, than his, that lies Entombed in the
Chancel.

Paradoxical Assertion 10.
Monoculus melius, eminus, and plus videt, quam duos habent Ocellos. That he
that has but one Eye, sees better, farther, and more, then he that has two
Eyes.

WHether the Sight be, by intra or extramittendo, as the Naturalists contend,
it matters not: this is certain, That these two Lights were placed above, as
Sentinels to look about, and afar off to discern any dangers approaching to the
Body. And in that notion, we know one Sentinel is enough in one place at one
time; and fittest, lest by discourse, or otherwise roving, they both neglect
their Duties. I grant indeed two Eyes in several Heads may see more then one in
one Head: and so a Stander by may often see more then a Gamester.

All I aim at is, to hit this White. That one Eye sees better then two in one
and the same Head. Waken but your Eye of Experience, and tell me, if you see
not more perfectly and exquisitely with one eye shut, then with both open? For
thus the Spirits Visual contract and unite themselves the more, and so become
stronger. For the Eyes, if the sight meet not in one single Cone or Angle, see
things double, and not in their true proportion and individual Species as
Nature formed them.

Besides, Observe but how the Pupil of that Eye, which is open, dilates, when
you view your pourtract in a Looking-glass, and shut the other. And I am sure
all cunning Marks-men do choose to wink with one Eye, that the other may the
surer find and hit the mark. Nay, when the Body is wholly deprived of sight,
the Eyes of the Soul then see best.

And though I commend not those Philosophers and Divines, that have emasculated
themselves, and eradicated their Eyes, whether because our Savior bid, If thy
right Eye offend thee, plu^k it out, etc. or that the Eyes of their
Understanding should thereby be the more intense, I know not: yet doubtless
Corporeal Darkness causes a greater Light of Judgment and strength of Memory,
the Mind being not then by dilitation carried away after several Objects and
distracted.

Hannibal had but one Eye, and yet espied the Advantage to win many famous
Battles. Homer was stark blind, and yet what Poet more Eaglesighted, or made
more lively and accurate Descriptions with both his Eyes? Democritus was
blind, and yet (as Laertius says) he saw more then all Greece besides. As our
Democritus junior, though blind with one Eye, saw more then all Britain.
Tiresias the Prophet, Maleasses and Timoleon were blind, Roscius squint-eyed,
Socrates, Aesop, and Horace purblinde; and yet who had more refined Wits and
diviner Spirits?

Well then, since the one eyed person may see as clear as the two eyed man, and
this is as clear as a Sun beam: I shall hold him another Light up, by which he
shall see farther also. See through our Optic or Perspective-glasses, the
hollow of the hand contracted, or through a Level, or when the eyelids are
gathered somewhat close, farther, then when too much light disperses the visual
Beams, or weakens them quite, as looking on the Sun will dazzle, and by
continuance darken. The Night has its beauty and amiable pleasures. And our
New ingenuous Stargazers see through Galilaeus his Glass, with but one Eye,
more Worlds, (as that in the Moon and other Planets) then all the wise
Philosophers of old did, or could, had they Argus or Linces eyes, and were now
living.

The Lover, that is Moon-blinde, (if not starkblinde as his Cupid) sees a world
of beauty in his Dulcinea's face, which her self never saw with both her Eyes
in her own false Glass.

And to conclude, the Monoculus or race of Indians, that has but one Eye, and
that in his middle Forehead, sees two in another man's head, that can see but
one in his. Then clear it is, that he that has but one Eye, sees better,
farther, and more, then he that has two Eyes.

Paradoxical Assertion 11.
Faeminis castra sequi licite congruum. That Women should follow the Camp.

When Astyages made the Persians fly, their Wives and Mothers met them with
their Coats up; asking them whether they would seek for Refuge in their Wombes:
with which shameful check being reproved, it made so deep an impress, they
resumed their courage, put their Assailants to flight, and took Astyages
Prisoner.

If the like shame will not make men valiant, then Love will: for (as Plato
holds) only Lovers will dye for their friends, and in their Mistresses
Quarrel. Why should not women then so much beloved of men (as he infers) follow
the Camp, to be as well Encouragers, as Spectators of their Heroic Actions?

At the Justs or Quintins, what Gallant is not inspired of the sudden with
Valor, when so many young Ladies and admirers of his Person and Deport appear
in the Theater? Cupid goes always armed, and all his Shafts are headed with
mertle: What did Medaea's love prompt Jason to effect? The Squire of the Dames
himself, Sir Lancelot, Sir Tristram, Sir Huon of Bordeaux, the High and Mighty
Don Quixot, nor our Fiercer Saint George (who all fought for fair Ladies sakes)
did ever encounter so many Dragons and deaths, as a young Enamorado plumed over
with Ladies Favors shall readily embrace. He is forty thousand strong of the
sudden, improved beyond himself and all his hopes; and since Plato was of
opinion, that Venus infused Valor into Mars, I could me thinks with an Army of
such Lovers, undertake a second Conquest of the World. How fought Sir Blandimor
and Paradel, those Fairy Knights, in Florimel's presence, all sprent with
bloody Gore, for her only Love, which only animated them?

But to omit Romantic story, none ever fought like the Spaniards in their
Ladies presence, whilst a few of them by that Encouragement overcame a
multitude of Moors.

Audaces faciebat Amor -- -- King Fardinand had never conquered Granado (thinks
Castilio) had not Queen Isabella and her Attendants been present at the Siege.
And some English Historians believe, That Queen Elizabeth's presence at Tilbury
Camp, encouraged both Horse and Infantry more, then all the known Valor of her
experienced Leaders.

Nay, the personal Valor of some Heroina's in the Conduct of Martial Affairs
is wonderful: Tacitus admires the Britains, who used to war (says he) under
the Conduct of Women; witness Bonduca, Queen Margaret wife to our Henry the
Sixth, and many others, who all equalled the courage of either Hannibal or
Scipio.

To pass by the holy Valor of Judith, etc. in the Apocrypha: The Women of Argus
repelled Cleomenes the Spartan King, and Demarathus another, and freed their
City from sacking and ruin. That Sarmatick Nation of the Amazons, famous to
all posterity, and born of Mars himself, (as they boasted) what fighting Queens
did it produce? These Virago's cutting off their right Paps, that they might be
more dextrous at shooting, overcame the greatest part of Europe, and got a good
footing in Asia.

When Pyrrhus fought with the Spartans, and was most opposed with that Sex, how
shamefully was he beaten back, being forced to retreat with his son Ptolomy,
and the strongest part of his Army? The like ado had Marius when he fought with
the Cymbrians, to conquer their Wives too; who with Carts and Wagons, Lances,
Darts, and Stones sent from the Towers and House tops, so opposed him, that (as
Florus says) Perinde speciosa mors eorum fuit, quam Pugna. Amalasunta daughter
to the valiant Theodorick King of the Goths, drove the Burgundians and Almains
out of Liguria. The dreadful Frown of a Woman turned Fury, is able to daunt an
Enemy, and look him dead.

It is Revenge that thus steels their Valor. And I am confident, none naturally
are more revengeful then Women; none more eager, cruel and bloody, in the
prosecution of it. Thomyris that noble Queen of Scythia, to revenge her sons
death, flew most of Cyrus's Army, and cut off his Head also, with those
insulting words, Satia te sanguine, quem sitisti. Again, none more crafty then
Women to invent Stratagems, lay Plots and Designs ex tempore; none more subtle
to forese^ and prevent them.

Why may not Gynaecocracy then be allowed, since a Scepter and Distaff are both
alike weighty, and Women again be admitted into the Senate and Council? Though
the Salick Law now forbid Women the Scepter; yet amongst the Celtae in France,
they were of Council formerly, who therefore admitted them, that when they had
made too severe Edicts, they with their Lenity and Moderation might mitigate
them. For indeed what Heart cannot the Oratory of sovereigne Beauty melt and
assuage? What Judge cannot a Calphuria wind and turn to her own interests?
Pulcheria did often consult with, and advise her Brother Theodosius the
Emperor; Theodora, Justinian; Agrippina, Claudius; Livia, Octavian; Katherine
de Medicis, her Husband and sons, all Kings of France like so many Tanaguils,

-- Medis levibusque Sabaeis
Imperat hic sexus, reginar umque sub armis
Barbariae pars magna jacet. --
The Medes, Arabians, and most part of the Barbarous World (says Claudian) was
then under Female Governors. Nay, the third part of the World take it is name
from Women, (as Herodotus observes) Asia from the Mother of Prometheus; Europe
from Agenors Daughter, Europa Jupiter Courted, Lybia from the Daughter of
Epaphas, etc. And many Cities since bear their Names, as Rome from Captive
Romana, Lavinium from Lavinia: And that inimitable Assyrian Queen Semiramis; in
forty two years subdued most of Asia, built many Cities, Babylon the chiefest,
and checked the waves of proud Euphrates.

But I trifle. What can men indeed do without them either in War or Peace? A
Woman with her Thunder-clapper can Roar and Batter like a Canon: And if her
Beauty blind you not, she can with her Distaff (especially if she set Fire to
the Tow) first smoke a man into silence, and then Cudgel him with it into
perfect Obedience. Witness the Valiant Zantippe's in all ages, who wear the
Breeches, govern at home, and command their Cuckolds abroad, that they may play
Rex both there and abroad with more security.

Are not such Tisiphone's then think you fittest for the Camp? Nay, such
Hecate's, such furious Spirits, what wise Leader would not place in the very
front of the Battle? for these are no Haggards; they scorn to turn tail, but
boldly march forward, encountering the point of the fiercest weapon, and like
Messalena are perhaps tired, but never weary of the Combat.

Surenus the Parthian General, when he Warred against the Romans, carried about
with him constantly two hundred Concubines. And do not our Swiss Soldiers in
France, Italy, etc. (as well as some of other Countries with their Doxes)
march to this day most commonly with Bag and Baggage, accompanied with their
Wives? such Amazonian Eyes dart like Lightning, and ca^ strike fire out of the
most soft and leaden Spirit.

Since then shame or love will make a Coward bold as Hector, since a Woman's
Anger, Envy, Ambition, Hatred, and Malice is so mighty and invincible, and
prompts them to dire attempts beyond the thoughts of most men; all objections
of the indecency, weakness of body and mind through fear, modesty, etc. innate
to that Sex, (as many falsely suppose) being laid aside; and a^ thus answered:
Women I say ought, if they have not lost their pristine Valor, to follow the
Camp as well as Men.

Paradoxical Assertion 12. Constantia apud unic^m Messalinam non Virtus
constat, sed Solaecismus; and gravius est peccatum, quam Fornicatio apud
plurimas. That Constancy to one Messalina is no Virtue, but a Solecism in
Nature; and is a greater sin then Fornication with many.
THough all offenses are not capital, and yet are without Repentance and Mercy
all alike Penal, contrary to Iovinians Error which he sucked from the Stoic
Schools, who think all Faults alike grievous: yet I shall evince this Truth,
that that Constancy, which in Italy many Curtizans boast of to their Paramours,
is not only not a Virtue, but a Vice; nay, a greater sin then Fornication with
many, and therefore in Nature also becomes a mere Solecism.

Degrees then in sin being allowed, for certainly to Rob a Church is more
heinous, then to steal an Apple.

Nec vincit ratio tantundem ut peccet idemque,
Qui teneros caules alieni fregerit horti,
Quam qui noctur^os Divum sacra legerit --
For shall we not account him a greater Criminal, that of his own head, without
any leave of the Neighborhood asked or granted, shall enclose a part of a
Common, and appropriate it to his private use and benefit, then the Rich man
who over-stocks it? And is not there par vatio in the enclosure of Woman kind?

Where a Fence must be made, the Church is to set the Hedge, and consecrate the
Bounds: But when profane Atheists or Independent Teachers will Marry themselves
(for this looks like Marriage, it being the Devils craft to come as near as he
can to God in show, so to bereave him of his Honor) in mere opposition to the
Church; what is this, but usurping the Churches Privilege, and a most
malicious slighting of those Holy Ordinances appointed first by God himself in
Paradise?

Observe also where Marriage is a Sacrament, and the Priests themselves forbid
to partake of it; Stews are permitted even in Rome it self, in policy to keep
their Wives honest. For they hold it impossible, (as well they may) so many
idle, lusty, well-fed gallants, Monks and Friars should live Chaste: and
therefore are these Ambu^ajae or Brothel houses tolerated and connived at, to
prevent (as they insinuate) both Adultery and Murder.

Well then, where such a Platonic Commonwealth and Community of men and Women
is permitted, where Fornication to allay the bilious heat of Concupisence is
counted necessary, or but a Venial sin; why should any man think (especially
there) to empale any part of this Common which lies so freely exposed to the
public good and benefit of all, since the public must ever be preferred
before any man's private interest?

If then, I say, it be such an apparent injury there, what shall an enclosure,
a constant Fornication with one be accounted in all the Reformed Churches,
where all Fornication is wholly and absolutely forbid and punished? What is
this licencious juking but a dwelling in sin? and to repeat it with the same
party, what does it argue, but a greater lust? Whereas the act committed
accidentally with strange persons, and that but perfunctorily perchance and in
fear, it being not aggravated with those other evil circumstances, is by so
much the more excusable. So that since all Fornication in general is unlawful
in every Christian Church, and so prejudicial in that especially: by a Sorites,
or induction a fortiori, it must needs be a greater sin and offense amongst us,
who are otherwise taught both by the Laws of God and Man, that such Carnal
Copulation most deeply entrenches upon Gods Honor.

But all Religion set apart, (as it is in truth amidst these brutish
sensualities) what rational man would be wedded to one single Whore? who would
be bewitched with one Lais? a tie more slavish then it is ignoble? And I would
fain know, what natural carnal man, unrestrained either by Divine and Humane
Laws, would by the Dictate of his own Reason, be confined to one only, when
his sense and appetite with the Mahometans prompts him to a more pleasing
variety.

The Nicholaites, Adamites, etc. use a more promiscuous Venery, and think it
lawful, without either respect of age, person, quality or condition, to mingle
with any they first light on: as the Heathen were wont naked to satisfy their
Lusts like very bruit Beasts in their Sacrifices, before their Priapus.

Since then by mere natural instinct both men and beasts do all alike most
incline to a promiscuous Community; and since to a Christian guided by Religion
and Reason, an Impropriation (especially of what we cannot call our own, and is
performed without the Solemnity of the Churches joining hands) is no way
allowed; upon these grounds, I say, such a brutish Constancy is no Virtue, but
a greater sin then Fornication with many; and is a very Solecism in Nature.

Paradoxical Assertion 13.
Qui magis sapiunt, magis insipiunt. That the deepest Scholars are the
shallowest Asses.

THat they are so in the eye of the world is obvious: who more ridiculous in
all companies? while the mere Scholar looks like his Ass in the College
Quadrangle, and can hardly eat his meat for being stared upon. His Discourse
smells of the Lamp: Fough, cry the ignorant, he is unsavory, morose, Pedantick,
a mere Fardle of musty Books, whilst his Learning comes from him like water out
of a bottle by gulps, or not at all: and then,

Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire hoc sciat alter. This is the vulgar
Remarque upon Learning and learned men: the more's the pity; though in truth
the best do but delirare, and are but Erectae stultitiae statuae, as Scaliger
calls them. It is Ignorance, blessed Ignorance, we all know, is the Mother to
Devotion. Erasmus is as famous for his Moriae Encomium, as learned Bacon for
his Advancement of Learning.

Though I shall not therefore altogether decry humane Learning with our
new-gifted Precisians, because the Apostles were but plain Fishermen, etc.
being Homo trium literarum my self: Yet I presume I have just Learning enough
to evince this Assertion, That the Scioli, the Gnostics, and most profoundly
learned men in all Ages have found out the greatest Errors, Schism's, Heresies,
etc. and have been guilty of more Madness and Folly, then the more sober,
illiterate, and quiet Proletarii, whose implicit Faith without unprofitable
Disputes (of which there is no end) is pined upon the Churches sleeve.

I may tell these acute and sophistical Jesuits and subtle Schoolmen, as
Agrippa told Paul, much Learning has made them mad. They having more need to
plant Hellebor, or set up three sails for Anticyra, then many others of
shallower Capacity.

Aristotle the prince of Phlosophers, who said, There is never any great wit,
sine mixtura dementiae, without a mixture of Madness, verified this saying
first himself; for who but a mad man would have drowned himself in the Sea,
because he understood not the reason of the Seas refluxes?

And I pray betwixt Madness and Folly what is the difference? No more then inter
Amentem and Dementem, Scotum and Sotum: The one perhaps never was, the other
nor was, or ever will be in his right wi^s. So that this privilege a Fool has
above a Wise Man, he can never run out of his wits, which many that think
themselves wise now adays do, at least are much besides them.

Indeed no Fool to the wise Fool: Sapientia prima stultitia caruisse. And no
man so little wise, as he that thinks otherwise: the Overwise, being siingular
in that self-conceited opinion of his own Wisdom and Judgment. See thou a
man wise in his own Conceit, there is more hope of a Fool then of him, says
Solomon. Lipsius was so puffed up with his Pedantick Learning, that he bragged,
he only sowed Wisdom in the Netherlands. Paracelsus elevated above his
Mercury, boasted himself Divine, a Miracle-monger, that he could make little
men, and raise the dead to life. Ovid thought his Poetry eternized him,

Iamque opus exegi, quod nec Iovis ira, nec ignis, etc. Keplar's Lunary
transported him beyond his new World in the Moon, into the third Heavens and
fantastic Empyraeum of those giddy Chymaera's. Indeed all excellent Musicians,
Painters, Poets and Lovers, are allowed to be mad, Poetica licentia. And you
may ever observe, that the most exquisite Artist in any Science or Manufacture,
is the most conceited, and most transported with his own acquired Perfections.

But in Divine Affairs (though true Wisdom is no where to be found but in Holy
Writ) how many Millions of Mad Enthusiasts have we? Such as pretend by their
speculative Divinity, they are a Secretis to God Almighty; that they know what
God is doing, and when he shall come to judge the World, etc.

To pass by the superstitious folly of each Order in the Roman Church, their
ridiculous Legends, Traditions, and more idle Customs, all taken up upon
trust: who cannot but see and admire the absurd Tenants, and most frantic
Blasphemies of these grave Heads (as they call themselves) of the Church and
particular Sects in all Ages? How many have fansied themselves to be Elias and
Christ's? as our Eudo do stellis in King Stephens time: David George in Holland,
with Hacket, Burchet and Hovat of late in England? What monstrous Opinions have
many other hair-braind Iehu's, lead since by the dictates of their own
Phanatick spirits broached and obtruded to the (...), who are ever apt to be
turned about with any wind of Doctrine? And when the Guides are thus blind
and blinded with their own Zeal and Folly, needs must the blinder Flock
miscarry.

Nor can his wife Holiness who sits in Cathedra, and cannot (at least as we are
bid to believe) err, be acquit from this infectious Leprosy of Madness and
Folly, in assuming and obtruding it to the people, Gods Attribute to himself,
Infallibility. Indeed now adays each man is Infallible, and wise in the Achme.
And whereas Greece could heretofore boast but of seven Wise men, now we cannot
find so many fools, if all the foolish Galatians and Gotham Coxcombs were but
Catechized. And this is the height of Folly.

Since then Bernardus non videt omnia, and that the wisest men labor with fits
of Folly; For so wise Socrates after all his search into Nature, and
indefatigable study, did at last confess of himself, Hoc tantum scio, me nihil
scire. Since our Masters of Arts are but Inceptors, but then beginning to
learn, (when they have as they believe at least) devoured all the Arts: since
all such as must be wise by Inheritance or Succession, as Popes, Rich men and
Magistrates, are all but Sapientum Octavi, wise men in the Eight degree: since
I say, Solomon the wisest of men concludes all is Folly and Vanity: and since
unus utrique error, sed variis illudit partibus: all men err, and are
consequently fools: I may certainly conclude, That the deepest Scholar, though
he study by Epictetus Lanthorn, sees no farther into a Millstone then the most
illiterate Peasant, and commonly dotes with the greatest Folly.

Paradoxical Assertion 14.
Qui nullis infestantur inimicis, sunt miserrimi. That those that have no
enemies, are most miserable.

Nec Amicum haebeo, nec inmicum. THus Nero having enemies enough, falsely
exclaimed, when even to avoid being surprised of his enemies he could not find
one courteous Friend to dispatch him. But what man living else can say, he has
no enemy? or in truth who can say, he has a true friend?

Populus me sibilat, -- says the Miser in Iuvenal. Let the whole Populacy
deride and hiss at me, let the whole Town envy and revile me;

-- At mihi plaudo:
Ipse domi simulac Nummos cont^mplor in arca.
What care I for their hate, so long as I have a friend in a Corner? let them
laugh on, so will I, so long as the great God Mammon smiles in my Chests. Is it
not much better to be envied, then to be pitied? Thus he. And thus may any
Rich or Eminent person securely argue.

It Is true, all Eminency draws Envy after it naturally; as the Sun draws all
eyes. And we see that Bowl that is next the Mark is ever most aimed at. Observe
all the Darlings of Fortune, the Favorites and Minions in all Princes Courts,
if Emulation, Detraction, Envy and Hate, have not attended all their Greatness.

Seneca was hated for his Eloquence and Riches. Se^anus for his popular Power.
Our Wolsey for his Wealth and Grandeur etc. yet though these, cum multis aliis,
were envied for their Riches, even by their Princes also, (who as often
fleeced, squeezed, and divested them of them again) it does not therefore
follow, that Ministers of State should cease to aspire, or do great things, if
good. For so long as they live justly, act faithfully, and can preserve their
Sovereigns favor, no matter how loud the Vulgar bark at them and traduce their
Virtues.

I cannot therefore choose but blame Publius Ventidius his supine fear, who
after three Victories over the Parthians, sat down modestly, threw down the
Cudgels, and would not prosecute his good fortune, for fear of Mark Anthony's
Envy, or Hate, under whom he served, though he were his superior.

By the same reason our Richard the first should have desisted his brave
Exploits in the Holy Land, because his Ambitious Corrival and Emulous
Fellow-fouldier, Philip of France, envied him so much, and cavill'd at all his
Proceedings. No; a gallant Spirit degenerates, when it furles up within itself
through Bashfulness; and* (...) sloth or fear of Envy, declines such places of
T^ as he can manage, and to which he is most adapted by Birth and Education.

Let the humble Lapwing pick worms; Aquil^ non capit muscas. A sting of a Wasp
shall no^ fright a wise Husbandman from his Honey-co^b and Hive.

Shall a valiant Leader fear two or three Pick* thank Enemies, or backbiting
snarling slandere^ at home, that dares look thousands of Enemies i^ the face in
open field undaunted? Shall a Minister of State fear the frowns or hate of the
people* for whose public good be bends all his ende^vours? Or what need he
care for some few envious men's undervaluing, so long as without Oppression or
Insolence he can set uppermost in the warm sunshine of his Masters favor?
Shall he fear to amass Riches, so long as he does but ^dere pecus, not
deglubere? or does not by griping too much, amass a public Envy and lose all?
Shall he fear Enemies abroad, that has such ^ sure friend at home, a good
Conscience? Amicus Socrates, Amicus Plato, fed magis Amica Veritas, should be
the Result of every honest man: for he that can preserve Truth and Honesty in
his breast is happy without other Friends, and need not fear any Enemies.

Well then; since the Rich and Powerful that have so many* Emula^ours and
bitter Enemies are yet most happy, then certainly the poor Man who has no such
Enemies, and whose pitiful Estate and Condition no man envies, is of all men
most miserable: for all his days are miserable. Nay, though the poor Man be
never so wise, honest, ^earned, or well-deserving, yet is he neglected and
slighted of all his neighbors, Projecta vitior Alga. Homer must stand without
door, sing Ballads, or ^eg, if he want money: for unhappy Poverty makes a man
not only Ridiculous and Contemptible, but Base; forces him to ill actions,
steal and be hanged, and what more miserable?

This necessity is as terrible, as well as it is Ingens telum, that in Iaponia
to avoid hunger and beggary, if they be poor, they stif^le their Children, or
make an abort, which Aristotle cruelly commends. The like has been done in
China. Nay, Christians (if we may believe Munster) in Lithuania, have
mancipated and sold themselves, Wives and Children, to rich men, to prevent
those fatal extreinities of Want, Sickness, Hunger, and ^arving.

Since then, no man does, or can live without ^ome Enemies, but the wretched*
Beggar, (whose only one is a Constable) and no Juments so servi^e, slavish and
miserable, as Poor men, who are the Pack-horses or Foot-stools for the Rich to
get up on and ride; I may positively conclude* That such Poor men, who only
have no Enemies are most miserable.

Paradoxical Assertion 15.
Dignior inter Pedites primus, quam inter Equestres secundus. That it is better
to be Head of a Private House, then the Tail of a Noble Family.

-- Famae servit ineptus,
Qui stupet in Titulis and imaginibus. --
L. Brutus, at the first Rise of the then Roman Aristocracy, though he had
Title fair enough to the Crown, yet perceiving the peoples disaffection to
Monarchy, chose rather to be the first Consul, then the last Prince. Like that
worthy Gentleman, who resolved rather to sit still at the upper End of the
Bar-Table, then Below his Puisnees at the Bench, who were otherwise beneath him
both in Learning, Judgment, and Desert.

It Is true, the people

-- Stultus honores,
Saepe dat indignis; --
But a wise Prince will prefer none but those that best deserve.

The Switz, Ragusian, and United Provincial Democracies, (as the Turks do at
this day advance their Bassawes) admit none to wear Honors Hereditary; nor any
to bear Office, but the most learned, wisest, and best qualified. He that is
Heir to the Virtues as well as Fortunes of a noble Family, is fittest to govern
an Estate. And such Hephestions only being more honorable in Birth and
Education, are for their Valor and Integrity fit Pillars for a Commonwealth.

There a young Lordling possessed of many Mortgaged Manors, as cracked as his
Manners, is turned Spend-thrift, and makes more haste to Poverty, then all his
griping Ancestors did to grow rich. Here Is one runs his Estate out with his
Dogs and Horses. Another makes it fly with his Hawks after Butter-flies, or
Birds of small value. Here Is one with the Palsy in his Elbow, shakes it and
the House so long, till it crack or fall at one stake. Another Sybaritical
Glutton, Apicius-like, ento^bs his Fathers Lands and Houses in his Belly; ^r
being given to Wine, pisses out his Patrimony against a wall. Here one consumes
all in sumptuous Building, and buries all in the Rubbish. Another prodigious
Prodigal prostrates his Estate to a prostrate Cleopatra, consumes himself and
Fortune amongst Women, through the Saltness of whose Tails he entails Shame and
Beggary to his half-pockified Posterity.

If such be the end of most of our Nobility and gallant Gentry, they may well
get Supporters (...) their Arms: Though when they are Crest-fallen* and reduced
to Poverty, all their Crests and glorious Coats will hardly keep them warm: nor
when hungry, will their painted Lions and Eagles feed them. And thus their
shame, as well as Misery is greater, because entailed. F^i Caius, o^ Fui Dives,
are both but lamentable Mo^to's, when a Patrician in his old age must be
entombed in ^ Prison or Hospital.

Stemmata quid faciunt, quid prodest Pontice longo,
Sanguine censeri? --
The twinkling Stars on their Cloaks are little minded when the golden Sun
shines not in their Pockets. Alas! Threadbare Nobility without other
Endowments, is a Non ens, a mere flash of Lightning and Airy Fancy, this which
so many boast of,

-- Nobilit as sola est, atque uniea virtus. An upstart Horace, Libertino Patre
natus, or Terrae filius, who by his admired worth and supereminent qualities
steps forward, though he be but a Carpenters Son, and so knows best how to
raise his House, is more honorable, then such outside* Glo worma, who swell
with Honors and shine with ^ng-winded Titles, and carry no true and constant*
heat of Virtue and Magnanimity in their Breasts.

Why then should a mean Extraction be despised? E tenui casa saepe Vir magnus
exit. The greatest Houses were once but lean Cottages; and the Capitol was at
first covered with thatch. How many from private Soldiers have risen up to be
Emperors? as Regillianus, Pertinax, Maxi^inus, Probus, etc. How many Popes and
Cardinals, for their Cardinal Virtues, have been advanced to the Chair ex
infima plebe? How many in all Ages, of all Professions, have raised themselves
out of nothing to great Honors? And set aside our City Majors, (who are seldom
elected to that Government but for their Riches only) who better deserve them?

For tell me: What does our noble* Hero so much boast of? Of his great, great,
great Grandfathers noble Exploits and Services done perhaps in such a Kings
reign, and the Barony, or the like, conferred upon him for that Action.

-- Ole quid ad te?
Nam genus and proavos and quae non fecimus ipsi,
(...) Vix ea nostra voco. --
What if

-- Avus tibi mater^s fuit atque paternus,
Olim qui magnis regionibus imperitavini.
What is all this to the present Inheritour, if he degenerate into a Pismire,
into a (...) an^ base Neoptolemus? What boots all those fair Houses and ancient
Demeasmes descended to him, when he has not wit enough to keep them, or
sometimes an Account, but suffers his Stewards and Bailyffs to Let and Sell
him? Whereas the modest private person of mean though honest Parentage, who
strives in a serious Emulation of others Virtues, to excel them in the Goods of
Nature, meets with the Goods of Fortune also, and in that is much happier in
the raising of his elegant superstructure. As that Architect was more famous,
that built Diana's Temple, then Erostratus infamous that burnt it down: Or as
that Mason has more skill that can build a stately Edifice, then the ignorant
workman that only knows how to pull it down.

To conclude then; It is more Honorable to say, This was got by my own
Industry and careful Endeavors, then when it is too late with shame enough to
say, This I lost, sold, or spent, by my Luxury and Folly?

Besides, I am sure a Farthing Candle new lighted and set up, is much better
then one of Four in the pound almost blazed away and reduced to hi^ last Snuff,
which always goes out with the greatest stink.

Philosophical PROBLEMS.

BY RH



Aut prodesse solent aut delectare. London, Printed by R. W. and are to be sold
by Charles Webb, at the Bores-Head in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1659.

The Table of the Philosophical Problems.
WHy Jews are said to stink naturally? Why a fair Woman is said to be fish
below? Why the stone water-spouts are formed conveying water through the Lions
Mouth? Why Cuckolds are said to wear Horns? Why drowned women float with their
Bellies downwards? Why there are more Christnings registered then Burials? Why
men talk most and loudest when drunk? Why there is reason in rosting of Eggs?
Why Englishmen creep to the Chimney in Winter and Summer also? Why the younger
Children are more ingenuous then the Eldest? Why Dogs turn round so often
before they lie down? Why drunken men run when they cannot stand: Why man is
naturally so unapt to swim? Why the Botonick Galenist gets more Gold then the
Hermatick Paracelsian Why mean persons dye of the great Pox, and great persons
dye of the small Pox (...)* (...) Why the abused husband is called Cuckold
(...) Why the covetous Miser is called Hog? Why confident men never blush? Why
women naturally grow not bald? Why Barbers are news-^ongers? Why men are sooner
inebriated at dinner then at supper? Why Melancholy men are witty? Why the
Cornutee loves the Cornutor?
Philosophical PROBLEMS.
Why Jews are said to Stink Naturally?
Non been olet, qui been semper olet,

SAid witty Martial satyrically: so that that according to his sense, the Jews
may be said to stink indeed, because, ever extremely odoriferous, being
anointed with Saffron, Nard or Oil of Spike, etc. to preserve their dainty
bodies from infection. Perhaps they still smell of the strong Garlic, Onions,
and Fleshpots of Egypt, in which they so delighted. Or is it not because they
feed the best and ^eanest of all men, and so the Philosophical A^iom may be
best verified in them, Corruption optimi est pessima. This verity holding
Analogy also in their manners and nature, as well as diet.

For they, who were once the Peculiar and elect people of God, are now become
the unsavory cast-awayes, the Refuse, Vagabonds and Stergulinious
Off-scourings of the World. And in this accursed detestable Notion they are
shunned in all Countries, as the Pests of mankind. And for this may most
properly be said to stink in the offended Nostrils of God, and of all good Men.

Or is it, because their Noses are of the size of Martials Papilus, so long and
great, and therefore full of Mucre and Stink? or because the Jews-Ears grow on
stinking Elder (which Tree that Fox-headed Judas was falsely supposed to have
hanged himself on.) And so that natural stink has been entailed on them and
their Posterities as it were ex traduce. Or do they not rather stink for fear
of being abused and undone (as it has been the fate of these scabbed sheep to
be (...) and Tar-markt in whatsoever Climate they have shifted) these
Dei-Regicides being both the scorn and the hate of all Commonwealths, but such
as are like them Anti-Monarchical.

Why a fair Woman is said to be Fish below,
According to the Verse,

Desi^t in Piscem Mulier Formosa s^.

BEcause some of them are she-Otters, neither Flesh, nor Fish, nor good
Red-Herring; and so being reckoned amongst the Amphibolous Animals, men had
need look to their waters. Or is it because from the wat^ing-place down-wards
they Bath with Susanna so long till the Elders shoot them 'twixt wind and
water, and then board their weak Pinnaces? Or because they are Composed of
Phlegm and Water, of a flesh-flishy substance (for there is a flesh of fish
also) and we commonly say, he that holds a woman has a slippery Eel by the
Tail? Or is it, because the Back of a Tench and the Belly of a Wench are
conjoined? Or because their Fish-pools smell of Old Ling, whilst that taste and
savor gives the Maids and Mermaids the best relish, and a Tail of Green-fish
buttered well with Eggs, you know has the like Gusto.

Or is it not because they are Venus-like, born of the Sea, like that fair
unconstant Goddess their Queen Mother, their lower parts like hers, being ^er
moist and coldest, according to the Adage.

A Dogs Nose, and a Woman's Knee,
They at all times cold will be.
But I rather believe it is, because women are (or ought to be at all times) as
mute as fishes, and so might be suspected to be fish all over, did they not
devour more man's flesh, then either Spinola's Whale, or Seneca's Lampreys.

Why the stone water-spouts are formed, conveying water through the Lions Mouth?
WHy? the Stone-cutters fancy a Lion vomiting up the rain-waters, may either be
because as the Lion Roars with open mouth, so through his fierce Aquaeduct
those violent inundating streams are made to roar also. Or perhaps the Lions
are there placed, as the Devil is over Lincoln, with sour and terrible looks
(as their^ that sp^e are Lion-like) only to fright Theeve^ from the Mansion.

Or because the Lion is supposed to forget its Ferity, and minister cordial
waters to the use of Mankind: according to Ennodius his Elegant Epigram of a
Marble Lion ejecting water as it were out of his bowels; which he thus concludes

Effera dum vitreos effundunt marmora fontes
Dira salutiferis corda lavantur aquis.
But I rather agree with Plutarchs conceit: that the Lion is made to belch
forth waters; because when the Sun has passed Leo, they then stream most
abundantly.

Why Cuckolds are said to wear Horns?
WHen the Woman is the verier Beast, why should the innocent Husband wear the
Horns? Unless you will say he looks like Aesops Ass with his two ambitious ears
(which may be mistaken for Horns) cropping of Thistles, whilst the Rampant
Adulterer crops the sweet flowers of his wives Chastity?

Is it not because the abused Cuckold becomes Lunatic at the Affront, and so
every Moon at least being either changeable, jealous, or hornmad, or all three,
he wears her Horns by Assimulation? Or is it because the Cuckoldly Actaeon is
transformed into a Stag by his Ephesian Diana? Or being an Hunts*man, like him,
in perpetual Chase of his wives suspected Chastity, does he therefore wear the
Bugle to wind it aloud when the Deer is fallen? Or as the Snail which is said
to have Horns also, that appear but seldom; so does not this Hedge-creeper
thrust out his Horns sometimes at his forehead, and as often put them up
quietly, and wear them in his pocket?

Or is not this monster rather said to wear the Horns, because other men with
their two forefingers point and make Horns at him? And thus vexed and nettled,
he scratcheth his aching head, when it is his salt-wives tail only that itches?
Or does he not swear damn him and ram him so often, till at last he look like
Aries indeed? Or since they be both one flesh, and she sins under Covert Baron,
but with her Husbands Limbs, he being the Head, why should not the Horns in
justice and reason be fitly placed upon the man's forehead, as who would say,

Quam pulchrum est digito monstrari, and dicier hic est! So that a Salacious
woman, (who is of the Epicaene Gender) may well be compared to the
flesh-devouring Eagle, which is Aquila, both he and she.

Why drowned women float with their Bellies downward?
SInce it is the natural disposition of light women to fall backwards, and
since Philosophy tells us, that heavy bodies move downwards, and that all light
things tend upwards, why should women then renverve to men when drowned, lie
with the face downwards, which part being fair, they have least cause to be
ashamed of? This Problem might have puzzled Aristotle (that studied them well)
were he now alive; and have made him that studied the Sea as much have drowned
himself again, for indignation that he could not solve this Riddle.

Is it because women are so naturally given to change, that when dead also they
maintain the same mutality against the Laws of Art and Nature? Or because that
changeable and unconstant Element is governed by the Moon, do they therefore
with their multiformed Governess affect the like preposterous change in their
Bodies also, whilst they float thus arsie-varsie upon that uncertain Element?
Perhaps it is because Venus was born of the Sea, and therefore women naturally
love and embrace as it were with their Arms and face toward it, when dead,
that specious Element whence that fairest Queen of Women was extracted.

Or may it not rather be suspected, they are looking toward the Infernal Pit,
whether Charon is ferrying their black souls, and they are ^ailing? Did not
Charity oblige me to a more candid construction of this their Aversness
Heaven-wards, and bid me rather believe, that by natural instinct, the innate
Modesty of that Bashful Sex thus endeavors to hide from us it is Nakedness, as
Pudenda.

Why there are more Christnings Registered in England then Burials?
THough there is a Statute for all men to dye; and none was yet translated to
Heaven (for I doubt whether Enoch and Elias are bodily there as yet) but
through Ezekiels Valley of dead and dry Bones: And for that cause John the
Evangelist was falsely suggested not to dye, upon our Saviors Hypothesis, What
if he tarry till I come? Though Moses his Burying-place was concealed, least
perhaps the Idolatrous Israelites should have adored his Shrine, or for other
reasons best known to God himself: yet that there are more Christened, then Dead
or Buried now adays in England, is Billa vera, and as sure as Death it self.

Is it then because the Font being at the Church entrance, and therefore more
perspicuous, and that we take notice of those that enter the stage at first
with more attention always, then him that speaks the Epilogue? Or because one
Childs crying in the Temple is more observed then the Exit's of twenty men
stealing thence quietly one by one before Sermon be ended? Or is it because our
Iordans of late overflow with Anabaptists, who whilst they multiply Baptismes,
wash away Christianity it self?

And truly this last reason might most prevail with me, did I not rather fear,
that too too many by ill deferring it, dye before they be so happy as once to
be registered amongst Christians in holy Church? But indeed this certain Truth
is raised from Policy and Experience.

For this Island is naturally wholesome, and since so many are translated hence
to Foreign Plantations; since some kill themselves, and are denied Christian
Burial; since many others dye in the Wars, on the Seas, or Gallows, and are
numbered with the Dead indeed, but their number not particularly known: It is no
wonder the Churchyards swell no more with Grave-stones, and that by these
violent and unknown ways and means, the Christnings should exceed the Burials
in every Parish.

Why men talk most and loudest when they are drunk.
SInce full Hogsheads do least resound, and empty Casks return the best and
clearest answer, why should men when swilled with drink and fullest, be fuller
then ordinary with noise and clamor? You will reply perhaps, That they are
then emptiest. For having turned out o'doors the Mind* and the rational Soul
either dislodged at present, or withdrawn to sleep in some corner of the Body,
according to the Proverb, When the Drink is in, the Wit is out, And so being
as it were out of themselves, devoid of their Reason, they may be truly said
then emptiest, in the Garret especially, and so no wonder if they be heard
loudest, over the whole House.

Or are they not like our Organ-pipes, which never sound full and loud, till
soundly filled; and then, like them, no sooner full, but roaring? Or does the
Spirit of Wine enliven and embolden them the more? Or the oyliness of the Grape
does it so supple the Tongue and untye the Ligaments thereof, that it may run
the more easily? Or does not the jovial God Liber, to whom they sacrifice,
assist them to speak the more freely and loudly; that, thus amidst the high
Jollities of those Bacchanals, they may the better be heard of that Deity they
then invoke. Indeed the Mariners in a storm at Sea cry always loudest: So in a
Deluge and Sea of Drink, where the Understanding is first shipwrackt, the
troubled Sea-sick Sailors must with the Billows storm for company in this
Confusion, or else they cannot hear* for understand one another either but
seldom do, unless it be by signs.

Or does the continual pouring forth of their Liquors deafen them, like the
by-dwellers to the Cataracts of Nyle? and so make them hoop and hollow to one
another as they were all hunting the Fox in the Wild of Kent, or dwelt in
Chaucer's Mill? Or does the Drink make them wise, or at least think they are
so, and accordingly make every one abound in his own Sense, and Quarrel too, as
in the Battle of the Lapithae, if that be contradicted?

But I rather believe the cause why the notorious drunken Anthonies of this age
are so obstr^perous, is either because their stomachs boil with St. Anthony's
Fire, or that they do m^e a^dire indeed in either sense: And therefore their
Reason being lost, (as Losers may have leave to speak) they plead the louder
with their Stentorian voices. For the Drunkard that was Bos in lingua when
sober, animated with Liquor, makes more noise then twenty Gossips and Midwives
at a Labor.

Why there is Reason in Roasting Eggs?
IS it because there is a Reason in all Dominion, and to rule the Roast well,
is no small part of Reason and Judgment? Or because men are so apt to cry
Roast-meat as they are, and to cry up any thing that is good? Is not therefore
the Roasted Egg cried up because it is as full of Goodness, as it is of Yolk?
Or because there is more then ordinary skill in Roasting them exactly, then in
Boiling them?

Or are not Roasted Eggs therefore preferred* not only in that they are
substantial and genitive, and so have materiam primam in them: but because they
multiply of themselves with the Crumbs of Comfort into Scholars Eggs, and so may
very well be thought Reasonable? Or because the Egg sits upmost at the upper
end of the Table, and with them the Meal is commenced? Is it not therefore
accounted the worthiest Viand, and consequently in Reason to be preferred.

Why English Men creep to the Chimney in Winter and Summer also?
THis is, because that place is coolest in the Summer, and hottest in Winter;
according to the Chimneys old Motto, Aestate frigeo, Hyeme calesco. Thus under
the notion of being comfortably refreshing in both Seasons alike, it draws us
to it, as if there were a Lodestone buried under the Hearth-pace, by a secret
sympathy.

Or do not the pleasant green Boughs, fragrant Flowers, and Water-pots,
together with Coolstones and Marble there scited, invite us all thither* for
Coolness? For certainly there descends as cool a Breize down the Tunnel, as
sometimes comes in at the Door. Or are not our Epicu^an Fancies more delighted
with, and therefore more inclined to honor that place, that ministers the Fuel
to our hot Appetites? Or since in medio consistit vi^rtus, do we not like that
place best as most honorable and most frequented, being situate in the midst
of the Room always by skillful Architects?

Or does not the warm Zeal of an English man's Devotion (who was ever observed
to contend most stiffly pro Aris and Focis) make them maintain and defend the
sacred Hearth, as the Sanctuary and chief place of Residence of the Tutelary
Lars and Houshold-Gods, and the only Court where the Lady Fairies convene to
dance and revel?

Why the Younger Children are more Ingenuous then the Eldest?
IT is because the Youngest being robbed of succession into civil Benefits and
Lands, therefore our wise indulgent Mother Nature carefully lays up for them a
lasting stock of Wit of her own providing, equivalent to a Portion. Besides,
though the Younger be less able to help themselves, and for that cause in many
places, by Custom, are first and best provided for: yet since our Common Law
gives all the Real Estates to the Eldest, she (who is the pattern to all Laws)
in Equity gives Cunning to the Younger, that by the help of their Wits, these
Citizens of the World may shift and get their Livings.

Some may ascribe this sterility of the Brain in the Firstborn, to the over
early Copulation and Pregnancy in this fruitful Island, where we tread almost
as soon as out of the shell, and marry for the most part as soon as they do in
the hottest Conntreys. And probable enough it is, that thus through the want of
Virility, or rather maturity in either Sex, the Offspring, and that especially
the first, is infected with the Rickets of the Mind as well as the Body.

For how should two Striplings in whose smooth Faces neither Sex can be
distinguished, who both cannot count twice Thirteen, and scarce understand
what, or how they act, or which way they come into the world themselves, at
their first Venereal Rencounters, get other then such Insects and Pigmies in
Stature and Understanding? Whereas the Younger begotten in riper Years, in
nature Judgment and Experience, have that well-digested Judgment and Reason,
ex traduce, derived to them from their more aged and wiser Parents.

Indeed as in that unnatural Disease of the Rickets (known amongst us but
lately within these Eighty Years) the Head is too big for the dwindling Body;
so as unnaturally the Eldest Brothers Fortune swells, whilst the Underwoods and
Younger Suckers would dwindle and consume to nothing, did not Nature carefully
feed and preserve them with the sovereign Nectar of Apollo and the Muses. The
eldest therefore who commonly suck too long, and much of their fond Mothers
Milk, and are most Cockered, may therefore have that Priority allowed them to
be the first and greatest Fools, and in time prove Dotards.

Why Dogs turn round so often before they lie down?
IS it because Dogs are more subject to the Vertigo or Megrim, then other
Creatures; and so being more inclined to madness are therefore most restless?
Thus while the Syrian Star in the Canicular days reigns (at Rome especially)
they say Dogs and Frenchmen have their Deliriums and are ever actively turning
or walking, though at Noon the hottest time of the day.

Or is it because they are Round-headed, and so being of an Oval and
vertiginous disposition, are never quiet, but turning round from one Maze to
another Labyrinth? As these giddy turn-coats do through all the wield and
blind Maeanders of Civil and Church Government? Or are they Philosophical, and
have found out the perpetual motion only? For we read of Tobits Dog (the best
of that kind sure) that he was ever either sociably walking with, or dutifully
following after his Master, and not at all find when or where he rested or lay
down (though it is to be presumed when he did, he was so active, he turned round
also.)

Indeed we find men that are currish, and of a dogged disposition, are ever
restless and unquiet. But I rather believe the true natural reason why Dogs
turn round so often is, They then go about to lie down. For rest is the end of
all Motion and Labor.

Why Drunken men run when they cannot stand?
THe reason of this is best confirmed by similary demonstration. For example;
Observe but how the violent current of an Impetuous River swelled up to the
Banks by the sudden inundation of showers and increase of smaller Brooks and
Rivulets being stopped by a dam or other obstacle, either runs backward, or
over, or on each side of the dam, and at long running falls of it self. Just so
a drunken person filled up to the very throat with wash, foams and is ready to
run over at the Mouth, and will be running, though he be reeling on one side or
other, till he gently falls into the Ocean of Liquor perhaps himself spued up
but just before.

Is it then because his Brains are hot, and so heat becoming the cause of
motion, as well as motion is the cause of heat, that in this restless
condition, the Ver^igo of the Brain descends into the feet, and sets them on
running also? Or are our English Drunkards like our Lancashire Bagpipes, no
sooner full of Wine, as the others with wind, but going? It being observable
in English men drunk or sober, that they rest not long in any one place.
Whereas the tun-bellied Sedentary Dutchman, and more stayed Dane, though they
be moved with Wine, yet move they not from the spot, till they fall dead on it
under the Table, or are carried thence? Or does the spirit of the Liquor
infused encourage Philosophizing good fellows to find out the perpetual
motion, that thus whilst the Spiket's out, the Drink running, Healths flying,
the Smoke vapouring, their Brains turning round, and the World running round
also, they themselves should run also to bear them all company?

Or is not this Volatile Issue of the Brain caused by the Defluctions of
Rheumes and Vapors thence, like an Issue of the Body, never well but running?
Or is not the professed *Drunkard, like a Bowl, without a Biass, which is never
well but Trouling and running awry and out of the way? For in truth when that
force, that moves either of them, laggs; then both of them fall alike
instantly, as a stumbling horse will rumble forward a good while before he
sinks down right.

Why men are sooner inebriated at Dinner then at Supper?
WHen holy Writ says, They that are drunken, are drunken in the night; for as
Pliny insinuates, they drink then most freely in hope of sleep, which is a
great help to the discussing of the fumes, rarifying and settling the brain: Is
it not then Problematicall why men's brains are at noon more inclined to
intoxication?

Perhaps it is because men are then sipping in regard of their afternoon
Dispatches; for sipping we all know foxeth sooner then sooping larger draughts.

Or is it not rather because our stomachs are then emptiest; for long fasting
makes the heat of our appetite flacid, or quite deads it? Or is it (as
Physicians agree) because the passages by which the nourishment should disperse
being then shut, it sticks indigested in the midway, and diffuses it self
later into the veins, and thus through long emptiness the stomach oppressed
which crude ill humors, nauseates meat, or is sooner satisfied? thus where no
good Foundation is laid, there can be no good superstructure: for without
ballast the ship over-turns.

But I rather believe men are then soonest inebriated, because as Bacchus was
i^ter Bacchanalia then truly Liber, and at night after good digestion fittest
for Venereal embraces: so men being as little ashamed now, as he was to be seen
drunk in the day, drink sub dio, and such drinking in the open air when the
Suns heat opens the pore^, sooner inebriates then drinking in a close room at
night.

Why man is naturally so unapt to swim?
SInce man was first preserved by, and out of the waters, and ever since Noah's
time has delighted in, and lived on the waters: since he can sail so well
lavere, and swim in all waters, with all winds, even against wind and Tide:
why should man then of all Creatures be so unapt to swim when his naked-body
(fittest therefore for that purpose of all other Creatures) is first exposed to
the mercy of that soft and pliant Element? Did not the spirit of God first move
on the face of the waters? and ever since have they not been most useful and
ministerial to mankind? That then such sovereign Ministers should prove so bad
Masters, so destructive and distasteful to man only, is the greater wonder.

Is it because man has more of Prometheus his ethereal fire in him, and so
because Fire and Water cannot agree through this Antipathy and Reluctant
Abhorrency, is it that he does naturally disgust that cold and watery Region?
And yet report bears Witches above the Waves, riding on Neptunes hoary
Shoulders in Triumph. But this Conceit is so shallow it cannot hold water, nor
can so light an opinion, contradicted by daily experience, sink with me into a
belief. The Mermaids indeed ride on Thetis Lap: Nor is it any wonder, since
they are more then half fish, that they should swim in their old Element. and
if Jonas were not Transubstantiated Fish in the Whales belly, when he did swim
as fast as it, the miracle was the greater. Sure I am, never flesh lived
so-long in the sale Sea, or lay in such a pickle.

Is it not then the sad weight of our original sin, with the load of actual
transgressions, that sinks our stony-hearted bodies down to the bottomless pit,
the center, to which all sublunary things do naturally tend?

Or is it not rather an innate fear that makes man's heart all lead, as Peter's
was, and so consequently sinks him into faithless despair?

For certainly man having Arms and Legs, which are the natural Finns and Oars
to the Body, had he but resolution and courage answerable to move them orderly,
might swim as naturally and easily as walk, without the help either of Cork or
Bladder. Nor is there any habit so natural; for the skill being once attained,
it is never through disuse forgotten.

Why the Botonick* Galenist gets more Gold then the Hermetick Paracelsian?
WHen the Founder of Spagyrical Physic could (as he vainly boasted of himself)
by mere Art make little men, raise the dead to life, and prolong that life to
some thousand of years. When Paracelsian extractions are found by experience
less loathsome and cumbersome, and withal more spiritually operative,
especially when applied with good advice and judgment; why should the dull
Herbalist extract more Gold out of his Earthy simples, then the Hermetical
Chemist out of his sublimated and more Ethereal Compounds? Is it because their
Gold also (since they have resolved all natural bodies into Salt, Sulphur, and
Mercury) is become thereby like the first principles more Mercurial, and so
flies away with it, in fumo? Or is it because their artificial separations,
preparations, and seemingly Magical applications (as in the weapon salve which
Paracelsiis first brought to light) startle the ignorant, who diving not into
the secrets of natural Sympathies, believe such e^res Diabolical, and therefore
bring not their Gold to these Magical Physicians? Or is it not because they
turn over every Stone in search of the Philosophers, which makes them poor; and
instead of turning Iron into Gold, transmute all the Gold into worse metal and
very Cindars at last? Though I am more inclined to believe, that the Botonick
sows his Gold with his Herbs in his Garden which so grows with them visibly:
whereas the Chymicks imperceptible notions of golden Mountains are only the
speculative and Aerie Fancies of Quicksilver wits.

For seeing is believing, and the vulgar Patients reason is more satisfied with
what he sees and knows to be natural, then with what a strong Faith must prompt
him to believe may possibly come to pass, by such extraordinary and
praeternatural (as he conceives) ways and means.

Why mean persons dye of the great Pox, and great persons dye of the small Pox
oftener?
THis is because the rich men bring more Oy^ to feed the Physicians Lamps,
whereas through their frequent Fluxes and Purgations the Oil in their own
Medulla's commonly extinguisheth soonest.

For example, the great person gives a great fee for his small pox: (which
natural disease we bring with us into the World) whereas Dame Nature and one
careful Shee-tender, cure it sooner than the whole College, whilst the poor
man is not able or willing to give a small fee for his great Pox, for which
Disease the Physicians skill is most requisite. Whereas if the Ientie Pocho
would always visit the Gentleman, and the ^ousie Jobs Pox the Beggar, the one
scraped with a Potsheard, and liquored with a little Beef-broath; and the other
dieted, fluxed, bathed, cleansed with a Syringe, and well purged, might be
cured infallibly, nor would eithers Pox prove fatal? It may be said also, that
the rich are so curious in preserving their beauties from the malicious Claws
of this worse then time-eating small Pox, that to preserve the face, the whole
body is often hazarded; for fear least these Moles or Earthworms should break
out there too furiously, and make the Physnomie* look like an Islington-Cake
with the Plums picked out; they with their cool repulsitives strike them in
again, too and through their very hearts* Whereas the lusty Peasant, careless of
being disfigured with these Love-dimples, drives them out with a Horse-pox, as
they came in, only with the help of a Saffron-Peper-posset, and a strong
sweat, and lives to see these tender ones pickled up for the Worms, and worse
pitted in their very Graves.

Indeed the great ones are often too strong (I mean not for their sent only)
for the poor man to overcome. Partly, because he is too long ignorant of his
malady, or where it lies: whilst that slye venomous Serpent is crept into his
very Bones often, ere he knew it was gotten into his flesh: And partly because
his strong diet of Beef, Cheese, Onyons, etc. is most offensive to that
Neapolitan, that must be fed cleanly with dry Mutton, Clean Larks, and
Partridge, etc. and that diet but sparingly. So that the hungry Clown in
starving this his disease, starves himself, and unless a London Hospital in
time set him on his Legs gratis, he dies of an Ague or Consumption in the
Country, where all Diseases are known by those two names only, and commonly
have all one and the same cure.

Why the abused Husband is called Cuckold?
SInce Plautus wittily and with most reason calls the Adulterer, and not him
whose Wife is Adulterated Cuculum, the Cuckold, because he begets Children on
others Wives, which the Credulous Father believes his own: why should not he
then that corrupts another man's wife, be rather called the Cuckoo, for he sits
and sings merrily whilst his Eggs are hatched by his neighbors Hens?

Is it because the Cuckoo is bald; and so the Cuckold by tearing his hair off
for anger, or its falling off through his wives unclean rottenness, he becomes
bald also as a Sea-cout? Or is it because when that bird sings, all the wood
rings, and all the neighboring Towns must hear of his approach? Or because
that bird is always alone, and so is the Cuckold, being from his mate when
first adopted, or disconsolate ever after for want of her company? Or is it not
rather, because as that bird is hooted at, and looked on as ridiculous; so the
monstrous animal with his supposed Horns is stared on as much as if they were
there really fixed, and in this notion is as much derided?

Why the covetous Miser is called Hog?
BEcause like the Hog he feeds nastily on Roots, Akorns, and Offals, routing up
other men's grounds for them also; does no good, but mischief, whilst he lives;
and like the beastly injurious, ravenous, insatiable Hog, is only good when he
is dead?

Or is it not because this earthy muck-worm, wallows and delights in his red
dirt? And whereas

Os Homini sublime dedit -- Man of all Creatures is made to look upwards to
Heaven, these earthly-minded bruits look downwards, as their thoughts direct
them.

-- Curvae in terras animae and caelestium inanes. Why confident men never
blush?
Is it because (ignorance and impudence being two inseparable companions, the
ignorant are blind, and blind men cannot blush) does this night of Ignorance
and blindness of understanding thus cause Bold men, like blind Bayard, to
commit Folly and wink at it, as if no body saw them neither?

Or is it the want of soft fear that makes the face Brazen, as if he had been
Christened in Pumpwater? For whereas in a bashful person afraid to offend, his
Heart misgives him in presence of those that observe his defects: so that
whilst his face labors, and nature to help it sends up heat, and that heat
draws up the subtilest blood, he blushes, which bold and impudent men careless
of others smiles or frowns, do not? Or is it not because bashfulness, or
blushing, proceeding either from shame or fear of having committed some evil,
being a peculiar passion proper to man only, cannot paint the cheeks of an
impudent beast, though his sins he as red as Scarlet?

But I rather believe such is the effrontery of a Brazen-fac't person, that the
thick skin of his hard forehead and face, is as much hardened as his heart is;
and so his blood cannot be discer^ed, which in a Bashful person is as
transparent as his crime.

Why women naturally grow not Bald?
NO wonder why Saleucus King of Syria never affected Stratonice his wife, after
he had espied her Bald-pate, by chance as she was undressing: It was a sight so
much against the hair, with wonder to be detested. Is it then for that reason
Nature will not divest that comely Sex of their chiefest Glory? And are they
not thus prompted by her to busy themselves in kembing and preserving it? Or
is their nature like to that of little Boys, as Hippocrates affirms, or that
of the Egyptians, as Herodotus, who are seldom or never Bald, etc. by reason
of their frequent shaving them in their Childhood?

Or is it because holy Writ injoynes them to nourish their Tresses, for
modesties sake to hide their faces and bodies (as some can) in token of their
subjection? Or do they not rather preserve their fleece with art and industery,
the sooner to catch their Lovers in those Golden Nets: and in Charity to cover
the Baldness of men contracted often by their Venereal embraces? For so the
Pea-hens Plumes may conveniently hide her Husbands Bulls feathers?

Or is it the coldness of their Brain that keeps the thatch on in policy,
whilst men being hotter quit it for coolness? Or, is it because they are not
bearded as men are, nor hirsute over the body (as we see beasts that have horns
have no upper Teeth) and so nature supplies that defect in vertice? Or are they
not bald, because old Mistress occasion and Grave Madam Metan^a, or Repentance,
are so? For generally they court neither of these dames, nor will they observe
their Antique fashions.

Why Barbars are News-mongers?
Omnibus and lippis notum and Tonsoribus.

IT was the custom, it seems, in Rome, for blind men having nothing else to
do, and idle persons having little else to do, to come to the Barbars shop, as
frequently as we do now to the Change, or Burse, Coffy-houses, to hear news.
What wonder then is it, if the Barbar amongst us also becomes a Statesman? (For
the same custom is still used) when so many Sir Pols, Athenians and lovers of
News daily and hourly bring him intelligence? For this cause Actius the
Southsayer, and Tarquins Barbar (as I suppose) who with his Razour would cut a
Whestone in too, was ever by Tarquin and the people consulted with in all
public Affairs.

Some have hence disputed, whether a Princes Barbar be not therefore enobled?
And Angelus and Jason have both concluded the affirmative, because he sticks so
close to the Princes side, being a Secretis, ever alone, and first with him in
the Morning.

Why may not our noble Triptolemus then, that can cut an hair in two, be the
best News-Monger, and by consequence, the most cunning Statesman? For tell me:
who is more Inquisitive and Catechistical, when you come under his hands, and
fit in his Cathedral Chair? Tormenting you with diverse impertinent questions
oft-times purposely, least you should feel the smart of his Wash-Ball on his
Razors wounds? Has he not therefore his Novel stories at his fingers ends on
purpose, as ready as his Customers Nose?

Besides, who has more to do with News, then he that is so busy ever about
the ears? Again, who should be more exact in News, whose shop is the staple of
news, where many new faces resort, at least he makes them new before they
depart, renewing youth, and refreshing each face he meets with, as new as day?

Why Melancholy men are witty?
IS it because as Trees set thick hinder each others growth, but transplanted
singly thrive best; so Scholars in the University, or Court, either thrive not,
or in these full Seminaries are not so much taken notice of; whereas if a while
Melancholy and retired, they gather more vivacity and produce it with more
confidence in all their witty and well-digested discourses?

For if the Melancholy be not mixed with too much Phlegm, but carries a
temperate heat (as a dry light makes a wise mind) it cause a terse and more
serene understanding. Whereas when it is adust and sweltred with the continual
excessive heat of discourse and company (as lime burns when water is cast upon
it) it rather inclines to madness then a serious constancy of well tempred wit.
Or rather is not the reserved person of the nature of the Melancholy Elephant
(whose brain being driest) so becomes the wisest amongst all bruit beasts?

Why the Cornutee loves the Cornutor?
IS it because they do convenire in uno tertio, or rather una tertia; and so by
a secret Sympathy lovingly agree and direct their lines to one Center? Or is it
because where bodies meet, though it be alternatim, love is engendered, and out
of frequency of society at last proceeds a harmony of souls also? Or as the
Spaniel who loves his Master the more for beating him, so does not the Cornutee
love the Cornutor the more for cudgelling his wife with his Flabellum or I^bel
of generation?

Or is it because level coile, is a much more sociable and friendly game, then
when two only contend, which makes the sport seem tedious, or more full of
animosity in the revenge? But I rather believe, that this disease of the Yellow
Jaundies is not so frequent in our Northern Climate as in warmer Countries; and
therefore where suspicion is cold, the fire of jealousy and anger never
kindles, but all is done in love; and so but little rancor or heart-burning.

FINIS.

