THE (...)AMBS INNOCENCE DEFENDED, Against Lies and Slanders. (...) Answer to a
Second Reply of a Priest, who is (...)lled a Minister at Lazonby in Cumberland
called Simon At(...)uson, who has showed his Wolfish nature against those
people (...)lled Quakers; ranking them up with the Papists; falsely accusing
them (...)f those things which they utterly detest: but his weapons is turned
against himself by one of the Camp of the God of Israel, whose (...)ye it
opened in measure, by the inward search and Counsel of Gods (...)pirit, to see
the winding paths of the crooked Serpent, and to see the Wolf under the
covering of outside Painted Profession; and to see (...)he mystery of
Witchcraft working in the shadow of Reformation (...)ranslated into a fairer
form springing from the old corrupt root; (...)nd to see the bickerings of the
night-armie running on heaps now in the dawning of the day; and the
uncircumcised in Heart and Ears is Flying from the light, and rep^oofe of the
same: and from the Alarm of the Spirits Trumpet which is sounded within, for
the cutting down of the man of sin, and for the quenching of his Motions.

O Lord, in thy light, we see light, and by it all things is made manifest; and
thou art worthy of all honor, and besides thee there is not another: for thou
have opened our eyes and unvailed our understandings, (...) the discovery of
the skirts of the Whore! Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for
the upright in heart: Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound; they
shall walk, O Lord, in the light of thy countenance. Truly thy light is
sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the Eyes to behold the Sun,

Psalm. 97.11. and 89.^5. Eccles 11.7. Lift up thy self, thou Judge of the
Earth; render a reward to the proud. They gather themselves together against
the soul of the righteous, and condemn the Innocent blood. Every day they
wrest my words: all their thoughts are against me for evil. And thou have made
us a byword among the Heathen, and a shaking of the head amongst the people,

Psalm. 94 2. and 21. and 56.5 and 44.13 14. A false Witness shall not go
unpunished, and he this speaks lies shall perish,

Prove, 19.9. There is a voice of the howling of the Shepherds, for their glory
is spoiled,

Zach. 11.3. Written in defense of the Truth as it is in Jesus, by a Fool to
the Wisdom of this World, who, according to measure, has tasted and obtained
of the Wisdom of God; whose bodily name is called, Joseph Helling. 1658.

To the READER.
FRiend, whosoever thou art that Reads this Dialogue or Conference ensaing, I
desire thy stability, in an honest Consideration before thou judge, that thy
judgment may be without partiality, in truth, and sincerity; for the end of my
Writing is not for the laud of Men, but for the taking off of Scandalls:
Therefore have I transcribed the Priests Second Reply to me. First, His Answers
to my Paper, and some of my quaeries. Secondly, His Considerations. Thirdly,
His Accusations and Closure; the scope of all which, I have transcribed and
answered, having abridged my answers with as much brevity as I could
conveniently, being assaulted with such a wresting, false-accusing Spirit,
which is not ashamed to write his forged lies and false constructions in a
Volume, the scope of which is divided into parsells, and answered in
plainness, and singleness of Heart for all seeking-sober-minded, to judge
with the seed and witness of God in the consciences of every one who reads
them. And Friend, though thou may judge me rash or censorious, because I render
to a false Prophet his name, and to an hireling his name, and to a liar his
name, and to the mystery of witcheraft (in the shadow of Reformation) its name,
and to the wolfish Ministry of Antichrist is name. I say, though thou may
judge me in thy will and reason to be rude in speech; yet know thou, that I am
not rude in knowledge; but I shall stand to vindicate the truth of what I have
here laid down in these ensuing Answers. Also, for brevity sake, I have only
cited the chapter and the verses, but not transcribed the sum of the words,
but has left them to thy search, and honest consideration. And this is my
desire, That the ancient of days might be exalted above all the heads of
Heresy. And that peoples understandings might be opened, that the Man of sin
might he made manifest in the mystery of his working (mark) and that the
worship might be known which stands out of all the limiting wills of Men; and
that all false Teachers might be discovered by their fruits, and according to
Scripture, who in this age is found casting blocks in the way of innocence, and
is as a thorn hedge before the simplicity that is in Christ Jesus; who for
their Trade, Merchandise, and Bellies sake, they set themselves in array in the
unity of enmity against the light and teachings of Gods Spirit in Man: one of
which volunteers of Gog, whose name is in the Title page S. A. has uttered his
folly, as one casting a stone into the Air, which falls upon his own Head,
as thou may see (Reader) if thy Measure be just, and Balances equal.

He that answers a matter before he hears it, it is solly and shame unto
him. The Heart of the Righteous studieth to answer: but the mouth of the wicked
powers out evil things, Prove. 18.13. and 15.28.

Joseph Helling.

The Lambs Innocence Desended against Lies and Slanders, in Answer to a second
Reply of a Priest, etc.
Simon Atkinson,
I Have received thy Paper, wherein I find thee acted by Corahs spirit, in
Kains way: but man, know thou, that its neither lies, nor false accusations
that I have laid upon thee, far be it from me; and the Lord do so to me, and
more if I wrong thee, or you, as thou haft done me and my Brethren. But in
plainness, and in truth, I answer against thy sophistry, for the defense of
innocence, and if there be any other end in me, let it be accursed.

Priest. Deluded souls; The Scripture says, Pro. 17.15. He that justifies
the wicked, and he that condemns the righteous, even they both are
abomination to the Lord.

Answer. Deceiver of souls, Pro. 17.15. is fulfilled upon thee and you, who
through covetousness, with fained words maks matchandise of souls for your
dishonest gain: and yet says, you are the Ministers of Christ: here you are
found justifying the wicked, even a generation of persecuting Priests, to be
Christ's Ministers.

Pr. Which ab^minable ends is found in you, and in all of your way, more then
in any generation of people in the world at this day that I know of?

Ans. Here thou art sound ignorant of us, and belyes us, in saying, that we
justify the wicked, we are clear from thine accusation; and let all that
knows any thing of our conversations bear us witness, whether we countenance
wickedness in the least, in any appearance: so man, be willing to receive thy
rusty stuff back again into its own bottle from whence it was broached, for it
has no place amongst us; for by us all wickedness, and your leven and trash
is denied.

Pr. Who are not only as the Devil himself accusers of the Brethren; but also
contemners of the generation of Gods children Rev. 12.10. do you not discover
this apparently in all your reproach full pratlings, slanders, seriblings, and
oppositions against the most godly and precious, both ministers and people,
whom the world batch?

Ans. As for accusing the Saints or Children of light, that is false; or for
contemning godly and precious Ministers and People; far be if from us: but
Kaines generation, Hams off-sping, and Ishmaels brood, and them that say they
are Christians, and Ministers of Christ Jesus, and are not (them we write and
speak against) in whose steps you are sound, in envy, and covetousness, suing
at Law, straining men's goods, Preaching for hire, for filthy lucre: therefore
let Rev. 12.10. turn edge against thee, who is not only found accusing, but
falsely accusing, and fiercely despising the innocent; writing in wrath, and
contempt, concluding us to be deluders, and deluded, because;e the Lord has
opened our Eyes to see your cunning deceit and hypocrisy: for which cause you
are angry, because your trade is like to perish, or be set at naught; and if
the rest of your Brethren (the children of Mammon) hate you; yet know thou,
that you are both in one ground albeit you be a little more in words, and
seeming something more like the truth then the other; yet receive them for thy
Brethren, for you are sound in the unity of enmity against the seed of the
woman, and teaching of Gods spirit within man, contrary to John 14.26.

Pr. And will God thank you, or will not the Devil rather, for sadding the
souls of the Saints, whom the Lord would not have sadded?

Ans. We are bound to give thanks unto God, but not God to give us thanks; here
thou art seen in thy drunken wisdom, speaking thou knows not what: and as for
the Devil, he sights to maintain his Kingdom against us, and therefore will
not thank us, for his peace is broken (which thou calls sadding the souls of
the Saints;) I say, take heed that it be not the Devils peace that is broken in
you, for no other Kingdom do we strive against, but that of darkness; and if
you were out of it (in the election of grace) then would you know us, and what
we justify and what we condemn; but thou and you knows us not, therefore it is
fulfilled which was spoken by our head, they hated me without a cause; even so
do you his members, who are content to bear your hatred, and the Lord lay it
not to your charge.

Pr. Or will he accept of your accusations, charges, and condemnations against
his own Elect? Is it not he that justifies them? who and what are you that you
condemn them?

Ans. God accepts the righteous, and they shall judge the world, and their
accusations, charges, and condemnations is just against evil doers: but that
we condemn such, is false; but the spirit of truth in us condemns such as is
not acted by it, and led out of pride and covetousness, and out of Kaines,
Corahs, and Balaams way, where you are found: And if you say, God justifies
such, I say its false, and thou will find it so, we are clear from accusing and
condemning the Elect and justified of God; so here thou art found a liar.

Pr. And if God have long patience with you, yet will not he always forget,
nor at all forgive such great impiety, except you Repent; consider this you
that forget God, etc.

Ans. While we were in the night of Apostasy, and in darkness under your
fruitless ministry; then were we forgetters of God (as thou and you are, which
says, and does not) in which time the Lord might justly have cut us off in his
hot displeasure: but now he has turned us toward himself by repentance in
self denial, which repentance is never to be repented of: and would thou
have us back again into the puddle of your imaginations? we know your spirits,
if we could give you Tithes, and let you go on in your own ways unreproved,
then we might be accepted, and have peace with you, by putting into your
mouths as well as others, then we might escape the spoiling of our goods, and
the imprisoning of our bodies (by you) as well as the Papists and others.

Pr. Are not you they also that justify the worst and wick^^st of the people
above the godly? Does not your more ordinary silence toward them, with your
feined and false faxning sly and subtle insinuation, abundantly testify this?

Ans. Here, thou false accuser, I charge thee with a lie, and it remains for
thee to prove wherein, and what wickedness, or wicked people we justify; how
long will thou not cease to lie, thou would fain be Capernaum-like, but thou
must come down to the sides of the pit for thy lies and slanders, except thou
repent; for I tell thee, that our silence is not at all toward thee and you
the leaders, nor toward them that are led by you; but wheresoever we meet with
deceit, we warn people to fly from it. And thou, the leader of the blind, must
take thy portion with them that are blindly led except you repent. And as for
subtly insinuating our selves into the wicked, that is false; for out teaching
is not with in^^cing words, but we Preach the cross of Christ, which is a
dying unto sin, and a growing toward persection, which is foolishness to you,
which teaches people, and tells them, they shall never be persect; here thou
and you are sound subtly to insinuate your persuasions into the transgressing
part in people, and there you lodge in the hearts of your hearers, and by your
bloody instigations, stirs them up to fight for your trade; take notice of
that, and be ashamed thus to belly the innocent who is under persecution by you.

Pr. Yea, and most especially your own justification evinceth your guilt in
this.

Ans. Here I do utterly deny thy assertion: for selfe-justification we deny,
and all that remains in the flesh (which is of the flesh) and does account it
to be as rotten rags, and menstruous clothes, and does abhor our selves, and
our own righteousness, and perfection, cleaving only to that of Christ Jesus,
who has, and does perfect, juslifie, sanctify, and glorify, and works in
us both to will and to do; so a liar thou art, and as I said before, not only
an accuser, but a false accuser; so be content to own it, for thou have set thy
selse to act it to thy shame.

Pr. Who although, as I said before, you are a generation of evil doers,
decemblers, and deceivers, as is abundantly evident by all your unfruitful
words, and works of darkness, notoriously known of all, etc. yet do you
justify your selves more then the Pharisee, though you fall short of him, etc.

Ans. This was thy accusation in thy former Paper, which thou promised to prove
positively, and particularly; but being required to do it, thou now goes about
to shift it off with false excuses; for art not thou ashamed to say it is
un^chtistian-like in us; to say unto thee, we require thee to prove that which
thou thy self promised to do? but now thou goes about to cast a snare upon
the innocent, and by thy windy wisdom strives to drive thy Clouds to vail then
Sun. Oh Elimas-like, how long will thou not cease to pervert the right ways of
the Lord?

Pr. But thou Joseph Hilling has sent me a proud Challenge and Charge to do
it.

Ans. I Charge thee to be a liar here again, and I appeal to these words which
I sent unto thee (thou having laid down some accusations as before) this was my
words. For all which we require thee to bring in proof positively and
particularly, etc. not challenging nor charging thee at all to prove it, but
only requiring thee; therefore own thy condemnation, thou have belyed me, and
the lying spirit in the sets at naught the way of life.

Pr. And why should Pearls be cast before Swine, that will trample them under
feet, and turn again, and rend us?

Ans. We do not look for Pearls at your hands; for how can a Fountain send
forth at one hole, sweet water and bitter? Or how can a liar and a false
Accuser communicate Pearls? and although thou term us to Swine, yet do we
chew our Cud, and knows our Manna, the food of life; and the Swine we know,
thou that feeds upon the husk, putting the letter for the word, and try all of
spirits, and for your rule, and not the new Creature. Therefore, I say, deal
honestly with thy soul, and take heed that thou be not found a Swincherd, in
stead of a Shepherd, take notice of that, thou that trades with the letter.

Pr. And why should you require this of me, or nay of us, since thou do deny
and renounce the power which the Lord has given us to edification, and not to
destruction; which if thou have no experience of thy self, yet take head of
condemning them that have; for wisdom is justified of her children; and they
that are of God, hears Gods Word, etc.

Ans. I have required nothing concerning this of thee, nor of any of you, but
that which thou thy selse prosered; and why do thou profer that which thou
do not perform? this is truce-breaking, and thou art a truce-breaker herein.
And as for denying the power, which thou says, the Lord has given you, (as
above) thou have given me good cause to deny thee, and the power by which thou
art acted, whose impudent lies, declares thee to have no power given of the
Lord, but thy power is the power of darkness (which pleads against the light)
transformed into the likeness of truth, before them whom the God of this world
has blinded, who sees not your life, nor discerns not your voices. And as for
having experience of my self, It tell thee, The spirit of truth in me condemns
all whose experience is but self experience, for I know nothing of God by my
self, nor of my self, for that cannot justify wisdom; but thou whose
experience is of thy self, is not a child of wisdom, for if thou were, thou
would be ashamed to lie as thou have done, as is proved. And as for them that
are of God, who hears Gods word, them I dearly own, and embrace, for they are
gathered into the sold unto the one Shepherd, and shall be no more meat for
you, ( Ezekiel. 34.10. to the end) neither shall you be numbered with them so long
as thou lies falsely accuses, is called of men Master, and sells thy
selfe-experiences for money; thou must stoup, the stone is descending against
thy Image, and the Sun is risen which will seatter thy mist: therefore beware
betime.

Pr. Thou art angry with me, because I say, you are poor, miserable, etc.

Ans. Thou speaks thou knows not what, for we are no more the blinder for thy
so saying; but our blindness and miserableness was, when we were deprived of
the food of life (and of the light which gives the knowledge of God) by your
cunning sophistical Doctrine, by which you insinuate your selves into the
peoples affections, keeping them always learning, and never able to come to
the knowledge of the truth which makes free: and here is blindness, and cause
of anger, war, and fighting in the unperfect unruly part, mark that.

Pr. Pardon me, I had but almost forgot what you say, you see with them, John
9.41. and with Laodicea, Rev. ^.17. that you are rich and increased with goods,
and have need of nothing, etc.

Ans. Here thou mocker shows thy self, in belying of us, we do not see with
them, John 9.41. who did not own Christ; but we see with them that suffered the
spoiling of their goods, and with them that was counted as the offscouring of
all things, and as sheep for the slaughter for Christ's sake; yea, and with such
as was counted deceivers by the Sect of the Learned, to wit, the Scribes and
Pharisees: therefore be willing to receive it home again, for it shall stand
for thine own condition, with the rest of thy Function, who is the successors
of the Scribes and Pharisees there spoken of, John 9.41. take them for your
predecessors, and fill ye up their meisures, for In their steps you are found.
And as for the La^diceaus, Rev. 3.17. that we are in their steps, there spoken
of, is another lie; for the Lord is our witness, we do not boast of riches by
increase of goods; neither do we say, that we have need of nothing; and here
thou art exercising thy self in the war against the Lamb; for God forbid that
we should glory in any thing, save in the Cross of Christ, or delight in any
other increase, but the increase of grace, for we have need of patience, that
after we have done the will of God, we might receive the promise, Heb. 10, 36.
so here thou art found in thy falsification, wresting and twining of Scripture
(to thy ows destruction) against the innocent.

Pr. But let me tell thee, that I do not, nor shall not at all believe you in
this matter, though you trumpet out your own praises, and bla^e your own
perfections never so much.

Ans. Man, when we trumpet out our own praises, and blaxe out our own
perfections, then you may have cause not to believe us, and though you seem to
lay it upon us, yet we are cleave; and if thou affirm it. thou affirms a
lie, as thou have done many, as is proved already; for there is nothing of us,
to wit, of flesh and blood, that is prayse-worthy; but we praise the Lord, the
the perfector and perfection of his Saints in whom is all fullness, unto whom
we fly for teachings, which makes you seers and diviners of our days in such a
rage, that forging lies is become your greatest refuge, who persuades people
that we trust in our selves, and self righteousness; which things we utterly
detest, and they remain for thee and you all to prove. And as for despising of
others, that is false, for we own all Creatures as they are in themselves
(Creatures, or Vessels) but the seeds is at enmity (mind that) for the
Creation of God, we have no cause to hate, but the mover of cedition in the
ground, take notice of that.

Pr. As for that Scripture thou cites, Luke 18.9.10. and bids we consider the
scope of the Parable, and we cannot but see our selves punctually to resemble
the Pharisees.

Ans. Here thou have reckoned us up with the Pharisee, and says, we resemble
him; here I charge thee with another lie, and it remains for thee to prove
which of us did, or does boast in our prayers of Fastings, paying fo Tythos,
and that we were not like other men; but we are bold to declare, that our
regeneration is not by our own merits, nor our salvation by works of
righteousness which we have done; but according to his mercy; he has saved us
by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5. so
thy accusations touches us not, but shall stand against you (with Luke 18.9.10.
and all other Scripture) for y^e are out of the rule of Scripture, both under
the Law and Gospel, as easily may be proved.

Pr. Could thou, or any of you, but convince me of this, that they are just
that justify themselves, then I should side, and say with you and the Papists
your patterns in this, and the most of your opinions, that perfection is not
only attainable in this life; but that it is the easiest thing in the world;
but how hard will it be to prove this principle

Ans. I do not strive to convince any of their justness that justify
themselves, for I deny them that so does, and the Papists to be our patterns:
but whether you will side with us, or not; thou and thy fellows must be forced
to take the Popes Law for a prop to your Gospel, for by that Law you are
guarded; therefore let thine accusation return home again, and take the Papists
for thy patterns (thou and you who tradeth in their shops;) and as for
perfections to be attainable in this life; here thou shows forth thy ignorance;
and that thou art not called into the ministry of Christ. (Reader mark) permand
of God to Abraham, Genesis 17.1. Deuteronomy. 18.13. Job 1.8. and 8.20. Psalm 37.37. It
was the Doctrine of the Apostle. 2 Cor. 13.9.11. and in Phil. 3.15. It was for
that end that the Scripture was recorded, 2 Timothy 3.17. it was the Prayer of the
Apostle for the Chruch, Heb. 13.21.1 Pet 5.10. Heb. 6.1. yea, the whole end of
the Ministre, Ephesians. 4.11.12. thou that denies perfection, denies thy gift, and
the power of the Lord. For shame, for what end do thou Preach? it is evident
hereby, that you keep people always learning, and never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth which makes free, John 8.32. And now, that it is the
easiest thing in the world, I say, in perfection is ease, peace, and joy in the
holy Ghost, and no treasure is to be compared to it, or any measure of it; and
you that are not growing toward it, knows nothing of redemption: And thou that
perswads people, that perfection is not to be attained unto, here, keeps people
always in the bondage of corruction, for it is hard to be attained unto, which
is the cause why many stumble.

Pr. Was is not Christ's peculiar prerogative to be without sin? Heb. 4 15.1
Pet. 2.22. 1 John 3.5. he did challenge the world, Ioh. 8 46. and could abide
the bitterest brunts of the Devil, because there was nothing in him for Satan
to work upon, John 14.30. but who besides himself could ever say so?

Ans. I grant it was, and is, the proper freedom of the head, and also of the
members of that head, and these Scriptures which thou have cited, I own,
compared with Heb. 2.18. and that none could ever truly say so of themselves,
is granted also. But this does not disanull perfection; and thou that does
despise it, and pleads against it, pleads against the one offering against the
Prayer of Christ, and privilege of the Saints ( John 23.14.) and against the
whole end of the Ministry, Ephesians. 4.12. and against the work of a Minister,
Col. 1.28.29. so man, I exhort thee be ware what thou do, least thou repent
when it is too late; for as the tree falls, so it lies, and as death seazes
upon a man, so judgment will find him out; and every man shall be judged
according to the deeds done in his body; and the righteous has hope in his
death: but the wicked shall rise to the resurrection of condemnation.

Pr. Paul, after a long and prosperous progress in sanctification,
mortification, and vivification, was not ashamed to speak the truth, Romans
7.11.18.24. but who can bear witness of your humiliation in this manner; nay,
the contrary is contemptuously, and impudently boasted of by you.

Ans. Here thou art seen to be ignorant of us, speaking evil of things thou
knows not; for the Lord is our witness, whether we have not groaned under the
bondage of corruption, or not; and cried unto him which is only able, to be
delivered from the body of sin. And the Apostles condition we own, knowing that
in our flesh dwells no good thing which is of its own nature, although thou
have thus judged of us; nevertheless, we have a treasure hid in carthen
vessels, which you (with all you do) cannot deprive us of, which is our joy.
But to proceed, Paul did not continue in sin, he said, God forbid, Rom 1.2 etc.
they could not live any longer in sin, they were planted together in the
likeness of his death; See what he dyed unto, Romans 6.10. and although Paul did
complain of the body of sin, Romans 7. yet consider what testimony he gives in
Romans 8.1.2.3. and 37. verses; take notice of Rom 8.8. thou that stands up to
make void the coming of the Son of God, by pleading against perfection, taking
the Apostles condition in his imperfection, to plead for the Devils Kingdom
withal; but leaves his after condition, in Romans 8.1.2. as though the Apostle
all his life time had been subject to bondage. Oh shameless man, who for
covetous ends would have people kept from the teachings of Gods Spirit which
sanctifies. I say, The Lord rebuke thee.

Pr. Is your condition then with Christ, and not with the Apostle? O horrible
Blasphemy! are you finite creatures equal with the infinite Creator? do not
all natural, as well as spiritual light, abhor this?

Ans. Here thou asks a question; I say, our condition is with Paul in the
measure of the growth, and with Christ according to the measure unto which we
are grown; and although we be finite creatures, as the Apostles was; yet we can
truly say, as we are faithful, that we are partakers of the divine nature,
which works, and leads us unto the righteousness of God, and out of the
Fall, and out of the Curse, into the Sonship, to receive the spirit of
adoption; and so we are made members of his body, of his flesh, and of his
bones, Ephesians. 5.30. and is not ashamed of the Doctrine of the Apostle, Ephesians.
2.5.6. (mark) thou that denies perfection, and equallity with Christ; shall the
members deny the head? oh horrible! if this be thy Knowledge, no wonder if thou
rage with thy natural light, (for spiritual light thou art ignorant of) which
was the Apostles message 1 John 1.5. Acts 26.18. which message is trampled
under Foot by you that has your Logic: but that any thing which is of the
flesh, or corrupt will of man, is equal with God, that we deny, and so is
clear from horrible blasphemy.

Pr. Thou tells me, I call Divine light, natural; but if this be thy Divine
light? I must tell thee, I call it not natural light, but Diabolical
delusion, even the glowings of Satan, transforming himself into an Angel of
light.

Ans. I have told thee the truth, though thou call it what thou will; and
seeing thou art given over to believe lies; and not only so, but a maintainer
of that work thy self; therefore thou calls light, darkness, and darkness,
light. And if thou call that Diabolical delusion, which I call Divine light; I
must tell thee, thou art a blasphemer, wrest and twine what way thou can; for I
call no other light, the Divine light, but that spoken of Luke 2.31. John 1.9.
and 3.20. and 5.35. and 8.12. and 12.36.46. Acts 26.18. Ephesians. 5.13. consider
this, thou that would put out the Sun, and have all to walk in the light of
thy, (and your) flame, which by your fallen wisome is invented, or kindled; thou
that hates this light, which we own, is in darkness, and so in Diabolical
delusion, acted by the spirit of Satan in the transfiguration; having a name of
that which you are not, to wit, the Ministers of Christ; for you are found in
Kains, Corahs and Balaams way, in envy, resifting the spirit, gainsaying the
truth, loving the wages of unrighteousnes, pleading for fin and imperfection,
and so, no Ministers of Jesus Christ, but of Antichrist: For the Minister of
Jesus Christ, said, If we walk in the light, as he is in the light, then have
we fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son,
cleanses us from all sins, (mark) if we dwell, or walk in the light, 1 John
1.7. the light gives the knowledge of God, 2 Cor. 4.6, the light is Christ
Jesus, John 8.12. and 12.36. and 46. and Christ is the power of God, 1 Cor.
1.24. and the power of God in Divine, 2 Pet. 1.3. by which Divine power, we are
made partakers of the Divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. which nature being enjoyed,
leads into an equallity with Christ according to measure in the regeneration:
So man, let thine own weapons turn edge against thee.

Pr. But because you own not the Scripture to be the Word of God, you are not
afraid to abuse them, and misapply them at your pleasure, both in this
particular, and all other, that Satan suggests unto you.

Ans. The Scriptures we own, to be what they are, to wit, the Words of God,
Deuteronomy. 11.18. etc. 12.18. etc 17.9. Prove. 30.6. Isay 31.2. I^r. 44.28. Micah
2.7. and 9. and a testification, 10.5. 39. a Declaration, Luke 1.1. a Treatise,
Acts 1.1. and the words of Christ, Marth. 24.35. Mark 8.38. Luke 4.22. John
8.47. 1 Timothy 6.3 Rev. 1.3. and these words we own (which was inspired by the
spirit of life Into the Saints) to be a Declaration of the word of life, which
is the Word of God; and what art thou, that thou would have us to pervert the
Scriptures; thou shows thy self ignorant of the Word of the Lord, which would
have the Scriptures to be the Word of the Lord, contrary to these Scriptures,
Gen 15.1. Number. 22.18. Dout. 30.14.1 Sam. 3.1. Psalm 33.6. and 107.10. and
119.89. Ier. 2.1. and 7.1. and 33.1. Ezekiel. 1.3. and.6.1. and 7.1. Deu. 9.2.
Ier. 23.29. John 1.1. and 14 the World sanctifies, 1 Timothy 4.5. it is called
his, or him, Heb. 4.12.13, see Heb. 11.3. James 1.18. at. 22.1 Pet. 1.23.25.
Rev. 19.13 and (mark) the a of Pet. 3.5.6.7. oh ye Priests, and others, who
calls the Scriptures the Word of God, here you are found the abusers, and
mis^applyars of the Scriptures; I refer the Reader to these places above cited,
if it be not so, and the suggestions of Satan to be in the Pharisaicall grave
like Ministers of this, and other nations, who thus perverts the Scriptures,
calling the Scripture that, which they call not themselves, but testifies
against, as is proved. So Simon Atkinsou, thou art caught in the net, that thou
have laid for others, and the day is over thee and you all.

Pr. As for further instance, how ignorantly, impudently, etc. have thou
wrested the words of the Prophets, Christ, and of his Apostles, to make odious
his most faithful, pious, painful and profitable Ministers that rule well and
labors in the word and doctrine, who are therefore of men to be counted worthy
of double honor, 1 Timothy 5.17. upon whom thou would power double contempt and
disgrace for their labor.

Ans. Its well that these Scriptures, and your practices is both apparent, we
shall lay the one to the other, and the Reader shall judge, if he will, whether
I have wiested the words of the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles by applying
the Priests practice to them, yea. or my; Reader, mind these Scriptures, I say
56.9.10.11. Ier. 5 30.31. Ezekiel. 34. to the end. Hos. 6.9. Micah 3.11. Mat. 23.
from 4 to the end. 2 Timothy 3.1 to the 10. ver. 2 Pet. 1.2.3. and 14.15. and 17.
Inde 11. and now deal honestly with these places, and see it the Priests of
our times be not in the same steps. And where as thou says it is to make you
odious; I say, I would you were discovered to all, then would your odiousness
appear to them, as well as it does to us, and your lambe-like discipline they
would also see to be of no profit, but for your own bellies, and your
faithsulnesse and painfulnesse for that end: For which end, you strive to keep
people from the new Covenant, Fleb. 8.9.10.11. and from the light that gives
the Knowledge of God, 2 Cor. 4.6.7. and from the anointing within, 1 John 2.27.
I say, you keep people from the Kingdom of God within them, Luke 17.21. in the
dregs of the old Covenant, miked with a new name, or shadow of Christianity,
held in, and by, the coverous envious boasting principle: And here you keep
people in slavery, to honor you own rules, as lords over them. You are not
like the elders, that was of old spoken of, 1 Timothy 5.17. they had not recorded
that they had the tenth of men's increase, as of goods; and ground, or sued men
as Law, or cast them into Prison, if they could not pay them: neither did they
cast men in Prison, for asking them a question, as you have done, and
threatens: and here thou and you, and powering disgrace upon your selves, and
your Ministry, and I am clear from contemning, or falsely accusing you, for your
fruit makes you manifest, and they are blind that does not see your loven.

Pr. They turn many souls to righteousness, and shall shine as stars in the
firmament for even and even, Dan. 12.3. which the envious one in you,
endeavors by you, to deprive them of their present comfort, though he cannot
keep from them their future Corwne.

Ans. How long will thou go about to cover thy, and your skirts, as though we
were ignorant of your untempered morrer; nay man, know thou, that we have
followed you (in a blind ceale) with fasting, mourning, and prayers, and we are
well experienced what profit is reaped from you, even open war at the Assizes,
and Sessions, if we put not in at your mouths, yea, Justices Warrants (as you
call them) Bailiffs Prisons, Flnes; and if we speak to you in the fear of the
Lord, you cry up your weapons that props up your Gospel, as Churchwardens,
Stocks, Justices Warrants (as you call them,) then a Fine, and so long
Imprisonment; yea, double worse then Queen Mary's Jesuiticall Priesthood for
Persecution. Therefore, I say, take heed, leaft in stead of shining, your cry
be not woe and alas for evermore. So S. A. thou art found far unlike them
spoken of Dan. 12.3. its in vain for thee to borrow these expressions to cover
that nature in which thou, with thy Fellows, live: your nakedness appears
under this covering, because its not your own, who is found out of Gods wisdom
in lies and false accusations, herein is envy known: And as for depriving you
of your present comfort; that is ut^erly false except you call Tithes, and
Augmentations, and set slypends your present comfort, which you strive after,
as though gain were godliness. So let the Reader take notice, that we do not
harbor an envious spirit, but we speak the truth by the spirit of truth, which
has blown its Trumpet against the seed of the Serpent, and the day is
springing over the head of all your Assirian Army, which fills the Countries.

Pr. These are able, through God, to cast down the strong holds of the Devil,
in the hearts of the children of men, and to convince, through the spirit, of
sin, of righteousness, and judgment, whom the Devil (impatient of the down.
fall of his Kingdom) rages in you most furiously.

Ans. They that are spoken of Dan. 12.3. indeed is able to do these things
thou here speaks of: but ye are not like them, thou and thy Fellows, which
denies the light, the manifester of transgression. Ephesians. 5.13. and denies
perfection, and an equality with the head of the body; here thou shows, that ye
are not members and that you do not turn people to righteousness, for he that
does no righteousness is not of God, 1 John 3.10. but he that does righteousness
is born of God, 1 John 2.29. and so a Son, and an Heir, Gal. 4.5 6 7. and so a
member, Ephesians. 5.30. and thou that denies and equality, and pleads against it,
rents the members from the head and so is not wise: and the spirit of truth in
us, beats testimony unto those, Dan. 12.3. but against you leveners, liars, and
slanderers, men in whom the Devilll rages, as in Dometrius of old, and the
rest of the Crafts-men, who gained by their Trade, as you do by yours. And now
thou would make people believe that the Kingdom of Satan, and his rage is in,
and amongst us! Reader (mark) I appeal to thee whether the Devil rage in the
persecutor, or in the persecuted; in them that does imprison for a word; or in
them that is imprisoned; in them that suffers the spoiling of their goods, or
in them that takes away men's Cows, Horses, Sheep, Pots, Kettles, or other
household stuff from them, for whom they do not work: so Reader, judge even as
thou would be judged of, between us and the Priests: so S. A. I charge thee,
and the rest of thy Function (whose Fruits makes you manifest) to be the agents
of Satan, and Ministers of his rage, and you fight for his Kingdom, to wit, for
imperfection, and a continuance in sin (contrary to Romans 6.1.2.) so thine
accusation turns home again to thee, and thy Fellows, who is found in the guilt
thereof.

Pr. And truly you do approve your selves to be his most faithful Facters,
and the potent promoters of his interest that ever he employed in any age that
I have Read of; well may you look for liberal wages for your unwearied
working, etc. you run at his book, when God bids you not, sends you not etc.
you compass many Countries to make proselites, etc.

Ans. Here thou blind man cannot get into Lots house to apprehend the
messenger, (to wit, that of God in the consciences of men) but thou art groping
in the dark, and lifting up thy lying voice in the streets of Sodom, take
notice of that; and I appeal to the considerate Reader, whether they that
plead for sin, and lives in it, be not the potent promoters, or mighty
advancers of Satan's Kingdom, or not? so here S. A. thou and you Priests are
found the faithful Factors, or men interested in hellish wars, who counts it
horrible to hold perfection and equality with the head: And as for looking for
Wages, thou that art in Balaams. way, must look for that, who pleads for the
Kingdom of darkness, viz. imperfection, etc, contrary to 2 Cor. 13.9. and 11.
for that which keeps from perfection, is sin; and I must tell thee, that so
long as you have put in at your mouths, you will not be weary; but sease
wages, and you tire, as is largely seen; but we run not at the book of Satan,
but by the Commission and permission of our God (even the living God) to turn
people from darkness to the light, a Cor. 4.6. which shines in their hearts,
which leads out of, and preserves from the motions of transgressions, as it is
minded and obeyed; and for that end do we labor in travel, as the Apostles
did; and we are ashamed to call them the Ministers of Christ, who is settled
Masters in their Parishes, at ease in the flesh (as a hog in the stall;) but if
you be Ministers, Go reach all Nations, and let the Heathen (as you call them)
hear your Message, If it be the same that John's was, 1 John 1.5.6.7. or else I
conclude you justly to be idle drones, jumbling in your notions amongst your
Natives; so thy false accusations touches us not, but is retorted into thine
own budget.

Pr. And when they are made, they are twofold more the, etc. having only
changed some of their impiety, into deeper hypocrisy, and all their Religion
into damnable Haeresie.

Ans. The Children of hell is liars, covetous, etc. which marks is stamped upon
thee, and thy generation of Priests S. A. but that we make people two, fold
more the children of hell then before, is utterly false; I appeal to every
man's Conscience, whether he that was a liar, a swearer, a whoremunger, and an
ignorant person, etc. being changed from these things into moderation? whether
he be made twofold more the child of hell then before, or not? For this I
testify, that we have no fellowship with the unfruitful (workers, and) works
of darkness; but them we own, who is changed by the renewing of their minds.
And as for changing impiety into hypocrisy (as above) in false, and I leave it
for thee to prove wherein we are Hareticks, or hypocrytes; for we are clear
from all that thou have laid downs in this Paper against us, and it shall stand
for your own condition, impiety and hypocrisy, both apparently brought forth,
as in most Goales, Courts, Assizes, Sessions, Correction-houses, etc. in this
nation; so here you are found the impious hypocrytes, who would be called
Ministers of Christ, but is found biters and devourers, take notice of that, ye
heretics, who calls it Heresy and Popery (to Preach the light to be within,
which gives the Knowledge of God) here you contradict the Scriptures, John
8.12. John 17.21.2 Cor. 4.6. so heresy shall stand for your own lot in the end
of time.

Pr. How clearly is this seen of all, that have their Eyes open, is discorne
between good and evil?

Ans. If thy senses were exercised to discern between good and evil, then
would thou be ashamed to say, that we made people twofold more the children of
hell, then before; but that it might be made manifest that the god of this
world has blinded thine Eyes, therefore have thou spoken.

Pr. Were not these times foreseen, and the danger of those days foretold by
the Lord himself, and his Apostles, Mat. 24.24.25. 2 These. 2.9.10.11.12.1
These. 4.1.2.3.4.2 Tim. 3. to 6.2 Pet. 2. 12.1 John 4.1.2.3. Jude 8. consider
them seriously, and compare your own conditions with them impars^ially?

Ans. These things were indeed foretold, which began in the days of the
Apostles, as the Reader may take notice; but it seems thou art blind concerning
the times. Reader, mark the ignorance of this man, who says, these is the
times (as above,) Christ said, False Prophets should come, Mat. 24.11. and
24.25. and by their fruits they shoud be known, Mat. 7.16.20. and John, before
his decease, he said, they were come; see 1 John 2 18 19. says he, it is the
last times, (mark) it is; and, says the Angel, all Nations have drunk, etc.
(mark have) have drunk, Rev. 18.3. here you may see your ignorance, who says,
Christ said false Prophets should come, and now it is the last times; Christ
said, they should come; John said, it was the last time then, and there was
many Antichrists then; so let John bear testimony against you: And as for
these Scriptures that thou have cited, they shall stand recorded for a witness
against all hireling Priests, who take pleasure in the wages of unrighteousnes,
whose working is after the flesh for fat benefices, suceeding the grievous
Wolves, which spared not the Flock, whose coming is after the power of Satan
the Prince of darkness, with enticing words of man: wisdom feeding itching
ears, living in fulness, suing and halling to Prisons, lying, and falsely
accusing, as I have proved upon you; and so S. A. thou art in the strong
delusion, believing lies, as that we depend upon merits, as selfe-righteousnes,
or selfe-performances, selfe-justification, and the like: And as for 2 Timothy 3.
let us see whether we, or the Priests be such as is there spoken of, as self,
lovers; the Priests for their back and belly sues poor people at Law, and
causes some to travel 400. miles; and some is imprisoned to death, and some
suffers so (by that generation of Balck-coats) that they have not had a Pan,
nor a Kettle lest; I say, such is selfe-lovers, and covetous men, taking three
times double that which they challenge at first, not only trebble damage, but
trebble sums, this is the wages of unrighteousnes, worse then Balaam, 2 Pet.
2.15. and they are boasters, beyond their measures, which is out of the
Prophets life, Christ's life, and the Apostles life, in a proud covetous life
(as above) and yet speaking of the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles words,
(in pretense of doctrine) pushing one another from their Benefices, as Beasts
push from the F other; unstable souls, who trades with other men's lines, and
they are proud, that consents not unto the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 6.3.4. who said, swear not at all; be not ye called of men, Master; sue
no man at Law; and freely ye have received, freely give, etc. but the Priests
of England, resists his Doctrine herein; So (S. A.) they (and your) spirits is
tried and seen: And I have considered these Scriptures which thou have cited,
and concluded thee in the path of rebellion, denying Christ to be come in the
flesh, as in the vessels of his Sons and Daughters, to perfect and deliver from
sin, and from corruption in this life; so man, desist from deceiving, least
thou perish.

Pr. This time seems to me to be emblematized to the Prophet in the Vision,
Zach. 3.12. it is the discovery of the state of a Church in the time of
Reformation, etc. but the resisters shall reap rebuke for opposing the
faithful Ministers, whom he has raised up to reform his House in these days,
and clothed with a spirit of light, zeal, and power, more then in many ages
before, which that you cannot see, its because blindness is fallen upon you.

Ans. Here is a snare for thy Feet! for our High Priest is risen, who was the
substance of Zachariahs Vision, Christ Jesus the light, whose Priesthood we
own, who has put an end to all you changeable Priests that receives Tithes,
Heb. 7.12. and his Priesthood you (Tythe-mongers) resists, because you love
the wages of unrighteousness, suing at Law, and as it were fights for your
bellies, and so is found evil beasts, slow-bellies, who can never have enough,
I say 56.11. but the Ministration of Christ Jesus is free, without money or
price, Isay 55.1. Mat. 10.8. Rev. 22.7. and you are found to be the resisters
of this High Priest, and his Doctrine, and Ministry, viz. the Ministre of the
spirit of God. And as for opposing Gods Faithful Ministers that is false, for
we own them that is such with our souls; but we deny the relics of Papistry,
by which (you) reformers is up-held; and all such who says, they are clothed
with the spirit of holiness, light Leale, and power, we deny, when they are
found in Kains, Corahs, Balaams steps, acted by a persecuting spirit, haters of
the light, in a Zeal without Knowledge, clothed with the power of darkness;
by which power, you are suing at Law, casting into holes and dungeons, and
pillaging poor people Houses (Cavelleer-like) and so is found as a Troop of
Robbers, Hos. 6.9. so the spirit of holiness is not your clothing, for you
execed your Forefathers, the Scribes and Phasisees, (or the Lesuits in Queen
Mary's days) for persecuting: Here you are found to be filthy Dreamers,
speaking the Visions of your own hearts, studying, invented for money, your
Church is your Shop, your Sabbath is your Market day, which makes me cry, Oh
miserable Reformers, and Reformation! for shame desist thy leven.

Pr. You are given up to believe lies, for that you received not the truth in
the love of at, nor liked to retain God in your Knowledge; therefore are you
given up to these strong Delusions.

Ans. All lies and lya^s we do deny, who says they are Ministers of Christ
Jesus, and yet makes a trade of the Letter; and we have received the truth in
the love of it, which is the light and grace of God, John 8.12. Tit. 2.11.
which teaches us to turn away from all covetous hirelings (who calls the
Scripture their rule, and the tryar of spirits) but is neither guided by
spirit, nor Scripture; I say, we are taught to turn from such to the light,
which shines in our hearts, and to the anointing, 2 Cor. 4.6. 1 John 2.26. by
which we come to know God, and to retain him in our Knowledge, by whose power
we are brought from darkness, deluders, false Apostles; and from all them who
are murmurers, complainers, walking, after their own lusts, whose mouths
speaks great swelling words, having men's persons in admiration, because of
advantage, Jude 16. who serves not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own
bellies: so, S. A. thine accusation stands recorded against thy slefo.

Pr. Vunder which you lie as spectieles of Divine wrath, which is come upon
you, as heretofore upon the Iowes, for the like sins; see 1 These. 2.15.16. in
which sad case we are forced to leave you, not knowing whether ever the Lord
will deliver you because you despise our help, and sets light by our cousells,
and hates our instruction, your hearts being utterly, and desperately hardened.

Ans. Reader, thou may take notice (how that the Apostle) in this 1 These. 2.
who used not a cloak of covetonsnes, ver. 5. But labored and traveled, that
he might not be chargoable, ver. 9. I say, take notice how he declares against
the Jews, (in the 15.16. v) who kiled the Lord Jesus Christ, and their own
Prophets; and forbad the Apostles to speak to the Goutiles: They had their
Synagogues to ateep into, as the Priests of our time the Papists Masle-houses
to creep into, not laboring in travel, as the Apostles did, (1 These. 2.
8.9.10.11.) but despising them that does, (Iewes-like, 1 These. 2. 15.16.) but
you are more subtle, holding up the first Priest-hoods maintenance, under the
cloak of Gospel maintenance, crying against them that speaks what they have
received freely: so the 1 These. 2.15.16. is fulfilled amongst you that is
called of men Masters, stands praying in your (Masle) houses, or Synagognes,
striving to draw from the spirits teachings, etc. but we are delivered from
you, and knows your voices to be the voices of strangers; and the Lord has
brought us into that one Fould, where he is the Shepherd alone, from the
mouths of all ye dumb shepherds, which made a prey upon us; and so your help
we deny, for you help into spiritual whoredom, but not out: And your counsel
we deny, its invented trash, and you are found, and proved liars; but he is our
Counselor, whose name is called Wonderful, Counselor, Isay 9.6. who is also
our hope of glory, Col. 1.26.27. who is our Instructor, who faith, learn of
me. Mat. 11.29. he has turned unto us his pure Language, by taking away out
stony hearts, for whose Instruction, we utterly deny all your leven, and you
leveners, who faith, and does not: so S. A. thou, and thy Fellows shall proceed
no further undiscovered to the Children of Light; and except you repent of your
lewdness, divine wrath will be the portion of your spirtuall Witcheraft,
wherein you keep people always learning, and you your selves always pleading
against perfection. Oh ye Caterpillars, and Grasse-hoppers, how long will ye
not cause to destroy the blossoms of the vine, which increases daily before
your bloody devouring jaws, and envious instigations? Oh that ye would be
warned!

Pr. And now to come to the conclusion of the Paper, which contains some simple
Quaries, etc. and why Quaries etc.

Ans. The end of my quaering was, and is for the clearing of the truth, and try
all of thy spirit, whether patlent, or perverse, and not tempt thee with evil,
as thou have enviously judged, but that by slighty cunning might be made
manifest, as after will appear.

Pr. Thou shows thy self without shame, to do the works of thy Father, who
was a tempter, etc. Mat. 22.17.18. and 19.3. etc. Mar. 8.11. and 9.14. Luke
10.25. John 8.56.

Ans. Here thou have eited some Scriptures, unto which thou compares me for
asking of thee a question. Ah thou judge of evil thoughts; the Scribes and
Pharisees had better cause to call Christ a tempter, then thou has to call me;
for the knew from whence the Baptisms of John was, better then they, as Mat.
21.25. and whose Son he was, better then they, Mat. 22.45. although he asked
them; I say, they mocked him, and subtly laid wait to entangle him; but I
have not quaeried of thee in that nature, but for clearing of truth, because of
diversity of judgments: so I deny them (that sought to entangle Christ) to be
my forefathers, although thy actions, with thy Fellows, cannot deny them to be
your forefathers, as is proved; for innoceney will clears me, and the Lord be
judge between thee and me.

Pr. And now, though I might send thee away as Christ did thy forefathers,
Mat. 21.25. and chap. 22.45. etc. yet because I know thee, and the rest of thy
generation to be less ingonuous, and more impedent and apt to be lifted up
upon light oceasion; and least my total silence should afford any fuel for the
fire of thy pride; I shall; shape thee such answers as may possibly have no more
wisdom then thy Quaries, though probably more truth then thou quaries after.

Ans. I have not asked after the nature of the Scribes and Pharisees to
entangle thee (although thou has entangled thy slefe) but for the causes before
said have I quaered, and thou art found the immetator of those who first
consulted to lie, ( Mat. 21.25.26.27.) and then answered plainly, ver. 31. and
41. as thou have done, ^s after will appear: But first thou have made thy
Kaine-like Jewish spirit manifest; Christ Jesus asked many questions, although
he knew; And the Apostle exhorted, to give a reason of the hope that was in
them; but albeit thou pretend to be a Minister of Christ, yet thou art found
unwilling to answer but is lifted up in contempt and false accusations; for I
tell thee, we know what we are, in good report, and bad; so, far be it from us
to be lifted up upon any oceasion. And as for the shape of thy Answers, in them
thy wisdom is seen; and I appeal to the Reader, whether there be any truer
thing to be quaried after, then the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness of
it? and whether S. A. be not in felse-exaltation, who says, his answers has
more truth then I quarie after? for the Kingdom of God, and his
righteousness, do I quaerie after.

And now to come to the Answer of my Quaeties; the first Word of my first
quaerie being transcribed (where? or what?)

Quae. 1. Where? or what is the Kingdom? and where is it to be found? and what
is the Righteousness of it?

Pr. Ans. Where it is? there is it to be found. This answer is just as wise as
thy question. But secondly, it is not amongst you, though it is in and amongst
the Saints, I woane, the Kingdom of grace; for that ye are fallow from common
grace, and from the means of spiritual grace; from Christ the King, and from
the standing Laws of his Kingdoms; so that truly, you have need to inquire
more seriously after is then you do, for you are far from it, and quite out of
the way to it.

A. Here thou are found a vain jangler, mocking simplicity with thy fallen
wisdom, saying, the Kingdom of God is nothing, though in and amongst the
Saints; as though the Kingdom of God were in none but the Saints; (Reader mark)
Christ says to the Scribes and Pharisees, that the Kingdom of God was in them,
although they were opposers of him, Luke 17.21. But, S. A. s^ilf it is not
amongst us viz. the Kingdom of grace, contrary to Tit. 2.11. John 1.9.10. which
grace and light, has enlightened, and appeared unto all men, and it is both
spiritual and common unto all in its appearance, Tit, 2.11. or else the world
should be excusabl; but the light shining, and the grace appearing, there is
therefore now no cloak for sin: But that we are fallen from this grace, is
false; or from the means, or from Christ, or from his standing Law, for this
grace we own to be our Teacher, as the Apostle did, Tit. 2.12. (and not a
hireling Priest, whose own the sheep are not) and the means we own, viz. the
gist of God, Christ the light who is given unto the Gentiles, as well as unto
the Jews, Isay 49.6. and his Law we own, according to the Prophets and Apostles
testimony, Ier. 31.33. Heb. 8.10. and these things we own, (and hear testimony
of) to be within us, so that we need not go forth, as says Christ and his
Apostles, Mat. 24.26.1 John 2.27. whose command we have learned, by his grace
to be obedient unto; and he, viz. Christ Jesus, is our way to the Kingdom, who
says, learn of me, and got not forth; he does not say, learn of Hirelings,
that makes bargales with their Parishioners for so much a year: but he says,
learn of me, and he is our High Priest, whose lips preserve our Knowledge. So
I charge thee, 8. A. to be a false-accuser, and a liar in this thy Answer to
the first part of my qu^rie.

Pr. To the other part of thy quarie, viz. What is the righteousness of it? I
answer, Not our own righteousness, which is imperfect; Isa. 64.6. but the
righteousness of Christ, by faith imputed, etc. Phil. 3.9. this is the only
perfect righteousness in it self, though the righteousnessse of Saints is
also perfect in him; but not meritorious: his is the righteousness of God
which is revealed from Faith to, etc. Romans 1.17. the everlasting
righteousness, etc. which first the Jews. Secondly, the Papists. And thirdly,
the Quakers, being ignorant of, and all going about to establish their own
righteousness, have not submitted to, Romans 10.3. and 9.10, etc.

Ans. That its not our righteousness, its granted; nevertheless, we must not
cease to work out our salvation, seeing that man is justified by works, and
not by Faith only, James 2.24. Secondly, That it is the righteousness of
Christ by Faith, and that that righteousness is perfect in him, and in the
saints; and that not meritorious; as of themselves; but by the righteousness
of God, which is revealed, according to, Romans 1.17. is granted. But lyart, and
false accusers, is out of this righteousness, albeit they may say as the
Scripture says, as thou S. A. has done, who says, that the Quakers is
agnorant of Gods righteousness, and goes about to establish their own
righteousness. Here I charge thee again to be a liar; for Gods righteousness,
which it the righteousness of Faith, we own; which righteousness speaks on
this wise, etc. as in Romans 10.6. but what says it? the Word is nigh thee, in
thy month, and in thy heart, Romans 10.8. this is the Word of Faith, and the
righteousness which is of Faith, which we believe and Preach; and if we, or any
other, Preach another Gospel then the power of God, ( Romans 1.16.) or another
power than Christ, the Power and Wisdom of God. (1 Cor. 1.24.) or any other
righteousness then that which is of Faith, which says, The Word is nigh thee,
even in thy mouth, and in thy heart, I say, let him be accursed; so man, be
ashamed, for thou art found one of them, that says, The Scriptures is the Word
of God, and so has not submitted unto the righteousness of God, which says,
The Word is nigh, in the mouth and heart, as before; so in the gall of
bitterness thou art sound, soming out thy own shame.

2. Querie. What it is that gives the Knowledge of God? and how? Priests Ans.
God himself only gives the Knowledge of himself, Iam. 1.5.17. Ier. 24.7. I
will give them an heart to know me, that I am the Lord.

Ans. That God only gives the Knowledge of himself, is granted; and seeing
that God gives man an heart to know him, and is the only giver of Knowledge:
Why then do thou judge us? because we do not own your help, counsel, and
Instruction; (here thou art manifest) for God having given us hearts to believe
(and know him) by his light which shines in us, as in them, 2 Cor. 4.6. I say,
this light, or grace (which is one) is sufficient for us, as it was for them, 2
Cor. 12.9. so him we own, and witness to be the only giver of Knowledge,
without the help of all the Learned Rabbis in the World, who is of it

Pr. Now he gives it? I answer: He gives it effectually only, by his Spirit;
but instrumentally, by his Word Preached ordinarily: he gives also some kind of
Knowledge of himself, by his Works, both of Creation, and Providence, when he
exercises the minds of men to consider them: this answer is a truth, though I
know it will not satisfy thy foolish fancy.

Ans. That God gives the Knowledge of himself only, and effectually by
himself, who is a spirit, is granted; therefore to God, who is a spirit, and
who is light, who gives the Knowledge of himself by his light, 2 Cor. 4.6. to
him we commit, and submit our selves to be taught: And seeing God is the only
giver of Knowledge effectually, (Reader mark) then, that, I say, which is the
only giver, is the ground, cause, and effect, spiritually and instrumentally,
as in Phil. 2.13. And whereas thou says, He gives some kind of Knowledge of
himself (as before) I say, He is the only effectual giver of all Divine
Knowledge, drawing us unto his Son, ( John 6.44.) in whom our Eye being placed,
we come to see, and to understand (by his Knowledge) the Works of Creation and
Providence. And although thou say, thy answers will not sat is f^^ my foolish
faney; As for thy reproachful terms of untruths. I little matter; but know,
though I am satisfied with that which gives satisfaction, and with so much of
thine answers, as is truth, though but in words, gathered by thy comprehension,
in litterall experience, for true experience is far from a liar; but God gives
the Knowledge of himself, by his light, 2 Cor. 4.6. and this thou art ignorant
of, who kicks against the prieks of Conscienes, which tells thee, thou should
not lie, nor falsely accuse, nor Preach for Hire, nor be called of men Master,
nor strive to keep people always learning, and still unperfect, still in the
bondage of corruption; they could but be so, if they never heard thee take
notice of that. But furthermore, God is both the effectual and isntrumental
giver; effectually, (according to thy own confession) and, I say,
instrumentally by the Word, 1 John 1.14. who was quickened in the spirit, by
which he also went and Preached unto the spirits in Prison, 1 Peter 3.19. so,
the Word is our Preacher, which the righteousness of Faith speaks of, Romans
9.6.7.8 by whose light we see your cunning craft, and the bottom of you all.

2. Quaerie, Whether you will own the Scriptures to be your rule, and your
loves and practices, judged by the Apostles lives and practices, yea, or nay?

Pr. Ans. I retort this Quarie upon your selves, who have forsaken th^^
Scripture rule, and left the good old way of the Saints: and what have you to
do with the Apostles practices as Apostles? ye false Apostles, deceitful
workers, transforming your selves into the Apostles of Christ, a Cor. 11.13.
that say, ye are Apostles, and are not, but is found liars, Rev. 2.12.

Ans. Here thy winding Serpentine Wisdom and equivocation in seen, evading my
question, turning is back against the innocent, (accusing us as above;) I say,
the Scripture we own every jor and tittle in its place and time of its
ministration, viz. the Old and New Testaments, the first and second
Priesthood, the Law, and changest the Law; I say, all these we own in their
time, and also the change; and we own, and also witness the service of God,
and his worship, in the newness of the spirit, and not in the oldnesse of the
letter; and also the ruse of a new Creature, which is availeable, Gal. 6.15.16.
which is, and was, the good old way of the Saints; and so by that rule we come
(through him that does renew us, as in Tit. 3.5.6.7. into the practices of the
Apostles, in measure; and so is not false Apostles, nor no deceitful workers
(that remains for thee to prove S. A.) so 2 Cor. 11.13. touches us not; (Reader
mark) Paul in the 7. ver. testifies that he Preached freely, and in the 9.
ver. Again, That he was not burdensome: And again, in the 10. ver. he would
not be stopped of that boasting, for cutting off occasion, in the 12. ver. from
them which desire occasion; (mark) Paul Preached freely, and they that sought
occasion against Paul, was false Apostles; even as the Priests of our days,
who Preaches for Hire, now seeks occasion against them that Preaches freely;
so Rev. 2.12. shall stand for your own condition; and the Lord knows our
innocence, who knows also that I lie not, neither do I falsely accuse you, ye
Task masters like of Egypt.

Pr. Ah arrant arrogant Pharisees; Will no lower form in the Church then that
of the Apostle fit you? 1 Cor. 12.28.29. and mark it well, ah more umbitious
thou Diotrophes; Do you love to have the highest pre-eminence? Did ever any
but the Pope, (that Lucifer Prelate) and your selves pretend to an Apostolical
Commission and Revelation, since the false Apostles? But if ye will needs be
Apostles, then prove your Apostleship, as Paul did, 2 Cor. 12.11.12. or elt you
must lie in the laps of the lie, as indeed you do?

Ans. Here thou calls us proud wandering Pharisees, from which we are clear; I
say, our example had not where to lay his head, Luke 9.58. and we are willing
to take our portion with him, and with our cloud of witnesses, Heb. 12.1. who
wandered, being destitute, etc. Heb 11.37. and such labored in travel,
Preaching the change of the Priesthood, and Law; and was persecuted of them
that had their Synagogues to creep into (as you have now) because they
testified against them then, as we do against you now, who is sound in their
steps, as is proved. And whereas thou says, Will no lower form sit etc. (as
before) I say, we are content with our measure, whether high, or low, and it is
lawful for us to covet earnestly the best things, 1 Cor. 12.31. and that
Scripture owned, 1 Cor. 12.28. And though the Apostle has showed a more
excellent way, ver. 31. And whereas we are accused with the Pope, to pretend
Apostolical Commission; the Pope we deny, and all you who is proped up by his
beastly power; imprisoning for a Word, or a question, and suing at Law for your
Gentiles Tithes, which was instituted and managed by the Pope and Saxon Kings,
as in the years 933, 940, 959, by King Ateston, King Edmund, and King Edgar,
Pope Innocent, and others; which Priesthood and Tithes, was never commanded by
God in Old in or New Testament; here you are seen succeeding your fathers,
ambitiously holding up that which God never commanded. And whereas thou says,
We pretend Apostolical Commission; False accusations and self protences, we
deny; but unto every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the
gist of Christ, and that measure we own, ( Ephesians. 4.7.) to be our Commission and
Caller, viz. the grace of God, at the Apostle did, ( Gal. 1 15.) whether into
Apostolical, or Prophetical, or lower places, which is all free
Ministrations, according to their measures, without money or price, and
profitable in their places for the work of the Ministry, for the edesying of
the body, for the perfecting of the Saints, which perfection, in this life, by
your Priests is denied; and so you are sound unprositable, and false Apostles
deceitfully working for your fat benefices, transformed into the name of the
Apostles, or Ministers of Christ's, having your Commission from Man, to trade
with the Letter for money, for the free Ministration of the Spirit is denied by
you; so you deny the Commission of the Ministry, which was, Go teach, etc.
freely ye have received, freely give; and for his sake who gave this
Commition, we take pleasure in infirmity, as the Apostle did, a Cor. 12.10. and
some in much patience, which signs and wonders, and mighty deeds, as may be
proved to the praise of the loving God; and we do not make a gain of people,
as you do, no more then the Apostles did, 2 Cor. 12.17.18. neither do we goo
to a Town or parish to inquire what maintenance there is for a Minister (as
Tithes, Gleabe-Lands, etc) and give them a Sermon or two (as you call them) of
liking: But we go to inquire who fears the Lord, and owns the Spirit of God to
be their Teacher, which Teacher cannot be removed into a corner, Isay 30.20.
and with such we can take a little meat and drink, which the Apostles was
Commisioned to receive; and here is our joy and proof, not only in imitation,
but in life also, witness a against all you who rules as Lords, patterns of
pride and covetonsnesse, learning your Trade, and selling, your invenitions,
bearing rule by your weans, which is a filthy, horrible thing now in England,
as it was in Ieremiahs days, Ier. 5.30, 31. Oh ye Priests, put it not from you,
for it sticks fast upon you.

Pr. And now to the rest of the Quaries, I shall only propose some
cousiderations.

Ans. I did but propound four questions unto thee, as in number, and thou have
diverted two of them, and answered two of them with lies, and true words, and
false accusations mixed together, as one void of all sense, making no matter
what thou speak, as is, and may be proved. Reader, this is the querie which is
not answered: Whether the false Teachers and Decoivers may not be known by
their fruits and whether they that bring^th forth the same fruits which was
declared against by the true Prophet Christ Jesus, and his Apostles of old, be
not the false Teachers now, as they were then, yea, or nay? This quaerie is
digressed because it coma near thee S. A.

Pr. first Consideration. Do thou conclude in cold blood, that either none,
or very few of the Ministers in England, are truly godly? and that either
none, or very few real Saints are the seal of their Ministry in the Lord? and
is such sensoriousnesse safe, and without flune?

Ans. I do conclude, That the Ministers of Jesus Christ new in England, who is
called by the grace of God, with Commission from the Spirit of God to Preach
the Gospel freely, as they have received in by the Revelation of Jesus in them,
(as in Gal. 1.16) according to the measure of the gist of God, Ephesians. 4.7. I say,
these are truly godly, as they are obedient to the grace appeared, (mark) and
that the children of light who is called (and obedient to the grace) out of the
fashions and customs of the world, and out of all formally invented worships,
to worship God in spirit and in truth in the inward man, Psalm 51.6. I say, this
is the seal of their Ministry; but that the Parish ministers (who is called
Ministers in England) is truly godly, that I do deny; For he that loves me,
says Christ, keeps my Commandments; (now mark.) he has commanded his to be
perfect; but the Priest of England denies, and pleads against his Doctrine
herein he has commanded, not to swear at all; but the Priests of England
pleads against hsi Doctrine herein he has commanded, not to sue any man at
Law; but the Priests of England resists his Doctrine here, in suing poor
people, and swearing, or causing some to swear men's goods from them, yes
trebble sums. Christ commanded to give freely as they had received; but the
Priests of England, neither receives freely, nor gives freely, Christ commanded
not to be called of man Master; but the Priests of England both calls, and is
called Master, with many more particulars (which might be mentioned) to this
purpose; all which shows, That the Priests of England is out of Christ's
Doctrine, and so has not God, 2 John 9. so not truly godly. And as for them
which follows you, which is thus found out of and oppose it against Christ's
Doctrine; I say, they make your Ministry manifert and seals it with their
unbridled lungs and actions to be a barren fruitless Ministry, void of
sanctification, which makes Saints; so you, and your followers, I do deny to
be either truly godly, or real Saints. But I call them (not in cold blood, as
thou quaeries) neither according to flesh and bloods wiscom; but by the spirit
of truth, and light of our Lord Jesus Christ; I say, I call you, like Priest,
like people, Hos. 4.9. etc. and this is no sinful sensuring, I commend my
felse to every man's Conscience in the sight of God, as the Apostle did, 2 Cor.
4.2. and to the honest hearted every where, who is but willing to compare your
practices with the Doctrine of Christ, and practices of his Aposels.

Pr. second Consideration. Do thou say or thinks, that thy self mire hate
all daceit, and sin whatsoever, then the said godly Ministers and Sainits in
England, or elsewhere do?

Ans. I am not sufficient of my self to think any thing as of my self; but my
sufficiency is of God, who has opened my Book of Conscience, wherein I find
and read the motions of the flesh, to be an enemy to the motions of Gods
Spirit, which has made me cry with tears for deliverance from that bondage;
so, by the power of God, I utterly tetest that nature in my self in the
particular, and in the general, which opposes Christ and his Doctrine; and
does conclude you to be no Ministers of Christ, who wrests his Doctrine for
selse ends, and to your own destruction; and them to be no Saints who follows
such; for the god of this world has blinded their eyes (that cannot see you to
be painted Harlots) lest the light of the glorious Gospel should shine unto
them; Therefore, I say, you are running from mountain to hill under pretense of
Resormation, and still without the door in the fashions and customs of this
world, and in your airic Knowledge and Wisdom, there you set up your building,
and also the foundation of your worship, hatched by Tradition, springing from
imaginations, the ground of changeable, wayes^; take notice of that.

Pr. third consideration. Do thou affirm that the detestable titles of
blind guides, dumb dogs, greedy Dogs etc. are given without sin to such
Minesters, and that their Doctrine and practices prova them to be such, as
Christ and his Apostles declares against?

Ans. As for godly Saints, or Ministers, these titles are not given to such by
us God forbid; but I affirm and testisie by the spirit of truth, with the
Prophet, that these titles are given without sin to you who is found seeking
gain from your quarter, as they were. Isay 56.10, 11. and you bear the
express image of the false Prophets, and false Apostles practices, as the
Reader may take notice in my Answers all along this Book; to that of God in
every Conscience who Reads it, I appeal.

Pr. fourth con. Caust thou prove, or dare thou deny that Ministers in the
Gosspel time were not seated in their own Churches, whether in Countries,
Towns. or Cities, Act. 14.23. chapter 20.28. Tit. 1 5. 1 Pet 5 1.2. Col. 1.17. all
these places plainly speaboth the countrary?

Ans. I do not deny, but that the Apostles ordained Elders in every Church,
and that such as was not greedy of filthy luere ( Tit. 1.7. 1 Timothy 3.3) but took
the over sight, not for silthy luere, but of a ready mind, 1 Pet. 5.1.2.3 and
they watched for souls, ( Heb. 13 17.) and not for gain from their quarters,
as you Priests do; but that they were seated in Parishes (the Popes division)
with their set stypends, suing men at Law if they could not pay them the tenth
of the increase of their goods, and ground; I say, that of deny; and all these
Scriptures that thou have cited will not prove such a thing, as that the Eiders
there spoken of received Tithes, either Tews Tithes, or Gentiles Tithes, as
tenth Stack tenth Cock, tenth Lamb, tenth Fleece, tenth Geese, tenth Pig, and
a Hen if one have but two, and Smoke pence, or Peter pence, etc. so S. A. thou
and thy Fellows, with your invented Elders must be forced to own the Pope to be
the institutor and promulgator of your Gentiles Tithes, and he is your example
for these things, and not the Apostles, nor Elders of old; and I refer the
Reader to Henry Clerks Book, styled, a description of the Prophets, Apostles,
and Ministers of Christ, and also of them called Ministers in England, etc.
there thou may take notice of the rise and foundation of your English Church
order, and your Ministers maintenance, who is found deceitful workers, and
enemies to the Cross of Christ.

Pr. fifth con. Were not the Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets, extraordinary
Officers in the Church, 1 Cor. 12.28. and particularly Commissioned to Preach
up and down at itinerants any where, every where without limitation? Mark
16.15. and does not thy denial of this, argue gross ignorance of the very
Scripture letter?

Ans Here thou shows thine extravagant spirit confusedly, Reader compare the
fourth proposition, and fifth together, and see what contraditions is in them;
for in the fourth, thou S. A. goes about to prove the Ministers settled in
Churches, whether in Countries, Towns, or Cities; and now thou says, they are
Commissioned to Preach any where, every where, without limitation; and also,
that they are particularly Commissioned, and were extraordinary Officers,
citing Marks 16 15, as though none but the eleven had had that commission; let
Paul, Silas, Timothy, Barnabas, and these Scriptures ( Acts 20.4.5.6. chapter 13.1.
and chapter 9.10) bear witness against thy falacy; for Apostles, Prophets, and
Evangelists, with Pastors and Teachers (Ephesians. 4.11) is but ordinary members
compacted in the body, (1 Cor. 12.12. and 27.28) and ordinarily supplyeth that
place in the body, where they are placed, as also does the lesser members; and
one cannot say to another, I have no need of thee, 1 Cor. 12.21.22. etc. so but
ordinary Officers in the body for the edifying of the same, and for the
completing and perfecting it; so here thy deceit is seen, and thou not to be
like unto them, nor none of you Tythe-mongers who is at ease in the flesh, and
in your parishes with a fat benefice: And whereas thou says. I deny the
Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets, Call, Commission Office, and Ministry,
w^ch was without limitation; here I charge thee (in meeknes, and in truth) to
be a liar, for I own the Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists, their call
commission office, and travel in their Ministry; and I honor them with my
soul, whose record lays open such leveners as thou to be deceitful workers
and enemies to the Cross of Christ transformed into the name of the Ministers
of Christ; but the nature ground, commission and life of Christ and his
Apostles you want; so take thy shameless accusations home again who has thus
belied me, and the Lord open thy eyes to see thy own folly

Pr. sixth con. Is there not a vast difference between taking hire and wages,
which the workman is worthy of, (Luke 10.7.1 Cor 9.7.10.15. 1 Timothy 5.18) and
teaching for hire and filthy lucre sake? and if it be the duty of all that are
taught in the Word, to communicate to him that teaches in all good things Gal.
6 6. can thou prove that it is not lawful for them to take such things, and
if Tithes are a Legal ceremony, and unlawful under the Gospel?

A. Here the end of thy drut is seen; Meats for the belly, and the belly is for
meat; but God shall destroy both it and them, 1 Cor. 6.13. but there is a great
difference between that hire and wages which the Apostles was commissioned to
receive; and taking of Gentile tithes, which was never commanded in the Old or
New Testament, and also taking set stipends, making bargains with Parishes,
suing and casting into prisons, as is proved: I say, here is a vast difference;
thou have cited Luke 10 1.1 Cor. 10 7. 10 15.1 Tim 5.8. for the defense, of
your hire. Reader take notice of Luke 10.7. where Christ says, in the same
house r^m^in eating and drinking etc. for the labourer is worthy of his hire;
also v 8. Eat such things as is set before you, mark, he does not say, Take
Tithes and if they will not give you Tithes, sue them at Law, or cast them into
prison, as you priests do; but he said they might cate and drink with them
that did receive them, Luke 10.8 mind that, they were not to bide where they
were not received, v 10. But the Priests of our time, who calls themselves
Ministers of Christ (as men void of all reason) compels all sorts of people to
maintain them albeit they be not received; and they that denies them to Tithes,
(let them be what they will in opinion, or judgment) in Law, or prison they
must go. Oh shameless men, where is your commission, or example in the New
Testament for these things, yea, or in the Old Testament? And whereas thou
cites, 1 Cor. 9 7. I say take notice, Paul says, v. 4. have we not power to
eat and to drink I (mark) he does not say have we not power to take Tithes? and
although he had power to eat and to drink, yet he used none of these things;
neither did he write that it should be done unto him, see ve^ses 15.16.17 18
19. And as for 1 Timothy 5.18. I answer, we shall not deprive the Ox of his
provender, nor the labourer of his hire, but shall communicate of our carnalls
to them that sows spiritual, and teaches in all good things, as andal 6.6. I
say, if any (who labors in the Word, and preaches freely as he has received
it) come amongst us, he shall have meat and drink, if he have necessity, and we
shall not hinder him of such wages as Christ gave his commission to receive,
Luke 10.7.8 but as for Tithes, (which you are not only Preaching for, but also
as it were, fighting for) the ministers of the Gospel, recorded in the
Scriptures, did not own them to be a lawful ceremony after the change of the
Priesthood; but preached the Law changed, and the commandment disanulled,
Heb. 7.11. therefore unlawful under the Gospel and as unlawfully used by you,
take it into consideration; is there not a beggar in England, as there was not
to be in Israel? and where is your store house? Ah ye Tythe-mungers, let shame
cover you all.

Pr. seventh con, Whether the Ministers of England etc. or the Quakers trade in
Babels wares as thou chargest us I but stay a little, since thou art so forward
in this matter, I suspect thee the more, and shall therefore make bold to
search thy pack before we part that I may see what commodities thou carries,
and whence thou had thy wares, etc. I fear thou will be found most foul in
this fauls thy self.

Ans. I answer, ye Parish-masters trades in Babells wares, as is, and may be
proved; and therefore my charge is truth, and shall stick near you till you
come down from the throne of your imaginations, where the stone, of your
building is graven, and your image molten. And whereas thou says, Stay a
little, etc. I say, come freely, with all thy Function, and search me, adn
spare me not, and accuse me for nothing but that which I carry; so I shall say
little more to this, but take heed thou be not found a blind searcher, as the
Reader may take notice, as follows.

And now I come to thy false conjunction, or accusations wherein thou would
rank us with the Papists, if thou could.

Pr. first accusation. The Babylonish merchants. (I mean the Papists) have
their several sorts of corrupt wares to sell, which you are their only
chapmen for, and has taken them of their hands; That the common light in all
is sufficient to salvation, provided men do not stifle it, nor extinguish it
by wilful sinning against it: Sirs, say not you-so too?

Ans This accusation is false, and confused; we never was at the Papists
Colleges to learn a trade, as most of you have bin; as at Trinity College,
Christ's College, Jesus College, St. John's College, etc. these Colleges was
instituted by the Popes Law, and named after Saints, for nursing up of
Jesuits; as also your Churches with the Popes Crosses upon the most of them,
and called by the name of Saints, as St. Peter's Church, St. Paul's Church, St.
Mary's Church, etc. so I have not given you a wrong title, viz. Merchants of
Babell, which comes nearer you in the mystery, then Papists outward tenants;
for I must tell thee and you, That Babell may be builded with cunninger
Carpenters then the outward impression of superstition; nevertheless, you are
found the Papists imitaters, enjoying both their learning-shops, and
market-shops, to wit both Colleges, and Masse-houses, in which you buy and
sell your wares; as singing Hopkins and Sternholds meeter, as part of your
worship, commanded by the Sexon Kings as in the year 747, by King Edgbert, and
in 924. by King Ethelstone, alies Atelstine, etc. as also your sprinkling of
Infants, which was commanded by King I^as, alies Ina. or Ive, in 1213. I refer
the Reader to Henry Clarks Book, styled a description of the Apostles and
Ministers of Christ, and of those called Ministers in England, etc. Thou says,
the Papists holds, that the common light in all, is sufficient, (as before)
joining us with them; and yet thou asks us, Whether we say so or not? Here the
Reader may take notice, that thou accuses us for thou knows not what, and also
that thou art a blind searcher, who said, thou would search my pack, and yet
thou art sain to inquire of us, What we carry, and what we say? I say, thou art
not fit to judge, seeing thou art both blind and hasty; and the Papists I
deny, with their bloody instigations, but that light I own, which the Prophet
Prophesied of, ( Isay 49.6.) and John boar testimony to, John 1.9.10 to be
sufficient to salvation which was given for salvation, Isay 46 6. John 8.12 and
he that walks not in this light, walks in darkness, and knows not whether he
goes, because darkness has blinded his eyes, as is manifest upon thee S. A.
which knows not what thou speaks, nor whereof thou affirms.

Pr. 2. Ac. That man's natural will is free to repent, believe, and turn to
God; and that conversion is not the fruit of the spirit in the elect alone.

A. Here thou would join us with the Papists, but we deny thy conjunction with
the Papists, and thou art found a blind searcher, for we hold no such thing (as
above:) For we know, that man's natural fleshly carnal will and mind, is not
subject to the Law of God, but naturally inclined to corruption, from which, he
that walks in the light, knows a cleansing, 1 John 1.7. but that convertion is
not the fruit of the spirit alone, is false also; For the spirit quickneth, the
flesh prositeth nothing. John 6.63. and this we testify, that it is God in all
his saints, m^sch works in them both to will, and to do, Phil. 2.13. so 5.
A. thou must own a liars portion, except thou repont.

Pr. 3. Ac. The Papist teathouth, that a man may be perfect, without sin in
this life, and may fulfill all Gods Commandments: and do not the Quakeres the
same?

A. Here thou accuses us with the Papists in thy smoakie consusion; for sirst,
thou said affirmatively, that we had taken the Papists waves off their hands;
and now thou art asking us questions, What we do? but thou should have had
thine Eye better opened, before thou had searched my pack, for thou boasted
proudly; and yet thou inquires of us: so thou art found a blind searcher in the
streets of Sodom. and therefore a blind guide nor fit to lead others. And as
for pe^f^ction. I have spoken to it before and he that perfects, is also the
fulfuler and end of the Law for righteou^nesse sake, to every one that
beleeve^h, to the Jew first, and also to the Genetile, Romans 10.4. and the
righteousness of the Law is sulfilled in them that walks after the spi it
Romans 8.4. take notice of that ye who pretends Reformation, and see if ye be yet
come to the Law and h^w you have passed through its Ministration of
condemnation, to the Ministration of righteousness and peace.

Pr. 4. Ac. The Papists makes their perfection to lie in thi^^^n casting off of
wordly employments, callings relations after the flesh, propr^^ties, as their
Nuns, Monks and Hormots, abusing Mat. 19 11 etc. you are as like them herein,
as you were s^itted out of their moutles.

Ans. We deny thy accusations and the papists perfection herein; but this is
our perfecter by whom our perfection is wrought, even he, which said Fashion
not your solves like unto this world, whose Doctrine we are willing to obey,
though reproached for the same, and numb^ed with the papists as our head was
with transgs ^ffours, Isay 53.11.12. but what the Nuns and the Munkes abuse. is
nothing to us, for we know, that perfection does not lie in selling out outward
estates; but in dying with Christ unto sin, and in putting off of the old man,
with his deeds, that the new man may be witnessed, which is perfect. (Ephesians 4.24)
cleaving only to the perfect righteousness of God, by the spirts of his Son
in our hearts, Gal 4.6. so we deny both you. and all the rabble of your
papistical Function, who has swallowed up the Popes Law which he vomited, to
guard his Jesultes with by which Law you cause the innocents to suffer, as most
of the Goales in this nation can witness; so you are the unclean spirits,
which is spitten out of his mouth, exeresing the power of his beastly Laws; so
you are his Image, though more ^in^lier carved, adn has a more gilded
covering, so you are found to be more in the mystery Babell, having your hearts
exercised with covertous prctises, whith is Idolatry, Gal. 3.5. this is extant
is England, and else where amongst you priests, the papists imitators, as more
largely may be proved by tour Churching of Women (as you call it,) Mortuaries,
Funerall-Sermons, and Marrying for money, with much more Romish trash, too
tedious to mention.

Pr. 5 Ac. The Papists holds inherent righteousness to be the matter of our
justsfication. and not the righteonsnes of Christ alone; and do not you also
the same?

A. Here thou blind man accuses us with the Papists, and yet thou enquires,
Whether we do the same, or not? thou art proved a blind searcher as I said;
confusedly first accusing, and then quaerying whether it be so, or not? I say,
if the Papists hold inherent righteousness, to be the matter of your
justification, as thou says; then we deny both you, and the Papists herein;
for we hold not inherent righteousness, viz. th^^ righteousness which depends
upon outward merits to be our justification alone; although James has said,
that man is justified by Works, and not by Faith only, Jam. 2.24. but we are
justified by the righteousness of the Faith of the Son of God, which Faith is
justified or made perfect by works, Jam. 2.22. So S. A. beware how thou
searchest my pack another time, least thou be found falsely, and confusedly
accusing, as then arr now.

Pr. 6. Ac. The Papists do place their Religion and Righteousness most in
externals, and things that have a show of wisedomo in will worship etc. so do
the Quakersridgedly restratning, as of obsolute necessity, the use of Cuff^,
Points Lace, Hathands, and the like, as if they might not at all be used, or
could not without sin, or as if these were matters of greatest moment.

Ans. Here thy blind and false conjuction is seen, as all along is proved and
thou art seen to be ignorant of us, and our Religion; for we deny that
foundation which is external, and we deny the Papists the head, and you the
tail in the mystery of Babell, and all your external performances, as they
are held in the our sed nature and ground, and all your principles in that
ground. And as for having a show of wisdom in will worship, etc. this will turn
home again to thee and your selves, who sormally in your wills can preach and
pray by your glass or watch being not a shamed to lie in the conclusion of
your work, (as thus) you having rent a verse of Scripture in pleces, Preaching
so long as an hour lasts; then you say, much more might be spoken but time
will not por^^^t, when you have nothing else to does but to serve your bellies;
for the which service, you leave the other, be ginning in your own time, and
ending in your own time; and none must ask you a question, not speak in
exhortation, till your hours talk be ended; contrary to 1 Cor. 14.30.31.32.
and here your will worship is ^een, as certain of your own P^ets (...)
Cr^s^s-men can testify, who by the grace of God, is convinced of, and turned
from your witchcrast. And as for ridgedly restr^^ning the uso of Cuffs, etc.
(as above) that is false; but we do it willingly in obe ^ience to our God, not
in a voluntary humility, neither to the satisfying of our st^sh; and if thou
were not shamesul^y hardened, thou would not contemn us for the casting off of
the superfluities of naughtiness, which l^mes exhorted to east off, lames
1.21. see 1 Pet 3.3.1. Tim. 2.9. and thou that on encourages peoples in outward
adorning is contraty to the Apostle 1 Pet. 3.3. and so help them to sow to the
flesh, and into whoredom, and is of that generation which ealled the proad
happy ( Mas. 3.15.) and one with the Papists, with your C^ff Points, Ribbous,
and ^uch like arregant trash, desired by your ambitious wills, for the outward
adorning of your dust and ashes in which you Parish Masters is patterns,
nothing different from the Papists in the ground, take notice of that Reader,
if thou have an Ear.

Pr. 7. Ac. The Papists, say, that we are no true M^^^sters of Christ, but
decesvers, and teaches the Devination of our own brai^es, and so do you, with
much more.

Ans. The papists we deny, with all their blood-thirsty crew: and also we deny
all the persecuting generation of pr^efts in England, and else where to be the
ministers of the power of God, which is the Gospel; and we have found you to be
one in the ground with the papists though more painted in the mystery; not
divine, though deviners; and what we say we are ready to prove against both the
papists and you, having not only found you out in the mystery, but also in
open rebellion against the Doctrine of Christ, the end of his coming, and
against the virtue of his offering as is proved.

Pr. 8. Ac. The Papists say, our Churches are no true Churches bus they own to
for their Pastors and Teachers; and so say the Quakers.

A. Here thou art trapped in thy own snare, both in Popery, and confusion: for
thou said before, that the papists said, You were not true Min^sters of Christ,
but deceivers; and now thou says, that they own you for their pastors and
teachers: here is confusion that the papists should first call you decesvers;
and now (according to thy own confession) calls you, and own you, to be their
pastors and teachers: and ^o may they well, for they pay you wages; so here,
you pri^sis are found papists pastors and teachers; although thou have gone
about hither^^ to clear thy self and priesthood papistry, yet in thy ^^se
conju^^i ^n, and blind search, the sire of thy pride, envy, and anger has
b^o^en f^rth in a flame to discover thee for thou art owned of them, with thy
Faction, to be their pastore and teachers; so (...) art found ^onle in that
wherein thou seared me and now thou must take the papists for thy, and your
brethren, and hearers, and let them b^ate your testimony, for they pay you
Tithes, or wages, and you enjoy their sh^pps, mark that.

Pr. 9. Ac. The ^arsts know, that the great thing that must be done before they
can ^^duce amongst us, is to make them reject their teachers; and there fore
they bond all their wits and endeavors to vi^^fie them and drow the hearts of
the people from them; end so do the Quakers

Ans. What the papists, your owners does, it is nothing to us we deny them and
your pastets and teachers, who is thus found in discord. First thou says. they
call you no true Ministers but deceivers. Secondly thou says, they own you for
their pastors and teachers. And now thou says they strave to vis^^fie you, and
draw people form you. Oh bottomless pit consasion no wonder if they mist or
vapor darken the air, and obscure the Sn; but that we bend our wits and
endeavors to debase you, or villisie you, contrary to truth and righteousness:
I say that false, for we lie in the will of God, who is gathering people (from
all dumb shepherds) himself, that they may be no more meat for them, Eze.
34.10. so we rest in his counsel and in his promise, ^zo. 34.11.10.17. John
10.16 so we rest in his counsel, who treads the winepress^ alone, Isay
63.3.4.5.6. by whose power, the refuge of liars is violated, and he has a
controversy with you all, and is risen in righteous judgment to render a
reward to the proud, Psalm. 94.2.

Pr. 10. Ac. The Papists main error consists in the contempt of the Soriptures:
they say, they will not take it for the Word of God, but on the authority of
the Church; and that it is but part of his Word, and that Decrees and
Constitutions of Popes and Counsels, are of equal authority with it: the
Quakers say, its not the Word of God, but only a Declaration of the Word that
was in them that gave it forth, and that what themselves speak or write, is
from the same spirit and therefore equal with it

A. Here we deny both you and the papists, who holds the Scripture to be the
Word, either in part, or in whole; and also we do deny both the Popes Decrees,
Constitutions, Counsels, and your divinations and practices, to be equal with,
or agreeable either to the Scripture as it is or to the spirit that gave them
forth; and you that say, they are the Word; and they that say, they are in part
the Word of God; I say unto you, you are both Idolaters, for the Scripture,
which you call, the Word, says, God was the Word, John 1.1. and, that Word
became Flesh, John 1.14. so you Priests is forming a whole idol, and the
Papists but part of an idol; so you are found filling up the measure of your
fathers, greater idolaters then the pa^if^s. And whereas thou says, the
Quakers say, its but only a Declaration; I say, the Evangelist says also so,
Luke 1.1. and God is the Word, who also is a spirit which did inspire his mind
and will into his servants, which they recorded for a restimony unto future
ages; which testimony is perverted, wrested, idolized, and made a trade upon by
the Parish-masters of England and elsewhere, who is owned of the Papists for
Pastors and Teachers according to S. A. his own consession: but as touching the
Word of God, I have spoken largely to it in the 15 page so, I say, he that
speaks and writes truth in sincerity, speaks and ^riteth from the spirit
of truth, viz. the spirit of God and so from the same spirit that gave forth
the Scriptures and so, (as it is truth) equal with the Scriptures of truth,
according to its measure.

Pr. 11. Ac. The Papists say, it is but a dead letter, and so do the Quakers

A. Thou said before, that the papists owned you to be their pastors and
teachers, so you popish pastors and teachers, we deny your testimony, if you
say that ink and paper in it self is living; but we own it, that it was the
inspired words, and will of God, freely revealed, and freely recorded by them
to whom it was inspired by the moveings of the holy Ghost, and so written
freely for our learning; but not to make a trade of, as the Papists, Bishops,
and Jesuits did of old (after five, or six, or seven years learning, as
Prentises at some University) and as the Parish masters do now, who after 5.6.
or 7. years Prentises at some University or great School, gets a place, or
Parish in the Country, and so much in the year, and teaches there, it may be,
all his lifetime, and will tell people, that three parts of the world has
never heard of Christ; and yet he abides in his Parish, and once in seven days
stands up in his shop, where he is accompani^d by some, may be 40.50. or 60.
years with some, and more, or less with most part; and still they are like the
crackling of Thorns under a pot, unbridled, unstable, not so much of Christ's
Doctrine lived in and obeyed, as yea and nay; in their communication; or not to
swear at all; so you Priests are found hatched in the Popes Nest, but deeper
in the mystery of witchcraft, by sayrer painted profession.

Pr. 12. Ac. The Papists say, it is not fit to be judge of controversies; the
Quakers say, the touchstone of trial is not the word without, but the light
within.

Ans. I say, I deny the Papists herein, for the Scriptures is fit to judge of
some controversies, if it be held in the righteous part; but I do not say
neither with the Papists that it is not fit; nor with you popish pastors and
teachers, that it is the tryar of spirits: so here I deny both the Papists, and
you. And whereas thou salst. We say the touchstone is not the Word without, but
the light within: I say, that God it light, (John 1.5.) who fills Heaven and
Earth with his presence, let. 23.24 and this is the word which we own, which is
like a sire, and a hammar; before whose eyes all things are naked and open,
Heb. 4.12.13. who is a discerner of the thoughts and searches the heart, and
tryes the reigns of people, this is our touchstone, the Word nigh in our
mouths and hearts, Romans 10 8. the ingrofied Word, I am. 1.21. and this is the
light which shines in our hearts, which gives us the knowledge of the glory
of God. 2 Cor. 4 6. and reproves and makes manifest all things, Ephesians. 5.13. and
thou that contemns the light within, comtemns that which gave the Apostles
knowledge, 2 Cor. 4 6, for Christ was given for a light, see the promise, Isay
49.6. and also his own testimony, Ioh. 8.12. and 12.46 and it was not a Christ
without the Gentiles which was the hope of glory, but Christ in them, Col.
1.27. and this Christ is the light, and seed, which bruiseth the head of the
serpent within, take notice of that; and unto him all power is given, and he
has said, Got not forth. Mat 14.16.

Pr. 13. Ac. The Papists prefer the vulgar translations, before the saws words
that the spirit did indite the Scriptures ^^s; namely, Hebrew and Greek; and so
do the Quakers the English before these.

Ans. We own all Tongues in their places; but that the Scripture was given
forth or indicted by the spirit in Hebrew and Greek only, is false; or there
was at ler isalem of every Nation under Heaven, and every man heard them speak
in his own Language, Act. 2.3.9. but I say, that you, or any other, by the
litterall Knowledge of these Tongues can open the Scriptures, that we deny, for
as there is no respect of persons with God, so there is no respect of Languages
(with him) nor Tongues; but in every nation, he that fea^eth God, and works
righteousness, is accepted, Acts 10 34 35, so seace your witchcraft, and from
dawbing over the saints words with your Lod^ck, who epride is in your songues;
your Tongues is waters, the seat of the Whore Rev. 17 15. and because you would
be counted wise and learned therefore you mingle your Tongues and so your
merchandise passes or current amongst the blind; yea, I may say wilfully blind,
who (if they will) may see your ravenous inside, out of which is powered envy
railing lies and slanders covetousne^, and persecution at all that reads in
this, and marks your reproa^hes, may see. And now I deny both the Papists, and
you, who is both nursed up at Universi^ies (so cal^ed) and learned in your
Tongues, as Pilate was, John 10.19. o^ let Peter and John (be witness against
you) who was not learned and yet gave forth the Scripture; so our native Tongue
we own as ch^ese to us, because it is the fist of God, wereby we understand one
another, and we own all other in their places; but we deny them that takes
pride in any Tongue, or mixes their dirty Logic with the Scripture, for money.

P^. 14. Ac. If the Papists could but get down the regulusing authority of the
Scriptures, they would conclude, they had won the field; for they will not
abide that all spirits be t^yed by the written word, nor will the Quakers.

A. The Papists we deny, and their endeavor herein: and the Scriptures we own,
and their regal authority, which is the power of God: but all such as creep
into houses, to make a trade of the Scriptures, abuses the Scriptures
authority; and here ye Parish, made ^s, and Jesuit successors (who coms from
their Colleges into their Masse-houses) are found in deavouring to tread the
Regal or Kingly Authority of the Scripture under your seet; so from that
authority, you are gone to the image of Queen Ma^^es Law, by which the Jesuits
was and you Priests is guarded; and by the same Law, some of you have imprisoned
to death; as witness, Exeter, Colchester, Lancester, York, and Durham Goales;
so the authority of the Scriptures, viz. the power of God is denied by you,
which is sled to the power of national Laws and Magistrates to hold you by;
putting the letter for the word and trial of spirits, you your selves being
ministers of the letter; and yet, whith the letter, cannot see your selves in
Cains, Corahs, and Bala^ms spirit and practices, for which (amongst the rest of
your forceries) the curse will overtake you, exe^pt you repent: And thou that
would have the Scripture to be the tryar of spirits, thou presumes to take the
balances out of the hand of God; the Lord weigh^th the spirits, Pro 16 2. and
the spirit search^th all things 1 Cor. 2.10 and whatsoever makes manifest, is
light, Ephesians. 5.13 so that which searches weighs and makes manifest is, the
Lord his spirit, and h^ light, and these three are one, from whom we have
^ecei^ed the unction, or ano^nting, which teaches of all thing, 1 John 2.27.
they that t^yed the pirits was such as John exhorted to the anoyn^ing for
teaching from the teachings of man says he Yere^d not that any m^n te^^h you
etc 1 John 2 27, and they that were of God h^ard them that ex^or^ed to the
anointing from the teachings of men of corrupt minds; and this I testify that
they are guided by the spirit of A^^ Christ, who does not own Christ the light,
come into th^i^ flesh to destroy the works of the Devil, and to give thee
knowle^^e of God and of Adoption, and the hope of Glory; and to give ^^e
knowledge of condemnation, and righteousness and of ea^^ (...) stration and how
they are passed through. And whereas h^^ art telling of a^titeen word ^o be the
^rya^; I say, the Scripture we (...) the addition ^^e deny and shall have it
upon thee to prove, for ^^ver and gold is pure in its nature, but it may be
mou^^en into a Calfe; so ^^o the Scriptures is pure and true as they are; but
they may be (and is) ab^sed by the builders of Babell now in the mis^ery of
their work^ng; but the Lo^d will no longer be mocked by such cunn^ng Carpenters
but is risen, and has taken a view of all shadows, by his light, which is as
the eyelids of the Morning by which all buildings is made manifest to be upon
the sand, though the builders of all sorts have pretended to hew their stones
from one Rock; yet the Lord has a controversy with you, and by his power,
which is the authority of the Scriptures, is the shaking all buildings at their
very roots.

Pr. Now many more particulars could I instance were it necessary, and not over
tedious, to prove your selves to be the Babylonesh Factors, that have received
the mark of the Beast in your hand, though not in your foreheads so fully yet
as to discover you to all; yet to us you are discovered plainly.

A These particulars which thou have already instanced, is sufficient for us to
see thy blindness, for if thine eye had been open when thou searched my p^c^e
(as thou said thou would) thou would have bin ashamed to have thus falsely
accused us with thy confusion which accusations is justly reforted to the
puddle from whence they sprang, for even the same spirit, that called Christ
mad, and said, he had a Devil; the same spirit that called Paul, a pestelont
fellow, and a mover of Sedition; I say, the same spirit in thee S. A. has
endeavored to join us with the Papists thine own predecessors as is proved;
therefore the Romish Factors or Merchants you are found, as well as Babylonish,
having received the mark of the Beast in your Foreheads, rushing forward in
lies and slanders, as a horse into the battle; so beast like, pushing and
wrestling with flesh and blood, viz. with the persons of men plunging them into
holes and dungeons, even as strong beasts drives the weak; so here you are
found exereising the power of the first Beast, persecuting the free
ministration of the spirit the anoynter, the comforter; for the Scribes and
Pharisees was the first that with stood the Ministry of Christ and persecuted
the saints and spoiled their goods. Secondly, the Papists getting the name of
Christians, they brought in Gentiles tithes, and so made an image to the first
beastly persecuting Ministre of the Seribes and Pharisees, having get up their
Tithes, Easter reckonings, P^^er-pence, Smoake-pence, and the like, as in Henry
Clerks Beck before mentioned, and in Anthony Pearsons Book styled the great
case of Ty^hes may be seen; for the which, they persecuted them that with held
them. Thirdly, the ^arish masters or out days having get a fairer form, is
found filling up the measures of both S^^thes and Pharisees, and the Papists
persecuting and fighting themselves, as has been proved, and as I can witness
from Richard Gilpyn of Grastooks, who pushed me with his hand, calling me
simple fool, and threathing me with prison, and clapping by the heels. etc.
so to us you are made manifest, and shall no more we are a rough garment (to
deceive) or a black dyed Ink garment; but the Lord will cut off the name of
the Kimerims, or the name of the Black-coats; so look to it you sons of the
Sorcerers; for the lack of wages has stopped, and will stop the mouths of the
idol shepherds, that calls the Scriptures the word of God, and try all of
spirits. And as for not being fully descovered to all; I would we were
discovered to all, as we are by the grace of God, that all might know our
innocence concerning those things whereof thou Acenseth us.

Pr. And the mark you have received, is your allowance among them to buy and
sell with them; so Rev. 13.16.17. for now they do trust you, and maintains
commerce with you, since they see you will not stick to sell their Rats-bane for
bread, with which you have poisoned many a sonle.

A. Here thou slanderous man may be proved an open liar, as hitherto thou have
been all along thy preamble; for although thou have endeavored, and bended thy
Caine-like spirit, to prove us consederate with the Papists, yet thou cannot
justly; and therefore thy fallacy is turned home again, and thou, and all you,
which is owned by them for their pastors and teachers, must own them in
community or else be ashamed of taking wages of them; and also of ^^^ading in
their steps, and trading with their Wares; for they learned 5. or 6. or 7.
years, more or less, at a College, or elsewhere, and so do you: They sing
David's Psalms Translated into Rhyme and Meeter by John Hopkins, and Thomas
Sternhold, or others, and so do you: They sprinkled Infants, and so do you:
They Preached Funerall-Sermons, and so do you: They had Mortuaries, and so
have you: They took money for Marrying, Churching of Women, Burying the Dead
and so do you: They stood up in the same Pulpits in which you stand, and in
the same Houses (as may be proved) which you ignorantly call the Church: They
rent the Scripture into Heads, Doctrines, Uses, Points, Motives, etc. and so
do you: They halled to prison them that spoke to them in the time of their
hours talk, and so do you: They Imprisoned but three months, but you
Imprison six, so here you are found in their steps, as may be seen in Anthony
Pearsons Book, and in Henry Clarks Book, spoken of before. And whereas thou
says, We are allowed, trusted, and they maintains com^^e^ce or conversation
etc. with us; here thou liar is seen: let their bloody persecution against us
in France, Spain, Italy and elsewhere, bear testimony against thy slanderous
Tongue, which discovers the treasure of thy heart what it is. And as for se^ing
their R^t^-bane, etc. whereby we p^tson, etc. (as above as thou says.) I say,
the p^yson of Af^s is under the lips of liars, slanderers, and false accusars,
in which work thou art found, and thy Fellow levenars; and all Ph^^i^^a^call
and Papisticall merchandise we abhor, and all such unreasonable men as thou
art; the Smoke of thy inverted Fuel is sea^^ered by the light of our Lord
Jesus Christ in this Paper; so p^ysoners you are by hypercrisie, and it shall
stand upon you in the day of the Lord for a name, except thou repent of feeding
poor people with leven.

And now to thy closure, the scope of which I shall transcribe.

Pr. ^^co fesse I have been more tedious thou ^^^ntended, etc. and does hereby
testify against your present condition, and after a first, and now this second
admonition, as Heretics, I^re act you, etc. Tit. 3.10. and will have no
fam^lear fellowship with such self condemned persons as you are not honor any
of your Papers any more with answer, ^^r receive you to house, etc. least I
should partake of your evil deeds etc.

A. Thou have had a long travel in lies, and standerous accustions; and the
same that opened thy mouth in confusion and lies, is now closing or concluding
thy paper with resolutions of the same nature; but thou had more need to
confess and forsake thy folly and deceit in which thou live in the mystery,
as a Wol^e in a Sheeps Skin; but it is too hard for thee to wage war against the
free ministration of the spirit of God; for he will not be tied to your form
nor confined to your houre-glasses, or watches: not will not at all be limited
by this confused covetous Came-like, gainsaying slanderous spirit, which
lodges, and lives in your invented traditionall will worship; which spirit in
thee S. A. has begun with a lie, and continued thy Discourse with confused,
and unjust retortings; and thy testimony against us, is but such another, a^
theirs was who said, this fellow said I am able to destroy the Temple of God,
etc. Mat. ^6.60.61. and this I lay upon thee S. A. in the presence of the
dreadful God of Heaven and Earth that thou art a liar, a false accusar, and a
false witness against the innocent and guiltless, reflecting that upon us,
which thou neither have, nor can prove, God forbid, it were better for us to
dye, if it were so; but we know our innoceney, which will clear us in the
sight of God, when these thy snares will setter thine own fect. And as for
being Heretics, or obstinate in a false belief, this is utterly false; for we
are willing to give account of our Faith; and we do appeal to God, the Judge
of all, and to every man's conscience in his sight, and to the testimonies of
the saints viz. the Scriptures, for any thing that we hold. And thou S. A. that
teaches for the fleede, and filthy lucre, and is found thus lying and
slandering, has nothing to do with Titus; For Titus did not make again of
people, as thou do; see a Cor. 12.28. but thou art found a liar, falsely, and
enviously acousing the innocent. So thou art not found in the spirit of godly
admonition, but in wrath, and in the spirit of wilful contempt against the
innocent, with whom thou can have no fellowship, neither do we desire it in
that nature. And whereas thou calls us Self condemned persons; here thou
contradicts thine own accusation, who ranks us up with the Papists in
selfe-justification; and now again calls us, selfe-condemned persons. I pity
thy sad condition, unstable soul, thou art a wandering star, to whom the mist
of darkness is reserved for ever, except thou repent. And, as for honoring
our papers any more etc. I say, thou have vilified them hitherto with lies and
slanders, and so is found contemning, and not honoring them. And now, whether
thou will receive us to thy house, or bid us God speed? yet know thou, that we
are not ashamed of the Doctrine of Christ. And we charge thee to prove wherein
we are out of it, and what the evil deeds is which thou accuses us of, and
wherein we are Heretics; these things remains for thee to prove, without false
accusations: so as I said before, so say I now, search our pack, and spare us
not but give us righteous judgment, and mark well least thou be mistaken; for
thou S. A. has not had thine eye in the head when thou searched my pack
whereof thou did boast; so, blind-man-like, thou have run thy self into error.

And now to conclude against it, in plainness and love to thy soul, and for
the feed sake in thee, I exhort thee, and warn thee, (being thy
fellow creature, and a lover of the Creation of God) that thou take head to thy
soul, least thou lose it, and consider thine estate seriously, and be not
puffed up by fleshly wis^dome, and because thou can speak fair things; but
take heed to the light which manites^eth all things, Ephesians. 5.13. which light
will let thee see the root, ground and end of thy Ministry, and decen^ble not
with that of God in thee, which me will answer; and testify with me, that you
all rebelliously walk contrary either to the Rule of Scripture, or a New
Creature; and also, that you Speak and Write contemtuously contrary to your
own knowledge; so man. I exhort thee (as one called in measure from the Net,
and from the Ship) if thou will receive it, to b^ware betime, and come out of
that wicked and adulterous generation, wherein thou lies in the shadow of
reformation, masked by the mist of the whores wisdom; For know this, That the
fitteth upon multitudes, Nations, Tongues, and Peoples, Rev. 17.15. not upon
one Nation, nor one Tongue, nor one People but upon Peoples, (mark) etc. but
now is the Lord bringing People from the Multitudes, and Heaps of Teaching
without, and from the mystery of Babylon the great which is drunk with the
blood (or lise) ( Rev. 17.11.) of the Saints which is recorded in the
Scriptures. I say, he is bringing People from that ayrie drunken wisdom
without, to the mystery which has been bid. viz. Christ within, Col. 1.27. and
those that doubts of Christ speaking in man, is such as sought a proose of
Christ speaking in Paul 2 Cor. 13.3 and now what shall I more say, for it would
till a Volume to record all that might be spoken in defense of our innocence
concerning those things whereof thou accouseth us, from which we are clear,
God is our witness, in whose presence we are naked, who knows that I lie not;
so the Lord weigh thee in a more equal balance then thou have weighed us; and
we pray that these things be not laid to thy charge. So with my tender love to
the seed of God in all. I rest reserring this Dialogue to the honest hearted,
and by the seed of righteousness in all to be judged.

And now, this w^ testify unto you all, That after the way that ye eal
Herefie, worship we the God of our Fathers, bel^eving all things (as they are)
which is Recorded in the Scriptures; and is willing to give a reason of the
hope that is in us; and this is out hope, Christ in us the hope ( Col. 1.27.)
which hope makes not ashamed Romans 5.5. and this Christ, this light and hope
within, gives us the Knowledge of the Glory of God, 2 Cor. 4.6. for none knows
the Father, but by the revelation of the Son, which is light, Mat. 11.27. for
that which may be known of God is manifest in man, Romans 1.9. and whatsoever
makes manifest is light, Ephesians. 5.13. and he that has revealed, and made
manifest the Father has given us an understanding of the dversities of the
opperation of God, which works all in all, (mark) all in all, 1 Cor. 12.6 as
says the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.13. its God that works in you both to will and to
do. So this we testify unto all people, That the living God is our God, who
by the Word, the World did make, which Word became Flesh; who is the express
Image of his Fathers Person, Heb. 1.3. in whom dwells the fullness of the
Godhead bodily, Col 2.9. and this is the Word which sactifieth. John 17.17.
the Word of Faith which is nigh, in the mouth, and heart, Romans to. 8 by whose
blood, or life, he has purged and is purging our Consciences from dead works,
to serve the living God in his spiritual worship, and in his own Kingdom,
which consists not in words, but in power, 1 Cor. 4. 20. and in righteousness,
Romans 14.17. and is not to be found without, but within, Luke 17.21. in which
Kingdom which consists in power and righteousness, is the deversities of the
operation of Gods work known both of election redemption, and sanctification
wrought by him which works all in all. He is the Author of our Faith; which
Faith purifies our hearts; which Faith is perfected by works, James 1.22. viz.
the works of righteousness wrought in our hearts by the spirit of God, and
brought forth by obedience to the motions of his power; so that with our hearts
we believe unto righteousness: and with our mouths, confession is made unto
salvation; the new covenant being known, which is not like unto the old, under
which Covenant we are in the substance of all Figures, in the better hope,
which makes perfect, Heb. 7.19. which hope we hold as an Anchor of our sonles,
staying our wills and desires, subjecting all, as he is obeyed: And this is our
Faith and Hope in which we stand, by which we know the teachings of Gods
spirit, which leads in to the life of righteousness, purging our Consciences
from all uncleanesse, as we obey the Counsel of his Will; by which Will we are
sanctified, Heb. 10.10. and now we rejoice in hope.

Giving thanks unto the Father, which has made us meet to be partakers of the
Inheritance of the Saints in light, who h^ delivered us from the power of
darkness, and has trai^ us into the Kingdom of his dear Son, in whom we
have ^demption through his blood, merits, and righteousness, ev^ the
forgiveness of sins, upon whom we lay hold by a lively Faith, the mystery of
which is held in a pure Conscience, 1 Ti^ 3.9. Therefore all People, examine
your selves betime, wheth^ you be in the Faith or not, for all your profession
(which is (...) held in the purifying Faith) will vanish from you, and leave
you naked in the day of the Lords vengeance; So take heed betim^ what you kick
against, and mind the prick of that of God (...) your Consciences in secret,
which will let you see where you minds are, and what is the treasure of your
Hearts; this is (...) Teacher that cannot be removed to a corner, Isay 30.20.
(...) whose presence you cannot fly to hide your se^ve, in (...) Profession;
therefore turn to the Teachings of Gods Sp^ that his Law which he has Written
in your hearts, may be Light unto your Feet and a Lantherne to your Paths that
y^ Bread may be sure, and your Water may never fail; that (...) in your own
Lamps you may witness, without which you (...) not enter into the Bridegroomes
Chamber: So remember ye^ are Warned.

By One who-hath Learned of the Grace (...) God to deny all Hirelings, and
wolfe-fish She^herds, and has found him whom my Soul love^ which leads into
his spiritual worship, there (...) rest, willingly to suffer the trials of
our F^ before all the Sons of Men. JOSEPH HELLING.

THE END.

