THE GLORIES AND Magnificent TRIUMPHS OF The Blessed RESTITVTION OF His Sacred
MAJESTY K. Charles II.

From His Arrival in Holland 1659/60 Till this Present.

Comprizing all the Honors and Grandeurs Done to, and Conferred by, HIM.

Culmen utrumque tenes, nil CAROLE Magne relictum Quo Virtus ^nimo crescat vel
Splendour Honor [Claud, Paneg.] O and Praesidium and dalce DECUS [Horat.] By
JAMES HEATH formerly Student of Chapter Chapter OXON.

London, Printed and are to be sold by N.G. R.H. and O. T. at the Ro^ Exchange,
Westminster Hall, and St. Paul's Churchyard. 1662.

TO THE QUEEN-MOTHERS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
May it please Your Majesty.
WITH the Most Humble, and Most Prostrate Submission, I lay at Your Feet this
my Endeavor, which though for its own worth it may justly be debarred such bold
Approaches, yet for its Illustrious Subject, and most Stupendous matter, will
well become Your Most August Presence.

That Elevated thought enforced this Address to Your Royal Hands: the Luster
of Your Son, Our Sacred Sovereign's Glory, being so Dazeling to the rest of the
Weak-Sighted World, that it were a Presumptuous Vanity to Court any other Eye
then Your Self, the Fountain of this Mavelous Light.

In Your Blessed Womb, Heaven Treasured and Matured those before Vnrevealed
Exaltations of Humane Nature, beyond all Her former most benign and
Industrious Excesses of Felicity; which while other Princes have stooped to by
some Politic Observances, and Wooed their Difficult Scepters, it most
officiously has Bowed and Humbled it Self to Our Dread Sovereign, and
obsequiously solicited His Acceptance.

May Your Majesty be Graciously pleased therein to imitate Him (who so much
Resembles Your Self) by Vouchsafing a Reception to this Reflexe, but weak and
imperfect Representation of those Magnificences: Which as they did Primarily
Proceed from Your Majesty, so ought they principally to return thither, to be
the inseparable and fruitful Blessings and Delights of Your Bosom.

God Almighty never cease such Rewards of Your most Celebrated Virtues here,
and Crown them hereafter; when He shall after a long Train of Prosperity change
these Temporal into Eternal Glories. So prays

Your MAJESTY'S most Obedient and most Dutiful Servant, JAMES HEATH.

To the READER.
IT is not to be doubted but that decaying and dim-eyed Time, must very
obscurely and dully render the Glories of His Majesty's Restitution to the rich
and pregnant Expectation of Posterity, for even after the immediate Passage of
the most famous of them, no Fancy was able to reduce them to Memory, neither in
the Beauty or Order thereof; such the Stunning and amazing Ravishments, such
the rare Curiosities, and splendid unlook'd-for Bravery (besides the Novelty
and Modishnesse) of its excelling Decorations.

We say Sermons have not that Efficacy in the Eye which they have in the Ear,
certainly these Triumphs will lose much of their Gallantry and Delight in the
Relation and Hearing, which they had in Seeing; like the Filings of Gold they
lose of their weight in every change of the Scale, so that it is impossible to
express them in any dress of Language suitable to that Garb, which Gods
Providence, or man's Joy attired and manifested them in their several
Solemnities.

'T was thought a fair and obliging Design howsoever, to trace them with the
speediest indagation and quickest pursuit could be made, to the recovery of as
much of these Grandeurs, as a research was capable of; which beginning from
Originals, no less Sacred then miraculous, may well be excused if it be at a
loss sometimes, being also outgone by their swift transiency and permeation,
into the lasting and durable Firmament of His Majesty's most assured Empire and
Government.

But who am I who dare to attempt this Flight, who have neither the Eagles eye
nor his Plumes, and have never trusted the Air of Fame? It Is too sublime an
Enterprise I must confess for so mean an Undertaker; but yet assisted by the
Medium of public Desire and Benefit, (which can no way better be delightfully
advantaged, then in the (how rude soever) Perpetuation of those Heaven-prepared
Fineries) I have adventured aloft, with this courageous impulse. -- Magnis
tamen excidit Ausis.

But he who shall more intently and prudentially consider this discourse, may
perhaps observe some necessity thereof as well as pleasure; the utile justly
taking place of the dulce; and challenging other more grave and labored
Argumentations and Defenses of Regal Authority. For it is not in the power of
Reason or Force of words to charm people and Subjects into that veneration of
their Princes, which the silent yet awful Majesty of their magnificent public
Appearances can most redoubtedly conciliate and Command.

By these glorious distances, the regardful Subject is kept within his bounds;
and by such Pomp the Throne is raised from the Level of Plebeian Encroachment
to its due height, and most Sacred impervious Ascent. Love and Fear, the Great
Props of Government, being never more equally attempered in men to the
harmonious Conservation of the Peace, then by these State Grandezza's. True
Policy being like true Religion, which once denuded of its Decency and
Ceremonies, is quickly profaned by the malapert vulgar, and invaded by Sedition
and impudent ignorance. And we have sad Experiments of them Both.

To redress which confident Mischief, Almighty God was pleased to proceed in
His Majesty's Restitution, by the most Magnificent Method he ever showed in any
of his works since the Creation; and having brought about that glorious design,
did also inspire the hearts of His Subjects with a most extraordinary and
cheerful reverence of His Majesty's Person and Authority; which to evidence and
demonstrate to Him and the World, they did express in these ensuing Anglorum
Magnalia; here digested and recorded as the most sumptuous Oblation of our
Solemn Respects and Gladness upon His Majesty's Return, that after Ages may
know how we valued this Mercy, and as the Expiatory Sacrifice of all those
Contumelious, barbarous Indignities, done to the Person of our late Martyred
Soraign.

Vale.
The Sum of the whole.
A.
AMbassador of Spain Complements His Majesty at Breda 17. at the Hague Folio.
56 Ambas. of Sweden had Audience Folio. 64 Ambas. of Brandenburgh his audience
Folio. 73 Ambas. of France his audience Folio. 93 Ambas. from the Prince
Elector Palatine Folio. 163 Army disbanded Folio. 167 Advantage coming to
England by His Majesty's marriage Folio. 254
B.
Burgomasters of Breda Speech Folio. 73 Baronets created Folio. 210
C.
Commissioners from the Lords, Commons, and City, sent to His Majesty at the
Hague Folio. 58 City of London feast His Majesty at Guildhall Folio. 156 Church
Government by Bishops Folio. 168 Cromwell, Ireton, and Bradshaws Exequies
descanted or celebrated Folio. 174 Catalogue of the Archbishops and Bishops of
England Folio. 206 Catalogue of the Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Lords, Viscounts,
Barons of England Folio. 217
D.
Doctor Clarges sent to His Majesty at Breda Folio. 21 Deputies of the States
General Speech to His Majesty Folio. 23 Deputy of the Province of Gelders
Speech to His Majesty at the Hague Folio. 50 Danish Ambassador Speech and
Audience at the Hague Folio. 54 Deputies of the Province of Holland complement
His Majesty Folio. 70 His Higness the Duke of York swears the Mariners of the
Fleet Folio. 72 Sir George Downing presents himself to His Majesty Folio. 76
Duke of York goes aboard the English Fleet Folio. 87 Death of the Duke of
Gloucester Folio. 168 Duke of York attends Her Majesty's arrival on the English
Coast Folio. 249
E.
Est^tes of Holland dine privately with His Majesty 67. Complement the English
Commissioners Folio. 68 Edenburghs triumphs for His Majesty's Restoration
Folio. 151 Extraordinary Envoy from the Duke of Curland Folio. 169 Earls
Created Folio. 191 Envoy from the Emperor of Rssiuia comes to complement His
Majesty Folio. 255
F.
French Ambassador had Audience at the Hague Folio. 54 Feasts of the Estates of
Holland Folio. 81
G.
Sir Harbotle Grimstons Speech to Sir John Greenvil, which brought His
Majesty's Letters Folio. 13
H.
Doctor Hardy Preaches before His Majesty at the Hague Folio. 77 Honors
conferred by His Majesty Folio. 217
I.
Joy at Lisbon when the Infanta of Portugal was saluted Queen of England Folio.
^245
K.
Knights of the Bath Folio. 189 Knights of the Garter Folio. 215
L.
Londons great joy upon the Parliaments receipt of His Majesty's Letters 14.
Its unexpressible joy at Proclaiming His Majesty 31. Its reception of His
Majesty Folio. 124 Lords of Zealand Speech to His Majesty Folio. 84 Sir Charles
L^cas and Sir George Lisle's Funeral at Colchester Folio. 180 Lords created
Folio. 196 Londons noble entertainment of their Sacred Majesty's in their
passage from Hampton Court Folio. 257
M.
His Majesty goes to St. Jean de Luz 3. Returns to Brussels 4. Comes to Breda
7. Sends Letters and Declarations to Parliament, Army, and City 9. Visited by
diverse Princes 14. Receives information of the Votes in Parliament 14. Invited
into Holland 38. His Majesty's Royal entertainment in Holland 38. Arrives at
the Hague 47. His Majesty's entertainment at the Hague 61, 65. His Majesty
gives Audience to the English Commissioners 62. His Majesty touches for the
Evil 79. His Majesty's sitting with the States General described 90. His
Majesty comes to Scheveling 106. Takes shipping 110. Lands at Dover 121. Comes
to His Royal Palace of Whithall 124. His Majesty's passage to His Coronation
197. Manner of His Majesty's Coronation 198. His Majesty's resolutions to marry
with the Infanta of Portugal 243. Goes to meet the Queens Majesty at Portsmouth
251. Is married at Portsmouth 252. Comes to Winchester, Farnham, Windsor, and
Hampton Court Folio. 253 Her Majesty imbarks for England 247. Lands at
Portsmouth 250. Is married 251. Comes to Hampton Court 253. Receives the
Addresses of the Nobility, Lord Major of London, and others Folio. 255 Marriage
of the Infanta with the King of France Folio. 142 General Moncks first
appearance in Order to His Majesty's Restoration 5. Receives His Majesty on
shore 121. Created Duke of Albemarle Folio. 159 Lord Mordant brings glad
tidings to His Majesty Folio. 8 Sir Samuel Moreland presents himself to His
Majesty Folio. 20 General Montague arrives with the Fleet to attend His Majesty
57. Made Earl of Sandwich Folio. 162 Earl of Montross his Funeral Folio. 176
N.
Names of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council Folio. 211 Names of the
Judges Folio. 209
P.
Proclamation for His Sacred Majesty Folio. 28 Prince Maurice of Nassau
complements His Majesty Folio. 95 Prince of Lignes arrival in England Folio.
167 Princess of Orange arrival in England Folio. 169 Death and Funervl Folio.
170 Princess Henrietta arrives in England Folio. 172
Q.
Queen Mother arrives in England Folio. 172
R.
The Resident for the Emperor complements His Majesty Folio. 63
S.
A glorious Star at His Majesty's Birth Folio. 2 Secluded Members contribute to
His Majesty's Restoration Folio. 6 States of Holland send Deputies to His
Majesty 15. As also the States General 16. They complement His Majesty Folio.
95 Spanish Ambassador Treats His Majesty Folio. 74 Statue of Mis Majesty se^ up
in the Royal Exchange Folio. 165
T.
Triumphs at Lisbon Folio. 161 Traitors Araignment and Execution Folio. 173,
174
W.
Wonderful things in Ireland. Folio. 164
THE MAGNIFICENCIES and GLORIOUS TRIUMPHS OF K. CHARLES the II.
THE Grandeurs of this Monarch which we shall here narrate (not undertaking the
History of his Life, too rudely hitherto attempted) are so far beyond all what
Fiction and Invention can offer in Ronsantick Hyperboles, Magu in speciem
adornal is verbis quam ut sentire videamur.
as they come near a Miracle; which will require Language as strange as it
self, or else to be expressed in the plainest and most facile words that can
convey and fit it to our Capacities.

To write it in a Style like it self, or to represent it any way in its full
Glories, no Traict but that of an Angels Plume, can serve turn: For Heaven was
pleased to use a very like curiosity in the very Beginnings and Dawnings of
that Splendour, which has now in its almost Meridian overspread the Universe.

For that the weak admiration of men at his Birth, might be aided and assisted
to a due veneration of his present and future Greatness (then divined by most
people) a Bright Star appeared at Noonday, and ushered in the Auspicia of his
Wonders, May 29, 1630. which benign Luminary never wanted those propitious
Influences, which in the darkest times serened his Condition. And such a
Remarque of Heaven was never vouchsafed to any Nativity, besides that of our
Savior.

To omit its Tutelage and Defense of him throughout the War, covering his head
in Battle, and conveying him in safety abroad, after the general ruin at home;
nor insist upon his Escape and avoydance of the English Fleet, that lay in wait
to intercept him in his Voyage for Scotland. To take no notice of his Scotch
Coronation, though as solemn and magnificent as ever was known in that Kingdom;
to pass by his well-designed Advance into England, and his more memorable
Escape out of it, from Worcester, never enough to be admired; because these
Providence were as the cloud, (...) concealed and obscured him: We will only
observe the Pillar of Fire, which after it had purified him in the Night of his
Humiliation and Affliction, at the end of that Darkness, revealed him in Glory.

This Discourse is deduced no further than his Renascency, from August 1659,
when Sir George Booth's Design was impregnated, with his Interest (though all
along the Usurpation, some Appearances there were of its reviving, particularly
that Noble Attempt of Col. Penruddock, etc.) which in Nine Months time
computed thence, ripened to a Full Deliverance.

During this Affair in England, his Majesty was removed from his Retirement,
and private Recess at Colen (where he had long sojourned, the rather for the
great Civility of that people to him, and who at his departure most nobly
treated him) to Brussels, where he stayed not long, but after some dispatches
for England, where every day his Hopes advanced, by the division of the
Parliament and Army) he presently posted away for St. Jean de Luz, The King so
Saint Jean de Luz. on the Confines of Sp. in and France.
where the two great Ministers of France and Spain were met in Treaty of Peace
and Marriage betwix^ both Crowns.

Here he was received by Don Lewis de Haro, the Spanish Favourie, with all
possible open demonstration of dutiful Respect, and proffer of taking his
Concern into that Treaty, on his Masters part; very observable also was that
Obeysarce which the Don made to his Majesty (at his coming to his Appartiments)
upon his knees in the Mire; so sagacious was the Spaniard in finding out where
the Wind blew. The like private Assurances and secret Visits his Majesty
received from Cardinal Mazarine, while the Rumps Ambassador Lockhart was
transcting for his Misters at that place. But the French cunningly re^porized
(no way affecting our Peace and Settlement) in that critical juncture of the
Kings Restitution.

But however the Cardinal reserved himself, Returns back.
the French Courtat his Majesty's Return from that Conference did him the
public honors due to so great a Prince; more especially, he was with all
M^gnificence treated by his Unk'e the Duke of Orleans, who in the worst of his
times had manifested abundance of Respect and Affection, both to his Person and
Service. He was visred also and complemented on the hopes of his Affairs in
England, by many of the Peers of France, the Dukes of Lorrain and Guise, and
other Grandees

His re-assumption to his Kingdoms growing every day more visible, as appeared
by the sudden Observance and Reverence of his person by all sorts of people,
though it drew all his good Subjects (and some Indifferents too, as well as
Foreigners eyes upon him) yet it no way awakened his divided and quarrelling
Rebels out of that stupidity into which the Magical Charms of Sovereignty had
cast them, so that great and insensible progress was made in his Majesty's
return, every remove of his Court (for it was now grown to that repure) as it
was nearer England, was so much nearer his Throne.

With great and universal acclamations he passes thus out of France, Comes to
Brusselss
and came to Brussels again, where at his arrival, he had intelligence of those
irreconcilable Feuds and Animosities which were arisen betwixt the Usurpers,
and that now the Renowned General Monk had opportunely, and with the expected
advantage put himself into the Quarrel, and set up another moderate Party
between the two Antagonists, while having felt the Pulse of the Kingdom, and
tampered with the perplexed Interest of the Parliament and Army, he in an
instant crushed and suppressed both, reseating the Secluded Members, who were
forcibly excluded in 1648, before the subversion of the Government.

The Felicity of this Hero's Achievements does very justly challenge a great
share of these Magnificences; General Monk appears in the rupture of Parliam,
and Army.
not to silence his Illustrious Extraction, from the Royal Lire, which
adaquared him to his Enterprise, that would have become none but a Princely
Descendant. The Crown had been taken off by rude, mean and base hands, it
exacted therefore a Noble and Princely Arm to set it on, and assert it. Next,
if we consider the peculiar and singular Honor of his Undertaking and Triumph,
not a drop of Blood spilt in the whole manage of it, when the desperate guilt
of his Majesty's enemies threatened a more furious and bloody period, than was
its miserable continuance. So much are the Trophies of a Loyal Submission to be
preferred to the Spoils of a debellated Rebellion.

This wonderful innocent Peace was next consirmed by the same men who at the
first overthrew it, The secluded Members contribute to his Restitution,
the united Remains of the Long Parliament. Their sollicitous expedite
endeavors toward the reduction of his Majesty proceeded with as much speed as
his Majesty could wish, who had searce so much leisure of those happy Minutes
(free from the trouble of Expresses and Advisoes) which might indulge him the
Contemplation of his Prosperity.

But the main Additament of Honor to his Majesty's plenary Restitution, was
reserved for more untainted persons, whose hands and hearts were free from
those sanguine pollutions of the Land; Providence so ordering, that none should
put his hand to that Plough, who had looked back to the Profits and Advantages
of Anarchy and Usurpation. By this means all Articling Conditions and
Limitations were avoided, and his Majesty's Sovereignty from the minute of his
Recognition, left free and inviolate.

This Absoluteness infinitely contributed to his Glory, not so much in point of
Greatness, as of his Mercy, which being so voluntarily and extensively offered
to all persons, referring his Justice to the Parliament, did not only
conciliate his peoples Affection, but so heighten them, that he became their
only desire, and as another Titus, Delitia Gentis Britan^ica; so that this
Glory was founded upon the surest Basis, and was real and solid, and as it was
well observed at his entrance into London, dispensed with, or rather refused
the Helps of Art and Pageantry.

The King was yet at Brussels, where the Marquoss Caracena Governor for the
King of Spain, used the same Grandeurs of Honor to him, as are redevable to
Sovereign Princes, but in a more sincere and opener way than is usual with the
Spaniard. Much Discourse there was in England, that his Majesty would have been
stopped in those Provinces by the Rebel-Phanaticks: this arose from his
Majesty's frequent Journeys to Antwerp, and back to Brussels, as if that were
his utmost limit; but nothing was so far distanced from the honorable
demeanor of that Governor and Court, who with all imaginable civilities
humbly took their leaves, the chief Persons of the Nobility attending on him as
far as his Majesty would suffer them, in his way, which required a greater
privacy than their pressing respects would admit.

Many Considerations obliged him to depart the Territories under the obedience
of the King of Spain in this Conjuncture of Affairs, The King departs out of
Flanders to Breda.
but the sole convenience which he had at Breda, to receive at all times Posts
from England, which passed and repassed every day and hour, and thereby the
better accommodating and expediting his more solemn return into England,
invited him to transfer his Court into Holland, for the little remainder of
time he had to continue abroad. On the 4th. of April therefore, our style, he
arrived at Breda, and was the same day complemented by Mounsieur Snel, the
chiefest and ancientest Burge-Master, in the name of the Magistrate, who would
likewise have obliged the Town to make a solemn Entrance to his Majesty; but
the Princess Royal hindered it for most considerable Reasons.

On the Seventh of the same Month, the Lord Viscount Mordant, newly then
created to that Dignity, arrived there, with full assurances that the Members
who were then elected to serve for the ensuing Parliament, which was to set
down on the 25th. then instant, were honest Patriots, and well affected to his
Majesty, and that they would labor indubitably for the re-establishment of the
King, as soon as it should be complete, and that their sitting down would
certainly commence the day prefixed and appointed.

From that time forward, there passed not a day almost, that the King received
not some remarkable News, upon which he might ground infallible hopes of his
Restoration. On the 15th. of the same Month, Sr. John Greenvile, since Earl
of Bath, and Sr. John Boys brought him Intelligence of the deseat of Genesis
Lambert; he had been Prisoner in the Tower of London, by virtue of an Ordinance
of the Council of State, and had made an escape thence, with design to put
himself in the head of those who were struggling to continue the Anarchy, and
our Ruin; but he was suddenly suppressed, and taken by Col. Ingoldsby, (...)
Edgehill, where to the greater Honor and content of the King, and his
Felicity, the last dying effort of the Rebellion was quelled where its first
potent Arms opposed it self against his Royal Father. Remarkable also was the
manner of the dissipation of those Rebels; for never did Lambert betray such
meanness and abjection of Spirit, as in that rendition of himself to his
formerly fellow-Colonel; a most evident sign that God had consternated and
utterly confounded them, not only one among and against another, but even in
themselves, perplexing and distracting their thoughts, and dashing and turning
their greatest Resolutions. He was brought back to his former Prison, the
Tower, and there better secured, and since removed to the Isle of Jersey. The
King received the same day Letters from General Montagne, then riding in the
Downs, which assured him of the good estate of the Affairs of the Kingdom, and
of the sincerity of his Intentions, of which he had already given Proofs many
months before, when S. George Boeth took up Arms for the King in Cheshire.

Now his Majesty thought it time to appear to his People, The Kings Letters and
Declarations to Parliament, and Army and City.
from out of that obscurity wherein his hard Fortunes had so long while
concealed him; which he did with such a sudden Brightness, that struck Joy and
Chearsulness into the Eyes and Faces of all his Subjects. For presently he sent
away the Lord Viscount Mordant, and Sr. John Greenvile to London, with his
Declaration and Letters, dated from this place to the 2 Houses, and the Lord
Mayor and Common Council of the said City, and the General and Officers of the
Army, who arrived soon after the sitting down of the Parliament, and on the 2
of May, delivered them to the Speakers. That Sacred Name of the King, which not
long time was the aversion and abhorrence of base mechanic fellows, and
Phanaticks, was heard with veneration, and inspired into that Illustrious
Assembly, such extraordinary and advantageous motions for the King, that it is
impossible to express them. It will be enough for the honor thereof to say,
that whereas not above 3 or 4 months before, it had been a Crime of High
Treason to speak in Parliament in behalf of the King, no sooner now is that
great name pronounced, than a general Joy appeared in the countenances of all
the Commons, and most high and dutiful Respects for that Divine Character. By
Vote of the Houses therefore Sr. John is desired to enter; the Speakers receive
the Kings Letters from his hand, the Clerk read them, every one in the mean
time with the greatest expressive submission in the world, standing bare-headed.

His majesty had thereunto, as before said, added a most excellent Declaration,
for the safety and repose of those who cortur'd in their thoughts for having
partaken in the Rebellion, might fear the punishment of it, and in that fear
might oppose the tranquillity of the State, and the calling in of their Lawful
Prince.

There never was seen a more perfect Assembly of all the most excellent natural
Quilities, and of all the virtues, as well Royal as Christian, where with a
great Prince may be endowed, than was found in those two wonderful Productions,
as was evident in their acceptance and entertainment. They were full of Piety
and Zeal for the Glory of God, and for Religion, of tenderness toward the
Afflictions of his People, Esteem for the Parliament, Firmness for the
Conservation of his own Rights, an admirable Prudence for the regulating of
Affairs, and an inexemplar conduct for the re-establishing of the Government in
its former state, Love for the good, indulgence for the seduced, and a more
than Christian Clemency for Criminals, or rather for Crime it self; for a
Crime, I say, so black, and so abominable, that as there was not an Example of
it in History, since the Creation of the world, so his Majesty has not
altogether been so wrought upon by his innate Goodness, as to let it pass for
an example unpunished to Future Ages.

Both these Papers wrought the Effect which the King promised himself from
them, since they absolutely gained the hearts of the people, which the miseries
of the time past had already very much disposed to the acknowledging their
Prince: For they were no sooner read, but the Parliament declared, that the
Tenders and Sentiments of the King, were Gracious, Good, and Generous, and
Conformable to the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, the Government whereof
ought to confist of King, Lords and Commons; and forthwith ordered, that most
humble Thanks should be returned to his Majesty, for the Gracious Letters and
Declarations aforesaid, and that for a present supply of his Majesty's
occasions, and in order to speed his Return, the sum of fifty thousand Pounds
was appointed for a Present, to which the City of London added ten thousand
more. They likewise ordered, that General Montague should sail with his Fleet
to attend the Kings Pleasure on the Coasts of Holland. That the Two Houses and
City of London should send Commissioners respectively from them, to beseech him
to come and take possession of his Kingdoms, which God, and his Right had given
him; and that in the mean time, Sr. John Greenvile should be disparched with
the Parliaments Answer, and should carry to Brada the Resolutions and Prayers
of the Two Houses, or rather the impatience, which the Nation had to see again
their Natural Sovereign, after a sad absence of many calamitous and miserable
years.

But that which was most remarkable in these Resolutions, was, that they were
not taken after a long contestation, consult or dispure; nor upon a simple
acquiescement of the Parliament in a major Vote, but by the express Suffrages
and Votes upon the universal and unanimous consent of all the Members of both
Houses, who strove in aeleg;mulation of each other, which should give the
greatest Proof of Affection. The Parliament also gave Liberty to the Noble
General, to send Mr. Clarges, now Sr. Thomas, being Knighted by the King at
Breda, his Brother in Law, accompanied with some Gentlemen, to assure his
Majesty of the Fidelity and Obedience of the Army, of which, upon the
communicating of his Majesty's Letters and Declaration aforesaid, they had made
Public and Solemn Protestations.

Nothing can more sully speak the sense of the English Nation on this great
Change and Occasion, The Speakers Speech to Sr. John Greenvile, at the Delivery
of the Letters and Declaration.
than what Sr. Harbottle Grimston the Speaker of the House of Commons, said to
Sr. John Greenvile after his delivery of the Letters. It is impossible for me
(said he) to express the acknowledgment and submission with which the Commons
Assembled here in Parliament have received the Letters with which His Majesty
was pleased to honor them. The thing speaks it self, you have seen it with
your eyes, and heard it with your ears, our Bells, our Bonefires, and the Report
of our Artillery have already begun to proclaim the King, and to publish our
Joy. We have made known to the People, that our King the Glory of England is
returning unto his Kingdom, and they have resounded in our ears, these cheerful
Protestations, that they are ready to receive him, and their hearts open to
entertain him, and both Parliament and People have already cried out in their
Prayer to the King of Kings, Long live King Charles the Second. I am also to
signify to you, that the Parliament not willing that you should return without
some Mark of acknowledgment to the King, your and our Sovereign, has Ordered
the Sum of 500 l. Sterling to buy you a Jewel, to give you to remember the
Honor which His Majesty has done you, in charging you with a Commission of
this Nature, whereof you have so well acquitted your self, that the Parliament
has commanded me to give you Thanks.

Never was a Scene so altered, as the Face of the City, which but two months
before being at the very Brink of Destruction, The Joy at London upon the
Parliaments acknowledgment of his Majesty.
was now overflowed with a full Tide of Gladness: for during two days in which
the Letters aforesaid were delivered, and Printed to public View, there was a
perfect Vacation from all business, every man indulging himself his share in
the general satisfaction, in such a measure, that London seemed rather a
Theater of Pleasure, than a Seat of Trassique, and as they say of Florence, was
fit only then to be seen on Holidaies.

The Prince of Aurange a little before was at Breda, Several Princes visit the
King.
and every day some Prince or Person of quality came to rejoice with his
Majesty, for the happy change of his Fortune, whereof there were growing
Assurances. Prince Frederick of Nassau, Brother to Prince Maurice, arrived
there on the 22th. of April, with the Princess his Wife, from his Government of
Bergen ap Zoom, and the Duke of Brlinswick Lunenbergh, who resides at Hannover,
came thither four days after, betwixt whom, and his Majesty, several
Civilities passed.

On the 4th. of May, The King informed of the Votes of the Pa^l.
the King was fully assured of the happy revolution of the Affairs of his
Kingdom, through the advertisement of what was done in Parliament, which News
the next day after, being of that great importance, were sent to the Hague, by
Letters from the Princess Royal, which were read in the Assembly of the States
General.

The Estates of the Province of Holland, who were at that time assembled in a
Body, and had by their wisdom foreseen, in the disposition of the Affairs of
England, the change which would apparently arrive there, had also foreseen by
their Prudence the Advertisement which was given of the Declaration of the
Parliament. For on the 3d of May, before it could possibly be known what
happened at London, that Illustrious Senate reflecting on the present
Constitution of Affairs, and the certain apparences of the near restitution of
the King, resolved that Monsieur de Beverweert and others, The States of
Holland send Deputies to the King
should depart immediately after they knew the Intention of the Parliam. to make
known to the King the Affection of that Province to the Person of his Majesty,
and to all the Royal Family, to restifie unto him the Joy and Satisfaction they
had to see infallible Dispositions, almost ready to place him in the Throne of
his Ancestors, and to assure him of the strong Inclinations they had, to make
with him and his Kingdoms a firm and indissolvible Alliance, for the mutual
conservation of the common Interests of his Estate, and of that Commonwealth.
But chiefly, to make him Offers of Service, and to beseech him to do that
Province the Honor to reside there, as in a place most commodious for
communication with his Subjects, and for his Passage into England, and to
receive there the Effects of the most sincere Protestations of Respect and
Amity, which they caused to be made unto him by their Deputies. They had also
Order particularly to insist upon the last Point, as on the most important of
their Commission, and to use to that purpose the most civil and engaging terms,
that Interest of State and Affection for the good of their Country could
dictate unto them. They enjoined also the same Deputy to officiate with the
Dukes of York and Gloucester, and with the Princess Royal; and that instance
should be made in the Assembly of the States General, that the same Offices
might be made of their part with his Majesty, and with all the Royal Persons.

The States General being thus informed, they agreed therein with the Province
of Holland, naming Monsieurs de Ripperda and Merode, with others to the same
Deputation. In the mean while the States of Holland pretending, that it would
take no effect, until they should have notice of the Declaration of Parliament,
not that they doubted of its Intention, but because they judged that it
imported the Service of the King, so to use it, as not to prevent the
Parliament, and do any thing rashly in an Affair of that consequence, Civility
done out of season, being incommodious and unprositable; but because it was
necessary that his Majesty should know the good Affection of the States, they
so ordered, that the King should have assurances thereof underhand; and to
this purpose the Lord Beverweert the Governor of the Bosch, a principal
Person, was pitched upon, as being also akin to the Duke of Ormond, by the Earl
of Ossory's Alliance with his House, and for his particular respects for the
King during his Troubles: All considerations which might oblige him to see the
King, before he appeared in the quality of a public Minister.

He arrived at Breda the 5th. of May, and executed his Commission so happily,
that the King reserving but the open Declaration of his Good Will for the
Deputies when they should be arrived, was very well pleased with his Address,
which proved of great moment both to the States, The Spaniard complements his
Majesty to pass through his Provinces.
and Monsieur Beverweert: for Don John de Monroy arrived the same day at Breda,
and prayed his Majesty from the Marquess Caracena, to take his way through
Flanders, and to embirk in one of the Ports of those Quarters to return to his
Kingdoms, assuring the King for the better inducement, that as he passed, the
Arrears of those Troops, which the King of Spain entertained for his Majesty,
being ready at Brussels, should be paid them, but this appeared no more than
what passed in the Conference, which the Duke of York had some days before
with the Marquess Caracena himself, in the Town of Antwerp, by Order of the
King, who would not go there in person, though he was pressed thereunto through
the consideration of the Important Affairs which he said he had to communicate
to his Majesty. The King excused himself with the same firmness now from the
Civilities which he sent to be made unto him, by refusing him upon the facility
which he found for his passage where he was present. Among other Reasons of his
complying with the Dutch Request, (not to speak of any hazard of detention of
his Person, if he should have returned by the way of Flanders, without certain
Articles or Conditions to be signed by him there) two appeared to be the
chiefest; 1. Because of the number of the Commissioners from the Parliament,
who were said to bring with them a Train of 400 Gentlemen, besides Domestics,
which must needs spend time in going from the Sea to Breda: and the other, the
Court was already so great and full, and the Town so streightened, and
unfurnished of Provisions, that it would be impossible to lodge them all there,
and the weather being hot, permitted not Victuals to be brought from other
remote places.

So real and so permanent an Honor and Glory did the States think the
Presence, and their entertainment of the King to be, that because of avoiding
all disputes for precedence, which each Province challenges in its own
Country, so that they suffer not the Generality to have other advantage in the
Provinces, than that which is due unto them by virtue of their Union, and not
to give the King any displeasure by their disorder in his reception, they
resolved of a course whereby that Province which was at the most cost, might be
taken notice of accordingly. The Eslates of Holland therefore, who had caused
the King to be prayed in particular to honor their Province with his Presence,
would have him to be received and saluted in their Name upon the Frontier, and
would defray the Charges on his way, from the time he entered into their
Province, and till the first day he should arrive at the Hague, as making part
of his Voyage: The Estates General, who represent not indeed in general, but
what every Province possesses in particular, left to the Province of Holland
all the marks of Sovereignty, and consented to this, that their deputies after
they had congratulated the King, and conducted his Majesty to the entrance of
Holland should remain in the quality of private persons, on condition
notwithstanding that the Deputies of Holland should give the Honor of the
House, and give them precedence in the places where they should meet together.
So nice and strict were they upon the punctilio in this Affair, from whence
they had designed themselves Reputation and Renown, which, if so famous to the
giver, could not but be infinitely honorable to the Illustrious Receiver.

The Estates General for their part of the Magnificence, resolved that same
day, that the Kings Charges should be defrayed during the whole time he stayed
in the United Provinces, and ordained likewise Provision to be made
accordingly; which though they met with many difficulties, they at last
abundantly performed as we shall see hereafter.

On the 6th. of May, another thing of Remark happened, Sr. Sam. Moreland comes
to Court.
Mr. Samuel Moreland Secretary Thurlo's chief Clerk during the Usurpation under
Oliver Cromwell, who lay Resident at the Court of Savoy, and had held
Intelligence with the King, whereby he was from time to time informed of the
Cabals and Designs of his Rebels, being a man of a pregnant wit, and other
abilities, arrived at Breda, where he brought diverse Letters and Notes of most
great importance, whereby the Perfidiousness of some of his Majesty's own
Party, who were famed men in the la e War, and who owed the King more Fidelity
for particular Favors showed them, were plainly discovered. The King received
him with good Affection, and rendered him this public testimony, that he had
received most considerable Services from him for some years past.

The 7th. of May the Deputies of the Estates General aforesaid, departed from
the Hague in the Afternoon, and imbarqued themselves the same day at Rotterdam,
where the Jachts or Pinnaces, which the States had caused to be in readiness,
attended them. Those of Holland departed in the Morning, but they made not the
some have, as well because they would not be in the first place, where the
Estates were to precede, as because they had diverse Orders concerning the
Entertainment and Reception of the King, to leave in the places of his Passage.

On the 8th. day of May. (memorable for a greater Magnificence in England, of
which by and by) the Deputies arrived at Breda, being met out of Town, in the
Village of Terheyda, The Deputies complement the King at Breda.
with four Cornets of Horse, and arriving at the Town, to render this Service
to the King more solemn and splendid, they passed by 12 Companies of Foot Drawn
in Baitalia, which saluted them with their shot, whilst the Artillery thundered
round the walls and Bulwarks. When they were come to the House prepared for
them, they intimated their arrival to his Majesty, the two Dukes and Princess
Royal, and toward the Evening, the King and their Royal Highnesses sent them a
Complement by Gentlemen of their own. Until these Deputies came, the Major of
that famous and noted Garrison received all his Orders from the Princess Royal,
but now they transferred that Honor on the King, who gave the Word Amsterdam.
It seems the King had some respects for the Magistrates of that Town, who had
deported themselves very respectfully to him sometime before.

The same day arrived also Dr. Clarges, the Generals Brother in law, who was
introduced by the Kings Order, with some Coaches of 6 horse apiece, by my Lord
Gerard; exceeding welcome he was made by the whole Court, who had owed so much
veneration and respect to the General; particularly the King entertained a
private Conference with him two hours, and afterward Knighted him, showing him
the Kindnesses suitable to the Message and business he was sent and employed in.

Neither did this days good Fortune ce^se here, but by an Express from
Dunkirk, (where the King had graciously some while before bestowed an
Invitation upon Lockhart the Governor, though unmannerly slighted by him) his
Majesty was certified that the Garrison had declared for him, and had witnessed
their Joy by the fire of Cannon and Muskets, and expected his Majesty's
Commands for the Government of the place.

These concurrent Accessions to the Kings fortune, together with Letters newly
come from the States Ambassadors in London, made the States General redouble
their Orders to their Deputies, touching the Complement and Offices which they
were to do, to the end to acquit themselves thereof with zeal and Affection; so
that on the morrow, by 11 at Noon, the King sent the Lord Gerard to conduct
them to their Audience in the Castle, where the King lodged. The Marquess of
Ormond met them on the stay^head, and brought them into the Kings Chamber, who
was standing in the midst of it covered, but as soon as he saw them, he
uncovered himself, and came 2 or 3 paces forward to meet them; After they had
made most low Reverences, and were approached the King, Monsieur Ripperda would
begin to speak, but the King would needs have them put on their Hats, which
they not willing (being not in the quality of Ambassadors, as in their own
Country) to do; he also continued uncovered all the while. The main of this
Speech was this;

That the States General of the United Provinces, The Speech of the Deputies to
the King.
had understood with an extreme joy the alteration of Affairs in England; That
they knew the good God had so well touched the heart of his Subjects, that
there was not any person almost that cried not on the name of the King, and
wished passionately to see him returned to his Kingdom. That upon certain
Advertisments which the States General had thereof, they thought fit to send
their Deputies to his Majesty, to witness unto him the part they take to
congratulate him in so important an occasion, and to wish him and all his Royal
Family all the Blessings of Heaven, and all the Prosperity he could hope for
from God, after so long and such bitter Afflictions. That the States General
made those Prayers with so much the more ardour, as they knew that the repose
of their Commonwealth depended in some kind on that of its Neighbors: That
they would not willingly enjoy the Amity of the English, but under the
Monarchical Government of his Royal House. That they hoped to enjoy it still
for the future under his Majesty's happy Government, and to this purpose, they
desired, that of his goodness he would be pleased to renew with the United
Provinces the Alliance which they had always considered as one of the chief
Points of State, and as the Foundation of the preservation of the common
Interests of both Nations. That moreover they had Order from their Superiors,
to remonstrate to his Majesty, that the residence of Breda was inconvenient and
distant, and to beseech him most humbly to choose one in their Provinces, which
he should judge more proper for his Affairs, for his Residence, and for his
Embarquement. That the States General had commanded them to follow his Majesty
in his Voyage, and to serve him with whatsoever the United Provinces possessed.

The King thanked them very much for their Civility, and the Testimonies of
their Affection, saying in very obliging words to them, The Kings Reply.
I love this Commonwealth, not only because the Princess Royal, my Sister, and
the Prince of Aurange, two persons who are extremely dear unto me, remain here,
but also through Interest of State, for the good of my Kingdom, and through a
very strong inclination to their good. I love, truly Sirs, these Provinces, and
so strongly, that I should be jealous if they gave a greater part in their
Amity to another Prince than to me; who think that I ought to have much more
therein, than any other Prince, since I love them more than all the other
Sovereigns together.

After they had had this Audience of the King, my Lord Jermyn conducted them to
the Two Dukes severally, where they gave and received the like Civilities; as
also to the Princess Royal. And the next day after, while they were in
consultation about ordering the Charge of the Kings Remove, the States of
Hollands Deputies had Audience likewise on the 10 h. of May, when Mr.
B^verweert spoke as follows.

Sir, It is now the third time that my Lords, the States of Holland have
congratulated with your Majesty upon the coming to the Crown. The first was,
when you attained thereunto by the Fundamental Law of your Estate, immediately
after the Decease of the Late King, your Father, of most Glorious and Eternal
Memory; and the other, when the Commissioners from the Committee of Estates and
Parliament of Scotland came to this Place to invite your Majesty to go and take
possession of one of the Crowns of your Ancestors. It is but with great grief,
that we remember those two disastrous Encounters; but on the contrary, it is
with a transport of Joy that we are now to congratulate your Majesty upon the
present happy state of your Affairs; and this with so much the more reason, as
they know that the reciprocal Amity between England and this Republic has
never suffered the least alteration under the Government of her Kings. The rest
was like that of the States General, and concluded with the like Invitation of
his Majesty to make his Court in their Province, protesting all thankfulness
for the Honor done them, if he pleased to accept thereof. The King returned an
Answer near the same he gave before, and used the Deputies with the same
civilities as the other, entering into a Discourse with them concerning the
Northern Affairs betwixt Sweden and Denmark, for the latter of whom he openly
declared himself.

It is high time now to cast an eye into England, where, on the aforesaid 8th.
of May, the King was Proclaimed in great State, and more than usual Solemnity:
The Copy of which Proclamation here follows, for that as the Occasion required,
it was drawn up in an unusual Form.

The Copy of the Proclamation, and the manner of Proclaiming it.
ALthough it can no way be doubted, but that his Majesty's Right and Title to
his Crowns and Kingdoms, is and was every way completed by the death of his
most Royal Father of Glorious Memory, without the Ceremony or solemnity of a
Proclamation: Yet since Proclamations in such cases have been always used, to
the end that all good Subjects might upon this occasion testify their Duty and
Respect; and since the armed violence, and other the Calamities of many years
last past, have hitherto deprived us of any such opportunity, wherein we might
express our Loyalty and Allegiance to his Majesty: We therefore the Lords and
Commons now assembled in Parliament, together with the Lord Mayor, Aldermen,
and Commons of the City of London, and other Freemen of this Kingdom, now
present, do according to our Duty and Allegiance, heartily, joyfully, and
unanimously Acknowledge and Proclaim, That immediately upon the Decease of our
Late Sovereign Lord, King Charles, the Imperial Crown of the Realm of England,
and of all the Kingdoms, Dominions, and Rights belonging to the same, did by
inherent Birthright, and lawful and undoubted succession, descend and come to
his most Excellent Majesty, Charles the Second, as being lineally, justly, and
lawfully next Heir of the Blood Royal of this Real^s: and that by the Goodness
and Providence of Almighty God, He is of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
the Most Potent (...) Mighty, and Undoubted King: And thereunto we most humbly
and faithfully do submit and oblige our selves, our Heirs, and Posterities for
ever.

God save the KING.
Will. Jessop Clerk of the Commons House of Parliament.

The Proclamation being ended, the Lords and Commons took their Coaches, and
proceeded in this order: First, the Head-B^yliffe of Westminster and his
Servants, did ride along with white staves, to prepare the way. Then followed a
gallant Troop of Officers of the Army, and other Gentlemen, with Trumpets
before them, then the Lifeguard very stately mounted, and richly clothed,
after them a Class of six Trumpets and three Heralds, then a Herald between the
Sergeant to the Commons, and the Mace of the Council, next Mr. Ryley King at
Arms in his rich Coat of ^he Kings Arms, between Sergeant Norfolk, and Sergeant
Middl^ after whom came the Usher of the Black Rod, and Mr. Bish together. These
thus ushering the way, came the Right Honorable the Eatl of Manchester in his
Coach, and six Horses, the Speaker of the House of Commons in his,, then his
Excellency the Lord General Monk in his, after which, followed both Houses of
Lords and Commons, some in Coaches of six Horses, some four, some two, and then
a Troop of Horse. In this manner they came to Whitehal, where they proclaimed
his Majesty a second time, and then in like Order proceeded. Being come to
Arundel House, they made a stand, where Mr. Ryley, King at Arms, taking one of
the Heralds, and six Trumpets with him, advanced forward toward Temple Bar, and
perceiving at a distance the Gates open, he paused a while. Col. Alderman
Bateman, and some other Gentlemen came to acquaint him, that the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, Colonels, and other Officers of the City, were there ready to receive
him. Whereupon the King at Arms having some Discourse with the Colonel, the
Colonel went back to Temple Bar, and caused the Gates to be shut; upon this,
the King at Arms, with Trumpets before him, went to the Gate, knocked, and
demanded Entrance. The Lord Mayor appointed some to ask who it was that
knocked; the King at Arms replied, that if they would open the Wicket, and
desire the Lord Mayor to come to the Gate, he would deliver to him his Message:
The Lord Mayor came on Horseback attended with several Officers to the Gate,
and Col. Bateman told the King of Arms, that he might now deliver his Message
to the Lord Mayor, who was come to receive it. The Trumpets immediately sounded,
after which, silence being made, it was demanded of the King of Arms, Who he
was, and what was his Message? to which he answered on Horseback with his Hat
on We are the Heralds at Arms appointed and commanded by the Lords and Commons
in Parliament Assembled, to demand Entrance into the Famous City of London, to
Proclaim Charles the Second, King of England, Scotland and Ireland, and we
expect your speedy Answer to this Demand. To this they returned, If it please
you, Sir, to have a little Patience, we shall speedily give you an Answer to
your Message, shutting the wicker again. After some little conference between
the Lord Mayor; and Aldermen, the Colonel returned, and opening the Wicker,
told the King at Arms, That his Message was accepted, and the Gates should be
immediately opened, which was done accordingly. The King at Arms entered,
trumpets sounding before him, and was joyfully received by the Lord Mayor, in
his Crimson Velvet Gown and Hood, the Aldermen and Sherisses in Scarlet, and
the Officers of the Militia gallantly accoutred on Horseback.

Both sides of the Streets were guarded by the Militia Forces of London, from
Temple Bar to the Old Exchange, and stood all with their swords drawn; as also
the Officers, and several spectators in Windows. The City Horse fell in next
the Lifeguard, then the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, after whom the Heralds and
the rest, as formerly. When they came to Chancery Lane end, they proclaimed his
Majesty a third time, where at the Word CHARLES the Second in the Proclamation,
the King at Arms lifting himself up with more than ordinary cheerfulness, and
expressing it with a very audible voice, the people presently took it, and on a
sudden carried it to the Old Exchange, which was pursued with such shouts, that
near a quarter of an hour was spent before silence could be made to read the
rest of the Proclamation. After this they went to Cheapside, where his Majesty
was Proclaimed a fourth time, where the shouts of the people were so great,
that though all the Bells in the City rung; Bow Bells could not be heard there.
Thence to the Old Exchange, where his Majesty was again Proclaimed, and the
Solemnity ended. The Shouts and Acclamations of the People to this gallant and
well ordered Procession, are not easily to be expressed. The numberless number of
Bonefires, the Ringing of Bells, and shooting off the Guns, and the joyful
Expressions of the People did declare them beyond the Art of any Pen.

The infected Herd of the Vulgar did hereby purify and cleanse the Air of
London, dispelling those dark Mists of the Rebellion with the thunder of their
Applauses and rejoicing at this Solemnity. Nor could a less Atonement acquit
the frantic multi ude from their mad Tumults, and their former Riot, at that
very Cross: So that the Kings felicity consisted not only in redeeming them
from Slavery, but restoring them to their senses, and the happy use thereof, by
the Magic of his excellent Name. The whole Solemnity was concluded with
Bonesires at every door almost, and congratulation of Friends and Acquaintance
(indeed strangers were such then, so great the freeness of men's minds)
concerning this happy and long desired Revolution. The like was afterward done
in the Country, in the several Cities and Buroughs, and with proportionable
Triumphs and Gladness. At this time the martyred Kings Statue was re-erected at
Guild Hall, and the Arms of the Commonwealth every where pulled down and
defaced, and his Majesty's set in their places; as likewise restored to their
former Stations in Churches and Courts of Judicature, w^ now acted in the Kings
name, and cancelled that opprobrious style of the Keepers of the Liberties of
England, and all Persons in Office or trust empowered to continue and discharge
the same in his Majesty's Name, and by his Authority.

The King having accepted the Offer of the Deputies of Holland, The King
accepts the Invitation into Holland.
and having expressed himself, that he intended to come into Holland by water,
the Estates General understanding thereof, gave order that all the Pinnaces and
other Barks capable to transport the King the Princes, and Princess of that
Royal House, with all their Court, Train and Baggage, should immediately repair
to the higher Swaluew in Brabant, to attend there the Orders which the Deputies
of the States of Holland should give to them for that purpose; they caused also
to be written to all the Colonels, and other Superior Officers, as well Horse
as Foot, who were quartered in the neighborhood of that Town, that they should
be the first day at the Hagne, to serve the State there, and to appear
splendidly at the Ceremonies of Reception and Treatment which they resolved to
make his Majesty: As for the Deputies of Holland, they took the same, if not
more extraordinary care, as the Honor of the Business more nearly concerned
them. For the better dispatch whereof, they now committed the care of the whole
business to one Person, viz. Mr. Wimme^um, President in their College. The
Deputies thereupon undertook all the outward Appurtenances to the Kings
satisfaction, writing presently to the Magistrate of the Town of Briel, to
advertise him of the Resolution which the King had taken to pass into Holland ^
to the end that if there should arrive any Expresses or Posts from the
Parliament Commissioners, who were every day expected, he should send them to
the Hague, whither the King intended to arrive in a very short time.

On the 14th. of May, his Majesty resolved to depart from Breda, and to
embarque himself at a place called Moordike, hoping to arrive at the Hague the
next day by water about four of the Clock in the Evening. Accordingly on the
11th. Preparations were made, and Commissioners named, of the Nobility and
prime Gentry of Holland, to attend that Service, wherein it was resolved that
his Majesty and his Brothers should be sumptuously treated, and defrayed, with
all the Train, during the time that his Majesty should remain in that Province,
from the 16th: of May, till his Embarkment for England.

Their next care was for his reception at the Hague, which was to provide and
procure as many Coaches of six Horses as could be gotten, for the Convoy with
which they intended to receive his Majesty, and should cause also as many
Pinnaces and other Barks to be ready, as was necessary to transport the Train
and Baggage.

For the better intelligence whereof, the Lord de Rhede, one of the Province of
Utretcht, lately Ambassador extraordinary in Denmark, and appointed then for
Spain, was ordered by the States General to go to Breda, and to report from
thence an exact state of the Kings whole Court, and Train of the Princes, as
also of the number of the Lords of the Council, and of his Majesty's House so
that necessary and suitable proportions might be taken for the Lodgings pointed
out for the Lords, Provision made for his Majesty and his Retinne.
for the tables which were to be furnished, and for the mouths to be fed,
during the Residence which the King should make at the Hague; and to that
purpose, the Estates (not to fail of their magnificent Design) laid a
Foundation of thirty thousand Pound for the Expense should be made for it.

On the same day they had notice that S. Peter Killigrew, a person formerly
employed in Messages betwixt his Majesty deceased and the Long Parliament,
which were full of Discord and dissension, was come now at last with an Olive
Branch in his mouth, the full Harmony of Englands Consent and Rapture at the
aforesaid Proclamation. This was ecchoed in this Country, and the first sounds
thereof were heard from the adjacent Towns of Dort, Rotterdam and Delf, whose
Magistrates sent to beseech the King, after humble recognition of his Potency,
to do them the unpresidented Honor of so great a Kings passing through their
Towns, there to refresh himself by the way. But his Majesty excused himself, as
well upon the present State of Affairs, w^ permitted him not to stay any where,
as because that his Passage could not but incommod^te the Inhabitants, unto
whom he should not cease to show himself sensibly obliged for the tenderness
they expressed to him.

Sunday the 13th. of May, Thanks are rendered to God by the Dutch for his
Majesty's Restitution with Bonefires.
Solemn Thanks was rendered to God by all the Ministers of the Dutch, French and
English Churches, who expounded Texts fit for the matter. And after Sermon the
Magistrate and Consistory were incorporated to make their Complement to his
Majesty, and to their Royal Highnesses, and at Evening Bonesires of Joy were
made through the whole Town, all the Bells r^ng, and many Volleys were
discharged from all the Artillery; all persons resident there from the States,
aemulating one another, which should express the most Joy and satisfaction in
this great day.

In the mean while also, not to intermit any thing from that study of doing the
King all acceptable Service, they began to load and send away the Baggage, and
furnish Prince Maurice his House at the Hague, where his Majesty was to be
entertained, appointing, by their Orders sent therewith, Lodgings for the whole
Court, and to make necessary Provisions for its subsistence when it should be
come, and whilst it should remain there.

Some dispute there arose at the Hague again concerning precedence of the
States themselves, The precedence of the Prince of Aurange taken care for.
but at last out of particular tenderness to the Kings Repose, and the have of
his Affairs, it was well accommodated; but the main business which related to
the Prince of Aurange, they took special care in; for because there was reason
to suspect that there might happen some disorder about the Rank of Coaches that
should be sent to meet the King, not so much because the Ambassadors were not
well agreed among themselves, about precedence, ^ut chiefly because there were
some of them that would pretend to have their Coaches go before that of the
Prince of Orange, who ought to be considered by them, not only in the quality
of a Sovereign Prince, but also as Nephew to the King, and consequently as
chief Prince of the Blood of England, after the two Dukes; therefore the States
judged fit to cause the Ambassadors of the several Crowns there resident, to be
prayed by their Agent, not to send their Coaches, but to leave the Conduct and
whole honor of this Ceremony to the States, to prevent the Consusion which
otherwise would be unavoidable. The Ambassadors all acquiesced therein without
any reluctance, and willingly showed that respect for the King, without
mingling it with their condescen lend to the desire of the States, because
they would not trouble the public Joy which the whole world endeavored to
manifest on this most happy occasion.

The whole Court was n^ departing from Breda May 14. The King departs from
Breda, May 14.
the Deputies going before at four of the Clock in the Morning, to give Orders
for his Majesty's e^b^quing. The King took shipping with his two Brothers and
^er betwixt 8 and 9 in the Morning. But before they went out of the Hall of the
Castle, the Burgo-masters presented themselves, and M. Snel in the name of the
rest, delivered this Oration.

Sir,

The Magistrate and Council of ^en of this Town of Breda, The Speech of the
Burgo-master of Breda.
present themselves again with a most low reverence before your Majesty, to
render you most humble Thanks for the honor it has pleased you to do the
Town, by the residence you have made here, and to bring you a last proof of the
perfect Joy which the wonderful success of your Majesty has caused; as it is
the powerful hand and infinite Providence of God which has drawn your Majesty
out of a Gulf of dangers, and has conducted you through a Desert of
Afflictions, even unto the Entrance of the Greatness which your Predecessors
have gained to their Royal posterity. This is the Subject of our Joy, Sir, when
we know that after the success of (...) Battles, Victories gained at the price
of the blood of Subjects, may content the Ambition of a Prince transported, yet
your Majesty is of that debonnair disposition, and so good a Prince, your
thoughts so generous and magnanimous, as to prefer an innocent Triumph before
all other advantages of the world. We praise with all our hearts that great God
who has begun this great Work in the Person of your Majesty, and pray him
ardently that it will please him to hear the Devotions which we shall continue
to make uncessantly for the prosperity of the voyage and Reign of your Majesty.

The King answered, That he thanked the Magistrate and Council for the
Affection they expressed to him, and should endeavor to acknowledge it on all
Occasions that should be presented unto him; Whereupon, the Burgomaster having
taken the liberty to reply, That, since his Majesty had the Goodness to accept
the Affection and Zeal they had for his Service, he besought him most humbly to
remember the Grace which he had made them to hope for, when he concluded in
that place by Treaty with the Deputies of Scotland, some years since; that he
would be pleased to honor the Town of Breda, and its Inhabitants with all the
Favor which the Laws of his Kingdom would permit to grant them. The King
answered, That he rememembred it very well, and that he was obliged to do so
much for a Town where he had received such acceptable News, and which had
rendered him so many testimonies of Respect and Affection.

The King took Coach after this Audience, and betwixt eleven and twelve of the
Clock came to Marvaert. His Majesty embarques.
He found some Squadrons of Horse there in Battalia, and the Deputies of the
States of Holland, who presented themselves at the Boot of his Coach, and made
him their Complement in the name of their Superiors, at the entrance of their
Province. After some Addresses and short Salutations, he proceeded to the end
of the Causey or Dike, where they had made a Bridge from the Dike to the
Pinnace, to facilitate his Embarquement.

For that splendid Occasion, they (as formerly they used to do for a Coach to
conduct Ambassadors) requested the Pinnace or Barge of the Princess Dowager of
Aurange, which should represent that of the States. But the King having viewed
it, and some others, chose one, which by his former use of it (as delighting
much to pass by water) he knew commodious, and because that of the Princesses
was not great enough to lodge the King and the Princess Royal of Orange, who
would pass the night by the King her Brother, with persons necessary for their
Service.

That Barge was formerly made for the Prince of Aurange, and was the biggest of
the Fleet which consisted of thirty great Barges, besides innumerable other
Barks, called Yachts, a kind of little Frigots. The Vessel the King was in so
pleased him, that he said in Discourse to the Deputies of Holland, that he
would cause one to be made in the same manner as soon as he should arrive into
England, to serve him upon the Thames above Bridge.

This gave occasion to one of the Deputies, Mr. de Vlooswick of Amsterdam, to
tell the King that lately they had made one in their Town of the same bigness,
at least as commodious every way, which he took the liberty to offer to his
Majesty. The King neither accepted nor declined, so that Order was privately
sent to Amsterdam, to make it ready, and gild it with curious Paintings inside
and outside, which at his going away, was presented to him, and is now the
Brigandine his Majesty uses on the River.

The Distribution of the other Yachts to the Lords and their Retinue, The Order
of the Fleet.
was transferred upon the King, no person of the Dutch being able without some
disgust to appoint them. The Duke of York Admiral.
The King therefore in this occasion ordained, that the Duke of York should
perform the Office of Admiral, in consigning the Yachts under his Authority,
and in his Presence, so that his Royal Highness gave himself the Yacht of the
Princess Dowager of Orange. The Duke of Gloucester had that of the States of
Holland: the Princess Royal to attend her, one of the Yachts of the Council of
State. The Deputies of Holland were shipped in Mr. Beverweerts Yacht, where Don
Estevande Gamarra, who went to meet the King at Moordike, not in quality of
Ambassador of Spain, but as a particular servant of his Majesty, the
Rhinegrave, the Lord Crofts, and other English Lords. The Chancellor of
England, and S. Edw. Nicholas embarked themselves in a little Pinnace called
the Maid of Zeland, the Marquess of Ormond in another, the Marquess of
Worcester in the Postillion of Zeland: the Lord St. John and Bellasis in that
of the Admiral Lieut. of Holland, St. Thomas Clargy's with his Attendants in
the Yacht of the Town of Dort, the Lord Gerard, and other Noblemen in the
Governors of Sluice. The Prince of Oranges Yacht was reserved for the Chamber
and Wardrobe of the Princess Royal. Every of these Vessels had its Steward, and
all other Officers necessary for the Kitchen and Buttery, and they which had
not the commodity to have their Kitchen aboard themselves, were accompanied
with other Barks where Chimnies were made for the Kitchen, and Ovens for the
Pastery and Provision of so prodigious a quantity of all sorts of Meats, of
Fowl, of Sweetmeats, of Wine, that all the Tables were plentifully served
therewith, and in such great abundance, that the English Stewards that are
known to be rather superfluous than otherwise, being accustomed to large
provisions, were astonished thereat, and confessed that they could not comprehend
how they could make ready in Boats which were so tossed, twenty, or five and
twenty great Dishes for every Table.

I insist the longer upon this Naval Story, because never any such thing
happened before in Holland: there is a Character of that Nation, that they
dwell upon the Waters, and certainly it was verified here; such a multitude of
them for some days together plying up and down in their boats, in the Kings
intended way. But to proceed;

The King intended to dine at Noon, as soon as he came on Board, and the Meat
was ready, but the Wind was so strong, and the Water so topping, that the
Princess Royal not able to endure the tossing of the Vessel, lost her Appetite,
and being Sea-sick, was forced to lie on her Bed. Thereupon the King desired to
know of the Captain, if there was no shelter under some rising ground to ease
her a little; which he answering to the contrary, but that they might arrive at
Dort speedily, they proceeded; and about 4 in the Afternoon came in sight of
that Town. The Rampart and Key were bordered with Citizens in Arms, The King
saluted as he passed by Dort.
and with a Battery of great Guns, which made many Peals, as well as the
Muskets, whilst the Fleet passed there, during and after the Repast which was
taken in sight of the town: yea so long as they could discover the Flag of the
Ship which carried the Person of the King, and that which carried the Dukes,
they continued the Thunder.

The Fleet stopped a mile beyond the Town, with design to cast Anchor that
Evening, and to stay the whole night following at the mouth of the River of
Leck: But there fell out two things which caused the King to change his
Resolution. The first was, the return of Sr. John Greenvile, who arrived from
England whilst the King was at Dinner, and related what the Parliament had
delivered to him in the House of Commons, and resolved to beseech his Majesty
to come to take possession of the Crown without any condition or reserve; and
that Admiral Montague was then under sail with a Fleet to come to receive him
in Holland, and transport him to his Kingdom. The other was, an Advertisement
which his Majesty received almost at the same time, by an Express that that
same Fleet appeared that Morning in sight of Scheveling, and at Nine of the
Clock had cast Anchor in the Road, about a mile and an half from the Shore.

This News the King presently imparted to Monsieur Beverweert, being chief in
Commission from the States of Holland, and caused the Duke of York, to tell
him, who was in person in the Deputies Yacht, which joined side by side with
his, that he confessed he made not account to arrive at Delfe till Noon next
day, according as he had appointed the time of his entrance there, and so to
the Hague for his Reception, but that now he had received intelligence which
obliged him to change his purpose, and to anticipate the hour that he had
resolved on, because it was of the highest importance to him to speak with the
Officers of the Fleet, so that he should be constrained to sail the whole
night, that he might arrive at Delfe by break of day; whereof he prayed him to
give Advertisement to the Lords States immediately by an Express, to the end
that the Coaches intended for his Reception, might be there precisely at seven
of the Clock next Morning.

Several Difficulties which would happen were remonstrated by Monsieur
Beverweert upon this occasion, because the Post would come late and
unseasonable, when it would be almost impossible to make the States to
assemble; yet notwithstanding to comply with the Kings Desires, and to give him
their utmost Devoir for his satisfaction, they would not fayl to advertise
their Superiors thereof, since they were there only to obey his Majesty, and
to serve him. The Duke of York replied, that it was through an invincible
necessity, and with much unwillingness, as to their and the States particular,
that he did thus, but that he hoped the Lords Deputies would consider the
estate of his Affairs, and so oblige the King very much in expediting their
Post, and in contributing by that means to the advancement of his Voyage and
Embarquement in that pressing Conjuncture.

The Letters went away about five a clock in the Afternoon, The King is saluted
at Rotterdam as he passed.
when the King caused Anchor to be weighed, and passed at evening before the
Town of Rotterdam, where the contrary wind enforcing the Fleet to laveer, or
tack about, and by that means to draw near the Haven two or three times, gave
the Town leisure to salute his Majesty, as well by the Musket shot of the
Burgers, who were all in Arms with flying Colors on the Rampart and Port, as
with all the Artillery of the Town, as also with all the Cannon of the Ships,
which were in the Road. He passed next to Delfts Haven, where they had made a
Battery of sixteen Pieces of Cannon more, and staid not till he came to
Overschy, a Village situate between Delfe and Delfes Haven.

The States of Holland had resolved to cause his Majesty to be received at the
Powder Magazin upon the Channel, The King arrives at Delfe.
which serves for Line of Communication for the two Towns of Delf and
Rotterdam: For the Town of Delf having been partly ruined by an Accident of
Fire, which met the Powder some eight years ago, they thought it fit to lodge
it without the Walls, and without Cannon-shot of the Town. But the King having
caused the Fleet wherein he was, to set sail as soon as the Sun began to appear
on the Horizon, came to the Suburbs of Delfe, before the Deputies could give
order to make the Fleet to stay at the designed place for the Reception.

All the Citizens of the Town were in Arms from three of the Clock in the
Morning, and a part had their Post upon the Key, before the Port where the King
was to land: and the Magistrate of the Town came thither with his Brethren, to
do reverence to the King in the Yacht, as soon as he understood he was arrived,
and to beseech him to do them the Honor to repose and refresh in their Town,
whilst his Majesty should attend the Deputies of the States of Holland; but the
King excused himself on the state of Affairs, which was so far from permitting
him to stay by the way, that it had obliged him to prevent the Hour which he
had taken and appointed for his Reception.

In the mean time the Letters of the Deputies were brought to the Hague at
Midnight, and immediately after the states assembled, and caused the Orders to
be changed which were given for the Kings Reception at 4 of the Clock in the
Afternoon, into others more pressing, and they sent word to the Deputies by the
same Post that they might assure his Majesty that they would not fail to
receive him at the Hour he had appointed them, or at eight a Clock in the
Morning at the furthest. And indeed about two of the Clock after Midnight, they
caused the Drums to beat, to summon to Arms the six Companies of Burgers, and
the Regiment of the Guards of the States of Holland, who all rendezvouzed at
six of the Clock.

The Coaches began to file toward Delf about seven of the Clock in the
Morning, and immediately after the Burgers, who stood in Battalia in the great
place, and marched toward the way which goes to Delfe, and the Soldiers went
to take their Post, on the Viverberg where they made a Guard, even to the House
of Prince Maurice, which was prepared to lodge his Majesty.

The Deputies of the States of Holland being arrived at Delfe, and having
spoken with those who had complemented the King at Breda, and had had the
conduct of his Person in the voyage, informed his Majesty of the order they had
given for his Entrance, for his Lodging and Treatment, to the end that as their
intention was wholly to submit to the Will of his Majesty, they might make that
to be changed therein, which might displease him. After the King had given them
his approbation, and that they had invited the Deputies of the States General
to honor this Ceremony with their Presence, and to take place immediately
after the Kings Coach, they gave order that the Coaches should be drawn into a
file along the Key of the Suburb.

After a Complement passed to the King in the name of their Superiors, who,
they informed the King, had sent a Member of each Town in their Province to
wait upon him; which Ceremony was done in the Yacht where the King was: His
Majesty presently landed, and seated himself in the Coach of the Princess
Royal, which that day carried all the Royal Family. The King sat in the midst
with his Sister, the Duke of York and Gloucester sat before, and the Prince of
Orange in one of the Boots; and as soon as they were placed, the whole Company
began to advance, to enter into the Town of Delfe. Here the King stayed not
according to his first Determination, but passed away from his Landing-place,
through the Ranks of the Citizens in Arms, who marched more than the space of a
Musket Shot from the Gates on both sides his Coach, where they stayed and
saluted his Majesty, whilst all the Bells rung, and the Artillery thundered from
the Bulwarks and Rampires of the Town.

It was near ten of the Clock when his Majesty departed thence, The King comes
to the Hague.
and made it eleven when he came at the Hague. In the head of the whole Train
which met him, marched some Trumpets of the Estates, clad in their Coats of
Crimson Velvet, embroydered with Gold and Silver. After them came a long File
of Officers belonging to the War, of young Lords and Gentlemen very gallant,
and bravely mounted. Next to that marched a great number of English Gentlemen,
and Officers of the Kings House, of the two Dukes, of the Princess Royal, and
of the Prince of Aurange. After them came Monsieur Wimmenum, who had attended
the King as chief of the Deputation in the quality of Master of the Ceremonies,
in his Coach, with some Lords in it, preceding immediately that of the Princess
Royal, which carried his Majesty. The Deputies of the Estates General filled
the two first after the Kings; those of the States of Holland the six
following, and the other Coaches which in all amounted to the number of seventy
and odd, each having 6 or 4 Horses, were filled with English and Dutch Lords.

It was by the Dutch confessed, that this Entrance (so much did they fear of
falling short of the due Honors to the King) was not made with an
extraordinary Pomp and Glory, worthy so great a Monarch, but it was impossible
to make greater Preparations in the time that the King had appointed for it;
and even then when they were constrained to change in a manner their first
Orders; which would no doubt have rendered it more Illustrious, had it not been
for this Change. And yet the Crowd was so great, because the curiosity of all
men to see this miraculous Prince, had drawn a great part of the Inhabitants of
the neighbor Town to this Entrance; that they were constrained to go very
softly. As soon as the first Coaches were entered into the Court, and the King
alighted, the Deputies of the States General retired, and left the Honor of
the Reception and Entertainment that day to the Estates of Holland.

The King being come to His Majesty arrives at the Hague.
the House prepared for him, there met him on the stayrhead his Aunt the Queen
of Bohemia, led by the Duke of Brunswick Lunenbergh, of whom before; the
Princess Dowager of Orange, led by Prince William Frederick of Nassau, her son
in Law, and accompanied with the two Princesses, her Daughters, Madam the
Princess of Nassau, and the young Lady of Aurange. The King saluted them all,
being followed by the Deputies of Holland, who gave him another small
Complement, and left him to his Repose at a private Dinner. The Princess Royal
who had not slept that night before, was the first that withdrew, and obliged
the others by her example, to do the like. The Queen of Bohemia and the
Princess Dowager of Holland followed her; so that none stayed but the two
Dukes, who dined with him. That done, the Toil of the Journey, and the little
rest he had taken the two former nights, made him desire to withdraw: And
indeed, the States would have made the Musketeers to forbear shooting (who
gave continual Volleys) if it had been possible to smother the universal Joy
which the whole world would express on this occasion. For these Volleys
answered those of a B^ttery of eight and thirty pieces of Cannon, which were
planted on the Viverberg, reinforced with another of five and twenty pieces of
a greater stamp, which they were enforced to plant behind the Cloyster-Church
of the Voorhout, upon the Rampart, in turning the mouth toward the Field, for
fear the powerful noise of that Thunder might shake the Walls of the old Palace,
and all the adjoining Building.

The next day the States General (after they had sent a Nobleman to know of the
King what time he would please to spate to receive that duty which they had
resolved to render him, by doing reverence to him in a body) Prince William of
Nassau being in the head of them, with their chief military Officers bareheaded
before them, they went to the Kings Lodgings. At their Entrance, they were met
with by the Lord Crofts, accompanied with a great number of Gentlemen, and
introduced to the King from the stayr-head by the Duke of Ormond. The Press was
so great, that though there were but 25 of the States present, yet they could
hardly get into the Presence Chamber. Being come there, the Baron of Gent, a
Deputy from the Province of Guelders, which is a Duchy, and therefore the
chief Province of the Union, and h^d for that reason this Honor to be Speaker
to the King, delivered himself in these words,

Sir,
The States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, after having
expressed to your Majesty by the Deputies they sent unto you at Breda, how they
participated in the happy Successes which follow your wise Conduct, and the joy
which they have to see you going to your Kingdom of England, to take there the
Scepter of Great Britain, come here now in a Body, to uphold the Truth and
Sincerity thereof by more strong and solem^ Declarations. It is the same
Company, Sir, which had the Honor to present it self to your Majesty in this
very place in a sad and mour^ful Equ^page, and which with more grief in heart
than it could express in words, pronounced the most bitter lamentable Accents
of a most deep sorrow, which came then not only to strike the Soul of your
Majesty, but also universally of all the Members of this State.

From the same Principle which divided then their Afflictions, proceeds now
their common rejoycement, to wit, from that of a most tender and most
respectful Affection for the Sacred Person of your Majesty, and from a most
submissive zeal for the Service and for the good of your Affairs. The Cause
thereof is so just, and so touching, that we hope your Majesty will be easily
persuaded of the Truth of the Protestations which are made thereof here in your
Royal Presence. And we may boldly say that their Joy exercises it self in its
full extent, which is so much the more vast, as these admirable Events arrive
in a time when all humane appearance seemed to remove them wholly. For it must
be confessed that they are the Effects of Divine Providence, which has made
the hearts of the Children return to their Father; that is to say, of the
Subjects to their Lawful King, and levelled the ways by which your Majesty
walks at present so peaceably, and without Effusion of Blood, upon the
magnifick and superb steps of your Glorious and Triumphant Throne.

The Estates General of the United Provinces wish, Sir, that these great and
important Prosperities which surprise us no less than we have wished them, may
be followed with the constant Obedience of your People, with the respect of
your Neighbors, and the Love of both, and that the Diadem which God has put
upon the Anointed and Sacred Head of your Majesty, being accompanied with all
the Favors of Heaven, may stand there a long Train of Years with a happy and
glorious Reign for your Sacred Person, and remain perpetually in your Royal
Posterity, even to the end of the world.

We will finish this Discourse, Sir, by most humble Thanks which we render to
your Majesty, in that it has pleased you to chase this Country, rather than
any other, to pass from thence into your Kingdom; for which, we shall always
think our selves obliged and honored, with the regret notwithstanding to see
that the Reception which we cause to be made unto you with so good a heart, is
not accompanied with all the Pomp and Magnificence that the Majestical splendour
of so great and potent a Monarch deserves, who is so dear and precious to this
State, and of whose Gracious Favor they shall endeavor to acquit themselves
by all the Respects and Services which your Majesty may desire from your true
Friends, most faithful Allies, and Humble Servants.


'Twas observed in this Visit, that the King never offered to be covered, as
was thought, to show that he would do something more for them than he could do
for an Ambassador. After this Speech ended, the Lords the Estates were
conducted in departing from the Audience, by the same Lords that received them,
and being returned, in their ordinary Hall they separated themselves.

Two other Audiences were given to the foresaid Colleges, which being over,
some doubt was made (though this Difficulties upon the audience of Ambassadors.
Solemn Magnificent Occasion well might and did dispense with Customs and
Punctilio's) whether the Ambassadors and Ministers of the Kings, Princes and
foreign Estates which were at the Hague, should be received to make their
Complements to the King, without Letters of Credence, or if after it were
acknowledged that their Character legitimated them for that, they might be
covered, since that having no Character toward this Monarch, they could not be
considered but as particular Persons to him. The difficulties which arose here,
were taken away by the following Considerations: They said, that Ambassadors
having a general Commission, and not being, as they said, missi ad hoc, they
might, and ought to do that which their Masters would do if they were present
in person; and so being certain that there is no Prince in Europe, that would
not do Civility to the King of England, if he should meet him in his Passage,
their Ministers who were in the place could not fail therein also, without
being wanting to Civility, and to their Duty. Notwithstanding since his Majesty
was not in his Kingdom, he might use them as he pleased, yet so, that although
it was in his choice to admit the Ambassadors or not, he could not dispense
himself of treating with them, according to the dignity of their Character, and
of making them to be covered after he had admitted them, since they might The
King complemented by foreign Ambassadors.
and were obliged to make their Quality appear in all their public actions, in
an Estate where every one acknowledges them for Ambassadors.

And on this account (that nothing might be omitted which might conduce to the
honor of the King, and the Glory of his Restitution) Monsieur de Thou Count of
Meslay, The French Ambassador has Audience.
Ordinary Ambassador of France in Holland, obtained the first Audience, as
well for having demanded it first, as for that there was no other Ambassador
at the Hague, that would stand in competition with him. He was met in the Court
by one of the chief Gentlemen of the Chamber, and on the top of the Stayrs, by
the Captain of the Lifeguard, who was as the M^ster of the Ceremonies. As Soon
as he had made his Reverences, and would have begun to speak, the King covered
himself presently, and showed thereby to the Ambassador what he had to do. His
complement and gratulation of his Majesty's, and his Kingdoms Happiness was
well received, but his Audience was short.

Monsieur O^te Krag, The King of Denmarks Ambassadors next.
and Mr. Godsch of Bugwaldt, extraordinary Ambassadors from the King of
Denmark, had their Audience, after the French Ambassador, and after they had
been received and treated as the other, the first of them bespake the King in
these words;

That since it has pleased God to call again his Majesty unto his Kingdoms,
where his great merit should have established him long ago, as well as the
Right of his Birth, they would not fail to come to congratulate him, and to
acquit themselves by this means of the duty which they have as well to the near
Affinity which is between his Majesty and the King their Master, as because of
the straight Alliance which has always been between the Kingdoms of England
and Denmark. That they had cause to rejoice for this happy Change, not only
because of the Glory and Felicity which redounded thence to his Majesty, but
also because of the advantage which the King and Kingdom of Denmark would draw
from thence, which had not been afflicted, and unjustly oppressed so long, if
that of England had been in a condition to hinder it. That the King their
Master would not fail to witness himself, by a solemn Embassage, the joy which
he received from so surprising and so extraordinary a revolution, as soon as he
was advertised thereof; and that they hoped in this happy Conjuncture, that his
Majesty would continue to live with the King their Master in the Amity,
Alliance, and firm Confidence in which their Majesty's have always lived, and
which for some years was not interrupted, but to the irreparable Prejudice of
both. And so, that his Majesty would oppose himself generously to the violence
which is done their King, and succor him against the unjust invasion wherewith
his Kingdom was afflicted. Besides they thanked his Majesty for the honor he
had done them in admitting them into his Royal Presence, and for the Particular
Grace which they received from thence in their persons.

The King thanked the Ambassadors for the Affection they had expressed to him,
and said, that he knew very well, that not only from long Antiquity, there was
a most straight Alliance between the Kings of England and Denmark, but also
that the Deceased King his Father had such great Obligations to the Deceased
King of Denma^k his good Cozen, and to the present King himself, that one of
his chief cares after his Entry into his Kingdoms, should be to renew that
Friendship betwixt the two Crowns, protesting his clear Affection to that King
and his interest, being touched with those Injuries that had been done him.

The same day also he Complemented by the Spanish Ambassador.
was complemented by Don Estevan de Gamarra, a Count and Councellor in the King
of Spains Councils of Estate and War, and Ordinary Ambassador at the Hague,
but without Ceremony, or demanding of Audience, only he was admitted as a
private Person, uncovered, because of the Zeal he particularly always
manifested to the Kings Service in many private and public affairs, being a
very near Acquaintance of his Majesty's. The reason why he was not admitted as
an Ambassador, was, because of the open Wars betwixt Spain and England at that
time; though no Acts of Hostility passed; and the King considered m^tters in
statu quo.

But the Portugal Ambassador there, the Count of Miranda, could not be
admitted to Audience unless he had had Letters of Credence from his Master to
the King, and that because the Spanish Ambassador had it not in the quality of
a public Minister, from whose Sovereign he had received all kinds of
Civilities; but as Sir Edward Nich^las who was sent from the King on this
Errand, told the Ambassador, that the King would be ready when he should be
returned into his Kingdom, to receive the Ministers of Portugal as often as with
Credential Letters they should be sent to him.

As was said before, the King had received notice that General Montague was
arrived with part of the Fleet in sight of Scheveling on the 14. of May, having
Orders from the Parliament, to sail thither, and to await his Majesty's
Commands, which was signified to the King by an Express from the General. The
Fleet at first coming thither, consisted of about 18 great ships, which before
the King embarked were numbered to 38. being the Frigots that carried over the
Commissioners of Parliament and the City of London, whither we must a little
return.

The Parliament having Voted that the Government of the Kingdom by the
Fundamental Laws thereof, was vested in the King and his Parliament; after
they had with all Expressions of Duty testified their Joy of this happy
Revolution, ordered several Commissioners to be chosen by Glasses out of each
House, to go, for the greater solemnity and Luster of his Majesty's Court, to
attend on him in Holland, with the desires of the Parliament for his speedy
return to the exercise of his Royal Authority. The Lords that were chosen of
the House of Peers, were six; the Names of them as follows:

For the House of Lords.
Earl of Oxford. Earl of Warwick was sick of the Gowt^and went non. Earl of
Middlesex. Lord Visc. Hereford. Lord Barkley. Lord Brook.
For the House of Commons.
Lord Fairfax. Lord Bruce. Lord Faulkland. Lord Castleton. Lord Herbert. Lord
Mandevil. Sir Horatio Townsend. Sir A^th. Ashley Cooper. Sir George Booth.
Denzil Hollis, Esquire Sir John Halland. Sir Henry Ch^lmley.
These were the prime and the most Honorable Members of that House, and
therefore picked out for this extraordinary Honor of waiting on the King. Not
were the Citizens of London less curious in their choice and Election of
Commissioners (having obtained leave of the Parliament) to the same purpose;
and were all men of Estates and Reputation, and of conspicuous Loyalty, having
manifested it in the late Danger of the City; they were taken and composed
partly out of the Magistracy, partly from the principal Citizens, and partly
out of the Militia; they were more numerous than both the other; and very
splendid and gallant in their Retinue; being 20 in number, whose Names are as
follows: Sir James Bunce Baron. Alderman Langham. Alderman Reynardson. Alderman
Brown. Sir Nicholas Crisp. Alderman Tomson. Alderman Frederick. Alderman
Adams. Recorder Wild. Alderman Robinson. Alderman Bateman. Alderman Wate.
Theophilus Bidulph. Richard Ford. Will. Vincent. Tho. Bludworth. Will. Bateman.
J. Lewis, Esquire M. Chamberlain. Col. Bromfield.


The Lords likewise were attended with a great number of Gentlemen, and store
of Servants (...) in very rich and costly Liveries.

They arrived the said 14th. day of May, but came not on shore till the 15th.
but because they were not of the Kings Train, and had no Letters of Credence to
the State, they were not treated at their Charge, only out of civil respect to
the Lords, they had Lodgings provided for them by Billet. They came to the
Hague in Coaches sent by the States that Evening, but they did not reverence to
the King till the next day being the 16th.

The Estates of the Province of Holland had audience the day before in a very
magnificent and solemn way, and were dismissed from it with great and ample
demonstrations of the Kings affection; the like did the Deputies of Amsterdam
in behalf of that Town, and were complemented in like manner by him; His
Majesty vouchsafing if his Affairs would permit, to accept of their In^itation
thither; but Time and his Affairs required a dispensation from that Civility.
He admitted also their Request concerning the Barge or Brigandine which they
tendered to him, and gave them thanks for their great respects to his Person,
which he promised to keep in inviolable remembrance.

But that the King might not be troubled with multitudes of Visits, every
Corporation or Body of subordinate Courts purposing to demand Audience of him,
they forbid them by Proclamation; informing them that the States of Holland did
it comprehensively for all of them, and that it would be unseemly to
incommodate his Majesty with so many Visits, so that by this means the
University of Leyden then in a readiness was put by from their address and
Gratulations.

Indeed there would have been no end of those Ceremonies otherwise, so
passionately did each place and degree of men strive to show their joy and
affection for his Majesty; therefore not to clog the Reader, we will forbear
any particular Narratives concerning them.

Come we now to the manner of the Entertainment of the King at Dinner, The
manner of the Entertainment of the King at Dinner.
for which, as before said, a Sum of 30000 l. from the day of his coming to the
Hague, was allotted as a foundation for expenses, till he should depart in his
Voyage; seven Lords were appointed to attend constantly at his meat, and see
the Royal Family served. The Table was doubly furnished, at the head of which,
and in the midst, sat the King, having on his left hand the Princess Royal,
and on his right, his Aunt the Queen of BohemiA. At the end of the Table on the
same side, were the Dukes of York and Gloucester, and at the other end, by the
Princess Royal, was the Prince of Aurange her Son. This Order was observed in
all Repasts, only in the absence of the Prince of Aurange, the two Princes his
Majesty's Brothers separated, and placed themselves at the two ends of the
Table. By this means one could well serve all those that were there, because
they were all at a certain distance, which permitted the Officers to do their
Functions and places; as also the Deputies of the Estates left space enough
between the Kings Table and theirs, for the convenrence of those which served
the meat before the Royal persons, putting themselves at the two ends of the
skirt before the King, who would not that the Deputies Table should be
separated from his. There was commonly a Set of Violins, which played, and
divertised the King during Dinner, and in the Healths that were drunk, as the
King never failed almost to drink the Prosperity of the States, the Cannon of
the Viverberg thundered from every Battery.

On the 16th. day of May, Audience of the Commissioners before his Majesty.
after his Majesty had dined, the Commissioners of Parliament and the City of
London came to do reverence to his Majesty. They came from the House where the
extraordinary Ambassadors are lodged, and the military house of the Citizens
in this Order; both the Lords and the other went forth afoot, walking two and
two, having before them a very great number of Gentlemen. Among them the Lord
Fairfax drew upon him the curiosity and eyes of all men, as known to them by
name to have been Captain General of the Parliaments Army (he desired to see
the King privately, and to ask him pardon for the past Offense with all
submission, which afterward he did) Being brought into the Kings Chamber, they
made a very low and most submiss Reverence. The Earl of Oxford spoke for the
higher House, in a short but pithy Oration; Denzil Hollis for the House of
Commons; whose Elegant Speech is Printed at large; the Occasion of which
Publication, was some exceptions or sinister Reports made of it, and therefore
that Lord vindicated himself and it. He insisted therein chiefly upon the
miseries under which the Nation had so long groaned, and upon the Usurpation
and Tyranny of Cromwell; whereas on the contrary, they were assured by his
Majesty's innate Goodness, as well as indubitable Right, of enjoying
themselves, their Lands and Liberties in a full repose and serenity of Peace;
beseeching him in the Name of the people of England, to return forthwith into
his Kingdom, and to resume again the Scepter of his Ancestors ^ee and
unburdened from any Conditions or Limitations, as Sr. John Greenvile had before
re^orted.

The King received them with much Frankness, together with the protestations of
obedience and Fidelity which they made him in the Name of the Lords and Commons
of England, and of the City of London in particular, whose (...) to the King
were expressed and deliv^ by Sir William Wyld the Recorder, in few, but sincere
words, and therewithal gave them his hand to kiss, and welcomed them. After
they had taken leave of the King, they addressed themselves to the Dukes, to
whom they rendered the Complements from the Parliament and City, and thence in
the same order on Foot to the Q^en of Bohemia and the Princess Royal, where
they performed after the same manner.

To complete this Gratulation, both from home and abroad, from States,
Parliaments, Princes, Kings, The Emperors Resident complements the Ki^.
the Emperors Resident at the Hague, had also Audience of the King, declaring
unto him, that this change of his Affairs would be the most welcome News to his
Master in the world, since he hoped his Majesty knew what a sincere Friend and
Lover of him and his Interest, the Deceased Emperor Ferdinand had on all
Occasions expressed himself.

There was also that day admitted to the Kings Presence the Master of that
Barque which conveyed his Majesty from the Coast of Sussex over to Deep in
France, after his Escape from Worcester. The King was well pleased with the
sight of him, in this turn of his condition, which rendered his just greatness
now more pleasant to him by that contrariety of Fortune. He dismissed therefore
this faithful Person with assurance of his respect and Favor to him.

The King also received to the honor of his Hand many Persons of Quality, who
in the impatience to see his Majesty, had passed the Sea voluntarily, without
any particular Commission, they all did him Reverence in the same manner the
Commissioners had done.

The English Officers in the pay and Service of the States, came and presented,
themselves to his Majesty, among whom was Major Cromwell, whose Elder Brother
commanded a Regiment, whereof he was Major, being the Sons of Sr. Oliver
Cromwell Uncle to the Usurper; the King showed him no other Countenance than to
any of his good Subjects, but received him very well, permitting them to change
their Name of Cromwell into their ancienter name of Williams.

On the 17th. day the Swedish Ambassador, Mr. Coyet had Audience also of the
King, who in the Close thereof enquired particularly of the young King of
Sweden, and the Queen Regent, and the place of his Breeding, and so with usual
Civilities dismissed him, professing his desire and readiness to continue the
Alliance between the two Crowns. The rest of that day was spent in private
Conferences with the Commissioners of the Parliament.

It will now not be amiss to our purpose, since we shall presently speak of the
Kings intention to depart, The manner how the King was served.
to speak a word of the manner wherewith the King was served at his ordinary
Repasts, and of the estate of the expense which was made every day for his
Majesty, having already spoken of his Table, and how the Royal persons that did
eat there, were seated. They served up great Dishes in Oval Form, at five
Courses, each containing five Dishes and 12 Trenchers, because they changed the
Dishes twice at every Service, and every Dish was very massive, besides the
Load in them, there being two dozen of Pheasants in one Dish, and all the other
Dishes were served accordingly. They served besides that five tables for the
Lords, and for the Marquess of Worcester, etc. and one for the Ladies, all at
four Courses, and almost as full, and furnished with the same meats, as those
of the Kings Table, except one course, which was between the Boiled and the
Roast. All the sweet meats as well at the Kings Table, as at the Lords and
Ladies, were scrambled for at every meal, and exposed to the discretion of the
people, who were ordinarily there at those hours, by the King in Crowds. And
not only they served all sorts of delicious Wines at the Table, but the Sources
streamed therewith day and night, and were never dry, as well for the English
of what condition soever they were, as for all those of the Town that came to
demand it. Every Table was of twelve Coverings, and had its Steward, its four
Butlers, as many Assistants in the Buttery, and twelve men that served up the
meat and drink. But for the Kings Diet it was particular; there was a Clark of
the Kitchen, for the Broths, another for the Courses, another for the Pastry,
one for the Roast, and one for the meats between the Courses, every Clark
having four Cooks under him for each Service.

There was a rumor spread this day of some attempt intended against the Kings
person; 'twas discovered by a mean Frenchman, who was in danger of his Life for
overhearing of it in a private place in the Rampart, from whence coming out,
three men espied him, who, as he said, spoke to one another in bad French,
these words; That they failed twice because of the great Number of People that
were about him, and served him for Guards; but they would so well take their
Advantage from the two sides of the Coach, that he should not escape them. He
received two shots of a Pistol, but the Fellows upon his calling out, sled
away. Upon his persistance in this Affirmation, a Guard of Horse were presently
added to the Foot, a Cornet of whom always stood in the avenues of the Palace,
where the King was lodged, and of which there was always a Squadron which
followed his Coach wheresoever he went.

And forasmuch as it was known that there was found in the Fleet a man bold
enough, when the King should come to see the Vessel, where he served as a
Mariner, to give fire to the Powder, an Order was made by the General, as he
himself did, that every Captain should take the Key of the Powder to himself.
This invited the King to choose a Guard of fourscore Gentlemen, which are now
improved into a greater number, under the command of the Lord Gerard, Captain
of the Lifeguard, which served by squadrons; so that there was always twenty,
which marched on both sides the Coach, having one hand on the supporting staff
of the Boot, and holding a sword drawn out of the Belt, but in the Scabberd, in
the other. But as this Posture was somewhat irregular, and offensive in a
Country where the Person of his Majesty was no less dear, than in his Kingdoms,
the King considering that to hinder approach to his Person, was sufficient to
secure it, would that they should wear their Swords by their sides, and carry a
Cane in their hands, which assured the Passage, and also made their Quality and
Charge to be respected.

On Sunday, the 20th. of May, The States of Holland dine privately with the
King.
the States of Holland by their Deputies, dined in private with the King, and
that nothing might be wanting to the Testimonies of Affection which the Estates
would render to his Majesty, they ordained the same day that all kind: of
refreshments should be sent to the Admirals Ship, to the Vice-Admirals, and the
Reer-Admirals, to be afterward distributed to the whole Fleet. They
communicated thereupon with their Admiral Lieutenant, and caused so much Wine,
Victuals, Citrons and Oranges to be bought, and sent, that the Lord Montague
confessed, that he never saw so much. Notwithstanding they sent them not aboard
before the King had fixed on the day of his Embarquement, when they were
carried aboard the Admiral, to whose disposal they were left.

The Estates wrote also to the College of the Admiralty to provide such a
number of Hoyes and other vessels, as the officers of the Kings stable, of the
Duke of York and Gloucester should judge necessary for the transporting of the
Horses, and of a part of his Majesty's Baggage, and of their Royal Highnesses;
and Order was given that they should be stabled and kept in the Town of
Rotterdam till they could be embarked, and that the ships should be provided
of Hay, Oats and Straw for the time that probably they might be upon the Sea.

Friday the 18th. of May, the Estates General who knew they should highly
please the King in doing such a civility to him, The English Commissioners
complemented.
deputed three of their Lords to go with a Complement to the Commissioners of
the 2 Houses of Parliament, and of the City of London, upon the present Estate
of Affairs in England.

The Lords Commissioners of the House of Peers assembled in the House of the
Earl of Oxf. who was lodged at M. Buysero's, Greffier or Secretary of the
Council to the Pr. of Aurange: the said Noble Earl having at that time a
Regiment, as his warlike Progenitors before in the States Service; and the
Commissioners of the Lower House, were lodged in the House of the Baron of
Asperen, and received this Civility from them with much satisfaction.

Innumerable in the mean while was the Concourse of People, and as multiplied
the Excesses of those Kindnesses done to any that could but say he pertained to
the King of Great Britain; no other Business being minded but what concerned
the Honor and Pleasure of the King, in which they thought themselves never too
much sedulous and diligent.

The same day the Estates of Holland having deliberated upon the recommendation
which the King had made them when they saluted his Majesty in a body, of some
persons and English Officers which were in the Service of that State, whose
Duty and Affection, which they expressed unto him in the midst of his
Affliction, as well for his Interests, as those of his Sister and Nephew the
Prince of Aurange, now minded him of their Concerns, did ordain that the five
Regiments of Scots Foot, which were reformed and reduced to two, in the year
1655. should be brought again to their first estate, in behalf of Lieut. Col.
Henderson, whom the King respected; and that the Command of the third should be
given unto him, with the Quality of Colonel. On the same consideration they
gave a Troop of Horse to Mr. K^rkhoven Baron of Wooton, Son of the Deceased
Lord Heenvh^t and the Countess of Stanhop, being in the room of his Father,
great Forrester of Holland, and Superintendant of his Highnesses the Prince of
Auranges Affairs.

Another Complement was also Ordered to be given the aforesaid Commissioners of
England, A Speech made to the Commissioners of Parliament.
by Deputies from the Province of Hol. the sum whereof (meeting them in the
same place where the Deputies of the States General saluted them) being uttered
by M. Wimmenum, was this; That the Lords the Estates of Hol. who had so much
cause to rejoice for that great Catastrophe which they saw in Eng. could not be
silent in that wonderful juncture and in that public and universal Joy, but
found themselves obliged to express it to thens that contributed most to it,
and were the principal Authors thereof. That the Parliament of England had this
Advantage to be as the Foundation of the Estate; but that those which compose
it now had gained this Glory to all Posterity, that they had not only drawn the
Kingdom from its greatest Calamity, to carry it to the highest Felicity; but
also that they had been the first of the three Kingdoms to declare themselves
for so Glorious an Undertaking. That the Lords Estates who in the Anarc^y and
disorder had for their parts retained their due sentiments of the English
Nation, though necessitated to a War, which was merely personal on the English
side against a Faction and prevalent Party, did take this happy advantage of
assuring their Lordships of the Perseverance of their Affection, and prayed God
for the continuance of the Prosperity in the Kingdoms of his Majesty's
Dominions, and of their Persons in particular, with all the fervency and
earnestness that might be expected from an allied State, and from Persons
perfectly affectioned to their Good and Interests.

To this the Commissioners answered by the mouth of those Noblemen that spoke
to the King, That they thanked the States for their great Affection to the King
and his Kingdoms, the memory whereof they should always keep, and particularly
for the pains they had taken in coming to give them a Visit, with such
Assurances of their Respect and Friendship, which they would endeavor to
require by their personal Services, and by a perpetual and inviolable Amity
with that Republic; and so conducted them to their Coaches.

On the 19th. of May, Sixty thousand Pound added to the expense for the Kings
Entertainment.
an Addition of threescore thousand Pound was Ordered for the Expense which
they would now magnificently bestow on the Kings Entertainment, the States
intending to make him a Feast, and to give him and his Brothers some Presents;
upon which account, they thought also fit to furnish for his Majesty the Bed
and Appurtenances which the last Deceased Prince of Aurange had caused to be
made for the lying in of the Princess Royal, and which she never used, because
of the death of the P^. her husband, who deceased eight days before the Birth
of the Prince his Son. This Bed is without doubt the fairest and richest that
ever was made at Paris, and besides the Tester, the Seats and Skreens, the
Hangings and the other pieces necessary to make a Furniture complete, the
Estates would add thereunto a most perfect fair Hanging of the richest
Tapestry, embossed with Gold and Silver (which they caused to be made of
purpose with a great number of excellent Pictures, as well of Italy, as of
other Countries, both ancient and modern, and whatsoever can adorn a Chamber
worthy to lodge so great a Monarch in his greatest Magnificence. It is now set
up at Hampton Court.

The Council of State ordained also that all the Fisher-Barks of the Villages
of Scheveling and of Heyde should be stayed for the Service of the State, Order
given for the Embarquement of the Baggage.
to the end to serve the imbarquement of the Court, and Kings Baggage, and that
for the same purpose the Village of Catwyck on the Sea, and other Dorps
adjacent should send 20 Barks, and caused 30 open Wagons to be made ready
also, to bring the said Baggage down to Scheveling the Monday following being
the 21th. with 40 close Wagons to conduct the Train on Tuesday, which was the
day that the King had designed for his departure, though deferred till
Wednesday, as we shall see hereafter.

The same day the Duke of York accompanied with the Duke of Brunswick
Lunenburg, The Duke of York takes the Oath of Allegiance from the Mariners.
and with a great number of English, Dutch Lords and Gentlemen, went to
Scheveling, to take the Mariners Oaths of Fidelity, in quality of Admiral of
England, but the Wind being contrary, and the Sea boisterous, the Lord Montague
thought it not fit to send Boats from aboard him to fetch his Royal Highness,
and the Fishermen of the Village refused likewise to put him aboard, so that he
was forced to return to the Hague to Dinner.

At this time came also the Ambassador of the Marquess of Brandenburg, The
Ambassador of the Marquess of Brandenburgh his audience.
Monsieur Weyman, to salute the King upon his restitution, brought in by Prince
Maurice of Nassau, the same that was extraordinary Ambassador here since from
the said Elector; after the King had answered the Complement, they spoke of
indifferent Affairs, which have nothing common with this Relation.

Monsieur Vicque first Resident with the States, Ambassanours likewise from the
Landgrave of Hesse.
for the Landgrave of Hessen made likewise his Complement for the Prince his
Master, which was so much the better received, as in his particular he had an
Occasion in the business of the Palatinate, to which House he has constantly
bin allied, to render most important Service to his Majesty, as well as the
Deceased King his Father. He had the Honor to do reverence to his Majesty at
Breda, with the Duke of Lunenburg, where the King remembered the affection which
he had for his Service. The King added (so sensibly did the touches of other
afflicted Princes condition incite him to a generous Sympathy, and protested
himself, as well as his Father obliged to the Duke of Curland, who had in the
War in England supplied him with Arms and Ammunition, and that he never would
fail to acknowledge those good Offices done them both during the Disorders of
his Kingdoms.

After these verbal Ceremonies were past, other oral, as we may say, followed;
several Invitations were made from the Ambassadors to the Lords of the Kings
Train to dine with them; the Ambassador of France had treated the Earl of St.
Albans, and the Lord Crofts and some other Lords at a Dinner, and the Spanish
Ambassador was bespoke by the two Dukes of York and Gloucester, being of long
Familiarity with him, to entertain them at his House, where before the Marquess
of Ormond had been nobly treated, and had made such Relation thereof to their
Highnesses.

But the King who would dine that day in public with the Queen of Bohemia, The
Spanish Ambassador gives the King a Treatment.
the Princess Royal, the Prince of Aurange, and the Deputies of the States
General, having desired that the Princes his Brothers might be of the Company,
the Ambassador who had accordingly expected their Royal Highnesses, gave
himself the liberty to complain to the King in raillery for taking away his
Guests from him. His Majesty used the Goodness to tell him, that he did it of
purpose to hinder their dining with him, because he would also be of the Party.
And indeed that very Saturday, the King after he had ridden to Scheveling,
where he saw the Fleet, and at his return, visited the Queen of Bohemia, went
in the Evening to the House of Don Stephen de Gamarra, where were also the Qu.
of Bohemia, the Dukes of York and Gloucester, the Princess Royal, the Prince of
Aurange, the Marquess of Ormond, the the Lords Digby, Craft and Taaff, the Lady
Stanhop, to whom the King had lately have given the Title of the Countess of
Chesterfield and Madam Howard, her Daughter in law, Lady of Honor to the
Princess Royal. The Table was covered in the Hall, which is one of the fairest
and greatest of the whole Hague; but it would be very difficult to make a
pertinent description of this Feast, because that although they served up there
but Fish and Sallats (but such a number of Sweetmeats dry and liquid, that all
the Persons of quality which were come thither to see the Order of the Supper,
returned home laden) besides all sorts of delicious wines, as Limnada,
Hipocras, it was yet without doubt one of the most splendid and stately that
ever was seen at a private house. The King also, for which particular reason we
mention this Entertainment, appeared here in the best Humor that ever he was
seen to be, and expressed so much content in this Company, which was composed
of none almost but of his Family, and of Persons whom he saw every day, that he
stayed there even until one of the Clock after Midnight, yet without the least
Disorder or Confusion that ^ight trouble their Conversation and Divertisement.

Every thing here was indeed high and magnificent, but that which was most
remarkable was this, Sir G^o. Downing presents himself to the King.
that about Midnight arrived there Mr. Downing, who managed the Affairs of
England with the Lords States (having been Secretary to the Protectors Council
in Scotland) in quality of Resident for Oliver Cromwell, and for a while
afterward for the Pretended Parliament, which continued him in the same
Employment, in the quality of extraordinary Envoy. He was thought to have had a
respect and Duty for the King long before, when he was in Scotland, and when he
knew that all England declared for a Free Parliament, he forthwith abandoned
their Employment, and departed from Holland without any Order of Revocation,
wisely foreseeing that there was nothing could longer oppose the
re-establishment of Monarchal Government, with an intent to crave Letters of
Recommendation from General Monk, who at his arrival, out of consideration of
his Faithfulness and Respect to him and his Undertakings, when he could not
discover his Intentions, gave him such Letters. With these he arrived at
midnight at the House of the Spanish Ambessadour, and presented them forthwith
to the King, who arose from the Table a while afterward, read the Letters, and
received the submissions of the said Gentleman, and granted him the pardon and
Grace which he had sued in His Name to whom he could deny nothing.

Some days after the King Knighted him, Sir Geo Downing Kn^ghted.
and would it should be believed that the strong aversions which this Minister
of the Protectors had made appear against him on all occasions, and with all
sorts of Persons indifferently, even a few days before the public and general
Declaration of all England, proceeded not from any evil Intention, but only
from a deep and honest dissimulation, wherewith he was constrained to cover his
true Sentiments, for fear to prejudice the Affairs of his Majesty.

Something must be said of that which was remarkable on Sunday the 20th. Dr.
Hardy Preaches before the King at the Hague.
of May. The King had appointed that Morning to hear a Sermon, and to that
purpose it was ordained that Mr. Hardy one of the Ministers which came from
England with the Commissioners of the City of London, should preach before the
King in the Chapel of the Court which serves for a Church to the French that
live at the Hague, at eleven of the Clock in the Forenoon, as soon as the French
had ended their ordinary Devotions. And to the end to prevent disorder amongst
the People which were come there in crowds from the neighbor Towns, the
Company which had the Guard, was commanded to seize upon the Avennues of the
Chapel, and particularly to possess the door which leads into a little
Partition where the Princes of Aurange heretofore caused a Bench to be made,
clothed with black Velvet, and covered with a Canopy of the same Stuff for
themselves, and for Persons of Quality that were ordinarily of their train, but
they dreamed not to remedy another inconvenience, which deceived all the other
precautions that they used. For the French in stead of giving place to the
English, and of using the civility which they were accustomed to have for
strangers, would not go out of the Church; so greedy and resolute were they of
seeing the King, and the manner of his Worship and Religion. And even the
persons of Condition which sat in the little Partition, whereof before, and
who were for the most part Dutch, refused to make place for the Lords who were
in great number about the Kings Person, without considering that this very
Incivility hindered them absolutely to satisfy the curiosity which they had to
see the King, and to be present at the English Liturgy. The Reader of the
Church exhorted the people to withdraw, and likewise the Pastor who made the
Sermon, went up again into the Pulpit, and represented to them the wrong they
did themselves as well as their Brethren of the same Religion, and strangers as
they in this Country, in obstinately staying thus in their Seats after having
heard the Word of God, and in failing in that respect to the King, to whom that
very Temple was given by their Superiors, and where the English were to hear it
after them in their own Tongue. But these Exhortations made no Impression on
spirits prepossessed, no more than the other Reasons which he alleged, so that
the King was enforced to do his Devotions in the place where her Royal Highness
is accustomed to have her Preaching; particularly since most important
considerations hindered her in the time of the Usurpation to go to the English
Church. Into this place of hers entered as many as it could hold of the Lords of
that Nation. The Doctor took his Text in the 26th. Chap. of Isaiah, v. 19.
which he applied to the present estate of the Affairs of England, and made so
learned and pathetick Discourse, that there was not any one there who admired
not the Doctors Elegancy and Learning, and were not touched and edified
therewith.

After the Liturgy and Sermon were ended, there presented themselves many
persons sick of the Evil, The King touches for the Evil.
which the King was to touch, after many others he had touched on the 18th. and
19th. of the same Month in private. Now forasmuch as this Ceremony is done
with Circumstances very remarkable, and different from those which accompany it
in France, and because this Glory is wholly incommunicable, save to that King
alone, and because the Discourse of it may be of some use, as it will much
satisfy Curiosity, it will not be from the purpose to speak here of all the
Particulars thereof, since it will also be an essential part of this Relation,
which should omit nothing materially honorable to the King during his stay at
the Hague, or his Person and Reign hitherto.

Before we engage in the recital, for the Honor of this Crown, it will be
necessary to premise thus much, that they are deceived which give out or
believe that that which the Kings of Engl. do on this occasion, is but because
of that pretension which they have to the Crown of France, and by virtue of
that Title which they take, or from the Arms of France, wherewith they charge
their Escutcheon, that they attribute to themselves a Grace and Gift which is
given to the Eldest Son of the Church.

For it is most certain that the King of Great Britain has this right and
advantage, not as King of France, though he takes the quality thereof in his
Titles, but as King of England, and because the Kings his Predecessors have
used it efficaciously since the Reign of Edward the Confessor, that is to say,
600 years ago, and long before the King of England had declared their
pretensions, as they did when Philip of Valoi^ came to the Crown. The manner of
this Ceremony is as follows;

Those that feel themselves afflicted with the Disease commonly called the
Kings Evil, because the King cures it, are obliged to address themselves to
his Majesty's chief Chyrurgion, who searches them, and if he judges that it
is the Disease, he appoints them a day and hour when they shall come to be
touched. The Ceremony, as in France it is done after the King has communicated
in the Morning, so was it done here, in the aforesaid Chapel after Sermon,
though the King at home uses other places, as the Banqueting House at
Whitehal. There was here a great Chair placed for the King, in a place somewhat
distant from the people. As Soon as the King was sat, one of the Clerks of the
Closet stood at the right side of his Chair, holding on his Arm or in his right
hand as many Gold Angels every one tied in a Ribbond of white Silk, as there
were sick to be touched, which were in number forty eight. But because Angels
of Gold which are so called, because they have the Figure of an Angel on them,
were very rare, he used on this present occasion, the ten Shilling pieces,
which were near of the same value. Here; and in this occasion, Dr. Brown the
Chaplain of the Princess of Aurange, performed the place of the Kings Chaplain,
as he did all along before at Bitda.

The Chaplain then read the 16th. Chap. of St. Mark, from the 14th. verse to
the end, and then the Chyrurgion presented the sick, after three reverences on
their Knees before the King, who whilst the Chaplain, said these words in that
Gospel. They shall lay their hands upon the sick, and they shall be healed he
laid his hand on the two cheeks of the sick, saying afterward, I touch the^,
but God bral thee. The Surgeon arises not till all were touched. This being
done, the Chaplain begun another Gospel, and whilst these words were pronounced
out of the first of St. John, The was the true Light which lights every man
that comes into the world, his Majesty took the Pieces of Gold, and put them
on the Diseaseds Necks, the Chaplain repeating the words as many times as there
were persons touched, concluding with a Prayer that God would bless the
Ceremony. The Earls of Middlesex and St. Albans afterward holding the Basin,
Ewer and Towel whilst the King washed.

The rest of that Sunday after the Ceremony of Healing was over was privately
passed at Dinner, by the King with the Princess Royal, and a visit at evening
to the Queen of Bohemia.

Feast of the Estates of Holland.
COme we next to describe that magnificet entertainment which that night the
Estates of Holland had invited his Majesty to, at Prince Maurice his House. The
Hall (whose Door is one of the fairest and most costly in all Europe because it
is double, exceeding large and made of a rare Indian Wood) was furnished but
with the ordinary hangings of Crimson Damask, and had no other adornments but
that here and there, there were some fair pictures; the ends of the Chimneys
and the void place above the Crosse-Bar-Windows, were adorned with garlands,
wreathes and figures of Trees laden with Oranges and mingled with all sorts of
Flowers, which formed not only a very regular compartment, but wonderfully
refreshed also the Chamber, and charmed no less the smell by their perfume,
then they pleased the sight through the diversity of their Colors.

From the Center of the Roundel above, glazed about, descended low a royal
Crown very gallantly made in the midst of four Lustres or Crystal
Candlesticks, which with many other Candlesticks, Arms of Silver, and the like,
gave a most glorious light.

It is difficult to describe the manner of ordering and placing the Tables,
both for the terms sake and the intricacy of the design in this Treatment,
where convenience was made for the Lords to set and Sup; All was enclosed
within a balustrade that hindered strangers from intermedling into the
presence. The King first took his place under a Cloth of Estate of the same
Crimson Damask, between the Queen of Bohemia on his right hand, and the
Princess of Aurange on the left, and his Brothers and the Prince of Aurange
setting as they used before. The Kings Table (from whence he could see all the
Deputies, whose Table came from the midest of the Kings where they were seated
according to the ranks, which the Nobles and Towns hold in their Assemblies)
was served with six dishes in oval Form, and with two more laid a cross, the
other all laden like Pyramids, the Services being changed five times. There
was on the Estates Table Twenty eight great dishes, and many Plate Trenchers,
but they changed them no more then four times, to put a difference between
their Table and his Majesty. All along before This entertainment they served
but seven Tables with the Kings, besides the servants, but this day there were
sixteen, seven of which were served as ordinarily in the other appartments of
the Kings House, and the rest in the Costellary, where express order was given
to receive and treat all the English that should come. The expense of this
entertainment was not particularly known, by reason the States would not make
any brags of their Cost, but the King was greatly pleased with the magnificence
thereof, as he expressed himself to one of the States the next day, affirming
that he never Supped better then the day he arrived at the Hague, and that in
all the feasts which were made as well in France, Spain, and Germany, and in
the Low Countries, and among others, that which the Archduke Leopoldus made in
the Month of May 1656. when he was going out of the Low Countries into Germany,
he saw nothing come near that wherewith the states of Holland had now
entertained him.

As soon as the Estates began to drink the Kings Health, they gave the signal
with a Torch at one of the Windows which looked toward the Viver where the
Artillery was placed, which presently was fired, to which answered the Musket
and the Carbines of the Horse, and the Cannon from the Rampart, and this at
four several times, which was as the intermedial Music of that which passed in
the Palace during supper, whilst it lasted there was made to come forth from a
boat which was in the midst of that viver or pond, which washes the Foot of
Prince Maurice his House as well as o^e whole Palace, an infinite number of
squibs and of other artificial Fireworks, which gave a most pleasant
divertisement to the people the whole night.

On Monday the 21. the States having notice that the King intended to depart in
his voyage the day following, desired to know how they should wait upon him, to
make him their last complement either in body or by Deputies. But the King to
do them an extraordinary honor in recompense of those great civilities he had
received from them, acquainted them by a messenger of his own, that the next
day his voyage being deferred till Wednesday, he would make them a visit in
person in the place of their Assembly. They would have been glad if they could
have dispensed themselves from receiving so great an honor, but they chose to
be laden with civility at home, then to commit an incivility in opposing the
will of the King. The Estates of Holland likewise, to whom the King signified
by one of the Secretaries of his Commands that he would do them the same
honor, received the advertisement thereof with the same respect; and both one
and the other after they had agreed with the Ministers of the Court how they
intended to receive his Majesty, with all the submission they should be able to
render to so good a Prince and so great Monarch, they both gave necessary
orders in their several Assemblies for this glorious and illustrious visit.

The Speech of the Lor^s of Zeland.
In the mean time the Estates of Zeland and Friesland sent their Deputies a
part to congratulate the King who were received with the same Ceremony as the
the King had used to the other Provinces. At their Audience Mounsier De Veth
Pensionary Councellor of Zeland bespoke the King in these words. Sir, we are
here from the Lords the Estates of Zeland to do reverence to your Majesty, and
to assure you of our most humble and respectfull services, we represent Sir and
acknowledge in the person and sight of your Majesty, the favors and
assistances which our Province has from all time received from the Kings of
Great Britain your most famous Predecessors; and so we cannot but felicitate
you, and express the joy we have to see the grace which God would do unto your
Majesty in this admirable revolution of Affairs, wherewith your Majesty should
be so much the more touched, as neither you nor the rest of the world presumed
so much as to hope it.

If Great Britain has made Bon-fires at the Birth of your Majesty what should
we do now in this mavelous Conjuncture, where we see all the Artifices and
attempts of your enemies disappointed and overthrown, your Royal Person
miraculously reestablished in the Throne of your Ancestors, and your Crown (to
speak truth) sent from Heaven, rather then put upon the head of your Majesty,
by the hand of man: so we need not doubt that God who is the particular
Protector of Kings who raises at this time your Majesty by ways so
Extraordinary, will not fail to uphold you by that powerful hand, which laid
it on the Royal head; and that whole Christendom derives not advantages from
thence, which cannot be ordinary since that God by whom your Majesty reigns, so
visibly will make it so that you shall reign for him efficaciously, in rendering
the good and repose of his Church inseparable from the interests of your estate.

And hence shall it be Sir, that as from an inexhaustible spring upon the
Counsels and actions of your Majesty, shall flow all the blessings of Heaven
which shall settle the repose of your Estate and assure the Scepter in your
hands, for the comfort of your People, for the protection of your Allies, for
the Terror of your Enemies and for the establishment of a perpetual peace in
all Christendom, to the exaltation of the great name of God, and to the
particular glory of your Majesty. Especially we hope that this favorable
occasion will serve to tie more strongly the Knot of the Alliance which from
time to time has been so carefully maintained between Great Britain and this
Commonwealth, particularly if her Highness the Princess Royal who is so
notably interessed in the prosperity of both, will labor herein with the care
which we promise us from her Goodness.

These are the most ardent prayers Sir which the Lords the Estates of Zeland
your very humble Servants make unto God and which they hope will be heard in
due time.

The Count of Oldenburgh the powerfullest Count of Germany and allied to the
Royal house of Denmark, whose heir he is in case of faylure, no other Prince
or State having by express Letters of Credence to the King, by their Ministers
congratulated his Majesty upon the happiness of his affairs, sent Monsieur
Cotteritz his Councellor of State purposely on the Errand; the King received
him with all honor and respect and gave him a most obliging answer for the
complement.

This One and Twentieth of May, The Duke of York goes aboard the English Fleet.
the Duke of York, who was hindered on Saturday the 19. from going aboard the
Fleet as we have said by the storm, embarked himself and came on board the
General. It was thought necessary by the Kings Council to disengage the
Officers and Mariners of the Oath which they had taken to the last Parliament,
and to be assured thereof by a new Oath of Fidelity to the King their Sovereign
Lord. The Duke being received with extraordinary honor and submission caused
the Captains of the other Ships to come aboard him and take the Oath of
Allegiance, which the Captains caused afterward to be administered to the
inferior Officers, and to all the rest of the Seamen in the other Ships. The
Lord Mountague had caused the Flag wherein were the States Arms, to be changed
before he departed from the Coast of England, and made the Arms thereof in the
stern to be defaced and pulled down, but reserved the Honor for his Royal
Highness to change the name of the Ship, which Cromwell had caused to be
called the Naseby, in memory of that fatal place where the King deceased
received his total overthrow: who thinking no name great enough for so immense
a structure (being certainly one of the handsomest and biggest Frames for war
(and yet the best sailer) that ever sailed upon the Seas next after the
Sovereign, carrying fourscore pieces of Brass Canon, and six hundred men on
board her) nor so welcome to the Fleet, gave her the name of the Royal Charles.

It will not be amiss to set down a little brief of the Dukes entertainment
here; he dined in that Chamber or Gallery where the King was to lodge, which
was all new wainscotted and gilded, and furnished with a fair bed of the
finest Cloth of England, fringed with Gold and Silver, the Floor laid with
Turkey Tapestry. In the Generals Kitchen there were six Clerks that labored but
for the mouth, his Table being as well served at Sea as many Princes were in
their Dominions: The dishes which were all of Silver were of so vast a
bigness, most of them, that Surloines of Beef and Chines likewise were served
up in them. The Duke dined at this ordinary of the Generals, which might pass
for a great feast, and in going thence was saluted with the Artillery of the
whole Fleet, which did him the same Honor when he came on board. At this time
the King received letters from the Quakers in England full of impertinences and
menaces against him if he protected not their Sect and entered not also into
those thoughts.

The King having made known the day before to Monsieur de Veth Deputy from
Zeland to the Estates General, The King visits the States General in their
Assembly.
and President that Week, that his purpose was to render them a visit the next
morning in their Assembly, preparation was made to receive him with all
imaginable respect, and so ordered a Deputy for every Province to wait upon him
from his lodgings thither, two of them being to march before the King
bare-headed to the place where the Estates would receive him, and from thence
to the seat which was prepared for him.

They had also provided a great train of Coaches to wait on him thither, but
his Majesty had no sooner answered the Complement of the Deputies, but being
upon the stone stairs of the Court, he caused the Lords of the train to
advance, and expressed a willingness to walk that little way on foot, which is
between Prince Maurice his House, and the Palace. Prince William of Nassau put
himself immediately before the King, who not disposed to cover himself in the
way, the Deputies of the Estates that followed him, put themselves in the same
condition; and in this order between two files of Soldiers they arrived at the
foot of the stairs of the great hall, where the Estates General came in a body
to meet him, made him a low reverence, and opened themselves to make him pass
in the midst of them, and followed him thus two and two along the Hall, and
then through the Gallery (where they sell pictures, but their Shops that day
shut up) and their withdrawing Chamber, unto that of their ordinary Assembly,
his Majesty and the Estates being still uncovered.

This Hall is rather long then large, The manner of His Majesty's sitting in
the Assembly of the States General.
having in the midst of it a Table capable to hold about Thirty persons, in the
middle whereof is a place for the President, which changes every week
according to the number and rank of the united Provinces, but the President for
that Week quitted it then and sat in that which is over against it, where the
Ambassadors and Ministers of Foreign Princes are seated, when public
Audience is given them; and on the usual seat of the President, they made an
ascent or foot-bank of seven or eight foot broad covered over with a foot-cloth
of Tapistry, which reached along the passage even to the door of the
withdrawing Chamber: on the Foot-bank was placed a Chair of Green Velvet, and
over head a Cloth of Estate or Canopy of the same Colored Velvet, which was
hung between the Pourtraits of the four last Princes of Aurange of the House of
Nassau there standing, which were so separated that those of Prince William and
Maurice were of one hand, father and son together, and those of Prince Henry
Frederick (brother to Prince Maurice) and his son William the second, Husband
to the late Princess Royal, on the other side of the Canopy.

The King being come to this place, which was a kind of a Throne, Prince
William Frederick of Nassau, and some English Lords put themselves behind the
seat, and his Majesty, who stood still and uncovered till all the Members that
compose that illustrious Senate were entered, (which were numerous that day
because of the Extraordinary Deputies) when they were after a while disposed in
their places, sat down then and covered himself, but remained not long in that
posture: For as soon as he saw the seats full, and all the Deputies covered, he
arose and putting off his Hat, in very kind and obliging expressions for all
the civilities they had showed him since he arrived in their Country, he
assured them of the constancy of his Amity and affection for the good of that
Commonwealth, and here more solemnly recommended unto them the persons and
interests of the Princess Royal his Sister, and of the Prince of Aurange his
Nephew; to which the President made a reply in such terms as sufficiently made
known the respect wherewith they resented this Honor they had received,

This being done his Majesty retired the same way and in the same manner he
entered, Prince William marching in the head, and the Estates two by two
following him and conducting the King into the Court to the foot of the Stairs
of the great Hall where they had received him.

Here the Lords States of the Province of Holland, to whom the King had
promised the like honor of his presence in their Assembly came to meet his
Majesty in a body. They had likewise before them Prince Maurice of Nassau
Lieutenant General of the Horse and Governor of Wesel marching alone and
bareheaded, performing the same place which Prince William had done with the
Estates General; Nothing being new or what varied from the manner of his
Majesty's reception and sitting in the Assembly of the States General, twill be
needless to repeat them here; only this requires a remark that the King
speaking near the same words, at least the same sense in both Assemblies and
concluding with his recommendation of the Prince and Princess of Aurange to
their affection; the states of Holland taking advantage by a pretense that they
did not perfectly hear not understand that clause, ordered their President to
request the King that he would be pleased to signify his pleasure therein,
again to the said President, which he consented to and to satisfy the Estates
of Holland Sent their President this following Note signed in the Princess
Royal her Chamber with his own hand.

SIrs, whereas I leave here in your hands the Princess my Sister, and the
Prince of Aurange my Nephew, two persons which are extremely dear to me, I pray
you Sirs take their interest to heart, and to cause them to resent the effects
of the Favor in the occasions which the Princess my Sister shall request of
you either for her self or the Prince her son, assuring you that all the effect
of your good will toward then shall be acknowledged of me as if I had received
them in my own person. Signed

Charles R.


THis was merely procured from the King to do him greater Honor, for that not
knowing how to get a Copy of his Speech which they would have recorded, they
find this way to be sure of a parcel of it under his own hand: a Copy whereof
being therefore transmitted to the Estates General, was inserted in the
Registers of the Resolutions of the Generality and of the Province of Holland,
in perpetuam rei memoriam, and to manifest their readiness of complying with
the King in all things.

Monsieur de Thou Count of Meslay the French Ambassador had this day his
Audience of leave with the same Ceremonies as he was received at first; so
likewise had the Ambassadors of Denmark, and from him they went to visit the
Earl of Oxford, as Chief of the Commissioners from the House of Lords.

The Ambassadors had caused the King to be sounded, if he were pleased that
they should see the Commissioners of the two houses, to which question his
Majesty expressed himself, that they should do him a pleasure therein. They had
before often caused Audience to be asked of both Commissioners, but their
continual employments on the Kings person, joined to the difficulty there was
to assemble persons that diverted themselves in a place where occasions of
their entertainment were not wanting to them, and in a time when all the world
rejoiced, opposed always their satisfaction therein. Only the Earl of Oxford
endeavored what he could to make the Commissioners of the Higher house to
assemble but to no purpose. They prayed therefore at last the one and twentieth
of May audience of the lower House with my Lord Fairfax, who had assembled some
of them in the house of the Baron of Asperen where he was lodged; and the next
day which was Tuesday the day before the Kings imbarking, the Lord of Oxford
did as much, receiving them at the House of Mr. Buysero Secretary of the
Council to the Prince of Aurange. They were civilly entertained from the
Consideration of the respect the King had showed them, but as to their affairs,
my Lord told them, that the King for the future was to have the sole
disposition of such matters, since that in returning to his Kingdoms, the sole
conduct of the State appertained and was remitted to him.

Prince Maurice of Nassau did now likewise complement the King upon his
departure from himself, and also officiated for the Duke of Brandenburgh to
both of whom the K. professed a very great affection, to the Prince, for his
lodging, residence and other Civilities showed him at his house; to the Duke,
for those Testimonies of that kindness he had for his affairs, when all the
world believed them desperate, and further said, that he would conserve
eternally the remembrance of the good offices which his Highness had rendered
him in the Empire, and of the great obligations which he laid upon him in a
time, when there was no Prince almost, that dared to declare for his Interests.
Monsieur Coyet Ambassador from the Swede, because he would not be troublesome
to the King in this dispatch for England, contented himself to signify to his
Majesty, that his Master would send an Ambassador extraordinary to complement
him together for all his felicities upon his arrival to his Kingdom.

But the Estates General who had received an Honor by the Kings presence in
their Assembly, The Estates General do the like.
whose memory they intend shall be precious to all posterity, thought
themselves bound to acknowledge it, and to give him aparting complement on his
voyage, which was uttered by the Baron of Gaunt, in these Elegant words.

SIR,
THe Estates General of the United Provinces, having been advertised from your
Majesty, that you purpose to Embarque to morrow to complete your voyage for
England, return here again to receive the Honor of your Commands on the paint
of your departure. If your Majesty finds not in their faces the same
cheerfulness which you might observe there, when they had the Honor to salute
you at your Arrival, it is because of the sorrow to see themselves ready to be
deprived of the Splendor of so fair a light, which your Majesty has made to
shine in their Estate during the little time you would remain there. That which
comforts them, Sir in some kind is that they know that the interests of your
Majesty press your departure, and the good of the affairs of your Crown,
permits you not to defer it longer. Nevertheless, the little residence which
it has pleased your Majesty to make amongst us; and the goodness wherewith ye
would receive our endeavors, we have made to be able to please you, leaves
them such signal, strong and indubitable marks of your goon will toward us,
that we shall for it eternally bless that providence to which we owe these
incomparable advantages.

The Presence of your Majesty's sacred person in their Assembly, and the
obliging expressions which your Royal mouth made in the Senate, are such
evident Testimonies of the disposition which you have to Honor this Estate
with your Royal good will, that they deserve that all Posterity should find
them written in Letters of Gold in their Registers, as we have deeply graved
them in our hearts.

If the entertainment which has been made to your Majesty and which it has
pleased you to accept in so engaging a manner, has no proportion with the
greatness of so potent a Monarch, we beseech you most humbly to believe, that
this defect proceeds rather from the indigence of our County, then from the
will of the Inhabitants, in whose acclamations and joy we are persuaded that
your Majesty may observe visibly the zealous devotions and ardent prayers they
put forth unto Heaven for the prosperity of your affairs, and for the glory of
your Majesty's person.

And since the Estates General are through an indispensible necessity to be
deprived of the precious presence of your Majesty, they will at least accompany
you with their prayers, which they will make incessantly that the sea and winds
may favor your passage and make you h^ppily to arrive at the haven of your
Kingdom; that Calm and quietness may open and show that to you, which Storms
and Tempests have so miserably held sh^t for so many years.

As soon as the estates General shall have understood that your Majesty is
landed, they will not fail to send to you their extraordinary Ambassadors, as
well to finish with you in your Kingdom the Offices which they have begun
here, as to receive and make more particular overtures in the important matter
of an alliance, whereof it has pleased your Majesty to touch here something in
General, being ready to answer on their side the good and sincere intentions,
whereof you had the goodness to give such great assurances; because that with
the affection which we have for the good of your affairs, we have also a most
deep respect for the sacred Character of your Unction, and for the inestimable
merit of Your Royal Person.


The estates being retired, after the King had thanked them for their manifold
civilities they had done him, His Majesty employed the rest of the day in
taking his leave by visits designed to that purpose. The first he made was to
the Queen of Bohemia where he stayed not long, thence to the House of the
Princess Dowager of Orange, where he found also the Princess of Nassau, and
the young Lady of Aurange her Daughters. The time and discourse past here, was
not only complemental but of affairs of State, (of which that Princess is very
capable) and of the present condition of Europe and of the interest of it is
several Princes, of whose Estates she has a most perfect knowledge: After this
visit performed she reconducted the King to the place where she received him
and retired not till she saw the King gone.

The next visit was bestowed on the Princess Royal, who presented him many
persons either to recommend to him or to take leave. He stayed with her till
supper time at which time the Wagons were employed from the estates to carry
his Baggage to Scheveling which was presently embarked; and then he returned
to his Lodgings.

At evening the Chief of the Deputies of Holland, took occasion from the
respects the King said he had for that Province, for the testimonies of
affection which they had showed to him, to say to his Majesty, that the
intention of the Lords estates of Holland was to do something more if there
were any Rarities in their Estate that might be presented to so great a Prince.
Notwithstanding that they would give themselves the liberty to cause him to be
accommodated, and to send him on the first occasion some presents, which they
would beseech his Majesty to conceive as proofs of their good will rather then
of their power. The King would have declined it, saying that he needed no other
assurances of their affection, then those they had given him at this present
occasion, that he was already satisfied therewith, and thanked them not only
for the effects passed, but also for the good will they expressed unto him for
the Future.

Those presents which they intended for him were not yet ready, because the bed
of the Princess Royal was not perfect, which was to make a part of them, and
because they knew not yet what his Majesty would like most. No more therefore
then was said to his Majesty; but the Estates having resolved what they would
present to the Duke of York, the same Lord acquainted his Highness that the
Lords of Holland willing to give some marks of affection to his Royal
Highness, had sought every where for something that might be worthy of him,
and that having found nothing because of the shortness of residence, would not
permit them to make enquiry, yet that his Highness might not depart without
some token and sentiment of their submisse respects to him, they prayed him to
accept a bill of Exchequer of Seventy five thousand Guilders, which makes
sterling Seven thousand five hundred pounds, which he might cause his Treasurer
to receive either at present in this Town, of Mr. Berchel Receiver General of
the Province, or at London, or elsewhere, and it should be paid at sight. The
Duke received the Bill with many Testimonies of acknowledgement, and said that
it was without any repugnance or reluctance that he charged himself with this
obligation toward the Lords the estates. The like present and sum was tendered
in a Bill to the Duke of Gloucester, who also received it very kindly. They had
designed also a present of Four hundred pounds for my Lord Crofts who brought
the estates of Holland into the Audience of the King, but as they deferred the
Kings Present so did they alter this determination, staying while a Chain of
Gold of that value could with all possible speed and curiosity be made.

The days were now almost at their full length, and yet it may be said that
not only the Hague saw Wednesday the 23. of May something more early then the
Sun, but also that there was in a manner, no night between Tuesday and
Wednesday particularly for those, who finding no Nooke or Hole to put their
heads in (because the Houses were not able to Contain the people who flocked
thither from all parts of the Neighboring Country) for the most part were
constrained to walk the Streets.

There was no night for more then fifty thousand persons, who from that Tuesday
evening were gone to take up their places on the Downs or Sand hills which
border on the Sea along the coast of Holland, from whence they might discover
the Fleet and see the King to Embark. The Trumpet awakened the Horse that were
to attend the Solemnity of his Majesty's departure before day; and at two a
clock in the morning the Drums beat to assemble as well the Citizens as
Soldiers. In the Kings house it self every one was employed the whole night in
causing the rest of the Baggage to be laden and sent away, and there was seen
nothing but Wagons and Coaches full of English who went to embark themselves
before the ba^ks appointed for his Majesty's Service were possessed by his
Domestic people and Servants who were to attend upon his person.

The Citizens came together at their ordinary Rendezvous of the Viverberg, and
the Regiment of the guards in the outer Court, both of which marched from
thence to Scheveling, where they stood in Battalia on the Sea shore, from both
sides of the Battery of the Cannon which was brought thither from the Hague.

The king himself was very early and soon ready, and received the complements
of many particular persons that would do him reverence, expecting the estates
of Holland who had desired the favor of their last audience just at his
departure. They met at their hall as at their first visit and thence to the
Kings house, where all the Lords and persons of Quality about his Majesty came
to meet them and conducted them to the presence Chamber, where the chief of
them Mounsieur de Wit spoke this most elegant Harange, which far surpassed all
the rest. He began in these Words.

SIR,
IF one may judge of the displeasure, which we have to see your Majesty depart
from our Province, by the satisfaction we had to possess you, we shall have no
great trouble to make it known to you. Your Majesty might have observed in the
Countenance of all our People, the joy they had in their Hearts to see amongst
them a Prince cherished of God, a Prince wholly miraculous, and a Prince that
is probably to make a part of their quietness and felicity. Your Majesty shall
see presently all the Streets filled, all the ways covered, and all the Hills
laden with people, which will follow you even to the place of your Embarkment,
and would not leave you, if they had wherewith to pass them into Your
Kingdom.

Our joy is Common unto us with that of our Subjects, but as we know better
then they the inestimable value of the Treasure which we possess, so are we
more sensible of this sad separation. It would be insupportable to us, Sir, if
we reentred not into our selves, and considered not that it is the thing of the
world we most desired, and the greatest advantage also that we could wish to
your Majesty. We acquiesce therein, because we know that this Removal is no
less necessary for us then glorious for your Majesty; and that it is in your
Kingdom that we must find the accomplishment of the prayers we have made and
make still for you and us. So shall we not fail to profit thence as well as
from the assurances which it has pleased you to give us of an immutable
affection for the good of this Republique.

We render most humble thanks unto your Majesty for them, and particularly for
the illustrious proof which it pleased you to give us thereof by the glorious
visit wherewith you honored our Assembly. We shall conserve the memory of it
most dearly and make the marks of that goodness pass to our last Posterity,
to the end they acknowledge it with the same respect with which we have
received it.

The Constitution wherein we see your Majesty ready to take Horse for the
continuation of your Voyage, forbids us to enlarge our selves upon a Subject
which would never weary us, if we had words conformable to our respectfull
sentiments. But we have no mind to increase the just impatience, which your
Majesty must have to see your self returned into that Kingdom. We pray God Sir
that it be quick and happy, and that as be has disposed the hearts and
affections of your Subjects to acknowledge their lawful and Sovereign Prince,
it will please him also to Command the Seas and Winds to favor your Voyage; so
that after you have received in your own Coast the same prayer which we shall
reiterate, you may enjoy in your Royal Person and in your Posterity for ever
all the felicity and prosperity which your most humble Servants wish unto your
Majesty.


To this Speech the King returned in his usual civility, repeating the great
obligations they had said upon him, which he said he would convert into a
strict alliance and perfect understanding between them as soon as his estate
was composed. When this complement was over which the King expected, he took
his way to the Princess Royal her appartment, whom he would visit at home
before he took horse; whither the Lords States would needs conduct him, and by
reason they were uncovered he would not put on his hat in the going thither:
when he was come to the Chamber the said Lords retired, to take Coach when the
saw the King ready to take horse.

The conversation which his Majesty had with the Princess was but a moment,
for immediately after, he went thence and came down into the Court of the
Palace, where he mounted on horseback with the Princes his Brothers, and took
his way for Scheveling, with the report of the great Artillery which thundered
from the Rampire, Marching in the midst of those two Princes (which order he
observed after throughout his passage in England having before him the Prince
of Aurange, accompanied with Prince William of Nassau governor of Friesland,
with Mounsieur of Wassenaer Lieutenant Admiral of the Province, and many other
persons of Quality and condition. The Queen of Bohemia, the Princess Royal,
the Princess Dowager, and the Princesses her Daughters took Coach as well as
the estates of Holland who would accompany him even to the place of his
embarquement.

The Ambassadors and other Ministers of Foreign Princes who sent not their
Coaches for the same reason that had dispensed them from it at the entrance,
and almost all persons of condition took the avauntguard and disposed
themselves all along the coast where the Citizens, the horse and the Regiments
of the guard stood in Battalia. A great part of the Inhabitants of the
Neighbor Towns were there already, and those that came not forth early in the
morning or the night before, followed the Royal persons in so great a
multitude, that that place which is very populous, and could not lodge the
people that were come thither from all places of the province, was abandoned
and converted into a desert in very few hours.

As soon as they saw the King to appear on the hill which covers the Village
of Scheveling on the Sea side, The King comes to Schevely.
(where the King had formerly taken Shipping and from thence landed at the Spey
in Scotland in 1650) the Cannon which was transported two days before from the
Viverbergh, upon the Strand, saluted him with its whole battery, which ceased
not to shoot continually until (he being drawn off from those Coasts) they
could see no longer the honor they endeavored to render him. The Citizens and
the guards answered thereunto with their Vollies of Musket shot, and the
Cavallry with their Carbines, and invited thereby the Fleet to make all their
Artillery to thunder, which after it had lightened the Air, filled it with so
thick a smoke, that those great floating Castles (the Fleet) disappeared in a
moment to the eyes of those that were on land.

The King being alighted received the last complement of the Lords the estates
who had brought him to the brink of the Sea, by the same person, Mounsieur de
Wit. His Majesty next took leave of the Duke of Brunswick Lunenburgh, of the
Princess Dowager of Aurange, of the Princess of Nassau, and of the Young Lady
of Aurange her Daughter and of all the other persons of quality which could not
follow him or might trouble him in waiting on him to the Fleet.

There were none but his nearest Relations the Queen of Bohemia, The King comes
on board.
the Princess Royal and the Prince of Aurange that conducted him aboard the
Admiral Ship which was to pass him into England. The estates of Holland had
caused one of the greatest barks of the place to be fitted for the Royal
persons. The Body of the Vessel was garnished with Tapistry, its mast carried
the Royal Flag, and its yards were laden with Garlands and Crowns of verdure
and Flowers, among which there was one fastened and accompanied with a streamer
which carried for its devise Quo Fas et Fata, to denote that the King embarking
himself went to the place where his right and the providence of God called him,
alluding to the ordinary Motto of the Kings of England, Dieu Et Mon Droit. The
King entered there with all the Royal Family, but seeing a Shallop or Brigandine
to approach, glazed and covered with Tapistry which General Montague had sent
from aboard him, as soon as he saw the King to appear in the Strand, he entered
into her, and the Queen of Bohemia followed him. This Shallop was accompanied
with many others, and was rowed with Oars by the Seamen, who seeing themselves
in possession of their Sovereign prince made the Neighboring shore to resound
with their shoutes, and expressed their joy by all the signs and marks that
could be required from persons of that quality; Some in casting their Caps up
into the Air and others in casting them into the Sea, to which some likewise
abandoned their Wastcoats and Doublets.

The King approaching, the General caused the Royal Flag to be put to the
Mainmast and to the Castle of the Poop and received his Majesty (with the
greatest submission that could be rendered to a Prince) at the Top of the Stairs
by which he ascended to the Ship. The King again rendered him all the
testimonies of goodness and affection that could be imagined or expected from
a Sovereign who acknowledged perfectly the important Services he had done him,
as having been one of the most powerful instruments of his reestablishment,
whereof he had given him Assurances long before; and a most certain proof, when
he departed from the Sound (presently after Richards disappointment whither he
was sent to assist the Swede, under pretense to mediate between the Dane and
that Nation) upon his Majesty's Orders to favor the design of Sir George
Booth, who then was in Arms for his Majesty under the fair pretense of a Free
Parliament.

It was past eleven a clock when the King arrived at the Fleet, so that as soon
as his Majesty, was but a little disengaged of a part of those that would
follow him on board, he sat down at a Table in the great Gallery with the
other Royal persons, while some other of his Lords and others great ones of
Holland were entertained in other appartments. In the Kings passage the two
days at Sea the General expended above two thousand pounds, though the Lords
the Estates had provided his Ship and the Rest of the Fleet with all kind of
necessary refreshments and provisions beyond what needed for so short passage.

After Dinner was ended, the King received again the last complements of some
particular persons, expressing great civility to the Deputies of the States of
Holland, for whom the Leiutenant Admiral Wassenaer made the Speech, and sent
them away with new protestations of affection and Amity.

The Sea was calm and the heaven so clear, that the King had a desire to
discover once again a Country, where he had received so many testimonies of
respect and love. To this purpose to take his full and last view thereof, he
ascended to the top of the poop, and seeing the people with which he had left
the Downs covered remaining there still, he was pleased to acknowledge that it
was impossible his own Subjects could have more tenderness for him then those
people, on whose Affections he perceived he reigned no less, then he was going
to reign on the Wills of the English.

After this, he embraced the Prince of Aurange with the same tenderness as he
could have had for his own Son, and gave him his Blessing; and took leave of
the Queen of Bohemia. But when he was to depart from the princess Royal his
Sister; that Princess who had with so much courage and without grief almost,
looked all past misfortunes in the Face, and who had virtue enough to fortify
that of her Brothers, needed now all his constancy to resolve her self to
suffer this separation which she had wished with so much impatience, and whose
consequences were to be so glorious to them both. The King himself who had
resolution enough so as to show no weakness in his greatest misfortunes, could
not resist the tears of a Sister, whom many other considerations as strong as
those of Birth rendered extremely dear unto him. She would have been
comfortless amidst so many joys, but for the hopes she had again shortly to
see the King her Brother in his Kingdom. The former mutual endearments
between them were always so passionate and sincere, that much ado there would
have been to disengage her from the Arms of his Majesty, if the General had not
caused the Anchors to be weighed and the signal to be given the Fleet.

The Royal Charles newly so Christened was now under sail for England, when the
Q. of Bohemia, the Princess Royal, and the Prince of Aurange descended into
the Bark which was to bring them back again to Land. All the Artillery of the
Fleet saluted those Royal persons, and the Battery on the Downs of Holland
answered them with the small shot of the Citizens and Guards. It was about four
in the afternoon Wednesday the 23. of May that the Fleet did set sail, and
about six a Clock it was gotten so far off, that the people which all this
while stirred not from the Downs, having lost sight of it retired themselves,
whilst the King continued his way toward his Kingdoms, with the same
Serenity that was seen lately to accompany all his affairs.

Thus ended these Dutch Triumphs, which while the King remained there possessed
the minds of all men, who could not choose but stand at gaze to see the
stupendous alteration of his condition. His often and familiar residence
amongst that people, procured their universal love; the sudden glories of his
unexpected Restitution, rendered him their veneration and general reverence.
They are, what ever their enemies say to the contrary, because their Reasons of
state sometime have made them recede from the direct ways of Justice, the most
open hearted people in the world for the generality, so that one may read
their thoughts in their countenance; And next to England, it may be presumed
they shared as much felicity and joy and as truly manifested it as any other
Nation whatsoever.

That which in the Kings residence there, as was said, possessed their minds
then, now altogether employed their Tongues in relating the miraculous
providence and as propitious Grandeurs of this Monarch. Extolling his virtue
and Fortune, with the same elevation of discourse, as a Prince every way
suitable to those great Honors and Felicities which heaven had so graciously
reserved for him. And these speeches were uttered with such passion and
rapture, and so concerningly, as if they had Denizond themselves his natural
Subjects. The unmatchable, and incomparable happiness and glory of this
Prince, to be equally beloved by his own and other Nations; while we had the
Fruition and enjoyment, and they nothing but the amiable Idea and Platonic
affection for his Person and Government.

They blamed their Eyes that they were so short sighted they could see him no
longer, they complained of our Fleet, not for the injuries and losses they had
caused them in War, but for this done them amidst so much joy, tranquillity and
peace; they quarrelled the largeness of the Ocean that had so far divided and
distanced the two shores, in hindering them the content of seeing the
continuation of their begun wonderments, for the King, that they might please
themselves in the Aemulation of his Subjects. How often did they envy Dover the
reception of that Sovereign guest, whom they could detain no longer in view!
Reason as well as their former joy and gladness restrained them from sighing
lest thereby they should fill and swel those Sails which winged away their
delight too fast, complaining even of their farewell Vollies.

They then returned drooping, dejected to such a depth of Melancholy, as if
they had come from a Funeral, though the Sea never labored under such a
Triumph: when again at their return to those blessed shades of his abode, joy
get uppermost again, floated and swimming in full Bowls and Healths for his
Happy voyage as if they would waft him over in Vessels of Wine.

The remainder of that day and night was consecrated Carolo Reduci, the vicine
places to the Hague resounding with the like cries, ^en den Roning wedergaende
to the King returning Bacchus and Ceres made the Feast, and Neptune was
invited, and desired to bring Aeolus along with him, that they might make sure
there should be no disturbance by stormy weather, the Gods supt upon the smooth
Table of the Sea, and nothing reeled but the people on shore.

Leave we the Dutch to dream of their past felicity, and return to the Fleet
which was as beforesaid, under Sail for England, which the Duke of York being
Admiral now commanded. By his order the several persons of quality were
allotted and distributed to several Ships; And because of the uncertainty, it
was not thought fit to entrust so rich and valuable a prize as the Royal
Fraternity in one though never so firm a bottom, therefore the Duke of York
disposed of himself aboard the London, a Ship newly built of the third Rank, of
a most excellent Fabric and Composition and which for it is Name sake his
Highness was pleased to honor, and to continue it is own happy appellation;
having received it (after all the infamous places for the late Kings defeats
had been adopted into the Fleet) when there was some apparency of the Kings
Restitution, to which this City chiefly and primarily contributed, and so
happened to be the first Christian Ship in the Navy.

The Duke of Gloucester by his Highness order was likewise set on board the
Swiftsure, which Name he himself changed into James, with the usual Solemnities
and Customs. Nothing was now heard and seen at Sea, but the noise and the
smoke of the Cannon, which incessantly thundered all the remaining part of that
day, and continued in great measure all the voyage. 'Twas no little part of the
Triumph to see so brave a Fleet in all it is glories sailing together, which
King Solomon observed of a single Ship to be one of the most satisfactory
sights. The Lord of the Ocean now kept his Court upon it in all his Regalities,
and gave Law to it is unruly Floods; such a calm being thereon that it was an
easy observation to praesage from thence the evennesse, quietness, and
stability of his Majesty's future Reign and Empire.

Here we may not omit which has past us in its place, a particular Narrative
of the reception of the Letters from his Majesty and his Highness the Duke of
York, by General Mountague then in the Downs, where at the reading of them the
Commanders of the several Ships stood up bare and resolved nemine
Contradicente, That the Commanders and Officers of the Fleet do receive the
gracious Declaration of his Majesty as also the expression of his gracious
purposes to them and the whole Fleet, communicated in a Letter to the General,
with great joyfulnesse of heart, and for them return unto his Majesty their
most humble thanks, declaring and prosessing their exact Loyalty and Duty to
his Majesty, and desire the Generals of the Fleet humbly to present the same
to his Majesty.

It was likewise resolved, that the said Letter, Declaration and Vote should be
publicly read to the respective Companies of the Fleet, now in the Downs, to
know their sense concerning the same, which being accordingly performed, they
did by loud acclamations, and other expressions of joy, declare their assent to
the said Vote, not one person in the whole Fleet manifesting their dissent
thereunto.

The General fired the first Gun himself, and cried God bless His Majesty.
Then might you see the Fleet in her pride, with Pennants loose Guns roaring,
and Caps flying, and loud Vive le Roy's ecchoed from one Ship to another, which
were answered with the great Guns from Deal and Sandwich Castles. The General
entertaining the Officers, Gentlemen, and Mariners in his Ship with two Pipes
of Canary.

Thus as God turns the Heart of the King as the Rivers of water, so did he
turn the heart of those that dwell upon the waters to the King. The strong
Stream and Tide of Loyalty influenced by the superior motions, returned with
an overflowing excess of Gladness, and blessed these Islands with a deluge of
joy. Even those very men who so lately had declared against Monarchy, and His
Majesty in express terms, and stemmed the Current of duty, now winded about of
a sudden to their Allegiance. They who had been driven with the several
Euroclydons and various Gusts of the Usurpation, were now led by the fair Gales
of the Trade wind of Loyalty; that Loadstone, that after the many variations in
the Compass of our late revolutions, attracted the Hearts of the most obdure,
obstinate and rude people, fixing them in a due course by the benign guidance
of a more auspicious Cynosure, Great CHARLE's Native Star.

The Depths of those profound pretenses of Liberty, and the Honor of the
Nation, unjustly challenged to be debased by Monarchy, and swallowed up in the
Prerogative, were now found to be mere shallowes and quicksands; whereon the
Vessel of the Commonwealth was ready to be Shipwrackt, and nothing but the
Sovereign Pilot could save or rescue it, whom the mad ignorance of unruly
predatory men had desperately thrown overboard.

Nor was it less in the Flexanimity of the Soldiery; the Oracle of the Sword,
was now to be fulfilled, in turning it to Plow Shares and Pruning hooks, the
Long riddle of the War to be resolved into a lasting and certain Peace. The
great Alexander of the North -- qui cunctando restituit rem, undid the Sword by
the ties of his discreet and temporizing Allegiance. The Obligations, by his
Prudence, Worth, Discipline, Valor, and Vigilance, which he laid upon the
Army, civilized their untamed Spirits, and brought them to a just sense of
their obedience and knowledge of themselves; the Diabolical illusions which had
possessed most of them, now the appearance of Englands Redeemer was at hand,
totally disappeared, and they presently return to their innocence (such as
mistaken duty can be allowed for) in this following Address to the King, which
because of its summing up all the Circumlocutions and mistakes of the
Rebellion, and most highly magnifies the wonder of the Kings Restitution, is
here transcribed in its own words; it was drawn up while the King was at Sea,
and therefore it is placed here, though delivered to Him on Dartford Heath, May
29. the day of His Entrance.

WIth such a joy as flows from Reverence and Love, we present our selves
before Your Sacred Majesty. Besides our Reflection on the Common Good, which in
this happy change relates to our Particular intends this joy, and renders it
sincere; For we can now please our selves in our selves, while we are really
performing that duty for which we were raised. And with all thankfulness we
acknowledge that care Your Majesty in Your late Letter and Declaration, has
expressed of our necessary concerns.

We bless God to see that day, when the Serenity of every man's Countenance
discovers the Tranquillity of his mind, for this shows Your Majesty to be the
Soul of Your People, since during Your absence, the Nation was cast into such
distractions as we have no pleasure to remember, but had rather turn our
thoughts and grateful acknowledgements, to the happy Conduct of our noble
General, who has thus far lead us in our duty to your Royal Person. Yet as we
cannot attribute too much to his merits, so neither can we deprive our selves
of that Honor and Comfort which we find in the accomplishment of his just
design.

Therefore in plain and Souldier-like, though humble terms, we say, Your
Majesty has made us and the Nation happy in Your Return to this Your Native
Kingdom, which doubtless will, nay we may say, has produced a Settlement
upon the Foundation of our Ancient Laws; by the due execution of which,
together with Your Majesty's pious Inclinations, we trust Libertisme and
Profaneness will be wholly suppressed, the Protestant Cause and true
Professors of it encouraged, to the Comfort of all Your Religious and good
People.

Your Majesty will now have Your great Council about You, who have already
given proof of their Loyalty and Wisdom, both to Your Majesty and Your People.
We profess and declare, That as we have not been altogether useless in the
Restoration as well of Your Sacred Majesty to Your Crowns and Kingdoms, as the
People to their just Rights, so shall we for the future, cheerfully sacrifice
our Lives, or whatsoever can be more dear to us, in the Service of Your Majesty
against all Oppositions whatsoever, and by a ready obedience to Your Commands
express our Selves

Your Majesty's most loyal Subjects and obedient Servants.


Something has been said already, as to the Emblem of the Peace, the Lawyers
Cown, but the Law was already restored and returned into its ancient Channells
and Bounds, the writs issuing in His Majesty's Name, and the Courts of
Judicature setting by His Authority, (the States great Seal having been brought
into the House of Commons, and there broke, and the pieces thereof given the
Commissioners for their Fees) now ensues some preparations for the Gospel.

The Sacred Name of the King (like that of Jehovah with the Jews) had been not
out of reverence, but danger or despite, seldom or never indeed used in the
Pulpit, it being a piacular Crime to mention the King in our prayers, when
Curses and speaking ill of him, though in despite of Solomon's warning against
such malediction of Princes, was the safest and most advantageous Course. Now
God would Honor the place where his Name was to be called upon with due
Veneration to that of his Vicegerent, His Omniscience declaring that his
terrible Name cannot be revered where his anointed Ones is despised;
Especially such a Prince, whom he had so signally brought forth, protected and
restored.

The Pulpit therefore is reconsecrated, which the impudent intrusion and
blasphemy against God and the King had profaned; The Purity of Divine Worship
was to be recommenced with the acknowledgement of the Title and Style of his
Majesty, who bears not in vain the name of the Defendor of the Faith.
Accordingly in most of the Churches upon the first intimation of the order of
Parliament to that purpose (though some and many other Loyal congregations had
antevened it) the King was solemnly prayed for, to the great heightning of the
Peoples devotion and thanksgiving to Almighty God, who had given an earnest of
his Majesty's personal, by this nominall, presence amongst them to the further
exaltation of their praises to him.

But to refer these and other preparatory glories of the King to their
consummation in his Return, it will be time to look back to the Royal Fleet now
floating on the Main, and sailing very slowly, the Sea priding her self in the
burden of that Triumph she carried, as loath to deliver the Treasure she
possessed, till at last on Friday about three of the Clock in the morning they
came in sight of Dover.

The General attended with a great Train of the Nobility and Gentry having
obtained leave of the House to attend his Majesty's landing on Wednesday the
23. of May went from White Hall by Water to the Bridge-foot in order to meet
his Majesty by the way of Kent, having given order to several Gentlemen in the
Counties of Suffolk and Essex, to be ready with all manner of Civilities to
receive the King if he should chance to land in those parts.

The General came to Canterbury on Thursday night, whereabout quartered most
of the Troops of those Lords which went down likewise to meet the King at his
landing. The names of which are as follow. The Generals lifeguard, the Earl of
Clevelands, the Earl of Shrewsburys, the Earl of Northamptons, the Duke of
Richmonds, the Earl of Norwiches, the Lord Viscount Mordaunts, Sir Richard
Browns, and Sir John Robinsons, distinguished by their habit as well as by
their Colors, Liveries, and Cornets. A finer sight of men for bravery, and
gallantry was never seen in England, each Troop consisting of 150. or
thereabouts.

At this place of Canterbury an express was sent to the General to hasten him
to Dover, The King lands at Dover Friday the 25. of May.
which he did accordingly, and about one of the Clock came thither; his Majesty
refusing to Land while he had notice of his approach.

About three of the Clock in the afternoon the King landed (and upon his knees
kissed the Shore) with the Duke of York, Duke of Gloucester, and many of his
Nobles. Every man now with the greatest observation, drew as near as he could
to see the meeting and gratulation of the best of Kings, and most deserving of
Subjects. All were afraid there could be no apt expedient in matter of
Courtesy; The Admirers of Majesty were jealous on the Kings behalf of two low
a condescension, and the Lovers of duty fearful on the other side of an
ostentation of Merit, The King and General meet.
but such an humble prostration was made by his excellency kneeling, and so
suitable a Reception by his Majesty kissing and embracing him, that all parties
were satisfied. After this and a mutual Complement which was not full of words,
their Hearts being in their Mouths and precluding their passage, his Majesty
taking the General by the hand walked up the Hill with him, a Canopy being
carried over his Head, and a Chair of State by him toward his Coach.

In his Passage to the Town, the Mayor and Aldermen of Dover, with Mr. Redding
the Minister, met his Majesty, and after a short Speech, Mr. Redding presented
his Majesty with a Large Bible with Gold Clasps. His Majesty thanked him and
betook himself to his Coach, into which also entered the Duke of York, who sat
with the King at one end, and the Duke of Gloucester and his excellency at the
other, with the Duke of Buckingham in the Boot, after them several Coaches with
six Horses, and the respective Troops, besides particular Gentlemen on their
own Account.

About two Miles from Dover, his Majesty having had a large conference with the
General, with a mutual complacency in one another, alighted out of his Coach
and took horse, the two Dukes on the right hand of the King, and the General
on the left bare, after whom followed the Duke of Buckingham and several of the
Nobility likewise bare to Canterbury, where the Mayor, Aldermen, and the
Recorder (Mr. Francis Lovelace) of that City met his Majesty, who after an
Elegant Speech, afterward printed, presented the King with a Gold Tankard and
so conducted him to the palace made ready and furnished for him, where he
continued till Monday.

Here his Majesty was pleased to invest the renowned General with the most
Honorable Order of the Garter, putting it with his own Royal hands upon his
Neck; while the Dukes of York and Gloucester, put on the Garter, all the three
Brothers joining unanimously together to honor him, who had joined three
Kingdoms together to do honor and reverence to them. The King also Knighted
Sir William Morris and made him a Privy Counselor, (the Earl of Southampton,
and Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper sworn at the same time) a Gentleman of
Devonshire, a Privado and trusty Friend of the Generals, acquainted with, and
highly instrumental in his Majesty's Restitution. But a list of all the Knights
made by this King are reserved for a particular place at the end of this
Narrative.

Dr. Reynolds and Mr. Calamy of the Presbyterian persuasion, were here admitted
his Majesty's Chaplains.

From thence on Saturday a Letter to the House of Commons was brought by the
Lord Bartlet, from his Majesty, signifying that He intended to be at London on
Tuesday the 29. of May by Twelve of the Clock at noon, whereupon speedy Order
was taken in that City for his Majesty's reception, which they had before put
in some readiness in this ensuing manner.

The persons appointed for the Service of the day, The manner of the Cities
Reception of the K.
on Tuesday met together in the new Artillery Ground every one Mounted on
Horseback except the Persons hereafter mentioned.

First the two Marshalls Twelve men in Green Colored Habit, John Bibby the
City Drum Major, with his Kettle Drums fixed to his Saddle Bow, 3. Twenty
Trumpetters divided in three noise or Pageants, each having the Cities Banner
fixed to his Trumpet, 4. The two Marshalls of the City, 5. The City waits, 6.
The Scoutmaster for the day, 7. The four Quarter Masters, 8. The Sergeant of
the Channel with a Banner in his hand of the Irish Badge with the three
Sergeants of the Chamber each of them having a Pennant in his hand with the
Cities Arms, 9. The three City Carvers each of them with a Banner in his hand,
one with the Scotch Badge or Coat, the other with the Kings Crest or Coat the
3. with the cross or English Badge, 10. The Water Bailiff carrying the Cities
great Banner, 11. The Common Hunt carrying the great Banner of the King, 12.
The Conductors or chief Directors of the whole days march distinguished from
the rest of the City Servants (who wore the Kings and Cities Colors on their
hats, and a Scarf of Crimson silk about their waste tied with a white Ribbon)
by a black scarf mixed or added to their Crimson as they are Citizens of
quality besides, 13. Thirty four Gentlemen of the Grocers who in regard that
Sir Thomas Alleyn is a member of that Compeny are chief, 27. of the Mercers,
24. of the Drapers, 29 of the Fishmongers, 28 of the Goldsmiths, 27 of the
Skynners, 30 of the Merchant Tailors, 30 of the Haberdashers, 23. of the
Salters, 21 of the Iron-mongers, 24 of the Vintners, and 34 of the
Clothworkers, which said persons make the second grand Division, the first
being that of the Lord Mayor with the Aldermen and their Attendants.

The Third grand Division is supplied by 18 Gentlemen of the Company of Dyers,
by 20 of the Brewers, by 24 of the Leathersellers, by 12 of the Pewterers, by
20 of the Barber Surgeons, by 8 of the Cutlers, by 8 of the Wax Chandlers, by 8
of the Armorers, by 14 of the Girdlers.

The Fourth grand division is supplied by 14 gentlemen of the Sadlers, by 8 of
the Carpenters, by 5 of the Cordwayners, by 15 of the Apothecaries, by 11 of
the Paynter stayners, by 11 of the Woodmongers, by 10 of the Stationers, and by
8 of the Embroiderers. Every of the said Companies having a Pennant with the
Companies Arms, therein carried by one mounted on Horseback; and every
Gentleman in a Plush Coat and Sword, with a chain of Gold about his shoulders,
and a Page on Foot by his Horse side, clothed in a loose Garment agreeable to
their Companies Colors; the said Companies Attendants, Officers, Trumpets and
Drums, being in their distinct Habit.

About 7. of the clock in the morning, the four Quartermasters by direction and
oversight of the Conductors began to rank out the said Companies, two by two,
beginning at the Junior Gentlemen of the last Companies, and in the intervall
between Company and Company, placed that Companies Pennant that had lead the
Van. The said Companies being thus ranked out, in the head of each grand
Division, are placed six Trumpets, and the Kettle-Drums in the head of the
Grocers Company. In this Equipage they marched to Guild Hall, where the Lord
Mayor expected them having two Pages in Plush Coats attending him; The Aldermen
each of them with two Pages in loose Habits of Scarlet colored Cloth, and the
Sheriffs with like number of Pages, together with their Officers in Scarlet
Cloak; and Javelins, trimmed near the Beards with the same Color, The
Sword Bearer and Common Crier mounted; and likewise Mr. Chamberlayn; the Town
Clerk, the Common Sergeant, the two Judges of the Sheriffs Court; the City
Counsel; the Comptroler; the Solicitor; the Remembrancer; the two
Bridge-masters; the four Attorneys and Secondaryes of each Counter, with each
of them a Page; making up as was generally hinted before the first grand
Division. Then the Common Hunt and the Water Bailiff, marched away from their
station, placing themselves in the head of that first Division; the two
Conductors aforesaid, Quartermaster Cox, and Muster-master Buroughs of the
Military Bands of the City, and the City Wayts in the Head of the said
Conductors.

The fifth and last grand Division, was supplied by the aforesaid Sheriffs
Officers alone, who ranked themselves two by two; the Cities two Marshals
before them, and six Trumpets in the Head of them; the whole Body marched up
through St. Laurence Lane, through Cheapside, up Cornhill, down
Grace Church Street, Fish-street Hill, over London Bridge, through the Borough
of Southwarke, into St. George's Feilds; at the South end whereof, near the
Fishmongers College, or Almshouse, was placed a Tent for the reception of his
Majesty, and a Chair of State therein by the Lord Mayor, into which his
Lordship and the Aldermen entered and stayed, until intelligence came by the
Scout-master, that his Majesty was near at hand.

Now the other Trumpeters which lead the Van, that is to say, the two Marshalls
and Sheriffs Officers, removed themselves into the rear of the youngest or last
Company, likewise the Trumpets, Banner, and Pennant-bearer of each grand
Division do likewise remove themselves into the fear of their own Division,
with the Trumpets, and Kettle Drums, and Waits; the two Conductors, the Water
Bailiff, the Common Hunt, the two Secondaries, four Attorneys, two
Bridgemasters, the Remembrancer, the Sollieitor, the Comptroller, the four
Counselors, the two Judges, the Common Sergeant; the Town Clerk, and Mr.
Chamberlain, are by the Quarter Masters removed into the rear of the Aldermen;
The Chamberlain being placed next the Junior Alderman, and all facing about,
the Juniors of each Division, and the grand Division are become Leaders, and
the Elder both Commons and Aldermen Bringers up.

His Majesty being received and refreshed (if he shall so please) all Troops of
Gentlemen or others lead the Van, in the Rear of whom fall the Sheriff
Officers; after them the fourth grand Division of inferior Companies; after
them the third grand Division; after them the second grand Division; after them
the first, after them the Lords or Barons of the Kingdom, if any present, ride
on Horseback, after them Viscounts; after them Earls; after them Marquesses;
after them Dukes; after them the Lord Mayor, Lord Chancellor, the two Dukes,
His Majesty's Brethren, in the midst of whom (as His Majesty thought fit and
used in Holland before) the King himself rid, then the Master of the Horse,
next the Band of Pensioners, (though not established) then the Life Guard,
after them several Regiments of his Excellencies Horse.

In this Equipage the whole Body marched through Southwark the same way His
Lordship came, only the Trained Bands of Southwark, make a Guard, through which
the whole Body pass to London Bridge, where the Green Regiment are ready on
both sides of the way to receive and guard them by the way, toward Cheapside
and Temple Bar, all which way a Guard was made on the right hand by the several
Companies of London, in their Rails, adorned with the several Banners and
Streamers, and on the left, by the other five Regiments of the City Trained
Bands.

His Majesty and the whole Body being arrived at Temple Bar, are there likewise
conducted to Whitehall, by a Guard of his Excellencies Foot, but the Marshal
and Sheriffs officers who conduct the Citizens being come near the Exchange in
the Strand, do open to the right and left, every man placing himself before his
Leader, and every maniple or Company of Citizens, successively file away, the
one to the right, the other to the left, placing themselves before their
Leaders, but the Lord Majors Attendants, and Aldermen, do file to the right and
left, and not face in opposition, till the senior Aldermen terminate at
Whitehal-Gate.

The whole Body being faced in opposition, become a new Guard through which the
whole Body of the Nobility do pass and march through Tuthill Street, but the
Lord Mayor marched unto Whitehall, where taking leave not only of His Majesty
and His two Brothers the Dukes, he from thence repaired to his Brethren the
Aldermen, and each Party falling in as at first in the morning, are by the Care
of his Excellencies Troops, who brought up the rear, conducted back to his
Lordships House.

And in several places as he passed, in this days Triumph, as at the Gate of
the Bridge, Exchange, St. Peter's Cheap, Ludgate, and Temple Bar, He was
entertained with Wind Music; and Grace Church Conduit, the four Spouts,
Cornhil Conduit, Pissing Conduit, Standard in Cheapside, and Fleetstreet do all
run with Claret Wine to express the Cities, and heighten the joy of the
Partakers.

This was the Cities designation, and is writ in a style part as future, and
part past, because all their intendments did not take effect, but magnificence
they aimed at, which in good measure, as the shortness of the time for
preparations permitted, they attained. And therefore the true and real Triumph
of this day, in the whole Progress order and State of it, take in this more
exact Transcript.

On Monday the 18 of May, His Majesty came into Rochester, about 5 of the Clock
in the Afternoon, and went immediately into Col. Gibb^ns his hou^e, a Colonel
then of the Army, where that Night His Majesty and the Dukes of York and
Gloucester lodged. After His Majesty had in His Chamber eat something to
refresh himself, he went to Chatham to see the Royal Sovereign and the rest of
his Navy, there riding at Anchor, after the view, he did Commissioner Pett one
of the chief for Building so much Honor, as to receive the entertainment of a
Banquet from him. Thence he returned to Rochester, and about 8 of the Clock
supped, showing himself very courteous and gracious to the Colonel, who
presented to His Majesty, a very Dutiful Address, signed by himself, and all
the Officers of his Regiment in behalf of themselves, and the Soldiers under
his Command, which His Majesty received very graciously, and by many
expressions to the Colonel, gave a testimony of his affection to him in
particular, and to all the Army in General, of which His lodging with His Royal
Brothers in his House, was not the least Demonstration. The next morning early
Mr. Francis Clerk, and Mr. William Swan both Gentlemen of this County, received
the Honor of Knighthood from His Majesty. The Mayor and Corporation of the
City, presented His Majesty with a Basin and Ewer of Silver guilt of a good
value, which was well received.

Betwixt four and five in the morning, H^s Majesty took His journey from
Rochester, the Militia Forces of Kent lining the ways, and the Maidens in
White Wascoats (which kind of Rural Triumph the City Virgins by a request to my
Lord Mayor desired to perform and imitate) strewing herbs and flowers in the
way he passed, and the several Towns hanging out White Sheets; At the approach
of His Majesty to Dartford, the Address of the Army above mentioned was
presented, and at Black Heath the whole Army was drawn up; where His Majesty
received them, giving out many Expressions of His Gracious Favor to the Army,
which were received with loud Shoutings and Rejoycings. Several Bonfires were
made as His Majesty came along, and one more remarkable at Greenwich for its
bigness (all waves were invented and used to express the Peoples gladness
though never so uncustomary) where the States Arms were burned.

Thence, the Army being drawn, his Majesty, who had come in his Coach to
Suitors Hill and there took horse to show himself to his longing desirous
people, pursued his way toward London,. And because God himself when he would
set a mark of observance, upon his own Magnalia has taken notice of the
circumstance of time, it was very considerable here that it was his Majesty's
Birthday. He was heir apparent when first born, but had Jus in re now, when
entering the Metropolis of the Kingdom he took possession. All Lets and
Hindrances which have intervened since his Majesty's just Rights, are now so
many arguments of his Future fixed and peaceable enjoyment. This the Ancients
intimated, when they tell us that Jupiter himself was not quiet in heaven, till
after a long war with the Giants. And it is a greater and more mavelous
conquest Hostem conciliare quam debellare especially in and after civil
contests and dissentions.

When his Majesty came to St. Georges-field, the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen
were in a Tent ready to receive him, among whom for the notoriety of the person
was Alderman Ireton, once a rude enemy to the King and his Friends, whose
Company was nevertheless dissembled, to let the giddy world see whose
Counsels and directions they followed, in those late miserable times; men that
could cry Cru^i fige and Hosanna in one breath: when the K was come to the
Tent, the Lord Mayor delivered unto his Majesty the Sword upon his knees, which
his Majesty gave back to him again. After a short repast taken there, and
drinking a glass or two of Wine, and the respective reverences and
gratulations done to the King by each individual Alderman, the King Knighted
the Lord Mayor, and made him a Baronet, and set forward to White Hall in this
order and manner.

All the Houses being richly laid with Tapistry out of the Windows, and a Lane
made by the Militia from Southwark to Temple Bar on one side of the Streets,
and the Liveries on the other, the Generals Foot making the like Lane from
Temple Bar, till, they joined with a party of Foot all Gentlemen and Officers
in the Kings Army in White Doublets and Black Breeches, under the command of
Sir John Stawell (expressing their joy for the Kings restitution, and their
sorrow for his Royal Fathers Martyrdom) who having accosted the King at
Black Heath and showed themselves, followed not the King through London, but
turned off at Newington, and passed the Thames and placed themselves in two
Files making a Lane from Charing-Crosse to White Hall Gates; First of all
marched a Troop of Gentlemen led by Major General Brown, Brandishing their
Swords, all in Doublets of Cloth of Silver in all about 300 besides their
Servants, then another Troop of about 200 all in Velvet Coats, their Footmen
and Liveries in Purple, then another Troop led by Sir John Robinson, with Buff
Coats, Silver Sleeves and green Scarfes and Feathers, in a circular fashion.
After this a Troop of Blew Liveries and Silver lace, Colors Red fringed with
silver about 130. After that a Troop, six Trumpets seven footmen in Sea green
and Silver, their Colors Pinck fringed with silver, then a Troop with their
Liveries gray and blew, with silk and silver laces, 30 Footmen, four Trumpets,
consisting of about 220 their colors Sky fringed with silver. Another Troop of
gray Liveries, six Trumpets, colors Sky and Silver, of about 110 Gentlemen,
another Troop of 70. Gentlemen, five Trumpets, colors Sky and Silver, another
Troop led by the Lord Cleveland, of about 300 Noblemen and Gentlemen, Colors
Blew fringed with Gold, another Troop of about 300.

After these came two Trumpets with his Majesty's Arms, the Sheriffs men in red
cloaks and Silver lace with Javelins 79 in number. Then followed the several
Gentlemen of the Companies of London on Horseback in Velvet Coats and Golden
Chains, with their Streamers carried before them, Every company having their
Footmen of their several Liveries. Three Trumpets in Liveries richly laced in
Cloth of Silver Sleeves, rode before the company of Mercers, after all these
came a Kettle Drum five Trumpets, and three Streamers and very rich Red
Liveries with silver lace. The number of these Citizens were about 600. After
these, Twelve Ministers, another kettle drum, four Trumpets. Then his Majesty's
Lifeguard led by the the Lord Gerard, another party led by Sir Gilbert
Gerrard, and Major Roscarock, and the third Division by Colonel Blague. Then
three Trumpets in rich coats and Satin Doublets, the City marshall with eight
Footmen in French green trimmed with Crimson and White, the City Waits, the
City Officers in order, Dr. Warmsley, the two Sheriffs and all the Aldermen of
L^nd. in their Scarlet Gowns with Trappings, with footmen in Liveries with red
coats laced with silver, the Hearl^s and Maces in their rich coats. The Lord
Mayor bare carrying the Sword, the Duke of Buckingham and his Excellency bare,
and then the Glory of all, his Sacred Majesty rode between the two Dukes his
Brothers, with a Red circular Feather about his Hat, in a Deer colored Tabby
Doublet, the Belt of his sword of the same color.

Afterward followed a Troop bare with white colors, then the Generals
lifeguard, after which another Troop of Volunteer Gentry, their colors fringed
with Gold, after which 5 Regiments of the Army Horse led by Colonel,
afterward Sir Ralph Knight, viz. His excellencies Regiment, Colonel Knight,
Colonel Cloberryes, the Lord Falconberges, and Lord Howards; after whom came
two Troops more of Nobility and Gentlemen that marched brandishing their Swords
all along. Soon after his Majesty was passed, the Musketeers of the
Trained-bands (who by order of their Officers had presented to his Majesty as
he passed the Butt end of their Muskets) gave and discharged a great many
Vollies of shot.

His Majesty thus conducted came to his Royal Palace at White Hall, where after
the Lord Mayor had taken his leave of him, his Majesty went to the Lords who
were assembled in one of the Rooms there, where he was welcomed in a Speech
made by the Earl of Manchester Speaker then of the House of Lords; and from
thence he went to the Banqueting house where the House of Commons were
assembled and was likewise welcomed by the Speaker thereof in another Speech,
to the Originals of both which the Reader is referred wherein he may find the
glad and joyful sense of the whole kingdom.

Vide, The Speeches of the E. of Manchester, and Sir Harbottle Grymston, at his
MAJESTY'S coming to White Hall; Printed by the Printers of both Houses.

TO these Speeches His Majesty returned a short, but obliging Answer, That he
was so wearied with his journey, and the applause and noise of the People in
his passage, which yet he said was very acceptable and pleasant to Him, that he
should say little to them at present, but referred and reserved what he had to
speak to them, while his meeting them in Parliament. And so taking his leave
retired himself, and supped with the two Dukes in the Chart Chamber privately.

The Solemnity of this Day was concluded with all demonstrations and
testimonies of universal joy, which most of all appeared in the light and
cheerful Countenances of the People, which by reflection, kindled such an
infinite number of Bonfires, that all the Houses seemed to be Chimneys; being
supposed to equal very near half the Habitations of the streets, where with
safety they might blaze both in London and Westminster: Among the rest, a
costly one was made in the City of Westminster, where the Essigies of Oliver
Cromwell was set upon a high post with the Arms of the Commonwealth, which
having for a while been exposed there to public view, with Torches lighted,
that every one might take notice of them, were both burnt together.

The Foreign Ambassadors and public Ministers here resident, did likewise
highly express their Joy for His Majesty's happy Arival here on Tuesday last,
by their public Demonstrations, especially the Ambassadors of France and
Portugal, and the Plenipotentiaries of the King of Sweden, who, in particular,
besides bonfires and giving of wine, and throwing of money among the People,
made very gallant Emblems upon the business of the day. That King was Oliver's
greatest Confederate, and this Fire did in a manner purge and Expiate the
pollutions of that Filthy League.

Thus the King returned to us: Thus he bestowed and brought the Blessings of
Peace and Honor to these his distracted infamous Kingdoms; yet the Glory of
this his Restitution was not Nobis, to Us alone, but to the greatest part of
the Christian World besides. For at this time the Peace in the North was
Cemented by the Pacification and Agreement between the two Kings of Denmark
and Sweden; now questionless consolidated and firmed for ever, by the
indubitable affection and assistance of this Crown to that of Denmark in case
of a Rupture. If His Majesty could in the dawn and but glimmering of his
Restitution, by his Commands to Genesis Montague, awe the daring design of the
Swede by standing a Neuter; how much more will he be able to bridle and
repress the attempts of that quarrelsome People; when in the greatness and
height of Power and absolute Dominion, he shall undertake to vindicate his near
Ally, for whose Interests he had such pregnant respects as to declare himself
when his own were in dubio and uncertain.

This was but one Concomitant, see a more illustrious and most August, which
passed under the Famous and celebrated Name of a GENERAL PEACE between the two
Crowns of France and Spain, whose united Ambition presumed to bless the
Christian World with such a Rarity, that was only attributable to the single
and singular Grandeur of our Monarch, on whom the Divine Providence was pleased
to accumulate all those Felicities which through his alone influence, have ever
since vouchsafed Prosperity to the Nations round about us.

-- O Nimium Dilecte Deo.

And because there may happen some inquiry hereafter concerning those
Transactions which were concluded in a Marriage betwixt the French King and the
Infanta of Spain, of which among us sometime before, there were other Hopes and
Discourses; it will not be impertinent to relate the Solemnity of it here; for
in the Conclusion of this Discourse, it is probable, we shall see a more
illustrious Parallel; not to say to cry quits with it: because it is matter of
State and an Arcanum Imperi^ which we dive not into, the weakness of our eyes
being dazeled and scarce able to behold the apparent luster of the public.
The Narrative thereof follows as an aditionall necessary ornament and appendix.

This Treaty between the two Crowns was Commenced about the middle of Summer
1659. when Sir George Booth first appeared in Cheshire for the King. It had
been long before in project and designation, but cannot be derived so far as
that of the Kings Restitution. The place of meeting was at a Confine of both
Kingdoms; an Island called by the name of St. John de Luz, on a river which
divides the French and Spanish Dominions, where only the two great Favorites
and Ministers of each Crown met; the Cardinal Mazarine and Don Lewis de Haro;
(His Majesty of Great Britain was here himself present, to conce^ his Affairs
in the Treaty, as also Lockhart from his Masters at Westminster, under the
guard and protection of the French, in so much danger, besides privacy he
resided there.)

Much time it took up in composing and stating the several Pretensions, when
His Majesty was called away by his unquestionable and undubitable right (which
was adjudged without any praeliminary terms or limitation) to attend his own
Affairs and leave them disputing theirs, which upon secret intelligence and
their own judgment and opinion, they perceived would so readily advance, as
might (if a present Conclusion were not made) put both Crowns to new Councels,
such as the strangeness of the English Revolutions would render very difficult
and perplexed, if after such a progress either Party should recede; so that the
King did more than hold the Balance already.

Therefore Mounsieur de Lyonne of the French side, and Don Piementell of the
Spanish, made many journeys to and fro between both Courts, to hasten the
Conclusion of all the present Transactions. The Bishop of Aurange likewise much
stirred about the same; The Popes Nuncio labored therein, together with the
Venetian Ambassador, to whose Arbitration, the remaining Differences were at
last referred.

Shortly after on the 18. of May 1660. the Count of Fuensaldagne arrived at St.
John de Luz, bringing all satisfaction from his Catholic Majesty, so that all
things being regulated between the two Crowns, the Marriage might be celebrated
on the 23d. of May at Fontarabia Castle, on the Spanish side, and Consummated
in the 29. of the same month.

Never could any thing fall patter or suit better with the Honor of His
Majesty, whose most glorious Birth day it was, and on which he triumphantly
entered His Royal City and Chamber of London, where he married himself to the
affections of his People; so that all the honors of this Triumph so intended,
were but the Handmaids and Attendants of the Kings, whose Nativity was to be
followed by no less Grandeurs, then the Conjunct resplendencies of the 2
lately most Potent Princes of Europe.

By the same designation the King of Spain was expected at Fontarabia the 22 of
May and several days after appointed for these Ceremonies; the 25. the Duke of
Crequi was to carry the presents from the French King to the Infanta, the 26
the first view was to be between the King of Spain and the Queen Mother of
France, the 27. the two Kings were to meet; the 28. the Infanta was to be
delivered into the Hands of the Queen her Aunt; the 29. her Marriage was to be
consummated. Some of these Days indeed afterward by some casu^ interventions,
were altered, but mark how rightly, that Marriage was calculated to that
Meridian Star of Glory at the Kings Nativity: take a full account of it as it
passed.

On the 23. of May about 7. a Clock at Night the King of Spain with the
Infanta, and all the Grandees of his Court, arrived at Fontarabia, many
Trumpets sounding before him, and with the Noise of all the Canon, and the Shot
of the Musketeers of that Place, who gave fire above an hour together. In the
mean time the said King went into the Castle of the Town, prepared before for
His Reception, and hung with very rich Arras. Till 9. of the Clock, his Majesty
and his Noblemen refreshed themselves, being extremely weary of a long march in
a very rainy day. About that time his Majesty called all his Grandees to him,
and in their presence demanded of the Infanta her renunciation to the Crown of
Spain, which she gave very willingly under her hand: on the 24. his Catholic
Majesty came to the Infanta's Lodgings, to let her know that she was to be
married that day, desiring her to be ready about a 11. of the Clock to go with
him to the chief Church of that place. About One of clock in the Afternoon, the
Bishop of Pampelune being informed that the King of Spain was a coming, took on
him Pontifical Habits, and the Cross and the Pastoral Hook being carried
before him with Music, he came to the Church door to receive his Majesty, who
alighting from his Coach, was conducted by the said Bishop (the Infanta being
on the Kings left hand both under a Canopy with Curtains on all sides but that
which looked toward the Altar.) The King and the Infanta were no sooner upon
their knees, but the Bishop began a little or low Mass which was a very short
one: During which the Bishop of Frejus took his place by the Patriarch of the
Indies, being both the respective witnesses for their respective Princes. The
Mass ended, the Eishop put off his Priestly Garments, and took on him the
Episcopal Robes, and coming down from the Altar, drew near to the Canopy under
which the King of Spain and the Infanta were.

All this while Don Lewis de Haro was behind the Canopy, but then coming near,
and having made a very low obeisance to the said King and Infanta, as
Ambassador for the most Christian King, he presented to the Bishop the Proxy he
had of the said King, to marry the Infanta, which being read publicly and
accepted of, the Infanta fell at the King her Fathers Feet, where after many
reciprocal tears for their near separation, that Princess assured him of her
constant and perpetual submission, and demanded his Blessing, which he gave her
with many kisses, which notwithstanding his manly resolutions, drew again a
flood of tears from his Eyes.

Then the said Infanta having given her consent to the Marriage, as well as Don
Lewis de Haro in the most Christian Kings Name, after the usual words
pronounced by the Bishop, the said Don Lewis put a rich ring on the Infantaes
finger, and the rest of the Ceremonies being ended, the King of Spain looking
now upon his Daughter as a Foreign Queen, gave her the right hand and
conducted her to her Coach: And entertained her at a costly Dinner prepared for
that Solemnity.

The King of France was there himself incognite, and was very much made of by
the King of Spain, who assured him of a perpetual Peace and Amity, for a token
of which he gave him his Daughter, the preciousest Jewel he had. After mutual
Oaths, (for the performance of what they were agreed before concerning that
peace and Amity) in such a solemn manne: as the like is not to be found
recorded, the most Christian King retired. Madamoyselle of Orleans was there
also incognito, and very much made of, though no notice taken of her Quality.

The next day being the 25 the Queen Mother with Mounsieur the Kings brother,
went to the Palace of the Conference, whether the King of Spain was to bring
his Daughter, himself incognito, the 3 next days the 2 Courts met again, and
the personal Marriage was made on Tuesday the 29. the new Queen being brought
to the Isle of the ^onference on Monday night, in the mean time several Visits
past in private together with some public ones, between the two Kings and
Queens; the personal Marriage was performed in this manner.

The Church of St. John de Luz within the French Dominions, (the Queen being
delivered over, to the French King the Night before) was appointed for this
great Solemnity, being adorned with all possible Pomp and Bravery. All the
Court repaired thither about Noon, by a Bridge made purposely from the Queen
Mothers Lodgings to the said Church, whereof both sides were guarded by a
double File of the French and Switzers Guards. The Kings Musketeers on
Horseback, were in the middle of the place before the Kings House, all in new
and rich Cassocks. The Company of the Archers of the grand Provost of the Kings
Household went before, then that of the 100 Switzers, the Kings footmen, the
Pages of the great and small Stables in great number, the Pages of his
Majesty's Bedchamber, all in new and magnificent Liveries, and several Grandees
in black Clothes, with Clokes lined with golden Stuffs and Laces mingled with
Embroidery of Gold. Then came along Cardinal Mazarine, 12. Gentlemen of the
Ordinance round about him. After him came the King richly apparelled, and
marching in great Majesty between the Marquess of Pegillen, and the Marquess of
Humieres, and 2 Gentlemen of his Chamber on each side. The Marquess de Charost
Captain of the Guards followed him with two of the said Guards. Then came the
Queen with her retinue, in the same Splendour as before, the Queen Mother next,
being led by her Knight of Honor, and one of her Gentlemen ^^^^ers, the
Countess of Flex, her Lady of Honor carrying her Train. Mada^selle followed
having her Train carried by Monsieur de Manans. The Ladies and the Maids of the
two Queens closed the March, being followed by the Queen Mothers Guards,
abundance of Trumpets blowing all the while. The Ceremonies of the Rites of
Marriage, and the manner of performing them being Romish, are not requisite,
(being also strange and difficult to be understood) to be inserted here.

The 2 of June, the Pope's Nuntio, the Ambassador of Venice, the Resident of
Genoa, the Envoy of their Royal Highnesses of Savoy, and the Deputies of the
Parliament of Pa^, had Audience of their Majesty's whom they Complemented about
their Marriage, and the next day they departed for Byonne, where they were
sumptuously received, thence to Bourdeaux, in the like, but more sumptuous
manner, and so in conclusion to Paris; where several Triumphall Arches and
Collossus were reared with in impresses relating to the Peace and their
Nuptials being met without the Town near St. Germans, by the Militia of that
great City. But all the Triumph, and Honor they could render their Majesty's,
together with the Auxiliary splendour of the Nobility, came infinitely short of
His Majesty of Great Brittain's Coronation, and in truth of his Entrance, which
had appeared far brighter, had it not been for the Dust that covered all the
finery and sullied the rich Habits that were worn that day. Except only some of
the Princes of the Blood of France, as the Prince of Conde and some four more,
which alone made it seem a Magnificence, whereas in the Coronation of King
Carles, where was no distinction to be made by Strangers between the several
Noble men of that Caralcade, but of that hereafter.

Let us now look home to the subsequent and remaining Honors of the Kings
Restitution. On Thursday the last of May, the most Illustrious Princes the
Dukes of York and Gloucester took their places in the House of Peers, threby
restoring it to that veneration which the rudeness of the vulgar, and
Anarchists had deprived it of, for so many foregoing years; where the Lords did
unanimously concur with the Commons in a Petition to be sent unto his Sacred
Majesty, to desire his Royal assent for an Anniversary Thanksgiving to be
observed throuhout all the Kingdoms on the 29. of May, for the great blessing
the Lord had bestowed upon the Kingdom in restoring his Sacred Majesty.

But that w^ch mainly concerned the glory of his Majesty, was that Justice
should be done upon the Murderers of his Royal Father; the efore it was moved
the ^ame day in the House of Commons, that it be referred to the Committee to
prepare a Proclamation to require all those to come in that late upon the Trial
of his late Majesty, or else to be left to the Justice of the Law.

On Friday following his majesty to complete the Parliament, went by Water to
Westminster in the Brigandine, where he passed the private (...) to (...) House
of Lords, the Yeomen of the Guard making a Lane, the Heralds at Arms in their
rich Coats, the Maces before him, and the Lord General bare before his Majesty.

When his Majesty came to the House the Usher of the Black rod went to acquaint
them that his Majesty desi^ed to meet them at the House of Lords, when they
we^e entered his Majesty made a short Speech and gave his Royal assent to three
Acts viz. 1 The Act for Confirmation of this Parliament. 2 For the Tax of 70000
l. per m^nsem. 3 For the continuance of Process and Judicial proceedings,
after which the Lord Chancellor made a Speech more at large. Herein the King
appeared in his proper and full Orb, and spread those rays which the long
darkness of his misfortunes had clouded and obscured, constituting the
parliament more by his presence then by this his assent.

The next thing was the filling up of his Majesty's Privy Council, and
supplying the Courts of Judicature, there were honors ab intus, let us see
what others and those innumerable though small, which do tantamount to great
ones, from his subjects and Foreign princes.

It were an endless labor almost to repeat those many Addresses presented to
his Majesty, let it suffice, there was never a County in England that saluted
not the Kings hands with some feeling gratulating expressions of his Majesty's
return, being signed by all the Nobility and Gentry and Ministers thereof, some
particular Cities and Corporations presenting his Majesty with some more
substantial complements, which yet for the most part consisted of Surrenders,
then called Gifts of his Majesty's Majesty's Fee Farm Rents, particularly the
City resigned their grant from the State of New-Park by the mouth of the
Recorder Sir William Wild, who told his Majesty, that the City had been
Stewards for him, to preserve his Game, and woods which they came to tender to
his Majesty. The King answered, that he looked upon their tender, not as from
Stewards, but would receive it as a gift from them, for which he returned them
many hearty thanks. The like Addresses were made also from the respective
Regiments of the Army new molded again under other more Loyal Commanders, so
that as the Model revived it before his late Majesty's Overthrow, so the new
model extinguished it as his present Majesty's restoration. On the 14 of June
came out the aforesaid Proclamation against the Kings Judges, many of them fled
before, diverse of them now came in and rendered themselves as the Proclamation
directed to the Speaker of the House of Commons, who by order of the said House
committed them to the Sergeant at Arms.

It is fit we should bestow a glance, The Triumphs at Edinbrough.
off from these satiatory Triumphs here, to the imitation of them in his
Majesty's other Kingdoms, to begin with Scotland which take in a Letter from
Edinburgh.

The Magistrates of this City and Presbytery being most sensible of this great
mercy received, did appoint the 19. of June the day of their Public
Thanksgiving to God for his Signal love and kindness showed to them in
investing their most gracious Sovereign in his Thrones of England and Ireland,
and for restoring him to his Government over this his ancient Nation, that for
twenty hundred years has flourished under the Scepter of his Royal Anc^stors,
and gave notice of this their Resolution to all the the Burghs and Presbyteries
of Scotland, desiring their Concurrence, that as the cause was, so their joy
might be universal. The Ministers that day in their Sermons with so much
fervency and passionate expressions delivered what great kindness the Lord had
done for them, that it was observed their exhortations were never entertained
with such attention and so plentiful Tears by their Auditory.

The English Officers of State and War observed the Thanksgiving with no less
joy and devotion. After Sermon and after the Magistrates had all dined together
they marched from the Council House to the Cross in this Order; The Town
Council in their Gowns with their Trumpets sounding before them went first,
then two Bailies before the English Commissioners and Officers, and two behind
them went next. The Provost all alone before the Scotch Nobility and Gentry
that were in Town, and two Bailiffs with the Dean of Gild and Treasurer
followed after; their Guards near six hundred Citizens in comely apparel armed
with swords and partisans. The cross was covered with artificial Vines laden
with Grapes, both white and good Claret Wines springing out from all it is Pipes
or Channels; on it is Head a Bacchus bestriding a Hogshead with two or three
Satyrs, did with their mimick Gestures entertain the beholders. A little below
the Cross within a rail was erected a Scaffold six foot high, on which was
placed a large Table covered with a rich Banquet served up in Glass and
representing diverse forms and devices, as his Majesty's Arms, the Arms of the
City and diverse exotic Trees were raised laden with their leaves and fruits,
etc. the Table being surrounded by above an 100 persons of Eminency. The Music
and breaking of glasses were seconded by three general Vollies of the Horse and
Foot, who received an handsome answer from the great Guns of the Castle,
Citadell, and Ships in the Road, and all were ecchoed by joyful acclamations
of the people.

After this the Forces drew of, affording the Civilities of view to the people,
amongst whom the Dishes and Banquet were hurled, and so arose and marched down
to the Piazzo of the Palace of Holy Rood house, first the Comissioners, next
the Major General with his Army, and after them the City Magistrates with their
Guards; whence after the Muskets had saluted them there with diverse Volleys
and had received a return from the great Guns of the Castle, Citadel, and Sea,
as formerly, they marched back again quite through the City, up to the Castle
Hill, from whence every one apart returned to spend the rest of the Enemy with
their Friends, in mirth and mutual joy and Entertainments.

Major General Morgan after a health to His Majesty, began to the Earl of
Seaford, fired the great Canon called Mounce Meg, (a Gun never fired but on
extraordinary occasions) after which followed a round Peal, from all the
Ordinance thereabouts. A plentiful Largess was bestowed amongst the Soldiery
to heighten them in their joys, about 1500 Bonfires were made on Arthurs Seat,
one of forty Load of Coals, and at the Major Genesis Door one almost as big. After
this, was variety of Fire works, some burned in the water, others flew into the
Air, two Castles firing one against another, the several Boxes thrown into the
Air, and falling in several shapes, which with diverse others gave great content
to the Spectators.

Not to omit here that Thursday the 21. of June was appointed by the Parliament
of England, for a peculiar Thanksgiving day throughout England and Wales for
His Majesty's Restitution.

The two Divisions of Wales into North and South, made their Addresses to the
King, the first desiring as the Completion of their joy, the Restoration also
of the Liturgy, and the Divine Worship, as it stood Established in the days of
His Royal Grandfather and Father; and the latter after the enumeration of those
Blessings which attends His Majesty's Return; the aversion of that blood
guiltiness perpetrated on his Royal Father, by bringing the Authors and
Abettors of it to condign punishment, and exauctorating all whosoever had but
the least finger in that horrid Business.

The University of Cambridge likewise in their Formalities, made an Address to
the King, Doctor Love their Vice Chancellor, pronouncing a Speech in Latin,
the King graciously accepted them, as afterward he did the University of
Oxford, both presenting Copies of Verses made by the respective Students.

On the 20. of June, the Baron of Peluitz Master of the Horse, Chamberlain, and
Colonel of the Regiment of the Guards of His Electoral Highness of
Brandenburgh, and his extraordinary Envoy to His Majesty, had Audience at
White Hall. The Master of the Ceremonies, went to fetch him from his House with
two rich Coaches, each with 6 horses, and so conducted him to His Majesty
through the Gallery, full on both sides of Gentlemen, His Majesty was bare
during the whole Audience. His Speech contained a Congratulation, etc. with the
joy his Master had for His Majesty's Restitution.

The King returned a very obliging answer suitable to those Marks of Affection,
which his Highness made to him formerly, and also because he was the first
Foreign Minister with Credentialls to His Majesty. The Audience being ended,
the Lord Chamberlain conducted him through the said Gallery to the Stairs head,
the Vice-chamberlain to the Coach, and the Master of the Ceremonies and the two
Coaches aforesaid, brought him home again, an honor we have not heard of
conferred before upon any Foreign Envoy, by a King of England, and now done to
show those Sentiments of affection, His Majesty at the Hague professed to have
for that Elector, for his former kindness to him when all the World gave his
Affairs over for Desperate.

On the 27. of June, De Colladon Deputy from the Commonwealth of Geneva having
presented unto His Majesty the Letters of the Lords, Syndicks and of the
Ministers and Pastors of that place Congratulating, etc. His Majesty was
pleased to return them thanks, and give him a gracious Answer to his Complement.

On Thursday the 4. of July. The King is treated magnificently at Di^^^r by the
City July 5.
His Sacred Majesty and both Houses of Parliament, were entertained by the City
of London at Guild Hall, the raining unseasonable Weather, took off much of the
Solemnity, which was intended to be performed, so that His Majesty went into
London, attended only by his own Household Guards, which proceeded in this
order. Adjutant General Miller, rode before at some distance to make way, after
whom went Sir William Throckmorton Knight-marshall, his Servants and Footmen
waiting on each side of him, before 6 Trumpets, then a Kettle Drum, another
class of 7 Trumpets, 6 Maces, the Heralds in rich coats, the Pages and
Footmen, and next His Majesty's Coach with six Horses guarded on both sides
with His Majesty's Royal Bond of Pensioners (walking on Foot with Pistolls in
their hands, under the command of the most Noble and Valiant Earl of Cleveland)
the Equerries, several of His Majesty's Servants, next them came the Yeomen of
the Guard, then the Lord Chancellor in his Coach, the Duke of Buckingham, and
so all the Nobility in their order. The Speaker of the House of Commons, in his
Coach with 6 horses, attended by a Troop of Horse that were upon the Guard that
day. And after them the House of Commons in Coaches. In London, several of the
Penthouses and Windows were adorned with Tapistry. A Lane made by the Liveryes
of the several Companies, and many Pageants in the Streets; at Paul's Gate the
Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and several other of the City richly accoutred, met His
Majesty and conducted him to Guildhall. The Gentlemen of the Artillery, led by
the Valiant and Learned Lord Lucas at Cheapside, opened to the right and left,
and guarded both sides of the way, while His Majesty passed through. Being come
down to Guild Hall, Carpets were spread down from the Hall to the
Councel-chamber, for his Majesty to tread upon. Before Dinner, Sir Will. Wild
the Recorder made a Speech to His Majesty, declaring the great Honor that His
Majesty was pleased to confer on them in vouchsafing formerly to send to them
His Gracious Letter and Declaration, and now to add to that kindness, by
affording by affording them His Royal presence. At the upper end of the Hall in
the Hustings, toward the West, was raised 3. ascents, where was placed a Chair
of State, and a rich Canopy, where His Majesty and His two Royal Brothers
dined, His Majesty's Servants, and several Aldermen and Common Counsel men
giving attendance.

The two Houses of Peers and Commons, dined at other Tables in the great Hall,
attended likewise by Aldermen and Common-Councel-men. At the sound of loud
Music, the whole Service was set upon the Table, and during the whole
dinnertime, they were entertained with variety of Music, both instrumental
and Vocal.

After Dinner was a very costly Banquet, and then an Interlude, where a Rustic
was represented to the Content of His Majesty, and the rest of the Spectators.
Aser this His Majesty retired him into a withdrawing room, where he was pleased
to confer the honor of Knighthood on Alderman Reynoldson, Mr. Cleyton, the
Chamberlain of London, and Mr. Thomas Player, his Son.

The 3. of July was a Day of Prayers, and Solemn Thanksgiving, appointed to be
kept by the Prince Elector Palatine, the Kings Cousin German, through all his
Electoral Dominions, for his Majesty's happy Restoration. Before the Town
house in Heydelbergh, was erected a stately Fountain adorned with all sorts of
Fruits and Flowers, from whence flowed several sorts of Wine; after Sermon the
rest of the day was spent in Feasting and Jollity with sounding of Drums and
Trumpets, the noise of the Cannon, and at night many curious Fireworks were
performed.

But that which was most of honor to the King was a ray of honor from him
darted and influenced upon the Eminent loyalty and signal Services of that
great Warrier and faithful Subject his Excellency the Lord General Monck, whom
his Majesty was then graciously pleased to dignifie with these high Titles of
Honor.

George Duke of Albemarle, Earl of Torrington, Baron Monck of Potheridge,
Beauchamp, and Teys, Captain General and Commander in Chief of all his
Majesty's Forces in his Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, Master of
his Majesty's Horse, Knight of the most honorable Order of the Garter, and one
of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and as an addition to this,
may well be annexed, the honor God himself has conferred on him in making him
the chief Instrument in restoring his Sacred Majesty, and in his Majesty peace,
plenty, and happiness to the three Kingdoms.

According to these Honors his Grace accompanied by the Duke of Buckingham,
and other Personages of high quality, took his place in the House of Peers,
where long may he, and while this shall be a Kingdom (which he has with such
prudence and fidelity asserted) may his Posterity set as everlasting Ornaments
and Pillars of that thrice noble Estate.

Observe we also in the lusture of this Title, the glorious Prognostic of some
future greatness pointed at by his Majesty. This Honor has lain extinct ever
since the reign of H.4. when it expired in one of the Heirs of the House of
York, some while before that almost entire Conquest of France under H. 5. and
this Duchy lies in Normandy (the Inheritance of the Kings of England) now a
Province of the French. A Slip of that Royal Line has now resumed the said
Honor, whose Martial prowess, Conduct, and Heroic Atcheivments incited and
raised by a just claim to a local investiture and possession (the French
honors being more then Titular, by which our Ancestors were recompensed for
their valor) may in a due time restore his Majesty to that fourth Kingdom of
France, as well as to his 3 other Crowns of Great Britain and Ireland;
especially when it shall be called to remembrance how rudely and uncivilly the
French, for Oliver's sake, cast his Majesty out for worse then an Intruder; The
adapted and competent quarrel, which solely challenges the successeful Sword
of this most noble Duke.

Nor were the triumphs of Joy though not altogether so magnificent, less
expresive in foreign Countries, especially at Lisbon in Portugal, Triumphs at
Lysbon.
where upon news from Don Francisco de. Mello, that his Majesty of England was
arrived safe to his Palace of White Hall in quiet and peaceable possession of
his Haereditary Kingdoms, and welcomed from all parts of his Kingdom by the
Nobility, Gentry, and Commons, as well assembled in Parliament as out of it,
that came flocking to congratulate his arrival, and kiss his hand; the King of
Portugal presently gave order that the same night all the great Guns of the
Castle, of the Town, and of all the Forts and Castles of the Harbor should be
fired in token of his joy and contentment; which was accordingly performed, and
at the same time all the Navy-Ships, and Merchantmen in the Port, shot off all
their Cannons. All that night the whole City was adorned with Luminaries. In
every window of the Kings Palace two great Torches of white Wax: the
Ambassadors house being set out in the same fashion.

The next morning his Majesty with the Infanta went forth in solemn manuer,
attended by all the Nobility and Gentry of the Court and City, in a Noble and
splendid Equipage, to the Church of St. Anthony of the Capucins, and returned
to the same Palace in the same pomp, all the Bells ringing the while. This was
followed after with the sport of Los Toures the Royal Reales Bull baiting never
used but in the like August Solemnities, which was to continue nine days; The
Mainmast in the middle Pallace-yard all the while bearing the Flag of England.

The next day Don Antonio de Souza, who lived many years in London Resident;
and Acted so fervently for the King of England, as that the Parliament sent him
home, having most happily laid the foundation of the glorious match between his
Majesty and our Soverain Lady the Queen, then an Infant: and done other
offices, to the advantage of our late, as well as our present Soverain, sent
for many of the chief English Merchants, and gave them a treatment which cost
him five hundred Crowns with the greatest expressions of joy imaginable.

On the 26th of July, the King to honor his Restitution with another glorious
memorial thereof: General Mountague made Earl of Sandwich.
confirmed the dignity of the Earldom of Sandwich, Viscounty of Hinching-Brook,
and Barony of St. Neots, upon the right Honorable Edward M^unta^ue, who had
been so eminently and happily instrumental toward his reduction: and had
manifested his Allegiance to the King before there were any hopes visible, but
what were reposed in this personages Noble and prudent Conduct, whose
generosity did prompt every man's expectation of the ensuing miraculous
Revolution.

He was further created Knight of the most Honorable order of the Garter,
Vice Admiral under his Highness the Duke of York, and Master of his Majesty's
Wardrope, and one the Commissioners of his Treasury, and lastly of his most
Honorable Privy Council; which Honors, with his merit and virtues may he
transmit to late posterity.

On the second of June before, the Prince Elector Palatine sent a
congratulatory Address to the King by the Captain of his lifeguard of Horse
Christopher Clas of Keyemberg, An Embassy from the Prince Elector Palatine.
who was kindly received by his Majesty: and an answer by him dispatched to the
said Prince; with which he returned on the second of August.

In the middle of July my Lord Crosts was sent Ambassador from the King to
their Majesty's of France: being conducted to his Audience, at the Castle of
Vin^ennes, by the Sede Berleze Introductor of Ambassadors, who came to fetch
him in the Kings Coaches at Palace Cardinal; He complemented their said
Majesty in the name of the King his Master, concerning their happy Marriage:
which being performed, he went back to the Louvre to complement the Queens
Majesty a great retinue of English and Jrish Lords attending him in a most
stately Equipage.

For a remark of this happy revolution may we add a relation of unquestionable
credit, which came to hands soon after. In the Town of Dundalchin an English
Castle-Town in the County of Louth in Jreland, there is a chief and very
ancient seat belonging to the Noble family of Bellew, Sir Christ pher Bellew
being the four and twentieth Knight of that Family lineally descended: all
faithful Subjects to the Crown. About this House and Town were many Ash-trees,
where on many thousand Rooks did constantly breed; but when the late troubles
began about twenty years since, all the Rooks quitted the place, which had been
their constant Habitation Winter and Summer for above three hundred years, and
were never since discovered there abouts till the end of April. 1660. about the
time of the Kings restoration; at which time many thousand Rooks came again to
the same place, though the Trees were most of them cut down, where for want of
Boughs to rest on, the greater part sat upon Hedges and banks of Ditches,
spreading themselves upon the Mole hills: whereof all the Country took notice,
and remembering when they fled, concluded their return to be an auspicious
presage of the blessed Turn that immediately followed. The like of this
happened else where so that hereafter these Rooks shall be the Bonae Aves and
sacred only to Majesty and Empire.

Nor may another more rational piece of Honor be omitted here; the Royal
Exchange of London had been deprived and forsaken of one of its Tutelar Angels,
The Kings statues erected at the Exchange.
and had another excluded from his seat therein. It was therefore most pious,
most due, and a most just veneration and reverence, (as it was the greatest
glory among the Romans) which the City of London did to both Princes together.
The statue therefore of King Charles the first which the malice of his Rebels
had first decollated, and having understood how ridiculous they were taken it
wholly down, was now replaced in the same nick, in its full proportion, with a
Scepter in the K. right hand, a Church in his left Arm, a Globe at his left
foot, and on his Shield Magna Charta. On the Base stood this Inscription.
CAROLVS Primus, Monarcharum Magnae Britanniae secundus FRANCIAE and HIBERNIAE
Rex Martyr ad Coelum missus penultimo Ianu. Anno Dom. 1648.

And the Statue of King Charles the second supplied the vacancy of the next
Vault or Nick, being erected with a Scepter in his right hand, a Globe in his
left hand, and on his Shield Amnestia. OBLIVION CAROLVS Secundus, Monarcharum
Magnae Britanniae Tertius FRANCIAE and HIBERNIAE Rex: Aetatis suae Anno
Tricesimo, Regni Duodecimo, Restaurationis primo: 1660. It was almost elapsed
through the overdazeling of this subject, to give an account of the Triumphs of
the Irish which therefore we must of necessity contract in this Epitome that
they were not wanting in the same excesses of gladness, which upon the News of
his Majesty's Return, were carried over with a full Sea, and reciprocated it
back again in the substantial evidences of their joy by a present of twenty
thousand pound to his Majesty, which was delivered among other congratulations
by a select number of Persons of quality from the convention then assembled
there, in the nature of our Free Parliament here, but not so Regular, though as
Legal.

And as a more especial Honor to the King He who had first by his prevalent
virtues subdued the hearts of the Army: now by his own Royal Command, The Army
disbanded.
and with a word of his mouth, (when all the strength of England and lately all
his Fathers Forces before could not so much as resist them) disarms them
totally, and so secured the perpetual peace of this Nation, as in all humane
reason it was thought the only expedient conducing thereunto. Carolus Beatus
Pacificus.

On the thirteenth of September came that splendid congratulatory extraordinary
Embassy from the King of Spain, The Prince of Lig^'s gratulatory Embassy.
delegated to the Prince de Ligne a Burgundian formerly of his Majesty's
acquaintance in Flanders, very Nobly attended by persons of the best rank from
his Master, and with a very illustrious and large retinue. On the seventeenth
of that month he han Audience from the King at the Banqueting House of
White Hall, where he was waited upon by seventeen of his own Coaches, and
thrice as many more of the English. It was indeed one of the gallantest pieces
of Courtship the Spaniard ever boasted of in England, and as well received by
his Majesty: he departed on the third of October following. About that time
also a Kings Frigot, the Henrietta was attending on the Coast of Spain, to
bring hither the Baron of Batteville in the quality of Ambassador in ordinary.

But that which clouded this Triumph, was the death of that most excellent
Prince, Henry Duke of Gloucester: now lest the meeting and conflict of two
various Tides should transport me beyond my bounds I will give way to the
present stream and current of my discourse as the stronger: for sorrow was so
far banished from the face of all men, that Fate had need of a powerful,
instance to reclaim and tell us, that our gladness, (by this Princes death,)
so ho-nourably, was it treated and admonished) could not be perpetual.

On the twentieth of September, his Majesty had the glory of being actually the
Restorer of the Church. The Government by Bishops established.
For the most Reverend Father in God, William Lord Bishop of London, who was
present on the Scaffold with Charles the Martyr, was by Charles the Restorer
placed in his Archpiscopal seat, being translated to Canterbury. The
solemnization whereof was performed in Hen. 7^ Chapel, where and in that
Cathedral many more right Reverend Fathers of the Church were afterward
consecrated as Bishops, to the establishment of the Kingdom in Peace and Unity.

Monsieur Philip Friar a German in the quality of an Extraordinary Envoy to the
King from the Duke of Curland had audience on the 20 of September at
White Hall, An Extraordinary Envoy from the Duke of Curland.
with more then usual Ceremonies; his Highness the Duke of York being present
with many other of his Majesty's chief Officers and other noble persons, who
gave attendance on the King. His Commission was received, and a gracious answer
returned by the King, who always had expressed, as always he had received,
from the said Duke, real Testimonies of his affection. For this Duke though as
remote as Poland bordering between that Kingdom, and Muscovia, had supplied
his late Majesty with money, shipping and Arms in our late disloyal and uncivil
wars.

Toward the end of September Her Highness the Princess Royal of Aurange
arrived in England to complete her joys in the fruition of her Brothers
Company, The Princess of Aurange arrives in England Septem. 23.
now established in his Throne: as soon as the King had notice that she was
come up within the River of Thames, having endured a storm at Sea which
portended no good to her, He went with his Royal Brother the Duke of York, to
meet her; and brought her Highness up in his Barge the Guns from the Ships, all
along their passage saluting her, till the Barge came to White Hall, where her
Highness was received with joyful acclamations, which at night were converted
into Bells and Bonfires. But they proved funeral Fires, and instead of enjoying
her Brother, she was passed to a greater felicity, the Company of her dear and
blessed Father, near whose place of Martyrdom she deposited her mortality, and
by her brother lies enterred with a private funeral in King Hen. 7th Chapel
at Westminster:

There was indeed as much Honor in that privacy, as there was vain and profane
solemnity in the guegaw Exequies of Oliver, which wanted of their due Grandeurs
till his Execution. In opposition therefore to that rabble medly of a Funeral,
it will not be extravagant to set down here, the compact, yet Illustrious
manner of this Princesses, to show this difference betwixt Princes and
Ringleaders of the Rout.

On Saturday December the 26. but 5 days after her decease, the chiefest of the
Nobility and Gentry met together in the House of Peers, to attend the Royal
corpse of the Princess, which was brought about 9 a clock at night, from
Sommerset-house thither: from whence they proceeded, with the Funeral, through
a lane of Guards of the Duke of Albemarle's Regiment of foot. First went
several Gentlemen and Knights, next the servants of his Highness the Duke of
York, then-then the servants of the Queen, after whom came his Majesty's
servants, and next those of the deceased Lady; then 2 Heralds before James
Marquess, now Duke of Orm^nd, Lord Steward of his Majesty's household, Edward
Earl of Manchester, Lord Chamberlain of the same, after whom went Edward Lord.
Hide, Lord Chancellor of England, with the purse and mace born before him:
after whom came another Herald with a Coronet upon black velvet, and then the
Royal Corpse carried by her own servants, the Pall being supported by 6 Earls
and the Canopy carried over it by several Baronets. His Highness the Duke of
York as principal mourner followed the Corpse with a Herald before him, diverse
persons of quality bearing his Train. In this order they came to Henry the 7ths
Chapel, where she was interred in a Vault particularly set apart for the Royal
Line.

This Princess and the Duke of Gloucesterc who preceded her to bliss, needed
no Effigies to represent them to our Eyes being like Virtue not to be pictured,
and can have no resemblances but in the mind, where with immortality they have
placed their monuments, to dure and last with aeternity it self: Reader pardon
this obsequious digression

This was a great allay to the contentation the King had newly received by the
arrival of his Mother, the Queen, with his other Illustrious sister the
princess Henrietta, when the whole Royal family like a bright censtellation,
made the court Alba Aula vaild with cypress those white robes of his mercy
which he had lately showed to his Rebel subjects in his Act of Oblivion and
Indemnity; and sabl'd the Rubric of that Festival of his Nativity May the 29
which by the General suffrage and applause of the Kingdom was consecrated and
set apart to the memory of our temporal Redemption and restitution on that
day, Anno Dom. 1660. Lo! He that could save and redeem the innocent, and the
guilty, could and did preserve multitudes from the stroke of death, which they
had incurred by their revolt; could an enliven us allby the Anniversary of his
Nativity; must be so far subject to Fate, as to have a sad Subject of its
power, in his own Royal Family beyond his Control and arbitrament.

But still the glory of his parentation to his Martyrd Father is not in the
least overcast; The radiancy of his Justice the chief Gem' of his Crown, was
most resplendent; for to satisfy that duty he owed his Royal Father, and the
universal demand of his people, for justice against those horrid Regicides;
soon after he had extended his Grace and favor to others notoriously, yet
less peccant then they, he gave order for their Araignment and Trial which was
held at the Sessions house in the Old Bailey in October 1660. In the compass of
which month ten of those wretches viz. May. Genesis Harrison, John Carew, John
Cook the Solicitor, and Hugh Peter's the Agitator, Thomas Scott the Secretary,
Gregory Clement, Adrian Seroop, and John Jones were hanged drawn and quartered
at the railed place in Charing Cross, with their faces set toward the broad
place against Whitehall, where that execrable murder against the King by their
designment was perpetrated, and at Tyburn two others, Col. Francis Hacker who
had the guard of the King at his death, and Col. Daniel Axtel who guarded the
Court at his Trial. Sixteen more for that bloody crime were condemned, but out
of some respect to his Majesty's Proclamation, which was favorably wrested to
a reprieve (upon which they submitted and rendered themselves.) they were
remitted to the Tower where they still remain under the quick sense of guilt
and deserved punishment.

Heaven was well pleased, but not appeased with this victim, and therefore
provided it self of a more competent Sacrifice, so signally did it contribute
to the glory of this most just and most pious Action. For when with Cain, some
of those murderers wandering as fugitives abroad, thought to escape divine
vengeance, it suddenly surprised and overtook them, three of them Miles Corbet,
Col. John Okey, and Col. John Barkstead, being taken at Delf and transmitted
thence by Sir George Downing the Kings Resident there, to the Tower of London,
from whence being brought to the King's Bench Bar toward the end of April 1662.
they were there condemned and received Sentence, and suffered the same death
with other their fellows at Tyburn, with some little more acknowledgement of
the Fact, then those that suffered for the same crime before. On the 30th of
January 1660. that the Earth might no longer cover the blood which was
impiously and traitorously spilt on that day, vengeance persuing those wicked
miscreants v en beyond the Sanctuary of the Grave, the odious Carcasses of
Cromwell, Jreton, and Bradshaw, were dug out of the ground from those
sumptuous monuments, which as they did the Throne in their life, they had now
usurped in their death: they were drawn in a Cart from Westminster, Sejanns
ducitur unco spectandus, g^^deant om^ts.
where they were first enterred to the Red Lion in Helb^rn, and thence on
Sledges to Tyburn, where they were pulled out of their Coffins, and hanged at
the several Angles or Corners of that accursed Tree, (with the dregs of the
peoples curses and execrations) from ten a clock till Sunsetting, and then cut
down; their loathsome bodies thrown in a deep hole under the Gallows: their Heads
cut off and placed aloft upon Westminster Hall. quoe labra quis illis vultus
erat! where they will continue the Brand-marks of their posterity, and the
expiatory remains of their accursed crime.

But pass we from those deservedly ignominious, shameful objects, to the
contrary real and solid Funeral Honors done to the memory of those Loyal
Heroes; the famous and immortal James Graham Marquess of Montrosse, and Sir
John Hay of Scotland, and Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lisle, murdered in
cold blood at Colchester in 1648.

The several quarters of the renowned Montrosse, had been taken down some time
before, and with great solemnity and procession deposited in the several Cities
where before they stood advanced upon their Gates, whence by order of the
Parliament the whole body was reassembled and with great State and Magnificence
by direction from his Majesty, out of his entire love and affection to the
memory of so loyal and dear a servant and friend: interred after this manner
there in as great pomp as ever was seen in that Kingdom, the funeral
proceeding from the Abbey Church to St. Gyleses in Edenburg.

First went the Lord great Commissioners Lifeguard of Horse, then two
conductors in mourning with one Gumphione of twenty four sallies in long black
Gowns, and black Callots on their heads: An open Trumpet with the defunct
Colors at his Banners, A Gentleman in complete Armor with a plume of Feathers
in his Arms, of the color of the deceased's Paternal coat, his saddle Horse
with a rich saddle, led by two Lacquies, servants of friends, two and two in
mourning. John Graham of Dorchries, carrying the great Pinsel of Honor, with
his full achievement. Thomas Graham of Polento carrying the great Standart of
Honor, with his full achievement. A Horse with a great Saddle, Pistols and
Holsters fit for service led by a Lacquey in Livery: his particular servants
two and two in mourning. His Parliament Horse with a rich foot Mantle, led by
two Lacqueys in Liveryes with Badges back and breast. Four Trumpets in
mourning, carrying the Arms of the deceased on both sides of their banner.
William Graham of Duntrume the younger carrying the great Gumphion on the point
of a Lance, George Graham of Carine the younger carrying the mourning Pinsel,
George Graham of Inchbecke the younger carrying a mourning Standart, Lords
friends two and two in mourning. Walter Graham of Duntran the elder carrying
the Spurs. Alexander Graham of Druming carring the Gantlet George Graham, of
Menzie carrying the Crollet with back and breast, Mungo Graham of Gorthie
carrying the Headpiece 8 Gentlemen carrying the eight branches of the House
and Family of Montross, Capa in Bucklerin carrying the deceaseds Arms in black
Taffata, mourning Lances Four, Trumpets with the like Banners, six Heralds six
Pursivants, the two Secretaryes, his Chaplain and Physician, James Graham
carrying the Parliament Robes, Robert Graham the Elder of Cairny carrying the
Generals Batoon, Patrick Graham the Elder of Inchbecky carrying the order of
the Garter, Graham Lord of Morfie carrying the Coronet, Graham Lord of Phintry
carrying the Commission and Purse, His Coat of Arms carried by Lion King at
Arms in mourning.

Twelve Noblemen to carry the Pall, viz. Viscounts of Sturmont, Arbuthnot
Kingstone, the Lords Strenaw, Kilmarris, Montgomery, Coldingham, Fleming, Task
Drumlane Kirk, Sinclar and Macdonald.

The Earls of Mar Athol Morton Eglington Cathnes, Linlithgow 'Hume Roxburgh,
Tulibardin, Seaforth Calendar Anandale Dundee, Aboyne carried the Corpse under
the Pall, Gentlemen of quality walking on both sides the Pall to relieve the
Noblemen, viz. Sir John Keath Knight Marshall, Gordon son to the Earl of
Sutherland, Mr. Levnigston brother to the Earl of Linlithgow, Sir David Ogilvy
Son to the Earl of Ayrly, the Lairrds of Pitaure, Parry, Cromlicks, Abertarne,
Loud wanne, Mac Intosel, Glarat and Cowlbanne.

The chief mourners with Hoods and long Robes carried by Pages with Gentlemen
uncovered on every side, nine of the nearest Noblemen in the same habit,
marching three and three, which were the Marquess of Dowglass, the Earls of
Marshall and Wigton, the Earls of Southesk, Lords Drummond, Maderty and Napier,
Ralloe and the Lord of Lue.

With this Illustrious train, a triumph equally composed of Grief and Honor,
was this Marquess with the due rites to his super excellent merits laid in his
Tomb, which ambitiously declined his reception, till the public
acknowledgements of that kingdom, nay the whole world proclaimed its glory to
be envied for its enclosed dust, by the Pyramids and Mausolaea of ancient
Sepulchers: and if so? how much more precious that monument, his dear and
gracious Masters affection, in whose mind all those famous services he
achieved in his Cause are so indelibly written, that they are by much aere
prerenniora.

Neither was he attended only by the living, but as a completion of the
Honors intended him, Sir William Hay of Delgity.
the noble Relics of his fidus Achates that renowned Colonel Sir William Hay
of Delgitty (who accompanied him in his Masters service and for that Canse
suffered with l^m, and was buried under that infamous Gibbet whereon they
executed the Marquess) were taken up again and carried after the Marquess in
this order.

Captain George Hay son to Sir John Hay, late Clerk Register carried the
Standard of Honor, William Ferguson of Badyfarrow the Gumphion, Mr. John Hay
the Pinsel of Honor, Alexander Hay the Spurs and Sword of Honor, Mr. Henry
Hay the Croslet, Mr. Andrew Hay the Gauntlet. Next followed his four branches.
House of Arrel carried by Alexander Hay, Lesley House of Bonwhein by George
Lesley of Chappelton, Forbes, the House of Forbes by Forbes of Lesley, Hay of
Delgity by Robert Hay of Perk.

Then came the Corpse garnished with Scutchions and Epitaphs attended by the
Earl of Arrol Lord High Constable of Scotland, the Earls of Buchan, Tividel,
Dumfreize, Kingston, the Viscount of Fendraught, the Lords Ray, Fraser, Foster,
Mr. Robert Hay, of Dronlaw, George Hay of Kinninmouth, with a multitude of the
name of Hays, and other relations, and was with the same ceremonies, as well
Ecclesiastical as military, deposited to a more glorious resurrection.

Thus that which by malicious and barbarous cruelty, and disloyal impotent
revenge, was sown in dishonor, rose again to the sublimest pitch and
attainment of Honor; highly indeed glorious, to the memory of these renowned
Heroes, to their families, and grateful to good men, but infinitely redevable
to the felicity of the times, and his Majesty's most just Government, yet
further most signally obliged to his personal reflections and considerations of
the sufferings of his faithful servants, restoring them with himself, making
his restitution their resurrection. The powerful justice of his Scepter
reviving the sleepy Ashes of his Subjects, communicating with them the miracle
of his own never enough admired restoration.

Give me leave to add, that those Noble persons were lighted to their Tombs, by
the funeral fires of the Covenant; that Salamander and Incendiary, whose cold
Northern constitution had endured the scorching flames of a terrible war, could
not abide the glowing ashes of these Heroes, but expired in a hissing and
ignominious blaze, by the hand of the common Hangman.

Let us now leave these two Laureats, and at a nearer view contemplate the like
reviviscency in another pair of English Commanders, Sir Charles Lucas and Sir
George Lisle reinterred at Colchester.
as famous in their stations and places, Sir Charles Lucas and Sir George
Lisle, who were murdered as aforesaid at Colchester, and by his Majesty's
special command, with all becoming solemnity, reinterred in the same Town, on
the same day, 13 years they first took up Arms in Essex, being the 7th of June
1661. On that day the two Companies of Train-bands, met at one of the clock in
the afternoon, where appeared three hundred completely armed. The Coffins were
brought to the House of Mr. Recorder Shaw, a Member of this Parliament, being
the place into which the Corpse of these two Knights were first brought after
they were shot and stripped. About three in the afternoon, the Trained Bands
being come, they first marched in the military manner customary at Burials,
after them marched Mr. Thurston who carried the guilt spurs upon a black staff;
after him a gilt Sword and a velvet Scabbard born by that valiant and Loyal
Captain William Harris an Officer under Sir Charles Lucas from the beginning of
the War, the Gantlet carried by Mr. Thomas Tolcott, the Helmet by Mr. Andrew
Fromartel, the Breast by Mr. John Robinson, and the Back by Mr. John Merrydale.
Then Sir Charles Lucas his Escutchion was born by Mr. Thomas Puse, and another
for Sir George Lisle, then two led Horses covered with mourning, after them two
Trumpets, and then Mr. Layfield who preached the funeral Sermon, attended by
two Clergymen, one on each side. Then followed Sir Charles Lucas his Coffin
carried upon six Pikes tied with match, born by Captain Street, Mr. Masen Mr,
Wigs, and Mr. Soams in mourning, all of Sir Charles his own Regiment, and the
Pall supported by 6, viz. John Eldred, Senior, Hen. Ayliff, Thomas Tolcott,
Frane Nicholas, John Eldred junior, and George Sainford, all Esquires of good
quality in the County, each of them attended by an Officer bare-headed. Then
followed three Clergymen more, and after them Sir George Lisle's coffin
carried as the former upon pikes by four of his Officers in mournning, and his
Pall born by six proper Gentlemen, each of these having an Officer bare-headed
attending them. After the Coffins was born the great Mace of the Town covered
with black Cypress: then followed in their black Gowns the Deputy Mayor and the
Recorder; (the Mayor being out of Town) then all the Aldermen, with the
Chamberlain, Town Clerk, Assistants and Common Council in their Gowns
accompanied with at least ten thousand Gentlemen, and Inhabitants of the County
and Town. In this manner they marched through the chief streets of the Town to
St. Gyleses Church (who shall hereafter be a Patron for the martyred as well as
the maimed, for in a Church consecrated to that Saint, the Marquess of
Montress was buried as just now we saw) the place of interrment for the family
of the Lord Lucasses. After Sermon there Mr. Layfield made a ^anegyrick and
Elogie of the life and death of Sir Charles, who was well known to him, and
said as much as he knew of Sir George Lisle. After this the doors of the Vault
being opened where Sir Charl's Family lay, the two Coffins were carried down,
and the Gentlemen that bore the Arms went down in the Vault, the Drums beating
a march until they came out, and then the Musketeers gave three great Vollies,
concluding the ceremony with ringing of Bells in all the Churches of the Town.

And now least any of these scattered rays, and refractions of this Monarchs
Glory should be dimmed or disappear in the obscurity of time, we will translate
them to their bright Orb (as Jupiter is feigned to have stellified his Heroes)
encircle them in the Diadem, eternize them in that spherical figure, and fix
them in his Crown, the FIRMAMENT of his past, present, and future greatness:
the Celebrity of which action is not less due to the intrinsic matter, then
to the outward beauteous form, it being not so much an excess of pomp, as a
Boundary of Government, not so much height of Glory, as profoundness of
State-reason, and in that large capaciousness may justly pass for the
consummation and perfect excellence of all Regal felicity. This, was the Crown
profaned by the lewd hands of those prostitute Members at Westminster, when the
Regalia were seized on by them, and by H. M. his advice, thought fit to be
alienated to the public, that is shared among the Usurpers. This was the
Crown, afterward violated, deprived, and widdowed of that sacred, Royal head
of King Charles the Martyr, when its Gold turned pale and lay covered in the
ruin, the dust and ashes of three miserable and mourning Kingdoms. This was
the Crown which alone of all the Insignia of Majesty, (as Elijah of all the
Prophets that had not bowed their knees to Baal) abhorted the Idolatry of
Cromwels usurpation, and esca^ed the ravishing and polluted hands of that
Tyrant, when like Caligula that set the heads of the Gods upon his own statues,
he assumed all the other regalities of his rightful Sovereign, but could no way
fit this sacred Symbol of Majesty (though he could all other Holy things and
the Scripture it self,) to his impious designments. This was that Crown which
the malignity of a dire pestilence had envied the fight and blessing thereof to
the City of London his Majesty's imperial Chamber (which sadly felt the other
plagues of War and Want in a more forcible absence of it thereafter) at his
Royal Fathers inauguration, and was now Boded and bespoke with the like
contagion, when never were the influences of Heaven more curiously propitious,
the two Serene days of that Solemnity, exsiecating and exhaling these vapors
which a long moisture to the danger of a Flood did seem to portend. Lastly this
was that Crown, whose just and ancient descent, unwhichder we have flourished
ever since we were a Nation, till our late Anarchy upon the head of this
miraculous Prince now vindicated it self from the indignities and assaults of
base and insolent Demagogues, who from our Kings regardlesness of State and
Sovereignty, have evermore wrought their contempt in the Subject: who now with
a like joy of revenue, fear and love beheld this awful and most delightful
Triumph which we here relate.

HIs Majesty on the twenty second of April early in the morning passed from
Whitehall to the Tower by water, from thence to go through the City to
Westminster Abbey there to be Crowned.

Two days were allotted to the consummation of this great and most celebrated
Action, The relation of His Majesty's passage to his Coronation.
the wonder and admiration and delight of all persons both Foreign and
Domestic: and pity it was that the solid and lasting happiness it portended
should not have taken up a month and given it the name Coronalis, but real
glory will not linger, nor will time be officious but to the permanent
felicities of his Majesty's long and aged reign.

First therefore we begin with the City of London which participating the
greatest share of that inexpressible happiness that the three Kingdoms received
by the auspicious restoration of the King to his Throne, and of us to our
Laws, Religion and Liberties after a dismal night of confusion and
oppression; and therefore proportionably exceeding in their Loyalty, took
occasion to express in this Triumph of his Majesty's Coronation their joy and
gladness with the greatest magnificence imaginable: They spared not there in
any cost to manifest their affectionate duty to the King, considering, that if
ever excessive charges might be justified, this signalizing their affection to
their Prince might well be allowed, This being the most miraculous and joyful
of any happiness that ever yet blessed the Nation.

The first triumphall Arch through which the King passed was erected in Leaden
Hall street near the end of Lime-street, which represented a Woman figuring
Rebellion, with her attendant Confusion, in monstrous and deformed shapes.
Opposite to her was a representation of Britains Monarchy with a prospect
painting of his Majesty's landing at Dover above it

ADVENTVS AVG.

To The Return of the King.

The whole Tablet representing his Majesty's blessed arrival with this motto.
-- In solido rursus Fortuna locavit. part of the foregoing verses in Virgil
thus rendered.

The various works of time and many days
Often affairs from worse to better raise;
Fortune reviewing those she tumbled down
Sporting restores again unto the Crown
On the other side a Trophy of the example of Gods justice upon those rebels
that committed that horrid murder of the King.

Vltor a Tergo Deus.

Gods vengeance rebels at the feetpersues. The Statues of King James and King
Charles the first and second with the picture of Usurpation flying before them.
The whole inscribed to his present Majesty in commemoration of his most happy
return to his Kingdoms: with Speeches suitable.

Near the Exchange in Cornhill was erected the second, being a Naval Arch
relating to his Majesty's Dominion of the Seas, inscribed, Neptuno Brittanico
Carolo 2. To the British Neptune Charles the second.

The third Triumphall Arch stood near Woodstreet, not far from the place where
the Cross stood, it represented the Temple of Concord.

Aedem Concordiae In Honorem Optimi Principis. etc.
In Honor of the best of Princes intimateing the Unity and peace of the Kingdoms
In Fleetstreet near White Friars stood the fourth Arch, representing the
garden of Plenty whose Title was. Veribah Aug.
Extincto Belli Civilis Incendio clusoque Jant
Templo Vbefitati Aram Celsissimam construxis.
SPQL.

The Civil War being extinguished and Janus Temple which concluded with speech
o^
shut, the Londoners consecrated this Arch to Plenty. Those 4 letters importing
the City of London, were subscribed to all the inscriptions.

Thus much for the City, now for the Court, which in order challenged the first
place, but it is valor to deal with the biggest first, and those Colossus in
London were indeed Gigantick and of stupendous greatness: Come we now to the
Knights of the Bath made at this Coronation, who appearing at the Court of
Requests in Westminster, were called over by the Lords Commissioners appointed
for that purpose, viz.

The Duke of Ormond, the Earls of Northumberland, Suffolk, Lindsey, Manchester.

Their names were as follows.

Sir Fiennes Lord Clinton heir apparent to the Earl of Lincoln, Sir Egerton
Lord Brackley son and Heir apparent to the Earl of Bridgewater, Sir Philip
Herbert second son to the Earl of Pembrook and Montgomery, Sir William Egerton
second son to the Earl of Bridgewater, Sir Vere Fane second son to the Earl of
Westmerland, Sir Charles Berkley eldest son to the Lord Berckley, Sir Henry
Bellasis eldest son to the Lord Bellasis, Sir Henry Hide now Viscount Cornbury
eldest son to Edward Earl of Clarendon, Sir Rowland Bellasis brother to the
Lord viscount Faulconberg, Sir Henry Cape^ brother to the Earl of Essex, Sir
John Vaughan second son to Richard Earl of Carbery, Sir Charles Stanley
Granchild to James late Earl of Derby, Sir Francis and Sir Henry Fane,
Grandchildren to the late Earl of Westmerland, Sir William Prettyman Baronet,
Sir Richard Temple Baronet, Sir William Ducy Baronet, Sir Thomas Trevor Knight
and Baronet; Sir John Scudamore Baronet, Sir William Gardner Baronet, Sir
Charles Cornwallis son to Frederick Lord Cornwallis, Sir John Nicholas eldest
son to his Majesty's principal Secretary, Sir John Monson, Sir Bourchier Wray,
Sir John Coventry, Sir Edward Hungerford, Sir John Knevet, Sir Philip Boteler,
Sir Adrian Scroop, son of Sir Gervas Scroop who received 19 wounds in one
Battle in his Majesty's service, Sir Richard Knightley, Sir Henry Heron, Sir
John Lewknor, Sir George Brown, Sir William Tyringham, Sir Francis Godolphin,
Sir Edward Baynton, Sir Grevil Verney, Sir Edward Harlow, Sir Edward Walpool,
Sir Francis Popbam, Sir Edward Wise, Sir Christopher Calthorp, Sir Richard
Edgecomb, Sir Williams Bromley, Sir Thomas Bridges, Sir Thomas Fanshaw, Sir
John Denham, Sir Nicholas Bacon, Sir James Altham, Sir Thomas Wendy, Sir John
Monson, Sir George Freeman, Sir Nicholas Slanning, Sir Richard Ingoldsby, Sir
John Roll, Sir Edward Heath son of Sir Robert Heath, late Lord chief Justice
of England, Sir William Morley, Sir John Bennet, Sir Hugh Smith, Sir Simon
Leech, Sir Henry Chester, Sir Robert Atkins, Sir Robert Gay^r, Sir Richard
Powle, Sir Hugh Duey, Sir Stephen Hales, Sir Ralph Bash, Sir Thomas Whitmore.
In number sixty eight.

After their calling over they proceeded in their usual habits, each of them
between his two Esquires, and a Page following, the Heralds going before them
with their Coats not put on, but only hanging loose on their Arms, to King
Hen. 7th Chapel, where after the wonted reverence performed they took their
seats. Prayer being done, they returned to the Painted Chamber and the other
Rooms adjoining to repose themselves, till the supper of two hundred dishes at
his Majestyes charge, was brought to the Court of Requests, where they placed
themselves according to their Seniority on the Tables, by the wall side, their
Esquires and Pages waiting on them on the other.

Supper ended, the Lord Cornwallis and Sir Charles Berckly (the Tresurer and
Comptroler of his Majesty's Household) gave them His welcome, and then conducted
them to the painted Chamber and to the Lords House adjoining, and some other
near rooms where their bathing vessels and beds which were Pallets with
Canopies, were prepared, being covered with red say: There after they had
bathed more or less as each of them found convenient, they remained all night,
and early in the morning were bade good morrow by his Majesty's music. Then
arising and apparelling themselves in a Cordeliers habbit (being a long russet
gown with wide sleeves and hood tied close about the middle with a cordon of
Ash-colored and russet silk reaching down almost to the knees, and a white
Napkin or handkercheife hanging thereat) they proceeded to H. 7th Chapel, in
the same order as the night before, doing the same reverence, and heard Divine
Service, and took the usual Oath before the said Lords Commissioners, which was
read to them by Sir Edward Walker Principal King of Arms, in these words.

Right dear Brethren.
GReat worship be this Order to every of you. You shall honor God above all
things. You shall be steadfast in the faith of Christ, and the same maintain and
defend to your power. You shall love your Sovereign above all earthly things,
and for your Sovereigns right live and dye. You shall defend Maidens, Widows,
and Orphans in their right. You shall suffer no extortion as far as you may:
nor sit in any place where wrong judgment shall be given, to your knowledge.
And of as great Honor be this Order to you, as ever it was to any of your
Progenitors or others.


This done, they returned in the same order they came to the painted Chamber,
and put on the habit of the order, which was a Mantle and Surcoat of red
Taffata lined and edged with white Sarcenet, and thereto fastened two long
strings of white silk, with buttons and tossels of red silk and gold, and a
pair of white gloves tied to them, a white Hat and white Feather; in this garb
they dined in the painted Chamber, and thence girded with a sword the Pummel
and cross Hilt whereof were guilt, the Scabbard of white leather, and Belt of
the same, with gilt spurs carried by their Pages, they marched on horseback by
seniority to White Hall, with the Heralds before them, from the old Pulace
round about the New, and so through Kingstreet going round about the place
where Charing Cross stood, and then to Whitehall, where they alighted, and
after they had gone about the first Court, they were conducted up by the
Heralds to the banqueting House, where his Majesty sat under a cloth of
State to receive them. They were brought up by six and six, each between his
two Esquires, with his Page carrying his Sword before him. In their approaches
toward his Majesty, they made three obeysances, and each Knight being
presented by his two Esquires upon their knees to the King, (the Lord
Chamberlain of his Majesty's Household receiving the Knights sword from the
Pages, and delivering it to the King) who with the sword of State ready drawn
conferred upon them their respective Knighthoods, by laying the sword upon
their shoulders, and so put the presented sword upon the Knights neck, in such
sort that it might hang on his left side, and then the said Scabbard with the
order hanging in it. Which done the Knight made his obeisance of gratitude to
his Majesty, and falling back, the rest were brought up and Knighted in like
manner.

After this they went down into his Majesty's Chapel, and there heard Divine
Service, with the Organ and Anthems, and then went up six at a time to the
Altar, and offered up their swords, where Gilbert Lord Bishop of London, Dean
of his Majesty's Royal Chapel received them and laid them upon the Altar, and
afterward restored them with this admonition.

By the Oath which you have taken this day, I exhort and admonish you to use
these swords to the Glory of God and defense of the Gospel, to the maintenance
of your Sovereigns right and honor, and to the upholding of Equity and Justice
to your power, So help you God.

This done, they returned from the Chapel, where the Kings Mr. Cook stood with
his chopping knife in his hands challenging their Spurs, which were severally
redeemed with a Noble in money. As they past by, he said Gentlemen, you know
what a great Oath you have taken, which if you keep it will be great honor to
you, but if you break it I must hack off your Spurs from your heels.

When they came into the great Hall, the Officers at Arms acquainted them that
on Monday following they were to attend his Majesty from the Tower to
Whitehall on Horseback in the same Robes wherein they were Knighted, and on
Tuesday to meet early in the Painted Chamber in their Purple Satin habits,
thence to go before his Majesty to his Coronation at Westminster.

This Ceremony being over, the King to honor this great Solemnity, advanced
some eminent persons to higher degrees of honor, to be as Jewels to that Crown
which should be placed on his head, they were twelve in number, six Earls, and
six Barons. The names of whom are as follows. Edward Lord Hyde of Hendon Lord
High Chancellor of England, was created Earl of Clarendon, Arthur Lord Capel
was created Earl of Essex, Thomas Lord Brudenell was created Earl of Cardigan,
Arthur Viscount Valentia in Jreland was created Earl of Anglesey, Sir John
Greenvile Gentleman of his Majesty's Bedchamber, and Groom of the Stool, was
created Earl of Bath, Charles Howard of his Majesty's privy Council was created
Earl of Carlisle: Denzill Hollis Esquire was created Lord Hollis of Ifeld, Sir
Fredrick Cornwallis was created Lord Cornwallis of Eye in Suffolk, an ancient
Barony, Sir George Booth Baronet was created Lord de-La-Mere, Sir Horatio
Townsend was created Baron of Lyn Regis, Sir Anthony Ashly Cooper was created
Baron of Winterbourn St. Gyles, John Crew was created Lord Crew of Stene.

The Earls at their Creation, had two Earls their supporters, their Cap and
Coronet carried by one, their Sword by another, and their Mantle by a third.
The Lords were likewise supported by 2 Lords their Cap and Mantle in the same
manner but no Sword.

These Peers being thus led up, Garter King of Arms attending them to the King,
upon their several approaches, their Patents were presented by Sir Edward
Walker principal King at Arms, which being by the Lord Chamberlain delivered to
the King, and from him to Secretary Nicholas, were by him read, and then given
by his Majesty to the respective Nobles, who after they were vested with their
Robes, had their several Caps and Coronets placed upon their heads by his
Majesty's own hands as he sat in a Chair of State.

These likewise were ordered to attend the King at his Coronation, which
commenced its glories Monday the 22d of April aforesaid: it having rained for a
month together before, it pleased God that not one drop fell on this Triumph,
which appeared in its full lusture and grandeur, but as soon as the Solemnity
was past and the King and his Train at dinner in Westminster Hall it fell a
thundering, lightning and raining with the greatest force vehemence and noise
that was ever heard or seen at that time of the year.

The Streets were gravelled all the way and filled with a multitude of
Spectators out of the Country and some foreigners who acknowledged themselves
never to have seen among all the great magnificences of the world any to come
near or aequal this, even the vaunting French confessing their pomps of the
late Marriage with the Infanta of Spain, at their Majesty's entrance into
Paris, to be inferior in its State, gallantry and riches, unto this most
Illustrious Cavalcade.

The manner of the Kings Passage was thus, The Heralds having called over and
placed the Nobility and Gentry who attended the Solemnity in the Tower, they
went from thence immediately about ten in the morning and joining with the
others which were placed without, proceeded in this manner.

THE King having lodged mondaynight the 22 at White Hall, on Tuesday morning
April 23 St. Georges day his Majesty went from Whitehall by water to be Crowned
at Westminster. As soon as his Majesty was landed and was ready to set forward
to the Abbey, the Dean and Prebends of Westminster, brought all the Regalia to
his Majesty, who delivered them to several great personage; to bear before
him, and when he came to the West door of the Abbey, the Dean and Prebends met
his Majesty and received him with an Anthem all along up the body of the Church
and Choir.

All the Peers with their Coronets in their hands came up along with his
Majesty till his Majesty was placed in a chair of State (not in his Throne)
then the Lord-Bishop of London, for the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, went to
every of the four-sides of the Throne, and at every of them spoke to the the
people in these words, Here I present unto you King Charles the rightful
inheritor of the Crown of this Realm. Wherefore all you that are come this day
do your Homage service and bownden duty, be ye willing to do the same?

Whereupon all the Peers in their Parliament Robes and people gave a shout,
testifying their willingness. This while the King standing from his chair,
turned himself to every of the four sides of the Throne and at every of them
spoke to the people who again with loud acclamations signified their
willingness all in one voice. After which the choire sung an Anthem, in the
interim whereof his Majesty Supported by 2 Bishops of Durham and Bath and
Wells, and attended by the Dean of Westminster went to the steps before the
Communion Table where upon Carpetts and Cushions the King offered a Pall and a
piece of Gold.

After his Majesty had offered, he went on the right hand and kneeled down
during a a short Collect or prayer, and then Sermon began which was preached by
the Lord-Bishop of Worcester. Sermon being ended, the Lord Bishop of London
went to the King for the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and asked if he were
pleased to take the Oath usually taken by his predecessors, to which his
Majesty showed himself most willing.

Then his Majesty rose out of his chair and by those two that before assisted
him was led up to the Communion Table where he made a Solemn Oath to observe
those things he had before promised. After this Oath the King returned to his
chair, and kneeled at his footstool, while the Hymn of the holy Ghost was
singing, which ended, the Letany was sung by two Bishops.

After which the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury began and said, Lift up your
Hearts, etc. Then his Majesty arose from his devotion and disrobing himself of
his uppergarment (his under garment being so made as the places to be anointed
might be opened by undoing certain loops which the Archbishop undid his Majesty
setting in a chair) the Archbishop first anointed the palms of both his hands,
the choire singing an Anthem, after which and certain prayers the Lord
Archbishop proceeded and anointed his breast, between the shoulders, on both
the shoulders, the bending of his Arms and the Crown of his head, whereupon the
Dean of Westminster closed the Loops, and the Lord Archbishop said several
Prayers, which ended, the Coyf was put on his Majesty's head, and the C^lobium
^ndouis or Dalmatica, then the super-tunica of cloth of Gold, with the Tissue
buskins and Sandals of the same, then the Spurs were put on by the Peer that
carried them, then the Archbishop took the Kings sword and laid it on the
Communion Table, and after Prayer restored it to the King, which was Girt upon
him by the Lord great Chamberlain, then the Armil was put on, next the Mautle,
or open Pall, after which the Lord Archbishop took the Crown into his hands
and laid it on the Communion Table, prayed, and then set it on the Kings head,
whereupon all the Peers put on their Coronets and caps, the choire singing an
Anthem: next the Archbishop took the Kings ring, prayed again and put it on the
fourth finger of the Kings hand, after which his Majesty took of his sword, and
offered it up, which one of the chief peers then present redeemed, drew it out,
and carried it naked before the King. Then the Archbishop took the Scepter
with the Cross, and delivered it into his Majesty's right hand, the Rod with
the Dove into the left, and the King kneeling blessed him, which done the King
ascended his Throne Royal, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal attending him,
where after Te Deum the King was again enthroned, and then all the Peers did
their Homage; The Archbishop first, who then kissed the Kings left cheek and
after him the other Bishops. After the Homage the Peers altogether stood round
about the King, and every one in their order touched the Crown upon his head,
promising their readiness to support it with their power The Coronation being
ended, the Communion followed, which his Majesty having received and offered,
returned to his Throne till the Communion ended, and then went into St. Edwards
Chapel, there took off his Crown and delivered it to the Lord Bishop of
London, who laid it upon the Communion Table, which done the King withdrew into
the traverse, where the Lord Great Chamberlain of England disrobed the King of
St. Edwards Robes, and delivered them to the Dean of Westminster, Then his
Majesty was newly arrayed with his Robes prepared for that day, and came to the
Comunion Table in St Edwards Chapel, where the Lord Bishop of London, for the
Archbishop set the Crown imperial, provided for the King to wear that day,
upon his head. Then his Majesty took the Scepter and the Rod, and (the Train
set in order before him) went up to the Throne, and so through the Choyre and
body of the Church out at the West-door to the Palace of Westminster, where
his Majesty dined in great State and Magnificence. A Table being placed at the
upper end of the Hall.

I shall now relate the manner (though pre-posterously) of the proceeding of
this Triumph from the Tower.

First went the Horse-guard of his Highness the Duke of York, the Messengers of
his Majestyes Chamber, the Esquires of the Knights of the Bath, 136 in number,
the Knight Harbenger, the Sergeant Porter, the Sewers of the Chamber, the
Quarter waiters of the six Clerks of the Chancery, the Clerks of the Signet,
The Clerks of the Privy Seal, the Clerks of the Council, the Clerks of both
Houses of Parliament, The Clerks of the Crown, the Chaplains in ordinary having
dignities, ten in number, the Kings Advocate and remembrancer, the Kings
learned Counsel at Law, The Master of the Chancery, the Kings puisne
Sergeants, The Kings Attorney and Solicitors, The Kings eldest Sergeants, the
Secttarys of the French and Latin Toungs, the Gentlemen Ushers, daily waiters,
The Servers, Carvers, and Cup-bearers in ordinary, the Esquires of the Body,
The Masters of standing offices being no Counselors, viz. of the Tents,
Revels, Ceremonies, Armory, Wardrope, Ordinance, Master of the Requests,
Chamberlyn of the Exchequer, Barons of the Exchequer, and Judges of the Law
according to their dignity, the Lord chief Baron, the Lord chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, Master of the Rolls, the Lord chief Justice of England.

Trumpets. The Gentlemen of the privy chamber, the Knights of the Bath, 68 in
number, the Knight Marshall, the Treasurer of the Chamber, the Master of the
Jewel House, Knights of the Privy Council, Comptroller of his Majesty's
Household, Treasurer of his Majesty's Household.
Two Trumpets and Sergeants Trumpets Two Pursivants at Arms. Barons eldest
Sons, Earls youngest Sons, Vicounts eldest Sons, Barons, Marquesses younger
Sons, Earls eldest Sons.
Two Pursivants at Arms. Viscounts, Dukes younger Sons, Marquesses eldest Sons.
Two Heralds. Earls, Earl Marshal, and Lord Chamberlyn of the Household, Dukes
eldest Sons.
Sergeants at Arms on both sides the Nobility. Clarencieux and Norroy, Lord
Treasurer, Lord Chancellor, Lord High Steward, Duke of Ormond, two persons
representing the Duke of Normandy, and Aquittain, Gentleman Usher, Garter, Lord
Mayor Sir Rich. Brown.
The Duke of York alone. The Lord High Constable of England, Earl of
Northumberland, Lord Great Chamberlyn of England. Earl of Lindsey. The Sword
born by the Duke of Richmond.
The King. Equerries and Footmen next and about his Majesty, Gentlemen and
Pensioners without them the Master of the Horse Duke of Albemarl leading a
spare Horse, the Vice Chamberlyn to the King, Captain of the Pensioners,
Captain of the Guard, the Guard, the Kings Lifeguard, commanded by my Lord
Gerrard, the Generals Lifeguard, by Sir Phillip Howard, a troop of Voluntier
Horse, and a company of Foot, by Sir John Robinson.

The way from the Tower to Algate was guarded by the Hamblets, from thence to
Temple-Barr by the Trained-Bands of London, on one side, and lined with the
Liveries on the other side, with the Banners of each company. The Windows were
all along laid with the best Carpets and Tapestry, Bands of Music in several
places, and the Conduits running with Wine. At the Arches, the King was
entertained with several Speeches and Songs; and at Cheapside near the third
Arch, where the Temple of Concord stood, Sir William Wyld Recorder of London
with the Aldermen, who in the name of the City, did most cordially congratulate
his Majesty's access thither on that day, upon that solemn occasion in a pithy
Speech, and as a signal of their Allegiance and Duty, presented to his Majesty
a purse of Gold.

In St. Paul's Churchyard stood the Blewcoat boys of Christ-Church Hospital,
One in behalf of the rest declared their joy for his Majesty's wonderful
preservation in his absence, and his arrival thither, humbly beseeching his
Majesty's Gracious favor, and indulgence, according to the example of his
Royal Ancestors, and his Father of Blessed memory. The King was very well
pleased with this Speech, and after conferred something on the Boy that spoke
it.

In the Strand, and through Westminster also the ways were gravelled and
rayled, being guarded on both sides, with the Trained Bands of that Liberty and
City, and his Majesty's two Regiments of Foot, under the command of his Grace,
The Duke of Albermarl. and Col. John Russel Brother to the Earl of Bedford The
Houses were also richly adorned with the Carpets and Tapestry, and Music,
(particularly a stage of Morrice-dancers at the Maypole in the Strand) in the
several places all along his Majesty's passage.

When his Majesty came through Temple-Barr into his ancient and native City of
Westminster, the Head Bailiff in a Scarlet Robe, and High Constable in Scarlet,
received his Majesty with loud music, where alighting off their Horses, and
kneeling down to his Majesty, the head Bailiff on behalf of the Dean and
Chapter, City and Liberty, signified their joyful reception of his Royal person
into that Liberty, declaring how much more happy they were then any part of the
Nation, in that their Sovereign Lord and King was born within their Liberty,
and humbly desiring his Majesty to continue his Grace and Favor still to them,
whereby that City might still be enabled to do His Majesty service. When the
head-Bailiff had ended his Speech, he and the High Constable mounted their
Horses and fell in next after his Majesty's Sergeants at Mace, in which order
they attended his Majesty to Whitehall.

Infinite and innumerable were the acclamations and shouts from all the parts
as his Majesty passed along, to the no less joy then amazement of the
spectators, who beheld those glorious personages that rid before and behind his
Majesty. Indeed it were in vain to attempt to express this Solemnity, it was so
far from being utterable, that it is almost inconceivable, and much wonder it
caused in Outlandish persons, who were acquainted with our late troubles and
confusions (to the ruin almost of three Kingdoms,) which way it was possible
for the English to appear in so rich and stately a manner?

It is incredible to think what costly clothes were worn that day, the Cloaks
could hardly be seen what silk or satin they were made of for the gold and
silver laces and Embroydery that was laid upon them: the like also was seen in
their foot-cloathes. Besides the inestimable value and treasures of Diamonds,
Pearl and other Jewels worn upon their backs and in their hats, to omit also
the sumptuous, and rich Liveries of their Pages and footmen, (some suits of
Liveries amounting to fifteen hundred pounds;) the numerousnesse of these
Liveries and the orderly march of them, as also that stately Equipage of the
Esquires attending each Earl by his Horse-side: so that all the world that saw
it, could not but confess, that what they had seen before was but solemn
mummery to the most August, noble and true glories of this great day,

In this order the King arrived at Whitehall a good time before the evening,
and then retired himself to supper, and so to his Rest, to recommence, the
next day and to put an end to, this Triumph.

All the Kingdom over great rejoicing was made by feasting and other shows as
(...) the several Bands of the Countries, with the additional voluntary Gentry
in a new and gallant Cavalry, which showed the resurrection of their former
Loyalty, in its immutable State of peace, and Glory not to be thereafter
interchanged with the sullen humors and moods, and most saucy, ridiculous
presumptions of County Committee Men and such like venomous mushirooms.

Its the disgrace of this work to mention them; and therefore in compliance
with our subject ( omitting the same Triumphs in Scotland and Ireland with in
the express resemblances of this Magnificence: several Honors being conferred
both by the Lord Commissioner his Grace and the Lord Justices on that
solemnity) we will take a full view of all our personal Dignities at home.

We proceed then to those magnificences of the King which are in Honorante not
in Honorato. After the miserable vulgarly multitude of those evil Counselors,
we had been oppressed with for so many years, (who had raised themselves to the
mysteries of Government by their public scandals thereof in its former
administration, following the impious politics of Absal^n) see an Assembly of
Princes met in his Majestyes most Honorable Privy Council, whose superlative
and eminent endowments assisted by their conspicuous Grandeur restored the Form
of the British Empire, such as Palla ^gloried to be in the midst of; Her
Heavenly de^cent, being s^ited with their Noble extractions, and their
excellencies in all p^udent menage of the public accomp^ished to Her own
authentical institution of true Policy: such P^lots whose ha^py and skilful
hand could guide the tossed ba^k of the Kingdom in the darkest night, and the
most affrightful tempests, when there was neither Su, Moon, nor Stars, no face
of Authority, no rule nor directions, nor Chart to follow in the unexampled
case of our late distractions, and without any other compass then their Piety
to God. Duty to their Prince, and love to their Country, by which they
confidently steered through all those shelves rocks and sands which eminently
threatened its Shipwreck and Destruction.

Their sacred names, for perpetual memory, and to the eternal Fame of this
their blessed conduct, (understanding that by his Majesty's call to this
sublime eminent dignity, their precedent services were signated and notified to
the world) as most Religiously and gratefully is due, are here transmitted
among the rest of his Majesty's felicities to inquisitive posterity.

The names of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
HIs Royal Highness the Duke of York Earl of Clarendon Lord Chancellor of
England. Earl of Southampton Lord Treasurer. Lord Roberts Lord Privy Seal. Duke
of Albemarle. Earl of Lindsey Lord High Chamberlain of England. Duke of Ormond
Lord Steward of his Majesty's Household. Marquess of Dorchester. Earl of
Northumberland. Earl of Leicester. Earl of Berkshire. Earl of Portland. Earl of
Norwich. Earl of St. Albons. Earl of Sandwich. Earl of Anglesey. Earl of
Carlisle. Viscount Say and Seal. Lord Wentworth. Lord Seymour Chancellor of the
Duchy of Lancaster. Lord Hellis Lord Cornwallis. since deceased. Lord Cooper.
Earl of Louderdale. Sir Charles Berkley. Sir George Carteret. Sir Charles
Compton. Secretary Nicholas. Secretary Morie^.
From these Glories of the Gown we are next invited to as illustrious, those of
Chivalry, a medium betwixt war and peace, that there might be nothing which his
Majesty's Fortunes, could not comprehend. The most Honorable Order of the
Garter, famous for its Martial and Civil achievements had been dragd in the
dirt and trampled under foot of Plebeian Anarchy and usurpation, when the
innocent charm of its motto, Honi soit qui mal y Pense, evil be to him that
evil thinks, which had preserved it so many ages, found not veneration or
respect, being ridled by that monster of Rebellion, to be a badge and
significator of its certain, though long looked for Vltion and avengment in its
own dire retorts and self punishing revolutions.

It is not, nor ever will be forgotten how they abased this Royal Ensign, the
highest Order of Knighthood in the world, to the infimest and lowest
avilements, when it was derided by the most, abjectest and meanest degree of
the people; when its True bl^w, was ^a^ned with the blotts of Fantise and
imbecility of courage; its star was dimmd and looked like a fallen meteor in
the lower Region and St. George was enchanted by the Dragon. Now the fates had
decreed that our Charlemain should break this spel, and recover this champions
celebrated order to its greatest splendour, by filling up those vacancies, death
had made, by a new and solemn instalment.

Some of these most honorable Knights survived to his Majesty's restitution;
some be made abroad; others be decreed so, and they were so de jure, having had
the order sent them, but the investiture was wanting: The rest of these Noble
companions were allied to the restoration: all of them are ranked in the manner
as they sat at Windsor April the 23. 1662. being St. Georges day, where,
after the usual magnificent procession, his Majesty renewed the usual
solemnitys and grandeurs thereof himself being there in person.

The fellows and Companions of the most Noble Order of St GEORGE commonly
called the GARTER, as they were the 23. of April in the 13. year of K. Charles
the second, 1661.
CHARLES the second King of Great Britain, France, and ^eland, etc. James Duke
of York, the Kings only Brother. Charles L^dewick Prince Elector Palatine.
Frederick William Marquess and Elector of Brandenburch. Rupert Count Palatine
of the Rhene, and Duke of Cumberland. Edward Count Palatine of the Rhene.
William of Nassau Prince of Orange. Barnard Duke of Espern^n. Charles Prince of
Tarante. William Cecil Earl of Salisbury. Thomas Howard Earl of Be^^shire.
Algernon Piercy Earl of Northumberland. James Butler Duke of Orm^nd. George
Villier^ Duke of Buckingham. Thomas W^i^thsley Earl of Southampton. William
Cavendish Marquess of Newcastle. George Digby Earl of Brist^ll Gasper Count of
Marsha. George Monk Duke of Albemarl Edward Mountague Earl of Sandwich. Aubrey
de Vere Earl of Oxford. Charles Stuart Duke of Richmond and Lenox. Mountague
Bertie Earl of Lindsey. Edward Mountague Eaal of Manchester. William Wentworth
Earl of Strafford.
With the like happy reviviscency of the dead ashes of the Noble Montrosse etc.
did His Majesty graciously revive the sleeping honors and Titles of 2 of the
most illustrious Families in England viz.

THe Right Noble Thomas Howard Earl of Arundel, Surry, and Norfolk, was
restored to the dignity and Title of Duke of Norfolk, by an Act of the
Parliament begun at Westminster the 25 of April, in the 12 year of the Reign
of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the second, and in the year of
our Lord 1660, etc.

The Right Noble William Seymour, Marquess of Hertford, was restored to the
Dukedom of Somerset, by an Act of the Parliament begun at Westminster the 25
of April, in the 12th. year of the Reign of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord,
King Charles the second, 1660. both which are since confirmed.

Other Creations.

The Right honorable Heneage Finch, Earl of Winchelsey, was created Baron
Fitzherbert of Eastwell in the County of Kent, by Letters Patents, bearing date
at Westminster the 26 of July, in the twelfth year of the Reign of our most
Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the second, in the year of the Lord, 1660.
which Honor is entailed on him and the Heirs males of his body lawfully
begotten, with all Rites, Privileges and preheminences thereunto belonging.

The Right Honorable Elisabeth Viscountesse of Kynelmeky, was created
Countess of Guilford during her life by Letters Patents, bearing date at
Westminster the 14 day of July, in the twelfth year of the Reign of our most
Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the second; with all privileges thereunto
belonging, and Fee of 20 l. per annum out of the Exchequer, etc.

The Right Honorable James Butler Duke and Marquess of Orm^nd, in the Kingdom
of Ireland, was created Ba^on Butler of Lanthony in the County of Gloucester,
and Earl of Brecknock in Wales by Letters Patents, bearing date at Westminster
the 20. day of July, in the twelfth year of the Reign of our most Gracious
Sovereign Lord King Charles the second, which said Honors are granted to him,
and the Heirs males of his body lawfully begotten, with the Fee of 20 l. per
annum, together with all privileges, etc. he was in the same year also made
Lord Steward of his Majesty's household. Knight of the most Noble Order of the
Garter, and one of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council.

BARONS

The Right honorable Thomas Windsor de Windsor, alias Hickman, was restored
and confirmed to the Barony, Title and Dignity, of Baron Windsor, by Letters
Patents bearing date at Westminster the 16 day of June, in the twelfth year of
the Reign of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the second; which
said honor, is granted to him and his Heirs for ever, with the same precedence
and place in Parliament and else where in England, as Henry and Thomas
Windsor, Barons Windsor whilst they lived, successively enjoyed, and all
other Dignities and preheminences to a Baron of Parliament belonging, etc. 1661.

A Roll of the PEERS of the Kingdom of ENGLAND according to their Birth and
Creations.
DUKES of the Blood Royal
James Duke of York and Albany, Lord High Admiral of England. Rupert Duke of
Cumberland.
These take places in respect of their Offices. Edward Earl of Clarendon, Lord
Chancellor of England. Thomas Earl of Southampton, Lord Treasurer of England.
DUKES
Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk. William Seymour Duke of Somerset. George
Villiers Duke of Buckingham. Charles Stuart Duke of Richmond George M^nck Duke
of Albemarl.
MARQUISSES
John Paulett Marquess of Winchester. Edward Somersett Marquess of Worcester.
William Cavendish Marquess of Newcastle. Henry Pierpoint Marquess of
Dorchester.
EARLS
These three take p'ace in respect of their Offices. Mountague Berte Earl of
Lindsey Lord High Chamberlain of England. James Butler Earl of Brecnock, Lord
Steward of his Majesty's Household. Edward Mountague Earl of Manchester, Lord
Chamberlain of his Majesty's Household.
EARLS
Awbery Vere Earl of Oxford. Algernoon Piercy Earl of Northumberland. Francis
Talbott Earl of Shrewsbury. -- Gray Earl of Kent. Infra etat. Charles Stanley
Earl of Derby. John Mannours Earl of Rutland. -- Hastings Earl of Huntingdon.
Infra etat. Thomas Wriothsley Earl of Southampton. William Russel Earl of
Bedford. Philip Herbert, Earl of Pembrook and Mountgomery. Theophilus Clinton
Earl of Lincoln. Charles Howard Earl of Nottingham. James Howard Earl of
Suffolk. Richard Sackvill Earl of Dorsett. William Cecil Earl of Salisbury.
John Cecil Earl of Exeter. John Egerton Earl of Bridgewater. Robert Sidney Earl
of Leicester. James Compton Earl of Northampton. Charles Rich Earl of Warwick.
William Cavendish Earl of Devon. Bas^l Feilding Earl of Denbigh. George Digby
Earl of Bristol. Li^nel Cranfeild Earl of Middlesex. Henry Rich Earl of
Holland. John Hollis Earl of Clare. Oliver St. John Earl of Bullingbrook.
Mildmay Fane Earl of Westmerland. Edward Mountague Earl of Manch^ster. Thomas
Howard Earl of Berkshire. Thomas Howard Earl of Cleveland. Edward Sheffeild
Earl of Mulgrave. Henry Carry Earl of Monmouth. James Ley Earl of Marlborough.
Thomas Savage Earl Rivers. Mountague Barrye Earl of Lindsey, Lord great
Chamberlain of England. Nicholas Knollys Earl of Banbury. Henry Carry Earl of
Dover. Henry M^rdant Earl of Peterborough* Henry Gray Earl of Stamford. H^neage
Finch Earl of Winchelsey. Charles Dormer Earl of Carnarvan. M^untjoy Blunt Earl
of Newport. Philip Stanhop Earl of Chesterfeild. John Tuston Earl of Thanett.
Ier^me Weston Earl of Portland. William Wentworth Earl of Strafford. Robert
Spencer Earl of Sunderland. James Savill Earl of Sussex. George Goring Earl of
Norwich, Nicholas Leak Earl of Sca^sdale -- Wilmott Earl of Rochester. Infra
etat. Henry I^rmyn Earl of St. Albans. Edward Mountagne Earl of Sandwich. James
Butler Earl of Brecknock. Edward Hyde Earl of Clarendon. Arthur Capel Earl of
Essex. Thomas Brudenell Earl of Cardigan. Arthur Anensley Earl of Anglesey.
John Greenvile Earl of B^th. Charles Howard Earl of Carlisle.
VISCOUNTS.
Leicester Devereux Viscount Hereford. Fracis Brown Viscount Mountague. James
Fienes Viscount Say and Seal. Edward Conway Viscount Conway. Baptist Noell
Visconnt Cambden. William Howard Viscount Stafford Thomas Bellasis Viscount
Faulconberg. John Mordant Viscount Mordant.
BARONS.
John Nevil Lord Abergavenny. James Tutchett Lord Audley. Charles West Lord
Dela War. George Barkley Lord Barkley. Thomas Parker Lord Morley and
Mounteagle. Francis Leinard Lord Dacres. Conyers Darcy Lord Darcy. William
Stourton Lord Stourton William Lord Sandys De la Vine. Edward Vaux Lord Vaux.
Thomas Windsor Lord Windsor. Thomas Wentworth Lord Wentworth. Wingfield
Cromwell Lord Cromwell. George Fure Lord Fure. Philip Wharton Lord Wharton.
Francis Willoughby Lord Willoughby of Parham. William Pagett Lord Pagett.
Dudley N^rth Lord North. William Bruges Lord ^haundes. John C^ry Lord Hunsdon.
William Petre Lord Petre Dutton Gerrard Lord Gerrard. Charles Stanh^pp Lord
Stanhopp. Henry Arundell Lord A^undell of Warder. Christopher Roper Lord
Tenham. Foulk Grevill Lord Brook, Edward Mountague Lord Mountague of Boughton
Charles Lord Howard of Charleton. William Gray Lord Gray of Wark. John Roberts
Lord Roberts. William Craven Lord Craven. John Lovelace Lord Lovelace. John
Paulett Lord Paulett. William Maynard Lord Maynard. Thomas Coventrey Lord
Coventrey, Edward Lord Howard of Eserick, Warwick Mohun Lord Mohun, William
Botiller Lord Botiller. Percy Herbert Lord Powis. Edw. Herbert, Lord Herbert of
Cherbury. Francis Seamour Lord Seamour. Thomas Bruce Lord Bruce. Francis
Newport Lord Newport. Thomas Leigh Lord Leigh of Stone-Leigh. Christopher
Hatton Lord Hatton. Henry Hastings Lord Loughborough. Richard Byron Lord Byron.
Richard Vaughan Lord Vaughan. Charles Smith Lord Carington. William
Widderington Lord Widderington. Humble Ward Lord Ward. Thomas Lord Culpepper.
Isaac Astley Lord Astley. Richard Boil Lord Clifford. John Lucas Lord Lucas.
John Bellasis Lord Bellasis. Lewis Watson Lord Rockingham. Charles Gerrard Lord
Gerrard of Brandon. Robert Lord Sutton of Lexington. Charles Kirkhoven Lord
Wooton. Marmaduke Langdale Lord Langdale. William Crofts Lord Crofts. John
Berkley Lord Berkley. Denzill Hollis Lord Hollis of Ifeild. Frederick Lord
Cornwallis. George Booth Lord de la Mere. Horatio Townsend Lord Townsend.
Anthony Ashley Cooper Lord Ashley. John Crew Lord Crew.
By the inadvertency of the Press, we must be beholding to a Sch^lastical
Distinction, and place these Reverend Fathers and Prelates according to the
order of time, not of dignity (as they they should have preceded the Barons)
the time most duly to be computed from the Restitution when the Church rose
again to its pristine splendour, by an Act of Parliament, restoring this Sacred
Function to all their Honors, and in them the Kingdoms, making a main part of
these magnificences.

A DOctor Will. Juxon, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his Grace, Primate and
Metropolitan of all England, was consecrated Bishop of London 1633. translated
from London to Canterbury, 1660. A. Dr. Accepted Frewen, Lord Archbishop of
York, and Metropolitan of England, was consecrated Bishop of Coventry and
Litchfield 1644. translated from thence to York, 1660. Y. Dr. Gilbert Shelden,
Lord Bishop of London, was consecrated October 28. 1660. Dr. John Ceuzens, Lord
Bishop of Durham, was consecrated December 2. 1660. Y. A. Dr. Brian Duppa, Lord
Bishop of Winchester. (This See is now possessed by Dr. Morley, translated
hither from the Sea of Worcester) Prelate of the Garter, and Bishop Lord
Almoner; he was consecrated Bishop of Chichester, 1638. from thence translated
to Sarum, 1640. and from thence to Winchester, 1660. and deceased, 1662. A. Dr.
William Peirs, Lord Bishop of Bathe and Wells, consecrated 1632. A. Dr. Matthew
Wren, Lord Bishop of Ely, was consecrated Bishop of Hereford, 1634. thence
translated to Norwich, 1635. from thence to Ely, 1638. A. Dr. Robert Skinner,
Lord Bishop of Oxon, consecrated Bishop of Bristol, 1636. thence translated to
Oxon, 1640. A. Dr. W^ll. Roberts, Lord Bishop of Bangor, and Sub-Almoner, was
consecrated 1637. A. Dr. John Warner, Lord Bishop of Rochester, was consecrated
1637. A. Dr. Henry King, Lord Bishop of Chichester, was consecrated 1641. Dr.
Humphry Henchman, Lord Bishop of Salisbury, was consecrated October 28. 1660.
Dr. George Morley, Lord Bishop of Worcester, was consecrated October 28. 1660.
Dr. Robert Sanderson, Lord Bishop of Lincoln, was consecrated October 28. 1660.
Dr. George Griffith, Lord Bishop of St. Asaph, was consecrated October 28.
1660. Dr. William Lucy, Lord Bishop of St. David's, was consecrated December 2.
1660. Dr. Benjamin Laney, Lord Bishop of Peterborough, was consecrated December
2. 1660. Dr. Hugh Lloyd, Lord Bishop of Landaff, was consecrated December 2.
1660. Dr. Richard Stern, Lord Bishop of Carlisle, was consecrated December 2.
1660, Y. Dr. Brian Walton, Lord Bishop of Chester, was consecrated December 2.
1660. Y. This See was possessed by Dr. Fern^, who dying also, Dr. George Hall is
now Lord Bishop thereof. Dr. John Gauden, (who dying, Dr. Sith Ward is now
Lord Bishop thereof) Lord Bishop of Exeter, was consecrated December. 21 1660.
Dr. Gilbert Irenside, Lord Bishop of Bristol, was consecrated January 13. 1660.
Dr. Edward Reynolds, Lord Bishop of Norwich, was consecrated Jan. 13. 1660. Dr.
William Nicholson, Lord Bishop of Gloucester, was consecrated Jan. 13. 1660. Dr.
Nicholas Monck, Lord Bishop of Hereford, was consecrated Jan. 13. 1660. (who
dying, Dr. Herbert Crofts was consecrated in this place.) Dr. John Hacket, Lord
Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield. A. Notes the Ancient Bishops; Y. the
Diocesses in the Province of York, all the rest are in the Province of
Canterbury.
The Names of the Judges.
EDward Earl of Clarendon, Lord High Chancellor of England. Sir Robert Foster
Knight, Chief Justice of the Kings Bench. Sir Harbottle Grimston Baronet, Mr.
of the Rolls. Sir Orlando Bridgman Knight and Baronet, Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas. Matt. Hale Chief Baron of the Exchequer. Justices of the Kings
Bench Sir Tho. Mallet Knight Sir Tho. Twisden Knight Sir Wadham Windham Knight.
Justices of the Common Pleas. Sir Robert Hide Knight Sir Thomas Terril Knight
Sir Samuel Brown Knight
Barons of the Exchequer. Sir Edward Atkins Knight. Sir Christopher Turner Knight.
Sir Jeffrey Palmer Knight. Attorney General. the Kings Sergeants at Law. Sir John
Glynne Knight. Sir William Wild Knight.

The two Principal Secretaries of State, persons eminent for their faithful and
industrious loyalty, are Sir Edward Nicholas of the same place to His late
Majesty, and Sir William Morris; the only Confident, the Renowned General,
the Duke of Albema^le, used in those blessed Counsels toward the Restitution
of the King and Kingdom.

THE Names of the BARONETS made by Letters Patents since His Majesty's most
happy Restoration. Anno 1660. Anno Duodecimo Caroli Regis Secundi. With the
times of their several Creations.
SIr Orlando Bridgeman Knight, was created Baronet the seventh day of June, in
the Twelfth year of the Reign of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles
the Second, in the year of our Lord, 1660. Sir Jeffery Palmer Knight, was
created Baronet the seventh of June. Anno predict. Sir Hen^age Finch of
Raveaston alias Rauston in the County of Bucks Knight, was created Baronet the
seventh of June, Anno predict. Sir John Langham of Cottesbrook in the County of
Northampton Knight, created Baronet the seventh day of June, Anno predict. Sir
Robert Abdy of Albins in the County of Essex Knight, created Baronet the ninth
of June, V^supra. Thomas Draper of Suminghill-Park in the County of Berks
Esquire; was created Baronet the ninth of June. Anno pred. Humphry Winch of
Hamnes in the County of Bedford Esquire, created Baronet the 9 of June, Anno
pred. Jonathan Rease Esquire, created Baronet the ninth of June, Anno pred.
Henry Wright of Dagenham in the County of Essex Esquire, created Baronet the 9
of June, Anno pred. Hugh Sp^ke of Haselbury in the County of Wilts Esquire,
created Baronet the 12th of June, Anno pred. Nicholas Gould of the City of
London Esquire, created Baronet the 13th of June, Anno predict. Sir Thomas
Adams of the City of London Knight, created Baronet the 13th of June, Anno
predict. Richard Atkins of Clapham in the County of Surrey Esquire, created
Baronet the 13th of June, Anno predict. Thomas Allen of the City of London
Esquire, created Baronet the 14th of June, Anno predict. Henry North of
Mildnal, in the County of Suffolk Esquire, was created Baronet the fifteenth of
June, Anno predict. Sir William Wiseman of Rivenhall in the County of Essex
Knight, was created Baronet the fifteenth of June, Anno predict. Thomas Cullum
of Hasleam in the County of Suffolk Esquire, created Baronet the eighteenth of
June, Anno predict. Thomas Davy of St. Cleers Hall in St. Oseth in the County
of Essex Esquire, created Baronet the twentieth of June, Anno predict. George
Grubham How of Cole-Barwick in the County of Wilts Esquire, created Baronet
the twentieth of June, Anno predict. John Cutts of Childerley in the County of
Cambridge Esquire, created Baronet the one and twentieth of June, Anno predict.
William Humble of the City of London Esquire, created Baronet the one and
twentieth of June, Anno predict. Solomon Swale of Swale-Hall in the County of
York Esquire, created Baronet the one and twentieth of June, Anno predict.
Gervas Elwes of Stoake Juxta Clares in the County of Suffolk Esquire, created
Baronet the two and twentieth of June, Anno pred. Robert Cordel of Melford-hall
in the County of Suffolk Esquire, created Baronet the two and twentieth of
June, Anno predict. Sir John Robinson of the City of London Knight, created
Baronet the two and twentieth of June, Anno predict. John Abey of Moors in the
County of Essex Esquire, created Baronet the two and twentieth of June, Anno
predict. Henry Stapleton of Mitton in the County of York Esquire, created
Baronet the three and twentieth of June, Anno predict. Jacob Ashley of
Hill-Morton in the County of Warwick Esquire, created Baronet the five and
twentieth of June, Anno predict. Sir Robert Hillyard of Patrington in the
County of York Knight, created Baronet the five and twentieth of June, Anno
predict. Sir William Bowyer of Denham in the County of Bucks Knight, created
Baronet the five and twentieth of June, Anno predict. John Shuckburgh in the
County of Warwick Esquire, created Baronet the six and twentieth of June, Anno
predict. William Wray of Ashby in the County of Lincoln Esquire, created
Baronet the seven and twentieth of June, Anno predict. Francis Hollis of
Winterborne in the County of Dorset Esquire, created Baronet the seven and
twentieth of June, Anno predict. Nicholas Steward of Hartley-Maudit in the
County of Southampton Esquire, created Baronet the seven and twentieth of June,
Anno predict. George Warberton of Harley in the County Palatine of Chester
Esquire, created Baronet the seven and twentieth of June, Anno predict. Oliver
St. John of Woodford in the County of Northampton Esquire, created Baronet the
eight and twentieth of June, Anno pred. Sir Ralph Delaval of Seaton in the
County of Northumberland Knight, created Baronet the nine and twentieth of
June, Anno predict. Andrew Henley of Henley in the County of Somerset Esquire,
created Baronet the thirtieth of June, Anno predict. Thomas Ellis of Wyham in
the County of Lincoln Esquire, created Baronet the thirtieth of June, Anno
predict. Sir John Covert of Slungham in the County of Sussex Knight, created
Baronet the second of July, Anno predict. Maurice Berkley of Brewton in the
County of Somerset Esquire, created Baronet the second of July, Anno predict.
Peter Har of the City of London, created Baronet the second of July, Anno
predict. Henry Hudson of Melton-Mowbray in the County of Leicester Esquire,
created Baronet the third of July, Anno predict. Thomas Herbert of Trintern in
the County of Monmouth Esquire, created Baronet the third of July, Anno
predict. Thomas Middleton of Chirke in the County of Denbigh, created Baronet
the fourth of July, Anno predict. Verney Noel of Kerkby in the County of
Leicester Esquire, created Baronet the sixth of July, Anno predict. George
Ruswel of Clipston in the County of Northampton Esquire, created Baronet the
seventh of July, Anno predict. Robert Austen of Bexley in the County of Kent
Esquire, created Baronet the tenth of July, Anno predict. Robert (...) of (...)
in the County of Kent Esquire, created Baronet the twelfth of July, Anno
predict. John Clarke of North Weston in the County of Oxford Esquire, created
Baronet the thirteenth of July, Anno predict. William Thomas of Fowington in
the County of Essex Esquire, created Baronet the thirteenth of July, Anno
predict. Sir William Boothby of Broad-Ashe in the County of Derby Knight,
created Baronet the thirteenth of July, Anno predict. Wolstan Dixey of
Market-Bosworth in the County of Leicester Esquire, created Baronet the
fourteenth of July, Anno predict. John Bright of Badsworth in the County of
York Esquire, created Baronet the sixteenth of July, Anno predict. John Warner
of Parham of Badsworth in the County of York Esquire, created Baronet the
sixteenth of July, Anno predict. Sir John Harbey of Aldenham in the County of
Hertford Knight, created Baronet the seventeenth of July, Anno predict. Sir
Samuel Morland alias Morley de Sulthamstead Bannester in the County of Berks,
Knight, created Baronet the eighteenth of July, Anno predict. Sir Thomas Hewet
of Pish^berry in the County of Hertford Knight, created Baronet the nineteenth
of July, Anno predict. Edward H^nywood of Evington in the County of Kent
Esquire, created Baronet the nineteenth of July, Anno predict. Basil Dixwel of
Broomhouse in the County of Kent Esquire, created Baronet the nineteenth of
June, Anno predict. Sir Richard Brown of the City of London Knight, created
Baronet the one and twentieth of July, Anno predict. Marmaduke Gresham of
Sympefield in the County of Surrey Esquire, created Baronet the one and
twentieth of July, Anno predict. Henry Kernor of Hodnet in the County of Salop
Esquire, created Baronet the three and twentieth of July, Anno predict. Sir
Ioh. Aubrey of Llantrethed in the County of Glamorgan Knight, created Baronet
the three and twentieth of July, Anno predict. Thomas Sclater of Cambridge in
the County of Cambridge Esquire, created Baronet the five and twentieth of
July, Anno predict. Henry Conway of Betrytham in the County of Flint Esquire,
created Baronet the five and twentieth of July, Anno predict. Edward Green of
Soupford in the County of Essex Esquire, created Baronet the six and twentieth
of July, Anno predict. John Stapely de Tatcham in the County of Sussex Esquire,
created Baronet the eight and twentieth of July, Anno predict. Metcalf Robinson
of Newby in the County of York Esquire, created Baronet the thirtieth of July,
Anno predict. William Dudley of Clapton in the County of Northampton Esquire,
created Baronet the first of August, Anno predict. Hugh Smithson of Stannick
alias Stanwick in the County of York Esquire, created Baronet the second of
August, Anno predict. Sir Roger Mostyn of Mostyn in the County of Flint Knight,
created Baronet the third of August, Anno predict. Sir William Willoughby of
Willoughby in the County of Nottingham Knight, created Baronet the fourth of
August, Anno predict. Anthony Oldfield of Spalding in the County of Lincoln
Esquire, created Baronet the sixth of August, Anno predict. Peter Leicester of
Tablye, in the County Palatine of Chester Esquire, created Baronet the tenth of
August, Anno predict. Sir William Wheeler of the City of Westminster Knight,
created Baronet the eleventh of August, Anno predict. Thomas Lee of Hartwel in
the County of Bucks Esquire, created Baronet the sixteenth of August, Anno
predict. John Newton of Barscourt in the County of Gloucester Esquire, created
Baronet the sixteenth of August, Anno predict. Thomas Smith of Hatherton in the
County of Chester Esquire, created Baronet the sixteenth of August, Anno
predict. Sir Ralph Ashton of Middleton in the County of Lancaster Knight,
created Baronet the seventeenth of August, Anno predict. John Rous of Henham in
the County of Suffolk Esquire, created Baronet the seventeenth of August, Anno
predict. Henry Massingbeard of Bratosthal in the County of Lincoln Esquire,
created Baronet the two and twentieth of August, Anno predict. John Hales of
Coventry in the County of Warwick Esquire, created Baronet the eight and
twentieth of August, Anno predict. Ralph Bovey of Hilfield in the County of
Warwick Esquire, created Baronet the thirtieth of August, Anno predict. John
Knightly of Off-Church in the County of Warwick Esquire, created Baronet the
thirtieth of August, Anno predict. Sir John Drake of Ash in the County of
Devon Knight, created Baronet the one and thirtieth of August, Anno predict.
Sir Oliver St. George of Carrickdromrick in the County of Letrim in the Kingdom
of Ireland, Knight, created Baronet the fisth of September, Anno predict. Sir
John Bowyer of Kingperisley in the County of Stafford Knight, created Baronet
the eleventh of September, Anno predict. Sir William Wild Knight, Recorder of
the City of London, created Baronet the thirteenth of September, Anno predict.
Joseph Ash of Tittenham in the County of Middlesex Esquire, created Baronet the
nineteenth of September, Anno predict. John How of Compton in the County of
Gloucester Esquire, created Baronet the two and twentieth of September, Anno
predict. John Swinburne of Chupleton in the County of Northumberland Esquire,
created Baronet the twenty sixth of September, Anno predict. John Trot of
Laverstock in the County of Southampton Esquire, created Baronet the eleventh
of October, Anno predict. Humphry Miller of Oxen-Heath in the County of Kent
Esquire, created Baronet the thirteenth of October, Anno predict. Sir John
Lewis of Leeston in the County of York Knight, created Baronet the fifteenth of
October, Anno predict. John Beal of Maidstone in the County of Kent Esquire,
created Baronet the sixteenth of October, Anno predict. Sir Richard Francklin
of Moor-Park in the County of Hertford Knight, created Baronet the six and
twentieth of October, Anno predict. William Russel of Laughorn in the County of
Carmarthen Esquire, created Baronet the eighth of November, Anno pred. William
Barkhouse Esquire, Grandchild of Rowland Barkhouse, of the City of London,
created Baronet the eighth of November, Anno predict. Thomas Boothby of
Fridayhill in the Parish of Chinkford in the County of Essex Esquire, created
Baronet the nineth of November, Anno predict. Sir John Cutler of the City of
London Knight, created Baronet the eleventh of November, Anno predict. Giles
Mottel of Liege Esquire, created Baronet the sixteenth of November, Anno
predict. Henry Gifford of Burstal in the County of Leicester Esquire, created
Baronet the one and twentieth of November, Anno predict. Sir Thomas Foot of the
City of London Knight, created Baronet the one and twentieth of November, Anno
predict. Thomas Manwaring of Over-Perver in the County Palatine of Chester
Esquire, created Baronet the one and twentieth of August, Anno predict. Thomas
Bennet of Baberham in the County of Cambridge Esquire, created Baronet the two
and twentieth of November, Anno predict. John Wroth of Blendenhal in the County
of Kent Esquire, created Baronet the nine and twentieth of November. Anno
predict. George Wynn of Nosthall in the County of York Esquire, created Baronet
the third of December, Anno predict. Humphry Mononx of Wooton in the County of
Bedford Esquire, created Baronet the fourth of December, Anno predict. William
Gardener of the City of London Esquire, created Baronet the fourth of December,
Anno predict. Heneage Fetherston of Blakewar in the County of Hertford Esquire,
created Baronet the fifth of December, Anno predict. John Peyton of Doddington
in the Isle of Ely in the County of Cambridge, Esquire, created Baronet the
tenth of December, Anno predict. John Fagge of Wiston in the County of Sussex
Esquire, created Baronet the eleventh of December, Anno predict. Edmund
Anderson of Broughton in the County of Lincoln Esquire, created Baronet the
twelfth of December, Anno predict. Matthew Herbert of Bromfield in the County
of Salop Esquire, created Baronet the eighteenth of December, Anno predict.
Edward Ward of Bixley in the County of Norfolk Esquire, created Baronet the
eighteenth of December, Anno pred. Ralph Ashton of Middleton in the County of
Northampton Esquire, created Baronet the nineteenth of December, Anno predict.
George Marwood of Little Busby in the County of York Esquire, created Baronet
the one and twentieth of December, Anno predict. William Killigrew of
Arwinincke in the County of Cornwall Esquire, created Baronet the two and
twentieth of December, Anno predict. John Keyt of Ekrimpton in the County of
Gloucester Esquire, created Baronet the two and twentieth of December, Anno
predict. John Buck of Hanby-Graunge in the County of Lincoln Esquire, created
Baronet the two and twentieth of December, Anno predict. William Franckland of
Thirkleby in the County of York Esquire, created Baronet the four and twentieth
of December, Anno predict. Richard Stydalph of Norbury in the County of Surrey
Esquire, created Baronet the four and twentieth of December, Anno predict.
William Juxon of Albomue in the County of Sussex Esquire, created Baronet the
eight and twentieth of December, Anno predict. John Leggard of Ganton in the
County of York Esquire, created Baronet the nine and twentieth of December,
Anno predict. John Jackson of Hickleton in the County of York Esquire, created
Baronet the one and thirtieth of December, Anno predict. Sir Henry Pickering of
Whaddon in the County of Cambridge Knight, created Baronet the second of
January, Anno predict. Henry Bedingfield of Oxborough in the County of Norfolk
Esquire, created Baronet the second of January, Anno predict. Walter Plomer of
the Inner Temple London Esquire, created Baronet the fourth of January, Anno
predict. Herbert Springet of the Broyle in the County of Sussex Esquire,
created Baronet the eighth of January, Anno predict. William Powel alias Hinson
of Pengethley in the County of Hereford Esquire, created Baronet the three and
twentieth of January, Anno predict. Robert Newton of the City of London
Esquire, created Baronet the three and twentieth of January, Anno predict.
Nicholas Staughton of Staughton in the County of Surrey Esquire, created
Baronet the nine and twentieth of January, Anno predict. William Rokeby of
S^yars in the County of York Esquire, created Baronet the nine and twentieth of
January, Anno predict.
BARONETS made in the Thirteenth year of the Reign of our most Gracious
Sovereign Lord King CHARLES the Second.
WAlter Earnly of New-Sarum in the County of Wilts Esquire, created Baronet the
second of February in the Thirteenth of Charles the Second, Anno predict. John
Husbands of Ipsley in the County of Warwick Esquire, created Baronet the second
of February, Anno predict. Thomas Morgan of Wangatock in the County of Monmouth
Esquire, created Baronet the seventh of February, Anno predict. John Lane of
Talske in the County of Roscommon in the Kingdom of Ireland, created Baronet
the ninth of February, Anno predict. George Wakefren of Beckford in the County
of Gloucester Esquire, created Baronet the thirteenth of February, Anno predict.
Benjamin Wright of Cranham-hall in the County of Essex Esquire, created Baronet
the fifteenth of February, Anno predict. John Celleton of the City of London
Esquire, created Baronet the eighteenth of February, Anno predict. Sir James
Modiford of the City of London Knight, created Baronet the eighteenth of
February, Anno predict. Thomas Beaumont of Staughton Grange in the County of
Leicester, created Baronet the one and twentieth of February, Anno predict.
Edward Smith of Eshe in the County of Durham Esquire, created Baronet the three
and twentieth of February, Anno predict. John Napeir alias Naper alias Sands
Esquire, created Baronet the fourth of March, Anno predict. Thomas Gifford of
Castle-Jordan in the County of Mead in the Province of Lemster, in the Kingdom
of Ireland, Esquire, created Baronet the fourth of March, Anno predict. Thomas
Clifton of Clifton in the County of Lancaster Esquire, created Baronet the
fourth of March, Anno predict. William Wilson of Eastborne in the County of
Sussex Esquire, created Baronet the fourth of March, Anno predict. Compton Reed
of Barton in the County of Berks Esquire, created Baronet the fourth of March,
Anno predict. Sir Bryan Broughton of Broughton in the County of Stafford
Knight, created Baronet the tenth of March, Anno predict. Robert Slingsby of
Newsels in the County of Hertford Esquire, created Baronet the sixteenth of
March, Anno predict. Sir Ralph Verney of Middle Claydon in the County of Bucks
Knight, created Baronet the sixteenth of March, Anno predict. John Crofts of
Stowe in the County of Suffolk Esquire, created Baronet the sixteenth of March,
Anno predict. Robert Dicer of Vphal in the County of Hereford Esquire, created
Baronet the eighteenth of March, Anno predict. Sir John Bromefield of
Suffolk-place in the County of Southwark in the County of Surrey Knight,
created Baronet the twentieth of March, Anno predict. Thomas Rich of Sunning in
the County of Berks Esquire, created Baronet the twentieth of March, Anno
predict. Edward Smith of Edmondthorpe in the County of Leicester Esquire,
created Baronet the five and twentieth of March, Anno predict. Walter Long of
Whaddon in the County of Wilts Esquire, created Baronet the six and twentieth
of March, Anno predict. John Fettiplace of Chilbrey in the County of Berks
Esquire, created Baronet the eighth of April, Anno predict. Walter Hendley of
Coutchfield in the County of Sussex Esquire, created Baronet the eighth of
April, Anno predict. William Parsons of Langley in the County of Bucks Esquire,
created Baronet the ninth of April, Anno predict. John Cambel of Woodford in
the County of Essex Esquire, created Baronet the ninth of April, Anno pred. Sir
Charles Gaudy of Cowshel in the County of Suffolk Knight, created Baronet the
twentieth of April, Anno predict. William Morris of Werrington in the County
of Devon Esquire, created Baronet the twentieth of April, Anno predict. Sir
William Cayly of Brompton in the County of York Knight, created Baronet the
twentieth of April, Anno predict. Sir Charles Doyly of the City of London,
created Baronet the six and twentieth of April, Anno predict. William Godolphin
of Godolphin in the County of Cornwall Esquire, created Baronet the nine and
twentieth of April, Anno predict. Thomas Cursen of Walter Perry in the County
of Oxford Esquire, created Baronet the thirtieth of April, Anno pred. Edmund
Fowel of Fowels-Gembe in the County of Devon Knight, created Baronet the first
of May, Anno pred. John Cropley of Clarkenwel in the County of Middlesex
Esquire, created Baronet the seventh of May, Anno pred. William Smith of
Radcliff in the County of Bucks Esquire, created Baronet the tenth of May, Anno
pred. George Cook of Wheatley in the County of York Esquire, created Baronet
the tenth of May, Anno pred. Charles Lloid of Garth, in the County of
Mountgomery Esquire, created Baronet the tenth of May, An. predict. Nathaniel
Powel of Enhurst in the County of Sussex Esquire, created Baronet the
fourteenth of May, anno pred. Denny Ashburnham of Bro^nham in the county of
Sussex Esquire, created Baronet the fifteenth of May, an. pred. Sir Hugh Smith
of Long Asheton in the county of Somerset Knight, created Baronet the sixteenth
of May, An. pred. We will next cast a glance upon the rays of the Irish Diadem
in the Honors conferred there upon these eminent and excellent Personages
following.
IRELAND.
DUKES.
THe Right Noble James Marquess of Ormond, was created Duke of Ormond, in the
Kingdom of Ireland, by Letters Patents, bearing date at Westminster the
thirtieth of March, in the Thirteenth year of the Reign of our most Gracious
Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second; entailing the same to him and the heirs
males of his body, with all privileges and prehemine^ces thereunto belonging,
with the Fee of 40 l. per annum, payable in the Exchequer of Ireland, for the
better support of the said Honor.

EARLS.
The Right honorable Roger Lord Broghill was created Earl of Orrery in the
County of Cork, within the Province of Munster in the Kingdom of Ireland, by
Letters Pattents bearing date at Westminster the fifth day of September, in the
Twelfth year of the reign of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the
Second, entayling the same honor to him and the heirs males of his body
lawfully begotten, with all rights, privileges etc. belonging, with the Fee of
20 l. per annum out of the Exchequer in Ireland.

The Right honorable Sir Charles Coote was created Baron Coote of Castle
Cuffe, Viscount Coote of Castle Coot, and Earl of Mountrath in the Kindom of
Ireland; the said honors, etc. to him and the heirs males of his body lawfully
begotten withal privileges; etc. with the Fee of 20 l. per annum, payable out
of the Exchequer in Ireland by Letters Patents, bearing the date at Westminster
the sixth day of September in the twelfth year of the reign of our most
Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second.

The Right honorable Oliver Lord Viscount Fitz-Williams of Merwin in the
Kingdom of Ireland, was created Earl of Tirconnel in the said Kingdom by
Letters Patents, bearing date at Westminster the 20 day of April, in the
thirteenth year of the reign of our most Gracious Sovereign King Charles the
Second; granting the same to him and the heirs males of his body for ever, with
all privileges and preheminences thereunto belonging, and also 20 l. per annum
out of his Majesty's Exchequer in Ireland, for the better support thereof.

There are likewise three other Earls, but for want of Irish Heraldry, we must
be content to name their Titles, viz. The Earl of Mount Alexander, the Earl of
Drogbeday, formerly Lord Moon, and the Right Honorable Roger Palmer, Earl of
Castlemain.

VISCOUNTS.
The Right honorable Sir John Clotworthy of Antrim, in the County of Antrim in
the Kingdom of Ireland, Knight, was created Baron of Lough Neagh, and Viscount
Maszereen in the said County, by letters patents, bearing date at Westminster
the 21 of November, in the twelfth year of our Gracious Sovereign Lord, etc.
with the said honors, and also to him and the heirs males of his body lawfully
begotten; and for want of such ^ssue to John Skiffingtou Baronet, and the heirs
of his body, on the body of Mary the Daughter and heir apparent of the said Sir
John Clotworthy lawfully begotten, together with all the rights privileges and
preheminences to a Baron and Viscount belonging.

The Right honorable Robert Cholm^ndeley, Esquire, was created Viscount Kellis
in the County of Meth in the Kingdom of Ireland, by letters patents, bearing
date at Westminster the 29 of March, in the thirteenth year of the reign of
our most Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the second; granting the same to
him and the heirs males of his body, with the remainder to Hugh Cholmondeley
Esquire, his Brother, and the heirs males of his body, with all privileges and
preheminences to a Viscount of Ireland belonging.

BARONS.
The Right honorable Sir John King of the Abbey of Boil in the County of
Roscommon in the Kingdom of Ireland, Knight, was created Baron Kingston of
Kingston in in the County of Dublin, to hold to him and the heirs males of his
body lawfully begotten, with all privileges, etc. by letters patents, bearing
date at Westminster the fourth day of September in the twelfth year of the
reign of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second.

The Right honorable Colonel Richard Coot, was created Baron Co^te of Colrein
in the County of Shyoe in the Kingdom of Ireland, the same entailed to him and
the heirs males of his body lawfully begotten, with all privileges, etc. by
lettars patents, bearing date at Westminster the sixth of September, in the
twelfth year of the Reign of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the
Second, in the year of our Lord, 1661.

Additions to the Honors conferred by His Majesty, in the Thirteenth year of
His Reign.
SIr Thomas Fanshaw of Ware Park, in the County of Hertford, the Elder, Knight
of the Bathe, was created Viscount Fanshaw of Donnamore in the Kingdom of
Ireland, by Letters Patents bearing date at Westminster, the fifth of
September, Anno 13 Caroli Secundi.

BARONETS.
Robert Jenkinson of Walcot, in the County of Oxford Esquire, created Baronet
by Letters Patents bearing date at Westminster, the eighteenth of May, 13
Caroli Secundi. William Glyne of Bissiter alias Bercester in the County of
Oxford Esquire, the twentieth of May, Anno predict. Sir John Charnock of
Holcot, in the County of Bedford Esquire, the one and twentieth of May, Anno
pred. Robert Brook of Norton, in the county of Suffolk Esquire, the one and
twentieth of May. Anno pred. Thomas Nevil of Holt, in the county of Leicester
Esquire, the five and twentieth of May, Anno pred. Henry Andrews of Lothbury,
in the county of Bucks, the seven and twentieth of May, Anno pred. Anthony
Craven of Sparsholt alias Sparshale, in the county of Berks Esquire, the fourth
of June, Anno pred. James Clavering of Axwel, in the county of Durham Esquire,
June 5. an. pred. Thomas Derham of West-Derham, in the county of Norfolk
Esquire, June 8. an. pred. Abraham Cullen of Eastsheen, in the county of
Surrey, June 17. an. pred. Godfrey Copley of Spretborough, in the county of
York, June 17: ut supra. Griffith Williams of Pewrhyne, in the county of
Carnarvan Esquire, ut supra. James Rushort of Milast-green, in the county of
Essex Esquire, ut supra. Henry Winchcomb of Bucklebury, in the county of Berks
Esquire, June 18. an. predict. Sir Thomas Viner of the city of London Knight,
ut supra. Clement Clarke of Laune-Abbey, in the county of Leicester Esquire, ut
supra. John Segliard of Delaware, in the county of Kent Esquire, ut supra.
Christopher Guise of Elmore, in the county of the city of Gloucester Esquire,
July 10. an. pred. Reynald Fester of East-Greenwich, in the county of Kent
Esquire, July 11. an. pred. Philip Parker of Erwarten, in the county of Suffolk
Esquire, July 16. an. pred. Sir Edward Duke of Benhal, in the county of Suffolk
Knight, July 17. an. pred. Edward Barkham of Wanfleet in the county of Lincoln
Esquire, July 21. an. pred. Charles Hussy of Caythorp alias Caythrop, in the
county of Lincoln Esquire, ut supra. Thomas Norton of the city of Coventry, in
the county of Warwick Esquire, July 23. an. pred. Sir John Dormer of Grange, in
the county of Bucks Knight, ut supra. Thomas Carew of Haccombe, in the county
of Devon Esquire, Aug. 2. an. pred. Mark Milbanck of Halvaby, in the county of
York Esquire, Aug. 7. an. pred. Richard Rothwel of Ewerby and Stapleford, in
the county of Lincoln Esquire, Aug. 16. an. pred. John Bancks of the city of
London Esquire, Aug. 22. an. pred. Henry Ingoldsby of Lethenborough in the
county of Bucks Esquire, Aug. 30. an pred. Robert Jason of Broad-Somerford, in
the county of Wilts Esquire, September 5. an. pred. Sir John Young of Culliton,
in the county of Devon Esquire, Sept. 26. an. pred. Francis Buckley of
Attleborough in the county of Norfolk Esquire, Sept. 30. an. pred. John
Frederick Van Freisendorf of Heerdick, Lord of Kyrup, one of the Privy Council
to the King of Sweden, and his Ambassador Extraordinary to the King of England,
His most Excellent Majesty, created Baronet by Letters Patents, bearing date at
Westminster the fourth of October, in the Thirteenth year of King Charles the
Second, etc. William Roberts of Willesden in the county of Middlesex Esquire,
Nov. 8. an. pred. William Luckin of Waltham in the county of Essex Esquire,
November. 15. an. pred. Thomas Smith of Hill-Hall in the county of Essex Esquire,
Nov. 29. an. pred. Edwin Sadler of Temple Di^nesly alias Dinsley in the county
of Hertford Esquire, Dec. 3. an. pred. Sir William Windham of Orchard in the
county of Somerset Kni^ht, Dec. 19. an. pred. George Southcote of Bleborough in
the county of Lincoln Esquire, Janu 17. an. pred. George Trevellian of
Nettlecome in the county of Somerset Esquire, Janu 24. an. pred.
The Reader is desired to excuse our omission of all the Scotch Dignities, not
only because of National incuriosity, but by reason there are very few of
them, except the Restitutory Honors of the Family of the Gur^ons to the Earldom
of ^b^yn.

To omit also the Knights-Batchelors made by the King, with the Honors of the
several Offices belonging to Him, His Guards and other Commanders which assist
these Grandeurs: It will suffice to say, that we were a^l raised from ^l^w and
abject condition (being ^he servants of servants) to the honor of English
Freem^n which is such a Gen^y, that sew people in the world are born to, and
having once forfeited it, were ever restored to it.

These are the several Orbs and Spheres which make up this Firmament of His
Majesty's Glory. A Firmament indeed, not only because of its Luster and Beauty,
but for its strength and durablenesse; the Nobility and Gentry being the
Pillars and Supporters of Monarchy against the violences and overthrowing
tempests of the Multitude, as was lamentably experienced in the late Democracy,
which laid aside the House of Peers before it cast off the King and His
Government: but leaving the other Planets, we will address our sight to the
bright Orb of the Moon, that governs equally with our Sun, our Sovereign King
Charles.

His Majesty had now attained the utmost extent of humane Felicity, having
expanded the Rays of His Greatness to all the parts of the World, where his
Wonders were heard and related with Ecstasy. Yet as Adam placed in Paradise,
when the whole Dominion of the Universe was bestowed on him, was not so
perfectly happy, but wanted a Companion to complete him; just so was it with
our Sovereign, who lacked the Communication of these His most prosperous
Fortunes, the Company and Converse of a meet Consort, in whose Bosom and Womb
he might recond and treasure up the inestimable value of those Sure Mercies he
had received.

This Lovely Casket of such incomparable Jewels, The Kings Intentions to marry
with the Infanta of Portugal.
Nature and the Decrees of Heaven had more especially prepared and predisposed
out of the Royal Family of the Kings of Portugal, which having suffered an
Eclipse by the powerful interposition of the Spanish Monarchy, for the space
of near a hundred years, was now revisited in its former Splendour in the
assumption of John (Duke of Braganza) the fourth of that name King of Portugal,
by almost as miraculous a Turn as that of our Captivity by the Kings
Restitution. So Providence was pleased to adapt and fit both these Princes
Conditions and Estates to this happy juncture of them in the Royal and Happy
Estate of Marriage.

This was designed by King John in the beginning of our Troubles and of His
Reign, and was one of the first Acts of State he did with us, managed here by
Don Antonio de Souza his Ambassador hither, who was very instrumental in
transacting His late Majesty's Affairs of sorraign Concernment, receiving and
returning his dispatches. One Ingredient no doubt in point of Civility and
Honor, among those other of Affection and Interest that make up this Princely
Match.

Nevertheless that Fortune might pay our Sovereign all the dues she owed him,
for those many unkindnesses He had formerly received from her, she cared nor
feared not to dispense with her favors to that Crown, and to reduce it by the
puissant Grandeur and entire Force of the Spaniards (then employed against it
in the year 1661 and so onward hitherto) to a condition of so ill an Aspect, as
without some (...), to be accounted by the Politico's of the Times to be no
better then desperate; the more to enhaunce and raise the Kings Reputation and
Glory; and to add to His other Honors and Styles, the Title of The Succourer
of the Afflicted and Distressed.

So that at the same time that he bended His Arms to Her Majesty's Embraces, he
outstretched them to the Aid and Assertion of Her People and Country, being
alike Love and War powerful; Militating at one and the same time in the Camps
of Cupid and Mars, with the same generous valor and bravery; to both which,
never any Prince had the like Competent Courage and Virtue, the former softning
and esseminating, the latter roughening and uncivilizing the mind.

To the universal joy therefore of his People, The King declares his resolution
of Marrying, to the Parliament.
He solemnly acquainted the Parliament which he had called by his own Writ on
the 28 of May 1661, with this His Intention of Marrying the Infanta Dona
Katharina of Portugal for several weighty reasons, which he had offered to the
Lords of His most Honorable Privy Council, who generally approved of His
Majesty's choice, which approbation was then transubstantiated into the Thanks
of the Kingdom, delivered by the two Houses to the King upon the same account;
so impossible it was for the King even in His most natural Actions, whose
Delight was recompense enough, not to be magnified; to such a degree of Love in
his people, that it can be ascribed to nothing better, then a powerful Sympathy
influenced on them from His own Love-possessed Breast.

The Treaty and Articles of Marriage were a little before concluded with the
Conde Don Francisco de Mello, that no subsequent alterations by private opinion
should derogate from the Prerogative of His own most absolute cleerest
judgment, not to be profaned with common consideration; and accordingly the
said Ambassador took leave of His Majesty, in Order to his departure for
Portugal, with the ratification of the said Treaty of Marriage here; where not
long after he arrived, and brought that Court, but primarily and chiefly the
Princely Bride, the News thereof, who with Her Majestic Constancy of
Countenance, gave it a solemn and serious welcome, not touched with those
change of passions, which by the vicissitude of pallid and blushing looks,
discover the meannesse and inconsistency of other Virgin minds.

But though she did so prudentially and wisely conceal the joys of the
affection she had long nourished for the King; The News thereof at Lisbon.
yet was Her Royal Brother and Mother most openly glad and joyful at the wished
success of that Affair, which was instantly communicated to the City of
Lisbon, the Chamber of that King, by the Guns from all the Castles and Forts
thereof, which were Ecchoed from all the Cannon in the River both Portugese and
Forraigners, by which means without further Proclamation it was noised about
the Town, who like overjoyed People betook themselves to the presentest yet
most solemn demonstrations thereof, by Bonfires and Entertainments, etc. the
Streets resounding with Healths al Re del Grand Bretanna, which continued that
night and the next whole day.

Not long after by an Express from England from the King to Her, Donna
Katharina is saluted Queen of Great Britain.
she was Complemented with the Style of the Queen of Great Britain, which put
the Court into a new Gayety, both to Her Retinue and Attendance, and all
Honors and Duties done to Her, as if she were actually crowned. It will not be
much material to insist on all the other particulars, viz. those several
Messages sent and returned betwixt those two Royal Lovers, together with the
intercourse betwixt the two Crowns in point of Alliance and Security, nor the
numerous resort of the English every day to worship this Sun of the East, and
pay their Early Devotions to Her; It will be more unnecessary to relate those
other Romances and Fictions made by the Phanatick Crew at Home, that there were
a Fleet of Spaniards and Hollanders that lay ready in her way to intercept Her
Passage into England. To pass over that noble Exploit of our Fleet under the
Command of the Earl of Sandwich, and Sir John Lawson Vice Admiral at Algier to
the forcing those Pirates to very honorable Conditions for the English, when
at the same time the Hollanders had concluded with them upon base and insecure
terms of Peace; we will only mention the Happy Arrival of that Fleet, and the
Royal Charles from England, (with Sir -- Fanshaw sent to salute the Queen for
His Majesty, who now impatiently expected Her Arrival as did the whole Nation
together with Him) just at the same time: the Earl of Sandwich now the second
time visiting the Queen, being appointed to attend her departure and to convey
Her into England.

Now all things were preparing for the Voyage with such a Hurry, yet glad
intentnesse, as if the Empire of the World had been removing into a more
commodious Situation, and the Dii Gentiles, were transferring their Altars to
be present at the Celebration of those Espousals; Such the Prayers, such the
devoted Oraisons, and lifted up Hands, for the Felicity of Her transportation.
The multitude placing themselves on the brink of the shore, and playing with
those blessed Waves in its wanton refluxes, with the same Religion as they dipped
their hands into Holy water.

At the same the King her Brother, and Mother, with his Nobles and the whole
Court, made as Solemn a procession and Cavalcade from his Palace, where the
English Gallantry there present assisted, till She arrived at the River side
(the Golden Tagus, whose Surface and Bottom were alike precious, its Sand and
Burden vying with each other) where She entered a Stately Brigandine, and the
Naval Triumphs commenced their Glory.

Amidst the Volleys and Tire of a Thousand Cannon, and an hundred Thousands of
Farewell Acclamations on the 13 April 1661 She passed in the said Noble Company
and Equipage to go on board the Royal Charles, (in which the King Her Husband
was conveyed before from Holland to His Three Kingdoms) and was there welcomed
by the Thunder of the whole Fleet, then in its pride with Streamers and
Pendants flying, and their Wast Clothes out to show it in its dreadful
Loveliness, where His Majesty gave Her the innocent resemblance of Joves
Courtship to his beloved Semele.

Toward the Evening after a Princely Collation and Foy, and many passionate
parting expressions, which Nature extorted and wrested from Love, now system'd
in a Matrimonial Affection, to the Person of Her Lord and Husband. After those
Dividents of Joy and Grief which interchanged the Scene of this Entertainment,
the whole was summed up in loud apprecations, (that drowned the private and
heavy fondnesses of the 3 Princes) of a Bon voyage, and a Canon from the
Admiral, gave signal of Her Majesty's Resolution to depart, when all Hands were
set on work to weigh Anchor and let fly their Sails.

The King, and Queen Mother, and their Train, with sudden Tears (which showed
from what fountain they came, generous great Spirits cannot force a Drop for
any grief whatsoever) like the sweet Influence of the Pleyades, gave the first
happy Omen to the Fleet, which it received as They were reimbarquing for
Lisbon, and returned with the Discharge of all the Cannon; and so immediately
with a fair Wind and leading Gale, began their course, being as they past out
of the River saluted by all the Block-Houses, Forts, an^ ^astles, with the
imitation of their Thunder.

That Night and part of the next day the wind and weather was very propitious,
while Neptu^^ and his Goddess with their Nymphs, had paid their Homage to this
Sovereign Lady of the Sea. That Courtship being ended, a r^de wind came and
with an Officious Incivility stopped Her in Her way, till he had whistled out an
un-welcome Complement. It proved a long winded Harangue, not was there other
way to be rid of its importunity but by diversion and laveering, which so
retarded the Voyage that in a Fortnights time they hardly got into the middle
of the Bay of Biscay, where the Queens Majesty dispatched away Mr. Mountague,
Sir Th. Sands, and Sir Joseph Douglas on the 26 of April about 7 at Night, to
give an Account to the King of Her Condition; which the untowardlinesse and
averseness of the Wind had much altered, by protracting Her longing desires of
meeting the King, and also incommodating Her by the tossing and topping of the
Sea, so that she lay sick for the most part of the Voyage; until about the 5 of
May, with indefatigable working and Skill, the whole Fleet reached the Islands
of Scilly the furthermost western Dominions of England.

Her Arrival had bin every day expected a fortnight before, which caused the
King to send down his only Brother the Duke of York, Lord High Admiral to
attend on Her upon the Coast, and to Complement Her in His name; whereupon his
Highness hasted to Portsmouth, and on the 11 of May attended by the Duke of
Ormond, the Earls of Suffolk and Chesterfield, the Lord Berckley and other
persons of Quality went aboard the stately Yangh, a curious Vessel, with which
the City of Amsterdam presented the King, to coast about the isle of Wight to
meet Her Majesty. On the same day Sir Joseph Douglas making toward Portsmouth
with an Express from Her Majesty to the King, was met by his Highness the
Duke of York, 5 Leagues off the Isle of Wight, who commanded him back with him
to the Fleet. On Sunday Morning about 10. a Clock they discovered the Royal
James, but there was so great a Calm that they could not reach the Royal
Charles till 6 at Evening. No sooner had the General espied his Highness
Yaugh, but he went out in his Barge to meet him, the Royal Banner being all the
while vayl'd till he was aboard: When his Highness came into the Ship, the
Soldiers gave three several shouts, and all the great Guns in the Royal Charles
(which from that time till the Queens Entrance had been silent) proclaimed his
Welcome, after which the several Ships of the Fleet paid him their Salutes.
Being conducted to Her Majesty's Cabin, he was placed in a Chair on her right
hand, where after several Expressions of Joy for Her Majesty's happy Arrival on
the Coasts of England, and having presented His Majesty's high respects to Her,
and as exceeding affection for Her, his Royal Highness took his leave to
retire himself to his Yaugh for that Night, and the next Morning Sir Joseph
Douglas was again dispatched to the King, in the illustrious Company of the
said Duke of Ormond and Earls, and was forced to tide it thence, and sometime
lay at Anchor, and could not reach Portsmouth till the Evening, the 13 of May,
from whence Sir Joseph took Post, leaving the Duke of Ormond to make
preparation for the Reception of Her Majesty.

That same Night the Royal Fleet with the Princely Bride came to St. Helens
point, the Eastermost Promontory of the Isle of Wight, almost opposite to
Portsmouth, from whence, had it not been too bold a venture to hazard her
Majesty in that narrow Straight of Sea, and in a Night Tide, they might have
reached Portsmouth the next morning, but making use of the day Tide, which
served about 10 of the Clock, on Wednesday the 14 of May, the Queen landed at
Portsmouth about 4 a Clock in the Afternoon, where she was received with all
possible demonstrations of Honor, the Nobility and Gentry, and Multitudes of
Londoners, in most rich Apparel, and in great numbers waiting on the Shore for
Her Landing, and the Mayor and Aldermen, and principal perlons of that
Corporation, being in their Gowns, and with a Present and Speech ready to
entertain Her; the Cannons and small shot both from round that Town, and the
whole Fleet, ecchoing to one another the loud Proclamations of their Joy.

It is observable that at Southampton the next Fort Westward, two Sturgeons
being of Royalty, due to the King, came into that River, and were presented to
the Mayor, as His Majesty's chief Officer in that place, who sent one to
Portsmouth as a small but auspicious and fortunate Present to Her Majesty, who
was every day expected there, and the other at a Feast was distributed amongst
his Brethren of that Corporation. The good people of that place, taking them as
happy Prognostics (being Male and Female) of that blessed Union of their
Majesty's, by a Princely Increase of Issue to succeed them.

The King having received the Express of His Queens Landing, prepared to be
gone forthwith, to salute Her upon Her Arrival, but His great Affairs of State,
and Bills to be ratified by Him into Acts of Parliament, which were not quite
ready for His Royal Assent, delayed Him at Whitehall till Monday night the 19
of May, having sent before Him the Bishop of London, who departed on the 17. in
Order to the Solemnizing of the Marriage.

His Majesty having signed all the Acts, which are now so many wholesome and
good Laws, as no age of our Forefathers can boast of to adorn and honor His
Queens Arrival, posted away at 9 a Clock that Night, with His ordinary Guards,
in the Earl of Northumberlands Coach, Prince Rupert with Him only, to Kingston,
where he came soon after 10. and at the end of that Town entered into the Earl
of Chesterfields, there set ready for Him, and the Duke of Yorks Guards to
attend Him, and came before 12 at Night to Guilford, being 25 miles, where He
lodged that Night, and next morning posted with the same speed to Portsmouth,
where He arrived about Noon, to the mutual Joy and Content of His Royal Self
and Consort.

But because of Her indisposednesse, which yet held Her in Her Chamber, the
King satisfied Himself by giving Her a Visit in private that day and then
withdrew to His own appartiments, much resenting the distemper She was in by
Her long passage for His sake, which He most affectionately signified to Her,
and made appear to all Persons attending on Him by His Melancholy and retired
Comportment.

Yet it pleased God to restore Her Majesty to such a degree of Health, that She
was able to go abroad, to Consummate the Marriage Rites, which were performed
in the Church of that Town, Wednesday May 21. by the Right Reverend Father in
God, Gilbert Lord Bishop of London, according to the Ceremonies of the Church
of England; after which the Nuptials were concluded by His Majesty's Bedding
His most Excellent Lady that Night in this His Town of Portsmouth.

If the Reader shall now expect Her Character, I may ingenuously and justly
enough challenge the ablest Pen with a quis sufficit? Flies cannot catch
Eagles; Her soaring and Excelse Virtues, surmounting all Essays of Flight or
Pursuit after them, so that no quill can trace or discover their Altitudes; Let
me invite only your present admiration, and future Expectation of those
Felicities which attend them, to be their competent and illustrious Expositors.

Their Majesty's having thus celebrated their Rites of Hymen, for the better
perfecting that Health so happily restored to the Queen, purposed to stay a
little time longer in that Town, in which Interim, Visits were given to the
Grandees of Portugal, who came over with the Queen, by all the English Lords
and Ladies, and by them again returned, until the Removal of the Gourt next
Week to Winchester, thence to Farnham, to Windsor Castle, and so to Hampton
Court, where their Majesty's took up the most part of this Summer 1662, as well
for the Salubrity as Majesty of the place, being the most absolute, complete,
and magnificent Structure of all the Royal Palaces.

But that which is the most eminently great, and gives the matchless Honor to
this Marriage, is the great accession that is made to the Crown of England in
point of Trade and Commerce, besides the Treasure and Territory we possess as
this Ladies Portion. We have first an open Navigation into most part of the
East Indies, where the Portugal is more potent then the Dutch, having several
Kingdoms there, the principal thereof is that of Goa, where for the Security
of our Trade, and other Considerations of State, we have by this time several
Forts that Command the Country delivered to some English Forces sent thither
lately in a Fleet by His Majesty's Command, so that the Company trading
thither, will receive notable advantages to the thrusting out the Hollander
from His Covetous Ambition of managing solely the Wealth and Riches of the East.

In the West Indies they are possessed of Brasilia from whence in 1654 they
valiantly expelled the said Dutch, a place of good Traffic, and now free to
the English Merchant, from whence are brought Commodities of good value. But
the chiefest place of Importance is the City of Tangier, seated by the Mouth of
the Straights of Gibralter on the Africa shore, which serves not only to bridle
and repress the Piracies of those Dens of Thievery, Algiers, Tripoli, Tunis,
and the rest, by being of necessity forced to pass in sight, when they venture
into the Atlantic Sea, through that Straight, but also if occasion be, will be
of same benefit and commodionsnesse as the Sound is to the King of Denmark, as
through which no Ships of what Nation soever, trading into the Levant, can
pass or repasse without his Majesty's leave, if he shall please to keep some
ships to that purpose in that Harbor. I omit the Portion and store of money,
the Jewels and Pearls, etc. as great as any Princess in Europe ever brought,
because I will not presume to meddle with those sublime particulars.

The Queen received the Addresses of all the Nobility, and Submissions of the
several Deputies for the Cities of England; more particularly from the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen of London, who by Sir William Wild their Recorder, (who
pronounced a Spanish Oration) presented Her with a Purse of Gold.

In June came thither an Envoy from the great Duke of Muscovia, Emperor of
Russia, to Complement the King upon his never enough gratulated Restitution,
being sent to prepare the way for three extraordinary Ambassadors, commissioned
more largely to that purpose, and had a very cordiate and splendid reception
from His Majesty.

No less great was the Conflux to this Palace from all parts of the Kingdom
then at His Majesty's Coronation. The King then being beheld as the Wearer, She
now as the Continuer of it to perpetual Succession, which the beauteous and fit
frame of Her person do infallibly promise to our first impatient Expectation of
a Prince of Wales.

It was imagined Her Majesty would have made Her entrance by a Cavalcade
through London from the Tower, or through Southwark and so over the Bridge,
while the Triumphall Arches were yet standing. But it pleased the King to order
it otherwise, and to honor Her Access to Whitehall, with a new and unusual,
though as magnificent a Reception as had any of His Royal Progenitors; that as
the Queen had begun so She might finish her Princely Adventure by water, on
those Sovereign and Amorously combining Streams of Thames and Isis, whose
Floods hastening to the Sea to tell the News of Her coming, swelled back again
with such a full Current and Spring, (the British Marine Gods and Nymphs with
all their Train rushing in to behold and Welcome Her to Her Home) that their
Banks were overflowed, while neglecting their Bounds, they stopped Her Barge and
gazed on the Sight, with a long and steady view. The Order of that Triumph in
brief was after this manner.

The RELATION of the Noble Reception of their Sacred MAJESTY'S by the
Honorable CITY of LONDON by Water, from HAMPTON COURT to their Landing at
WHITE HALL, Saturday August 23 1662.
THE Barges belonging to the several Companies, were with the Morning-Tide
carried up the River from White Hall to Chelsey, beginning with the Mercers,
Grocers, etc. and ending with the inferior Companies, which were placed at
Chelsey; most of the Barges were atttended with a Pageant.

The Pageants were placed at the Head of every Barge. That which attended the
Mercers was thus set forth, under a Canopy of State was seated a Virgin, on her
head a Silver Coronet richly adorned. Her Robe long, of Violet colored Velvet,
lined with Cloth of Silver.

Her Attendants were three Maids of Honor, and six Pages. Her Maids of Honor
bore up her Train, habited in Velvet, their Heads neatly Ornamented.

Her Pages were habited in Cloth of Silver Doublets, Cloaks of Velvet lined
with Cloth of Silver, and Velvet Breeches, their Hats of Silver, in which were
Plumes of Feathers, and in their hands several Banners and Escucheons. They
were placed three of each side the Pageant.

The Drapers Pageant was thus set forth. Under a Canopy of State was
represented a Grave Roman Magistrate, habited in a long Robe, on his head a
Helmet, in his right hand he held a Scepter, in his left a Triple Crown, a
Sword girt to him. His Attendants were four, Loyalty, Truth, Fame, and Honor.
Loyalty and Truth were placed in the Front, at the two Corners; Fame and Honor
at the two Rear Corners.

Loyalty was habited like a Grave Citizen, plain and decent; in one hand he
held a Banner of the Arms of England and Portugal impaled, in the other hand a
Sword, signifying his Resolution to defend their Right.

Truth was habited in white, on her head a wreath of Stars; in one hand she
bore a Banner of the Companies Arms, in the other a little Book.

Fame was represented in a long loose light Robe, his head circled with a
wreath of intermixed Colors; in one hand he held a Trumpet, in the other a
wreath of Laurel, as intended for Loyalty.

Honor was habited in Cloth of Gold, on his head a Hat and Plume of Feathers;
in one hand he held a Shield, in which was figured a Portuges with a Sword
drawn, holding it over some Indians that were figured kneeling; in the other he
bore an Escucheon with the Arms of England and Portugal impaled.

The Merchant-Tailors Pageant was thus set forth. The Stage (being 12 foot
long, and 7 foot broad) was Arched with a wild Arbor, made in manner of a
Wilderness.

The two Camels (supporters of the Companies Arms) were backed with two
Indians, bearing in one hand an Escuchion of the Arms of England and Portugal
impaled. In the other hand they held Darts downwards, betokening subjection,
Their Motto Lusitaniae Oriens and Meridies.

There were two Moors that attended the Camels as their guiders.

In the Wilderness was seated an Aged man, representing a Pilgrim, and habited
accordingly. In one hand he held a Staff, in the other a Banner bearing the
Figure of a Golden Lamb, with this Motto Inter nocentes Innocens.

This alludes to St. John, the Patron of their Company: for his Attendants he
had Faith, Hope, and Charity, who were placed before.

Faith was presented in a flaming colored Silk Robe, her head circled with a
Wreath of sprightly Colors dilated from the Sun. In one hand she held a
Shield, on which was Figured a Young Man, endeavoring to fathom the Sea with a
Staff, with this Motto Nil Profundius.

In the other hand she held a Shield, whereon was Figured a Cross, with this
Motto Nil Salubrius.

Hope was presented in a sad Russet Garment close girt. On her head she wore a
Wreath of Linen shadowed with the Sunbeams. In one hand she bore a Banner, on
which was Figured an Anchor, with this Motto, Superabo.

In the other hand she bore a Banner with the Companies Arms.

Charity was habited in a careless Robe of White Silk, and a Green Mantle, On
her head a Coronet of Stars; In one had she held a Banner on which was Figured
an Arm out of a Cloud reaching to an Almsbasket to relieve a poor person; with
this Motto Consummavi.

In the other hand she bore a Banner of the Companies Arms.

The Goldsmiths Pageant was thus set out. Under a Canopy of State sat Justice,
her hair dishevelled. She wore on her head a golden Crown, her Garment gold
color, girt with a girdle of Gold, in one hand she held a Balance, in the
other a Touchstone. At her feet were placed two Virgins, their hair
dishevelled, their heads were encompassed with Wreaths of Flowers of several
Colors, as the Blew, Red, and Yellow, their habits answerable. In one hand
they held a golden Hammer, in the other a golden Cup.

The Barges were anchored some 40 or 50 yards distant in the middle of the
River, behind them was left an open passage for Boats to pass, this side of
the River was kept clear for their Majesty's and their Train.

Between 8 and 9 of the Clock, the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, moved
toward Chelsey, where they attended their Majesty's Coming from Putney, the
Lord Mayor being to lead the way down the River before their Majesty's.

The grand Pageants appointed for this day were placed thus: The first at
Chelsey; The second between Fox-hall and Lambeth; The third at the private
Stairs at Whitehall.

Those three entertained their Majesty's with Speeches, in their motion to
Whitehall.

There are two Drolls, one of Watermen the other of Seamen, continually
employed in dancing and singing.

The first Entertainment on the Water was a Sea-Chariot, drawn with Sea Horses.

IN the front whereof was seated ISIS; her hair of a light brown color,
somewhat consorted, her head adorned with an Anadem, or Crown of all manner of
Flowers belonging and relating to Gardens, as the Red, White and Damask Roses,
Pinks, July flowers, Violets, etc. Her Garment of white Silk, intermixed with a
pale green. In her right hand she bore a Scepter (made up like a Cornu-copia)
out of which all sorts of Flowers seemed to sprout. In her left hand she held a
Watring pot, to denote her the Lady of the Western Meadows, and Wife to THAM.
At her feet were placed several inferior Water Nymphs, belonging to small
Rivulets, who were Contributaries to her, their habits answerable to hers.

This View was presented to their MAJESTY'S at Chelsey, in the head of the Lord
Mayor's and Companies Barges; And upon the motion of their Majesty's Barge.
ISIS directed her self to Them in a Speech, which I omit for it is prolixity.

Isis having ended her Speech, their MAJESTY'S Train passed by another view or
Pageant, in the nature of a Droll of Watermen, placed not far distant from that
of Isis; in their passage the Watermen, who were continually in action, consort
into a Song, being set for three parts.

The which ended; His Majesty moved on toward another View, being the Second
Entertainment.

Which was a Pageant made in the manner of an Island floating, and presented
between Fox-Hall and Lambeth, with a Lion and a Unicorn standing in the Front,
the Supporters of the Arms of ENGLAND: upon whose backs were placed two bigg
Boys, the one a Scotch, the other an English, and habited accordingly, with
Banners in their hands, whereon was the Arms of either Nation.

In the middle of this View was seated THAM, represented in an Old Man with
long Hair and Beard, which may signify the Weeds and Sedges of the River: On
his head he wore a Crown of Flowers, such as belong to Meads and fruitful
Pastures, as the Primrose, Dazy, Blewbottle, and the like: In his right hand he
held a Trident, as he is Viceroy to Thetis, and King of Rivers. In his left
hand he bore a Pitcher of Water, as he is Son to Achelous (the Father of
Rivers) and Grandchild to Oceanus. He wore a long Silk robe tincted with
several colors like the Rainbow. On his right hand was placed a Nymph of the
Water, on whose head was the Figure of Greenwich Castle. On his left hand
another Nymph, on whose head was placed the Figure of Windsor Castle, which two
Nymphs were holding Banners in their hands, habited in Blew and White.

Upon his Majesty's approach, THAM presents himself with a Speech, which I omit
likewise.

Which ended, and their Majesty's Barge ready for landing at the Private
Stairs, at White Hall, The third View receives them, being a Sea Chariot made
in manner of a Scollop shell, drawn with two Dolphins, on whose Backs are
placed two Tritons. In the front of the Chariot is seated Thetis, her hair long
and gray, disheveled; On her head is placed a triple Crown, to denote and
distinguish her three Estates, as she is supposed to be Mother of all the Gods,
Goddess of the Sea, and Empress of all Rivers. On the upper part of the Crown
is fixed a Star; on the middle circle, a silver Crescent, on the triplicite
part a Wreath of Flags deep green, her Robe likewise of deep green, with a
loose Mantle of several colors. In the right hand she held a Scepter, in the
left a Chart or Map; her Attendants were four Sea Nymphs clothed in White and
Sea green Robes.

Thetis Addresseth her self to their Majesty's in these words, alluding to the
Storm, and Joy of the Portugues, which happened at one and the same time.

Most Sacred Pair!

FAME having echoed in our ears your choice
We summoned all Our Daughters to rejoice,
That to the five Hill'd City do belong,
Whose Murmurs did consort a Nuptial Song;
The Golden footed Tagus, many more
That wanton 'bout the Famed Ulissian shore:
They being sprightly met, a sudden sound,
(As though the imprisoned Winds had broke the ground
Supriz'd our Joys, we guest not what it meant,
Till seconded by the Upper Element.
At which the Voice of yrens became loud,
Though soft before; the humbl'd Waves grow proud
To caper into some seditious trick,
And Prey upon the Body Politic,
For so is Traffic held; The Cannons played,
And Fires (like scaling-ladders) toward heaven laid;
As though the Quarrels, and long-buried Odds
Betwixt the daring Giants and the Gods,
Were now revived: what then they could not do
With their Heap'd-hills, Flames should aspire unto.
This gave Great Oceanus cause to call
A helpful Council, who concluded (All)
So mighty a Conjunction could not be,
Without a Miracle or Prodigy.
The glorious heir to Great Braganzaes Name!
And the Worlds Wonder, Englands Charlemain!
The Result being past, a trusty Triton straight
(Who at the Councell-Table then did wait)
Was forthwith sent the ranging Waves to quell,
And to inquire the cause they did Rebel.
Scarce could you think ere (clad in a cold sweat)
He did return to make our hopes complete,
Declared that all was clear, the Sky serene,
And Ships in Safety rode where the Storm had bin;
That the Four Winds had Liberty to meet,
Not to Destroy, but Whistle to Youv Fleet
(Though rudely) tunes of Joy in different Seats,
Only to show they were Joves Flagerets,
And every Element in its Degree
Expressed a Power knit in a Jubilee.
Thus Heaven and Earth did your blessed Nuptials keep,
As well as we that Revell'd in the Deep:
Thetis her self none else allowed to bring
This intermixed Tale to Britains King;
Which ended, with my Wishes I begin,
(Not' against your Patience to commit a Sin:)
May You outlive the Malice of Your Foes,
While they, subjected to Your Justice, Close;
May You grow strong (too) in Your peoples love,
Which will your Treasure, and your armor prove.
And You Blessed Queen! so Famed for Piety,
May Your Deeds ever Live, Your Self never Dye.
After their Majesty's and the Nobility were Landed, the Companies Barges that
were in the Front, fell into the Rear, and so hasted to their several homes.

The Lord Mayor and the Aldermen attended the Kings coming at Chelsey, whence
upon notice of his approach they plied their Oars, and having met his Barge
they all stood up and made obeisance, and nimbly rounded it, and saluted their
Majesty's on that side also, and presently fell in just before their Majesty's,
and led the way to Whitehall; In the rear of the King came his Majesty's spare
Barge covered with Velvet most richly embroidered, next several Noblemens
Barges, filled with diverse Lords and Ladies who attended this days Triumph,
with the King and Queen came their illustrious Brother the Duke of York, who
being Lord high Admiral had his part of Glory in this Naval rencounter.

In this order by 7 a Clock their Majesty's reached Whitehall, and at the
instant of their Landing, were saluted with two Tire of Artilllery placed on
both sides the Water, and which concluded with their loud Music, those
harmonious Consorts of other lesser Instruments, which every Barge of the
Companies was furnished with, as Trumpets, Hoboyes, Flutes, Waits, Viols, and
Violins, to the great delight and satisfaction of the Spectator, and to the
ample decoration of this Magnificence, which passing along the murmuring and
trembling Waves, was highly advantaged in the resounds and quavering Echoes
reverberated from those pleasant Depths.

When those Guns ceased, the Tower began the testimonies of its Gladness, by
the same Melody, and continued it till night called upon the officious day
(which was the only dry one of a whole fortnight preceding) such his Majesty's
serene and sure influence) to close his cheerful eyes, and rest from his
illustrious labor; while she employed her emulous vicissitude in suitable
demonstrations of her joy, such as Bonfires, Fireworks, and the like
Brightnesses, which her Blacks only could commend and set off to the sight.

I have omitted all the Speeches, but one, appointed for this days service,
because his Majesty heard but that one, and but part of that also, by reason of
the misguided interposition of the Companies between the Pageants (very few
whereof their Majesty's had the full sight, by reason of those Confusions
caused by the number of Boats and Barges, so that the Thames never bore the
like burden for weight and value being covered from one bank to the other) (the
said respective Companies doing their civilities to the Queen, by waving their
hats out of the Bails of their Barges as she passed by them) But I refer the
Reader to their proper place being Printed at large, where the whole Menage of
this Affair at the Cities charge is fully described, being entitled Aqua
Triumphalis.

Somewhile before this their Majesty's coming to Whitehall, arrived that most
incomparable Lady for Piety, Prudence, and conjugal affection, the Queen
Mother, the mournful Relict of our late Martyred Sovereign, intending here to
repose that half surviving part of her dear Husband, and to integrate and make
entire the Royal Remains by her Presence, to the completion of his Majesty's
Felicity; whose Imperial Family may indulgent heaven enlarge by as swift and
sudden accrument, as it did in its displeasure lately retrench it.

The Place of this most Excellent Princesses Residence, her Palace and Manor
of Greenwich, importunely directs me to an observation well becoming this
discourse; and that is a consideration and Survey of its present glory (common
to it with other its Sisters, as Somerset House, Nonsuch-House, and some few
else) from the level of its designed near ruin and Demolition. The anxious
Genii and Penates of these places, no doubt did highly and industriously
operate in the Confusion and Division of the late several Usurpers; when to
save their seats and rescue their Altars, they powerfully intermedled betwixt
the Ambition and Covetousness of the Rebellion, equally avoiding the
prostitution and Sale of the Multitude, and the rape of a single Tyrant, while
they stood as the prize of eithers achievement upon the other, like the golden
Apple of strife and discord, betwixt both Competitors. They have now together
with his Majesty's fortune resumed their Grandeurs, and have reared up their
exalted heads, -- and as Nero once said of his capacious and glorious Edifice,
nunc incipiunt habitare; they do but now begin to dwell.

I must pass over many other splendid remarks, (purposely omitting those
several entertainments and gratulations given to their Majesty's by the
Nobility upon the account of this welcome.) that pursue my Pen, and do justly
vindicate their place in this Register. Such is the late expedition into
Portugal of that Army, under the Command of that famous Captain the Earl of
Inchequin, whose Glories challenge a Sphere to themselves, for who raises not
up his Spirit at the reducing of his Irish service though but to his mind and
memory? Such is the reducing the Courts of Judicature to their Ancient Seats in
Westminster Hall, from whence by the novelty of Tyranny they had been banished,
to give place to their bloody High Court of Injustice, whose detestable memory
shall be its only record, while the restored Law shall triumph in its pristine
Residence. Such those celebrated additions of State and Pleasure to His
Majesty's Palaces of White Hall and St. James's, that have deservedly famed a
Panegyric. Such is that (...) or accomplishment of these and their foregoing
Grandezza's, by the ever blessed and renowned Act of Uniformity, formed and
cherished to this vigor by his Majesty's Zeal to Gods Glory and the Churches
Peace and happiness. In the quiet and undubitable fruition whereof, and as the
most certain and infallible Pillar and firm support of these his temporal
Felicities, and as the earnest glory of those eternal to come, I leave our
Gracious Sovereign, as knowing nothing BETTER or GREATER can be said of HIM.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books Printed for H. Brom, at the Gun in Ivy-lane.
THe Alliance of Divine Officers, exhibiting all the Liturgies of England since
the Reformation, by Hamon L'estrange in fol.

Justice Revived, or the whole Office of a Country Justice, by E.W. Esquire in 8.

Dr. Browns Sepulchral Urns and Garden of Cyrus, in 8

Two Essays of Love and Marriage in 12.

The Royal Exchange, a Comedy in 4. by R. Brom.

Five new Plays, by R. Brom, never before printed in 8.

A Treatise of Moderation, by Mr. Gaul, in 8.

St. Boniventure's Soliloques in 4.

Jews in America by Mr. Thorowgood, in 4.

All Mr. R. L'Estrange's Pieces against Mr. Bagshaw and the Presbyterians.

Speed's Husbandry in 8.

All the Songs of the Rump, in 8. from 1640 to 1660.

The Pourtracture of His sacred Majesty King Charles the Second, from his birth
1630, till this present year 1661 being the whole story of his escape at
Worcester, his travels and troubles.

The Covenant discharged by John Sussell, in 4.

The complete art of Water-drawing, in 4.

Mr. Boys his Translation the 6th. book of Virgil, in 4.

Mr. Walwin's Sermon on the happy Return of King Charles the second.

A perfect Discovery of Witchcraft, very profitable to be read of all sorts of
people, especially Judges of Assize before they pass sentence on condemned
persons for witches. in 4.

A short view of the Lives of the Illustrious Princes, Henry Duke of
Gloucester, and Mary Princess of Orange deceased, by T. M. Esquire in 8.

Aeneas his Voyage from Troy to Italy, an Essay upon the third Book of Virgil,
by J. Boys Esquire in 8.

Mr. Grenfields Sermon in behalf of the Loyal party.

Mr. Stones Sermon at St. Paul's October 20. 1661.

The Harmony of the World, in 8.

Blood for Blood in 35 Tragical stories; the five last being the sad product of
our late Rebellion, in 8.

Son^s and other Poems by A. Brom Gent.

Trap on the Major Prophets, etc. in fol.

A Discourse of all the Imperfections of Women, in 8

Mr. Morton's Rule of Life, in 8.

A Geographical Dictionary of all the Towns and Cities in the World.

The Jovial Crew or Merry Beggars, by R. Brom Gent.


