A TREATISE CONCERNING Schism and Schismatics; Wherein the Chief Grounds and
Principles Of a Late SEPARATION FROM THE CHVRCH of ENGLAND, ARE Considered and
Answered.

By Henry Hellier, D.D. Fellow of C.C.C. Oxon.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Smith for Jo. Crosley Bookseller in Oxford,
MDCXCVII.

A TREATISE CONCERNING Schism, etc.
THERE have been many Discourses published about Schism since the late
Revolution, and most of them by Men averse to the present Government; who have
quoted diverse Sentences out of the ancient Fathers, which they say, make
against us; although they will serve, according as the case is differently
stated, either of one side or the other. They call us who do approve of the
present Government, Schismatics; and themselves the Church of England, who
have separated themselves from it; accusing us of Immoralities in our Prayers;
of all the mischiefs that are done in the Wars; of setting up Anti-Bishops;
concluding that we are without the Church, and that there is no Salvation to be
had among us in the ordinary way. Wherefore it can be no unseasonable work to
enquire into the nature of Schism impartially, and into the ways whereby Men
may become Schismatics, in order to the clearing such as are innocent from
this Offense, and to the charging it in the right place, and on the Persons
that are truly guilty of it. And seeing our Adversaries have taken so much
liberty of Speech against us, as after they have called us Schismatics, and
said we are in a state of Damnation, to boast of and print Catalogues of their
Books unanswered; It is but reasonable that any Man on our part should be heard
also, that has a mind to speak, without being blamed only for writing against
them, much less for indifferent stating of the case; for they have given
sufficient cause for both: But this latter is the thing which I principally
intend to do; namely, to give a state of the Case, or to consider the rational
part of the Subject; which seems hitherto to have been most neglected, although
it is of the greatest use. For if the nature of Schism in general, and the ways
whereby Men do become Schismatics, are once well understood, it will be easy
to explain the Sentences commonly quoted out of the Fathers, and to make use of
them if we please, against our Adversaries; or it will be lawful to reject
them, although there will be no need of that; for there are none of them that I
know of, which, after a Man has duly considered of the Subject, will seem to
favor them. Therefore to make a general Discourse on this Subject, and also to
include particular matters within as short a compass as conveniently may be, I
shall endeavor to show. 1. What Schism is, and how the Members of the Church
may become guilty of it. 2. I shall speak something also of the sinfulness and
inconvenience of it, to the intent that we may avoid it.


1. Let us consider what Schism is, and how the Members of the Church may
become guilty of it.

As for the word Schism, it signifies properly the cutting or cleaving of a
solid Body, from (...) or (...); hence it is translated to denote diversity of
Opinions and Professions, in those that once appeared at least to be agreed in
them; for they that never were united, cannot be said to be cut asunder. And
according to this metaphorical Acceptance, Schism is a breach of Unity in any
Society whatsoever: But common use and custom has applied it only to that
which divides the Unity of the Church.

Yet not the bare Separation, but giving the cause of Separation, makes the
Schism. Wheresoever a Schism is, each Party is divided or separated from the
other, but each Party is not in a state of Schism; that is, does not give the
cause of Separation, unless it so falls out, as it sometimes may, that both of
them are in fault, neither doing its part toward the maintaining of Agreement,
so far as is necessary to be preservation of Unity, in order to one common end.

Now, as many ways as there are, for the Members of the Church to profess
themselves united one with another, with relation to matters concerning them,
as they are the Church and Congregation of Christian People: So many there are
also for one or more Members to become Schismatical, by breaking off that Union
in outward profession, which is a Duty incumbent on them,

I speak of Union which relates to Matters concerning them, as they are Members
of the Church: Whence, not every passionate Heat, not every Quarrel, not every
Suit of Law, not every War, not every Faction or Sedition among the People does
make a Schism.

I speak also of Union in outward Profession: For, though there is an internal
Union and Communion of all God's faithful People, in regard they have the same
Faith, and the same Hope, and do practice the same Christian Virtues; and in
default of these, or any one of these, a Man in some sort cuts himself off from
those faithful People, and from the Portion which does belong to them, and so
the secret Infidel, and the secret Sinner, may be said to be separated now; for
they are none of Christ's, and shall hear that Sentence in the separation of
good and bad Men hereafter, Depart from me, for I know you not: Yet this is a
matter not peculiarly belonging to Schism, but common to it with every other
Sin, and therefore, in that Sense I shall not now consider it, but only as it
is a Breach of external Communion, and Separation as to outward Profession;
although this may be committed as well as any other Sin in the Mind also, by a
Man's intending or purposing to leave the outward Communion of the Church, when
perhaps he has not as yet actually done it.

Now, as the outward Unity or Communion of every Society appears in the apt
Order of the Members one with another, and Demeanor one toward another,
according to their respective States and Conditions, as in one House, one City,
one Kingdom: So does the Unity of the Church consist in Men's acting according
to their just Relations, as Members of the Church, in keeping fair
Correspondence, and retaining a due Agreement in Doctrine of Faith and Morals,
and in Discipline; that is to say, Church Government, and the things that
belong to it, as being requisite to the due Administration and right Management
of it.

And this Unity is consistent with several things, seemingly dividing Persons
as Members of the Church, and that partly even in the aforesaid respects; with
diversity of Spiritual Gifts and Functions; with diversity of Opinions, as to
Matters of Religion; with Ecclesiastical Disputes and Contentions; with various
Judgments and Resolutions, as to particular Circumstances and Cases relating to
Moral Actions; with Canons and Constitutions of diverse kinds; with difference
in Ceremonies, or other parts of Discipline in diverse Countries, or diverse
Parts of the same Country, according to the several Exigencies of Affairs, and
according to the Discretion or Approbation of the Governors Civil or
Ecclesiastical, as it does concern them. All these things may be, and yet the
Church continue still the same, as the Queen in a Vesture of Gold-wrought about
with diverse Colors.

Yea, Church Censures may go on, and Persons be Excommunicated; and yet, unless
they wilfully continue under Excommunication, no Schism be made; because they
do not cut themselves off from the Church, but are cut off by others; and
therefore are not as Schismatics, A (...), T^. 3.11
Condemned of themselves, as the Apostle speaks.

Schism therefore is a wilful breaking off of that outward Unity, which one or
more Members ought to maintain with the rest. A Schismatic or Schismatics
are, that one, or those many Persons, who do publicly refuse to act according
to his or their just Relations, as Members of the Church, in the station
wherein they are placed. Or, to speak more briefly, a Schismatic is that
Member of the Church, which disowns and cuts it self off from the rest; either
contemning and rejecting the other Members, 1 Cor. 12.21.
as if the Eye shall say to the Hand, I have no need of thee; or again, The
Head to the Feet, I have no need of you: Or else encroaching and breaking in
upon the Rights of other Members, as if the Foot shall say, V. 15.16.
because I am not the Hand, or not the Head, I am not of the Body, and will not
be of the Body: Or Lastly, refusing to communicate its Office to the rest, not
distributing to the Necessities of the Saints, not suffering and rejoicing with
the other Members, the Members not having the same Care according to their
different places and capacities one for another, 1 Cor. 12.25.
according to the Expression of the Apostle.

To know therefore who is a Schismatic, and who not, it will be necessary to
consider, in some general Terms at least, the Relations wherein Men may be, and
the several Causes or Pretenses of separating, with regard to such Relations,
declaring withal, so far as in a short Discourse of this Nature conveniently
may be, which are unlawful, and which are good and sufficient.

And First, As there is an Unity in general, which ought to be maintained by
all Christian Churches throughout the World, they being all reconciled to God
in One Body, Ephesians. 2.16. 1 Cor, 12.13.
and Baptized into One Body, and made to drink into One Spirit, and being
called One Body, 1 Cor. 10.17. 1 Cor. 12.2^.
whereof our Lord is the Head, Ephesians. 4.15, 16.
from whom the whole Body fitly joined together, and compacted by that which
every Joint supplyeth, according to the effectual working in the measure of
every part, makes increase of the Body, unto the edifying of it self in love.
So there may be a Breach made of this Unity by any particular Church, and
thereby whole Churches may become Schismatical. Whole Churches in respect of
the whole Body of Christians, have such Relation, as single Members have, with
Regard to any particular Church: They therefore, as well as single Members of
particular Churches, may fall into Schism, when either in express Terms, or by
necessary consequence, they break off their Communion and Friendly
Correspondence with the rest; which may be done several ways, 1. By professing
a different Faith: Or, 2. Different Agenda or Morals. 3. By different
Church Government; either as to the Species or kind of Government, or as to the
manner of exercising of it.

1. They may become guilty of Schism, by professing a different Faith, or
appointing different Creeds in any Material Point from other Churches: For
Christian Communion does not require, but forbid us to have Fellowship with
those who do not hold the Truth, as to the Substantials of Christian Religion.
The Body of Christ has but One Faith; and considering that the main Points of
Faith have such Influence upon our Lives and Actions, and are of so high
importance to every one of us, we ought to Contend earnestly for the Faith
which was once delivered to the Saints, Jud. 3.
and to withdraw our selves from those who teach otherwise, 1 Timothy 6.5.
and consent not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 6.3.
and to the Doctrine which is according to Godliness. Not but that Christians
may differ, and dispute, and err about Matters of less Moment, or ways of
explaining the True Faith not so clearly delivered, without either actually
separating themselves from the Church, or deserving to be cut off from it,
except they do oblige Men to concur with them, and to profess a Belief of their
Errors: For then we may, and ought to depart from them; it being not lawful for
any one, to profess he believes that to be true, which at the same time he
takes to be an Error, even in a matter of the smallest moment.

2. They may become guilty of Schism, by making wrong Professions de Agendis,
or concerning Morals: For none ought to concur with any Man, or any number of
Men, in that which is immoral. Concord is only commendable in that which is
good, not in that which is evil. To profess an Immorality, is not only to do an
immoral thing, (the profession of it being a sinful Act) but it is worse than
doing the same immoral thing that is agreeable to such Profession: It is a sin
committed with deliberation, greater than commonly precedes the Act of Sin; it
makes us persevere and continue in sin; it tends to the seducing and destroying
others in a more eminent degree than the Act. If any Man therefore shall teach
Doctrines manifestly contradictory to any part of the Moral Law; if a Man says,
instead of, Honor thy Father and Mother, Thou shall not honor thy Father or
thy Mother: Instead of, Let every soul be subject to the Higher Powers; Let
some men not be subject to the Higher Powers, and maintains this Doctrine in
Opposition to the Members of his own or other Churches, he is a Schismatic.
But he that allows of those Precepts, and knows not who is his King, or who is
his Father, is mistaken in the Person, not in the Commandment; or at most, he
is only mistaken about the Laws of the Land, which (though they do oblige in
Conscience when known, yet) it is not every Man's business, nor does lie in
every Man's power perfectly to understand: And an Error in these, does not
always imply a misunderstanding the Commandments of God. He that errs in
Explication of some Moral Points; as, in showing, How a Man must honor his
King or his Father, or in setting the Bounds and Measures of Obedience to them;
or in such a matter as I am now about, in stating the Case of Schism, is not
presently to be esteemed guilty of Schism: For a Mistake, though professed in
Matters less principal, either of Faith or Morals, unless it makes void the
general Commandment, or some plain Article of Faith, will not make a Man a
Schismatic. If it did, considering how little some do understand how to
explain the Articles of their Faith, how apt those that have a competent
understanding of them; are to differ in their manner of explaining them, how
various Men's Notions are about several Points of Casuistical Divinity, and
Commentaries on Morals contained in the Commandments; and how difficult it is
to suppose, that Men will be agreed in every Circumstance of them, the Church
would always abound with Schismatics, and there would be no remedy for it:
Such things therefore are to be born with in all Communions, as being
unavoidable in this Life, where we are subject to Errors, and our Knowledge is
only in part; unless the Doctrines be of very ill and dangerous consequence,
obstinately taught, and earnestly pressed upon us, and our Concurrence required
in them, as a Condition of Communion.

But what shall be interpreted Concurrence? He that hears a Man preach false
Doctrine in the Church, or read an Homily, wherein something is said against
his Opinion; or he that hears something in the Common Prayers, or in the
Pulpit-prayer before Sermon, which by reason of some Circumstances he does
dislike, cannot be said to concur in all Doctrines so taught, or in all Prayers
so put up: And therefore, it is not a sufficient Cause to make a separate
Congregation, that we dislike the Title given to the King, or any other Person
there mentioned; nor are these immoral things in their own nature, but on the
account of Circumstances of Men's doing them against their Consciences, etc. And
indeed, I do thus far agree with our new Separatists, That whosoever thinks the
King to be an Unjust Possessor, and to keep the Rightful One out of the Throne,
ought not to be so much as present at our Public Fasts, Thanksgivings, etc.
whilst he continues under that Error, because no Man ought to act against his
Conscience: But even such an one has not sufficient reason to forsake our
Communion altogether, unless he be forced to give consent to something that he
thinks unlawful, offered up in the Public Prayers, which a Man's bare presence
does not always imply: For then almost all those things that I excluded in the
beginning of this Discourse, would produce a Schism. We shall not have a
Dispute about a Prince's Title, a Civil War, or War with a Foreign Nation, or
so much as a Suit of Law, or Quarrel with our Neighbor, or a Design thwarting
his in the common Transactions of Human Life; but there will follow also among
us different Apprehensions and Opinions concerning the justice or injustice of
them; and consequently, concerning certain passages in our Public Prayers
which relate to them; and thereupon we may think it unlawful to say some words,
or at least to take them in the same sense that others commonly do, and so make
a Schism: And when there is a Division of the Church, whereby New Pastors and
Governors are introduced, and lay claim to the same Dioceses or Parishes, how
shall it be reconciled, although the Differences that occasioned it should be
brought to an end? How many would our Divisions be, if all the Factions that
ever were in the State, should have made a Schism in the Church also? But these
indeed are Matters which are not simply immoral in their own nature, but only
by reason of Circumstances relating to particular Persons; neither do they tend
to the Overthrow of the Churches Faith or Morals; nor are they of long
continuance; but as particular Persons or their circumstances alter, cease of
themselves. And therefore such Prayers, if not very many and frequent, ought to
be tolerated, even by those by whom they may not be said, to avoid a greater
Evil, viz. The Destruction of the Church, and lasting Depravation of Piety and
good Morals, the natural consequences of Separations made from the Church upon
the account of them.

Much less may we separate our selves from all those who are any way guilty of
immoral Actions, as some The Novatians, Donarists, etc.
Schismatics pretended to do of old: But I think we have had none such among
us of late, unless they may be esteemed of this Number, who hold themselves
obliged to separate from us, only See the Unreasonableness of the new
Separation, p. 1.
because we have taken Oaths which they account unlawful. A Separation from all
bad Men, is not only unreasonable, but in this Life, impossible. Hence the
Church of Christ is compared in H. Scripture to a Floor, Mat. 3.12.
on which is Wheat and Chaff; Luc. 3.17.
to a Net, which receives Fishes good and bad; to a Marriage Feast, Mat. 13.47,
48
to which many are called, but few of them are chosen; to a Fold, having in it
both Sheep and Goats; Mat. 22.14.
to a Great House, wherein are not only Vessels of Gold and of Silver, Mat.
25.32, 33.
but also of Wood and of Earth; and some to Honor, 2 Timothy 2.20.
and some to Dishonor: Wherefore we may not pretend to separate our selves
from all those that do immoral things; for then, as the Apostle says, We must
needs go out of the world. 1 Cor. 5.10.
Nor if Men do such things, must they thereupon be accounted Schismatics, or
to have departed from the outward Communion of the Church? But if they make
them Terms of Communion, or persist so long in them, as to give a just occasion
of Church Censures upon them, and wilfully remain under those Censures.

Lastly, by Agenda, or Morals, I would not be understood, to mean that only
which is obligatory in its own nature, but that also which obliges on the
account of Divine Institution, as the Sacraments; by diminishing from which, or
adding to them, Men break the Unity of the Church of God, and make it unlawful
for others to join with them. They trespass indeed against Faith and Morals
also, taking away from Men the Seals of God's Covenant, the Tokens of his
Favor, the Pawns and Pledges of the Performance of his Promises, appointed by
himself for the quickening of our Faith, and sacrilegiously robbing God of the
principal and most memorable Part of his Worship, whereby we declare in most
Solemn Manner, a Belief of his Promises, and vow Obedience to his Commands,
whereby we put on the Badges and distinguishing Marks of our Christian Calling.
These are therefore the strictest and highest Bands of Union, from which St.
Paul in diverse places infers the Unity of the Church: We being many, are one
Body and one Bread; for we are all partakers of that one Bread, 1 Cor. 10.17.
And again, By one Spirit we are all baptized into one Body, whether we be Jews
or Gentiles, whether we be Bond or Free, and have all been made to drink into
one Spirit, I Cor. 12.13.

And both these kinds of Schism; namely, such as are constituted by professing
Errors in Faith or Morals, do imply Heresy also, and may be called by either
Name, according to our different Consideration of them; as they do imply false
Doctrine in Matters necessary to Salvation, obstinately persisted in, Heresy;
as the are accompanied with Separation from the Church, or do give a just Cause
of Separation, Schism. Heresy and Schism are seldom long asunder. There are
few Heretics but will endeavor by separate Congregations to propagate their
Heresy; or Schismatics, but will frame to themseves some New Doctrine, the
better to justify their Separation from the Church, as On. Tit. 3.
St. Jerome observed. The Apostle seems to use both these Words in the same
Sense, 1 Cor. 11.18, 19. I hear that there be Divisions (the Word is (...),)
among you; and I partly believe it, for there must be also Heresies among you,
etc, And certainly every Heretic, openly professing and maintaining his
Heresy, whether he is able to get a separate Congregation or not, may be
called a Schismatic; and a Schismatic persisting in his Schism, will be very
apt to fall into Heresy, according to the forecited Passage of St. Jerome.

3. Whole Churches, as well as single Persons, may incur the Guilt of Schism,
by their differences about Church Government; sometimes as to the Species or
kind of Government, and sometimes as to the manner of exercising it.

Sometimes by a different Species or kind of Government: As for Instance; When
they do recede from Episcopacy, and break wilfully the Line of Apostolical
Succession: For in so doing, they cause probably great Disorders within
themselves, and in other Churches also, by loosing the Bands of Union among
themselves, and hindering good Correspondence with other Churches, by taking
away the chief Pillars and Supporters of that Correspondence, and tacitly
disappointing their sort of Government, tempting some of them to dislike it,
and to endeavor a Change for that which is likely to prove much worse instead
of it, as on many other accounts so particularly, because it has not the
Examples of the best and purest Ages to maintain it. But though Churches may
sometimes be Schismatical on this account, yet they are not always so in this
Case: For there may be a just Cause of breaking off that outward Succession,
where the Profession of the true Christian Faith, and of good Morals, must be
otherwise utterly wanting; the preservation of which, is declared in the Holy
Scriptures necessary to Salvation, not the manner of Government so declared;
consequently, this cannot be equally necessary to all People. This, in case of
a general Corruption, or sometimes on the Account of the Members of the Church
being dispersed abroad, perhaps cannot be had: And must Men Continue in such
Corruption, for fear of breaking off Succession? Or fall into a state of
Damnation, for not being able to preserve it? What Uncertainties will some Men's
Doctrine make all the Advantages we can receive from Christianity, and finally
our Salvation to depend upon? Sometimes on the Goodness of a a King's,
sometimes of a Bishop's Title, and sometimes on the Regularity of Succession.
How unreasonably are Men condemned, whom God has not condemned, and declared
to be in the state of those that never heard of Christ, even although they do
perform all the Gospel Conditions? Only because they have not among them a
certain Order, which is not absolutely necessary to the Being, -- What has
perished of the Outward From or Body of Government, being lost without any
fault or guilt of theirs, (their Infelicity, which they could not prevent, and
not their Crime voluntarily brought upon themselves:) This sure will never be
looked on by God as any dangerous want of Order, or as that which shall be any
way chargeable upon them. Order is required to the Well-being, not necessary
absolutely to the Being of a Church; and orderless or secret Society of
Brethren, may be a Church still, as any number of Converts in a City, before
the Apostle, which was gone to some other City, had yet placed any Governor
over them. Dr. Hammond's Second Defense of the Treatise of Schism, Chapter 6. S. 11.
but only to the Well-being of the Church. It is no where commanded, although
it seems indeed to the approved of by our blessed Savior in the Apocalypse ^
Rev. chapter 2.
, and is plainly enough made out to have been instituted by the Apostles, and
has been found by Experience a very strong Band of Union, in respect of the
Universal Church, and particular ones too, where it has had its just
Authority: Not but that the Succession in some places has failed, or been
interrupted, (I do not except the Church of Rome it self, which does boast so
much of it) and may fail again; or we may depart from it when it cannot consist
with Succession of true Faith and good Morals, without an utter and
irrecoverable loss of the Advantages of the Christian Religion, the Church of
Christ, or the ordinary hopes of Salvation. And although no Man ought to assume
to himself a Power of Governing the Church of God, but stay till it is
regularly conferred upon him; yet, where there is a general Deficiency and
Apostasy from the Profession of the true Faith and sound Morals, and they who
are to confer this Right, are themselves corrupted also, and will not give this
Power to any that are willing to reform it; in such extraordinary cases of
general Apostasy, (which, how far it may possibly reach, I will not here
dispute) Persons, Priests at least, who have Gifts and Abilities for it, have a
sufficient Call to interpose themselves, and are not to be blamed, but highly
commended for making use of it.

Sometimes again, there may be a Schism made by the ill Exercise of
Church Government; by a Churches refusing to hold Communion with the rest, or
unjustly censuring and excommunicating them, or disobeying General Councils,
the Representatives of the whole Church, in matters which they have a lawful
Power to determine; by usurping too great Authority over the rest; by assuming
the Name of Catholic to it self, in opposition to all other Churches; by
making such unreasonable Terms of Communion, as that others shall not be able
to communicate with it; by encouraging and upholding Persons excommunicated, or
deservedly declared Schismatics by other Churches; by wilfully continuing in
Faults, and under just Excommunication incurred thereupon; by refusing to keep
friendly Correspondence with other Churches, as in Communicatory Letters,
(which are in order to the well governing of the Church) and the like.

And it is about the Exercise of Church Government, that Schism is generally
conversant: All Schisms of particular Members of the Church, considered as
distinct from Heresies, are about Church Government; and commonly about the
Exercise of it, being occasioned either, 1. By Superiors contending for Power;
or, 2. Misemploying their Power; or, 3. By Inferiors Disobedience to the Power.


1. By Superiors, Civil or Ecclesiastical, contending for Power: The Civil
Governors usurping that which belongs to the Ecclesiastical, or the
Ecclesiastical that which belongs to the Civil, or the Ecclesiastical Governors
contending with one another; For the Contention of Civil Governors, considered
only as such, i. e. about their own Rights and Titles, will not constitute a
Schism, nor give a just occasion for a Separation; although some have lately,
as it seems, taken occasion to make a Schism on the account thereof, whose
Principles are partly considered in that which went before, and will be farther
in that which follows, according as they shall be found under their proper
Heads.

1. It may be committed by Civil Governors, invading the Power and Authority of
the Ecclesiastical: For although it be true, that every one of the Clergy is
subject to the Civil Governors; I mean, to that one or more Persons in whom the
Supreme Power is lodged: Yet there are some parts of their Office, which no
King or Prince can assume to himself; as The Power of the Keys, the Power of
Ordination, of administering the Sacraments, of officiating as Priests in the
Public Worship of God, and other such like; which if they undertake without
being lawfully called thereunto of God, they are guilty (among other sins) of
the sin of Schism; and we may say unto them, as the Priests did to Vzziah, when
he went to burn Incense upon the Altar; It appertains not unto thee, Uzziah,
to burn Incense unto the Lord, but to the Priests the Sons of Aaron, that are
consecrated to burn incense, 2 Cor. 26.18.

II. There is a Schism made when Ecclesiastical Governors deny the Authority of
the Supreme Civil Powers; for they have the care of the Church also, being
Custodes utriusque Tabulae, and appointed to be nursing Fathers of the Church.
Our Obligation to every Human Law is derived from the Divine; and seeing
Religion is the support of all Government, and the foundation of all Justice
Quod in Religionem Divinam committitur in omnium fertur injuriam, l. 4. ^ de
Hereticis.
and Peace, it cannot but belong to their care. They therefore that shall deny
them that Power, which is annexed to their Imperial Dignity; To reform Abuses
in the Worship of God, and in the Clergy; to constitute Bishops and Pastors; on
occasion, to depose or deprive them; to call together and to preside in
Councils; to dispense with their Canons, to rescind or alter them as they see a
just occasion: All which things Christian Kings have done, and that upon good
grounds. If these are indeed the Powers of the Sovereign, as it may be proved
You may see all this very well proved in Grotius, de imperio Summarum
Potestatum circa Sacra. And good part of it is owned by the Author of Christian
Communion, p. 26, 27.29. and elsewhere.
they are, then, they who deny them these Powers, and assume the same to
themselves, are Schismatics: Such are therefore the Papists, who by virtue of
their Ordination, pretend to be gotten out of the power of Princes, and
independent on them; yea, to be above them, and to govern them in temporalibus
in ordine ad spirituale bonum, Bellarminus de Romans Pont, lib. 5. cap. 6. Papa
potest mutare regna, and uni auferre, atque alteri confer, tanquam summus
Princeps spiritualis, si id necessarium sit ad animarum salutem. ibid.
by which Claim they show the unreasonableness of all the rest, in effect
confessing that to the right management of the Spiritual, there is a necessity
of an overruling Temporal Power, which they would therefore get unto
themselves.

III. Ecclesiastical Governors become Schismatics, by contending for Power
among themselves: As for Example; When one Bishop lays claim to the Diocese of
another, setting up himself, or suffering others to set him up an Anti-Bishop,
erecting Altar against Altar, according to the ancient Phrase. And in some
Elections indeed it has been difficult to know who was the Anti Bishop; and
the Emperor upon such an occasion, has caused The Case of Bonifacius and
En^^lius, Baron. Ann. 419.. 15.
both of the Contenders to depart out of the City; yea, after having called a
Synod Henricus Secundus in italiam cum magno exercitu veniens, habita Synedo,
cum Benedictum nonum, Sylvestrum tertium Gregorium sextum tanquam tria
teterrima menstra abdicare se inagistratu coegisset, Syndegerum
Bambergensem-Episcopum, cui Clementi secundo appellatio fuit Pontificem creat.
Platina de vitis Pontif. 155. Pont.

Clemens Secundus, Syndegerus antea vocatus, Bambergensis Episcopus in Synodo
Pontifex creatur, annuente Henrico Secundo vel impo^ante, and. co^^n^e potius.
^ ^^m 156. Pont.


, he has deposed at one time three, that have pretended a Right to the Papacy,
and created a fourth instead of them, to preserve the Peace of the Church. But
there is not always the same difficulty to know who is the true Bishop: As for
instance;

If a Bishop resigns or gives up his Diocese, and after the vacancy thereof
another be put in his room, he cannot afterward come back and lay claim to a
Diocese so given up, any more than to one that he never presided over at all:
And therefore, in that case it is plain enough, that he is the Schismatic, or
the Anti-Bishop, that comes to put in any such claim.

And a Bishop is under the same Circumstances, who is put out of his Diocese by
sufficient Authority, and is under the same guilt of Schism, if he comes to
make a second claim to the same Diocese. For it is very clear, that if he be
deprived by a sufficient Power, he is in the same condition, as if he never had
been their Bishop. Such an one therefore, who has been so deprived, if he shall
return and say to the People; I am your true Pastor still; you ought to obey,
not this Man that has succeeded, but me; He is justly to be esteemed a
Schismatic, and so are consequently all they that do defend him, and adhere to
him.

I know there have been two things urged, and are chiefly insisted upon, in
defense of a Separation of this nature; 1. This is the Sum of what is objected
in the first Part of Christian Communion.
That Bishops, though deprived to Temporalities, are not divested of their
Spiritual Power; that it is their Duty, expressed by their Titles of Watchmen,
Messengers, Shepherds, etc. in holy Scripture to make use of that their Power,
in order to the Extirpation of Immoralities; which according to the Opinion of
those who hold the present King to be only King de facto, and the other to be
King de jure (whom they suppose to be the major part) must necessarily, as they
say, follow, by praying for the King de facto, the unjust Possessor, as they
understand it, against the King de jure, the rightful King, in the public
Prayers, especially on the more solemn days of Fasting, Thanksgiving, etc. 2.
They (having Christian Communion, page 8.
professedly waved the Question about the King's Title) do urge, that the
Deprivation of Temporalities merely by a This objected in the Second Part.
Lay-power is invalid. This is inferred from the fomer Principles in the Third
Part.
Therefore the old Bishops retain still their Right, the others are
Anti-Bishops and Schismatics that are set up against them.

As to the First of these Objections, I answer, 1. That the Author who makes
it, seems to have misunderstood the Treatise called The Unreasonableness of a
new Separation on the account of the Oaths, etc. which he quotes in diverse
places and deservedly commends. Wherefore I shall repeat something out of it.
An Usurper is one, The Unreasonableness of a new Separation, etc. page 30.
who comes in by Force, and continues by Force. A King de jure is one, who
comes in by lineal Descent, as next Heir, and whose Right is owned and
Recognized by the Estates of the Realm. A King de facto is one, who comes in by
consent of the Nation, but not by virtue of an immediate Hereditary Right; but
to such a one being owned and received by the Estates of the Realm, the Law of
England, as far as I can see, requires an Allegiance.

So then a King de facto does not signify an unjust Possessor, for he is King
jure optimo; By such a Right as supersedes the bare right of Inheritance not
recognized by the Estates of the Realm; By such a Right as all the Laws which
make our Allegiance due to a King de facto do confirm, by such a Right as
implies sometimes, and particularly in the present Case, an express and free
Consent of the People by their Representatives, which is better than a tacit
Consent implied in Prescription, (which in these days is the only thing that
can make Succession a good Title, considered as distinct from other Titles) or
a forced Consent, i. e. Consent subsequent upon Conquest, which only does make
Conquest a good Title.

2. As for any other meaning of a King de facto, I shall not concern my self
with it, but only take notice, that, whether Men call the present King, King de
facto, or de jure, if they hold him to be their Sovereign to whom Allegiance is
due (which can never be due from the same Person to two opposite Kings at
once,) the Prayers for his Preservation, Victory over his Enemies, etc. do not
contain any Immoralities but only that which is their bounden Duty, and that
which is employed if we should use no other than the Apostles own words,
Praying, For Kings, and for all that are in Authority; 1 Timothy 2.2.
that we may lead a quiet and peaceable Life in all Godliness and Honesty. Nor
is then the using, but the omission of such Prayers on days by their Superiors
appointed for solemn Meetings rather to be esteemed an Immorality.

3. But if Men should use those Prayers against their Consciences, and profess
they did so, (which it is to be hoped few or none do) or if they should be
guilty of other open and acknowledged Immoralities, must He that is not Bishop
of the Diocese come thither to reform them? Then for the Extirpation of
Immoralities, which are to be found more or less in every Diocese, any Bishop
might invade the Diocese of another, saying he came to take away Immoralities,
to teach Men their duty, etc. And though the Commission of the Apostles, when
the Laborers were few, was indefinite over all the World, and that of Bishops
and Pastors is so in some sort now, in regard they are according to their
Places and Stations to give assistance to and promote the Edification of the
whole Church of Christ, and are in that sense Bishops over all the Church; yet
they are to be under certain Orders and Rules and within bounds, such as may be
consistent with the good Government and Peace of the Church; and therefore not
to make their Dioceses as large as they please, or go A (...).
disorderly beyond their own Precincts or proper Districts. Whence it was
justly forbidden (if not by express Act. 20.28. Tit. 1.5.
Scripture, as some think yet) by the Canons called Can. Apost. 14.35.
Apostolical, by the two first General Conc. Nic. Can. 6, 7.8. Conc.
Constantinop. Can. 2.
Councils, by the Council of Antioch Can. 13.22.
, and by the Imperial Laws, ^. 14 and l. 36. C. de Episcopis, and Clericis.
, that one Bishop should (...), etc. see Zonaras.
Invade the Diocese of another; whereby in understood doing the Episcopal
Offices therein without (...).
consent of the Bishop of the Place; when he is not (...) B^^^^mon in Can. 2.
Constantinop.
gone off, or deprived; without being appointed (...).
by other Bishops so to do; not being in (...).
Barbarous Nations where Bishops and Pastors are wanting. Without some of which
Reasons specified and excepted by the Councils prohibiting them, no Man
therefore ought to return back to officiate in a Diocese of which he is
deprived, notwithstanding any pretense of Immoralities.

Fourthly and Lastly, Schism is a great Immorality, and has many others
evidently consequent upon it, so that if by such proceedings they make a Schism
(the just Imputation whereof I know not how they can avoid) then instead of
bringing Men out of, they bring them into Immorality, and therefore by their
Titles of Messengers, Watchmen, etc. they are obliged not to return.

It may be, 'twill be said that these Dioceses are their own, and that they
come to recover their own Rights. But 1. If these were indeed their Rights,
they cannot by thus returning hope to recover them, neither are they capable by
the present Establishment of having them, although the others should be willing
to resign or deliver the Dioceses up to them. 2. Where the forementioned Cause
is wanting or insufficient, viz. that of ill Morals, this latter, of Right, by
a true lover of Peace will be parted with of Course.
John 10.11.
The good Shepherd gives his life for the Sheep, much more is he content to
part with the profits of his Pastoral Office to do them good. And as the true
Mother of the Child, in the Case brought before Solomon, would rather suffer
her Child to go to another Woman then let it be divided: So will a true Pastor,
rather suffer his Flock to go to any other Orthodox Bishop, than let it be
crumbled and broken into Factions only for the sake of him. The pretended
Mother of that Child might have made her excuse with the Schismatics of our
days, that she had rather her Child should be cut in pieces, than guilty of an
Immorality in Honoring a false Mother, and witholding due Honor from the true
One. And yet she that had not that Scruple was the best Woman, and the true
Mother of the Child as Solomon judged; and the Scripture approves his Judgment.
And this would be such another Immorality as the Authors of these late Books of
Schism talk of in paying Allegiance to one whom Men might mistake to be their
King. But they wave the question about the King's Title, as I said before, and
insist on the invalidity of a Lay-deprivation the next thing to be considered;
by way of answer to the second Objection.

This Deprivation does not take away the Power conferred on them in Ordination,
but only of having such and such Dioceses or parts of the Kingdom to officiate
in; which why the Supreme Civil Power, whether lodged in one or more Men,
should not be sufficient to do, is altogether unintelligible. The distribution
or division of a Country into so many Dioceses is not Jure Divino, but depends
on the discretion and determination of the chief Governors of the Church, i. e.
in a Christian Country, of the Supreme Legislative Power; to the Preservation
whereof it is necessary to have them well marked out and fixed, and to the
well-being of the Republic. Bishops are Subjects, and Kings may demand
Allegiance of them; and in case of refusal, if they have the whole Legislative
Power, they may forbid them living in any part of their Dominions. Such Power
is necessarily annexed to, or rather implied in the Imperial Dignity; from
which our blessed Savior by his Gospel detracted nothing, nor designed to
uphold his Disciples or Apostles against it; for his Kingdom was not of this
World. And though the Church did subsist at first without the assistance of
Heathen Emperors, yet Kings, when they embraced the true Faith, became Members
of the Church as well as any other Believers, and are therefore as much obliged
to act according to the Station wherein they are placed: As did the Jewish
Kings notwithstanding that the Church, in Egypt and Babylon, did subsist
without them; and as did the first and best of Christian Emperors; And among
the rest of those Powers, that of depriving Bishops has been one. And this
Power has been exercised here among us, with the Approbation of the Church of
England, and consonantly to the Articles, Homilies and Canons thereof. And
among the Reasons of Deprivation the not acknowledging the Kings Supremacy in
Ecclesiastical Causes was none of the least; which yet is not so much as to
deny his Civil Authority also, which is the present See the Vindication of
their Majesty's Authority to fill the Sees, etc.
Case. Indeed, if we consider the Supreme Power only as having so much
Authority as is absolutely necessary to preserve the Civil Government, and to
secure the outward Peace of the Kingdom, we must own that it can judge also,
what shall be reasonable Security of any Subjects being true to the Government;
and that Ecclesiastical Persons as well as others, for want of such Security
given, may be deprived of places of trust, or places where they may have
considerable influence on the People, least they should pervert them to
disaffection. Cujus rei facilis est probatio etc. Grotius De Imperio Summar.
Tot. circa Sacra, Cap. 10. 33.
Hence follows a Power of removing Bishops from their Sees upon such occasions;
which that it belongs to the Sovereign, Grotius thinks is a very easy matter to
prove. For he that has power to banish a Man out of all parts of the Country
or Kingdom, has by Hoc enim illi inest; a^ cujus totum est in Potestate, ejus
in Potestate pars non esse non potest. Idem ibid.
Consequence a Power of forbidding him to exercise there the Episcopal Office.
This he can do as the same Grotius observes, not only by way of Punishment, but
also by way of Caution, if he finds the People tumultuous on the account of any
Pastor, though without the Pastor's fault.

And such Deprivation may be made not only without, but even against the
Consent of a Synod; of whom Kings are so far from being obliged to ask the
question, whether they shall have their Subjects Allegiance or no; that they
are rather obliged, especially here in England, not to ask or enquire of them;
because it is a Violation of of the Laws of the Land, and an injury done to the
proper Judges of Allegiance. And although in Cases of Heresy or Schism (when
there are matters of difficulty to be decided) it is very fit and proper, and
agreeable to the most ordinary and usual practice of the Church to call Synods;
Yet even in those Cases they are to be convened only at the Sovereign's (...).
Socr. Proaem. lib. 5. Doce -- quis Imperator hane Synodum jusse^^ Congregari?
Hieron. Apolog. adv. Ru^^i^^^ lib. 2.
appointment, and when they are come together, they are all of them under the
same Circumstances of Obedience to the Civil Power, as they were singly before;
obliged to the same Duties, and liable to the same Penalties upon refusal of
them. How then can this be a matter of Ecclesiastical Cognizance, or how can it
belong to them to determine it?

Examples of Emperors deposing Bishops without as well as with a Synod are
many, and that even in the Case of Heresy, which does most properly belong to
the determination of a Synod, and which they are best able to judge of; not but
that in plain Cases, or Cases before sufficiently declared Heresy, this may be
done without them, even as Kings in the Old Testament, brake down the Images,
destroyed the high Places, and put down the Idolatrous Priests by their own
Authority; which Kings under the New Testament having the entire Legislative
Power, do not come short of. Thus Christian Emperors have deposed Heretics,
and their Power to do so seems anciently to have been generally acknowledged on
all hands. All Parties seem to have been sensible thereof. Sometimes the
Emperor threatened to depose them, and sometimes put it in Execution, without
any ones gainsaying. To him Bishops brought their Theodorit, lib. 5. c. 23.
Complaints against such other Bishops as they desired to have deposed; Him
they sometimes Leo. 1. Ep. 99.
praised for using this Power; His Power they Flavianus in Theodor. loco citato.
acknowledged, though against themselves; In his Sentence, though sometimes
unjust, they acquiesced Socrat. lib. 2. c. 12.
. And this is more than to depose them on the account of State-Crimes, or for
default of Allegiance. Lastly; As this is agreeable to Ancient Practice, so it
is the constant and concurrent Sense of all the old Reformers, and till of late
it has been denied, I think, by none but Papists, and some of the worst and
maddest of Enthusiasts.

And thus Men may become guilty of Schism by contending for Power. Whereby we
may also discern, how Persons in other Relations, according as they happen to
be concerned in some of these Circumstances, may become guilty of the same
fault.

2. They may be Schismatics by misimploying their Power, and so cutting
themselves off from those that are under them. For there is no Place so high as
to make a Man incapable of this fault. Nor may Inferiors only be guilty of it
in respect of their Superiors, or Superiors in respect of one another, but
Superiors in respect of their Inferiors also. The Head may say to the Feet, I
have no need of you, as well as the Feet to the Head, we have no need of thee.
Wherefore the Supreme Civil Powers, if they shall set up and pull down Persons
at pleasure, encouraging, increasing, promoting Schismatics, deposing or
highly discouraging those that are Orthodox: Ecclesiastical Governors, Bishops
and Pastors, if they shall do the like; if they shall refuse to communicate
with their Flock, unjustly excommunicate them, forbid them Communion in express
Terms, or by Consequence exclude them by unjust Impositions and unreasonable
Terms of Communion, are guilty of Schism.

3ly. Men are Schismatics by disobedience to Power, and that this may belong
in some sort to any Member of the Church, Page 13.
yea, or to any particular Church, has been observed already; also that the
Common People may have a share in and partake of the guilt of Schism in most of
the Cases already mentioned, is not to be doubted; but I am taking notice only
of what has been as yet omitted, and comes nearest to being peculiar to the
Common People. And that is Disobedience to their Lawful Governors in Spiritual
Matters. Yet not all Disobedience is Schismatical, (for then every Transgressor
of Canons might be called a Schismatic) but such as is Cum Rebellione quadam,
as the Aquinas 22. Q. 39. Art. 1. ad Zum.
Schoolmen express it; when Men design thereby to signify openly desert them,
2. Tim. 4.3.
and heap to themselves Teachers after their own Lusts, having itching Ears;
when they disown and disclaim their Authority; when they presume to invade the
Bishops, Priests or Deacons Office without being lawfully called, climbing into
the Sheepfold another way, instead of entering in at the Door; when they refuse
to Communicate on reasonable Terms, or separate themselves because they will
not conform in Public Assemblies to your Superiors Injunctions as to
Ceremonies, etc. which last I see not how they can excuse from Schism, except
in two Cases only. 1. That the Things commanded and appointed by them are
unlawful in themselves; in which Case, without all question, it is their duty
to disobey them, and rather to separate from them, than to comply and concur
with them in that which is sinful. Or 2ly. If they be not unlawful in their own
Nature, but indifferent, as being no where forbidden; yet if they are unlawful
in respect of some Circumstances, as if they should be so many and so extremely
inconvenient, as to hinder Men in their chief design of Worshipping God in
their Assemblies, and Men have no other way of getting themselves relieved. But
this, some Improprieties of Speech, or insignificant Ceremonies, if not too
many and frequent, can never hinder. Yea, a few of them need not take off the
least degree of Devotion in Men of Charity or Understanding.

Moreover if such excuses as these, viz. having better words, more significant
Ceremonies, or none at all, were of any value, they never would be wanting, nor
would there be a possibility of keeping Order, Unity, or Peace in any Church
whatsoever. Our blessed Savior, beside his Precepts of Love and Charity, has
provided no means to prevent such Cavels as these are, neither is it possible.
Men's Fancies never did, never can agree in all these Particulars; nor can any
one perhaps at all times agree with himself. And therefore I shall not here
spend any more time upon them.

From what has been said, it appears, that there are ways, and those more
perhaps than I have yet enumerated or can reckon up, whereby Men may become
guilty of Schism in all Estates and Conditions. Whence it is not without cause
that the Fathers, when they are speaking about Schism, do represent it so
(...). S Ignatii Epist. ad Philadelph. c. 7. It is called (...). Clement. Ep.
ad Corinth 1. cap. 47. Episcopatum autem tenere non posset etiamsi Episcopus
prius factus, a Coepiscoporum suorum corpore and ab Ecclesiae unitate
descisceret. Cypr. Ep. 55. Qui se ab Ecclesiae vinculo atque a Sacerdotum
Collegio separat Episcopi nec potestatem potest habere, nec honorem, Id. ibid.

An esse sibi cum Christo videtur qui adversus Sacerdotes Christi facit? qui se
a Cleri e^^s and plebis Societate discernit. Id. De unitat. Ecclesiae Ed. Oxon.
p. 116. -- Plebs obsequens praeceptis Dominicis, and Deum metuens, a peccatore
praeposito separare se debet, nec se ad Sacrilegi Sacerdotis sacrificia
miscere, etc. Id. Ep. 67. Ed. Oxon.


variously, sometimes as a Separation from the Bishop, sometimes from the
Priests, sometimes from the Deacons, and sometimes from the common People; as
does S. Cyprian himself. Whence we may see how little weight there is in that
Saving commonly quoted out of his 66. Epist. Scire debes Episcopum in Ecclesia
esse and Ecclesiam in Episcopo, and si qui cum Episcopo non sint in Ecclesia
non esse; as to the uses which have been lately made of it.

And in all the forementioned Cases, the Schism proceeds from one or more
Members, not having a due care and concern for the rest, or from not having an
equal Care according to their respective States and Conditions. And therefore
the Apostle in the place before quoted, 1 Cor. 12.25. does intimate that there
would be no Schism in the Body, if all the Members did take the same care one
for another.

Lastly, We may observe, that every particular Schism is an injury to and a
Schism in respect of the whole Church; as every division of any one Member of
the Body is by consequence against the whole Body; which is not sound,
complete, and entire, except it be so in every particular Member of it, or if
but one of the Members is broken. Therefore, as our Savior says concerning the
doing or denying any charitable Act, Mat. 25.40, 45
Insomuch as you did, or did it not to one of the least of these, you did or
did it not unto me: So we may say, where a Schism is made in any particular
Church; In as much as you have made a Division in this particular Church, you
have separated your selves from Christ the Head, and made a Rent in the whole
Body.

But perhaps Men would not be so apt of themselves, or so easily prevailed upon
by others to Separate themselves from their Brethren, did they duly consider,
how great a Crime, of how ill and dangerous consequence to the Church in
general, to themselves and others, this of Schism is, which therefore I shall
take some Consideration of; and it is the second thing I proposed to speak to:
Wherein I do not design to make Reflections on any one Party more than another,
but only to consider the nature of this Sin indifferently to whomsoever it may
belong.

St. Paul, who, as I observed before, uses Heresy and Schism promiscuously, as
did also the Primitive Christians for some time after him, Gal. 5.20. 1 Cor.
3.3, 4
reckons it among the works of the Flesh. Whereby he signifies that it is not
commonly on a bare Mistake, or Misapprehension of Things, nor out of Zeal for
Religion; but upon some worldly Designs and Interests, that Men do become
guilty of it. But whatever the Design may be, a very dangerous and pernicious
thing it is.

Unity is the Strength of all Societies, Division the Weakness and Infirmity of
them. There is no readier way to destroy a Church then to divide it. Every
Kingdom divided against it self is brought to Desolation, and a House divided
against a House falls. Wherefore Schism lays the Axe to the root of that
Church wherein it is bred, and tends to the utter Ruin and Subversion, first of
it; next, if it be in a Protestant Church, of the Protestant Religion, which it
hereby lays open to powerful Adversaries; and last of all of Christianity it
self. Every particular Schism in some sort reaches the Universal Church, as I
have already shown. So it is against the Gospel and against Christ; Vide.
Gregor. Tholos. Syntag. jur. Universi. lib. 33. cap. 11. 1.
and is therefore Crimen laesae Majestatis Divinae, as some do style it.

It is against the design of our Savior's coming into the World; who came to
make Peace, not only between God and Man, but also amongst Men. He gave the
strictest Commands about it; He contrived the firmest Bands to maintain it.
Schism violates these Precepts, frustrates this Design, breaks these Bands,
makes our Savior's Passion vain, and the Cross of Christ to be of none effect.
It makes the Evangelical Writings vain; for the Gospel was written to that
intent which the Schismatic disappointeth. St. John says, 1 John 1.3.
That which we have heard and seen declare we unto you that ye, may have
fellowship with us, and truly our Fellowship is with the Father and with his
Son Jesus Christ. A good Shepherd gathers the Sheep together; the Schismatic
makes it his business to scatter them.

It gives Scandal to those that are without. The Divisions of Christians in
general do give offense unto the Jews and Pagans and make the name of God
Blasphemed among the Gentiles, and the Divisions among Protestants to make our
Reformation Blasphemed amongst the Papists. It causes Atheism and Infidelity,
when each part says there is no Salvation to be had in the contrary Part;
dissolute Persons persuade themselves that there is none in either. And while
some Men are crying, Lo here is Christ, and others, Lo he is there, such as
might otherwise have a Mind to enter into the Church know not whither to come.

It makes all Virtues in general not to thrive so well, in that Church where
there are Divisions; it disturbeth that Joy and Peace which are the Fruits of
the Holy Spirit of God; it takes off much from that comfort in Christ, which
should be the lot of every Pious and devout Christian. Whence there is not only
great Vehemence of Passion, but admirable soundness of Reason in that earnest
Exhortation of the Apostle to Unity, Phil. 2.1, 2.
If there be any Consolation in Christ, if any comfort of Love, if any
fellowship of the Spirit, if any Bowels and Mercies; fulfill ye my Joy, that ye
be like minded, having the same Love, being of one Accord, of one Mind. Whence
St. Augustine and S. Cyprian in diverse places.
some have called it Sacrilege, not only because it is a Violation of Divine
Ordinances and Usurpation of Sacred Offices, but because it seems to be far
greater robbery to deprive the Church of the benefit of all these things, then
to take the Silver or Gold out of the Temple.

It shows want of Charity or Love, as of God so also of our Brethren, on such
easy terms to divide our selves from them; too hardly to Judge them; too highly
to Esteem our selves; too little to bear with them; to be too ready to grieve
them; not to have compassion on their Necessities and Wants in Spiritual
matters; not to be willing to give them our assistance as Members of the same
Body should do to one another. Wherefore the Apostle after having Described the
Nature of Schism in the First Epistle to the Corinthians, Chap. 12. spends one
whole Chapter more in praise of Charity; and setting forth its Adjuncts and
Properties, does touch upon those things which seem in the Schismatic to be
more especially wanting. 1 Cor. 13, v. 4, 5, 6, 7.
Charity suffers long and is kind; Charity envieth not; Charity vaunteth not
it self, is not puffed up, does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her
own, is not easily provoked, thinks no Evil, rejoices not in Iniquity, but
rejoices in the Truth; bears all things, believes all things, hops all
things, endures all things.

But the Schismatic is not only Uncharitable, and thereby injurious to his
Neighbor, but brings many and great Inconveniences upon himself, by cutting
himself off from the Church of God, whence he is Condemned of himself, as the
Apostle speaks, Jude. v. 19.
and Separating themselves they have not the Spirit, says St. Jude. They have
not the kind Influences of the Holy Spirit, whereby the Church is governed.
Whence not only all their Gifts, but all their good works are utterly spoiled
and come to nothing. As a Part cannot retain its Sense and Life when it is cut
off from the Body, as the Branch cannot bear Fruit except it abide in the Vine;
John. 15.4.
as a Rivulet is soon dried up when separated from the Fountain; as a Ray
cannot subsist when taken away from the Sun: St. Cyprian. de unitate Ecclesiae.
So neither can a Schismatic Reap any profit from his gifts or good works,
when Separated from the rest of the Church of Christ.

The Apostle speaks as to both of them in the beginning of the forementioned
Chapter, concerning Gifts; Though I speak with the Tongues of Men and Angels,
though I have the gift of Prophesy and understand all Mysteries and all
Knowledge, and though I have Faith so that I could remove Mountains, and have
not Charity, I am nothing. Again, concerning good Works; Though I bestow all my
Goods to feed the Poor, and though I give my Body to be Burned, and have not
Charity, it profits me nothing.

Some are not sensible that it is any great harm to go amongst them, to pray
with them, or to hear the Gospel Preached. But to join with them, in those
otherwise Holy Offices, is the way to become partakers of their Sins. Hos. 9.4.
Their Sacrifices shall be unto them as the Bread of Mourning, all that eat
thereof shall be Polluted. Where two or three indeed are gathered together in
Christ's Name, Mat. 18.20.
there is He in the midst of them; but not when they are gathered against his
Name, and against the other Members of the Church. Such Men's Prayers are not
only Ineffectual, but Excrable. The Communion of Christ is but one. Among his
Disciples there is Peace. We must not Communicate with those who break that
Peace, least we become partakers of their evil Deeds, and make the Breach wider
by Encouraging of them. They are without the Church; and we must not be with
them. For we cannot be within and without at the same time. Mat. 12.30.
He that is not with me is against me, and he that Gathers not with me
Scatters, says our Savior. Their Prayers and Preaching, and other parts of
Divine Worship being performed in Opposition to the other Members of the
Church, are turned into Sin; and they come together, 1 Cor. 11.17.
as did the Corinthians in a Division of theirs, not for the better but for the
worse.

Thus we see how Schism is a work of the Flesh against Christ's Kingdom,
against the Gospel, against the Protestant Religion, against Virtue in general,
against all the Apostolical Rules of Charity, very pernicious to the Church,
very hurtful to the Schismatic himself, and of dangerous Consequence to all
that go after him.

All things therefore are to be endured before we make a Schism, even
Immoralities themselves, where we are not made to concur with them, when it
does not belong to our Office to Reform them, when it does not lie in our Power
to Reform them without breaking in upon other Men's Rights, and doing Immoral
Actions our selves. And then certainly we are much more obliged to lay aside
private Advantages, not to seek our own, to let fall particular Quarrels for
the sake of the Church of Christ. And if our Governors should deal hardly by
us, and require difficult things of us in Divine Worship, not frustrating the
main end of the Worship it self; if some Words are improper, if some Ceremonies
are uncouth, yet not hindering us from serving God with a pure Heart, we ought
to bear with them. Charity bears all things. It is a large Expression, taking
in all things that are tolerable. Surely these indifferent things. And in a
latter Schism here among us, Men seem to be hard put to it to find a Cause of
Separation, when Protestants are forced to take up old Confuted Popery to
ground it upon. If they had never so just a State-quarrel on the account of a
Popish Prince, one would think they should scarcely part with the Principles of
their own Religion for the sake of him. To conclude then with the Apostles
Words, Phil. 3.16.
Let us walk by the same Rule, let us mind the same thing; Romans 14.19.
Let us follow after the things which make for Peace, and thi^ wherewith one
may Edify another; Ephesians. 4.2, 3.
With all Lowliness and Meekness, with long Suffering, forbearing one another
in Love; Endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace;
Romans 16.17.
And let us Mark them which cause Divisions and Offenses contrary to the
Doctrine which We have Learned, and avoid them.

FINIS.

