Tithes no Maintenance FOR Gospel Ministers: OR, A seasonable Discourse
concerning Tithes.

Wherein it is fully proved, That those who urge the payment thereof for their
maintenance, are no true Gospel Ministers, but Antichristian, and do concur
with Prietsts of the Leviticall Order and Institution.

Occasioned by a PROPOSITION, with nine Reasons laid down for the proof
thereof, which was lately printed and published, holding forth the dreadful
danger of Sacrilege and sin even in the highest nature in the withholding of
Tithes.

Which said PROPOSITION, with the Reasons therein contained at large are
hereunto annexed, the gross absurdities thereof briefly discussed and
confuted, and the Truth vindicated and cleared from those mists and foggs of
Judaism and Antichristian darkness which the Proposer bath darkened it withal.

By T. H. and T. R.

1 John 4.1. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether
they are of God, because many false Prophets are gone out into the world.

Rev. 2.9. -- I know the blasphemy of them which say they are Jews and are not,
but are the synagogue of Satan.

Jer. 6.13. For from the least of them even to the greatest of them, every one
is given to covetousness, and from the Prophet even unto the Priest every one
deals falsely.

LONDON, Printed by R. A. for William Larnar at the Black-Moore near
Fleetbridge, and Thomas Heath in Martins is Grand. 1652.

To all who love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity.
IF the mystery of iniquity did Login to work in the Apostles time? 2 These. 2.7
2. Cor. 11.13, 14, 15.
if there were false Apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into
the Apostles of Christ? If there were the Ministers of Satan? who were
transformed as the Ministers of righteousness, whose end should be according
to their works? And if we are exhorted to try the Spirits whether they are of
God, 1 John 4.1.
(upon this account) because many false Prophets are gone out into the world.
Then no marvel is it, that the factors and agents for Antichrist are so
increased, and the Mystery of Iniquity grown to such maturity and ripeness;
nay (may we not rather say) to such boldness and impudency, that they are not
ashamed to open their pack of Romish Trumpery (we mean) their unwritten
Traditions and humane Constitutions in the sight and view of the whole world,
and these their musty and putrified wares, for sound and substantial
commodities, would they force upon tender consciences, whom God has enlightened
to discover the slights and cunning craftiness of these grand Impostors, Ephesians.
4.14.
whereby they lie in wait to deceive. One piece of which their Merchantable
stuff most cunningly and artificially woven together, with Scriptures absurdly
applied, and others as lamentably perverted, is here presented unto your view,
whose eyes the Lord has anointed with his eye salve to discern the wiles and
workings of Satan in these men. Rev. 3.18.
And although evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, 2 Timothy 3.13.
deceiving, and being deceived, yet the righteous shall hold on his way, and he
that has clean hands shall be stronger and stronger: Job. 17.9
And although many deceivers are entered into the world, 2 John 7.
who confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, (and such are all
they, who would bring us back again unto Moses, and press the Observation of
Leviticall Rites and Ceremonies upon the conscience, which are altogether
abolished and done away by the coming of Jesus Christ in the flesh) And
although Antichrist by his Sorceries has deceived the Nations, Rev. 8.22. and
19.20. Esa. 44.20
and a deceived heart has turned many aside, that they cannot deliver their
soul, nor say, Is (...)ot a lie in my right hand? yet it is not possi^e, Mat.
24.^4.
that the Elect shall be deceived by them. Beloved you are those who are taught
of God, Esa. 54.13.1 John 2.21. those to whom he has revealed his secrets,
Psalm. 25.14. who have the gift of trying and discerning the Spirits, 1 John
4.1. and therefore we could not but recommend unto you this ensuing Treatise,
wherein we hope we have discovered the gross absurdity of that Proposition,
and have vindicated the truth from that error and darkness which the Proposer
has clouded it withal; and truly our consciences do bear us witness, that
it was not out of any prejudice to the person of the Proposer, but the love
which we bear unto Truth, that did stir up our spirits to this undertaking;
and the rather, so that the Author of the said paper, who being a chief man of
the Presbyterian Sect, and pretends himself a Minister of the Gospel, has
said such high accusations against the most conscientious people, charging them
with sin in the highest aggravations thereof, with temporal and spiritual
judgments accompanying it, threatening also no less then eternal death
against them in a case where no Law is transgressed. And to enforce his
accusation and charge of sin and judgment, how notoriously has he wrested and
perverted the Scriptures? dishonoring the Lord, and falsifying his truth, which
was so great a trouble unto our spirits, that we could not be silent. Nor would
we be thought to be disobedient to that authority which God has set over us,
and under which we live, and through his blessing do enjoy much freedom,
protection, and preservation.

We profess our subj^ction to Magistracy in all lawful things that are
commanded by them, only in the matters of God, and of his Christ our Lord and
Savior, and wherein the glory of God is so highly concerned, it is our desire
to keep our consciences pure and undefiled, remembering always, that the Laws
of God must have the pre-eminence, and all humane Laws and Ordinances must and
ought to be subordinate thereunto. And in reference unto his House, which is
spiritual, we can acknowledge no other King or Lawgiver save Christ alone: We
look not to receive honor from men, Joh. 5 44.
but we seek the honor that comes from God only. And if the Lord will
vouchsafe to honor his Truth by such poor and unworthy Instruments as we are,
we shall account it honor enough.

Thomas Heath. Thomas Rosewell.


The dreadful danger of Sacrilege, held forth in this one Proposition:
Namely, The withholding of Tithes from a Minister that labors in the Word and
Doctrine, or denying those accustomed rates upon houses, which have been paid
to the Ministers successively, time out of mind, is a great and grievous sin,
highly displeasing to Almighty God, as appears by these Reasons.
1. Reas. BEcause it is a direct breach of the eighth Commandment, which
says, That thou shall not steal; and directly contrary to the Rule of the
Apostle, Romans 13.7. Render therefore to all their dues, Custom to whom
Custom, etc.

Yea Tithes are due to the Minister by the Law of the Land, and the Minister
has as legal a right to the rates set upon houses, as the Landlord has to
his rent; therefore to deprive the Minister of them is a breach, not only of
Gods Law, but also of man's Law, and who so breaks this hedge; a Serpent shall
bite him, Eccles. 10.8.

1. Object. But tithes are antichristian, and therefore not to be paid any
longer.

Answ. This is a false opinion, as appears by this Argument; That which our
Savior enjoined is not Antichristian, but our Savior enjoined tithes, Luke
11.42. Ye tithe, mint, and rue, and all manner of herbs, and pass over
Judgment and the Love of God: these ought ye to have done; that is, ye ought
to pay tithes, therefore they are not antichristian.

2. Object. But we do not come to hear him, why then should we pay him, since
we have no benefit by his Ministry?

Answ. If thou live in a Parish where a godly Minister is seated, thou art
bound to hear him, for he works the work of the Lord, as well as these of
greater parts. See 1 Cor. 16.10. If thou do not hear him, nor pay him, thou
addest sin to sin; for first it is a sin to withdraw thy presence, and then it
is another, yea a greater sin, to withdraw his maintenance.

3. Object. But the Minister will not give us our due in the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, therefore we may justly deny him his due?

Answ. First, The Sacrament is not due to all, but only to those that come in
a regular way, according to the order of the Gospel, for all things must be
done decently, and in order, 1 Cor. 13.40. Now the order of the Gospel is this,
that the power of examining those that are admitted to the Lords Supper,
belongs not to the Minister alone, nor to the Minister with the whole
Congregation, but to the Minister and ruling Elders, as is undeniably proved by
that singular Treatise set forth by the Provincial Assembly, called the
Vindication of the Presbyterian Government, page 70, 71. Secondly, the
Sacrament is not due to those that live in any scandalous sin; but theft, or
robbing of God is a scandalous sin.

2. Reas. It is a sin of a high nature, because it affronts God himself, Mal.
3.8. Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me. But ye say, wherein have we
robbed thee? in Tithes and Offerings. To rob a man by the highway does deserve
death, to rob a King of his Plate and Jewels deserves a tormenting death, but
to rob the King of Glory, deserves the fire of hell.

3. Reas. It is a complicated sin, wherein fraud or cheating is added to theft:
For the Landlord lets his house to the Tenant at a lower rate, upon this
account; namely, that he shall pay the duties to the Minister: As for example,
if the house be worth 21. l. per annum, the Landlord lets it for 20. l per
annum, on purpose that the Tenant may (perhaps) pay twenty shillings a year to
the Minister. The Tenant notwithstanding pays nothing, but keeps it back from
the Minister by fraud, and puts the Landlords money in his pocket. Here is
fraud with a Witness.

4. Reas. It is a sin, whereby godly Ministers are discouraged in their work,
their hands weakened, and their spirits broken, so that they cannot go on in
their Ministry with joy, but with grief; this is directly contrary to the
practice of that godly King Hezekiah, (whose example is written for our
learning, Romans 15.4.) for it is testified of him, 2 Chronicles. 31.4. that he
commanded the people that dwelt in Jerusalem, to give the portion of the
Priests and Levites, that they might be encouraged in the Law of the Lord.

5. Reas. It is a sin wherein and whereby the defrauder robs his own soul of
that spiritual benefit and advantage which he might get by such a man's
Ministry; for it is just with God to say to such a man, thou withdrawest
maintenance from my servant, and I will withdraw my blessing from my own
Ordinance, so that the word preached (by whomsoever it be dispensed) shall do
thee no good at all, but rather it shall be a savor of death, to thy own
condemnation. Thy soul shall never thrive or prosper by any Sermon that thou
hear.

6. Reas. It is a sin that provokes God to curse a man in his outward estate
and trading, as appears by that forenamed place, Mal. 3.9. Ye are cursed with a
curse, for ye have robbed me: It is usual with God to pay sinners with their
own coin; they rob God in tithes, and God robs them of their trade and
livelihood; they grudge the Ministers a maintenance, and God grudgeth them even
bread for their Families, so that they usually turn bankerupts, or are so much
in debt, that they are ashamed to show their faces.

7. Reas. It is a sin against the Gospel, because it hinders the progress and
success of it, for such men do as much as in them lies to extinguish the light,
by taking away the oil that feeds it. It is observed in that excellent bo^k
Vindic. Presb Gov page 81. that Julian the Apostate, that cursed enemy of
Christ and his Gospel, did by taking away tithes do more mischief to the
Church of God, than all the persecuting Emperors that were before him; for the
Persecutors took away only the Ministers, (and their blond was the seed of the
Church) but taking away tithes, took away the Ministry it self.

8. Reas. It is a sin will not be pardoned upon repentance, unless there be a
restitution as well as repentance, according to that of Angustine, Non
remittitur peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatum, Thy sin shall not be pardoned,
unless that which thou with-holdest unjustly be restored.

9. Reas. It is a sin that will cry for vengeance, when the sinner on his
deathbed is crying for mercy, as appears by that remarkable Scripture, Jam.
5.2, 4. Your gold and silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a
witness against, and shall eat your flesh as it were with fire; Ye have heaped
treasure (that is of wrath) together for the last days. Behold the hire of the
Laborers which have reaped down your fields which is of you kept back by fraud
cries; and the cries of them which have reaped are entered into the ears of
the Lord of Sabbath. Now if the hire of the Laborers in men's Vineyard, kept
back by fraud cries, how dreadful will the cry be of the hire of Gods
Laborers in Gods Vineyard, kept back by robbers and defrauders? I tremble to
think of it.

Consider what has been presented unto you in this paper, and the Lord give ye
understanding in all things.

Courteous Reader,
THis ensuing discourse was intended for public view before this time, but
received some interruption, which occasioned the delay thereof; yet we hope it
will be seasonable, and not prove Abortive, as one that it born out of due
time: And though some have gone before us, whose spirits have been stirred up
to the same undertaking, (for which we rejoice and bless God) yet we can truly
say, we have not lighted our Candle at their Lamp: And in this we are very much
comforted and encouraged, considering, that in the mouth of two or three
Witnesses, the Truth will receive the greater establishment.

TITHES No Maintenance for Gospel Ministers: OR, A seasonable Discourse
concerning TITHES, etc.
WE shall omit to insert any thing as touching the name of the Author of the
said Proposition, by reason that he is either afraid to own it, or ashamed to
publish it, remembering what our Savior says, John 3.20, 21. That every one
that does evil hates the light, neither comes to the light, lest his deeds
should be reproved: but he that does truth, comes to the light, that his deeds
may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God. But to the ^roposition it
self.

P. The witholding of tithes from a Minister that labors in the word and
doctrine, or denying those accustomed rates upon houses which have been paid to
Ministers successively time out of mind, is a great and grievous sin, highly
displeasing to almighty God, as the Author or Publisher of the said Paper would
make it appear by the Reasons laid down in the said Paper.

The Proposition holds forth sin displeasing to God, therefore we shall reply
somewhat as touching it, and the grounds laid down to plead the force of his
Proposition, which are two. First, Here he shows the weakness of his
argument, having no Scripture, but ancient custom, which was from a Popish
institution, which are not rules for Christians to observe.
his being a Minister that labors in the Word and Doctrine; and secondly,
accustomed rates set upon houses, which have been paid successively to such
Ministers time out of mind. Concerning the first, it would be very requisite,
that he would prove himself a true Minister set apart by God for that work, and
chosen by a true Church which has approved of his gifts; and then secondly,
for custom, we do affirm that they are not to be obeyed without they are
grounded upon a command from God, or example out of the Word of God. But grant
he were a true Gospel-Minister, yet ought he not to plead custom or antiquity,
to force men to pay Tithes, which were due only to the Priests that served at
the Altar, Numb. 18.24, 26. under the Ceremonial Leviticall Law: And as all
types and ceremonies pointed to their anti-types, so the antitype being
produced, the type cease: But Tithes were a ceremony of the Leviticall Law,
and Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that
believes; and we hope, that none of them that call themselves
Gospel Ministers, will be called Priests of the Leviticall Law, and press
Tithes for their maintenance, or rather as their wages, which was the wages of
the Priests, Number. 18.31. Heb. 7.12. which offered up sacrifices and
burnt-offerings; but Christ has put an end to all Priesthood and sacrifice
under the Law, and the Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a
change also of the Law, except you will show us a command or precept under the
Gospel.

But you will say, shall not your person be maintained? We answer, if one that
truly labors in the Word and Doctrine, would lay down a precept for his
maintenance, let him show what the Lord has ordained; that they which preach
the Gospel should live of the Gospel; 1 Cor. 9.14.
but Tithes are not Gospel-precepts.

Again, whereas you say, it is a sin of that nature, as to term it sacrilege,
or robbing of God, we hope, you will be more calm in the censure of men, who
through tenderness of conscience (desiring to do nothing but what they may have
a word for their rule) refuse the payment of Tithes: But we think it may be
safer said, that you rob God of his glory, in setting your self in the seat of
God; for by demanding of Tithes, you take the Priesthood upon your self, Heb.
10. from 1. to 15. verse.
which is now ceased. Tithes typified the great High Priest of our souls
Christ Jesus, who has by one offering put an end to all Sacrifices and
Priesthood; and has also paid the debt that was due for sin; how then can we
rob God, except it be of his glory? For matter of debt, he is fully satisfied;
but if it had been before the time of our delivery by Christ, and we had been
Jews, and you had been of the Tribe of Levi, and ordained to serve at the
Altar, then, under that dispensation, if we had not paid you Tithes, you must
have said, that we had robbed God: But the Lord be praised, those days of
bondage are ended: Oh that the Lord would open your hearts, and convince your
consciences of this your blind zeal! But we shall leave this your rash censure,
and reply further, in that you plead accustomed rates set upon houses which
have been paid time out of mind.

We demand first, whether you are ignorant of the time when it began, that
Tithes were first imposed upon the Tenants by the Landlord? We fear your great
predecessor, the Man of sin, and the Sea of Rome, were the first institutors of
that superstitions Idol, as imposition of Tithes, who teach for doctrines the
traditions of men, and so make the commandment of God of none effect by their
traditions, Mat. 15.6, 7.

Secondly, What reason have you to plead ancient custom, when as you live
under the Gospel, and say you are laborers in the word and doctrine; of what?
of the Law? then indeed you may urge custom from antiquity; but if of the
Gospel, why not a Gospel-precept? But we blame you not to seek to blind the eyes
of the ignorant by your ancient customs. What greater arguments have the
Jesuits, to maintain their corrupt principles, then Antiquity? as if men under
the Gospel seek for rules elsewhere then the Word of God: But we fear that the
love of money has blinded your eyes, that you cannot see, or discover the true
meaning of that which the Apostle means, that they which preach the Gospel
should live of the Gospel; 1 Cor. 9.14. though the Apostle used it not, but
rather labored with his hands: But why should we speak of laboring with the
hands, so long as you plead the law etcustoms of men? for then you have
strength enough on your side: but god is to be obeyed before men. But to leave
this; While God shall put it into the hearts of our Rulers, to search whether
or no this ancient Law and Custom has its foundation from the Gospel, which
is and ought, and (we hope, thorough Gods mercy, ever shall be our rule. But
now to come to the Reasons you allege to maintain your Proposition.

P. First you say, It is a breach of the eighth Commandment, which says, Thou
shall not steal: and directly contrary to the rule of the Apostle, Romans 13.7.
Render therefore to all their dues, tribute to whom tribute is due, etc.

R. You think you have something now on your side, but pray consider, whether or
no the Apostle speaks there concerning Tithes; his junction is for paying of
tribute, which might lawfully be required by a civil power or Authority, and
in such things there is no tie on the conscience, or snare, by which it is
intrapped; but, as our Savior commanded, that what was Caesar's one should be
paid or given unto Caesar, Mat. 22.21
which is all one to those accustomed assesments or rates now set on men, by
those that God has set in authority: And look in the verses foregoing your
text, they are such Powers as are ordained by God, and are Ministers for God to
minister justice: But what is this argument or reason of any force to prove the
lawfulness of paying Tithes to Ministers under the Gospel? But you positively
affirm, That the Minister has, by the Law of God, as legal a right to the
rates set upon houses, as the Landlord has to his rend; which we deny
absolutely; for according to your former argument, time out of mind, the
Landlords had Law for their rent, or a right to their rent by Law, before ever
Law was made for paying of Tithes to Ministers, except you will prove the
antiquity of your Law, from God's injunction of the children of Israel to pay
tithes of all they possessed: And again, the Landlord has more right to his
rent then you have to tithes, for many Landlords have right to their lands and
houses by inheritance, but you have but a bare right from a humane institution,
and that by a Law not as yet abolished by the State now in being.

But if we should grant, as we cannot, except you show better reason then your
bare positive affirmation, that it is as lawful for the one, as for the other:
Yet we wonder, you have no proof of Scripture for your argument, knowing, or
rather having ought to have known, that it is the only rule, whereby the
people of God ought to walk: Therefore we conclude, that it is no breach of the
eighth commandment, insomuch as no command of God is broken; and to charge the
non-payment of tithes to be theft, we know not how you can make it good, except
you prove a right, or that you have a right by the Law of God, to the money, or
ware, or what else we do enjoy.

But you add further, that it is a breach of the Law of God, and that you would
prove in the answer to the first objection, which is that to pay tithes is
antichristian, therefore not to be paid any longer, which you call a false
opinion, and would make it appear by this argument ot yours, viz. That which
our Savior enjoined is not antichristian, but our Savior enjoined tithes,
Luke 11.42. Ye tithe Mini, Rue, and all manner of herbs, and pass over
judgment and the love of God; these ought ye to have done; that is, say you, ye
ought to pay tithes, therefore they are not antichristian.

We desire that you will again consider this Scripture, both the person
speaking, and the persons spoken unto; here is Christ by way of reprehension
reprowing the Pharisees for their formality, and pretending to make conscience
of the smallest matters, when the chiefest and weightiest things of the Law
were neglected by them; Woe to you Pharisees, for ye tithe mint, etc. And we
know that the Pharisees were Jews and unbelievers, therefore as yet not freed
from the Ceremonial Law. Therefore it was a Law to them, and requisite for
them to fulfill, but we hope you will not affirm, that this was Christ's
Injunction to the Disciples, or to those that believe that Christ is come in
the flesh; for the Apostle said, that whosoever was circumcised; was bound to
keep the Law; and even so denies that Christ is come in the flesh.

Therefore if Tithes be also a ceremonial right or precept, it holds forth (as
was said before) that the thing signified being come, the sign is ended. For
Circumcision and Tithes washing, and purifyings are held out by the Holy Ghost
in the 9. of the Heb. 10. v. to continue but to the time of reformation;
therefore we deny positively that Tithes were by Christ enjoined to believers;
and then if you have no stronger argument to prove that Tithe is the Injunction
of Christ, either by precept or example from him, or from the Apostles for
believers to observe, we cannot be evinced by that which you infer from that
in the 11. of Luke 42. v.

Then of necessity the objection stands firm, and not yet overthrown, or proved
a false opinion, to wit, that to pay Tithes to Ministers of the Gospel is
Antichristian; for what is not for, or with Christ, is against Christ; but to
pay Tithes, is not for, or with Christ: Ergo Antichristian.

P. Again, whereas you proceed in your answer to the second objection; but we
do not come to hear him, why then should we pay him, since we have no benefit
by his Ministry? Your answer is, If thou live in a Parish where a godly
Minister is seated, thou art bound to hear him, for he works the work of the
Lord, as well as those of greater parts, 1 Cor. 16.10. If thou do not hear
him, nor pay him, thou addest sin to sin; first it is a sin to withdraw thy
presence, and then it is another, yea a greater, to withdraw his maintenance.

Now you go about; first, to insinuate not only the lawfulness of your own
calling to be a Minister of the Gospel truly called, etc. by gifts and parts
which God has endued men withal.

But secondly, you lay also an Injunction upon all in the Parish wherein you
are seated, to come and hear you, by the charge you lay of committing two sins,
the withdrawing the presence, and the withdrawing your maintenance.

But for the first argument, we conceive, that as you have not brought any
proof of Scripture to prove your calling to be a true Minister of the Gospel;
therefore we shall not need to raise any argument to disprove you, but shall
remain desirous of some satisfaction in that particular; for though gifts and
parts are essential to a Minister of the Gospel, yet that is but one part of
his calling; it is requisite that he be chosen and ordained by a true Church;
for that Scripture which you have brought in the Corinths concerning Timothy
does in no wise prove you to be so; then, if no true Minister, the force of
that argument must fall to the ground.

Secondly, We must then be at a loss in our answer to the inference which you
draw, that living in a Parish, we ought to come and hear; but the Spouse of
Jesus Christ, in the first of the Canticles, does inquire for Christ's abode
and residence, which is, to the flocks of his companions; and except you can
prove that a Parish is a true church, your argument is of no force to draw any
to the place of the assembling, for where there is no Law, there is no sin; but
you have charged sin, where you can show no Institution; pray, why do not you
preach this to be a sin, to those which live in Parishes far distant from you,
and yet come to hear you, where (for ought you can judge) are godly Ministers,
and yet they leave their own. Parish, and go to hear some in one Parish, and
some in another? Again, how can that be charged as sin, for not coming to hear
in the Parish wherein they live? when, as in the first place, their tender
consciences cannot eat or drink with those that are not as yet separated, and
come out of the world, and joined in a church fellowship, and therefore where
there is no Union there can be no Communion. Secondly, though they may live in
your Parish, yet the assembly whereof they are members, meet two or three
Parishes off, and in the rule of equity how can you judge these sinners, that
go out of your Parish to hear for their further edification and growth in the
knowiedge of Christ, in obediedce to the rule of the Apostle, not forsaking the
assembling themselves together, as the manner of some is; but with whom? Heb.
10.25.
with the Church where Christ has promised his presence, as that, where two or
three are gathered together in his Name, he will be in the midst of them; but
mind, we pray you, it must be in his Name, that is, according to his example in
the order of the Gospel, not with Babylon, which signifies [a confusion of
mixture] from whence the people of God are to come out. 2 Cor. 6.17.
Again, If Christ's presence be with his people so met together, then where
should they go but there? Rev. 18.4.
and out of such a people are Pastors and. Teachers to be chosen, who have the
teachings of the Spirit of God, accompanied with the knowledge of the word of
God, which is able to make the man of God perfect, thoroughly furnished unto
all good works, 2 Timothy 3.17. These are those Shepherds that come in at the
right door, spoken of in the tenth of John, whose voice, those which are sheep,
will hear, but those which are thieves, and robbers, or strangers, which come in
by other ways, these they will not hear. But you say, where a godly Minister
is seated, there we ought to hear: But pray tell us, whether God and Beliall
can live to gether, how came you by that Ministerial Office? had it not its
rise from the Bishops and Prelates, and they their rise from the Pope? and
though you have put on a fair gloss, and assumed to your selves of late the
name of Presbyters, have you yet openly denied the other, so as to have
disclaimed that Ordination by which you stand? is not the same language of the
Beast sounded forth from your mouths, as proceeded from the mouth of the first
Beast? did you not show your selves bitter against those that could not submit
to what you had agreed upon in the Classical Assembly? and when you had the
power in your hands, did you not vex, molest, and imprison the Saints of God?
and how far might your blind zeal have transported you, had you not been
stricken down by a mighty hand? but blessed be God, the great Reformer, whose
direction is far better, and gives more light into his will, then all the
Presbyterian Directory could do; therefore send us not, we beseech you, to the
Directory, but to the word of God; but however we are by you judged or censured
for not coming to hear you, yet you will not judge them that come a mile or two
to hear you, sooth them up in their ignorance.

Again, you make the forbearance of paying you Tithes. to be a greater sin,
then the not hearing of the Word of God.

We even blush to hear you; but it is true, covetousness will stretch the
judgment many times to great and large sins, as well of Error, as of Practice;
had you not by your paper discovered so much gross, and almost unparalled
and absurd hypocrisy, which makes us even tremble to read it, we should not
have been so pressed in our Spirit to enter upon these replies; and we hope
the Lord in his time, (as he has) so he will more discover the hypocrisy of
your bitter hearts against those tender consciences that dare not yield
obedience to that Law, as yet not taken away by the power now in being; but we
hope the Lord will give them eyes to see the great oppression that lies upon
the Nation in that particular. But to proceed, pray consider what you have
affirmed to make the non-payment of Tithes a greater sin, then the not hearing
the Word of God. Consider (we pray) the effects of hearing the word of God, is
it not the means by which Faith is begotten in the heart, (as says the
Apostle in the to. of the Romans 14.) and whereby knowledge is increased,
especially, when those declare it that are the true dispensators of the Word of
God; and certainly if your love were more for the gaining of poor souls, then
it is unto money, which is the root of all evil, you would be of another mind,
and follow the example of the Acts 20.33, 34, 35.1 Cor. 9.18.
Apostle Who without question did mind the fulfilling of the Commission of our
Savior Mat. 10.8, 9. verse Freely ye have received, freely give
Paul, which would rather work with his hands then be chargeable to the
Churches; and if your tongues were touched with a coal from Gods Altar, as was
Isayas, the Prophets, you would then be of another mind; but the Lord open your
eyes, that if by any means you may see the hardness of your hearts. But we
have learned better of our Savior Jesus Christ, then to be of your judgment in
that particular. What maintenance is it that you mean? is it Tithes? that is
clear to be the wages of the Priest that served at the Altar; But that has
been handled already: and now we are not to look back to the Law for our rule,
nor to the Directory made by your Assembly; For if an Angel from heaven were
to declare us any other rule, then the doctrine which our Lord and Savior has
taught us, we are commanded to eschew it, etc. But tithes are not the
institution of Christ (as you falssy affirm) for believers to observe,
therefore on sin: but to hear, is the command of God; Matthew. 17.5. This is my
beloved Son, hear him. Therefore not to hear, is a great sin, and we hope any
judicious man which is of your own judgment, will say a greater, then the
non-payment of tithes.

But for the third Objection which you have answered, viz. But the Minister
will not give us our due in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; therefore we may
justly deny him his due.

This indeed may by some of your Parishioners be objected, who out of blind
zeal may suppose they have a right to that Gospel-Ordinance, when they have
not; and where it is not to be had: And whereas you bring that Scripture, 1
Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done decently and in order; you may know there
the Apostle speaks of prophesying one by one, and therein order and decency
ought to be observed, yet not restraining the liberty of any from speaking, but
being a member of a true Church, and gifted by the Spirit of God, he may speak
to edification. The Apostle did not monopolize the work of the Ministry; but
exhorted all the Church to covet to prophecy, 1 Cor. 14.31.39.
and says, Ye may all prophecy one by one; and Moses wished all the Lords
people were Prophets: But to come to your answer, Numb. 11 29.
seeing this Scripture makes not for your purpose in that particular, whereas
you hold forth to the eye of the world, that you would do nothing but what may
be according to the order of the Gospel. We should have liked your argument
well, if you would have declared an order from the Gospel for tithes: but if
you cannot prove from the Gospel your practice, you will (like those who are
ready to sink) catch hold of a straw to keep your head above water; you will
run to the laws of man, so from humane precepts infer Gospel-institutions: So
you bring the vindication of the Presbyterian Government as undeniable, to
prove your examining of persons: But what rule have you from the Gospel for
this your practice, that we must search men's works and leave the Word of God,
which is the only means of salvation. Our Savior sends the Jews to search the
Seriptures; not any learned Father, or Treatise made by Synods. The Bereans
would not receive the doctrines, or teachings of the Apostles, before they had
searched in the Word of God, to know whether those things were so or no, for
which they were called more noble then those of Thessalonica; but as it has
been held forth by the Sea of Rome; that Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion:
See if you can persuade men to believe the worship you hold forth, as to pay
Tithes, and come to be examined by a few ignorant men, (such who are chosen
many times for your Elders) who have more need of examination themselves
oftentimes, then many poor souls, which you debar from that, which you call the
Supper of the Lord.

Again, we wonder you are not ashamed to charge us with scandalous sins, as to
term us Thieves and Robbers, and that of God; but we hope your Kingdom is
falling, and now seeing your time is short, you begin to rage with open mouth,
yet all you can say will not add one day to your continuation, you have not in
the least proved your selves Gods Ministers, neither have you proved a command
from God to pay Tithes, how then can you call us robbers; you learn not these
rash censures of the Apostle, who was free in the dispensation of the Gospel,
and thirsted more after the gaining of poor souls to the knowledge of the
truth, then after their moneys or inheritance: it was not Tithes, or great
living that opened their mouths, but love to the promulgation of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, where is there that love in any of you, that will rather leave
whole Parishes destitute of means, we mean of that which you call laboring in
the Gospel) and seek for greater livings? Is this the right door by which a
true Pastor ought to come into the sheepfold? but you are ratther indeed right
thieves and robbers, which rob not only God of his glory, by attributing to
your selves the Priesthood, but you also rob the people; First, of their souls
benefit, which they might receive from a true Minister: Secondly, of their
moneys, to which you have no right by the Law of God. How many poor men are
there in this Nation, that groan under the great bondage of Tithes, who have
not so much as will maintain their own charge with their great pains and
industry, and you will rack the tithe of all their labor the whole year, and
also of the fruit thereof, think you not that the cry of this oppressing sin
does cry for vengeance; and certainly the avenger of blood will in his time
avenge their cause; and when that false Prophet spoken of Rev. 19.20. is taken,
he shall with all his false Teachers be judged; and think you, that then the
Tythe-hunters shall escape? what are their deserts we dare not judge, though
you are so rash as to judge poor tender consciences to hell fire. Further to
proceed to the third reason, and to examine what weight or show of truth is in
it, for the former, he that has but an eye of reason may discern, that
covetousness has so choked them of your judgment, that truth cannot be
received by them.

Your third reason, It is a complicated sin, wherein fraud or cheating is added
to theft, for the Landlord lets his house to the Tenant upon this account,
namely, that he shall pay the duties to the Minister: As for example, if the
house be worth 21. l. per annum, the Landlord lets is for 20. l. per annum, on
purpose perhaps that the Tenant may pay 20.5. to the Minister per annum, the
Tenant notwithstanding pays nothing, but keeps it back from the Minister by
frand, and puts the Landlonds money into his own yocket, here is frand with a
Witness.

Here take notice how you charge a duplicated sin, we confeffe if you were, as
you look upon your selves to be, a true Teacher of Instructor of a people, it
were your duty to inform them, and dehort them from any known sin, which they
live or continue in; but if the foregoing reasons, with the Proposition, have
no force to prove the non-payment of tithes to be a sin, then of necessity
this aggravating reason, or conelusion, must in like manner fall to the ground.

For our parts we are so far from conceiving it a sin of such a nature, that
we should sin in so saying: But to come home to your reason, tearming it
acheat, or defrauding, pray what is your intention, in that you say they
defraud? First you say, it is the Landlords money that he puts in his pocket,
though it was the Landlords intention he should pay the Minister his due:
First, this is that which ever before we were ignorant of, but if it be as you
affirm, the Landlord must also comply with the Parson, and so are both, as
Simeon and Levi, brethren in evil; and what do you else then defraud the poor
Tenant? by ensnaring of him to do that which is a direct sin against his light,
and do (as much as in you lie) cause him to deny Christ come in the flesh, in
imposing upon him a ceremonial Law. which were all one, as if you would teath
Circumcision and burnt Offering; but as the Apostle demanded in Gal. 3. who had
bewitched them from the love of the truth? So may we say, who has bewitched
you, O ye foolish Presbyterian Priests? that you are so fallen into such a
contrariety to truth, that is that which God hates, for men to halt between two
opinions: If the worship of Christ be to be observed? If he be Lord of all, let
him be Lord? but if the ceremonial Law be that which is now our rule, then let
us have Priests, and Levites, and burn Offerings, and Sacrifices: are these
the Reformers of Religion, that seek by their Directory to desude the Nation,
and briing them into a greater bondage then ever the Israelites were? That
after the profession of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, (which makes men
Christ's free men) to be inslaved again into bondage, and moreover to enact
Laws, Institutions and Ordinances of men, to enforce the consciences of men;
and if that will not do, to set Promoters on their backs, and to imprison men,
and seize on their goods, and take them by force; is not this theft and
defrauding (as we may say) with a Witness? But we hope those that are
entrusted with Englands Liborty, will shortly see and take notice of this great
bondage of the Commons, we mean the poor country people, who have so much
suffered in this behalf, and yet have had no redress, and also the insulting
cruelty of those bsoundy Priests or Presbyters, that (like Meroz) came not out
on to help the Lord against the mighty; but when they did see their Dagon was
like to fall, together with Reg all Dignity, laid all their heads together to
uphold that power, which the Lord had determined to overthrow; and whilst they
were see to be fighters against God, he took of their Chariot wheels that they
drove heavily, and were overthrown, as Pharaoh and his Host; yet the Lord
suffers them a little while, if by any means they would see the deceit and
hypocrisy of their hearts; and if this writing will not work its kindly
effects, then let them take heed of the woe that is coming forht against them,
and that this last snare prove not a greater overthrow to their Kingdom then
the first: This one thing we heartily desire, that God would please to let them
see this the error of their hearts, before the great judgment fall down upon
them: but we shall leave, and come to the fourth reason you give.

It is a sin whereby godly Ministers are discouraged in their work, their hands
weakened, and their Spirits broken, so that they cannot go on in their Ministry
with joy, but with grief. This is directly contrary to that godly King
Hezekiah, whose example is written for our learning, Romans 15.4. for it is
testified of him, 2 Cron. 31.4. that he commanded the people that dwelt in
Hiernsalew, to give t he portion of the Priests, and the Levites, they they
might be encouraged in the Law of the Lord.

Here the world may take notice of your zeal ion the publication of the
Gospel, whether it be not covetousness that steers you in all your
proceedings, you cannot forget the Gardlick and Onyons, which was the food of
the children of Israel, which made them grumble and murmr against God, and
against Moses, by which their hearts were enfeebled; and it is now the great
disease most of you are troubled withal, as the French saying is, ( fault d'
Argent, want of money.) Now your great benefices are taken away, by which many
of your Lords waxed wanton.

Now the great complaint is, want of maintenance, and therefore you cry out,
The work of the Lord goes slowly on: but we hope by this time you will be
ashamed to assume to your selves the names of Priests and Levites, but by the
inferences you draw, you make people believe no less, by reason that all the
refuge you have to fly unto for the maintenance of tithes is to the ceremonial
Law, as in that place noted by you, 2 Chronicles. 31.4. The exhortation of the King
Hezekiah to the people, to give the portion to the Priests and Levites to
encourage them: First, consider, as we have before declared that this portion
was their wages for their work, but it is otherwise with Gospel Ministers;
what wages had the Disciples, when they were sent from Christ to declare the
grace of God in Juses Christ? what was there any condition made for wages or
hire? John 10. The Mireling in no good Shepherd, as by sad experience has
been found in all that are called Christian Nations, and how came they in, but
over hedges and by-ways, and instead of laying down their live; for the sheep,
they have devoured them: But you will say, the labonrer is worthy of his hire?
pray what did the Disciples want, when they returned? could not the Gospel
yield its increase, as well in the gaining souls to God, as also in the
maintenance of them that work in the harvest? therefore you have no warrant to
use unlawful means to come by maintenance, as tithes, which is altogether
unlawful and Antichristian, and that which does extinguish the light of the
Gospel.

Again, this your argument must of necessity unvaile much of the falsenesse of
the hearts of those Ministers, that make the non-payment of tithes to be alone
wheel that moves their Zeal for the publication of Gospel, and the blood that
moves in the veins, by which they are made stong in the work of the Ministry;
for by withholding of tithes they are weakened in the work, and their spirirs
cannot act, and so are become dumb; these are sad soul-Physitians, that though
the poor souls are like to famish for want of spririuall food, they may famish
and perish if they have not wherewithal to give them the tithes they demand,
like some Physicians, which will have their money in hand, though in the mean
time the Patient is like to perish for want of their help: But you say they are
discouraged by want of tithes, which is their maintenance; surely well they
may, when as they shall seek their maintenauce in an unwarrantable way, having
no Gospel precept for in: Nor do judge that there is any cause of
discouragement, or rather that they should complain that they are discouraged
for not being maintained by an error, and such an error, as even amounts to
heresy it self, for what greater heresy can there be, then to deny Christ
come im the flesh? but the inforeing of Cireumcision, Tithes, with the services
and rights of the Leviticall Law, does extend so far as to the denying Christ's
coming in the flesh; therefore pray do not think to draw us ever a whit the
more to be of your opinion in that particular of tithes, or the lawfullnesse of
it, because the non-payment thereof is a discouragement to your preaching, or a
weakening to your spirits; we could wish that this discouragement would work
your hearts into an humble frame, or temper, then you would not cry so
outragiously against the Saints and servants of God, which are so kept by his
power, as not to submit to your ways and worship for not paying of tithes: It
is not Hezekiahs command, as you infer, to the people that were under the
Liviticall, as you infer, to the people that were under the Leviticall Law,
that can be any example for our practice of paying of tithes for you
rencouragement: And concerning the Justice of God, whereas you say, It is just
with God to withdraw his blessing, by reason we cannot pay tithes for your
maintenance;

We may justly say it is just with God to draw his blessing from your end
eavours, and that upon good ground, by reason that you go on in an illegal
way, contrary to precept or example to urge that as your due, which never was,
and to press it so hard on the consciences of any, so that you have intrapped
multitudes into your snares and gins: but this be sure, that instead of a
blessing your speak of, you may fear the contrary, least that the curse of God
will light upon you, and all your proceedings, that seek to d^hrone the Lord
Jesus Christ, and to set up your own power, and to nullify his Laws, and to
enact the Law of Moses, or rather the Law of men; but as the foundation of that
Law is sandy, having no more weight but ancient custom, as you falsely assume,
time our of mind, so the fall of it will be great, when your sins are ripened,
and the time is come of your downfall, and then your griese will be more and
more encereased. But now we shall proceed to your fifth reason, to examine what
weight that has whereby to work forth our consciences to this point of yours,
concerning the payment of tithes to Ministers of the Gospel.

Reas. It is a sin (say you) wherein, and whereby the desrauder robs his own
sold of that spiritual benefit and advantage, which he might get by such a
Ministry, for it is just with God go say to such a man, thou withdrawest
maintenance from servant, and I will withdraw my blessing from my own
Ordinance, so that the word preached, by whomsoever it is dispensed, shall do
thee no good at all but rather it shall be a savor of death to thy own
condemnation, thy soul shall never prosper or thrive by any Sermon thou hear.

We admire to see or hear from any man such rash inconsiderate censures, when
as our Lord and Master Christ Jusus has lest us such a warning piece in Mat.
7. Judge not least thou, be judges. For matter of fraud or cheating, we
think we have sufficiently proved the Priests, we mean the Presbyterian Priests
are the greatest defranders, therefore we shall not now touch any further upon
that, but to show in this particular your cunning cautelous wiles, wherein you
lie in Wait to deceice. But we are exhorted not to-let any man beguile us. We
hope the Lord will still support us with the assistance of his Spirit to
discern all your wiles, and especially this of your injunction of Tithes. But
you go about to fright us with the justice of God, and you measure Gods
Justice, which is an attribute in himself (unchangeable) by the Justice of men,
who are mutable; in this you show a great presumption to meddle with Gods
Justice, but in this you are rash and censorious, as in all the rest of your
reasons: But for answer, we have already proved, that Tithes are not
maintenance for Ministers under the Gospel, but were to Priests under the Law;
therefore it would be sin to perform any unlawful action, for the maintenance
of any, though you were Gospel Ministers, but to pay Tithes is unlawful;
therefore no sin to deny the paying thereof, for the maintenance of
Ministers, for that God has not commanded, if we make it our duty, though
commanded by man, it is will worship, as worshipping of Angels, etc. colos.
7.18, 19. and God may say, who has required this at your hands, Esa. 1.12. It
is not then our pleading, Authority commanded us, will acquit us at that day,
thoug in civil action we ought to be obedient to the Anthority in being; but
tithes was a ceremony of the Leviticall Law, as well as Circumcision, which are
both abolished: therefore how can you expect a blessing from God upon the work
of your Ministry, so long as you plead for any false worship; it is all one as
if you pleaded for Baal, which was idolatry; So tithes being that which is
abolished, is now in opposition to the Gospel, therefore idolatry and heresy,
which is a sin highly displeasing to God: and for heretics, we are not so
much as to eat withali. Therefore you may not marvel why you are abandoned by
so many people whose consciences are tender concerning the worship of God, by
reason that you do maintain a false worship. But concerning Gods blessing,
which always accompanies his own Ordinance, many thousands of this Nation have
had great and large experience of: We mean such as are not of the Presbyterian
Order, but such unto whom God of his infinite mercy has made known his truth,
and discovered the darkness of those who would be called Presbyterians, who
indeed are zealous (many of them) in their profession; but their zeal is blind
in many things, as in this of tithes, which makes them, like Saul, to breath
out persecution against the Saints, to disquiet their peaceable being; yea they
will take hold of the sword of the Magistrate to prosecute their designs. But,
we hope, as the Lord has overthrown their designs against the peace of this
Commonwealth, so he will also in this great design of disturbing the peace of
his people of this Nation, who are indeed the pillars upon which the safety of
the Nation lies, and take away the pillars, the house must needs fall. Oh,
that the Pareiament would consider this, and stand for the liberty of those
that have spent their lives and estates for the liberty of this Nation, and
that God would put it into their hearts to take off all heavy burdens, and even
this unsupportable yoke of tithes from this Nation! Again, we conceive you
have somewhat enlarged your self, in saying, by whomsoever it is dispensed, the
word is dispensed, but shall do thee no good at all, but rather a savor of
death, etc. You seem here by this argument, to reach all Ministers, as well
true as false, and so long as the people abstain from paying tithes to the
Parish Priest; bear with us, if the title Priest be put in, (for tithes imply,
you appropriate Priesthood to your selves) though they do hear a Minister
rightly constituted, yet no benefit shall accrue (say you) to their souls, but
on the contrary a curse, this is a very sad and lamentable condition, that such
a poor soul shall be in; we mean that such a man (who thorough tenderness of
conscience does refuse to pay tithes to the Priest that ministers in the
Parish where he lives) shall receive no benefit from whomsoever he hears.

But this we absolutely deny: For first of all, if he shall refuse thorough the
tenderness of his conscience (desiring only to be regulated by the Word) to
hear you, he does well, for that which is not of faith, is sin; and a man ought
to be persuaded of what he believes to be true, and consequently he does sin
against his conscience, if he hears such a one, that goes about to persuade,
or enforce him to do any thing against his conscience, and you teach that to
pay tithes is the duty of believers, both by the Law of God and man, and he
believes that to pay tithes, is a sin, by reason he has no warrant from the
Word for it being a believer.

Secondly, if such person should refrain the hearing of him, that declares the
word or mind of God, as the truth is in Christ, according to that light which
God has endowed him withal, certainly he should sin in an high nature, a sin
of omission; and you must acknowledge the blessing of God does accompany his
own Ordinance; except you hold there is no Ordinance of God held forth by any
but the Presbyterian Ministers, who press so hard for tithes. And thirdly,
experience witnesses the contrary, how many thousand poor souls have been
converted from their natural estate by the dispensators of the Word, even by
those of select Churches, though you may term their conversion subversion, or
deluding, yet our experiences witness to us the contrary; therefore the
inference you draw must needs fall to the ground.

Your sixth reason is, That it is a sin that provokes God to curse a man in his
outward estate and trading, as you instance in that of Mal. 3.9. Ye are cursed
with a curse, for ye have robbed, etc. It is usual with God to pay sinners
with their own co^n, they rob God in tithes, and God robs them of their trade
and lively hood; they grudge the Ministers maintenance, and God even grudgeth
them bread from their families, so that they usually tu^n bankrupts, or are so
much in debt, that they are ashamed to show their faces.

We have already proved that the non-payment of tithes is not robbing of God,
therefore that place is of no force to prove, that believers rob God by not
paying tithes, but on the contrary, he that pays tithes does rob God, by
reason in that action he does abet unto the unlawfulness of their practice who
upheld the Priesthood of Aaron to be still in being, when as we own no other
Priesthood then Christ Jesus, that Pretogative alone belongs to him, then
there is no curse, but rather a blessing, by disowning the unlawful practice
of paying tithes, and consequently they are blessed in their trading.

But whereas you say, they grudge the Ministers maintenance, we believe none
that have learned the lesson of the Apostle, thee they which preach the gospel,
shall live of the gospel, and that those which freely sow in spiritualls,
should reap of carnalls, should grudge a true Minister of the Gospel
maintenance, therefore your charge is too large in that particular also; we
grudge no man's maintenance; much less such as labor in the word and doctrine,
and in charity, we judge, that none of the people of God are so hard hearted;
therefore your consequence which you raise, must needs fall; That that is the
reason so many turn Bankerupts and run in debt, etc. It were a hard matter to
prove that God pays men in their own coin, in this life, for generally the
wicked and ungodly and covetous of this world do thrive, and grow rich, and
increase in worldly goods; but on the contrary, many that are sincere
Israelites, as Nathanael, do live but meanly in this world.

But we shall proceed to the seventh reason, in your paper.

It is a sin against the Gospel, because it hinders the progress and success
of it, for such men do as much as in them lies, extinguish the light, by taking
away the Oil that foods it. It is observed by that excellent book, Vindication
Presh. Gov. page 81. That Julian the Apostate, cursed enemy of Christ and his
Gospel, did by taking away tithes do more mischief to the church of God, then
all the persecuting Emperors that were before him; for the persecutors took
away only the Ministers, and (their blood was the seed of the church) but
taking away tithes, took away the Minister himself.

In this reason of yours you have made out to the world, that the non-payment
of tithes is a sin against the Gospel, therefore because you make it out a sin
of so high a nature, we shall answer your reason in the several parts thereof,
and anatomize it in the several members thereof.

First, that which is a sin against the Gospel, must be a breach of some known
institution of Jesus Christ, either in precept, or example, but tithes were
never an institution of Jesus Christ for believers to observe, therefore no sin
against the Gospel, though you say that place in Luke 11.42. proves tithes to
be an injunction of Christ: That place of Scripture, as before is inserted,
fully imports Christ's reprehension of the Pharisees for being strict in the
observing of trivial things, and leaving the weightier, as [of judgment, and
the love of God.] Now from this place you can prove tithes no more the duty of
believers, then the former offices of the Law, as Sacrifices and Offerings for
sin by them which were Levites, and served in the Temple and Tabernacle, which
are all put to an end by the Sacrisice of Christ Jesus, Heb. 9.11. and the 10.
c. 9, 10, 11, 12. v.

But tithes, as was well observed by a brother in the Gospel in certain
replies heretofore set forth by him, are not moral and perpetual, and now
under the Gospel to be paid or taken, for these reasons.

First, because it calls for the setting up of the Jewish Temple, tabernacle,
and altar, etc.

Secondly, because it calls for the Priesthood of Aaron and the Levites in
their former office to serve.

Thirdly, because it lays a yoke of bondage upon him that pays his tithes, and
upon him that takes tithes, which the Gospel sets at liberty; and how dare any
man charge that to be a sin against Gospel, when we stand fast to the liberty
wherewith Christ has made us free, Gal. 5. 1. v. Therefore it is your gross
erroneous opinion to charge the non-payment of tithes to Gospel Ministers to be
a sin, yea and a Gospel sin; yet we hope this your rash censure shall not
bewitch us to be withdrawn from the love of the truth, or to observe Leviticall
ceremonies for Gospel Ordinances therefore the non-payment of tithes is no
Gospel sin.

Secondly neither does the non-payment of tithes hinder the progress of the
Gospel, by reason that the Gospel is not furthered in its progress by any
unlawful practice, as has been sufficiently proved; therefore no let or
hinderance, but rather the contrary; for the observation of any Levitical
ceremony does extinguish the light of the Gospel, and so confer uently it does
hinder the progress thereof, And here pray take notice of your absurdity in
this particular, as if tithes were that which would be any furtherance to the
progress of the Gospel; we confess it may be a hinderance of your progress
in your Ministry, and of the success thereof, but no hinderance of those that
are true Gospel Ministes, neither of the success of it.

Again, have you any ground for this reason from any of the Apostles? When was
the Gospel so free in its progress as in the Apostles time, who taught us,
that the Ceremonial Law was abolished, and tithes being part of the
Ceremonial Law, if that comes in being again, it must needs hinder the
success and progress of the Gospel: Therefore of necessity that part of your
reason must needs fall to the ground, having not so much as the face of truth
to uphold it.

Thirdly, In that you say, such men do, as much as in them lies, extinguish the
light, by taking away the oil that feeds it.

Here we do also admire at the weakness of your argument, to make tithes to be
the oil, that gives light to the Gospel; But to the first we answer, on the
contrary, that such men do as much as in them lies, discover the true
Gospel Light from that darkness and obscurity which tithes would shadow the
light of the Gospel withal, by unvailing it from that, which Christ has put
an end unto, we mean all ceremonial Rights, etc. But pray what light is it you
mean? Is it the light of your understanding (which in this particular is
already darkened, therefore cannot be extinguished) or the light of the Gospel,
which is the light of truth? but by your foregoing reason, we conceive rather
the later; if then, observe that is is by this light out eye are in lightened,
to discover the darkness of this opinion, that, The non-payment of tithes does
extinguish the light of the Gospel.

Fourthly, whereas your inference is, that it takes away the oil that feedth
it; we answer do you count tithes, or the payment thereof the oil that feeds
the light of the Gospel? Pray, was that the oil the foolsh virgins lacked, so
that their lamps went out? We think rather it is the Spirit of God, which
gives light to the Gospel, and this lies beyond the reach of any man to take
away; We read of many oils in Scripture, as the annoiting oil, etc. and the
oil wherewith Christ was annoyted, even the oil of gladness above his
fellows; but we never yet read that tithes were called by the name of oil, nay
such oil, as feeds the light of the Gospel. Pray when was the light of the
Gospel more darkeded, then when the Bishops of our later days had so many
spiritual livings, or tithe oil, as you call it? Did that oil which they had
in such abundance add anything to the light of the Gospel? Nay rather, did it
not suffocate it? So now may we truly say of you that are Priests of tithe, by
imposing or receiving of tithes, ye do (as much as in you his) take away the
true oil that feeds this light, by reason that you do not discover the
spiritual sense and meaning of the Gospel, but cloud the glorious light of it,
by re-edifying of the Leviticall ceremony of Tithes.

But we shall take a view of that saying of yours concering fulian the
Apostate, who (by your affirmation) did more harm by taking away tithes, then
the persecuting Emperors did by taking away of the Ministers. If you have no
stronger argument to prove his Apostate then the bare taking away of tithes,
the cannot in that be proved an Apostate: but if he did this action from a
right principle, he was more a friend to the profession of the Gospel then an
enemy: and we hope and heartily with, that the Parliament of this Commonwealth
would unburthen this Nation from this superstitious ceremony of tithes. O that
the profit, which the first fruits and tithes do yield were not so much
esteemed by them, as to make it an hinderance of their proceedings in this
partitular! It is very observable that many of the Kings of Israel did that
which was right in the sight of the Lord; yet this is charged upon them, that
the high places were not taken down, until God raised up that good King
Josiah, who pulled them down to the ground, and burned the bones of them that
offered sacrifices on them: but we hope there are many amongst our Worthies, we
mean those of the Parliament and Arny, whom God in his time will make like unto
Josiah, who shall root up this grand idol of imposition of tithes, which so
blasphemously is called the oil that feeds the light of the Gospel. Therefore
we hope by this time you may see clearly, that the non-payment of tithes does
not hinder the progress of the Gospel; but on the contrary, does further it:
For, if the intruding enemies of the Gospel, we mean those false teachers
spoken of by the Apostle, Galat. 3. did bewitch them from the love of the
truth, by urging of Circumcision, and the observation of the Ceremonial Law
(which made the Apostle fear, he had labored in vain, forasmuch as Christ was
not yet formed in them) then certainly the urging of the necessity of paying
tithes, does hinder the free progress of the Gospel, and eclipse the light of
it, and keeps a poor soul under that Schoolmaster which was to bring us to
Christ; but now Christ is revealed, he is the end of the law for righ cousnesse
to every one that believes, and consequently no longer need of that to be our
Schoolmaster.

But in your last Reason your cry may well be called outrageous, as if you were
bereft of your senses, It is sin that will not he pardoned upon repentance,
unless there be a restitution as well as repentance; according to that of
Augustine. Non remittitua peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatum: Thy sin shall not
be pardoned, unless that which thou with-holdest unjustly be restored.

We know our Savior faith, that all sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto
men save the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, and such a one certainly that
sins that unpardonable sin, has his heart shut up from repentance; and a
sin committed against God is of a higher nature then any sin against man, but
in all that thou have said, you cannot prove the non-payment of tithe to be a
sin, but on the contrary, we have proved it to be a in to pay tithes, and
consequently the non-payment of tithes cannot lay any such burden upon the
conscience of any man, as to make your reason in this particular of any force;
but you may well be compared to the Scribes and Pharisees, which laid heavy
burdens upon men's shoulds, and would not feel the weight of them themselves.
Again, if this your Argument should stand, that any may has unjustly
withheld your right or due, we hope you wll grant, that many times God gives
a man a heart to repent when he has not wherewithal to make restitution. But
we never read of any sin to be unpardonable, except it was the sin against the
Holy Ghost, but the non-pryment of tithes cannot be proved a sin, much less of
that nature. Then on the contrary, if (as has been sufficiently proved) that
to demand tithes under the dispensation of the Gospel by any that are
Gospel Ministers, or pretend so to be, is a sin against the Gospel, for tithes
were never enjoined by our Savior for believers to observe, and to presume to
make an injunction for any duty, where there is no precept nor example, is
highly displeasing to God, and comes under the reprehension of the Holy Ghost
in the last of the Revelation, he that adds to the words of this book, etc.
Therefore it behooves you that stand so much for tithes, to examine well and
seriously your own hearts, and repent of this your evil practice, lest the sin
you charge upon others be not one day laid to your charge.

But the last refuge you have is this, that it is a sin will cry for vengcance,
when the sinner on his deathbed is crying for mercy, as appcars by that
remarkable Scripture, James. 5.3.

Now if the hire of the laborers in man's vineyard kept back by fraud cries,
how dreadful will the cry be of the hire of Gods laborers in Gods Vineyard,
kept back by robbers and defrauders! I tremble to think of it.

We hope by the time you have read read over the replies to your former reason
and Proposition, your spirit will be more calm then here you have showed your
self, but that it is usual with many of you to thunder out hell and damnation
against all those that cannot through conscicure truly enlightened obey your
humane traditions and legal ceremonies, and forget and leave out judgment and
the love of God, as if the worship of God consisted in those abolished legal
rites and ceremonies; but in this, you seem to show little of the spirit of
him, that is the good Shepherd of the Sheep, but rather like ravening Wolves
you seek to devour them; But indeed, as you have well said to that purpose,
that you are defrauded of your hire, do you not herein demonstrate you selves
to be hirelings? therefore in Joh. 10. The Hireling is no good Shepherd, but
comes in as the wrong door, and is a thtefe and a robber; and how many of these
hirelings, both in Company and City have for a time cominaed in a Parish, but
when they have heard of a greater living or parsonage, have relinquished their
flock, and given it over to stranges, or left it destiture. Will not this sin
at that day rise up in judgment against many of you Tythes-Priests? Ye can be
contented to call your selves Gospel Ministers, which (if you were) ye would
not strive so much to set up the rites and ceremonies of the Leviticall Law; ye
would rather preach Jesus Christ, and that freely from a principle of love; and
as long as you continut thus in your outrageous cry, and censorious judgings,
(which are but the passions of the mind, which the people of God have learned
to crucify with Christ) you do but the more make out the truth of the Word,
that the strength of your Kingdom is going down, and the fear thereof makes
you cry out for help, and use all unlawful means to make good your argument,
even to the wresting of the Scriptures, as that in Luke 11.42. upon which is
built all your whole Fabric, which appears like all the rest to be built upon
a sandy foundation, which is falling, and shall fall to the ground, and God
will put it into the hears of his people, that they shall vindicate the truth
in this particular. O that the Rulers of this Nation would discharge their Vow
to Almighty God, in setting this Nation at liberty from this great and
unsupportable burden of tithes, which is not only (as has been proved)
Antichristian, but a bondage, even like that of the Egyptians over the
children of Isael; for as they set Taskmasters over them, so these Priests more
like Egyptians then Christians, do set Taskmasters over the people to enforce
them, and that against their consciences to pay: and are there not some now in
prison upon the same accounts and others under prosecution also, and will not
their cry ascend up into the ears of the Lord for vengeance? Oh that particular
interests into unlawful gain were not that which does blin the eyes of many of
this Nation, that they cannot make use of the opportunity which God has put
into their hands: But it is our hope, that as the putting down of Bishops (who
were as Lords over Gods Heritage) was one of the first of the Worthtes in
Parliament, so the taking away of Tithes shall not be the last which shall be
acted by them.

FINIS

