The Queens Majesty's Message and Letter from the Hague in Holland, directed to
the Kings most excellent Majesty, etc.

Being sent in that Ship which was forced to put in at Yarmouth by reason of a
Leake which she sprung at Sea, and was bound for Newcastle, who had in her
fifty Commanders, besides other common Soldiers, 400. Barrels of powder, ten
pieces of Ordnance, and great store of other arms and ammunition, all which
was sent to his Majesty.

And now coming up to London to be disposed of by the Parliament for the
Kingdoms safety and security, which Letter, with diverse others, are in the
custody of -- Henry Elsing Cler. P. Dom. Com.

All which Letters were cast overboard into the Sea, and miraculously saved by
a Sailor in the said Ship.

Also the Declaration and Petition of the Palsgrave and the Queen his mother
to both houses of Parliament for their annual pension, withal denying and
disclaiming in having any hand or consent in Prince Roberts unruly actions,
against the Parliament.

London printed for 1. Underhill. October. 14.

The Queens Message and Letter sent to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, from
the Hague, the eight of October.
MOst Royal and Illustrious Monarch of great Britain, my great, my good and
worthy Liege, the most regal object of my loving heart, best affections and
utmost endeavors; Be pleased to let this paper in all humility salute your
Princely hands, and to give your Princely cogitations some account of my
endeavors, (as I am bound in duty, and as I am your Spouse and loyal wife) for
your Majesty in my absence, my love having now no other ways left of
expectation, but by being Your humble and faithful Agent in accommodating and
promoting your high affairs, wherein if my words, the pledges, and earnest
solicitors for the improvement of Your present Fame and glory, may carry in them
any strength of persuasion, I would earnestly encite your Princely thoughts to
a remembrance of your Majesty's Resolution to carry forward your designs
until they grow to a famous maturity and ripeness: maintain and continue
your cause and complexion in the hardy prosecution of your affairs without any
mittigation, unless an honorable satisfaction may make you disbandon and
raise your former Intentions: Now you have a large field given you, wherein the
illustrious virtues inherent in your Royal Person may be actually expressed,
and give the whole Christian world which are now spectators, and the eye of all
Christendom upon your Person, a clear approbation and testimony that Your
Majesty merits that noble attribute annexed to your Royal Title, Defendor of
the Faith: for by such like actions as these, Princes live when they have paid
their debt to Nature, and will be their own monument which shall be
everlasting, and more durable then that of Marble. Be therefore constant in
your Princely resolutions, full of your own Cause and your Majesty shall never
want external accommodations and Foreign compliances, which by my earnest
endeavors and solicitations have of late bin somewhat advanced, having
obtained a list from our Brother the Prince of Orange, from whence as the
special merit did distinguish them in worth, I have selected out of that
number some choice, well experienced and serviceable soldiers, such as shall
be forward with courageous affections to maintain Your Princely affairs, and
to amplify your renown and glory in the engagement of present actions: and
out of these deserving men, I have sent fifty stout Commanders, who will be
always be ready to do your Majesty service in your Army, and that I might
further supply and serve your present occasions, I have caused 400. barrells of
powder, and 10. pieces of ordnance; to be conveyed to your Majesty, besides
good store of all other ammunition, necessary upon all warlike occasions. The
compliance of our noble Brother the Prince of Orange is so settled in a firm
complexition, sympathising, and affectionately agreeing with the present
condition of affairs, that he has by many demonstrations given testimony
thereof, and by raising diverse sums of money for my use, has endeavored the
inclination of his particular affections, amongst other accomodations least
your Majesty should be any ways necessitated, I am to certify your Majesty,
that the Jewels of your Crown are for present receipts engaged to some certain
Jews of Amsterdam. Moreover I am to give your Highness cause to esteem the
cheerful undertakings and forward alacrity of our Brother the Prince of
Orange, who will with all careful vigilance be ready to take all opportunities
for your Majesty's advantage, and will with clear intentions wherein you may
repose trust, be ready to express himself in all Christian Offices: My
acknowledgment of Prince Robert's valiant courage and love expressed in personal
actions, and those adhering to your Majesty, being arrived to my knowledge by a
letter lately sent to Mr. Iermin, must needs deserve my approbation and highest
commendation, since his worth and noble actions are of such transcendent
expression of Princely merit. Amongst the other endeavors of my affectionate
desires, the States have been earnesty solicited for their aid and assistance,
which as yet cannot be induced upon them to grant, nor can I by any persuasion
obtain the effect of my urgent motion, though I hope my Letters sent unto my
Brother the French King, shall infuse a Royal flame into his breast, and make
him through accompable fulness of your Highness Cause, give such aid unto
your Majesty, as may express him Royal in his thoughts, and tender of his
Regal relation unto your Highness; but if my Letter should be so unhappy as
not fully to inflame and instigate his mind to awake his power in Your aid and
defense, I cannot nor will not see your actions brought on with so much
expectation any way disanimated, but since the Ages hopes must be the
production and business of Your weighty affairs, my personal solicitation
shall at my going into France enduce and incline my most Christian brother to
appear in promoting and assisting your Majesty's cause and actions, which are
so full of honorable Justice: though absent till we be resident in your
Princely heart, and believe my affections and endeavors are ever ready to
serve your Majesty.

Sir, I am and allwaies shall be your most dutiful wife and liege woman.
HENRETTA, MARIA,

The Declaration and Petition of the Prince Palsgrave of the Rhyne, and the
Queen his Mother, disclaiming and discountenancing Prince Robert in all his
uncivil actions which he uses in this Kingdom, desiring both houses of
Parliament not to stop their annual pensions due to them for his cause which
they cannot help.
Their Protestation and Declaration, etc.
WE do in the presence of Almighty God, and to all the whole World, and in the
sight of all good men, in no manner approve, allow, give consent, or any way
countenance the unjust and unruly actions of my Son Prince Robert now in
England; and so do I the same with the Queen my dear mother, by the same vow
disrellish and hate all those outrages and cruelties of my brother Prince
Robert, and it grieves us at our very Souls for his unhnmane cruelties we
hear he commits, whose passion we cannot confine, and whose hot spirit we
cannot calm nor diswade him from acting, by all the lawful means which we
have used, as by Letters, Messages, and intimate friends.

And our petition and desire is to the honorable houses of Parliament, that our
annual pensions may be duly paid us, which is our chiefest livelihood under
God, and that we may not suffer and languish for his sake, whose actions and
behavior we cannot help. Hoping that both Houses of Parliament will speedily
consider of our petition which we have sent unto them, having continually found
that favor from this Kingdom of England, for their real loves in our
distress, that we are bound to assist you and your Nation both with our
prayers and thanks, which is only acceptable and best pleafing unto God, and
to all righteous men.

And for my particular, I take God to witness, so long as I was in England
with his Majesty, I labored for peace, and a Reconciliation betwixt his
Majesty and his Parliament, but finding that I could not prevail, but I was
over-borne by a strong faction who had his Majesty's care, I took my leave, and
went from Holland, obeying and harkening unto my dear mothers counsel, whom I
shall willingly obey and abide with.

From the Hague 5. October. 1642.
FINIS.

