THE GOVERNMENT AND ORDER OF THE CHVRCH OF SCOTLAND.

NVMB. 23. and 24. How goodly are thy tents O Jacob, and thy Tabernacles O
Israel: for this house full of silver and gold I would not curse, for how shall
I curse whom God has not cursed? or how shall I defy, whom the Lord has not
defied. COL. 2. 5. Though I be absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in the
spirit, joycing and beholding your order and the steadfastness of your faith in
Christ. Printed, Anno MDCXLI.

To the Reader.
MY desires at this time to know and to make known to others the form of
Government and order of worship used in the Church of Scotland, have brought
these following lineaments to light. There come daily into my hands without my
seeking; some one form of Church Government or other, as the diverse Authors,
from their love to Reformation in their judgments did conceive: But I must
confess they did the less relish with me that they were directions and
modells without the example or practice of any of the Christian Churches, and
were Abstract Idea's of discipline in the minds of men and not Disciplina in
Subjecto. One I had, Titled The form of government used in the Church of
Scotland, but, being nothing but an Abridgement, and containing generals
only, It did not satisfy. I found also many of the godly much wearied of the
Prelacy, who yet bow their shoulder to bear, and couch down between the two
burdens, because, being unacquainted with the Government of the Reformed
Churches, they do not know what to choose, and fear (as to them who are in the
dark is usual) they know not what. Such as these do rather suffer themselves
to be led away with the policy of Pacuvius at Capua, which in such a case was
cmmendable, then resolve to follow the faith of Abraham when the Lord called
him, Get the out of thy Country, etc. into a Land which I will show thee, Genesis
12. 1. What he was to forsake, and the Terminus a quo of his removing, he did
know; But whether he was to go and the Terminus ad quem, he did not know,
resting assured that God would show it him. In our own affairs we may think the
evil known to be better then the good unknown; But it holds not in the
matters of God, nor when we speak of Malum turpe and bonum honestum, the evil
of sin and the good of obedience. But as they who travel from the South to
the North, losing the sight of the one Pole come in sight of the other, and as
they go on the North Pole is elevated to them by degrees: So is it here, if men
would once forsake and turn their back upon that which they know to be wrong,
and would ask the way to Zion with their faces thither ward, the Lord would
teach them his way.

I must confess that I did give too much ear and audience to the
misinformation of many (so may I call it now after true imformation) who would
have made me to believe, 1. That the true government of that Church was
Episcopal, and that beside the order of Episcopacy, there was nothing in that
Church, but disorder and confusion through the Parity of their Ministers, (...)
that all did speak and no man did hear any thing of another. 2. That they had
no certain rule or direction for their public worship, but that every man
following his extemporary fancy, did preach and pray what seemed good in his
own eyes. And 3. (which was to me an huge rock of offense) That they were
enemies to Kings for no other cause, but that they are Kings: and, out of a
desire of Anarchy, did prefer Democracie to Monarchical Government: Great
crimes I can not deny, and much to be abhorred, for they are destructive of all
Ecclesiastical and Civil Order, and do break both the staves of beauty and of
bonds.

But upon trial I did remember that, if accusation were guiltiness, no party
conld be innocent, and found that it was nothing so as was alleged: for
concerning the first, I called to mind the practice of a painter of old, who
being desired to represent the body of Hercules, did express nothing of the
lineaments of his face, stature or members, but did only make a resemblance of
the Lions skin, which he was wont to carry about as the badge of his strength,
and the Trophee of his honor. Episcopacy was never the face nor order of that
Church. In the most part of their assemblies have they conflicted with it, and
by the strength of God obtaining the victory both of old, and much more of late
They may well number it among their spoils. The order of their Ministers each
one standing in his own station, and none usurping over another, and the
Subordination of their four kinds of assemblies, joining the consent and
obedience of the people, are the face and strength of that Church. Against the
second, The form of prayers, administration of the Sacraments, admission of
Ministers, Excommunication, solemnizing os marriage, visitation of the sick,
etc. which are set down before their Psalm-Book, and to which the Ministers are
to conform themselves, is a sufficient witness: for although they be not tied
to set forms and words; yet are they not left at random, but for testifying
their consent and keeping unity, they have thelr directory and prescribed
order. No where has preaching and the ministry more spiritual and less
carnal liberty, the Presbytery and assemblies encouraging to the one and
restraining from the other. And against the third, Their Confession of Faith,
the doctrine and prayers of their Church, their late declarations and
remonstrances, and what is contained in ^he conclusion of this Treatise,
express as much respect and reverence to magistracy, as any Christian Prince
will require.

I was also strongly drawn to the liking of that Church by the Testimonies
given unto their Reformation by some of the most famous witnesses of this age.

One is of that worthy Scottish Martyr Mr. George Wischeart. This Realm shall
be illuminate with the light of Christ's Gospel, as clearly as ever was Realm
since the days of the Apostles. The house of God shall be builded in it, yea
it shall not lack (watsoever the enemy imagine to the contrary) the very
top-stone; the glory of God shall evidently appear, and shall once triumph in
despite of Satan. But alas, if the people shall be after unthankful, then
fearful and terrible shall the plagues be that after shall follow. Hist. of
the Church of Scotland, page 108.

Another of Beza. Magnum hoc Dei munus quod una and religionem pura^, and
(...), doctrinae, viz. retinendae vinculum, in Scotiam intulistis. Sic obsecro
and obtestor haec duo simul retinete, ut uno amisso alterum diu permanere non
posse semper memimeritis. Sicut Episcopi papatum pepererunt, ita
pseudoepiscopos papatus reliquias Epicureismu^ terris invecturos: hanc pestem
caveant, qui salvam Ecclesiam cupiunt, and quum illam in Scotia in tempore
profligaris, ne quaeso illam unquam admittas, quantumvis unitatis retinendae
specie, quae veteres etiam optimos multos fefellit, blandiatur. Bez Epist. 79.

This is a great gift of God, that you have brought into Scotland, together
pure Religion and good order, which is the bond to hold fast the Doctrine. I
heartily pray and beseech for Gods sake, Hold fast these two together so, that
you may remember, that if one be lost, the other cannot long remain. So Bishops
brought forth popery, so false Bishops, the relics of popery, shall bring
into the world Epicureism. Whosoever would have the Church safe, let them
beware of this pest, and seeing you have timely dispatched it in Scotland, I
beseech you never admit it again, albeit it flatter with show of the
preservation of unity, which has deceived many of the best of the Ancients.



A third of the body of Confessions of faith.

It is the rare privilege of the Church of Scotland before many, in which
respect her name is famous, even among strangers, that about the space of four
and fifty years without schism, let be heresy, she has kept and holden fast
unity with purity of doctrine. The greatest help of this unity, through the
mercy of God, was, that with the doctrine, the discipline of Christ and the
Apostles, as it is prescribed in the Word of God, was by little and little
together received, and according to that discipline so near as might be, the
whole government of the Church was disposed. By this means all the seeds of
schism^s and errors, so soon as they began to bud, and show themselves, in the
very breeding and birth, were smothered and rooted out. The Lord God of his
infinite goodness grant unto the Kings most gracious Majesty, to all the
rulers of the Church, to the powers that are the Nursers of the Church, that
according to the Word of God, they may keep perpetually that unity and purity
of doctrine, Amen.

Est illud Ecclesiae Scoticanae privilegium rarum prae multis, in quo etiam
ejus nomen apud exteros fuit celebre, quod circiter annos plus minus 54. sine
schismate nedum haeresi unitatem cum puritate doctrina servaverit and
retinuerit. Hujus unitatis adminiculum ex Dei misericordia maximum fuit, quod
paulatim tum doctrina, Christi and Apostolorum disciplinam, sicut ex verbo Dei
est praaescripta, una fuit recepta, and, quam proixme fieri potuit, secundum
eam totum regimen Ecclesiasticum fuit administratum H^e ratione omnia
schismatum atque errorum semina quam, prinum pullulare, aut se exerere visa
sunt, in ipsa quasi herba and partu sunt suffocata and extirpata. Det Dominus
Deus, pro immensa su a bonitate Regiae Majestati Serenissimo, omnibusque
Ecclesiarum gubernatoribus, potestatibus Ecclesiae nutritiis, ut ex Dei verbo
illam unitatem and doctrinae puritatem perpetuo conservent, Amen. Corp.
Confess. fidei, page 6.

The fourth of King James of happy memory. The Religion professed in this
Country, wherein I was brought up, and ever made profession of, and wishes my
son ever to continue in the same, as the only true form of Gods Worship, etc.
I do equally love and honor the learned and grave men of either of these
opinions, that like better of the single form of policy in our Church, than of
the many Ceremonies of the Church of England, etc. I exhort my son to be
beneficial to the good men of the Ministry, praising God that there is
presently a sufficient number of good men of them in this Kingdom, and yet are
they all known to be against the form of the English Church. Basildor. To the
Reader, And in the Assembly 1590 his Majesty praised God, for that he was born
to be a King in the sincerest Church in the world, etc.

The fifth is of Brightman, our own Countryman, who joyneth the Churches of
Helvetia, Suevia, Geneva, France, Holland, SCOTLAND, all together into one
Church, for the Counter-payn of the Church of Philadelphia, because, says he,
they almost live by one and the same laws and manner of Government, as touching
any matter of moment. Neither does the distance of place break off that society
which the Conjoyning of minds and good will coupleth together, having thus
joined them into one Church, he subjoyneth concerning it. Loath would I be to
provoke any man to envy, or to grieve him with my words, yet this I must say
there is no place, where the doctrine sounds not more purely, the worship of
God is exercised more uncorruptly: where more faithful diligence of the
Pastors does flourish, or more free and willing obedience is given by the
people, nor yet where there is greater reverencing of the whole Religion among
all orders. And afterward, Neither does it only keep the doctrine of salvation
free from corruption, but it does also both deliver in writing and exercise in
practice that sincere manner of government, whereby men are made partakers of
salvation, Revel. of the Apocal. Chap. 37.

To these may be added what upon the one hand is said by these of the
separation in their first petition to to King James, insert in their Apology to
the Doctors of Oxford. We are willing and ready to subscribe to these grounds
of Religion published in the Confession of Faith made by the Church of
Scotland, hoping in the unity of the same Faith to be saved by Jesus Christ:
being also like minded for and with other Reformed Churches in points of
greatest moment. And upon the other hand, That the meetings of Ministers for
interpreting Scripture, like unto their Presbyteries were allowed by Arundell,
Hutton and Matthew, three Archbishops in England, and proved very profitable in
the Northern parts for increase of knowledge both in Ministers and People.

But all these and the like testimonies were to me but like the saying of the
woman of Samaria to her Contrymen, till I did more fully understand the
constitution and order of that Church. Then did I believe, not because of their
testimonies, but because I did see and know. And from that which I have seen
and do now know when I have walked and gone round about that Church, when I
have told the Towers thereof, marked well her Bulwarks, and considered her
palaces, I may without offense affirm three things.

First, That God has not dealt so with every nation, if envy would permit, I
might say, any nation, as he has dealt with them. Whereof no cause can be
given but his own good pleasure, he shows mercy, and makes his Sun to
shine on whom and were he will, and of him, and through him, and for him are
all things.

Secondly, that it is no marvail if that Nation stand to the defense of their
Reformation, had the Lord been pleased to bless us with the like at the time
of our Reformation we would not have been so unwise as to make exchange of it
with Prelacy, we would have forsaken all things rather then have forsaken it,
It is more strange that any should have been found amongst them at any time to
speak or to do against their own Church: Sed quum omnia ratione animoque
lustraris, omnium societatum nulla est gravior, nulla carior, quum ea quae cum
Repub. unicuique nostrum est. Cari sunt Parents, Cari liberi, propinqui,
familiares; sed omnes omnium caritates patria una complexa est, pro qua quis
dubitet mortem oppetere, si ei sit profuturus? quo est detestabilior istorum
immanitas qui lacerarunt omni scelere patriam and in ea funditus delenda
occupati sunt and fuerunt, Cicer. Offi. l. 1.
But after you have with your reason and mind made a general survey of all
societies there is none more grave, more dear then that which each one of us
has with his Country; Parents are dear, Children, Friends, familiars are
dear; But our native Country alone takes all these within her compass, for
which what good man would doubt to die, could his death serve her for good? So
much the more detestable is their barbarity, who have with all kind of
wickedness rent asunder their native Country, and both are and have been
exercised in overturning her from the very foundation. If a Patriote spoke so
of his Country, a Citizen so of his Republike, what should the Christian born,
baptized, and bred in Scotland think and say, if he have been borne there not
only to this mortal, but to that immortal and everlasting life: No children
on earth have better reason to say, We are not ashamed of our Mother, and it
were to be wished that the saying were reciprocally true.

Thirdly, having the pattern of all the Reformed Churches before us, and this
example so near unto us, what need we to stand amazed, as not knowing what to
choose; To abide that which we have been, is neither profitable nor possible,
To conjoyn the two in one is but the mixture of Iron with Clay, and must needs
make the distemper greater. It were well for us (and no other well for us can I
see) that laying aside our high conceit of our selves, and the low esteem of
other reformed Churches We would resolve to follow them as they follow Christ,
and not to despise the government of Christ, because they seem to be but
Molehils; But to conform to them, because they are conform to Christ, and to
the pattern showed in the Mountain. What reciprocation of giving and receiving
in matters of Religion, has been between this and the Scottish Nation may be
known by the words of Beda, Nec multo post illi quoque qui insulam Hii
incolebant Monachi Scoticae Nationis, cum bis quae sibi subdita erant
monasteriis, ad ritum paschae, and tonsurae Canonicum, domino procurante,
perducti sunt etc. And afterward, Quod mira divinae factum constat
dispensatione pietatis, ut quoniam Gens illa qua noverat scientiam divinae
cognitionis, libenter ac sine invidia, populo Anglorum communicare curavit,
ipsa quoque postmodum per Gentem Anglorum, in eis quam minus habuerat, ad
perfectam vivendi norman perveniret. Beda eccles. hist. gentis Angl. l. 5. c.
23.
but speaking in his own idiome, according to the grounds of popery.

Not long after the Monks of the Scottish Nation, who lived in the Island Hii,
with the Monasteries under their power were brought into the rite of observing
of Easter, and of shaven Crowns. The Lord bringing it so to pass (he should
have ascribed it to another spirit). Which certainly was done by the mavelous
dispensation of divine mercy, that because that Nation, who had the science of
divine knowledge, did willingly and without envy communicate the same to the
people of England; that the same Nation afterward should by the Nation of the
English attain unto the perfect rule of living in these things which they had
not before.

The Government and Order OF The Church of Scotland.
A Description and not a Demonstration of the Church of Scotland is intended;
non jus sed factum, their doing simply and not the reason of their so doing is
desired: The delineation therefore of the face of that Church, without
artificial Colors and dispute of her comeliness and beauty, is nakedly
expressed in two Parts: The one of her Officers, the other of her Assemblies.

The first part.
I. Of the Officers of the Church.
BEside the ordinary and perpetual Officers, which are Pastors, Doctors,
Elders, and Deacons. The Church of Scotland has no other at this time, nor did
at any time acknowledge any other: These being warranted by Christ and his
Apostles, the extraordinary Ministers unto whom his will was revealed, and
being sufficient for all the necessary uses of the Churches, as Exhortation,
Teaching, administration of the Sacraments, Government, and distribution.

The Offices of Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets were extraordinary, and
continued in the Christian Church, so long as by the Will of God, it was
needful for the well of the Church; who although in regard of their order,
degree, manner of Ministration, and the places, which they did hold, which is
called successio in gradum eundem. They have properly none to succeed them: yet
in respect of their doctrine, holiness of life, and substance of their
Ministry, which is successio in caput, all faithful Pastors, lawfully called
to their functions, are their successors: And in this sense not only their
first reformers, who had somewhat extraordinary, but all their faithful
Ministers since, who have labored in the Word and Doctrine, for the planting,
preserving and purging of Religion to the edification of the Church, and no
other, are successors to the Apostles.

The Office of a Bishop consisting in power or priority above a Pastor, as
having no warrant in the Scripture, as being a member of the wicked Hierarchy
of the Pope (for, although this priority of Prelates had place in the Church
before the Pope ascended to the top of his Ambition; yet every corruption in
doctrine, worship, but especially in government, which, since the mystery of
iniquity began to work, is retained by the Pope, and by his authority is
obtruded upon the Church, they conceive to be His) and as a cursed tree, which
amongst them has brought forth no better fruits, then heresy, and errors in
doctrine, idolatry and superstition in worship, Tyranny and persecution in
Government, and lewdness, and profanity of life both in Pastors and People;
They have abjured and removed out of their Church, together with all the
branches of that Hierarchy, and all the offices, titles, dignities, and courts
depending thereupon as may be seen in their confession of faith, Books of
discipline, and acts of assemblies of old, and of late.

In the beginning of their reformation they had no constitute Presbyteries, nor
such provincial and general assemblies as they had afterward, and upon the
other part they had superintendents, visiters of certain parts of the Country,
and Commissioners for Provinces: But they who desire to know the constitution
and condition of that Church, must distinguish between her infancy, and her
riper age, between her desires, designs, and endeavors, and her seize,
proceedings and performances; for how soon it was possible for them,
presbyteries and assemblies, which from the beginning had been intended, were
erected and established; And no sooner was this brought to pass, But
superintendents and all others of that kind, which at first were of necessary
use in visiting the Country, and in planting of Churches, were declared to be
neither necessary nor expedient for the Church.

The Church of Scotland has been disquieted and much troubled with Episcopacy
since the beginning, and at last by the ambition of vain men, by the power and
working of civil authority, and by the corrupt assemblies of Ministers, had
some footing, and was in end raised to a great height, and did become a
mountain. And yet the office of a Bishop was never received in that Church. But
when some Ministers, who in regard of their benefices were called Bishops, had,
by their own usurpation and the slavish disposition of their brethren, obtained
some degree and power over them. They did come into England, and, without the
consent or knowledge of the Church, received consecration, and returning home,
did consecrate others like themselves.

II. Of their calling.
AS no man ought to presume to enter into any office Ecclesiastical without an
inward calling from God, who only discerns the intentions, and desires of the
heart, whether they be earthly or heavenly, whether they be set upon the glory
of God, and edifying of the Church, or upon the means of this life; So are
there none here admitted without the approbation and judgment of men according
to the rules of the Word, and the received order of the Church.

This outward calling of the Officers of the Church does consist in Election
and Ordination, after due trial and examination of their soundness in
religion, and godliness of life: For the better understanding of the order of
the calling of their Ministers, it is to be considered,

That in every one almost of their Classes, or greater Presbyteries, there be
Students of Divinity; whereof some, if they have opportunity of their Studies,
do make their abode within the bounds of the Presbytery, and attend the
meetings thereof: Others, who are the greater part, stay at the Universities,
and in the time of vacation come home and wait upon the Presbytery.

The abilities of both the one sort and the other, are tried in private, before
the Presbytery, and how soon they are found fit to come in public, they enter
upon the exercise or prophecy with the Ministers of the Presbytery, and at
sometimes are employed and allowed to preach before the people: By which mean
their gifts and abilities are known to the people, as their manners are
manifest by their conversing amongst them.

Out of the number of these Proposants, or (as they call them) Expectants, the
Pastor is nominated to the vacant place by the Eldership, and by the Minister,
if any be, with the consent and good liking of the people, and if they can
pitch upon none within the bounds of their own Presbytery they have their
liberty to make their choice of an Expectant of good esteem and report in some
other Presbytery.

The Person thus known and nominated, is by the particular Eldership, named to
the greater Presbytery, where he is examined of his skill in the Languages,
Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, in his interpreting of Scripture, in the
controversies of Religion, in his gift of exhortation, in the holy and
Ecclesiastical History and Chronology; And first of all, Of his life and
manner of conversation; wherein if he be found vicious or scandalous, he is not
to be admitted to any other examination; Being thus examined, and found
qualified for that charge, he is sent to the vacant place, that the people
hearing him, may have the greater assurance of his gifts for edification.

After the people have heard him, some Minister of the Presbytery is appointed
to preach to that people of the necessity of the Ministry, of the excellency
of a faithful Minister, of the qualities of a Minister, and of the obedience
due to the Gospel, or of some such Theme: And at the same time a public Edict
is served, That if any person or persons, have any thing to object against the
literature, doctrine, or life of such a man, why he may not be a profitable
Minister of such a Parish, They shall appear before the Presbytery in such a
place, and at such a time, that their objections may be tried and discussed.

Upon the day appointed, the Doorkeeper of the Presbyterian meeting, does call
three several times, if there be any to object against the Person nominated,
and if any thing be alleged against him by any of that particular flock, or
any other to whom he is known, it is duly and equally pondered by the
Presbytery, and if it be found to have any weight, or the case be doubtful,
the ordination is suspended till a more perfect trial; Otherwise if there be
nothing but silence, they use to proceed.

So that no man is here obtruded upon the people against their open or tacit
consent and approbation, or without the voices of the particular Eldership with
whom he is to serve in the Ministry. But if the person nominated be a Pastor
of some other flock, and his faithfulness known in his former charge, this
process is spared, and his translation more speedily expede, if there be no
impediments of another kind.

Upon the day appointed for accomplishing his election, and for his ordination,
which is in due time made known to the Congregation, and agreed upon with them,
a Fast is ordained to be kept, with more than ordinary supplication for the
assistance and blessing of God, in a work of so great concernment: And one of
the Pastors of the Presbytery is appointed to preach to that people of the
mutual duties of Pastor and people. All which being done, the party, (who,
during the time of the exercise of public worship, has been sitting in a
conspicuous place before the Pulpit, accompanied with the Elders, and some
Ministers of the Presbytery) is called up, and demanded concerning his
willingness and desire to serve the Lord JESUS, for the good of that people;
with other questions of that kind; and the people also are demanded, whether
they will receive him for their Pastor, and submit themselves unto his
Ministry in the Lord. Both having declared their readiness and mutual
consent, The Minister comes from the Pulpit, and with so many of the Ministers
present, as may conveniently come near, lay their hands upon his head, and in
the Name of JESUS do appoint him to be the Pastor of that people, praying that
from JESUS CHRIST, who is at the right hand of the Father, and gives gifts
unto men, he may find the demonstration of the Spirit, and the power and
blessing of GOD in his Ministry, to the comfort of that people. Thereafter the
whole Eldership give unto him the right hand of fellowship. And last of all,
the Minister goes to the Pulpit, and concludes the whole action with
pertinent thanksgiving and prayers, a Psalm is sung, and the Assembly dissolved
with the blessing.

By this it may appear that Pastors or Presbyters are not there admitted at
large, without assignation to a particular flock, like Masters of Art, or
Doctors of Physic. They conceive it to be as preposterous for Ordination to go
before the Election of Ministers in the Church, as it is first to Crown a King,
or Install a Magistrate, and thereafter to choose him: next in the ordination
of their Ministers they use none of the ridiculous toys, and apish conceits of
Popery; but, according to the simplicity of the Apostolical and ancient
Church, content themselves with Fasting, Prayer, and Imposition of hands;
Prayer, to bring down a blessing upon the person on whose head the hands are
laid, and Fasting, to make the prayer to ascend the more fervently.

This liberty of Election is in part prejudged and hindered by Patronages and
Presentations which are still in use there, not by the rules of their
discipline, but by toleration of that which they cannot amend, in the mean time
procuring, that in the case of presentations by Patrons, the examination and
trial by the Presbytery, is still the same. The Congregation, where he who is
presented is to serve, is called, if they have ought to object against his
Doctrine or life, after they have heard him, or that their consent may be had.
And if he be found Reus ambitus, or to have gone about to procure a
presentation, he is repelled, and declared incapable of that place.

No Pastor may thrust himself upon a flock, nor after his entry, desert his
charge, or remove himself to another Congregation at his own pleasure. The
Deserters, if any be, are appointed to be admonished, and in case of obstinacy,
to be excommunicated. If a Minister, upon lawful and urgent causes, desire to
remove from one Congregation to another, of if a Minister be called to another
Congregation, for which he is more fit, or be called forth upon grave
considerations for some public employment, tending to the common benefit of
the Church; This is not done by private transaction, and particular agreement
of Ministers and Congregations, but by the wisdom and authority of the
Presbyteries or Assemblies of the Church; Nor is it done by them, but upon such
reasons as should move that Church, wherein for the present he ministers, to
give her consent: for whose supply also, either a convenient course is
presently taken, or the way of supply is seen to be easy.

The Minister thus removed from one Church to another, receives no new
ordination, but by virtue of his first ordination he serves in the place, unto
which he is called and elected: Only at his admission one of the Presbytery,
who is appointed to preach of the duty of Pastors and people, and to pray for a
blessing, recommendeth him to the Congregation, who have before declared their
willingness and desire to receive him, and the Congregation to his care and
fidelity, And the Pastor, if any be, together with the Elders, with whom he
sits before the Pulpit, take him by the hand.

Pastors and Ministers of the Word, through old age, sickness, or other
infirmity being disabled to bear the weight, and discharge the duty of their
Pastoral charge, Do notwithstanding still retain the honor of their office,
and comfort of maintenance during their lifetime. And they performing what they
are able in reaching, government, visitation and catechizing, others are joined
with them by the Presbytery, and with the consent of the people to be their
fellow laborers, and to undergo the main charge.

The same course of election and admission for substance, and in form according
to the nature of their office, is observed in the calling of other Officers, as
Ruling Elders, and Deacons: At the beginning, and where there be none, the
Pastor, with the gravest, holiest, and those of the soundest judgment, and
best affection to Religion, do choose them with the consent of the rest of the
people. And where particular Elderships are already constitute, the Pastor and
the Elders who are now in office, do choose such as are to succeed those who
are removed by death, or any other way, or by vicissitude are to relieve such
as are now in place; And that the election of one or more at first, or afterward
may proceed with the consent of the people, their names are published and made
known to the congregation by the Pastors, that if ought may be objected against
any of them, why they may not be received to the office of an Elder or Deacon,
it may be examined, and, if it be found important, others may be chosen. When
the day of their admission comes, the Pastor having framed his doctrine to the
purpose, calls them up, and remembering both them of their duty in their
charge, and the people of their submitting themselves unto them, they ar^
solemnly received with lifted up hands, giving their promises to be faithful.

III. The discharge of their duties in particular, and first of the Pastor.
1. The order kept in Preaching.
THe Pastor is bound to teach the Word of God in season and out of season, and
beside all occasional, and week day Sermons, which in Cities and Towns use to
be at least two days every week, The Congregation does assemble twice on the
Lords day, and for this end notice is given of the time by the sound of a Bell.
When so many of all sorts, men and women, masters and servants, young and old,
as shall meet together, are assembled, The public worship begins with
prayer, and reading some portion of holy Scripture both of the Old and New
Testament, which the people hear with attention and reverence, and after
reading, the whole Congregation joyneth in singing some Psalm. This reading and
singing do continue till the Preaching begin; At which time the Minister having
prefaced a little for quickening and lifting up the hearts of the people, first
makes a prayer for remission of sin, Sanctification, and all things needful,
joining also confession of sins, and thanksgiving, with special relation to
the hearers. After which, in the forenoon is another Psalm, and after the Psalm
a prayer for a blessing upon the preaching of the Word. His Text is ordinarily
some part of that Book of Canonical Scripture, which in his judgment he
conceives to be fittest for the times, and the condition of his flock. The
Doctrine deduced, is explained and confirmed by Scripture, and fitly, and
faithfully applied, all in such method, manner, and expression as may most
edify the hearers.

After Sermon he praises God, and prays again for a blessing, joining
earnest petitions for the Church Universal, and for the coming of the Kingdom
of Christ, for all the afflicted Churches, for the Churches in his Majest.
Dominions, for the Church of Scotland, Ministry and People, for the King, the
Queen, the Prince, and their whole Royal Progeny, for all the members of that
particular Congregation, as well absent in their lawful affairs as present,
for all that are afflicted among them in body, mind or means. The prayer
ended, a Psalm is sung, and the people dismissed with a blessing.

In the afternoon either the same order in all things almost, is followed in
performing the parts of public worship, or some part of the Catechism is
expounded, and thereafter so much time as may be spared is bestowed in
Catechizing some part of the Parish warned particularly to attend.

Beside the public means they have other three helps for edification, one is
an ordinary course of Catechizing on such days of the week, as are judged to
be fittest by the Pastor, and Eldership. Another is the visitation of families
by the Pastors, and the Elders each one in his own quarter, for trying the
manners of the people, whether they walk worthy of the Gospel, for setting, and
holding up religious exercise in families. And that the Pastor from his
particular knowledge of the flock committed to him, may apply his doctrine, and
pray the more pertinently in public The third is, Examination of all sorts of
persons, who are not known to have some good measure of knowledge, before the
Communion. All these parts of the Ministry in public and private are
performed more diligently, or negligently, according to the faithfulness or
unfaithfulness of the Minister, who has according to his work, his praise, or
censure at the visitation of the Church, by the greater Presbytery.

No Minister there, is suffered to be a nonresident, or to have the charge of
more Churches; But if two small contiguous Parishes be united by the assembly,
to make up a competent congregation, he Preaches sometime in the one, and
sometime in the other Church, as the people do desire, and the Eldership does
direct.

2. The order of Baptism.
NO other but the Pastor, who preaches the Word has the power of the
Ministration of the Sacraments; And concerning Baptism it uses not to be
hastened before some day of the public meeting of the Congregation, nor
delayed after, but upon necessary impediments, and is never ministered in
private houses. Notice is given thereof in due time to the Pastor, and that by
the Father of the child, if he be not justly hindered, that a word may be
spoken to him in season.

After Sermon on the week days, and after Sermon in the afternoon, on the
Lords day, The Pastor remaining in the same place, where he has Preached, and
having water in a large Basin provided, with a fair Linen Cloth, in a
convenient place, and in a decent manner; The Father, or in his necessary
absence, some other man, who is reputed godly, presents the child to be
Baptized.

The action is begun with a short and pertinent prayer, next, some words of
instruction touching the Author, nature, use, and end of this Sacrament, the
duties to be performed, in the one time, of the person to be Baptized, and of
the parent or viceparent. Thirdly, he that presents the child, makes
confession of the Faith, into which the child is to be Baptized, and promises
to bring up the child in that Faith, and in the fear of God. Fourthly, the
Minister being informed of the name of the child, Baptizeth the child so
named, by sprinkling with water, Into the name of the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost. Lastly, the Minister concludes, as well the public worship, for that
time, as the action, with thanksgiving for the Word, and Sacraments, and with
prayer for a blessing, and with such Petitions, as he uses at other times
after Sermon, and in end dismisseth, the Congregation with the blessing.

3. The order of ministering the Communion, or the Lords Supper.
THe Sacrament of the Lords Supper, is more frequently ministered in some
Congregations, then in other, according to the number of the Communicants, and
the Proficiency of the People in the way of Christ; and in some places upon one
Sabbath, in other places upon two, or three Sabbaths, as it may be done most
conveniently, which is determined by the Minister, and Eldership of the Church.

None are admited, to the Lords Supper, but such as upon examination are found
to have a compe^ent measure of knowledge in the grounds of Christian Religion,
and the doctrine of the Sacraments; and are able according to the Apostles
Commandment, and profess themselves willing, to examine themselves, and to
renew their Covenant made with God in Baptism, promising to walk as beseems
Christians, and to submit themselves to all the Ordinances of Christ. The
ignorant, the Scandalous, the obstinate, and such as are under Censure, or
public admonition in the way to censure, are not admitted; Neither are
strangers received, but upon sufficient testimony, or otherwise be very well
known.

The Sabbath day next before the Communion shall be celebrated, public warning
thereof is made by the Pastor, and of the doctrine of preparation, to be taught
the last day of the week, or at least toward the end of the week; That the
Communicants may be the better prepared, by the use of the means, both in
private and public.

Upon the day of the Communion (notice being given after the doctrine of
preparation, of the hours of meeting, which uses to be before the ordinary
time observed other Sabbaths) a large Table decently covered, is so placed, as
that the Communicants may best sit about it, and the whole Congregation, may
both hear and behold.

The Preface, prayers, and preaching of that day, are all framed to the present
matter of the Sacrament, and the duties of the receivers; after Sermon
immediately the Pastor use^h an exhortation, and debarreth from the Table all
ignorant, profane, and scandalous persons, which being done, he goes from the
Pulpit, and sits down with the people at the Table, where the bread standing
before him in great Basins, fitly prepared for breaking and distribution, and
the wine in large Cups in like manner, he first reads, and shortly expounds
the words of Institution, showing the nature, use, and end of the Sacrament,
and the duties of the Communicants; next he uses a prayer, wherein he both
gives thanks, especially for the Inestimable benefit of Redemption, and for
the means of the Word and Sacraments, particularly of this Sacrament, and
prays earnestly to God for his powerful presence, and effectual working, to
accompany his own Ordinance, to the comfort of his people now to communicate.

The Elements thus being Sanctified by the Word and Prayer, the Minister
Sacramentally breaks the bread, takes and eats himself, and delivers to
the people, sitting in decent and reverent manner about the Table, but without
difference of degrees, or acceptions of persons; these that are nearest the
Minister, having received the bread, do divide it from hand to hand amongst
themselves; when the Minister delivers the bread, according to the
commandment and example of Christ, he commands the people to take and eat,
saying, Take ye, eat ye; this is the Body of the Lord, which is broken for you:
Do it in remembrance of him. After all at the Table have taken and eaten, the
Minister takes the Cup, and drinking first himself, he gives it to the
nearest, saying, This Cup is the New Testament, in the Blood of the Lord Jesus,
which is shed for many, for the remission of sins; drink ye all of it, for as
often as ye do eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lords death
till he come. All this time the Elders, in a competent number, and in a grave
and reverent manner, do attend about the Table, that all who are admitted to
the Table, may have the bread and wine in their own place and order of sitting,
the Minister also, continuing in his place, after the giving of the Elements,
does either by his own speech, stir up the Communicants to Spiritual
meditations of faith, of the great love of God in Christ, and of the Passion of
Christ, and to holy affections of love, joy, godly sorrow, thankfulness, and
whatsoever may concern them at that time, or causes be read the history of the
Passion, or some other part of Scripture, which may work the same effect.

After all at the Table have received the Cup, they rise from the Table, and
return in a quiet manner, to their places, another company comes to the Table,
and so a third and a fourth, till all have received in the same manner as the
first, during which time of removing of the one, and approaching of the other,
the whole Congregation sings some part of a Psalm, touching the Passion, or
the love and kindness of God to his people, as Psalm. 22, or 103, etc.

After the last company has received, the Minister rising from the Table,
goes to the Pulpit, where, after a short speech, tending to thanksgiving, he
does again solemnly give thanks unto God for so great a mercy, and prays
as on other Sabbaths; The prayer ended, all join in singing a Psalm of praise,
suitable to the occasion, and are dismissed with the blessing, before which none
are to depart, unless in case of necessity.

The Communion being thus celebrated in the forenoon, the people meet again in
the afternoon, at which time, the Minister teaches the Doctrine of
thanksgiving, and closes the public and solemn worship of that day, from
which the people use to depart, refreshed with the grace and peace of God, and
strengthened, with new and fresh resolutions to serve the Lord.

4. The order of public fasting or humiliation.
SOmetimes the fast or humiliation is of larger extent, to be observed by all
the Churches in the Kingdom, sometime more particular, of one or more
Congregations; Sometimes the fast is kept one day only, sometimes all the days
of the week, Sometimes on the Sabbath only, especially in the Country
Churches; Sometimes upon some day of the week also, as in Cities or Towns; They
neither make difference of days for humiliation, nor do they keep any set
fasts or feasts: all is disposed and done, according as the occasions, and
causes do press or require, as may serve most for the end intended, and may
best ply with the opportunities, and necessities of the Congregation.

The Sabbath next before the fast, notice is given of the Causes of
humiliation, and of the times to be observed, with earnest exhortation to the
people, to prepare themselves for afflicting their souls, and extraordinary
humiliation.

In many places especially in Cities, Towns, and greater Villages, or where the
people may conveniently assemble, The day before the fast, the doctrine of
preparation to the fast, is taught expressing the nature, and use thereof, for
averting the wrath of God.

The days of the fast from morning to evening, are kept holy unto the Lord in
the nature of an Extraordinary Sabbath, with abstinence from meat, and drink,
from delights and worldly labors, with the exercises of reading the Law, plain
preaching, interpretation, and particular application, deep humiliation, and
renting of the heart for sin, large, and hearty confessions of sin, fervent
supplications, and earnest seeking of God, by prayer for pardon, with singing
of penitential Psalms; after which they have many times, found wonderful
deliverances, and extraordinary blessings from Heaven.

5. The order of marriage.
ALthough marriage be no Sacrament, nor part of the Worship of God, yet they
conceive that the Matrimonial conjunction of Christians, and members of the
Church is most conveniently solemnized in the face of the Congregation, with
instruction out of Gods Word, of the Institution, use, and ends of marriage,
and of the duties of married persons, and with blessing by the Minister, and
with the prayers of the Church.

The parties are contracted before they be married, and before they be
contracted, if there be any suspicion of their ignorance, they are examined in
the grounds of Religion, and in their knowledge of the mutual duties, which
they owe each to other. Notice also is given of the consent of Parents, or
vice-Parents, and that neither of them is contracted before to any other party,
nor any impediment from the degrees of Affinity, or Consanguinity prohibited;
The contract and purpose of marriage is also published, three several Sabbaths
before the same be solemnized, and if there be nothing objected to hinder their
marriage, then are they solemnly married, in the face of the Congregation,
before the ending of 40 days from the time of the contract.

They require for marriage the free consent of the parties come to the years of
discretion, and the knowledge and consent of the Parents; they do not allow of
the marrige of Infants, nor secret and clandestine contracts and marriages, nor
do they use any idle rites or superstitious Ceremonies, in the time of the
Solemnization.

6. The Order of Burial of the dead.
THough Burial be no part of the Worship of God, nor of the work of the
Ministry; yet they think meet that an honest and competent number of
Christians, accompany the Christian friends of the dead unto the Grave, that
they may confer and comfort one another by the way, and to see the Burial done
in a grave and decent manner, remembering that sin is the cause of death, that
Christ has overcome death and the grave, and that they who die in the Lord,
shall rise again to life everlasting.

Their Burials are without singing or reading, which the superstitious do
conceive to be profitable for the dead; without Funeral Sermons, which do
beget superstition, and tend to flartery, make the Gospel to be preached with
respect of persons, and are most pressed by such as do least regard Sermons at
other times; and without Feasting, with affectate shows of mourning, and any
further pomp or Ceremony, than civil differences and respects do require.

They conceive, for many reasons, that the places of the assembling of the
people for the Word and Sacraments, ought not to be places of Burial, which is
therefore forbidden, and, for the most part, is forborne in that Kingdom.

Registers are ordained to be kept, of the nam^^ and times of all that are
baptized, of all that are married, and all that are married.

IV. Of Doctors, and their Office, and of Schools.
THe Church of Scotland has had no other Doctors, but Masters and Professors
of Divinity, in Universities and Colleges, of which, some use to be chosen to
be Elders of particular Churches, and Commissioners to the National Assembly,
and besides these the Teachers of more private and particular Schools.

They use to be examined and tried, both in their learning, and life, by the
Presbitery, and their charge is not only to bring up their scholars in humane
literature and liberal Arts, but also in Civil Conversation and good manners,
but especially in the Grounds of Christian Religion, by way of Catechism.

As the Doctors of Colleges do keep the meetings of the Presbitery, and by
course do prophecy, or make the exercise with the Ministers, so also do the
masters of private Schools for the greater part of them, who therefore are a
part of the Seminary of the public Ministry, are numbered among the
expectants, how soon they are enabled, to enter upon the exercise, and
sometimes are employed by the Ministers to help them, in teaching and
Catechizing of the people.

The Universities also use to be visited by Commissioners delegated from the
National assembly, that there be nothing taught by the Professors and Doctors,
but what is sound and consonant to the confession of faith, and the received
doctrine, and order of the Church; and to see that both Masters, and Scholars
do their duties diligently, especially that their be no scandal nor corruption
of manners. In like manner the more private schools, are visited by the
Presbiteries, poor scholars of good ingines and expectation are provided in a
great part of their maintenance, by places of the foundation of Colleges,
which are appointed by the Founders, or Reformers, for that use, and others are
maintained, by Contribution of particular Churches within every Presbitery,
which the Pastor or Elder brings unto them, so soon as they are chosen by
the Presbitery.

V. Of Elders and their Office.
THe Calling, Election, and admission of Elders is before spoken of. The number
of Elders in every Parish is not definit, but does vary according to the
number, and necessity of the people; In some parishes o, in some 10, or 12, etc.

Such are chosen to be Elders as come nearest to the gifts, and qualities
required, by the Apostle, and after they are chosen, are at all occasions
exhorted by the Pastor to be ensamples to the flock, and to watch over them
faithfully, against all corruptions, in religion and life. And as the Pastor
should be diligent in teaching and sowing the seed, so are the Elders desired
to be careful in seeing and seeking the fruits in the people.

The Elders do attend with the Pastor in Chatechising the people, do assist him
In visiting the sick, In admonishing all men of their duty, and if any will not
hear them, they bring the disobedient before the Eldership; In causing the
acts of the assemblies, as well particular as general, to be put in execution;
But a principal part of their duty is to join always, with the Pastor in the
particular Eldership, and in the other assemblies of the Church, as they shall
be called, for exercising of discipline, and governing the whole Congregation.

VI. Of the Deacons and their Office.
WHat manner of persons the Deacons ought to be, the Scripture is plain, and
such they make choice of as are so qualified, so far as may be; The form of
their election is before expressed. Their number must be considered of,
according to the number of the poor, and the proportion of the Congregation,
as we spoke before, of the Elders.

Their maine duty, is to collect, receive, and distribute, not only the alms,
for the poor, but the whole Ecclesiastical goods, which are not assigned and
appointed, for the maintenance of particular persons.

These duties they must perform, at the dscretion and by the appointment of
the Pastor, and Elders; for which cause, and not for government, they are to be
present at the ordinary meetings of the Eldership.

The means for the maintenance of the poor are collected, by the Deacons, the
first day of the week, and other days of the public assembling of the people
to the worship of God, at the entry of the Church. And if this prove not a
competency, then do the people either bring in their Charity, on such days as
are appointed by the Eldership, or are willing to be taxed, according as they
shall be judged to be able. In some Cities, and Parishes, where this order has
been carefully observed, none have been suffered to beg, and none have lacked.

Their Ministers, beside their Gleab and Manse, are all provided to certain,
and the most part, to competent stipends, which are paid either in victual or
moneys, or in both: And if the charge of their family be great, and their
children put to Schools or Colleges, they are helped, and supplied by the
charity of the people, which uses also to be extended, if need be, toward
their widows and Orphans, after their decease, of which the whole Eldership
has a special care.

Every parish almost has some stock for the relief of strangers, and for
supply of the extraordinary necessities, of their own poor: Hospitalls have
their own rents, and the public buildings of the Church, are upholden, by the
Patron, and the Freeholders of the Parish* unto which, if any be unwilling, he
is constrained by Law to pay his proportion.

The Second Part.
I. Of the Assemblies of the Church, and first in General.
NO man here, were he never so eminent above others, for Piety, Wisdom, or
Learning, or does he never so much arrogate authority, to himself, has the
rains of Church Government in his hands to determine, or to do what seems
good in his own eyes; But all matters are advised, determined, and judged with
common consent in the meetings, and assemblies of the Church, which for this
end are of four sorts and degrees, which are commonly called by the names of
Church sessions, or particular Elderships, or Consistories; Presbyteries, or
Classes; Provincial Synods, and National or General Assemblies.

Each of these assemblies, has a President or Moderator, who begins, and
ends with prayer; propounds matters to be treated; procures them to be
debated if need be, in an orderly way, that all may be heard, and none
interrupted, unless he speak too much; gathers the voices, which are noted
by the Clerk; and pronounces the sentence, or if there be an equality,
remitteth it to the greater Presbytery; each of them has a Clerk, or a
Notary; and a Register of all things debated and done by them, especially of
such matters as may be of future use.

None of these assemblies, from the least to the greatest are to treat of
matters pertaining to the civil Jurisdiction and Magistrate, but only of
matters Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, that the doctrine and worship may be
kept in purity, all things be done decently, and in order, in the particular
Churches, and that all the members of the Churches may walk worthy of the
Gospel.

The lesser and inferior assembly is subordinate to the superior and greater,
so that if any person, shall think himself wronged or distressed, by the
unjust proceeding of the inferior assembly, it is lawful for him to seek
relief of the greater, providing, it be done in an humble and peaceable way,
and in the right order, by proceeding to the next greater assembly, and so of
the rest, if need be, taking them in their subordination until either he be
satisfied, or, which rarely comes to pass, he ascend unto the highest of all.

In matters difficult or such as belong to superior assemblies, References
from the lesser are ordinary, but nothing belonging to an inferior assembly
is brought before a greater, til either it cannot be settled or be disorderly
done by them, or some complaint arise. And in that case, so far as may stand
with truth and peace, the greater assembly is careful to preserve the power
and authority of the lesser; and therefore matters belonging to inferior
assemblies are commonly remitted unto them by the greater.

There, one Church were it never so great, has not authority over another,
nor is it governed by any extrinsecall power; but all the particular Churches
are of equal power and authority, and are ruled and judged by themselves and
their own intrinsecall power in assemblies composed, and consisting of their
officers and commissioners from them.

II. Of Particular Elderships in Parishes.
THe particular Eldership or Church-session consists of one or more Ministers
and of Elders so many in number as the proportion of the Congregation does
require, who ordinarily do meet once in the week.

The Deacons are always present with the Elders, not for government, but that
they may make known the case and necessities of the poor, and may consult and
receive direction for their supply.

The Minister of the parish is always moderator of this Meeting, and if there
be more Ministers then one, the moderator is either chosen or they do moderate
by course, providing that none be moderator while any matter is treated, which
concerns his own particular.

The matters treated by this eldership, are such particulars as concern the
worship of God in that Church, as, what days of the week are meetest for
assembling to the public worship, if it may be had and be thought necessary,
what hours on the Lords day before and after noone, which are variable
according to the length or shortness of the day, in Summer and Winter, what
times are fittest for public Catechizing, and for visiting of particular
families, how often, and at what times the Lords Supper is most seasonably
ministered: all which are proper for keeping of order in that Church, and cannot
be so fitly determined by a superior assembly; the Elders also do here delate
scandalous persons, and bring them to public repentance according to the form
prescribed in the greater assemblies: But if there be any doubt or difficulty,
or if the offenses and scandals be great and heinous, or if the delinquents
add obstinacy and impenitencie to their fault, then are they warned to appear
before the greater Presbytery there to receive order for their censure, or to
be sent home again to give satisfaction, or to make their repentance in their
own Church where they have given offense, and where the fault was committed:
For example, a man behaving himself scandalouslie with a woman, both unmaried
and single persons, is first admonished and rebuked, if fornication appear, he
is called before the Eldership, brought to the sense and confession of his
fault, and ordained to make his public repentance according to the order of
the Church, and to abstain from all scandalous behavior afterward. But if he
prove obstinate, he is conveened before the greater Presbytery, the matter is
examined, and either he promises to give obedience to his own Eldership, or
in case of continued obstinacy, the censures of the Church proceed against
him. But if there be a scandal of adultery or murder, the noise and scandal
whereof is far spread, and fills all men's ears round about, the parties are
brought before the greater Presbytery, and the particular Eldership does
before prepare the parties for their appearance before the Presbytery.

The same faults which are brought before the particular or greater Presbytery
in an ecclesiastical way, are also punished by the civil magistrate, and the
pecuniall mulct or penalty is given to the Deacons to be kept in the Church
treasure for the benefit of the poor, or other pious uses.

Nothing uses to be done by the lesser or greater presbytery in ordering the
public Worship, in censuring of delinquents or bringing them to public
repentance, but according to the settled order of the Church, and with express
or tacit consent of the congregation, and if there be any new emergents that
cause doubting or haesitation, the matter is remitted to the greater assemblies
of the Church.

III. The Order of Excommunication.
ALL baptized persons, when they come to age and discretion, are not admitted
to the Lords table; but such only as either upon examination are found to have
a competent measure of knowledge in the principles of Religion, do profess
that they are believers and do live unblameably, or coming from another
Congregation bring with them sufficient testimony that they are such, or are
otherwise well known and approved.

The Minister and Elders use all means in private and public to bring all
others within the parish to knowledge, faith, and holiness of life, that they
may be fitted for the Lords Table.

But this not admission to the Communion is one thing, and excommunication of
heinous or obstinate offenders is another thing very different.

In case of obstinacy and wilful impenitencie, even when the offenses are not
so great and scandalous, they proceed to excommunication, but with great
meekness, longsuffering, and by many degrees, the censure being so weighty,
and they desirous to gain the sinner to repentance.

If any person walk unworthy of the Gospel, or commit any trespass, he is
(unless the scandal be public and notorious) admonished first secretly by
one, next by two or three more. And thirdly, If he contemn both, then
according to the order prescribed by our Savior, Mat. 18. The matter is
brought before the Minister and Elders where he is accused both of the
trespass and of the contempt. If he cannot yet be brought to repentance, then
is the matter in some measure made known unto the Congregation, and he called
before the greater Presbytery; where if he give signs of his repentance, he is
remitted to satisfy his own session. But if he persist in his obstinacy,
then by the Ordinance of the Presbytery, the particular eldership is to proceed
against him with the censures of the Church even to excommunication.

The matter being thus heard known and judged, and the whole process revised
by the greater presbytery, the next Sabbath without delay, the trespass and
order of admonitions are declared to the Congregation, and the person without
specification of his name, admonished yet to satisfy: Which if he still refuse
to do, the next Sabbath his name with his offense and contempt, are published,
if he yet continue obstinate, then the next, which is the third Sabbath, is he
charged publicly to satisfy for his offense and contempt under the pain of
excommunication. If now he offer himself to the particular Presbytery, then
do they at the appointment of the Presbytery, give order for his public
repentance, the removing of the scandal, and his reconcilement to the Church,
otherwise the Minister proceeds in this ord^r.

The Sabbath after the third public admonition, the Minister with consent of
the Eldership, is to make known to the Congregation that such a person is to
be excommunicated, warning all that have any thing to object against it, that
they appear the next session day: And for the present, that the whole
Congregation power forth their supplications, that God would grant him
repentance, and to come out of the snare of the devil. If nothing be objected,
or if none for him witness any appearance of repentance, then is the danger of
the person, and the weight of the sentence laid open the next Sabbath, and he
the second time prayed for publicly. If at last upon the next Sabbath there be
no sign of repentance, then is he prayed for the third time, and there being
no mean unassaied, nor remedy left to reclaim him, he is stricken with the
terrible sentence of excommunication, with calling upon the Name of God to
ratify the sentence in Heaven, and the people warned to hold him as an
Heathen, or a Publican, and to shun all communion with him, except in natural
and civil duties to be still performed by such as are bound. It is to be
understood, that where the crimes are such that they cry to the heavens for
revenge, waste the conscience, and by the law of God deserve death, and the
transgressor certainly known, the process may be more summarie, and
excommunication more hastened, as on the other part of absolution, the time
would be longer, and the trial of repentance more exact.

After excommunication, he is permitted to come to the preaching of the Word,
yet so as it may appear that he comes as one not having communion with the
Church. Neither is he debarred from private counsel, instruction, admonition,
and prayer, that in end his spirit may be saved. If after excommunication the
Eldership find the signs of repentance, as the good life and behavior of the
excommunicate, declaration of the grief of his heart, and his humble
submission to the order of the Church, in all things that may reconcile him to
God and his people, they shall with joy of heart make it known to the
Congregation by the Minister, that they may also have joy over their brother
repenting: or if they have ought to object against ^he ^uth of his repentance,
they may give notice thereof at the next meeting of the Eldership, where if
nothing be alleged against him, after he has obeyed the injunctions of the
Eldership for his further humiliation and the better trial of his repentance,
he is either brought before the greater Presbytery, as all other penitents for
great crimes, or by relation from his own Eldership, is to give them
satisfaction in the signs of his repentance that he may be absolved.

As all public penitents are received, so is the excommunicate absolved in the
face of the congrega^ion, before whom being brought by the Elders at the time
appointed, he makes free confession of his sin and mourns for it, cries
to God for mercy, seeks to be reconciled to the Church and promises new
obedience; with which all being satisfied and willing to receive him into their
common and mutual consolation, the Minister who preaches for that time
pronounces him upon his repentance to be absolved in the Name of Christ from
his sin, and free of the censurs of the Church, and have right through faith
to Christ and all his benefits and ordinances, praising God for his grace, and
praying that he may be fully accepted to his favor, loosed in Heaven, and
hear the voice of joy and gladness.

After the sentence of absolution, the Minister speaks to him as to a brother
exhorting him to watch and pray, or comforting him if he have need, the Elders
embrace him, and the whole congregation keeps communion with him as if he had
never offended.

As the Presbytery excommunicateth profane professors, so does it also depose
Preachers, if they be teachers of corrupt Doctrine, if their lives continue
scandalous after admonition, if they be busy in renting the Church a sunder by
schism and division; if they be given to blasphemy, profanation of the Lords
day, simonie, perjurie, drunkenness, fighting, or any other sin, for which,
whether in respect of the greatness of the sin, or by reason of the contempt
and obstinacy when the sin is not so great, private persons are
excommunicated; and although they be upon their repentance absolved from the
sentence of excommunication, yet in some cases especially, where the crime
infers a perpetual infamy, are they never readmitted to the Ministry,
except upon the unanimous and most earnest desire of the whole Church where
they served before.

IV. Of greater Presbyteries or Classes.
THe Presbytery or Classical meeting does consist of particular neighboring
Churches in such a circuit as may conveniently meet together, to the number of
ten, sixteen, twenty, or so many as the vicinitie of the places, and parishes
may well accommodate.

It is supposed that the whole particular Elderships cannot well assemble in
one place ordinarily, neither is it necessary. There be therefore beside the
Minister or Ministers of the Congregation who are supposed to be perpetual
members of the Presbytery, some of special note chosen out of the Elders and
by them, who receiving from them commission may represent the whole; from each
particular Eldership, one of the Elders with the Minister or Ministers
repaireth to the place of meeting: so that the members of this Presbyteriall
meeting are all the Ministers within the Circuit, and one Elder delegated from
each particular Eldership.

None of the Ministers are permitted to be absent, unless they be detain^d by
necessary impediments or extraordinary employments. And therefore the day of
the meeting of the Presbytery may not be destinate to ordinary preaching? Nor
are they to wait that day upon solemnizing of marriages. The names are called by
the Clerk, and the absents are noted and examined the next day upon the reasons
of their absence; and if any happen to absent themselves many days without
reasonable causes, they are set apart and censured as guilty of the contempt
or neglect of the order of the Church. But the Elders are not so strictly tied
to ordinary attendance; but if there be any matter of great weight to be
handled, they are all warned to be present: And if he who was formerly
Commissioner may not assist, another Commissioner in his place may be chosen
by the Eldership.

It is permitted to the expectants having entered before upon the public
exercise or prophecy to sit by the Ministers and Elders in the meeting of the
Presbytery, and to give their judgment of the doctrine, but they have no
voice when matters of doctrine or discipline are debated. And in the handling
of some matters which are thought fit to be concealed and kept secret, till
they be by common consent published, they use to be removed.

Because the whole discipline in a manner is in the hands of the Presbytery,
they are to meet once a week or fortnight upon a certain day, and in a certain
place, but in some places, through the length and deepnesse of the way in
winter, they do not meet so often.

The subject and matters treated in the Presbytery are all the Ecclesiastical
matters of weight, which concern the particular Churches there represented, as
the examination, ordination, suspension, and deposition of Ministers; scandals
of Ministers in doctrine, life, or any part of their calling; the decerning of
excommunication, references, and appellations from particular Elderships, and
the amending of any thing that has been negligently or weakly done by them;
the answering also of questions and requests from other Presbyteries, Churches,
or persons, or sending of Commissioners in some cases to other Churches or
Presbyteries, whether to admonish or advise them, or to seek counsel from
them, but so that they have no autho^ity without the limi^s of their own
consociation.

The Ministers and Elders who are Commissioners, together with the expectants
and others who are pleased to be present, meeting in the place, and at the day
and hour appointed, which uses to be one half hour after nine a clock in
the forenoone, whereof warning is given by the sound of a bell, that so all the
affairs of that day (unless there be somewhat extraordinary to hold them
longer) may be exped against midday, do begin with prayer, and proceed to
the textuall interpretation of Scripture, which is done by the Ministers, each
one in his own place by course, or by the expectants, whose names are set forth
in a table, or written in the Register of the Presbytery for that end; after
the first speaker, some other who follows in order, and is also appointed by
the Presbytery the day before, speaks in the second place, collecting some
doctrines one or more upon the text expounded and showing the use thereof. The
second speaker having ended about eleven a clock, the exercise is closed with
thanksgiving by him who spoke first. The matter of each days exercise is some
portion of that particular book of the Old or New Testament agreed upon in the
Presbytery: once every month some common place or controversy is handled,
unto which the exercise gives place for that day. The ground is read in
Scripture; the state of the question propounded, the arguments for the truth
pressed and vindicated from the Sophistication of the adversaries; but the
arguments contra are left to be proponed in the Presbyteriall meeting by such
Ministers as are called by the Moderator to dispute upon the propositions, or
Theses exhibit, the day of the meeting next before, by the contraversar, and
are propugned by him, the Moderator being praeses of the disputation. That the
Presbytery may go through all the controversies, they have also a table wherein
they are all digested in order, so that each minister or expectant knows a
month before what is next to be treated.

The exercise or common head of controversy ended in public, the people
depart, and the Ministers and Elders with others, who are permitted to be
present, go to the private place of their meeting, where all being set in
order, and the Moderator having begun with prayer, the doctrine delivered in
public is examined, and each one of the Presbytery and expectants, either
approves, or in charity and soberness of spirit, propounds his doubt
against any point spoken of, which being done, the speakers for that day are
called upon (they being apart at this time) their interpretation and doctrine
approved, and they encouraged or (if there be cause) they are in a brotherly
manner admonished. The doctrine censured (for this they call the censure of the
doctrine.) The matters before mentioned to be the subject of the Presbyteriall
jurisdiction, are propounded, modestly debated, and either concluded, or taken
to further deliberation, or remitted to the Synod, and so the meeting concluded
with prayer. The Moderator either continues in his place between one
Provincial Synod and another, or for a shorter time, but they think it not fit
to change the Moderator at every meeting.

The Presbyteries also do visit the several Churches within their bounds,
either by holding their full meetings at the Churches, or by sending their
commissioners thither, that they may see how the ordinances of Christ are used
and obeyed, by the Minister, Eldership, and all the congregation, and that if
any thing be amiss, it may be rectified.

V. Of Provincial Synods.
THe whole Kingdom is by the wisdom of the General assembly, so divided in
Provinces, as the Ministers and Elders may, for vicinity of place, best meet in
Provincial Synods, without respect to Episcopal Dioceses, the particular
Churches whereof are so far cast a sunder in Scotland that they cannot
conveniently join in provincial Synods.

The provincial Synod is of the same constitution with the Presbytery, and
does consist of all the Ministers, and one Elder having commission, as before,
from each particular Church within the province.

It meets ordinarily twice a year, but the place and the time of the meeting
are chosen according to the conveniencie of the Churches of the province, and
as the exigence of their affairs does require. The Moderator of the former
Synod, opens the Synod with a Sermon, fit for such an assembly; and after
Sermon setting himself down in his place, with the clerk of the Synod (who
for the most part is one of the Ministers chosen by plurality of voices)
begins with prayer, causes the names of the Ministers to be read, who not
only answer for their own presence (the absent being noted) but also give up
the names of the Commissioners from the several Churches, which are written,
down by the Clerk, and their commissions also read, if need be, and proceeds
to the choosing of a new moderator.

The Moderator is thus chosen. A list is made by the former moderator of four
or five of the ablest men for wisdom, authority and dexterity for such an
employment which is approved by the consent of the Synod. And if any member of
the Synod be pleased to add any other so qualified to the list, his name is
joined with the former, and out of this list the Moderator is chosen by the
suffrages of the Ministers and Elders, and set in the place of the former
Moderator.

The new Moderator first of all calls for the Registers of the several
Presbyteries, and puts them in the hands of the Ministers of other different
Presbyteries to be revised and examined, That by the Records it may be known
how they have kept order, and performed what has been recommended unto them
by the preceding Synods. And what and how matters have been treated by them at
every session, that they may be censured or allowed, which upon the report of
the revisers is accordingly done in the face of the Synod.

If there be any references from the Synod before, they are first debated and
determined, and thereafter new matters are brought into deliberation. What was
obscure or difficult for the Presbyteries, or might concern them all in
common, is here resolved and ordered, what has been done amiss is redressed.
And if any difficulty arise which does not fall under some Church
constitution, it is referred to the national assembly.

Before the assembly be desolved, each Presbytery is set a part by course and
inquiry made from the rest, if there be any known scandal, fault, or
negligence amongst them, That it may be in a brotherly manner censured, like as
upon the day of the meeting of the Presbytery next going before the Synod; all
the members of the Presbytery suffer the like inquiry each one a part by all
the rest.

As the Moderator begins and ends every session before and after noon
with prayer, so does he somewhat more solemnlie close the Synod with some
pithie and pertinent exhortation, and hearty thanksgiving and prayer unto God.

All matters, where these Synods are ordinarily kept, are with such diligence
exped That the Ministers (none of them having above a short days journey, and
Tuesday being usually the first day of their meeting) may return to their
charge against the Lords day, having notice of the day and place of the next
following Synod, and carrying with them such acts as are necessary that they
may be made known to their particular Elderships and congregations. And thanks
may be given in every Congregation for the good proceedings of the Synod, and
for the liberty of the Churches.

These Synods are not always held at one time, and therefore if there be
cause, some Commissioners are sent from one Synod to another, for their
judgment and advice in matters of difficulty, which is reported at the
following Synod for their further resolution, and that so far as is possible
there may be a conformity in all things.

VI. Of National Synods or General Assemblies.
THe national assembly meets once in the year, and the time of the
following assembly agreed upon before the rising of the former, or oftener pro
re nata, concerning which some Ministers have commission and warrant from the
assembly to give timely advertisement to the Presbyteries for choosing and
sending their Commissioners.

This great assembly uses to be honored with the Kings Majesty's presence
either in his royal Person, or by his High Commissioner, who does all the
parts of a Supreme Civil President. In a peaceable ordering of the whole
proceedings of so frequent and holy a meeting, that all men's reasons and voices
may be heard, and in acquainting himself with the grounds of every
constitution that shall be agreed upon, that by his Princely authority they
may be observed, and if need require the sanction of the Civil Law may be
added, for which end also certain Commissioners from the assembly are sent to
attend the Parliament.

It does Consist of Commissioners from the Presbyteries or Classes, three
Ministers and one Eld^r from each Presbytery, who are chosen by the voices of
the Ministers and Elders sent from the particular Elderships, and of one
Commissioner from the Church session of every royal Burgh, that there may be
some proportion and equality. Others also are permitted although not to voice,
yet to hear, propound, and debate, provided that they first obtain leave of
the Moderator: and that it may appear to be done animo aedificandi, non
tentandi.

The first day of the assembly is kept with a solemn fast and humiliation,
wherein the whole City or Town, which is the Seat of the assembly, uses to
join with powerful preaching and earnest prayers from morning till night.

The particular Churches also throughout the Kingdom, upon the days of their
public meeting, pray to God for his direction, assistance, and blessing unto
the assembly, that they may be led into all truth, and all the Churches be
refreshed with the sweet fruits thereof.

The next day the Moderator of the preceding assembly begins with prayer,
causes the Clerk call the Presbyteries, and take up the names of the
Commissioners, Ministers, and Elders, who give in their Commissions, which
being read, examined, and allowed, they proceed to the choosing of a new
Moderator, keeping the same order which is set down before in choosing the
Moderator of the Provincial Synod.

The new Moderator calls for the Records of the Synods, and by the voices of
the assembly chooses a Committee for perusing and trying them; a Committee
for the bills, complaints, and petitions to be presented to the assembly, and
such other Committees as are ordinary for preparing of weighty matters for
the assembly, and for cutting off idle and impertinent things, that the
dispatch may be the more speedy and easy, when they shall be brought to open
debate and voycing; all references from Synods, appellations, grievances,
complaints, petitions, are here examined and answered; Acts and constitutions
for all the Churches are agreed upon with common consent, and if there be any
considerable contradiction, and the doubts and scruples, which are made be not
satisfied, matters are remitted to further deliberation till the next
assembly; course is taken for planting of Churches, with able Ministers, that
the Gospel may be spread through the whole Nation; Rules are set down by
which the inferior assemblies shall be directed in all their proceedings; all
means used that the Church be not wronged, neither by confounding the Civil
and Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, nor by the abusing or interverting the
patrimony of the Church.

The Commissioners of each Presbytery do carry home with them a true copy of
all such acts as do concern all the Churches, that they may walk by one and
the same rule.

The Moderator gives forth Summons signed with his own hand, and the hand of
the Clerk, for citing of persons in the name of the assembly to compare
before the next meeting thereof, with certification of the censures of the
Church in case of disobedience.

The Conclusion.
IN the authority of these assemblies Parochial, Presbyteriall, Provincial,
and National, and in the subordination of the lesser unto the greater, or of
more particular Elderships to the larger and general Eldership, does consist
the external order, strength, and steadfastness of the Church of Scotland,
which is lovely and comfortable to all fearing God, whether Pastor or
professors, and has been very awefull and terrible, as an Army with Banners,
to all Papists, to all Heretics, Schismatics, Hirelings, and all ungodly
persons: As upon the one part they break not the bruised reed nor quench the
smoking flax, but do cherish and labor to bring to ripeness and use, the
grain of Mustardseed in sincere beginners, and the smallest talent in
Preachers having the zeal of God: So upon the other part, no scandal of proud
sinners escapes censure, no heresy or error is sooner hatched, but is either
presently spied out and crushed by some of the inferior assemblies, or, if it
be kept on foot and gather strength, it is quite suppressed and extinguished in
the general assembly which meets once in the year, and never suffers such
bastard births to grow to be one year old, which is a true and maine cause why
no sects nor errors have appeared in the reformed Church of France, and in the
Churches of Scotland, and of the Low Countries, so long as they enjoyed the
liberty and happiness of assemblies, which they did no sooner by the mercy
of God recover, but immediately at their brightness, the mists and mildewes
gathered before were scattered and evanished. And as, by the order and power of
these assemblies, Foxes are taken that they spoil not the Vines, and Gangrenes
are prevented that they spread not against truth and unity, all sorts of lewd
and wicked men are discouraged and put to shame: So is there excited among the
Godly Ministers an holy emulation by acquaintance, conference, and by
perceiving the gifts one of another, which makes them return from the
assemblies, with a mean and humble conceit of themselves, and with new and
strong resolutions for greater diligence in their studies, and faithfulness in
every Pastoral duty, to the common benefit and edification of all the
Churches; all the Ministers are made more wise in matters of Government; and
all the Congregations are affected with reverence to what is required of them
by their particular Elderships, as having the consent and approbation of the
whole Church. Many such fruits are reaped of these assemblies, which without
them no particular person or congregation can have any ground to hope for or
expect.

They have no Archbishops, Diocesan Bishops, Suffraganes, no Chapters, no
Curats, dumb nor idle Ministers, no hirelings, non-residents, nor pluralists,
no Deanes nor Archdeacons, no Chanters, Sub-chanters, nor Treasurers, no
Chancellors, Officials, nor Apparitors, no Canons, Peti-canons, Prebends,
Singingmen nor boys; And yet without these and the like, they have practice
and use of all the ordinances of Christ; all matters Ecclesiastical
determined, remitting questions of tithes, marriages, divorcements, etc. to the
civil Judge to whom they properly do belong, and all petitions, complaints,
and Church grievances heard and redressed, which they esteem as the sweet yoke
of Christ, and think it a great ease both to their consciences and estates to
be free of such bundles and burdens of trash and superfluities. They conceive
that to erect Presbyteries, Synods, and National assemblies, and still to
keep Prelates and the members of that Hierarchy is, in the matter of Church
government, not unlike the Popish adding of Traditions to Scripture in the rule
of faith, or works unto faith in the point of justification, etc. additions to
Christ's institution, being not only in respect of their author humane
inventions, and for any use they can have idlements, vanities, and follies; but
that they do also corrupt the purity, and eat out the life of the ordinances of
Christ.

Here there is a superiority without tyranny, for no Minister has a Papal or
Monarchical Jurisdiction over his own flock, far less over other Pastors, and
over all the Congregations or a large Dioces. Here there is a paritie without
confusion and disorder, for the Pastors are in order before the Elders, and the
Elders before the Deacons; the Church is subordinate to the Presbytery, the
Presbytery, to the Synod, and the Synod to the National assembly. One Pastor
also has priority before another, for age, for zeal, for gifts, for his good
deservings of the Church, each one honoring him whom God has honored, and as
he bears the image of God, which was to be seen amongst the Apostles
themselves. But none has power or jurisdiction above others: even as in nature
one eye has not power over another, only the head has power over all, even as
Christ over his Church. The same may be seen in the Commonwealth, and in
some of the offices of the Roman Church it self. And lastly, here there is a
subjection without slaverie, for the people are subject to the Pastors and
Assemblies, yet there is no Assembly wherein every particular Church has not
interest and power; nor is there any thing done, but they are, if not actually,
yet virtually called to consent unto it.

As they have done and suffered much for vindicating and maintaining the
liberty of their Religion, that what belongs unto God may be rendered unto
God; So do they desire, that according to the rule of righteousness, each man
have his own, and above all men, That the things which are Caesar's be rendered
unto him, and to give him that which is Gods were a wronging both of God and
Caesar. They have ever been willing to taxes and to pay subsidies above that
which they were able. They join with the inward reverence of their hearts,
external honor and obedience in all things lawful. They power forth their
prayers to God in private and public, for all blessings spiritual and
temporal upon his Royal Person and Government, and upon his Progeny; and for
the same blessings upon the Queens Majesty, especially that God by his Spirit
would give unto her the knowledge and love of the truth. They long for her
conversion as an happiness to her self, and a mean of great happiness to
the King, to their Children, and to all their Subjects. And, that the Lord may
answer their prayers, they think it incumbent to the Church of England, nor can
any bond whatsoever oblige them to the contrary, to use the best and most
powerful means, and would most willingly in all humility, love and respect,
join their endeavors for that blessed end. And as they thus present their
best desires and prayers, so are they ready to sacrifice their lives to God
for his Majesty's good, and in their hearts are grieved that their loyalty,
which they account their no small glory, should have been called in question.

Neither is this all. But moreover they do acknowledge that his Majesty, as
supreme Magistrate, has not only charge over the Commonwealth, but does
watch and has inspection over the Church and Church matters, but in a civil
way. Vos Episcopi in Ecclesia (says Constantine) Ego extra Ecclesiam Episcopus
a Deo constitutus sum. And therefore that he is, by his high calling and place,
Custos utriusque tabulae, to command the precepts of the first table as well as
of the second table to be obeyed: That he is Vindex Religionis by his sword,
as the Spirit of God in Scripture is Iudex, and the Church is Index: That he
has power to turn the constitutions of the Church into laws, and to confirm
them by the civil sanction in Parliament: That he may constrain all his
subjects to do duty in matters of religion, and may punish the transgressors:
That when debates arise about Religion, he has power to call the Assemblies
of the Church, to be present and civilly preside in them, and to examine their
constitutions, that he may discern of them both as a Christian caring for his
own soul, and as supreme Magistrate watching over his people: and that he may
do all things which can prove him to be a kind and careful nursing Father.
They account all that is vomited out to the contrary, [as, that they liked
Anarchie better then Monarchy, and that they would turn a Kingdom into a
democratie,] to be but the fictions and calumnies of the malicious enemies of
God and his truth; not unlike the lies which were devised against the
Christians of old: their consciences, their words, writings, and actions, even
then when the world did put the worst constructions upon them, were witnesses
of the integrity of their hearts. They do still hold that there can be no
antipathy betwixt one ordinance of God and another. By him Princes do reign,
and he has also appointed the Officers and Government of his own house. They
do desire nothing more then that the Son of God may reign, and that with and
under the Son of God, the King may command, and they, as good subjects to
Christ and the King, may obey.

FINIS.

