A VINDICATION OF KINGS AND NOBLES.

Against that ungodly paper called, The Alarm to the head Quarters.

By T. H.

LONDON, Printed for R. L. Nov. 15. 1647.

A Vindication of Kings and Nobles, against that ungodly paper called, An Alarm
to the head Quarters.
A Vindication and clearing of King Charles, against that ungodly paper called,
The Alarm to the head Quarters, that paper speaks maliciously and wickedly,
against the Title, Power, and Person of King Charles and his posterity.

I hope the head Quarters will not commend such an ungodly Book, for by the
help of God I shall make it plainly appear by the holy Scriptures, that Kings
do much good, and blessed is the Land where good Kings are: Therefore let those
that desire Anarchy count themselves slaves to their sins more then slaves to
their Kings, if he rule according to godly Laws, for all their bibble babbling
in that book, so leaving them to be wise in their own conceits, let us come to
show something of the wisdom of the word of God, first of all, before Noah's
flood we read of no Kings; and what wickedness was then committed, was not the
earth then filled with blood and violence, so that the Lord repented that he
had made man upon the earth, and so all was destroyed but eight persons, and so
there was no King in Judah nor in Israel, when the civil wars began in Gibath
of Benjamin, what a beastly act was there committed by this free people? how
were they inslaved to their sins? and would not give up those wicked men to any
justice, until ruin and bloodshed came upon them all, Judge. 10. 40. There was
no King in Israel, when they went tumultuously, and wickedly went to burn and
spoil their Neighbor Jephtaphs house, Judges 12. 1. and many times the people
of Israel were oppressed by the Midianites, and by the Moabites, and the
Cananites, until God raised them up a Judge or General to go before them and
deliver them out of the hands of their enemies, and for their Religion these
people of Juda and Israel when they had no King but God: they forsook him and
did evil in his sight, and served Baalim and As-shateroth, and the God of
Syria, and the gods of Zydon, and the gods of Moab, and the gods of Ammon, and
the gods of the Philistims, and forsook the Lord, and served him not, Judge.
10. 6, 7. And the anger of the Lord was hot against Israel: where then are
those men which put all fault in their King for their idolatry? when as the
people of Israel without a King, fell so much into idolatry, that God Almighty
bid them cry unto their false gods, he would deliver them no more, Judge. 10.
13, 14. Now at last all the Elders of Israel came to Samuel at Ramoth, and said
Make us a King to judge us like other Nations, when as yet the Lord their God
was their King.

And although Samuel told them the conditions of a King at large, Sam. 8. yet
no persuasions would prevail, but they would have a King to fight their
battles, like all other Nations, and God Almighty bid Samuel harken to the
people and make them a King, Sam. 10. 1. Then Samuel took a Violl of oil, and
poured upon his head, and kissed him, and said, Is it not because the Lord has
anointed thee to be Captain of his inheritance, and ver. 20. Saul is chosen of
the Lord in public, And ver. 24. The people shouted and said, God save the
King.

Now presently God works a deliverance to the people by his King, for Chap.
11. 1. the Amonites came up and besieged Iabesh Gillead, and would make no
Covenant, nor show no mercy, but to put out all their right eyes, but King
Saul gathered the people together and slew them, and scattered them so that
there was not two left together, and the people would have slain the enemies of
King Saul, had not the King hindered them.

Then after God chose King David, Sam. 16. Then Samuel took the horn of oil,
and anointed him in the midst of his brethren, and the spirit of the Lord came
upon David from that day forward.

Then Kings which come lawfully to be King, are of Gods choosing: Then let not
men rail like Shimei, in their words, and in their books, against Kings, nor
against our King, nor call him bloody man, as some do in their books, for it
is written, Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of the people.

But leaving these people to their own consciences, let us speak something of
the great good that many Kings have done.

Some good did King Saul, we read of little Idolatry in his days, and he
saved the people from the Amorites, he saved them from the Philistims, and
King David mourns for him, and says, he taught them to shoot, and clothed
them in Scarlet, and King David after him did great good, God Almighty enabled
him to overcome all the Heathen his enemies round about, he brought renown to
his Nation, and made the Cananites and the Amorites to pay Tribute, so that he
had a great name through out the whole World.

And for Religion he was most excellent, how many Psalms of thanksgiving did
this worthy King write how mightily did this King set out Gods works in the
creation of the world, and how does he record Gods deliverance in former times,
and how wonderfully did God reveal unto him by the spirit of prophecy, the
Kingdom of Christ, and how did the people and the King rejoice together in
their free will offerings toward the building of the Temple, and in their
Sacrifices and feasting, and then he blessed them in the name of the Lord, and
let them go. And after his decease, God chose Solomon to be their King, and
he was anointed by the Prophet, proclaimed with great joy, so that the earth
rang of the shouts of the people: Then why do Anarchy people scoff at the
anointing of Kings, are they wiser then their Maker? surely no, and we find
it no where forbid in the New Testament, but we are commanded to give Caesar
his due, and Christian Religion teaches us to honor the King, and to pray for
him and all that are put in authority by him, Saint Peter and St. Paul were
better taught in Christ's school then all the Anarchy men in the world. And was
not King Solomon the wisest man that lived, God almighty loved him, he builded
that famous Temple at Jerusalem, and directed and ordered stately and wise
orders in the Church and Commonwealth, as for his sins, God gave him
repentance, and therefore we ought to speak little of that, then after his
decease, by succession for many ages, God raised up his sons to be Kings,
Rehoboam, Abia, Asa, Jehosophat, Ahaziah, Joram, Jehonas, Amaziah, Azariah,
Jotham, Ahaz, Hezekias, and the rest, till the Captivity. Many of these were
godly and religious Kings, some were, indifferent, and some were very bad, yet
all were made Kings in order, Abia had some fear of God, and got a mighty
victory against Jeroboam, and Idol Priests. Asa feared God, and praid unto
him, and God gave him a mighty victory over the Blackmoores and Lubines, which
came to invade his Land, they had fared so well in his Grandfather Rehoboams
time, because he had fallen to idolatry, that they came again, but he made them
fly to Gaza, and took sheep and oxen, and an exceeding great spoil, and
Jehosaphat feared God, and maintained righteousness and true justice, charging
the Judges to do no wrong: And when he and the people fasted and prayed, when
three Kings with all their power, came up with all their hosts, the Lord heard
their prayers, and raisd up a Prophet to tell them that they should not be
afraid of them, but should go out against them, and so the Lord sent strife
among the Heathen Kings, that they destroyed one another in such abundance,
that the people were three days a gathering the riches which they left upon
the ground.

Thus God helped those good Kings, Hezekiah and Josias, many good Kings has
God sent amongst his people, and in many places we ought to judge so, and not
to cry out slavery because there are degrees of men one above an other, they
that are great and strong should help the needy and oppressed, and pull the
prey out of their strength which they have taken from the simple widows and
father less children. I hope none of these Anarchy people which are against
Kings and Nobles, I hope none of them will speak against the King of Saints in
heaven: for there are degrees of glory in heaven, yet all are free, one star
diffe^eth in glory above another, yet they should keep their places,
Godliness is great gain, if a man be content with his estate: And here in
England, God Almigty has sent us many good Kings, Queens, and Nobles, although
this Alarm paper does envy all the Norman Race and Orders of Lords, yet we
have had godly, learned, wise and valiant Kings and Nobles in this Land as any
other. What valiant Edwards have we had in this Land, which conquered that
great Kingdom of France, and made them pay tribute? And King Henry the Seventh
how valiant he was to pull the Kingdom out of the Usurper and Tyrants hand
Richard the Third. How wise and prudent was he in bringing Englands peace
again, how just was he in sitting in Courts of Justice many times himself:
What buildings did he build at Westminster? How valiant was his son Henry the
Eighth, and Edward the Sixth? what care had he of Religion? how charitable was
he to the poor Orphans of the City of London can tell, then Queen Elizabeth,
how constant was she in the Protestant Religion? how learned in Languages? how
wise and loving to the people? then King James a man very learned and
peaceable: And now King Charles has a great many good conditions. Who can tell
what favor the Lord will show him. Yet then I pray (good brother and sister)
to them that cry out thou art in slavery under Kings and Nobles, in this wicked
paper called, The Alarm to the head Quarters, have ye not a double heart, and
would you not have the brambles Kings of the Forest, if it be so, change your
minds, for certainly God Almighty will keep better order in the world,
therefore with the Apostles let us pray for Kings and Governors, that under
them we may live a free and godly life, in peace and honesty.

FINIS.
Imprimatur

I. Downame.


