AN ELEGY UPON THE Death of THOMAS Earl of Strafford, Lord Lieutenant of
IRELAND.

Who was beheaded upon Tower Hill, the 12 of May, 1641.

By THOMAS HERBERT.

Take an example from Lord Wentworth all,
Lest by high climbing you do chance to fall.


Printed Anno Dom. 1641.

AN Elegy upon the death of THOMAS Earl of Strafford, Lord Lieutenant of
IRELAND.
Awake my drowsy Muse, no longer dream,
But in Apollo's Sisters divine stream;
Go wash thy self, swiftly return again,
Begging Melpomene, her Tragic strain,
Noe Epithaliums, I intend to write,
Nor will I Comicke, Love Letters indite,
To want on Females, I must touch the urne,
Thaw frosen hearts, and make them with zeal burn;
I do intend, all Mortals to tell plain,
From Earth they came, to Earth they must again:
But yet before that sad tale I do begin,
I Will tell man what his Nature is, and how by sin,
Death is his wages, assist me then great GOD,
Whilst I show man, how he may escape thy Rod:
Draw an Example from Lord Wentworth all,
Whose Virtues lay obscured by his fall:
Man's definition is a Lump of Clay,
At first Divine, until sin drove away,
That happiness, joy, and felicity,
Were then transformed into misery;
Then man sublime, by Nature did he grow,
His Soul with sin, like high water did flow:
But Oh, Alas! by it what did he get,
A world of sorrow, and to live by swet:
Adam did lead the way, and we like fools,
Continue Trewants out of Virtues School.
Poor men are not content, but murmur still,
Because the World they have not at their will;
Rich men (like Poets Icarus) aloft do soar,
Never regarding they owe death a score;
Like Phaeton they vow for to ascend,
Although Jove's thunder, forces them to bend:
But whither ramble I? my Theme is to treat,
Of one whose Virtues once were counted great:
His vices I condole, wondering to see,
The Devils malice, linked with policy:
When he perceives a man like for to thrive,
In Gods affairs, then does he plot and strive,
Casting his golden baytes, Riches, and pride,
To hale him from such virtues clean aside:
Angels rejoice when as man does do well,
Devils Triumph, when as he is in Hell:
Was not this man, whose deeds we did despise,
Once pious, virtuous, learned and wise;
Which caused our King his fortunes for to raise*
In an iron age, for to see golden days,
Which he had enjoyd, had not the Devil,
By sugry baytes acquainted him with evil.
O what is wisdom if it be abused,
Or what the best of things, if but ill used;
The costliest jem, ill usage does deface,
The best of men sometimes come to disgrace*
Nor do I excuse him which does amiss,
Nor will I Serpent like, at's sorrows hiss
Had I his Honors upon me conferred,
Why might not I, as well as he been barred
From doing well, without JEHOVAHS aid?
My fame with his, in darkness might be laid;
O therefore let none in derision say,
There once the head of a false Traitor lay;
We all are Traitors unto Heaven, we all,
Are guilty of our Gransire Adams fall:
If GOD let slip, who is it which can stand?
The best may fall, and feel his powerful hand.
Satan himself was once an Angel bright,
Who now is Prince of the infernal night.
Those which do think themselves clearest from sin,
Know not the danger which their selves are in;
As before said, we all base Traitors are,
For which judgments do wait on us, though noe care,
Is taken to repent, if GOD strikes, we
Suffer not Earths, but Hellish misery.
Were GOD not merciful this very day,
Death might Arrest, Oh who could his debt pay;
That were not for to loose a life or name,
Wife, or Children, or a glorious fame,
But Soul and body, which do far excel,
Such Earthly trifles and be cast in Hell.
But to my Theme again, he wisdom had,
Honor and Riches, why was he so mad,
Then not to be content, but covet more,
And by ill courses to increase his store;
Some such a question may propose I know,
I answer thus, and thus their error show;
Why marvel'st thou that when man has honor,
He is apt to follow Satan's displayed Banner;
It is man's Nature still aloft to sore,
Though daily rising, yet would he rise more*
Honor it is true, an Earthly blessing is,
But yet sometimes it makes man do amiss;
Aiming at honor what Tragedies have been,
Acted by puffed up Spirits, blood was seen,
To die our Channels with a crimson gore,
Once here in England Traitors were sad store;
Man having Honors, and conjoined with pride,
To all affections made a nuptial Bride:
Whence came the Roman Civil War which taxt
The total circle Orb, and each man vexed;
But by two Spirits honored of all,
By which Caesar did rise, but Pompey fall:
Had not proud Haman honor as a King,
Who against poor Mordecaies complaints did ring;
Sitting in the Gate and to him did not bend,
Wherefore his Life on Gallows he must end.
But he escaped, and Haman he must die,
His honor brought him unto misery;
By which we may perceive, honor often times,
Ruins that man which highest seems to climb?
But yet mistake me not, I do not say,
Honor makes all men perish and decay:
Be that far from me. Peers are in our Land*
Decked with Honor, and yet firmly stand;
But GOD protects them, he does give them grace,
To rule their actions, and maintain their place;
Which that he may do still, let good men pray,
And condole him, which lately went astray;
Let all lament, that Satan has the force,
Man from his Heavenly maker to divorce;
To see that one, which late was of renown,
By Satan's malice should be overthrown:
Gush out in tears ye barrenest of eyes,
Break Adamantine hearts, that one so wise*
Unfortunate should be, so low to fall,
Let all good men lament his Funeral;
Not that he dyed, but that his death was bad,
Let that the object be to make us sad;
O ye Honors, why did ye not preserve
Your Masters life, why did you let him swarve,
From doing well, why did he eschew good,
Stayning by Treason his most noble blood.
Why stand ye silent, and me no answer give,
Tell me where is your Master, does he live?
Are Honors dumb, tell me ye riches then,
Where is your Lord, once famous amongst men
Methinks they answer me, and thus do say,
Going to death from him we sled away:
O why do men then with so greedy speed,
Run after Riches, when in our greatest need,
They cannot help us, why do mortals so
Hugg Baggs of gold, authors of Terrene woe?
Honor and Riches each man does desire,
Which causes are to set their hearts on fire:
With worldly vanities and damned sin,
Which are the causes we do grief live in;
O then contemn them, do them not regard,
But about thy Bul-wark still keep watch and ward*
Thy Soul I mean, which if but entered once,
It Is ten to one thou loosest not thy sconce;
O did we know the Devils malice all,
We would for Riches not so often call,
Which are but miseries, the Devils baytes,
Stuffed with venom, and cramb'd with decayts;
What will our Usurers refuse to do,
To obtain wealth, their Souls they will foregoe;
Rather than tenths ith hundred, as for death,
They do not fear it, push, they yet have breath.
O foolish worldling, sooth not up thy self,
That thou must live, because of worldly Pelf:
This very night thy soul may taken be,
And then for gold thou'st naught but misery:
Death fears none, no not the greatest Kings,
Monarchs he wounds, and to the grave down brings;
His dart can pierce the thickest Coat of Male,
Undaunted still he rangeth with looks pale,
And hideous, none sees him but does fly,
All are afraid Deaths dart for to come nigh,
But fly whither they came, Death will them meet,
And for their Honor, give a winding Sheet;
Courageous Soldiers, and the Courtier neat*
In person though tall, low, little or great,
If Death say unto them, ye mortals stand,
They dare not answer, Sir, at whose command?
If man but knew his own brittle estate,
And how he suject is unto each Fate:
His looks so lofty he would sure cast down,
Upon his grave, dig'd in some hole in the ground,
Who knows how soon his glass it may be run,
Which being out, alas his life is done.
Then does he wish he sooner had repent,
And in the world so vainly not been bent:
Their Riches, Honor, or their earthly fame,
Cannot redeem them from eternal shame.
As man must dye, so is there several ways
To cut him short, and end his wretched days.
None knowing when first borne what death to dye,
Whether by Rope* Knife, Axe, Artillery.
My Lord of Strafford, once sure little thought
Crimes at so high a rate to have had bought.
Each man can tell what present is, but who
What in the future he shall undergo?
Wherefore you which have honor and renowned,
Be sure that guilty you be never found*
In offering to your King and Country wrong*
By heinous deeds, or by offensive tongue*
If that your King do show unto you love,
Oh Love again, and treachery remove
Far from your hearts; if this you do deny,
Though Noble, yet disgraceful death you die*
Art thou admired for Wisdom, praise thy God,
O be not selfe-conceited, least his rod
Do bruise thee into Atomies; thy fame
Being metamorphosed to eternal shame.
Have Honors, Riches? o employ them well,
He which is Righteous bears away the bell.
Without the which, what thing so ere be thine,
Is but vanity, puffed with blustering wind*
They which desire to see JEHOVAHS face,
Earth must contemn, and seek for heavenly grace.
O let Lord Wentworths fall, which once was wise,
Cause us repent, that by it we may rise:
The quintessence of valor he accounted was,
But yet the Devil was too strong, alas!
Who can deride him? and not rather weep,
That he by Satan should be laid asleep
In vain security. Ireland forget his sin,
Only forsake those steps which he trod in.
To Englands Peers, let him example be*
Let them take warning by his misery.
A Traitors name, o let them count it base,
For of all scandalls, that is the worst disgrace*
O here in peace, let them still sit and sing
Praises to God* and Prayers for our King.
FINIS*

