THE CALIDONIAN FOREST.

By John Hepwith, Gent.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for R. Best, and are to be sold at his shop near
Grayes Inn gate in Holbourne. 1641.

The Calidonian FOREST.
WHilome divided from the maine land stood
A Forest in the circle of a flood.
Which was the Calidonian wood eclipt,
And long time there the Lion his Court kept,
And gave good laws, unto each plyant beast,
When bloody broils and rigid stirs were ceast,
For long had been the war and perilous
Between the Birds and Hippopotamus
For the Batavian Fens and Calidon
In the Sea-horse's cause did Arms put on
Against the Eagle, for great pity 'twere
That weakness should too much oppression bear.
But letting pass this needless talk, I Will tell
What in the Lions peaceful reign befell.
He ranging in the Forest on a day
Only for thirst of pastime not for pray,
A goodly Heart espies so fair a creature,
Acteon in his metamorphos'd feature
I ween was not, and well he knew by heart
Both graceful complement, and courtly art,
And due obeisance did unto his Grace,
Low lowting with his knees upon the grass.
The Lion with a blithe and merry look
His humble Subject from the ground up took,
And like a Prince both kind and Debonaire,
Him entertained with much language fair.
My friend, quoth he, thou must attend on me
To live at Court, it best beseems thee,
If to thy outward parts suteth thy wit,
Needs must thy service for a King be fit.
The beast then humbly thankt his Majesty,
And speaking with a graceful modesty
Thus said, My Pedigree is mean, not base,
For I was bred, and borne, of gentle race,
I cannot show a long continued line,
Nor boast of what I cannot claim for mine,
But for my service, if you please to use it,
Impose what charge you will, I Will not refuse it.
The Lion to be brief, leads him to Court,
Where he preferred him soon in such a sort
That he who was least fearde not long since,
Became in power even equal with his Prince,
Such heaps of honors were thrown on his back
As would have made the Giants shoulders crack
(Which holds up heaven) long with his Lord he rested
In sweet content, not envied, nor molested;
He for his kindred, did great fortune find,
Preferred the Roe, the Fallow Dear, the Hind,
For what he craved was his, he had the art
Of pleasing, and had won his Sovereigns heart,
Who in a jesting manner often would throw
His Royal Crown upon his branched brow,
And with some favor often would grace his horn,
Or with some goodly Gemme his ear adorn.
Well knew the Heart he was his eye-sights Jewel,
And to his fires still added store of fuel,
Often would he to some Crystal fountain trace,
And therein view his gilded head and face,
By the direction of that watery glass
There men ^ing what not to his likeing was,
Often would he wend unto the Adders Den,
Whom with his strong breath he drew forth, and then
Him swallowed quick, for to preserve his youth
Much pains he took, to keep his soft skin smooth.
His breast a pillow was for his Lords head,
His eyes were books, whereon he daily read,
Like to those loving B others in the sky,
They were endu'd with equal Sympathy,
His blisfull smyles presented to his Lord,
Their passions struck a mirthfull monacord,
His favors object he was only made,
H^s was the substance, all beasts else the shade,
Like those Fraternall lights, which do present
To joyful Seamen, hope of good event,
So they together ranged through the groves,
While all besides stood wondering at their loves.
Sertorius that famous Roman knight,
Would never bring his Soldiers out to fight,
Till he had been by his white Hind advised
Of future haps, even so the Lion prized
The Counsel of this Heart, and did commit
All weighty Matters to his trust and wit;
He made him Ruler of the great green Lake:
The Lyonell him for his Mate did take*
When he to the Hesperian Forest went,
For by his old Sire he was thither sent,
Not for a golden Apple, or a fleece
Of Gold, but for to Court the Eagles niece,
So was he blessed by hap, that he came back,
Without a Mistress, and without a wrack.
The beasts at his return did so rejoice,
That Hills and Valleys sounded with the noise.
The Camel danced, the horse for joy did wince,
And all the Forest echoed, welcome Prince;
The Heart for his good service done they praised,
And would have been contented to have raised
Statues in's honor, if they had not thought
Idolatry thereby might in be brought.
Twice had not Sol past through the Zodiac,
Ere Leas death clad all the beasts in black.
Then with applause and hope they entertain,
The brave young Lion for their Sovereign,
He bent to glorious actions did provide,
Great forces to abate the Eagles pride,
She banding with the Dragon that does dwell,
In Satan's Den near the high way to hell,
(As Poets say) had wrought such grief and sma^t
To beasts and Fishes, even in every part.
This monstrous Dragons nature was so strange,
So noisome, that he needed not to range
About the world to pass the Alps, or Seas,
To plague his wretched foes, for heat case,
And lurking in his filthy hole and nest,
Could quite destroy, or Fish, or Foul, or beast,
He could infect the Air, with his rank breath,
And on each obj^ct glance, naught else but death;
Pure Crystal streams he turns to poison black,
Where he opposed, all surely went to wrack.
Besides he had a sort of noisome Creatures
At his command, which indisguised features,
Would search each Clime, and wont to fly by night
(The story says) the Cockatrices height.
These were his damned Ministers, these caused
Great funerals, and made all beasts amazed.
That few or none the Dragon durst contemn,
His strength and Malice so affrighted them.
Fish, foul, and beast, he long time ruled at will:
What he required, they durst not but fulfill.
He did usurp that power, which he well knew,
Was both the Lions and the Eagles due.
But Jove that sees, and rules all things below,
Resolves to let his pride no higher grow.
Least like his old, snake-footed Ancestry,
His proud Ambition, might annoy the sky.
Then sends he down his winged post to have,
Who through the bright Spheres in a moment past,
And first in the Hircinian forest lights,
Where he his message openly recites
Unto the Eagle who was hitherto
Jove's own dear hird, though now she be not so.
He told her that the Dragons power was not
By law obtained, but by oppression got,
That in the Forest he no title had,
Of Rule or Soveraignety, but what was bad.
And what he had by falsehood erst obtained,
Be now with Craft and open wrong maintained.
The Scepter of the Forest is (said he)
Thy due, (O Princely Bird) except it be,
Where the bold Lion umpires, or his beast,
The Dragon has no right nor interest,
To rule within the limits of thy woods
A thief he is, and robs thee of thy goods.
Then let him be cashiered, thrust out from hence,
Renounce all fealty, and obedience
Erst done to him, for now Jove thee commands
To pluck thy freedom from the Tyrants hands.
This said, the Eagle with a lowly nod
And Cringe, did do obeisance to the God,
And thus beginning after a short pawse,
Against her self Maintains the Dragons cause.
A Crown (said she) best fits the wisest head,
As does a Miter the best littered,
And who more prudent then the Dragon is,
Who more exact in Acts, and sciences?
He he alone keeps all the sacred keys,
Of holy and religious mysteries.
And if that strength beseemes a ruler well
In valor, who may be his Parallel?
The stoutest beast is with his noise dismayed,
Yea of his wrath the Lion is afraid.
Therefore the Dragon best deserves to be
The Forest Prince, and so shall be for me.
Hermes that could not her proud language brook
Longer, bewraid his anger with his look,
And through disdain to bid the Dame adue,
He took him to his wings, and thence he flew.
He gone the whole assembly began to mutter,
And each his mind did to his fellow utter,
The Kite the Eagles answer did allow,
So did the Owl, the Ostrich and the Crow,
But so did not the Storke and Pelican,
The watchful Crane, the Falcon, and the Swan,
The Bear, the Wolf, the Boar, the Stagge, the Hind,
Were altog^ther of the Eagles mind.
But the Elephant, the horse, the Unicorn,
Did their opinions contradict, and scorn,
And said, she to the Dragon did submit
Herself, for her own proper benefit,
Forsooth that she might by this power draw,
Her subjects into a more servile awe,
Or if ambition did not cause the Error,
It was ignoble Cowardice, and terror
Of his great force, who was indeed a beast,
Of no such strength and vigor, as she guest,
And as for his Religion (they say all)
It was but merely Hypocritical;
A feigned feature to beguile his friend,
A tool made by him, to work his own end;
And therefore they would never more accord,
To take so base a scarecrow, for their Lord,
This disagreements of opinion stirred,
Beast against beast, and Bird was against bird.
Thus in the Hircinian Forest 'gan the strife,
Which mickle blood has cost, and many a life.
But Hermes now had pli'd his wings so well,
That in the woods of Calidon he fell,
And did his message to the Lion there,
The same which erst to the Eagle he did bear.
The Lion and the beasts attentively
His Counsel heard, then with one voice did cry,
The God speaks well, nor is it meet or fit
Said they, that we the Dragon should permit,
To umpire in the limits of our woods,
Therefore we are resolved to spend our bloods,
Our selves from his authority to free,
The Lion our sole General shall be.
Hermes replied, the auspicious Deityes,
Shall second your thrice worthy enterprise,
And that the Princely Lion may not fear
The Dragons devilish spite, we give him here,
An herb of force, so rare and exquisite,
That it does frustrate all enchantment quite.
Most thankfully the Lion his gift took,
Expressing plain with gesture and with look
Acceptance kind, the God bids him adieu,
And up into Jove's ayrie place he flew,
Where to the Senate of the Gods he told,
How by the Eagle he had been controld.
And how the Calidonian Lion did
Resolve to do, what his advise did bid.
And did the Eagle (quoth the Thunderer)
Thus slight our message, and our messenger?
With that he leaning on his Ivory Rod
Made heaven, and Earth, and Seas at once to nod,
By shaking of his terrifying locks,
And thrice his hand upon his breast he knocks.
Is all respect (said he) now clean forget,
What damned ungrateful humor does besot,
That rash fond foolish Bird? did I in vain,
Make her the Birds dread Queen and Sovereign?
Did I so often daine to put on her shape,
From Iunoes watchful eye to make escape;
Was her form only fit to make my theft,
When of her Ganimed, I Troy bereft?
Did I my sacred self hide in a feature,
Of so disloyal and so vilde a creature?
Were thou (false Bird) thought worthy for to bear,
The fiery Weapons of the Thunderer?
What dare not mortals do, if they see me
At thy contempt to winck, not punnish thee?
And thou O Dragon sweld with poisonous pride,
Whose speckled bulk nine Acres breadth does hide,
Then his keen bolt with fearful countenance,
He takes in hand beginning to advance
His everlasting fist, while all the route
Of Deities did quake, save Juno stout,
For still the angry Gods did much repine,
To see the Arcadian Bears, bright Nonacrine
And her young Son, to shine before her face,
The bright Memorialls of that great disgrace;
That Jove had done her bed, now is time fit,
Thought she, to try with wedlock breakers quit;
And as he has fixed just before my face
My foes, I will serve him with the same sauce,
And ere he could let fly his doleful dart
Against the Eagle, and the Dragons heart;
From earth she scatcht them up, (him unawares)
With an impetuous wind, and made them stars,
The Dragon she did place close by the Bears,
Them ever to torment with horrid fears,
For though they were twice changed, yet they enjoyed
Their former minds, and feared to be destroyed,
By the fierce Dragons wrath, who swiftly does,
Always about the Poole pursue them both,
But angry Jove full of disdain, and scorn,
To be thus checked, strictly enjoined the morn,
That when he drove the heard of stars too slack,
There burning heat in Amphytritis lake,
He should remember to fulfill his mind,
And leave the thirsty Dragon still behind,
But in remembrance of old Jove, he gave
The Eagle leave, her wings in Seas to lave.
This rash act of Jove's queen bred diverse rumors
Above, the Gods according to their humors,
Censured the fact, and most did Juno blame,
But great despite did Jove's heart so inflame,
That once he was resolved down from the skies,
Quite to Cashiere all female Deities.
Then wise Minerva rose up from her place,
With splendent luster, and a comely grace.
Not wrath, but modesty made her look red,
For those that will persuade, must not be led
By choler, then a low voyc'd murmur fills
The Court, such sound within the shallow rills,
Pibbles are wont to make, when they do chide
The stream, because she will not faster glide.
Thus she begins, If all for ones offense
Must smart, then what avails innocence?
If that some one has done amiss, then shall
The vengeance of the crime extend to all,
Is this your Justice, wherein does rely,
(Ye Gods) your kingdoms great eternity?
Are all good turns worn out of mind and gone,
What do the Gods admit Oblivion?
Were Victory and I your chiefest help,
When earth sent forth her hundred pawed whelpe,
To throw you headlong from the battlements,
Did she and I alone stand at defense,
When ye in Niles seven doors your selves did hide
In various shapes, for fear to be descride,
Then let us all be to the Earth confined
In hills or woods, we shall some harbors find.
The Nymphs shall entertain us in some grove,
And old Silvanus shall be then our Jove;
Such pastimes we shall meet withal below,
As all the skies the like did never show.
Then come along Astrea with thy train,
(All faith and pity hence) ye shall again
To earth perforce, dispatch and come away
(O Victory!) Juno make no delay;
Let Jove make merry with his Nonacrine,
His pretty Ganymed, and Hebe fine.
The Goddesses thus ready to depart,
Jove suddenly did from his throne up start,
And by the sleeve disdainful Juno snacht,
But Vulcan, as he would have Pallas caught,
The angry Dame, so rough a knock him wrought,
That unto him she mickle sorrow brought.
With the but-end of her lance, that the lout
Saw plainly then the world turned round about.
But while the God with lowly blandishment,
To pacify the Goddesses was bent,
Vulcan brings in a Flaggon and a Cup,
With lusty Nectar to the brim filled up,
To Juno he a bowl gives, she to Jove,
In wine remembers all respect and love,
He pledged her, and to Pallas dranck another,
She drinks to Mars, and Mars to Cupids mother.
Thus like the Sheares full bowls went round apace,
And Phoebus did their mirth with Music grace,
While to his Harp the Muses did apply,
Their voices with a heavenly Symphonie.
So long they quaff'd, such was the liquors strength,
That soon a sleep they cought down all at length.
But now I come back, leaving them at rest,
Unto the Matter whence I have digrest.
Now are the Lions ships met altogether,
And under sail to go, the Lord knows whether.
But first I should recount as it is meet,
Who were commanders in this goodly fleet.
Then Oh the thrice three Nymphs, that dwell upon
Parnassus green, and shades of Helicon,
Assist me with your skill, whilst I rehearse
Names of those doughty wights, whom courage fearce
And thirst of Reputation led as far,
As the Herculian pillars to make war.
The Heart was in respect of office tide,
As many say, this enterprise to guide.
But loath the Lion was to condescend,
To trust unconstant Neptune with his friend;
For it had rashness argued to have let,
So fair a Gemme at six and seven be set,
Yet some affirm that he to Sea had gone,
Had not the Silver Nymphs made such moan,
That altogether to the Lion came,
Beseeching him to keep the Heart at home,
For to say truth, green cool and shady bowers,
Soft Grassie bancks, and beds of fragrant flowers;
The remiss nature of the beast did please,
Better then hard ribb'd Ships and troubled Seas;
But in his room the Mule went sole Commander,
A well experienced Knight, an ancient stander,
He for so great a charge was thought most fit,
For practice long had seasoned well his wit,
There went the Horse for brave achievements bred,
Whom false Hiennas foul adulterous bed
Had nigh well slain of yore, the Bull, the Bear,
The Mastiffe and the greedy Hound were there,
But so was not the Boar who had changed knocks
Not long before with the Iberian Fox,
And died soon after, and with him deceased
As many fear the fortune of the beast:
Like those adventurous Gentlemen of Greece
To Colchos sailing for the goulden Fleece,
Or like those fifty Knights sworn to destroy
For wanton Helens rape, unhappy Troy:
So did these Gallants glide in Neptunes breast
With passing pride, till all heads were possessed
With expectation of great deeds of worth,
Even so the Mountains traveld, and brought forth
A Mouse, they went for gold, but sure I am
They brought naught home worth speaking of but shame.
Fortune miscarried their attempts they said,
For had she lent them her auspicious aid,
Good service had been done, but whosoere
Was to be blamed, the Mule the burden bare,
And through extreme despair desired to dye,
Lamenting his unhappy destiny,
To quench his thirst of death, himself he cast
Into the maine, where he had drunk his last,
If Thetis in a pitiful regard
The life of the poor miser had not spared.
She softly entertaines him in her wave,
And while he strives to make the Sea his grave
His featur's changed, and he 's with feathers clad
And turned into a foul, yet still he had
The self same mind, and full of anger still
Because he must live, sore against his will,
Into the air on high he mounted often,
And on the waves himself throws from aloft,
His feathers eased his fall, full often he dives
Into the maine, to dye in vain he strives.
Care and displeasure makes him lean and bare,
His neck and bill still long and slender are,
So are his legs, in Sea he lives always,
This Foul is called a Gull, as Seamen say.
Much damage and more infamy lights on
The stout inhabitants of Calidon,
For this inglorious voyage and that wood
Which erst a terror to each Forest stood,
Was now no better then a Hens neast thought,
Unto so low an ebb the beasts were brought.
They much perplexed did to the Temple fly,
Imploring aid and pity from the sky,
They crave a medicine for their maladies.
And long to find out where the humor lies
That breeds their troubles, they conclude at last
A sacred Messenger to send in haste
To Delphos by Apollos Temple graced,
Which in the middle of the Earth was placed
The Elephant was thought to be most fit
To take this charge, for gravity and wit
He to the Temple comes and humbly falls
Before the Altar of the God, and calls
For his auspicious lot with mind and voice.
Then suddenly was heard a hideous noise
Of the approaching God; the Priest does cry,
Be all profane far off, the God is nigh.
Then with deep terror was the Pilgrim struck,
The place, the Laurel, and the Altar shook,
The Quiver of the God likewise did shake
And from the Vault a hollow voice thus spoke.
When the humor which is bred
In The heart, shall cease to annoy the head,
When Justice shall not be controld
By greatness, nor be bought nor sold,
When smoothed vice shall be cast down
And honor be fair Merits crown,
When gleaning Patrons shall desist
To ask an offering of the Priest,
When crafty Foxes shall not pluck
The silly Goose, and foolish Duck,
When greedy Wolves shall cease to cramb
Their guts with blood of tender Lamb;
Then shall your Forest find relief,
And be preserved from fear of grief.
The Elephant returns, while all expect
And are assembled to hear the effect
Of his Embassage, and he does report
The answer of the God, in open Court,
The Lion, and the Heart, the Wolf, the Bear,
The Bull, the Buffle, and the Elke were there,
The noble Unicorne was not in place
For he offended had the Lions grace,
And in his white Rock was imprisoned
Because the young Monoceros he did wed,
The Princely Leopard borne of high stem,
And was indeed fit to be linck'd with them,
But sore displeasure did the Lion fill
Because the Lovers sought not his good will
Ere they did match, but others said the Heart
Unto the Unicorne bred all the smart,
For he thought to have matched as most did guess,
The Buck his cosen with the Leopardesse;
But so kind Hymen for the Damsel stood
That she got one more worthy of her blood.
Now began the wiser Beasts to call to mind
The Hearts assent, his merit, and his kind,
They saw him in the highest circle fixed,
That very little distance was betwixt
The Lion and his height, when he each day
Did feast with honor, and with honor play.
So did Adonis in the Paphyan Grove
On Bosie beds sport with the Queen of love.
They saw him turn about the Orbs at will,
Yet had this wood received no good, but ill
From his great inauspicious influence.
Thus then the Elephant began: far hence
Be all unbridled headstrong passion,
Let Justice, Piety, Religion,
Be Mynates here, great Empires within these
No Empires are, but mighty Theeveries.
And since this Court affords a remedy
For each abuse, and gives free liberty
Unto the sick weal public to descry
What breeds her pain, and where the same does lie;
Then let my zeal crave gentle sufferance
To speak for her, but ill I deem my chance
That I must bring again upon the stage,
Things erst done by so great a personage
As is the Heart, but alas it is not I,
It is your Country, and your Monarchy.
Oh mighty Lion, they are both dismayed,
With fear of Dissolution, and crave aid.
The fierce Iberian Griffin stands before us,
Pressed to epsy advantage to devour us,
And mischief, malice, war, about him skip,
He threats the sword, the rope, the yoke, the whip;
Our weakness makes him strong, our cowardice
Does promise fortune to his enterprise.
And yonder does the Eagle prey upon
Our overmatcht Allies, while we look on,
And friendly Rhyne, low in his channel lies,
And to his Rills in vain for succor cries.
For burnt faced ruin has Carrous'd them up
With Healths to Dissolution in a cup,
Composed of ashes, rubbish, dust, and stone,
The hideous work of dire confusion.
And at our Elbow stands the Crocodile
Masking his rancour with a feined smile.
He animates us to begin the war,
But malice is a divellish counselor.
Behold yon green eyed Lake, whose gentle flood
With kind embraces clip, and hug our wood,
And stand like walls by Jove and Neptune fixed
Our cruel enemies, and us betwixt.
Our enemies have won those walls, how can
The Town hold out when all the walls are taken
Not long since were we Lords of Sea and Land
Durst breath in any air, tread any sand
Our Spartanes virtues, and Herculian vigor
Releiv'd the weak pulled down the oppressors rigor,
But now alas things have put on new shapes,
Our Forest is become a Den of Apes.
The greedy Ostridge, and the obscene Owl
Do Timber in our woods and Satyrs foul
Frequent our thickets, virtue is divorced,
From greatness, Natures excellence is forced
By appetite, and reason is defloured
By vile affections, Arts are now devoured
By great panch'd ignorance, fidelity,
Consists in Lucre, and in Luxury.
Our Forest is a field of naughtiness,
Or rather like foul Lernas marrishnesse,
Where sin does lurk, crested with many crimes
Like Hidra, oh Alcides, help betimes,
Help mighty Prince, and banish all delay,
Meet the approaching ill, and take away
Pernicious causes, nor do we envy
Against thy judgment, Royal Majesty
That thou thy Heart in so high place do hold
Princes affections must not be controld
By subjects humors, for there love may fly
Or high or low, none ought to ask them why
To rule, and not to serve Kings were ordained,
They may be often advised but near constraind.
Yea though the State through their ill government
Be sure to fall, Subjects must be content.
But as the laws of God and man oblige
Subjects unto their Sovereign Lord and Liege,
So does the laws of God alone bind Kings,
With equity to steer the course of things.
But if they shall neglect their charge and cure,
None must for reformation put in ure
Any sinister course, for they alone
To God must give account what they have done,
But as all force is divelish and profane
By vassals against their Princes undertane,
So wholesome counsel is a sovereign way
To work with them, in some respects though they
Be Gods, yet like men do they understand,
So die they shall, though they like Gods command.
Whilome (dread Sovereign) was the Hearts good grace,
As high in peoples favor, as in place,
But things grown to their height needs must we see
Decline, the very Stars unstable be;
No sooner Sol begins to rise then fall,
The infant that begins to live, withal
Begins to dye; yet still might thou have stood
Untoucht, O Heart, had thou been still as good
As great, more would the Elephant have spoke,
But night came on, and the assemblies brake.
Henceforth against the Heart began many rise
Accusing him of great enormities,
Light fame, as quick of hearing as of flight,
That seldom does befriend a favorite,
Soon hears the accusation of the Heart,
And in a thousand scrols writes every part,
And as it matters were not ill enough,
She adds something still of her own stuff,
With these same scrols she filled her wide mouthd scrip
And with her wings the buxome air does clip,
And as she flew the Forest round about,
Whole handfuls of her scrols she casts out,
So does Septembers careful seedsman throw
The kirnels plumbe before the crooked plough;
Such bitter libels did this tattler spread,
That heartily all wished, the Heart were dead,
So high the fury of the beasts were grown
That sore the Heart began to fear the Crown,
Therefore to shun each dirie accident,
He to the house of Politea went
To crave her counsel in so hard a case;
Low in the gloomie vale her Palace was
Hewne from a Marble Rock by Mulciber
The craftsman of the Gods, she dwells there
Secured from danger of damned treachery
Who once to undermine her house did try,
Thinking to have blown her up into the skies
As does the Giant which in Etna lies,
Spew flaming stones, no thorow-faire is there,
No Hermits Cell, no shepherds Cottage near,
No beasts do graze upon the neighbor hills,
No chirping birds the cliffes with ecchos fills;
Black sollitude there always walks the round
With foulded arms and eyes bent to the ground.
Upon the top of all the house was reared
A Tower, which so exceeding high appeared,
That it Ixion-like did seem to kiss
The clouds, on top of which there seated is
One called providence, who holds a glass
Wherewith she sees what is done in every place
Beneath the Cope, with this she does epsy
The drifts of Kings, and hidden plots descrie,
A huge high wall was built about the place
In which not any port or entrance was
Except one private posterne, which was kept
By a grave Sire whose secrecy was clept.
The Heart comes to the door and safely knocks,
The watchful Porter with long snowie locks
And beard, soon heard the sound, and soon drew near,
But ere he did unlock, asked who was there,
A friend quoth the Heart, then he inquired his name,
What was his errand, and from whence he came,
With such wise answers, did the Heart him win,
That he unlockt the gate, and let him in;
Then did a goodly groom discretion height,
To Paliteas Hall conduct him right,
Where on such uncouth shapes of things he gazed,
That like a Statue he stood still amazd.
Upon an arch sat Politea high,
With many Dames in seemly order by.
And though she and the Ladies seemd to be,
As jolly Dames as eyes could wish to see.
Yet she alas was changd in face and grace,
Ere since the fair Astrea lost her place
And most part of her train, that sat hereby
Were but mere shades made to delude the eye,
But fierce ambition beaten and repeld
From her attempt in the Phlegrean field
Where she was hunting them, earths graceless fries
To mount on Mountains, and to climb the skies,
Yet still retaind her former spite and hate,
Although the blow did much her strength abate,
But having proud the prowess of the Gods
And to her cost and sorrow seen the odds,
She would no more in arms against them go,
But mean to single out a weaker foe
Great Politea that renowned Queen
Was she on whom she vowed to wreck her teene,
But laying steely arms and shield aside
Another way to work her ends she tried;
She by a treaty thought to get more gain
Then ere by open force she could attain,
A beauteous Lady in her train she had
Which high desire her all in white she clad
And with an Olive wreath she dight her head,
And in her hand she likewise carried
An Olive branch, a hundred Maids of honor
(With Olive likewise crowned) did weight upon her,
Though these like messengers of peace were clad
Yet war and murder in their hearts they had,
For they were all begirt with faulchons keen,
Which underneath their vestures were not seen,
She these instructs with wondrous subtilties,
Under pretense of Friendship to surprise
Queen Politeas fort, but when she came
Near to the place, they sent a crafty Dame,
Before unto the Castle, to obtain a maine,
A safe conduct for desire, and her train.
This speedy Herald delectation height,
As fair a creature to the outward sight,
As ever eye beheld, and yet was she
As foul deformed a monster as could be,
Besides her outward grace she had a tongue,
Most skillfull to persuade, and passing strong;
She having entered Politeas Hall,
Where then was sitting amongst her Ladies all
Between Religion, and Astrea fair,
So wittily her message did declare,
That Politea gave her free consent,
That foul desire and all her Rabblement,
Might come into the fortress, all in vain
Astrea and her fellows did complain;
And like Liceas priests with flaring hair,
With outcries shrill, they rent the tender air.
Trust not ambitious friendly shows they cried,
Trust not desire, let access be denied,
And like Troyes unbeleeved Prophesies,
They did presage approaching miseries,
In vain they told of dangers that were near,
For Politea would not lend an Ear.
Then fraught with grief, and deep disdain they flew
From thence to heaven, and bid the earth adieu;
Thus Politea was quite left alone;
Religion, Justice, Temperance were gone,
Faith, Pity, Fortitude, were flowne away,
None of Astreas train behind would stay,
But hope, for she bewailing the weak state
Of wretched men slunck close by out at gate,
And to the wide world did betake her self,
A professed foe to that most dammed elfe;
Which height despair, she gives men much relief
That be in pain, Calamity and grief,
Now is despair at Politeas Fort,
Safely arrived, and entering the Court.
A Dame that kept the Tower of consent,
The keys thereof did unto her present;
Then on she went into the Hall apace
Where Politea, at her feet craved grace,
Which she obtained, but one this Condition
Forsooth, that she forth with yield to Ambition
all Homage, fealty, and Obedience,
And always hold her for her Liege and Prince;
To keep these Covenants she was bound by oath,
So she her honor lost and freedom both;
Then Superstition, false-hood thi^st of gain,
Succeeded fair Astrea, and her train,
Yea bloody Murder, and foul treachery,
Then straight crept closely in and there stood by,
And though the Heart saw them he could not spy,
Their ugly shapes and great deformity;
For they were clad in virtues fair array,
Which she had lest in haste to fly away,
Their faces sprent, were with a tincture vile,
Made of the ordure of a Crocodile,
And Dragons milk, love did Medea move,
To use this Ceruse, first for Iasons love;
But the Heart viewed with most intention,
The workmanship and rare Invention;
That there on every side was to be seen,
Where many Statues were of famous men,
High in the roof, which dust well nigh defaced,
Where Numa, Solon, and Lycurgus placed,
And many other did stand them beside,
Which time had made unfit to be descri'd,
Each politicians plot was there displayed,
From point to point, as it at first was laid;
The Pope was pictured there, and Charles the great
Each helping other, to Atchieve his feat.
Charles for the Empire of the West did try
His skill the Pope for his Supremacy:
Pope Hildebrands foul plots were there expressed,
Against the Luchers Empire of the West,
Pope Alexander and his wicked Son,
Duke Val^ntine, Machivells paragon
Were figured there, with their damned subtilty,
To g^t the Soveraignetie of Italy,
And Machivell was likewise to be seen
There with the proud D. Alva and the Scottish Queen,
And so was Barnavelt, who had of late,
A Traitor been to the Netherlanders state,
Besides were portray'd amongst all these,
Don Spinola the warlike Genoavyes,
And Gondamor, two old ill-looking Scots,
Who both did seem to be contriving plots,
To make their Mr. Western Emperor,
Full fast they plied their work and labor sore,
All forms of State likewise that ever were,
Were to the eye plainly descryed there,
Firm Monarchies and Aristocrasies,
Oligarchies, and worse Democrasies.
The Heart delivered from astonishment,
Before the Throne of Poletea went,
And falling on his knees did her entreat,
To stand his friend and teach him some good feat,
The fury of his foes to turn away,
Who had indented to work his decay.
The Dame replies, our greatest pleasure is,
To succor those that are in deep distress,
Therefore we pity thee, for thee it is good,
To be Commander of the Silver flood,
Which Cantaber is cleeped, where do dwell
The learned Sirens, which strange things can tell,
And then be safe, let Justice work her worst,
And with displeasure her own bowels burst.
The Heart from this advise much comfort had,
And to the Forest returned blithe and glad,
Where he reported to the Lions grace,
(For in his favor still he had a place)
The manner of his voyage, and success,
And how the Goddess taught him to redress
His griefs; Him he besought to stand his friend,
Whereby his aims might hit their wished end.
Then did he send a trusty Messenger,
To the inhabitants of Cantaber,
The Lion likewise for him interceeds,
By Messengers unto the Reverend heads,
For out of Sixteen heads issued the flood
Devoid of ^agged Moss and filthy Mud,
He tumbled on a Sandy bed full clear,
Where under Peasant might not approach near.
But on his grassie bancks with Laurel Crowned,
The Nymphs and Fayries sat in circle round,
Composing wreathes of never dying Bayse,
To deck those heads, whose knowledge merits praise.
But in this sixteen headed spring did sit,
So many Sirens grave in years and wit,
These by a higher power, were put in trust
To order things, and keep all right and just;
But one above them all was placed high
In honor, and in grave authority,
Which height Learned Panace a Lady fine,
And far renowned for skill and medicine;
But Dinamene had the second place,
A Dame of Comely countenance and grace.
Yet were her Oseants stained with lustful flame,
From Tyncas she had an evil name,
She often wont to leave the Crystal floods,
And seek her lovely stripling in the woods,
Glytephone, and fair Philacreete,
Armold, and sage Pilitrope,
Eusibia, Panope, and Encrate.
Thomesty, just and wise Polime,
Patient Cymodoce, that could assawge
The surging Seas, when they began to rage,
Kind Elimuce and Antonene,
Faithful Memphee, and old Zione.
All these the Daughters were of mighty Jove,
Begot by him in the adjoining Grove,
An Academie fair, the elder daughter
Of Cronus and Minerva, for long after
Minerva bare another lively Dame,
Begotten of Cronus on the bancks of Them.
Besides the sixteen Sirens fair, which were
Chief in the flood, three thousand more were there,
Begot all by Phoebus, and great Jove,
Nursed and brought up all by their neighbor grove.
The Hearts swift post comes to the gentle River,
Where he his masters letter did deliver,
Unto the Sirens, who as it fell out
Were in their sacred bowers met about
Some great affairs, nor did the Messenger
Forget with gentle language to prefer
His masters humble suit, and thus he said,
Lo he that long has the great Ocean swaid,
Who to the Fritians does prescribe a law,
And keeps Eolus blustering Sons in awe,
Even he the Empire of your flood stands for,
Desires to be your Lord and Governor,
And what the Lion might command, he now
Requesteth, so his mildness does him bow;
Refuse not then the Heart, who is so kind
For your good Lord; since it is your Sovereigns mind.
This said the Sirens did his absence crave,
And told him soon, he should an answer have.
Then ^^g^ P^ra^ her self to advance,
St^ing the assembly with an Austere glance,
Two things (said she) invites us to deny
The Hearts request: First does the peoples cry
Deem him unworthy of so great a place,
And secondly his weak and wretched case,
Makes him unfit to oversee our flood,
Least he should fail at need to do us good;
But on the other side his Princes love,
To take him for our Ruler does us move,
Time is a salve for many soars, but hate
Of Kings displeasure no time did ere abate,
Should we adore the rising sun, or when
He Is at the hight, fall down before him, then
We might be deemed by some misdeeming Syres,
To be no better then vile Flatterers;
But doubtless him in his design to prop,
When he is like into the deep to drop,
It is an action that deserves best,
The favor of the Gods, then his request
(And our dread Sovereigns will,) ye shall allow,
If my persuasion may avail with you;
I often have heard well taught experience sing,
It Is greatest wisdom, for to please a King.
This said, a confused rumor the house filled,
But Pyamene his opinion held;
And so did many more grave headed wights,
Some fear, and thirst of honor some invites
To make the Heart their Lord, but one true blade,
Whom Tytan had of better metal made,
Did stoutly stand against gray headed wit,
Most voices yet at length, miscarryed it,
But though the Heart obtained this great place,
The silly beasts still hated his good Grace.
Then he the Camel made of his great kin,
Who likewise was grown mighty by great sin,
For he was not to Lordly Manners borne,
But fortune honored him with plenties horn,
For ranging in the Forest on a day,
By accident he found a goodly prey.
A Lady fair was on a green banck laid,
Her Limbs in Careless posture all displaid,
Which under a thin veil were half descri'd,
In empty clouds so Phebe wont to hide
Her bashful face, when she was gazed upon,
With a sixth eye, by her Endymion;
Certes she was one of Dianas dames,
Whom a long chase, and bright Apolloes flames,
Had from the plains into the cool shade sent,
For sweet repose and gentle solacement;
The Camel, such was his most happy lot,
Did find her sleeping, and so near her got,
That he lost not his opportunity,
But so prevailed that he with her did lie,
Lewd Priapus went often in such guise,
Some light heel'd Nymphs in Court for to surprise.
The Camel lying with the Lady gat^
Great store of money, and a great estate,
Her name was Thesenia the fortunate,
Her prateing Lovers she went to elate
To high degrees, hard was my destiny,
Cause with that less, I found not grace to lie
Who makes her Lovers rich and happy too,,
And yields to each that has a face to woo.
The Camel lying with this St^^mp et grew,
Worthy to wear a goodly gown of blew,
How does that giglet fortune favor fools
F^r he was neither well trained up in Schools,
Nor ever could he of a fine wit vaunt
But he was passing bold and ignorant,
Yet expert was he in his faculty.
Oh what an easy Art is knavery!
Thus do great knaves become great men alone,
Whilst true Nobility is trod upon;
The Scholar spends his wit, and none regards him,
The Soldier spends his blood, and none rewards him.
The virtuous Gentleman, whom competence
Protects from want, and pinching Indigence,
May live at home in mean and honest port,
Near looking for preferment at the Court.
Now was the Camel with great office graced,
And high in awefull seat of Honor placed,
With looks and words the Stygian Frogs did check,
Who went to cry Coax breck Ekex neck,
Four times a year in that great Hall, from whence,
Astrea fled away three ages since,
Nere was it known before, that Justice did
Depend on Hymen, or wait on a Bride,
She did not Nuptials know, nor what was meant
By Venus sport of Junos blandishment,
She is a Queen by birth, but made a slave,
Damned be those heads that did her thus deprave.
Thus at length with the Camel the Heart tied
Bonds of Alliance, to make a stronger side;
And then he calls from the Cimerian land
The reverend Ass, and he must keep a stand,
And be the buckler to a mass of sin,
Whom does not sacred thirst of money win?
That fair Pananra, daughter of the gods,
That Mistress of delight, fairer by ods
Then honesty, who dares not once be seen
When she appears, so does nights pale-faced Queen
Give place to Sol: but still the beasts sore hate
The fearful Heart; Jove does commiserate
The Forests state, and him from thence did take
Whom he had made a star for Venus sake,
Whose Priest he was, if Atlas had not c^i'd
That Heaven would from his feeble shoulders slide
Were he fixed there (so heavy mischief is)
But Jove to make a Metamorphosis
Him turned into an Ignis fatuus,
A wandering light which often appears to us
Poor swains, that watch our flocks upon the plains,
This fire oft-times the timorous Clown constraines
To run through bush and brier, ditch and dale
For very fear, and many a diry tale
Is told by Peasants in the winter night
To maids by the fire side of the same sprite.
Yet fame reports (but fame tells many lies)
That Jove did take the Heart up to the skies,
And made him a bright star, and placed him near
Shag-hairy Orgon the fierce Forrester,
Who with his staring looks and glittering brand
A terror dire does nere to him stand un.
For the Heart (as it should seem) and many write
No swordman was, but a mere Carpet-Knight
Certes his stars portend (as wise men guess)
Much ill to those which Art and Arms profess,
And great impoverishment to Mariners,
Whom it arising from the Sea deters.
FINIS.

