ARGUMENTS Proving, The Jurisdiction used by the President and Counsel in the
Marches of Wales, over the Counties of Glouc. Worcester, Hereford, and Salop to
be illegal, and injurious, and a mere incroachment, beyond their appointed
limits.

And the Proof is like a threefold cord, not easily broken Viz. By statutes.
By Law books. By Records.


Whereunto is added a Catalogue, of part of the manifold grievances, to which
his Majesty's subjects are liable, who live within that Jurisdiction.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Wakley. 1641.

The first part of the Prooffe, viz. By Statutes.
FRom the preamble of the statute of 34. Hen. 8. (by color whereof the said
countyes are involved) may be collected, the intent of the law, which as Sir
Ed. Cook says, is a key to open the understanding of it. The words are these,
The King of his tender zeal and affection that he bears toward his obedient
subjects of his dominion and country of Wales, etc.

Here is no provision made for English men, Also the clause of attendance
shows plainly the meaning of the statut, whereby only the sheriffs and
officers of Wales are to give assistance, and attendance, and not those of the
four counties: Therefore not intended to be subject to that Jurisdiction.

Likewise the statute says, That the President, and council, Attorney, and
solicitor there, shall be Justices of peace in all the dominion of Wales. If
the four counties had been intended, noe doubt they had been accommodated with
a commission of peace (as they are not, nor never were.)

Are these words: In the Marches of Wales, or in any other place, where the K.
writ does not run, The enquiry is, 3. Ed. 1. cap. 17.
where are the Marches of Wales; the statute answers, where the Kings writ does
not run, but it is and ever was current in those four counties. Ergo etc.

No Welchman may purchase lands in the towns of Salop, 2. Hen. 4. cap 32.
Hereford, Glou. etc. nor in any other merchant town, adjoining to the marches
of Wales.

Ergo not marches, for nothing can adjoyne to it self. It is said, 20. Hen. 6.
cap. 3.
that the counties of Gloucester, Hereford, and Salop, be adjoining to the
marches of Wales.

And again, Bringing goods out of the said counties into Wales, and the
marches of the same. Hence apparent, That those counties were not marches, for
then they should go out of marches into marches, which were absurd.

Diverse dwelling in Wales, 13. Hen. 6. cap. 5.
and the marches of Wales come into Hereford, where Hereford is distinguished,
and excluded from being marches of Wales.

27. Hen. 8. cap. 26.
Diverse Lordships, Marches lying between the shires of England, and the shires
of the Country, and Dominion of Wales; Is not here a plain description, where
to find the marches, viz. within the dominion of Wales, and between the shires
of England, and Wales?

It appears there, 32. Hen. 8. cap. 37.
that the inhabitants of the Lordships, marches did use at their first entry,
to pay to the Lord of the manner, a sum of money for redemption. And 2. and 3.
Ed. 6. cap. 13. There was a custom in Wales, to pay tithes of goods given in
marriage, but neither the one nor the other ever came, nor were ever used in the
four counties. Ergo etc. Cum multis aliis.

Law Books.
Rex Escaetori suo in Com. Salop. and March. salutem. Register. 315.23. B.
If Salop were included in the words Marches, it would not have been
distinguished to cumber a court, which is called Breve for brevity sake.

Another writ, Regist. 318 B. 21.6. Hen. 4.10 M. 19. H. ^
Rex Escaetori suo in Com. Glou. and March. eidem Com. adiacen.

A Scire facias upon a fine of land in the march* directed to the Sheriff of
Shropshire, who returned the land was in the March, and therefore he could not
execute the writ.

When the manner of Burgane in the Marches is in demand, the writ shall be
directed to the Sheriff of Hereford. 21. Ed. 4.3. Fitz H. Not. B. 259


An issue joined in the marches of Wales shall be tried in the county
adjoining, Where the Kings writ runs.

Rex Escaetori suo in Com. Salop and March. eidem adjacer. if adjoining, not
March.

Records.
In the Parliament Roll, of 16. Ric. 2. Numer. 34. Is an express declaration
of the house of commons, that those 4. shires are not within the Marches of
Wales.

The Parliament Roll of 27. Hen. 6. Membrana 10. shows That those 4. counties
have been adjoynant to the Mar. of Wales, but not within the said Marches,
wherein is recited the like petition in the 20. year of the said King,
exhibited by the said commons.

The Parliament Roll of 33. Hen. 6. Mem. 3. shows, that the said counties of
Gloucester, Worcester, Hereford, and Bristow are not within the Marches of
Wales.

A commission of Oyer, and terminer, to Jasper Duke of Bedford, running in
these words, tam infra Com. Salop, Primo H. 7
Hereford, Glou. Wigorn. and March. Walliae iisdem Com. adjacen. quam infra
Walli. etc.

The like 8. Hen. 7.

The like to Prince Arthur 17. Hen. 7. in iisdem Verbis.

Objections.
Marches of Wales, were idle in the statute of 34. Hen. 8. of not draw in the
4. counties.



Secondly, the words dominion, and principality had not included those
counties, newly erected out of the Lordships Marches without the addition of
the words Marches.









Eliza. And the City, and county of Chester, until 11. of her reign, and
those four counties until 17. Car.

Pulsus interruptus, an interrupted sickly power, and pursued even with hew and
cry, by the 4. counties.

in Wallia, and Com. Gloucestr. Hereford. etc. and March. Walliae iisdem Com.
adjacen.

Iac. reported by Sir Edward Cook, in the second part of his institutes, and
produced before a committee in this present parliament.

Quia comitatus Anglicanus. And granted to the inhabitants of the very town of
Ludlow, the chief place of their residence, and where their honor dwells.

Iac. whereby they declared their Jurisdiction over the said counties to be
illegal.



Here follow the Grievances.
1 FIrst which might suffice for all the rest, the multiplicity of suits
commenced in that Court, as appears upon search lately made by warrant for a
Committee in this present Parliament, whereby there is found, that since the
first day of January last, until the first day of May 1641, there have been
sued out 7524 several Process, 1.2, 3, 4 and 5 def. in each of them, and most
of them for small and trivial (I might say) triobular things.

2 This makes the report good, that diver^ beggarly tradesmen get more by that
Court, then by selling their wares, for they put 4 and 5 def. in one process,
which costs but 2 shillings 6 pence, which they make every def. pay severally,
and if he stand out, the Court allows a Noble for each Process, and the
serving of it, and this gives encouragement to plaintifs, and such a Mill can
never want griste.

3 A man may sue for five shillings, and recover it, only for form sake the
Attorney will direct him to demand above forty shillings, because the
instructions run so.

4 Many covetous and deceiptfull persons usually sue Process out of the said
Court for small pretended debts, without cause, or color, and the parties
served, to avoid travel and expense (although they never owed the debt, or
contructed with the plaintiff) pay what is demanded, rather then they will
travel in person or send for a dedimus to answer the same (many of the
inhabitants dwelling above 50 miles from the said Court, and the ways extreme
deep in the winter season) and upon each dedimus potestatem, the def. (besides
the charge of it and his own expenses) must pay the plaintiff a Noble costs,
so of two evils he chooses the least.

5 There were in one morning three several causes heard in that Court about
the killing of one poor Hare by a company of Ploughmen.

6 The penal statutes (though made interrore^) yet these put in execution to
the height, some time against the intention of the law, as a Gentleman to be
fined and imprisoned for shooting in his own ground, at his own poultry, to
try his piece: and since such offenses by act of Parliament have been limited
to the proper County, yet there they have bin punished as misdemeanors,
wherein they take upon them to be wiser then the Parliament, because they
usually vary from the penalty there imposed.

7 If a master strike his servant (by way of correction) or a farmer a beggar
for stealing his corn out of the cock, or sheffe in harvest time, they shall
be there questioned, and oftentimes fined, and imprisoned.

8 They try trespasses and other actions, which are local, and confined to the
proper County, and ought to be done by a Jury of 12 men upon oath.

9 Suits in Cities and Corporation Courts (not exceeding 5 pound) are usually
removed thither, contrary to the statute of 21 Jac. upon pretense that the said
Court is not named (which indeed is true) yet lively described, for the words
are, Any Court that has power or pretends to have power, to stay, or remove
causes, etc. Now every one knows, that the Marches of Wales, have no power
(within the 4 Counties) to stay, or remove causes: only they pretend to have
power, and so is the very Court intended by the statute, (albeit they will take
no notice of it.)

10 Justices of peace, Majors, and Bayliffes of Cities, and Corporate towns,
Constables, and other Officers, are often there convented, for executing of
their offices against malefactors, and if they err never so little in
formality of justice (although their intention was good and the present
necessity of preserving the peace required speedy justice) are often there
punished, and if they are dismissed (which is rara avis in terris) yet their
journeys are chargeable, and they discouraged to execute their place, and
office.

11 Although the statute gives authority to Justices of the peace to allow and
suppress Alehouses (as they shall think sit) yet the said Court has
intermedled with the same, and limited the number of Alehouses in diverse
towns, and Villages (even where Justices of peace do dwell.)

12 If a suit be there commenced for trespass, battery, or the like, and
depending the suit, the parties agree, yet for a fine, process issues forth
against the plaintiff for not prosecuting, which is not so in any other Court.

13 If a sentence be there given for payment of money, or the like, if the def.
perform not punctually, a new bill is preferred for breach of the order, and
the def. fined to the King for the said breach (although it be in a civil
plea.)

14 If a Sheriff have a prisoner in execution for debt, yet by a process from
the said Court in the nature of a Habeas Corpus, or duces tecum. the Sheriff
is commanded to bring the prisoner to the said Court, which if he disobey, they
will fine him, and if he perform it, then at the next festival time, they
will enlarge him, or take insufficient bail, in which case the Sheriff has
bin enforced to pay the debt.

15 If a Sheriff, or Bayliffe execute any process from that Court, for the
King, or subject, and the def. brings an action of false imprisonment, he
cannot plead not guilty, and give the process in evidence, but must be
enforced to plead the statute at large, together with their instructions,
which never yet could be drawn by the best Clarks, and besides, it will cost
above 10 pound.

16 Double vexation and punishment has usually been inflicted by the
authority of the said Court. As those that have in the Bishop; Consistory been
punished for incontinency, have afterward been punished there for the same
offense, and the former punishment not allowed for a plea. Besides punishment
has been there inflicted by whipping (too severe for a freeborne subject.)

17 The inhabitants of those parts are subject to a double jurisdiction, and
oftentimes served to appear both at London and Ludlow, in one, and the same
day.

18 Administrators, and Tutors of minors (who according to the Ecclesiastical
law) have put in good security to the Bishop or his Chancellor, have been
drawn thither, and enforced to put in other security, and make yearly account
there, to their great travel and charge.

19 Although their instructions extend but to 50 pound, yet they having power
to hear all matters of equity, by reason or color thereof, they, do Judge
and determine matters of any sum, or value whatsoever, not only for goods,
but for land.

20 They usually alter and stall possessions and oftentimes upon oaths of
prosecutors, whereby men loose their right and inheritance, at least with much
charge and difficulty regaine the same.

21 Sequestrations are usually granted, both for lands and goods, for not
performing of some decree collateral for debt, or other things, which is not
so practiced either at common law, or in Chancery. Besides they sequester copy
hold lands, which is not liable to a judgment at law, or any other process
whatsoever, being no estate in the eye of the law, but only ad voluntatem
domini.

22 Suits are brought there for titles, and other matters of weight, and many
witnesses examined in perpetuam rei memoriam, and otherwise, yet all cast away,
though under their seal exemplyfied, for being no Court of Record, they are
rejected, and not permitted by the Judges, to be read at affizes etc.

23 Many suits are there commenced for causes not within their instructions,
whereof they will take no notice, but suffer the plaintiff, and defendant, to
spend much money to bring it to hearing, and then, some they will dismiss,
some others they will hear, and sentence, because they are in no danger, only
the party grieved may sue forth a prohibition out of the superior Courts at
Westminster.

24 The Sheriffs, to their great charge, and travail, execute many process,
issuing out of that Court, yet others there are authorized to receive the Fees
incident for the same, and do receive it accordingly.

25 Hence it comes to pass that Proclamation, and some other process directed
to the Sheriffs, never comes to their hands, but are returned there, and the
Fees taken to the great prejudice of the def. who has not that notice of the
suit which the law intends him.

26 They award binding process against many poor and needy persons,
authorizing commissioners of small respect to apprehend them, and if they
cannot find sufficient security (as seldom they are able to do) to carry
them to the next Goal, and so oftentimes they bring them into Corporations,
where either they break Goal, being constrained thereunto by hunger (which
will break stone Walls) and then that Jailer must pay the debt: Or else, if
they escape not, they are maintained at the charge of that place, and if a
Jailer refuse to take into his custody, any such beggarly fellow, they will
fine him.

27 If a Gentleman dwell above a 100 miles out of the jurisdiction of that
Court, yet has some land there lying, and happily may come to receive his
rent, or see his land, etc. And then, if some troublesome tenant or other, do
serve him with process out of that Court, that shall conclude him, and he
enjoined to attend that Court, and to perform the decree, and sentence thereof.

28 If a man be sued in that Court for entry with force, and takes away goods,
the plaintiff shall recover damages, and the def. be fined to the King, and yet
if the plaintiff will sue at law for the same thing (as sometimes they do) the
def. cannot plead the former recovery in bar, but is enforced to make a
second composition.

29 Many lewd and dissolute fellows live by serving the process of that Court
and making Affidavit thereof: and though they can neither write nor read, yet
will swear the serving of 40 or fifty process at one time, wherein they
cannot but oftentimes forswear themselves, and much prejudice the def.

30 Informers upon penal statuts, adventure to sue there, having no proof at
all, but relying upon the des: examination upon a multitude of Interr. whereby
he shall accuse himself, against the liberty of the subject, and then (right
or wrong) he must give bond with two sureties of 40 pound to abide the hearing:
to avoid which trouble and charge the Informer obtaines his ends, viz. a
composition.

31 The charge of the country is not small, when that Court removes from one
place to another with all their incidents and accommodations, (as if the King
were going a progress.)

32 His Majesty, and diverse of his officers are great loosers upon fineable
writs above 40 pound which are swallowed up by this Court.

33 The authority of this Court is augmented, or diminished as it shall please
the King to give instructions, whereby apparent, that it is merely arbitrary:
and once in the time of Queen Eliza.) The Court had power by their
instructions (at least did practice power) to enjoyne proceedings at the common
law, which although it is not now used against suits at Westminster, yet the
inhabitants are still in danger to be subject to the like, by the alterations
of the instructions.

34 If the King and wisdom of this present Parliament would not entrust them,
nor the like arbitrary Court, with criminal, why then with civil causes?

35 The wages and maintenance of the Judges, and officers there, arises out of
the mulcts, fines, and punishments of the subjects, which is a very great
inconvenience, being well considered, for by reason thereof, fines are, or may
be imposed, super quantitatem seu qualitatem delicti.

36 And although the Lord President and Justices now there are honorable,
worthy, and just men (as ever were) yet it is doubtful, whether succeeding
times may not place such governors, Justices, and Officers there; which may be
more grievous to the people, and whether instructions being altered, or
enlarged, the inhabitants may not be in greater subjection: and who would live
in fear of alteration of Government.

W. H. no. 2.

FINIS.

