A SERMON PREACHED To the Honorable HOUSE OF COMMONS, At their late solemn
Fast, Wednesday, December 27. 1643.

BY ALEXANDER HENDERSON, Minister at Edenbrugh.

NUMBER. 21.14. Wherefore it is said in the book of the wars of the Lord, what
he did in the red Sea, and in the brooks of Arnon.

Published by Order of the House.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Bostock, dwelling at the sign of the King's Head in
Paul's Churchyard. 1644.

Die Mercurij 27. December. 1643.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that Master
Solicitor do from this House give thanks unto Master Henderson for the great
pains he took in the Sermon he preached this day, at the entreaty of this
House, at Saint Margarets Westminster; being the day of public Humiliation;
and to desire him to Print his Sermon. It is also Ordered that none shall
presume to Print his Sermon without being authorized under his hand writing.

Hen. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.
I appoint Robert Bostocke to Print this Sermon,

Alexander Henderson.



To the READER.
THIS Sermon, such as it is, was preached to the honorable house of Commons at
their desire, and is now by their Order printed for thy use, and, by the
blessing of God, for thy benefit. The desire and endevor of the Preacher was,
according to the scope and nature of the Text, to show, that after so often
renewed and long continued humiliation; and after solemn entering into Covenant
with the most high God, The true reformation of Religion, is the readiest mean
to turn away the still pressing wrath of God from the Kingdom, And to bring
the desired blessings of all sorts upon Church and State; which yet will prove
but uneffectuall, unless the Reformation intended by the Honorable Houses of
Parliament and the reverend Assembly of Divines be attended and faithfully
followed with Renovation and Repentance in the people: Repentance for every
known Sin (and how can Sin be unknown in the midst of so many burning and
shining lights?) But repentance especially for sins (...) the matter of
Religion, the present Epidenticall disease of this Land, which threatens
changes and Armies of sorrows; so it pleases the Lord to give more then a
taste of the bitter fruits of bad Church Government and a sad representation of
the face of the Kingdom, if every man should be left to preach, profess and
print what he will. O that my people had harkned unto me, and Israel had walked
in my ways! I should soon have subdued their Enemies, and turned my hand
against their adversaries. The haters of God, should have submitted themselves
unto him; but their time should have endured for ever. Hearken therefore unto
the voice of God in the spiritual, plain and powerful preaching of his
servants (one of the greatest evidences that the Lord has a purpose of mercy
toward you) and walk in his ways. Mark them which cause devisions and
offenses amongst you; be wise unto that which is good, and simple concerning
evil; and the God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly. The
Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.

A SERMON Preached at the late Fast, before the Honorable House of Commons.
EZRA 7.23. Whatsoever is commanded by the God of heaven, let it be diligently
done, for the house of the God of heaven; for why should there be wrath against
the Realm of the King and his Sons?


THE Lord, who is the Father of Spirits, has a great diversity of influence
and operation, upon the minds and hearts of the children of men; The Lord
works diversely upon the hearts of men.
he can send a dream upon Nebuchadnezar, while he is at rest in his house and
flourishing in his palace, which makes him afraid and the thoughts upon his
bed, and the visions of his head to trouble him Dan. 4.4, 5.
. While Belshazzar the King makes a great feast to a thousand of his Lords, he
can make a hand to write over against the Candlestick upon the plaster of the
Wall, which makes the Kings countenance to be changed, and his thoughts to
trouble him; so that the joints of his loins were loosed, his knees smote one
against another, and his wise men and Lords were astonished with him Dan. 5.5.
: he can make Balaam, when he is called to curse the people of God, contrary to
his own intention and the desire of Balaak, to bless them three times Number.
24.10.
: He can make Cajephas to prophecy what he understands not, that one man
should die for the people, and that the whole Nation perish not John 11.49, 50.
: And the Lord can reveal his will to Joseph, Daniel, and his Prophets,
concerning things to come for the comfort of his Church Genesis 37. Dan 2. and 4,
and 5. and 7. etc.
. Again, the Lord can renew the hearts of his Enemies, and make such a
Persecutor, as Paul sometime was, to be a believer and Zealous Preacher Acts 9.
: He can restrain the impetuous violence of the heart of man; thus dealt he
with Laban, that he durst not speak to Jacob either good or bad Genesis 31.
; he can also and does indeed overrule the hearts and ways of his most
Malignant and desperate Enemies, whom he neither renueth nor restrains, and
contrary to their Counsels and intentions, bring them mervelously about to his
own ends, as he dealt with Judas, Herod, Pilate, and the people of the Jews,
who devised and did mischief against Christ, but God meant it for good, to
save his people from their sins Act. 4.27.28
. There is yet another way of divine providence and Sovereignty, when the Lord
is pleased neither to proceed to far as to renew, nor do so little as to
restrain, but thinks meet to change the affections of the heart of man;
whether from particular hatred and opposition, as he dealt with Esau coming
against Jacob Genesis 33.
, and Alexander the great, marching against Jerusalem Joseph antq. Judaic. lib.
11. c. 8.
, or from that common and innate hatred that all men naturally bear against
the true Religion and Church of God: Of which we have the example of Ahashuerus
in the book of Ester, of Artaxerxes in the book of Nehemiah, of Cyrus and
Darius in this book, and of the same Artaxerxes in this Text: In whose eyes
Ezra did find such favor, and of whom he had as ample testimony of royal
benevolence and bounty toward Jerusalem and the house of God there, as his
heart could have wished, and as made him humbly to acknowledge, that the good
hand of the Lord his God was upon him, and to bless the Lord God of his
fathers, which had put such a thing in the Kings heart, as to beautify the
house of the Lord God which was at Jerusalem. In the letter of Artaxerxes
expressing his munificence, and containing the Commission and instructions
given unto Ezra for this purpose; the clause which I have read is worthy of a
star or finger in the margent, wherein we may perceive, that the King as he
had heard and learned not from a flattering Court-Chaplaine, but from faithful
Ezra, believes, that the great wrath of God, shall come not only upon
himself, but which was more, upon his Kingdom and Posterity; if Religion
should not be settled, and the house of God ordered with all speed and diligence
in every thing, as God himself had commanded.

The Text divided.
If we will look more distinctly upon the Order not of the words, but of the
matter, we shall meet with three particulars fitting the present condition of
affairs, and very worthy our gravest consideration: The first is the great
evil to be avoided, even the greatest of all evils, The wrath of God against
the Realm of the King and his Sons.

The second is, the mean which is the chiefest of all means, and without
which no other mean can be effectual for averting or preventing of wrath,
Whatsoever is commanded by the God of heaven, let it be diligently done, for
the house of the God of heaven.

The third is, the connection of the one and the other, or the inference of the
effect from the cause: For why should there be wrath? etc. When that is not
diligently done for the house of the God of Heaven, which the God of Heaven
commands, then is there wrath against the Realm of the King and his Sons.

Would the Lord, who is so rich in wisdom and can use so many powerful ways
of dealing with the heart of man, be pleased to put it in the Kings heart, to
write such a letter and send forth such an Edict as this is, it would be the
opening of a door of hope; or as good Schechaniah says Ezra 10.2.
, there would be now hope in Israel concerning this thing: That the horrible
deluge of wrath which now overrunneth this Land, should be aswaged, the
Fountains also of the depth, and the windows of Heaven would be stopped, the
Arc would rest, the Dove would come with an Olive-leafe in her mouth, we would
all join in offering a Sacrifice of thanksgiving, the Lord would smell a savor
of rest, and we should see a new world wherein should dwell righteousness and
peace. Amongst all the great things which the honorable Houses of Parliament
have done, there is none more acceptable to God, or more promises peace and
happiness to this Land, then that a Church-assembly is called, for searching
into the will of the God of Heaven, that whatsoever is commanded by him may be
diligently done. The wrath of the Lord has raged for many years in Germany
and is not yet abated, because nothing is done there for Reformation of
Religion, and building of the house of God. But there be three things in
England which give us hope and promise deliverance. First, Your frequent and
continued fasting and humiliation. Secondly, Your entering into a solemn
Covenant with God for obtaining mercy. Thirdly, Your begun Reformation, and the
course You have taken for perfecting the same, That whatsoever is commanded by
the God of Heaven may be diligently done for the house of the God of Heaven. If
these three be performed in truth, You may expect a blessing: True humiliation,
Covenanting with God, and Reformation, are the Harbingers of peace and
happiness: But when they are not in truth, the hypocrisy threatens more then
the performance promises.

Concerning the great evil to be avoided, which is the wrath of the God of
Heaven, The wrath of God laid open
although it be infinite and above all dimen^ion unmeasurable, as it is in the
infinite and incomprehensible God, yet according to our capacity and the matter
in hand, it is expressed and set before our eyes in the dimensions thereof. In
the Psalm. 103.
Psalm 103. we have the dimensions of the infinite mercy of God, the height
and the depth thereof, according to the height of heaven; or as the heaven is
high above the earth, so great is his mercy toward them that fear him: and
like as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him:
the breadth as far as the East is from the West, so far has he removed our
transgressions from us: and the length, The mercy of the Lord is from
everlasting to everlasting to them that fear him, and his righteousness unto
his Childrens Children. In this place We have the like dimensions of his anger
against them that use no^ the power which God has given them, for settling his
fear and worship according to his own will: The height and depth thereof is
in the word Wrath, Romans 1.18.
Deuteronomy. 32.22.
which is a boiling and burning anger, and this is the wrath of God revealed
from heaven, In the hight and depth thereof.
and burning to the lowest hell; The breadth is, where it is not said against
the King, but the kingdom of the King; and the length of it is, the Sons and
Posterity of the King to al generations.

To speak a word of these three severally: First, we know that the words used
in Scripture to denote the wrath of God against his Enemies, do express
humane affections and bodily passions, which are not in him who is not like
unto man; But the thing intended is the Lord his most holy dislike and serious
detestation of sin, with his most just and constant will and decree to punish
the same: His Comminations and threats declaring his dislike and decree, and
his judgments and vengeance which are the executing of his threatenings. This
execution of wrath is principally meant in this place, and yet it is not called
the wrath of God, but simply ( Wrath) thereby showing the greatness and
immensity of the wrath of God; that there is no wrath comparable with his
wrath, and therefore no wrath so formidable as his wrath. For first, all other
wrath of Man or Angel is but the limited wrath of the creature, but his wrath
is infinite like himself; as the man is, so is his wrath, and as God is, so is
his wrath* The wrath of a King is like the roaring of a young Lion, but the
roaring of the Lion of the Tribe of Judah is more terrible; look how much the
Wisdom, the Power, the Justice, the Mercy of God are greater then the Wisdom,
the Power, the Justice, the mercy of man, so much is the wrath of God greater
then the wrath of man. Secondly, the wrath of God reaches to the soul as well
as to the body; to Kingdoms as well as to particular persons or Families; to
the posterity as well as to the present generation; it being accompanied with
omnipotency to which all things are alike, easy and faisible. Thirdly, the
greatness of his anger appears in this; that he is the Lord of Hosts, when
the Heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host of them Genesis 2.1.
Genesis 2.1. then and not before did God the maker of all things take upon him
the name of the Lord Genesis 2.4.
, verse 4. After he had made all things by his word, and set them in order, he
commands and rules all by his authority, he has them all ready to execute
his will; they are all his Host and Soldiers, from the Angels, Sun, Moon
and Stars, unto the smallest Flies and Worms; and when he gives the alarm
to the least of them, the greatest on earth are not able to resist.

The Use of this may be twofold: Use 1.
One is against the wicked; since in these three respects there is no wrath
comparable to the wrath of God, no wrath is so much to be feared as his wrath.
Vengeance belongs to me, I will recompense says the Lord; and again, the
Lord shall judge his people; It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of
the living God Heb. 10.30.31.
; although it be much better for the Godly to fill into the hands of God, whose
mercies are great and who in judgment remembers mercy, then into the hands of
men whose mercies are cruel; and it were more tolerable for them to have the
pestilence then the sword raging in the Land 2 Samuel 24.14.
yet the wicked shall find that it had been more easy for them to fall into
the hands of men then into the hands of God, who both kills the body and
destroys their temporal being, and casts both soul and body into the fire
of hell; For the Lord whose name is jealous is a jalous God Exodus 34.14.
; and which is very proper for such as at this time flatter themselves in their
own wickedness; The Lord will not spare him, but the anger of the Lord and
his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the curses that are
written in this book shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his name
from under Heaven Deuteronomy* 29.2^.
. To which that of the Prophet is very agreeable; Then shall mine anger be
accomplished, and I will cause my fury to rest upon them, and I will be
comforted Ezekiel. 5.13.
. The wicked amongst the people of God, who bless themselves in their own
hearts, saying; We shall have peace, though we walk in the imaginations of our
own hearts; are the natural element for the curses and judgments of God,
which are moving to and fro, to lie and rest in, and when the curses and
judgments of the Lord come upon them, the Lord is at rest and is comforted,
and his people that fear his name and tremble at his judgments, are also at
rest and are comforted.

Another use is for the Godly, Use 2.
who in some similitude and conformity with the wrath of the jealous God,
should stir up in themselves their zeal and just indignation against false
worship, and the contempt of the true worship of his name. When Moses did
behold the Idolatry of the people in the golden Calfe, his Zeal was so strong
and he so impatient, that he brake the Tables written with Gods own hand Exodus
32.
. I have been very jealous for the Lord God of Hosts, says Elias 1 Kin. 19.10
; For the Children of Israel have forsaken thy Covenant, thrown down thine
Altars, and slain thy Prophets with the sword. When Paul came to Athens and
saw the City wholly given to Idolatry, his spirit was stirred in him, and a
Paroxisme like a fit of a fever did take him Acts 17.16.
. And when Lot was at Sodom, he vexed his righteous soul from day to day with
their unlawful deeds, his soul was tormented within him Pet. 2.8.
. You must not any longer be lukewarm like Laodicea, neither hot nor cold Rev.
3.16.
, but (according to the fervent anger ascribed here to God) fervent in spirit
serving the Lord Romans 12.11.
. When we are lukewarm in the matters of God, then does the wrath of God wax
hot, and when we are fervent and zealous, then does his anger cease and the
fire of his wrath is extinguished.

The second is, the object of his wrath, or the breadth unto which it is
extended: In the breadth thereof.
The Realm of the King: he says not upon the King, or upon the King of the
Kingdom, but upon the Kingdom of the King; and thus he expresses himself
upon two grounds, or for two reasons: The one is; because he knew that for his
fault the people might suffer: The other is; that he looked more to the
suffering of the people, then to any thing that could befall himself. No
question he had learned from Ezra and others of his spirit (so good and
necessary a thing is it, that Ezraes and Nehemiahs be about Kings, such prove
indeed as their names imply, helpers and comforters both to King and people)
that Kingdoms suffers sometimes for the sins of their Kings and Rulers 2 Samuel
24, 1 Kin. 21.
; a truth not unknown unto natural men. It is also true that Kings sometimes
suffer for the sins of the people: For the transgression of a Land many are
the Princes thereof Prove. 28.2.
. If you shall still do wickedly, says Samuel to the people 1 Samuel 12.25
; ye shall be consumed, both you and your King. But all the debate is in the
application; for Kings many times justify themselves, that the people suffer
not for their sins, but for their own; and the people are as ready to
justify themselves, that Kings suffer not for their sins but for their own;
and when wrath is upon both, both are ready to stand to their own defense, and
to plead their innocence: But the true determination is, that no man or
multitude suffers but for that sin, which some way is their own sin, and
whereof they themselves are guilty. When David numbered the people, and the
people were punished, the people were punished for their own sins; both
their former sins which the Lord at this time did take occasion to call to
remembrance; and their present sin in consenting to the numbering of the
people; for had they been all unwilling as Joab was, and had not consented,
they had not sinned. Kings should not be permitted to commit such public
sins, but Council, Parliament, People, and every one according to his place
and power should hinder them. It may displease them for the present, but
afterward it shall be no grief nor offense of heart unto them, either that
they have shed blood causlesse, or have avenged themselves, as Abigail said to
David 1 Samuel 35.31.
; yet David said truly, it was his sin, both because it did begin at him,
and he was the principal Agent in it; and because he gave the provocation at
this time, and his sin was the match that set on fire the wrath of God, which
was ready before to be kindled against the people for their sins. It is a
miserable debate betwixt a King and a people, when in the time of a public
judgment, both of them stand to their own innocence, and the one accuses the
other of guiltiness: But it is a sweet contest and promises much mercy and
comfort: when the Prince says; I have sinned and done wickedly, but what has
the people done? and when the people say, we have sinned and done wickedly, and
thereby have drawn wrath upon out selves. Although at this time the Kings
Majesty, when he sees so many of the poor people fall to the ground, so much
blood spilt, should be moved in his heart to say as David said, I have sinned:
Yet ye that are his Subjects, each one in his own place, should confess your
own sins, and justify the Lords doing, for ye are guilty; first, of many
sins before this time, especially that you have not called and endeavored so
earnestly as ye ought for Reformation of Religion, that every thing might have
been done in the house of God according to his own will; but have pleased your
selves with, and have rested in the beginnings of a Reformation; ye have been
for the greater part more pleased with things which were not reformed, then the
things which were reformed in the worship of God; and this sin has been the
cause of many other sins, for where God is not served aright, all other
duties are but neglected or performed without sincerity. Secondly, for the
present, this is the sin of the Land, that the people have not according to
their power stayed the King from shedding of blood, but many have joined their
Counsels and endeavors to begin and increase the common misery, and others
have not resisted the evil, but suffered the sword to rage, which may make the
people justly to say, We have sinned and done wickedly.

The third is, the length of this wrath; In the length thereof.
for it reaches to the Kings Sons and so to the Posterity. The wrath of God
ends not at the persons that have sinned, but is extended to others that
descend of them, without respect of persons, and especially for sins about
the house and worship of God. For the horrid and blasphemous murmuring of
Israel, when they repented themselves* of their coming out of Egypt, and said
one to another, let us make a Captain and let us return into Egypt; not only
their own carcasses fell in the Wilderness, but their Children which had not
murmered, yea which were not yet born must wander in the Wilderness forty
years, and bear their whoredoms Numb. 1^.
In like manner in the seventy years of the captivity of Babylon, the Children
that were borne in Babylon, or were carried from their own Land, suffered in
that captivity a world of miseries for the sins of their Parents. The
examples of the Children of Dathan and Abiram, of the first borne of Egypt; of
the young ones in Sodom, that had not sinned after the similitude of the
transgression of Adam; and many other judgments of God, plucking up root and
branch, prove this to be the manner of the Lords proceeding against sinners,
and that without respect of persons: The greater the persons be, the more
grievous in the justice of God is the punishment; because the sins of great
ones are not only sins, but examples of sinning, and proclamations of
liberty to inferiors, and therefore I will be glorified in Pharaoh and in his
servants Exodus 14.
, says the Lord. For the sin of Saul. in slaying the Gibeonites, there was
not only a famine in the days of David, three years year after year, but
seven of his sons also were hanged up in Gibea. David himself was not
sp^red, but because he had slain Vriah the Hittite with the sword of the
Children of Ammon; Nathan said, the sword shall not depart from thine house
because thou have despised me 2 Samuel 12.9.10.
: And afterward when his sin was pardoned, because he had given great
occasion to the Enemies of God to blaspheme, the Child also that is borne unto
him shall surely dye. This course the Lord does after a special manner follow
in sins about his house and worship; and therefore in the second command and
no other does the Lord threaten to visit the sins of the Fathers upon the
Children. The reasons why the Lord does so; are first, that all the world may
know, how much the Lord abhors sin, especially in matters of his worship.
To this purpose it is observable what he says, Exodus 32.34. In the day when I
visit I will visit their sin upon them: So often as he punished the people
and their posterity for other sins he remembered, their sin of Idolatry,
which gave occasion to the saying, That in every plague of Israel there was one
ounce of the golden Calfe. Secondly, that men may abstain from sins of this
sort, not only for respect to themselves, but to their posterity, whom they
love so ^enderly, and of whom they are often more careful then of themselves.
And this he does to the third and fourth generation, that both the Parents
themselves and others who are witnesses to the sins of the Parents, may be
sensible of Gods dealing, and know that the Lord is just, and the avenger of
sin. I leave the theological discourse in vindicating the justice of God,
only I say; first, that the Lord punishes no man with eternal wrath for his
fathers sins, but the soul that sins suffers in that kind. Secondly,
that the ungodly and wicked posterity cannot open their mouth against the
justice of God, since they continue in the iniquity of their fathers. Thirdly,
that the Godly when they are visited in their bodies, goods, or estates which
they have from their Fathers, will find these visitations to be indeed indicia
peccati non judicia propter peccatum, and rather medicines and preservatives
for their eternal happiness then wrath for their destruction.

And I come to the use; that in this nicke of time and jointure of affairs,
Use.
the great wisdom which God has given you in your public places, be stirred
up and exercised, in taking heed that all the former sins of this Land
committed by so many Progenitors, be not brought upon this Generation,
according to that sore and sad sentence pronounced by the Son of God against
Jerusalem, Matthew. 23.35. Matthew. 23.35.
That upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the
blood of righteous Abel, unto the blood of Zacharias, Son of Barachias whom
ye slew between the Temple and the Altar; and verse 36. Verily I say unto you,
all these things shall come upon this Generation. Ye cannot preserve all
particular persons from the judgments due unto them for their own, and for
their fathers sins; nor can ye preserve every Family from the wrath which
the present and preceding generations have been treasuring up. It appears
that the Lord has decreed the destruction of some persons, and the e^tirpation
of some Families: But it is in your hands to prevent the desolation of the
Church and Kingdom. The Jews filled up the measure of their Fathers, by
crucifying the Son, of God when he came amongst them and would have wrought a
Reformation, and therefore their habitation was left desolate, and they are no
more a Nation nor a Kingdom unto this day: It is true the people were
executioners, but the Rulers were the prime Agents. Do therefore the work
unto which the Lord has called You, and Ye shall save the Kingdom from this
wrath: It is in Your hands as Instruments to make the posterity blessed, and to
bless You for your faithfulness. Woe to them that leave their Station in such
an exigence; they do what they can to bring all the blood and all the sins
of former times upon this Generation, and to make the Posterity miserable. Let
others profess or pretend what they will, I am assured, that such as are
faithful in their places, are upon the right way to save the Kingdom, the
King, and the Kings Sons from wrath.

Now there is nothing more necessary, nothing we should desire more earnestly
to know, then by what means this great wrath of the great God may be prevented
where it is iminent and feared, The me^nes to avert and prevent the wrath of God
or averted where it is incumbent and felt; and to what end does the Lord
threaten his wrath, to what purpose does he make it smoke, and in part to break
forth in a flame, but that the means may be used to turn it away, that the
fullness thereof come not upon us. We will find three sorts of means practiced
in the books of Ezra and Nehemiah, and of the Prophets their contemporaries.
The first was public fasting and solemn humiliation joined with Confession of
sin, The first mean.
justifying of God in all the evils he had brought upon them, earnest
deprecation of wrath, and supplications for a blessing that God would accept of
their endeavors, and prosper his work against so many professed and secret
Enemies. The second was, The second mean.
a solemn Covenant: For the Princes and Rulers first, and then the people
entered into a curse and an oath, to walk in Gods Law, and to observe and do all
his commandments, judgments, and statutes. Here there was swearing,
subscribing, sealing; and all means used which could bind their inconstant and
fugitive hearts unto God. The third was, The third mean.
the doing of the work of God; the building of the Temple, the reformation of
Religion, the ordring of the worship and service of God, and the reedising of
the walls which were ruined and lying in heaps. Their fasting and praying was
not sufficient, they behoved to enter into Covenant. Their praying and
Covenanting was not enough, nor were they to rest there, They behoved to build
and reform. It has pleased God to putt in your hearts, to give your selves to
frequent fasting and humiliation, only consider, whether with the
acknowledgment of your particular Sins and personal transgressions, ye have
been humbled for public and National Sins, and especially such as have
been committed about the worship of God, and the Government of the house of
God. The Lord has been much dishonored this way, for this has he entered in a
controversy with the Land; this therefore would be confessed that God may be
resto^^d to his honor by your confession. It fears me that a great part of
the people of the Land are not yet brought to this Confession, but are still
fond of a formal Service, and a proud Prelacie; and therefore as ye are your
selves in humility to acknowledge this sin as a high provocation, so would all
good means be used for bringing the people to the sight and sense of it. It is
true, there is a secret and real acknowledgement in the Covenant; but the Lord
requires a more direct, open, and plain confession; nor can he be pleased, or
his wrath turned away, till that which has been called and esteemed, for so
many years, the glory and the beauty of the Church of England, be thus brought
low and cast into the dust. It has pleased the Lord also, to bring you a
degree farther: That both the honorable Houses of Parliament, and many others,
whose hearts the Lord has touched, have entered into a solemn League and
Covenant, for performing such duties, as are judged necessary at this time,
for the honor of God, and for the deliverance and preservation of the Church
and Kingdom, which no doubt will prove a precious and powerful mean of good,
if the Name of the most high God, be not by it taken in vain: But take heed,
that it be not forgotten by them that have taken it, before it be taken by
others; And therefore two things would be looked unto. 1. That although it
should never be taken by others, yet it obleigeth such as have entered in
Covenant; and although the whole Nation, be bound to the same duties, which ye
are bound unto, ye have entered into a new Obligation, which, if you shall
forget or violate; will certainly be laid to your charge. Jeremiah reproves
Israel not for the transgression of the Law, Jer. 34.
which yet commanded the same duties, but for violation of the Covenant. 2.
That others be instructed and moved to enter into the same Covenant: for if
they who have entered in Covenant shall not consider that it is a perpetual
Covenant never to be forgotten, or (which God forbid) shall forget their
supervenient obligation, and others shall refuse to enter in Covenant, it will
not only make a division in the Church and Kingdom, but shall be a ready way
to bring on a greater wrath, then yet has been seen or felt: Upon one sort for
their perfidy; and upon the other, for their neglect or obstinacy.

There is yet a third mean, without which the former two are not sufficient:
And this is, Whatsoever is commanded by the God of heaven, be diligently done
for the house of the God of heaven: A duty which in it self is necessary, and
which to us who live under the Gospel, is no other thing, but the reformation
and settling of Religion. Wherein we are to consider. Considerations about the
third mean.
1. the Rule of reformation, which is the Commandment, Decree, or revealed will
of God. 2. The extent of this reformation, whatsoever. 3. How or after what
manner we should go about the work, diligently. 4. The reasons, which should
induce us to this duty: one is, from the greatness and sovereignty of God: He
is the God of heaven. The other from common equity: It is the house of the God
of heaven; and it is equitable that every man bear rule in his own house.

The rule of building the house of God, and of the reformation of Religion, 1.
The Rule of Reformation.
is the same and perpetual: the commandment of God, and not the commandment of
man one or more, whether they be Civil or Ecclesiastical persons. It is their
part to provide according to their places and callings, to command and direct
that the Commandment of God be obeyed. This King commands not that his will
be done, but what God has commanded. Neither King nor Parliament can command
otherwise. Civil powers have great authority, not only in things civil, but
in matters of Religion; and they sin against God, if they use not the authority
which God has put in their hands, for the good of Religion. To them belongs
Inspection and watching over, not only Ecclesiastic^s, but Ecclesiastica.
Ecclesiastical persons are subject to Civil authority no less then others;
and in respect of things Ecclesiastical or matters of Religion, Eusebius
brings in Constantine the great, saying: Vos Episcopi in Ecclesia, ego extra
Ecclesiam seu templum Episcopus a Deo constitutus sum: Not that any mortal man
whether Pope or Prince, can be properly Head of the Church, or Vicegerent unto
Christ the Mediator in his special and oeconomicall Kingdom of Grace: for
Princes are Vicegerents to God, and to his Son Jesus Christ as he is God, in
his universal Kingdom of Providence; and this watching and inspection of
Princes and Magistrates, is objective Ecclesiastica, but formaliter civili^, it
is about matters of Religion in a civil manner, and in a way suitable to the
nature and quality of their place and power. The faithful custody and
preservation of Religion, is a part of their office: for they are not only
keepers of the second, but of the first Table of the Law. To them appertains
the vindication and defense of Religion, against contempt, corruption, and
abuses. Religion also expects from them the Civil sanction, that the worship
of God, and the wholesome constitutions of the Church about Religion, be
confirmed and settled by their Laws. Coaction also is theirs, for they by their
power are to constrain their Subjects to the duties of Religion, and to coerce
and stop them that they do nothing to the contrary. They also may and ought to
call Assemblies of the Church, when the case of Religion does require, praeside
as Civil Presidents, and examine Church-Constitutions, not only as they are
Christians for satisfying their own souls, but as Magistrates for the good of
the people. And when there is a necessity of reformation of Religion, and the
Ministry and Churchmen, like the sands of the Seashore are covered with a
deluge of defection and corruptions, they are by their Authority to endeavor a
Reformation. And yet in all this exercise of their power, they are to do
nothing but according to the Commandment of God: so David, Jehoshaphet,
Hezekiah, Josiah, and other good and religious Princes have done. But when
Jeroboam puts his own commandment in place of the commandment of God, when
Ahaz sets up the Altar of Damascus beside or in place of Gods Altar, when
the Kings of Judah and Israel, did worship God, or did command the people to
worship God, otherwise then God had commanded, wrath was upon the Kingdom of
the King and his Sons.

When we consider of this, Use.
we have cause both to lament and rejoice: to lament, that through the working
of corrupt Churchmen so many things concerning the worship and house of God,
should have been pressed upon the people of God, without or against his
commandment, if Arminianisme for the soul and life, and Popish Service and
Ceremonies for the body of Religion, had been received and admitted, as they
were offered and obtruded, our condition had been more lamentable, then it is
at this time, notwithstanding all our calamities and miseries. We have also
cause to rejoice, that in the one Kingdom a course has been taken for doing
every thing in the house of God, according to his Commandment, and that in this
Kingdom it is ordered, that a wise and holy Assembly of Divines shall search
diligently into the Word of God, That whatsoever is commanded by the God of
heaven, etc.

The extent of this Reformation is, 2. The extent of Reformation.
Whatsoever God has commanded: for what God has commanded must be done; what
he has forbidden must not be done, but abolished; and what is in the nature
thereof indifferent must be regulated according to the Commandment of God,
which is, no less plain and peremptory in our practice of things indifferent,
then in other matters. Reformation therefore of Religion must be a through and
perfect reformation. The particular reformations which were wrought by the
Kings of Judah, are noted, and according to this rule, do they receive a
testimony from God. Some only destroyed the Temples of Baal, some the golden
Calves of Dan and Bethel, and some also the groves and high places, and we know
what approbation is given to Hezekiah and Josiah. There is a promise made to
such a through Reformation. Azariah says to Asa, Be ye strong therefore, and
let not your hands be weak: for your work shall be rewarded: 2 Chronicles. 15.7.
By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit to
take his sin: when he makes all the stones of the Altar as chalk-stones that
are beaten asunder. Isa* 27.9.
The Lord has promised a more special blessing, Isa. 1.26. Isa. 1.26, 27.28
I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy Counselors as at the
beginning: afterward thou shall be called the City of righteousness, the
faithful City, etc. The reason is, 1. Because God is not honored by a begun,
imperfect, and half-reformation. He is ready to spew out the lukewarm
person, family, or people. If we love the Lord with all our heart and strength,
we will do every thing that he commands: for what is it that hinders, but
that our heart is parted or divided betwixt two; and that we resolve, to be
almost, but not altogether godly. 2. Because a little leaven leaveneth the
whole lump, says the Apostle to the Galathians, Galat. 5.7, 8, 9.
reproving them that having run well they did halt and not thoroughly obey the
truth, and telling them, that this persuasion did not come of him that called
them. When any known corruption is kept, it becomes a snare, and like a
nest-egge, that brings us back again. I know this is censured for
preciseness by the world: but we see the best servants of God have been such
Precisians. Remember the hoof of Moses, Mordecai his bowing of his knee, Daniel
his abstaining from idolatrous meat, and the opening of his window; Paul his
hour and appearance of evil, with many more examples of this kind. They are
Precisians indeed, who are liberal in the matters of God, and can find in
their hearts to dispense with his commands, his truth and worship: but will not
be content to want the least complement of their own worldly honor and
dignity, nor the smallest penny of their gain and worldly commodity. Although
it be true, that some things in Religion be fundamental, and absolutely
necessary unto salvation, and other things not so, yet to be obstinate against
revealed truth, or to mis-regard or despise smallest matters of Religion, which
are necessary to be received, if not for themselves, yet for the authority of
Scripture, (as some make the distinction) brings as certain a curse and
condemnation, as ignorance and error does in matters more substantial.

Use.
No Nation under the Sun has more need to take heed to this then England: No
persons have reason more to consider this, then the Honorable Houses of
Parliament, who have in their hands the work of Reformation at this time. It is
better known to this Honorable Audience, then to me; and yet who is so great a
stranger that knows it not: that Reformation was begun in the time of two
Princes? But because it was not a through Reformation according to the
Commandment of God, Superstition and Idolatry returned again like an
inundation. It was again begun and continued in the time of other two Princes;
but because, they set up their rest in the Rudiments and beginnings of
Reformation, Idolatry, Superstition, and Heresy have assayed to enter again
with ^ew strength and policy. Now the third time the work is begun, and there
is a greater stir and shaking for it then before, either now endeavor to carry
it through to every point of known perfection, doing whatsoever the God of
heaven has commanded, or look for nothing, but that Superstition and Idolatry,
and with it ruin and desolation, shall come upon you as a flood.

And therefore, which is the third, go about the work after the manner here
prescribed, 3. The manner of going about Reformation.
that is diligently, which implies very much. 1 Sincerely, aiming at the right
end without simulation. This is to do the work of God, for the honor of God,
and good of Religion. And not for our glory or benefit, or for civil ends were
they never so public; And therefore it calls not only for public, but for
pious Spirits. Where this sincerity is wanting, there may be a business and
counterfeiting of diligence, but no true diligence or faithfulness. 2
Zealously: for true zeal is active, like fire, or like metal in a horse, or
like wind to the sails of a ship, it carries us on, and makes us diligent.
3. Prudently, Prudence considers both the opportunities and impediments of
working, where Prudence is wanting, there may be precipitation, but no true
diligence. 4. Speedily, without delay or procrastination. A^ vinegar to the
teeth, and a smoke to the eyes, so is the sluggard to them that send him Pro.
10 26.
. The slouthing and slipping of occasions brings despair of doing good in the
end, and then our own consciences chide, and others to whom we should have done
good, do curse us. Solomon's house was not built in less then thirteen years,
but the Temple was built in seven years: because, beside the preparation of
materials, both the King and the people were more earnest about the one then
the other. There is no want of materials at this time, only speed is required;
and without speed, no di^igence. 5. Constantly; that no calumny or
contradiction, no hope or fear, no trouble or example of others, prevail with
you, to leave your station, or desert the work unto the which the Lord has
called you, but that you resolve still to do, and, if the Lord will, to die.
Let no man think by deserting the work and forsaking his station, that the work
shall cease and he shall prosper. No, thou shall find thy soul filled with
grief and vexation upon two contrary grounds: One is, Thou shall with a grieved
and envious heart behold with thy eyes, the work to prosper, and thou not
honored to have a hand in it. The other is; Thou thy self shall perish in the
end: For as a bird that wandreth from her nest, Pro. 27.8.
so is a man that wandreth from his place. Mark and consider what comfort they
have found who have deserted this work of Reformation, whether in the one
Kingdom or in the other. Thou think, that thou will not hazard thy self for
the honor of God: but God says, he will not honor thee, to have heart or
hand in his work, and thou shall run a greater hazard.

Reasons hereof.
There be two reasons secretly couched in the words to persuade and provoke unto
this duty: The first Reason.
The one is from the knowledge of the greatness and majesty of God, the other
from the conscience of common equity amongst men. Concerning the first:
Artaxerxes was a great King: for in the beginning of his letter, he is honored
with the title of King of Kings, as having many mighty Princes under his
power; And in the end of the letter, he has power of confiscation of goods,
imprisonment, banishment, and death: Yet he acknowledges one greater then the
greatest whom he calls the God of heaven, thereby to express his greatness,
majesty, and glory, which made him to give forth this Decree, and by which he
would move all men to do diligently what he commands: For the knowledge and
apprehension of the greatness and Majesty of God, especially compared with
our baseness, is a powerful mean, to move us to obey his Commandments, and to
go diligently about the affairs of his House. The Lord is great eminently and
infinitely above the creature: he is the original of all created greatness,
and nothing can be conceived in him, which may be the least diminution of his
greatness and Majesty. It is not so with men. When he is to give his Law to
his people, he first manifests his greatness by his wonders in Egypt, by
bringing them miraculously through the Red sea, and by the Terrors of Mount
Sinai, and then he begins, Isa. 6.1, 2, 3, 4.
I am the Lord thy God that brought thee, etc. When he speaks to his
Prophets, to make them diligent and faithful, he uses this Preface: Thus
says the Lord. Isa. 46.1.
When he sends Isaiah with his message, he begins with a vision of his
glory: I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up, and his train
filled the Temple. etc. When he will have men to tremble at his word, Thus
says the Lord, the heavens is my Throne, and the earth is my footstool. When
he revealed himself to John his servant, he shows his greatness, Revel. 4.
and 7. If the greatest of the children of men did consider that he is higher
then the highest, Eccles. 5.8. that in his hand is there breath, and all their
ways, as Daniel tells a great King that went before Artaxerxes, Dan. 5.23.
That in his fight when once he is angry, no creature can stand. Psalm. 76.7.
They would not by any sin, and least of all by dealing deceitfully in the
matters of his House, provoke him to anger. Woe unto him that striveth with his
Maker: Let the potsheard strive with the potsheards of the earth. Isa. 45.9. If
either King or Parliament, or Assembly, could really in their hearts apprehend
this uncreated and infinite greatness, and could look upon God, as he is
described, Dan. 7.9. I beheld till the thrones were cast down, and the Ancient
of days did sit, whose garment was white as snow, and the hair of his head as
pure wool, his Throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burning
fire. A fiery stream issued and came forth from before him: thousand thousands
ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him. They
would choose rather to offend all the world, then to offend him in the smallest
matter of his House: but the truth is, we put the Lord far from us, and we
see not him that is invisible. Unless by the goodness of God a timeous and
powerful remedy be provided, the multitude of Sects and Sectaries will become
ere it be long, the reproach of this Nation, yet it fears me that Atheism and
Atheists be more common, and abound more, then any Sect, or sort of Sectaries:
For did men know or believe, that there is a God in heaven, who is God of
heaven and earth, were it possible for them to live as they live, and to do
what they do. Men become first Atheists in their life and conversation, living
as a worm in a man's belly, thinking no other ways of man, but as ordained to
be a place for it to live in, and of no other world but that wherein it lives:
So do the Atheists of the world, wallow in their sins and sensuality, never
thinking of the Author or end of their life, that there is any other world, or
that this world serves for any other end but for their life. After they have
lived as Atheists, when they are constrained sometimes to think that there is a
God, they become Atheists in their desire and affection, wishing that there
were not a God to be avenged upon them for their wickedness; and in end the
Lord gives them up to Atheism in their judgment and opinion. As they did not
like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind.
Romans 1.28. Being stricken with his judgment, they have no serious thought of
the House of God or his glory, but all their care is, about their own houses
and honor; And ordinarily the Lord befools them in their deepest Policies,
sweeping down their cob-webs, which they have been for a long time twisting,
making their own wits a snare unto them, and turning the means which they did
use for their standing and rising, to be the means of their fall and ruin.

The other Reason is from common equity amongst men, Reason 2.
which was the ground of that Decree, Esth. 1.22. Esth. 1.22.
That every man should bear rule in his own house. The Temple of Jerusalem
was the House of God: and now under the Gospel the Church of Christ, is the
House of the living God, where he has promised his presence, his face is seen,
and he is found of them that seek him: which therefore may be called, Surely
God is in thee. Isa. 45.14. Isa. 45.14.
And Jehovah Shammah, The Lord is there. Ezekiel. 48.35. Ezekiel. 48.35.
And therefore the Lord should bear rule in his Church, and his Commandment
ought to be obeyed. According to this ground has the Lord given the precepts
of his holy, just, and good Law: For if he be our God, what more equitable then
that we have him and no other for our God, that he direct his own service and
worship, that his Name be reverently used by us, that we observe the times
wherein he will have us to appear before him, and that we do duty to every one
with whom we live under him.

This consideration may be very useful: For it may first serve to be a Cure of
two great ills in this Land: One is of such as conceive that the Law of God,
belongs not to Christians; They may as well say, that Common and Natural
Equity belongs not to Christians. Is it not written in the heart of man by
nature? Is it not confirmed by Jesus Christ? Is it not recommended to
Christians by the Apostles? Is it not established by faith? Is not the
observing of it, a testimony of our communion with God? Is not the end of it,
love from a pure heart, a good conscience, and faith unfeigned? Is it
thankfulness to God, because we are delivered from the condemnation, coaction,
and rigor of the Law, not to acknowledge the obligation of the Law? Shall not
the domestics of the house of God observe the Commandments of God, or shall
they not be grieved when they transgress and observe them not? It is too
common an error to turn the grace of God into wantonness. The other evil is
on the other hand when men give themselves to will worship: the one sort
neglects the Commandments of God, the other adds the commandments of men to
the Commandments of God, which is that (...) that Epiphanius speaks of, a
superfluous will worship: of which there is too palpable an example and
practice in this Kingdom at this time, in the observation of days. No Church
or Kingdom on earth, has greater reason to take heed to it, then the Church
and Kingdom of England. 1. Because the house and service of God, has been
pestered, beside a multitude of superstitious observations and Ceremonies, with
a greater number of days, then the Church of the Jews had in the time of their
Ceremonial worship. 2. Because the Christian Sabbath or Lords day has been
profaned, and what has been added to other days, has been added with
derogation to the Lords day: They have forsaken the fountain of living waters,
and have dug unto themselves cisterns which hold no water. 3. Because God
has called this Land to mourning and fasting, as we profess this day, and I
pray God that the unseasonable keeping of this festivitie, which God has not
commanded, be not more prevalent for evil, then the humiliation of this day for
good; and yet the keeping of this day of humiliation in such a time of
festivitie, is a presage that by the blessing of God upon the proceedings of
the Honorable Houses of Parliament and Assembly, this superstition shall
shortly expire, and that it is now at the last gasp.

Secondly, Use 2.
It may teach us what reason the Lord of heaven has to be angry when his
Commandment is not obeyed in his own house. Kings will be obeyed in their
kingdoms: Majors and Magistrates in their Cities, every man in his own house:
The Church of God is the Kingdom, the City, the House of God, which we must
either deny, or resolve to have his will done.

There is yet a third point to be considered: The third part of the Text.
the conjunction of these two, or the inference, of the effect from the cause:
For why should there be wrath, etc. It is expressed in an interrogatory way to
show the necessity of the consequence; and that the wrath is certain and
inevitable, unless what is commanded be done: and to show the foolishness and
wickedness of man in bringing upon himself this wrath which by his obedience
he might prevent, like unto that in the Prophet: Why will ye die O house of
Israel. The prudent man foreseeth the evil and hides himself: Pro. 22.3.
but the simple pass on and are punished. Whence we learn, that it is a
special wisdom in these that have place and power, to prevent or turn away the
wrath of God from the present and future generation by establishing true
Religion, and ordering the house of God aright. I confess it is a higher point
of wisdom to have a care of Religion, that thereby ourselves and others may be
brought to spiritual and eternal happiness, and thereby to prevent
everlasting wrath: yet even in relation to the blessings and miseries of this
present life, this kind of piety is the best policy. I will honor them that
honor me, says the Lord, and those that despise me shall be lightly esteemed.
Men may expect honor by dishonouring of God, and despising of Religion, but
the Word of the Lord abides sure, and their honor shall be turned into shame.
More particularly to this purpose and text, the Prophet Haggai speaks. Hag.
1.9, 10.
A heavy judgment was upon the people for the neglect of the worship and
service of God: Why says the Lord of hosts? because of mine House that is
waste, and ye run every man into his own house; Therefore the heaven over you
is stayed from dew, and the earth is stayed from her fruit, like unto that in
Deuteronomy. Deuteronomy. 28.23.
The heaven that is over thy head shall be brass, and the earth that is under
thy feet shall be iron. But afterward he speaks comfortably: Hag. 2.9.
The glory of this latter house shall be greater then of the former, says the
Lord of Hosts: And in this place will I give peace says the Lord of Hosts. And
again, Hag. 2.18, 19.
consider now from this day and upward, from the four and twenday of the ninth
month, even from the day that the foundation of the Lords Temple was laid,
consider it: From this day will I bless you. Jehosophot and Hezekiah are two
Witnesses of this truth. The Lord was with Jehosophat, because he walked in the
first ways of his father David, and sought not to Balaam, but sought to the
Lord God of his father, and walked in his Commandments, and not after the
doings of Israel; therefore the Lord established the Kingdom in his hand, and
all Judah brought (...) Jehosophat presents, and he had riches and honor in
abundance, etc. 2 Chr. 17 3, 4, 5, 6.
Hezekiah teaches the Levits themselves this Lesson; that for trespasses of
this kind the wrath of the Lord was upon Judah and Jerusalem, and he had
delivered them to trouble, to astonishment and to hissing. 2 Chr. 29 6, 7, 8,
9, 10, 11.
There be as many pregnant examples of this truth in the book of God as of any
other; but he who desires a full Commentary or Sermon upon this point of the
Text, let him read the 2 Chap. of the book of the Judges, Judges 2.
and he shall see the ebbing and flowing of prosperity, peace and safety,
according to the course of Religion. The reason of it is; because where true
Religion has not place, there is nothing but prophanenes, uncleanness,
excess, oppression, violence, deceit and falsehood. The laws of men may do
some hurt for repressing outrages, but how shall the floods be dried up unless
the fountains be obstructed? There is great difference betwixt outward
restraint from man, and inward mortification from God: Where Religion takes
place, men neither dare nor will commit sin; and does not the wrath of God
for these things come upon the Children of disobedience? Men need not in
searching out the periods and fatalities of Kingdoms and States, trouble
themselves with the intricat numbers of Plato, Predictions of Astrologers or
particular Prophesies, (...), impiety, iniquity, luxury, which must needs have
place where true Religion has nor place, and are causes for which the Lord
brings alterations upon Kingdoms.

Use 1.
By this we may easily discern who are Malignants and Enemies to the peace and
prosperity of the Kingdom; Religion is the touchstone: Such as are mockers of
the Reformation of Religion and of their own lives, have brought on and hold
on this heavy wrath; but they who desire and endeavor the Reformation and
settling of Religion are in the right way to bring honor and happiness upon the
Kingdom of the King and his Sons.

Use 2.
It is a damnable and cursed policy, by dispencing with any thing which God has
commanded to be done for his house, to seek after peace and deliverance. It was
the policy of Jeroboam, and it turned to his ruin. It was the policy of the
Jews, and it brought their City and Nation to desolation. In this thou walk
contrary to God, and therefore God will walk contrary to thee. Thou think^st to
turn away wrath by the neglect of Religion and of the house of God; but God
has said, that wrath shall be upon the Kingdom, unless what he has
commanded be done for his house. Art thou wiser then he? or art thou stronger
then he? will thou against the will of God, against ^he experience of all ages,
against thy own conscience, run in a way contrary to Gods way? Salvation shall
come to the people of God, and his house shall be built; but thou and thy house
which thou make an Idol and preferrest to the house of God, shall certainly
perish; God will not he mocked.

I must therefore take the boldness according to the charge and trust
committed unto me at this time, Use 3.
in the name of God to exhort, and in the bowels of Jesus Christ to entreat,
that the house of God be diligently looked unto, and that first of all,
Religion be reformed and settled. No man must be of Gallio's temper, Acts 18.14,
15, 16 17.
to care for none of those things, as if they were but light matters in
comparison of civil and secular affairs, or as if they were impertinent for
him. Nothing in the world that does concern thine own private, or the state
and public, is of so great weight and importance, nothing so pressing and
pertinent as this of Religion. No man must be of Gamaliels temper; he was a
grave, learned, and peaceable man, of great esteem amongst the people; yet his
counsel was crafty, corrupt and unchristian; somewhat in it was good; he aimed
at peace, he laid this ground, that the work was either of God or of man; and
what was of man would come to naught, and what was of God could not be
overthrown: But in this, very corrupt, that he would have us to judge of
Religion by particular events, and that we should do nothing for the
advancement of a good cause, but leave it to the providence of God. His
arguments were fitted to his purpose, but true Religion is neither a matter of
fancy, as was that of Theudas, nor of sedition, as was that of Judas of Galile,
and therefore all men ought to bend themselves to the settling thereof by all
good and lawful means, Nor must ye in this work linger or delay upon any
consent or concurrence whatsoever: It is true, where matters are dark or
doubtful, ye should seek for light and resolution, and ye have to that end a
learned and godly Assembly, but where matters are clear and manifest, if ye
lie still waiting for the consent of others, ye are like to lose both the
opportunity and the thing it self, as many have done, and rep^^ted themselves
too late. There be some things wh^^^in we are subject to God alone, and in
thi^^ of this kind, we are not to wait for counsel or c^^sent from others. It
was the saying of Dioclesian, (...) a good and wise Emperor is often-sold by
his Cou^ers, who have a guard about his ears, and traduce go^^men forevill and
commend evil men for good. As Ba^^am dealt not faithfully with God, so the
messengers (...) unto him did deal unfaithfully with King Balaa^. It also
true, that as at Rome, so in other places patres (...) scripti, are sometimes
patres circumscripti. Nor must fear opposition or enmity, and thereby trouble
to (...) State while Ye are seeking after Reformation. Wh^^ Cassander one of
the successors of Alexander was p^^swading them to receive Alexander to be
worshipped amongst their Gods; and that if they refused, he would ^^nounce war
against them; Demades their Orator to them, that it was to be feared while they
were hold^ the heavens, they should lose the earth. But I change (...) words
with Peter Martyr, that it is to be feared ne (...) Rempublicam terrenam
curatis and defenditis nimium, (...) lum amittatis, while Ye stand for the
State, that Y^^ lose Religion. If Zerubabell, Ezra or Nehemiah had d^layed the
building of the house of God, upon the opposition of enemies, or because there
was Lions and For^ in the way, the worship of God had never bin set up, (...)
Religion reformed; but the builders with one of the^^ hands wrought in the
work, and in the other hand held weapon. In this posture I leave you, till the
house of the Lord be built amongst you, and your swords be turned into
plough-shares, and your spears into pruning-hook^ that is, till truth and
peace be established in your borders. The Zeal of the Lord of Hosts will
perform it: To him be praise for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

