A REPLY IN THE DEFENSE OF OXFORD PETITION, WITH A DECLARATION of the
Academians Tears for the decay of LEARNING, OR, The UNIVERSITIES Fears: ALSO
THE DESCRIPTION OF A Reverend Coachman which preached before a company of
Brownists.

BY THO. HERBERT.

London Printed, 1641.

ACADEMIANS TEARS, OR, THE UNIVERSITIES FEARS for the decay of LEARNING.
LIke to the Swan or Augur of the Spring,
In depth of woe thus I your sorrow sing
Learned Academians, eyes dimmed with tears,
The diapason of my sorrow bears:
I grieve, and for my grief am checked by those
Who seem well learned, yet are learnings foes.
Wise they do seem to be, but yet are fools
For loving Wisdom, and yet hate the Schools
Wherein the nutriment of wisdom dwells,
What! Is it wisdom for to seek new hels
In an eternal Theme of bliss? is it fit
To approve nonsense to be real wit?
How shall the Eunuch Scripture understand,
If Phillip not ascend the Chariot, and
Instruct? how shall dark sentences be made
clear as the Sun, when Masters of each trade
Will be interpreters? Can Lands be free
From heresies, where all will Preachers be?
O surely no, where ignorance does reign,
Wisdom to visit that coast will disdain;
When all shall teach, who will be learners then?
Sure brutish beasts must act the parts of men,
They must the audience be, and learn as much
As those which do at learned fountain grutch.
The Universities I mean, who have
Too much they say, and yet do daily crave:
Suppose that some do avarice affect,
Do therefore all? suppose that some neglect
The feeding of their flocks, all don't do so,
Why should then any seek all to overthrow?
Some Bishops have done ill (as heretofore
I have declared) let them then pay the score
They owe to death, let not such servants frown
Have power to cast a faithful Prelate down,
Though jure divino Bishops must not be,
Yet from derision they ought to live free,
Which have not tainted been, such sordid slave
(Whose baseness my sharp pen shall strike to's
Ought not to rail at them, which cannot tell (grave)
How they have lived, whether bad or well.
Ironmongers, Glovers, and each Cobblers wit
Is bent to shoot, what is the mark they hit
But only Bishops? Lord Bishops they must fall,
The reason why? they are turned Papists all.
They love the Pope, and therefore they must down,
The Miter never shall ore top the Crown:
God forbid that it should, O first let all
Which think but such a thought, by justice fall.
Let them be kept from the bright shining Sun,
I love Minerva, but Medusa shun.
Let virtue flourish, and let right take place,
But those confounded be, which vice embrace.
Yet give me leave once more for to revie
Minerva's torment, Oxfords misery.
Oxford Petition being dedicated
To the Parliament, was printed, hated,
Abused, and reviled by each factious tongue,
Answered with envious lines, which stung
The very hearts of well affected men,
Who said, what would become of learning, when
Each Libeller durst scandalize it, none
Being called in question for it; but yet did pray,
Scholars would patient be, until a day
(Being consecrated by the Parliament)
Should come, wherein bad minded men's intent
should hindered be, scandalous Libels stopped,
The authors being hanged, or their ears cropped.
This cordial did give some ease, but still,
They are abused by Brownists words and quill,
Some of whose actions to you I Will descrie,
But first view Academians misery.
Which thus begins.
Once Oxfords merits were accounted great,
Our learning reverenc't, but now are beat
To The ground by each illiterate pen,
Being termed no better than Romes serving men.
Like doleful mourners we are forced to walk,
Finding no fitter Theme on which to talk
Then our misfortune, which is Englands hate,
But yet are ignorant from whence our fate
proceeds, some say from envy it does come,
Others because we much affected Rome,
By loving Canterbury, whose sad tears
We do present you, being writ in our fears.
Canterbury his tears.
Countrymen hear him which has done you wrong,
Regard my tears, being Progn's sisters song.
A Clothiers Son I was, in Redding borne,
But now Archbishop, and each Vassals scorn;
And well I do deserve it, because I
Delighted in naught but your misery.
I aimed at that which equity forbid,
Still cogitating, that my plots lay hid;
I spurned at virtue, but did vice embrace,
I never did dream of justice, of disgrace,
Which would ensue my crimes, I still did think,
I was too high at sorrows font to drink:
But ah me wretch! my deeds are now well known,
Boreastick blasts my deeds have abroad blown,
In each place Zephyrus not suffered is
With his mild gales to blow, envy does hiss
At her chief Patron, for I termed was so,
Which now does heap upon me fatal woe:
Each Poet does the Muses nine invite,
To aid his pen Satyrick strain to write
Against poor Canterbury, there are none,
Which in the least degree will me bemoane:
For if they should, I know the Commons hate
Would heap on them my dismal, mournful fate.
My Flock I fed not, no more will they me,
With ought but new invented misery.
Nor can I blame them for their deserved hate,
'Cause I did first make them unfortunate.
I caused their grief, and why should they not mine:
It is not fit the Presser should the Vine
Cut down, for being good and wholesome fruit,
Nor was it fit, those I could not confute,
For to confound, but now alas, it is past,
Wherefore those few days I enjoy the waste,
In ecchoing forth lamentation
For their falls, and Englands vexation.
O what is man? why nothing. It were well
If he were so, then wide gaping hell
Had naught to do him; if nothing, then
Nothing could torment him, but when
It Is plainly proved, essence he has from Jove,
Bestowed on him, only for the great love
Which he did bear to him, if he abuse
That free-will-offring, and do quite refuse
To be obsequious to his Gods command,
Kick at his salutes, and proudly withstand
His Makers ediots, then woe be to him,
He must be sure in brinish floods to swim,
Or burn eternally in the infernal Lake,
Which but to name, each artery shake,
My limbs do tremble, horror me afflicts,
Conscience accusing me of my vain tricks,
My corpse, death fear not, it is the jem within,
Whose death I fear, deprived by my foul sin.
Pray for me Contrymen, let curses cease,
Lest that you hinder my souls future peace.
Oxfords Answer.
Pray you for him, and us, but we for all,
Especially that learning never may fall.
Finis.
Of a reverend Coachman which preached before a company of Separatists.
AN honest Gentleman of the Inns of Court,
Amongst the Brownists meaning to resort:
His hair he cropped, and with a brothers pace,
With turned up eyes, he went to seek the place
Of their abode, at length he it does find,
And coming in salutes a sister kind.
Sister quoth he, who is it does teach this day,
Insooth I know not brother she did say;
Last Sabbath day did teach a worthy man,
Whom once again I Will hear if that I can.
What was his name said he, she could not tell,
Her only plea was, he taught very well;
A worthy man he was, a Coachman too,
He thought it strange a Coachman so should do.
The Authors answer.
A Coachman, and a Preacher, O it is strange,
What meant these idiots for to exchange
Levi for Benjamin? What did they skip
From doing evil by his Coach-horse whip.
I do conceit a whip would have been fit
Laid on their backs to have taught them better wit.
If Coachmen turn Divines, poor Scholars take
Their office, perhaps in time they will make
You Chaplains to them, serve the Hall table,
And afterward they will make you able,
To minister the Sacrament, but oh!
I quake to tell it, too many have done so.
When I perceive Ironmongers, Walkers are
In Gods own Tabernacle, and do not fear
His thundering rage (although they know full well)
For peeping in the Ark, how many fell.
My eyes I cannot abstain from springing tears,
Lest truth should cease, I Am filled with 1000 fears.
But yet I Will pray such things may be altered,
Or those which are upholders of them haltered.
Coachman, get up thy Box, Audience return,
Lest the same place do prove your fatal Urn.
FINIS.

