Persecution for Religion JUDGED and CONDEMNED: In a DISCOURE, between an
ANTICHRISTIAN and a CRHISTIAN. PROVING By the Law of God and of the Land, And
By King James his many Testimonies, That no man ought to be Persecuted for his
Religion, so he Testify his Allegiance by the Oath appointed by Law.

Proving also, That the Spiritual Power in England, is the Image of the
Spiritual Cruel Power of Rome, or that Beast mentioned, Rev. 13. Manifesting
the fearful Estate of those who subject to such Powers, that Tyrannize over the
Conscience: And showing the Unlawfulness of Flying, because of the Trouble men
see or fear is coming upon them.

To which is added, An humble SUPPLICATION to the Kings Majesty; Wherein (among
other things) is proved, 1. That the Learned usually Err and resist the Truth.
2. That Persecution is against the Law of Jesus Christ. 3. Against the
Profession and Practice of famous Princes. 4. Condemned by ancient and later
Writers. 5. Freedom in Religion not hurtful to any Commonwealth, and it
depriveth not Kings of any Power given them of God.

2 Cor. 10.4. For the Weapons of our Warfare are not carnal, but mighty through
God, to the pulling down of strong holds.

Printed in the years, 1615. and 1620. And now Reprinted for the Establishing
some, and Convincing others, 1662.

To all that truly wish Jerusalem's Prosperity and Babylons Destruction; Wisdom
and Understanding be multiplied upon you.
IN these days, if ever, that is true which the Wiseman said, Eccl. 12.12.
There is no end in making many books, and much reading is a weariness to the
flesh: yet considering how heinous it is in the sight of the Lord to force men
and women by cruel Persecutions, to bring their bodies to a Worship whereunto
they cannot bring their spirits; we thought it our duty for Gods Glory, and the
reformation thereof in this our own Nation, to publish this little Writing
following, wherein is manifestly proved by the Law of God, the Law of our Land,
and his Majesty's own diverse Testimonies, That no man ought to be persecuted
for his Religion, be it true of false, so he testify his faithful Allegiance
to the King. What shall men do striving about matters of Religion till this be
ended? For, if this be a truth, that the Kings of the Earth have power from God
to compel by Persecution all their Subjects to believe as they believe, then
wicked is it to resist, and the Persecutions of such is justly upon them, and
the Magistrates that execute the same are clear from their blood, and it is
upon their own heads: but if the Kings of the Earth have not power from God to
compel by Persecution any of their Subjects to believe as they believe (seeing
Faith is the work of God) then no less wicked is it in the sight of God to
disobey, and the Persecutions of such are upon the Magistrates, and the blood
of the Persecuted cries unto the Lord, and will be required at the Magistrates
hands.

Wherefore in all humility, reverence and loyalty we do humbly desire of our
Sovereign Lord the King, and all Gods Ministers under him, as Judges, Justices
of Peace, etc. by whom this Persecution is executed, themselves to consider,
not whether herein they please Lord Bishops, but whether they please the Lord
Jesus Christ, who after a little while shall judge all Judges according to
their works, without respect of persons, and therefore are commanded to kiss
the Son lest he be angry, and they perish in the way, Psalm. 2. Our humble
desire is, that they would consider what is testified in the Scriptures; That
the Kings of the Earth shall give their power unto the Beast, till the words of
God be fulfilled; then shall they take their power from her. If it be granted
(as it is) that the Kings of this Nation formerly have given their power unto
that Romish Beast, it shall evidently appear that our Lord the King, and all
Magistrates under him, do give their power to the same Beast, though the Beast
be in another shape: For, as that spiritual Power or Beast of Rome sets up a
Worship (as they pretend) for God, and force all thereto by cruel Persecutions,
the Kings of the Earth giving their Power thereunto; So this spiritual Power,
or Beast of England, sets up a Worship (as they pretend) for God, and force all
thereto by cruel Persecutions, the Kings Majesty giving his Power hereunto. Oh
that all that are in Authority would but consider by the Word of God (which
shall judge them at the last day) what they do, when they force men against
their souls and consciences to dissemble to believe as they believe, or as the
King and State believe, they would withdraw their hands and hearts therefrom,
and never do as they have done, partly through inconsideration, and partly to
please Lord Bishops being in favor with the King.

It cannot but with high thankfulness to God, and to the King, be acknowledged
of all, that the Kings Majesty is no blood-thirsty man, for if he were, bodily
destruction should be the portion of all that fear God, and endeavor to walk
in his ways, as may be seen in the primitive time of this spiritual Power, or
Beast of England, after that K. Henry the eight had cast off the Romist Beast
and since (so far as leave has been granted them) by hanging, burning,
banishing, imprisoning, and what not, as the particulars might be named. Yet
our most humble desire of our Lord the King, is, That he would not give his
Power to force his faithful Subjects to dissemble to believe as he believes, in
the least measure of Persecution; though it is no small Persecution to lie many
years in filthy Prisons, in hunger, cold, idleness, divided from Wife, Family,
Calling, left in continual miseries and temptations, so as Death would be to
many less Persecution; seeing his Majesty confesses, that to change the mind
must be the work of God. And of the Lord Bishops we desire, that they would a
little leave off persecuting those that cannot believe as they, till they have
proved that God is well-pleased therewith, and the souls of such as submit are
in safety from Condemnation; let them prove this, and we protest we will for
ever submit unto them, and so will thousands: and therefore if there be any
spark of grace in them, let them set themselves to give satisfaction either by
word or writing, or both. But if they will not, but continue their
cruel-courses as they have done, let them yet remember that they must come to
Judgment, and have their Abominations set in order before them, and be torn in
pieces when none shall deliver them.

And whereas they have no other color of ground out of the Scriptures, than
that they have canonized a Law, viz. That whosoever shall affirm that the Kings
Majesty has not the same power over the Church that the godly Kings of Israel
had under the Law, etc. Let him be excommunicate ipso facto. The unsoundness of
which ground is manifested in this Dialogue following, wherein is showed their
palpable ignorance, in that they know not the Mystery of God; and therefore
have they made this Canon in flattery to the King, only to support their Pride
and Cruelty: For, if the Kingdom or Land of Israel, or Canaan now under the
Gospel, be an earthly Kingdom or Land, or Israel now a worldly or fleshly
Israel, as both were under the Law, Then we would confess there should be an
earthly King thereof: But if the Kingdom of Israel now be not earthly, but
heavenly, Joh. 18.36. and the Israelites now not of this world, Joh. 15.19.
Then the King thereof is not of this world, as they are not of this world, Joh.
17.16. And if these spiritual Lords confess that Christ is King now of the Land
and People of Israel, but yet he has left our Lord the King his Deputy, to
make such Laws and Lords over the Church as pleases him; the Word of the Lord
is against them, There is but one Lord, ( 1 Cor. 12.5.) and one Lawgiver (Jam.
4.12.) over his Church. Nay, his Majesty himself is against them, who says,
There is no earthly Monarch over the Church, whose word must be a Law. And
says further, Christ is his Churches Monarch, and the holy Ghost his Deputy,
alleging Luke 22.25. The Kings of the Gentiles bear rule one over another,
etc. but it shall not be so among you. Saying further, Christ when he ascended,
left not Peter with them to direct them in all truth, but promised to send the
holy Ghost to them for that end, etc. If any will be rebellious against the
Word of the Lord herein, yet let them not be rebellious against the word of the
King. Oh that any thing would prevail with them to make them leave off these
cruel courses, of persecuting poor souls that desire truly to fear God, and are
most faithful Subjects to the King, and desire also the salvation of the souls
of these their cruel Persecrutors, who do seek their utter undoing by all the
forenamed Persecutions, only because they cannot of faith offer up such
Worship to God as these spiritual Lords command; and the rather let them leave
off persecuting, seeing the Kings Majesty acknowledges, It is a sure Rule in
Divinity, That God loves not to plant his Church by Violence and Bloodshed. And
if it be a Law for all Christians, That in indifferent things one must not
offend another, but the strong to forbear rather than offend his weak brother;
otherwise he wounds the weak conscience, and sins against Christ, 1 Cor. 8.
Then how much less has any man power to be Lord over the weak conscience,
forcing it to practice that it has not faith in, bringing it thereby unto sin,
and unto condemnation, Romans 14. We do unfainedly acknowledge the Authority of
earthly Magistrates, God's blessed Ordinance, and that all earthly Authority
and Command appeartains unto them; let them command what they will, we must
obey, either to do or suffer upon pain of Gods displeasure, besides their
punishment: But all men must let God alone with his Right, which is to be Lord
and Lawgiver to the soul, and not command obedience for God where he commands
none. And this is only that which we dare not but maintain upon the peril of
our souls, which is greater than bodily affliction: And only for the
maintenance of Christ's right herein, do false Prophets and Deceivers (who by
that craft are clothed in fine apparel, and fare deliciously every day)
labor to make us odious in the ears and eyes of Prince and People, knowing
well that if they had not power by Persecution to force men to dissemble to
believe as they, their kingdom and gain would soon come to naught; the
wickedness of which course is discovered in this Writing following.

For the manner, being Dialogue-wise, we thought it the fittest in two
respects: First, for the understanding of the simple, to whom especially Gods
Mysteries appertain, more than to the wise and prudent of the world. Secondly,
Because all the Objections that we have met with, might be set down, and the
plainlyer answered. And because we have faith and assurance that many will see
and acknowledge the unlawfulness of tyrannizing over the Conscience, by
persecuting the bodies of such as cannot be subject, We have also though it
meet to manifest the fearful estate of such subjection, that they may deliver
their souls, if they will be saved: and also have set down the beginning of
that old and good way, that John Baptist, Christ Jesus and his Apostles have
left unto all that will be saved unto the end of the world. Beseeching that
Almighty worker, that he would work in the hearts and consciences of men, that
they may enquire for it, and that out of the Scriptures, and walk therein; then
shall they find Rest unto their souls, although Afflictions to their bodies. Oh
it is time for the Lord to work, for they have destroyed his Law, and have set
up in many Nations such Worship for God as best pleases them that are in
Authority, and have power to persecute the contrary-minded. Let all Gods People
cry, How long Lord? when will thou come to destroy Antichrists cruel Kingdom,
and establish Christ's meek and peaceable Kingdom? As thou have begun, even come
Lord Jesus by the Spirit of thy Mouth, and the Brightness of thy Coming, even
come quickly. Amen.

By Christ's unworthy Witnesses, his Majesty's faithful Subjects: Commonly (but
most falsely) called ANA-BAPTISTS.

PERSECUTION for RELIGION JUDGED and CONDEMNED: In a DISCOURSE between an
ANTICHRISTIAN and a CHRISTIAN.
Antichristian. Why come you not to Church?


Christian. What should I do there?


Antich. Worship God.


Chr. I must worship God as he requires, and not as any mortal man requires.


Ant. True, but the Worship that we require you to offer up, is the Worship God
requires.


Chapter If it be so, I will with all willingness assent unto it; but my conscience
must be satisfied thereof by the Word of Truth, that I may have faith in it,
otherwise it is my grievous sin, Romans 14.23. For I may not believe it so to be,
because you affirm it.


Ant. Well, you must go to Church, otherwise you are disobedient to the Law,
and will fall under punishment.


Chapter But still remember that you would have me worship God as you pretend,
therefore let us agree what Worship God requires: Christ says, Joh. 4.24. God
is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and Truth.
Here we see what Worship God requires, viz. That we worship him with our Souls
and Spirits, and also that we worship him according to the Truth of his Word:
And therefore for your Book-worship, if it were according to Truth, (from the
which it is as far as light is from darkness) yet if I cannot offer it up with
my spirit, it is not acceptable to God, but most abominable.


Ant. Well, you must come to Church.


Chapter I pray let me ask you a Question, Do you seek the Glory of God, and the
Salvation of my soul herein, or your own Obedience?


Ant. I seek the Glory of God, and the Salvation of your Soul, and not my own
Obedience.


Chapter Then manifest it not by words only, but by deeds and truth; which if you
do, you will not threaten me with punishment to cause me to come, but with
meekness and patience satisfy my Conscience by the Word of Truth, (for this is
the duty of the Minister of Christ, 2 Timothy 2.24.) that I may come with a
willing mind, so shall I be accepted, 2 Cor. 8.12. Psalm. 110.3. For if by
threatening me with punishment, as Imprisonment, Banishment, or Death, you cause
me to bring my body, and not my spirit or soul, so shall I come near to the
Lord with my lips, when my heart shall be far from him, which he accounts
vain worship and hypocrisy, Mat. 15.


Ant. I perceive what you aim at, you would have none brought to Church, but
such as come willingly of themselves, so should every man worship God as
himself pleases.


Chapter Your Conclusion I aim not at; for I acknowledge, that as there is but one
God, so there is but one way of worshipping him, out of the which way,
whosoever is, and repents not thereof, shall pay a dear price; and therefore
it stands all men upon, not to please themselves in worshipping of him. But
you perceive aright that I aim at this, That none should be compelled to
worship God, but such as come willingly; for I will (by Gods assistance) prove
most evidently by the Scriptures, that none ought, nor can be compelled to
worship God to acceptance, by any worldly means whatsoever.


Ant. Prove that.


Chapter Well, I prove what I have affirmed, thus: First, Heb. 11.6. Without Faith
it is impossible to please God; and, Rom 14.23. Whatsoever is not of Faith, is
sin. These two Scriptures prove most evidently, that whatsoever I have not
Faith in, in worshipping God, although it were undoubtedly true, I may not
offer it up to God, for it is displeasing to him, and it is a sin against him:
As also it appears plainly by him, that came unto the Kings Supper, and
wanted his wedding garment, Matthew. 22.


Ant. It is the Kings Law that you must go to Church, and therefore you must be
obedient.


Chapter The intent of the Kings Law is not so, as appears both by the Statute
for the Oath of Allegiance, and also by his Majesty's own words, manifested in
his Apology for the Oath of Allegiance, as is hereafter more fully declared.
For, if the intent of the Law were to make me come to Church to worship God,
and not of Faith, the intent of the Law were to compel me to sin, which his
Majesty requires not.


Ant. I deny not but whatsoever is not of Faith is sin; but we would have you
come to Church to worship God in Faith.


Chapter It is not so: you regard not whether I have Faith or no; for if you did,
you would not urge the Kings Law against me, which is but a carnal weapon, and
cannot beget Faith, and therefore is no sure ground of Faith. For, in my
obedience to God, I must not presume above that that is written, 1 Cor. 4.6.
For, the Word of God is the only ground of Faith, Romans 10.17. and therefore if
you would have me come in Faith, you would only urge the Law of the King of
kings against me.


Ant. Have not all the Learned of the Land considered of these things, and set
them down? Are such simple men as you likely to see more than all these?


Chapter I demand of you whether they be not all subject to err, as all men are;
and therefore I must try their spirits, whether they err or no, 1 John 4.1.
For I may not hold, either that they cannot err, or that if I find them to
err, I must obey them notwithstanding; do you not herein teach me that Popish
and accursed Doctrine, that you inveigh so much against in the Papists, That I
must believe as the Learned of the Land believe?


Ant. I do not hold that they cannot err.


Chapter Yes, you hold either that they cannot err, or, if they do err, I must
obey them; for, if I do not obey them, you threaten me with punishment.


Ant. Nay, but I hold, that they being Learned do not err, and therefore you
must obey them.


Chapter Then this is your Argument, The Learned do not err, and therefore must be
obeyed. The Bishops and the rest of that rank are learned, and do not err, and
therefore they must be obeyed. Another Argument as vain as they may be
collected from this ground: The Learned do not err, and therefore must be
obeyed. The Pope and the rest of that rank are learned, (yea, as learned as
yours) and do not err, and therefore they must be obeyed. The one is as true
as the other, but both abominable. If you prove, that they that want this
Learning, must not meddle with the ways of God but as these learned men teach
them, then indeed you say something; but if you cannot, as most certain it is
you cannot, (for the Word of God is against you herein) then for shame to God
and men leave often your cruel persecuting; For why do you persecute men that
cannot in faith submit to your direction concerning the ways of God, upon
which consists their Salvation, if they walk in the true way of Faith with
the love thereof, and their Condemnation if they walk in a by-path?


Ant. Then I perceive if a man can plead that he has not Faith in any thing
which the King commands, he need not to be obedient.


Chapter Would God all men could see your dealing herein. This is your usual course
when your mouth is stopped by the power of Gods Word that you know not what to
answer, then you run to the Kings Command, and so make your matters good, like
unto your predecessors the wicked Scribes and Pharisees, who when our Lord and
Master had stopped their mouths that they had no word of answer, then they
sought to make him a trespasser against Caesar; but I have learned in some weak
measure, that as there is a Caesar unto whom in conscience I must be obedient,
So there is another King, one JESUS, that is King of kings; unto whom if you
will not be obedient, in giving unto God that which is Gods, He will tear you
in pieces, when there shall be none that can deliver you, and cast you into the
Lake that burns with fire and brimstone for evermore, where there shall be no
rest day nor night; and therefore agree with this your adversary quickly,
whilst you are in the way with him.

The Power and Authority of the King is earthly, and God has commanded me to
submit to every Ordinance of man, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. and therefore I have faith
to submit to what Ordinance of Man soever the King commands, if it be an humane
Ordinance, and not against the manifest Word of God, let him require what he
will, I must in conscience obey him, with my body, goods, and all that I have:
But my soul, wherewith I am to worship God, that belongs to another King,
whose Kingdom is not of this World, Joh. 18.36. Whose People must come
willingly, Psalm. 110.3. Whose weapons are not carnal, but spiritual, 2 Cor.
10.4, etc.


Ant. Is this all the Authority that you will give to the King?


Chapter What Authority can any mortal man require more, than of body, goods,
life, and all that appertains to the outward man? The heart God requires,
Prove. 23.26. He commanded to give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and
to Himself the things that are His, Luke 20.25. Now if all the outward man be
Caesar's, and the inward man too, so that he must be obeyed is his own matters,
and in God's matters also, then tell us what shall be given to God? If you, or
any man, will give him more Power or Authority than I give him, then you give
him more than his Majesty requires, as shall be showed.


Ant. We do not say that the King can compel the soul, but only the outward
man.


Chapter If he cannot compel my soul, he cannot compel me to worship God, for God
cannot be worshipped without the soul, Joh. 4.24. If you say he may compel me
to offer up a worship only with my body, (for the spirit you confess he cannot
compel) To whom is that worship? not to God. Then consider you who they worship
that are thus compelled, (say you by the King.) Let it well be here observed,
that you make the King a commander of such worship as is not to God, contrary
to his Majesty's own mind, manifest in his Writings. But this you do, not to
advance Gods Glory, nor the Kings Honor, but your own cursed kingdom of
darkness, which you hold by flattery and falsehood. For, if this compelled
worship (which is not to God) were taken away, then your kingdom would fall to
Hell, from whence it came; and therefore all men may here see it is supported
only by wickedness.


Ant. I confess the Kings Authority is earthly, but he is Head over the Church
under Christ.


Chapter God forbid that any mortal man should so equalize himself with Christ, who
alone is Head of his Church, as the Husband is of the Wife, Ephesians. 5.23. and has
left no Vicegerent in that his Office, for he is never absent from his Church,
Mat. 18.20 amd 28.20. All that any mortal man can be, is to be a subject of his
Kingdom; for there is but one Lord, 1 Cor. 12.5. and one Lawgiver, Jam. 3.12.
And that this is so, his Majesty confirms by his own testimony, in his
Apology for the Oath of Allegiance, page 46, 47. But as I well allow of the
Hyrarchy of the Church for distinction of Orders, (for so I understand it) so I
utterly deny that there is any earthly Monarch thereof, whose word must be a
Law, and who cannot err in his sentence by an infallibility of spirit: because
earthly Kingdoms must have earthly Monarchs, it does not follow that the Church
must have a visible Monarch top: For the World has not one earthly temporal
Monarch; Christ is his Churches Monarch, and the Holy Ghost his Deputy. The
Kings of the Gentiles reign over them, but ye shall not be so, Luke 22.25.
Christ did not promise before his Ascension to leave Peter with them, to direct
and instruct them in all things; but he promised to send the Holy Ghost unto
them for that end. These are his Highness own words, whereby it evidently
appears his Majesty challenges no supremacy over the Church, but labors
to overthrow that abominable exaltation of that Man of Sin in the Romish
Profession; for Christ has given no Supremacy in, or over his Church to any
mortal man, but expressly commanded the contrary, as that place of Luke,
mentioned by his Majesty, plainly declares. His Highness is supreme Head and
Governor over all his Subjects Bodies and Goods within his Dominions, and
therein I detest and abhor all foreign Powers whatsoever.

But now for the thing in controversy betwixt you and me, of compelling men by
Persecutions to do service to God (as is pretended) wherein they have not
Faith: it shall be manifest not to be of God, in that Christ Jesus himself, the
only Lord and Lawgiver to the soul, neither had any such Power and Authority,
neither taught any such thing to his Disciples, but the contrary. First, Mat.
28.18, 19. All Power is given me in Heaven and in Earth; Go therefore and teach
all Nations. And 2 Cor. 10.4. The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but
mighty through God, to cast down strong Holds, etc. Here we see Christ has no
worldly power, nor worldly weapons. Secondly, He practiced and taught the
contrary. When the Samaritans would not receive him going to Jerusalem, Luke 9.
his Disciples would have had Fire come down from Heaven and devoured them, but
Christ rebuked them, and said, Ye know not of what spirit ye are of: for the
Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them. And the Apostle
by the Spirit of Christ, 2 Timothy 2.24. commands the Servants of the Lord, not
to strive; but to be gentle toward all men, apt to teach, suffering the
evil-men patiently; instructing them with meekness that are contrary-minded;
proving, if God at any time will give them repentance, that they may know the
truth, and come to amendment out of the Devils snare, etc. These Scriptures
need no explanation for this most evident Truth.


Ant. Well, yet notwithstanding all this, it is manifest in the Scriptures, by
the Example of the Apostle Peter smiting Ananias and Saphira to death, Act. 5.
and of the Apostle Paul striking Elymas the Sorcerer blind, Act. 13.11. and
also by delivering Hymeneus and Alexander unto Satan for the destruction of the
flesh; that punishment upon the body may be used, and the flesh destroyed: For
if it were lawful for them to smite to death, and the like, though by
extraordinary means, then it must be lawful for us by ordinary means, since
extraordinary means now fail: If you say it be not lawful for us, then you must
say it was not lawful for them, and that were to accuse them of laying a false
foundation, which none fearing God will affirm.


Chapter I dare not once admit of such a thought, as to disallow the truth of that
Foundation which the Apostles, as skillful Master Builders, have laid: But for
your Argument of Peter's extraordinary smiting of Ananias and Saphira, he
neither laid hand upon them, nor threatened them by word, only declared what
should befall them from God; and therefore serves nothing to your purpose.
Also that of Paul to Elymas, he laid no hands upon him, but only declared the
Lords hand upon him, and the judgment that should follow. If you can so
pronounce, and it so come to pass upon any, do it, and then it may be you may
be accounted Master Builders, and layers of a new foundation, or another
Gospel. And for the Apostle Paul his delivering Hymeneus and Alexander unto
Satan, 1 Timothy 1.20. it was not by any temporal sword or power, but even by the
Power of our Lord Jesus Christ, in his Name, by the sword of the Spirit, 1 Cor.
5.4. And this was not extraordinary, but ordinary, to continue in all Churches
to the end; and not to destroy the outward man, as you teach and practice, but
to destroy those lustful affections which dwell in the flesh, that so the flesh
being mortified, the Spirit may be quickened, and the Soul saved in the day of
the Lord Jesus. And whereas you say, that as they did it by extraordinary means
so you may do it by ordirary means: If you would use only those weapons which
Christ commanded his Disciples to use in this business, which are not carnal,
we would agree with you herein; but if your ordinary means be such as Christ
never had, nor any of his Disciples, then it is a means of your own devising,
for Christ has all means whatsoever for bringing men to the obedience of the
Truth.


Ant. Does not Christ in the Parable teach, that he compelled all to come in?


Chapter I demand of you, wherewith does he compel them? he has no carnal weapons:
Does he not compel them by his Word, which is his two-edged Sword? Heb. 4.12.
Rev. 2.12. Does he smite the Earth with any other weapons than by the breath of
his lips? Isa. 11.4


Ant. Well then, you see then compulsion may be used.


Chapter Yes, I confess to you such compulsion as much as you will, if when you
have done you will walk in his steps, who when the Gaderens prayed him to
depart, he left them, and taught his Disciples where they should preach the
Word of God, if they would not receive them, that they should shake off the
dust of their feet for a witness against them, Mat. 10.14. which accordingly
they practiced, Act. 13.51. and 18.6. etc. He never taught them to pull the
contrary-minded out of their houses, and put them in Prisons, to the undoing of
them, their wives and children: This was Readiness course when he was a Blasphemer
and Persecutor, etc. Act. 9.1, etc. Christ taught his Disciples to wait if at
any time God would give the contrary-minded repentance, and not to prevent
their repentance by seeking their blood.


Indifferent man. I have heard you all this while, and by that I have heard, I
see evidently that none ought to be compelled by any worldly means to worship
God, neither can any be accepted in such worship, in that it is Spiritual
Worship that he accepts.


Chapter Blessed be the Lord that you see it, I would not you only, but all men did
see that the sword of the Magistrate, and all afflictions proceeding therefrom,
are only upon the outward man, and connot convert a soul from going astray, not
beget faith; for, Faith comes by hearing the Word of God, Romans 10.17. and
therefore is no instrument in this work. All that the Magistrate can do, is to
compel me to bring my body; for, except there be a willing mind, which no man
can see, there is no acceptance with God; and therefore it is not Gods Glory,
nor my acceptance with him they seek by forcing me, but merely their own
Obedience, to God's great dishonor, and the destruction of my soul, if I
should so do. But if it would suffice them to bring my body to that they call
their Church, and require of me no worship: I will go when they will, only not
when their false worship is performed. For I abhor the accursed Doctrine of the
Familists herein.


Indif. It is a lamentable thing to consider how many thousands in this Nation
there be, that for fear of trouble submit to things in Religion which they
disapprove of.


Chapter Oh! whose eyes do not gush out with tears in the confideration thereof?
seeing in all that God is highly displeased and all those are under the
Judgments of God everlastingly, if they repent not.


Ant. If it were as you would have it, that all Religions should be suffered,
how dangerous would it be to the Kings Person and State? what Treacheries and
Treasons would be plotted?


Indif. Indeed that is a thing greatly to be suspected: but if permission of
all Religions could be cleared in that, there is no question but it might
prevail with the King and State.


Chapter If it be not cleared of that, then let all men abhor it. It is the
Commandment of him, who is the God, not of confusion, but of Peace and Order,
and therefore to be obeyed, Mat. 13.30. Let the good and bad grow together unto
the end of the world; Suffering the contrary-minded patiently, proving, if God
at any time will give them repentance that they may acknowledge the Truth, etc.
First, for all those that seek and practice in themselves Reformation in
Religion, Satan himself cannot task them with the least jot of Treachery: And
for the Papists, may it not justly be suspected that one chief cause of all
their Treasons has been because of all the Compulsions that have been used
against their Consciences, in compelling them to the Worship practiced in
public, according to the Law of this Land; which being taken away, there is no
doubt but they would be much more peaceable; as we see it verified in diverse
other Nations, where no such Compulsion is used: for, if they might have
freedom in their Religion, unto their faithful Allegiance to the King, the fear
of the Kings Laws, and their own Prosperity and Peace, would make them live
more inoffensively in that respect.


Indif. Only the Papists are dangerous, in that some of them hold, That the
Kings and Princes that be Excommunicated by the Pope, may be deposed or
murdered by their Subjects, or any other.


Chapter For that damnable and accursed Doctrine, as we abhor it with our souls, so
we desire all other may: and therefore all the Laws that can be made for the
prevention of such execrable practices are most necessary. But now I desire all
men to see, that the Bishops and we justly cry out against this accursed
doctrine and practice in the Pope and his associates, That Princes should be
murdered by their Subjects for contrary-mindedness in Religion, yet they teach
the King to murder his Subjects for the self-same thing, viz. for being
contrary-minded to them in their Religion. So likewise, as that accursed
doctrine is to be abhorred in the Papists, who teach Subjects not to be
obedient to their Princes that are excommunicated by the Pope: even so is that
accursed doctrine of the Bishops to be abhorred, who teach Princes not to
protect their Subjects that are excommunicated by them, in not affording them
either Law or Justice, nor to bear Testimony in any Court, Do not the Bishops
herein justify this accursed doctrine and practice in the Papists?


Ant. There is a great difference in the persons, for the one are Princes, the
other Subjects; and Subjects must be obedient.


Chapter Most true it is; but is it not also true, that Princes must afford all
their Subjects Justice and Equity, although they be as Heathens and Publicans?
For, if Princes be freed from doing Right and Justice, and protecting their
Subjects that be excommunicated, why are not Subjects also freed from
Subjection and Allegiance to their Princes, being excommunicated, if
Excommunication be Christ's Law to all alike that will be saved, without
respect of persons. And also, Is not that Law of Christ herein to be observed,
That whatsoevr ye would men should do unto you, even so do ye unto them, Mat.
7.12. And therefore, as Princes would that all their Subjects should be
faithful and obedient unto them; so ought Princes to be just and equal to all
their Subjects, in maintaining them in every just and equal cause between man
and man: For, For this cause (not for Religion) says the Apostle, the Saints
at Rome paid Tribute to Caesar their Heathen Prince, who was against them in
Religion. Shall they not escape Damnation for this accursed doctrine and
practice, and think ye you shall? Thou that judge another, judge thou not
thy self? By this it may appear, as also by exceeding many other doctrines and
practices, how near you are to that bloody spiritual power, what pretenses to
the contrary soever you make.


Ant. It were a lamentable thing if that bloody Religion should be practiced
again in this Nation.


Chapter I acknowledge it a bloody Religion, but God has cast down the Power
thereof in this Kingdom, blessed be his Name: but I would you could see your
own cruel bloody Religion; But that God of his mercy has restrained it by the
Kings Majesty (who thirsts not after blood) How many, only for seeking
Reformation in Religion, have been put to death by your Power in the days of
Qu. Elizabeth? and how many, both then and since, have been consumed to death
in Prisons? Yea, since that cruel spiritual Power has been set up, has not
Hanging, Burning, Exile, Imprisonments, and all manner of contempt been used,
and all for Religion? (although some for grievous Errors) and yet you see not
this to be a bloody Religion. Further, You cry out of their bloody Cruelty; the
reason is, because you will not be of their Religion; And when you have done,
your selves are most bloody and cruel (so far as is in your power) because we,
and all men will not not be of your Religion.


Ant. If men hold Errors, and will not obey the Truth, do they not sin against
God, and deserve punishment?


Chapter Yes, such deserve punishment, but God has appointed their punishment, and
the time thereof. Their punishment, Romans 2.8, 9. To them that are contentions,
and disobey the Truth, and obey unrighteousness, shall be Indignation and
Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish shall be upon the soul of every one that does
evil, Mark 16.16. He that will not believe, shall be damned, 2 These. 1.8. In
flaming fire, rendering Vengeance unto them that know not God, and obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; which shall be punished with everlasting
perdition from the Presence of the Lord, and the Glory of his Power. The time
thereof is mentioned in the last recited place, ver. 7. When the Lord Jesus
shall show Himself from Heaven with his mighty Angels. And Romans 2.5. The day of
Wrath. And ver. 16. At that day when God shall judge the secrets of men by
Jesus Christ. And Mat. 13.40, 41. At the end of this World the Son of man shall
send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his Kingdom all things that
offend, and them that do iniquity, and shall cast them into a furnace of Fire,
etc. Here is showed the Punisher, the Punishment, and the Time thereof. This
Punisher has commanded you to wait for their repentance (by his own example)
which is in his hands to give them; and not to cut them off, and send them to
Hell, as you teach and practice, which is contrary to God, who is patient
toward mockers, which walk after their own lusts, 2 Pet. 3.3. Because he would
have no man to perish, but would that all men whatsoever should come to
repentance. But you (contrary to Him) use all means you can to cut men off that
they might perish, in that you seek to destroy their bodies whilst they remain
in their errors.


Ant. I confess that God commands (Matthew. 13.) that the good and bad must
grow together unto the end of the World, but that is in the Church.


Chapter Well, if that be the true exposition, I pray you why do you then
excommunicate any out of your Church, contrary to your own acknowledgment? And
here let all men take notice, that by this Exposition you overthrow your own
Excommunication quite, and accuse Christ for giving a Rule, Mat. 18. and the
Apostle Paul, and the Church of Corinth for practicing that Rule, 1 Cor. 5. in
casting out of the Church: For you say, all must grow together to the end in
the Church: But the Exposition of the Lawgiver himself is against you, that
the Field is the World, ver. 38. Yet in that you confess that the Wicked and
the Godly must be let alone in the Church unto the end, then much more in the
World unto the end: For, if the Wicked pollute not the Church, sure, it is they
pollute not the World. This then you are commanded unto ver. 29, 30. Nay,
gather them not, let them grow together unto the end of the World.


Ant. Let them come to Church, and they shall grow together unto the end.


Chapter Indeed I think so. Hereby you manifest you regard not how wicked and
ungodly men be; so they come to your Church, you will not destroy them, though
they remain in their abominable lusts: but if they will not come to your
Church, let them be Wheat or Tares, you will gather them, and (as much as in
you is) send them to burning. Herein all men may see, as I said before, that
you seek your own Glory and Obedience, and not Gods, and so exalt your selves
above God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.


Indif. Well, I bless God, I see this as clearly as the Sun shining in his
brightness, That it is to fight against God to compel any, contrary to their
consciences, to perform any service unto Him, in that there are so many places
of Scripture commanding the contrary.


Chapter The whole New Testament throughout in all the Doctrines and Practices of
Christ and his Disciples, teach no such thing as compelling men by Persecutions
and Afflictions to obey the Gospel, but the direct contrary, viz. to suffer at
the hands of the wicked; when they were persecuted for Righteousness sake, to
suffer it; when the unbelievers and wicked curse them, to bless, and pray for
their repentance, and that God would forgive them, and never lay these sins to
their charge, as our Savior, Luke 23.34. Stephen, Act. 7.60. and the rest did.
And for a conclusion of this point, that your Faith may be full herein,
consider, that we are to wait for the Jews Conversion, and not to destroy them.


Indif. It is true, that might give all men satisfaction in these things.


Chapter Oh yes, if men had any regard of God or his Word, they would never deal
more in this thing: the Lord, we see, Romans 11. has promised, That when the
fullness of the Gentiles is come in, the Jews shall be converted. Now if the
Jews, who are such fearful Blasphemers of Christ and his Gospel, that contemn
him and his Testament with all despite, if their Conversion must be waited for,
that they may not be destroyed from off the face of the Earth, then who may not
see (if they shut not their eyes) that the Conversion of all is to be waited
for? and, that no man for blaspheming Christ and his Gospel may be destroyed,
or afflicted by Imprisonments, Death, or any Calamity whatsoever.


Indif. It is not to be gain-sayed with any show of truth. I would God the
Kings Majesty would consider of this point, seeing that the cruel Bishops, by
using his Power, commit such sin against God in this thing, both in persecuting
them that cannot in faith yield, and also in forcing them that do yield,
contrary to their consciences, to sin against God, and to perish, if they
repent not.


Chapter I am persuaded, that if his Highness did but once well weigh and consider
it, he would never suffer such high iniquity to be committed against God,
contrary to his express Commandment, and all to be done by the King's Power,
for nothing have they else to bear them out. The Lord persuade the hearts of
his Majesty and his posterity unto it, seeing his Throne is established by him,
that he and his Posterity may sit and reign over these Nations and Kingdoms,
till Jesus Christ the Commander of these things, come in his Glory to
recompense every man according to his works, without respect of persons.


Ant. If wicked Malefactors should be let alone to the end of the World, then
where is the Magistrates Sword? it is of no force if evil men may not be cut
off.


Chapter I acknowledge unfeignedly, that God has given to Magistrates a Sword to
cut off wicked men, and to reward the well-doers, Romans 13. But this Ministry is
a worldly Ministry, their Sword is a worldly Sword, their punishments can
extend no further than the outward man; they can but kill the body, Luke 12.4.
And therefore this Ministry and Sword is appointed only to punish the breach of
worldly Ordinances, which is all that God has given to any mortal man to
punish. The King may make Laws for the safety and good of his Person, State,
and Subjects, against the which whosoever is disloyal or disobedient, he may
dispose of them at his pleasure; the Lord has given him this Sword and
Authority, foreseeing in his Eternal Wisdom, that if this his Ordinance of
Magistracy were not, there would be no living for men in the world, and
especially for the Godly; and therefore the Godly have particular cause to
glorify God for this his blessed Ordinance of Magistracy, and to regard it
with all reverence,

But now, the breach of Christ's Laws, of the which we all this while speak,
which is the thing only I stand upon; His Kingdom is spiritual, his Laws
spiritual, the Transgressions spiritual, the Punishment spiritual; everlasting
Death of Soul; his Sword spiritual: no carnal or worldly weapon is given to the
supportation of his Kingdom, nor to punish the Transgressors of the Laws of
this Kingdom: The Lawgiver himself has commanded that the Transgressors of
these Laws should be let alone until the harvest; because he knows, they that
are now Tares, may hereafter come to repentance, and become Wheat: they that
are now Blasphemers, Persecutors and Oppressors, as Paul was, may by the power
of Gods Word become Faithful, and a faithful Witness, as he was: They that are
now Fornicators, etc. as some of the Corinthians once were, 1 Cor. 6.9. may
hereafter become washed, cleansed, and sanctified, as they were: They that are
now no People, nor under Mercy, as the Saints sometimes were, 1 Pet. 2.10. may
hereafter become the People of God, and obtain Mercy, as they did: All come not
at the first hour, some come not till the eleventh hour; if those that come not
till the last hour should be destroyed, because they came not at the first
hour, then should they never come, but be prevented.


Ant. Were not Blasphemers put to death in time of the Law? Lev. 24.11, etc.


Chapter Yes, an Israelite blaspheming the Lord, or doing any thing presumptuously,
which was Blasphemy, Numb. 15.30. no Sacrifice was to be offered for him: But
would you from hence have the Kings Majesty put all his Subjects to death that
contemn the Truth of Christ? If yea, see what will follow. All Papists ought to
be put to death, who are direct Blasphemers, Rev. 16.10, 11. When the Vial of
Gods Wrath was poured upon the Throne of the Beast, (which all England confess
is meant the Popish Power) they blasphemed the God of Heaven, etc. All the
Jews, that speak many things blasphemously against Christ, ought to be put to
death: Yea, of what Profession soever he be, doing any thing presumptuously
against Christ, ought to be put to death by your Affirmation; no Sacrifice to
be offered, no Repentance to be admitted, dye he must under two or three
Witnesses. But that this is most false, Christ and his Apostles in his
Testament do manifestly declare, as is before showed. Was not Paul a
Blasphemer? yet received to mercy. But this the holy Ghost teaches from
Blasphemy under the Law, Heb. 10.28. He that despised Moses Law, died without
mercy, under two or three Witnesses: Of how much sorer punishment suppose ye,
shall he be thought worthy, that treads under foot the Son of God, and
counts the Blood of the Testament as an unholy thing, wherewith he was
sanctified, and does despite to the Spirit of Grace? speaking of such as had
received and acknowledged the Truth, ver. 26. This is now the due proportion,
an Israelite according to the flesh, in the time of the Law presumptuously
sinning against Gods Commandment, by his Command must die by the worldly Sword,
no Sacrifice was to be offered for him: So in the New Testament, or time of the
Gospel, a spiritual Israelite according to the Faith, contemptuously or
despitefully sinning against Christ's Commands, which he has formerly
acknowledged, despiting and contemning them, by his Command must die by the
spiritual Sword, no repentance to be admitted, seeing he crucifieth again to
himself the Son of God, and makes a mock of him, Heb. 6.6. David and Peter came
not within this compass; though they sinned of knowledge, yet they did it not
contemptuously or despitefully, but through frailty. If an Israelite under the
Law did ought through ignorance, as Numb. 15. or through frailty, as Levit. 6.
there was Sacrifice for him: So under the Gospel, an Israelite doing ought
through ignorance, or through frailty, as Peter and Barnabas, with the rest of
the Jews, mentioned Gal. 2. or the Incestuous Person, 1 Cor. 5. there is
Repentance for him. This is it that confounds all true Religion; That because
it was so in the time of the Law, therefore it may be so in the time of the
Gospel: by which reason men might set up as truly the whole Law, as some part,
and utterly abolish Christ. I pray you seriously consider what is here said.


Ant. Has not the King the same Power that the Kings of Israel had, who
compelled men to the observation of the Law of God?


Chapter First, I answer you: That the Kings of Israel had never power from God to
set up any thing in or for the the service of God, but that only which was
commanded by God, Deuteronomy. 4.2. no, not so much as the manner of any Law, Numb.
15.16. and 9.14. and therefore this will not serve your purpose, that Kings may
set up within their Dominions such spiritual Lords and Laws for the serving of
God; no, nor the manner thereof, as may best please themselves, under what
pretense soever; thereby making God for his Worship subject to their pleasures.
And his Majesty acknowledges that Christ's Church after the establishing of it
by miracles in the primitive time, was ever after to be governed within the
limits of his revealed will. Speech at Parliam. Anno 1609. Secondly, the Kings
of Israel might compel men to the Sacrifices and Ordinances of the Old
Testament, all which were carnal, and purged not the conscience, Heb. 9.9, 10.
as Circumcision, the Passover, etc. But no mortal man, whatsoever he be, can
compel any man to offer the Sacrifices of the New Testament, which are
spiritual, and purge the conscience, except he can beget Faith in him, and
convert his soul. The Ordinances of the Old Testament were to be performed by
the posterity of Abraham according to the flesh, that thereby they might be
taught Christ: but the Ordinances of the New Testament are to be performed only
by the posterity of Abraham according to Faith, that have learned Christ, and
have put on Christ, and so having Him, all things else appertain unto them. But
one thing I demand of you, Who now is King of Israel?


Ant. I confess CHRIST is King of Israel.


Chapter Yes, CHRIST alone is King of Israel, that sits upon David's Throne, and
therefore mark the true proportion: In the time of the Old Testament the Kings
of Israel had power from God to compel all to the Ordinances of God, or to cut
them off by their Sword from the earthly Land of Canaan, and the Promises
thereof: So in the New Testament the King of Israel, Christ Jesus, has power
from the Father to compel all to the Ordinances of God, or to cut them off by
his Sword from the heavenly Land of Canaan, and the Promises thereof. The Kings
of Israel only had this power under the Law, and the King of Israel only has
this power under the Gospel: And therefore whosoever will challenge this power
under the Gospel, he must be the King of Israel in the time of the Gospel,
which is peculiar only to Jesus Christ, unto whom all Power in Heaven and Earth
is given.

And let it be here well observed, that by this opinion of yours you make the
Kingdom and Ordinances of Israel under the Law, and the Kingdom and Ordinances
of Israel under the Gospel all one; directly contrary to the whole Scripture:
for the Kingdom and Ordinances of Israel under the Law were of this world, but
the Kingdom and Ordinances of Israel under the Gospel are not of this world, as
Christ the King thereof himself testifies, John 28. And therefore you setting
up a worldly King over this Heavenly Kingdom and Ordinances, you and all of
your Profession declare your selves to be of that worldly Kingdom, and so to
look for that Heavenly and Spiritual King yet to come in the flesh; being of
the number of those that deny Him to be come in the flesh, and so are Deceivers
and Antichrists, whatsoever you say to the contrary.


Ant. Well, yet I cannot see, but that as the Kings of Israel had power from
God to compel all their Subjects to the Worship then appointed; so the King,
being a Christian King, has power to compel his Subjects to the Worship now
appointed.


Chapter You may see, if you shut not your eyes, that what power the Kings of
Israel had under the Law in matters of Religion, Christ Jesus the King of
Israel has under the Gospel: but I pray let me ask you this Question, you say
the Kings Majesty has this power as he is a Christian King: my Question is,
Whether it appertain unto him as he is a King, or as he is a Christian?


Ant. Neither simply as he is a King, nor as he is a Christian, but jointly as
he is complete in them both: for I grant that no Heathen King has power to
compel in matters of Religion, but a Christian King has.


Chapter Then you confess that if a Christian King may be deprived of his
Christianity, (for of his Kingdom or Kingly Power, or any part thereof, I
affirm he may not be deprived) he has lost this power you plead for, in
compelling men in matters of Religion: What say you to this?


Ant. I confess if he may be deprived of his Christianity, he has not this
power I plead for.


Chapter Then I demand this Question, Whether every Christian, without respect of
persons, ought not to be subject to Christ's Laws for his Salvation?


Ant. Yes, it cannot be denied.


Chapter Christ has given his censure, Excommunication, for the Salvation of every
Christian, That he that will not hear the Church, is to be as a Heathen and a
Publican; that is, has lost all right and title in Christ, and in his Church,
till he repent. Now I know it cannot be denied, but every Christian whatsoever
is subject to sin, and so to Excommunication, to be as an Heathen, etc. If you
say, that Kings either are not subject to sin, and to impenitency therein, and
so not to this censure of Christ, of Excommunication for their impenitent sin;
then consider what you make them, and God you make a liar. If you grant (as you
cannot deny) that Kings as well as others, are subject to impenitent sin, and
so to Excommunication for the same; then they being deprived of their
Christianity, by your own confession, they are deprived of power to compel in
matters of Religion, the which, if it were any part of their Kingly Power, they
might be deprived of a part of their Kingly Power by being excommunicated.
Consider what a wicked doctrine you teach herein.


Ant. Does not the Prophet say, That Kings shall be Nursing Fathers, and Queens
Nursing Mothers to the Church? And also it is said, that Kings shall hate the
Whore, make her desolate, eat her flesh, and burn it with fire. Where we see,
that Kings that have power and authority, shall destroy Antichrists Kingdom,
and nourish and cherish Christ's Kingdom.


Chapter Most true it is, the Lord has spoken it, and therefore it ought to be a
great comfort to Gods People: but what is this to the purpose in hand, namely,
That Kings may persecute the contrary-minded. The words of the Prophet Isaiah
prove, that Kings and Queens that have formerly persecuted and destroyed the
Church, their hearts shall be turned by the power of Gods Word, to be lovers
and preservers of the Church. And the other place, Rev. 17.16. proves, that
Kings shall make that Whore desolate, etc. not by their temporal Authority or
Sword (as some say, that make more show of Religion than you do, although
themselves be now persecuted, yet, if Kings were of their minds, would be as
cruel as you, for they maintain the same thing) but by the Spirit of the Lords
mouth, and the Brightness of his coming, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. For this kingdom of
Antichrist shall be destroyed without hand, Dan. 8. 25. only by the Everlasting
Gospel, the true Armor indeed, wherewith the Witnesses fight against the
Antichrist. As the Kings Majesty, acknowledges, Apol. page 93.


Ant. You are so stiff against using of outward weapons in Church matters, Did
not our Savior make a Whip of small cords, and whip the Buyers and Sellers out
of the Temple? And why may not we follow his example?


Chapter In this and many other actions of Christ our Savior, we are to consider
him as the fulfiller and ender of the Law; as in the action of the Passover,
and sending him that was cleansed of his Leprosy, to offer to the Priest the
gift that Moses commanded; in which things we are not to imitate him; for by
him the Ceremonies are fulfilled and abolished, and the everlasting Gospel
established, in the which we are to walk: and it were more than foolish to
reason thus: Christ whipped wicked men out of Gods Temple made with hands, with
whips made of cord; therefore we may whip wicked men out of Gods Temple made
without hands, with whips made of cord. There is a wholesome doctrine to be
collected from the Type to the Truth, as thus: Christ drove out wicked men out
of the Temple made with hands, by a carnal or worldly whip; So Christ (by his
People) must drive wicked men out of the Temple made without hands, by a
Spiritual whip, even his Word, which is called a Whip or Rod. Rev. 2 27. and
Psalm. 2.9. So is Excommunication, 1 Cor. 4.21.


Ant. If freedom of Religion should be granted, there would be such Divisions
as would breed Sedition and Innovasion in the State.


Chapter Thus when your shows out of the Scripture are answered, then you run to
conceits and imaginations, of Sedition, Innovasion, and the like, thinking
thereby to dissuade Princes, and all that are in authority therefrom, knowing
else your kingdom of iniquity would fall. But that it may appear to all that
you deal deceitfully herein, let us consider first the Scriptures; secondly,
behold the success, of suffering of Religion free in other Countries. And
first, Christ our Savior ( who is that Prince of Peace, Isa. 9.6. not of
Sedition) has taught, Mat. 10, and Luke 12. That he came not to send Peace on
the earth, but Debate; to divide five in one house, two against three, and
three against two; the father against the son, etc. And a man's enemies shall be
they of his own household: And his desire is, that the fire of such Sedition
should be kindled. Where we see, this Prince of Peace puts difference in
Religion by preaching his Gospel, which some receive as the savor of life unto
them; others refuse it, and so become enemies unto the Truth, and witnesses
thereof, as they did to Christ Jesus himself and his Disciples, and as you do
to me and others. Secondly, behold the Nations where freedom of Religion is
permitted, and you may see there are not more flourishing and prosperous
Nations under the Heavens than they are.


Indif. The Convocation of Bishops, and the rest, have made a Canon, That
whosoever shall affirm that the Kings Majesty has not the same power in Causes
Ecclesiastical under the Gospel, that the godly Kings of Israel had under the
Law, let him be excommunicated, ipso facto.


Chapter Yes, they have so. In the beginning of his Majesty's Reign, when they had
gotten him sure unto them, of the which they so much doubted, as with my own
ears I heard some of their chief followers say, when his Highness was coming
into England: Now must Steeples down, and we shall have no more High
Commission! (with a lamentation they spoke it) then they made this Canon;
because their consciences are convinced, that they stand only by his Power, and
if his hand be turned, their spiritual power of darkness falls to the pit of
darkness, from whence it came, and whither it must go, though there be never so
much means used for the supporting of it; for the strong Lord has spoken it,
Revel. 18. As for their sending men to Hell (as they suppose) with their ipso
facto Excommunications; if they had no stronger weapons for the supportting of
their kingdom, it would stand but a short space. If Israel now were of this
world, as it was under the Law, then they said something; but if it be not of
this world, as it is not, John 17.14. then the King of Israel is not of this
world; for when this King came, the worldly Israel knew him not.


Indif. I see evidently, that all are but cavels, and that no mortal man can
make any man offer Sacrifices under the New Testament, until he be a Believer
and converted; for he must be in Christ before he may offer Sacrifices; for in
Christ only the Father accepts us. But what say you, Have they not power to
compel men to come to the place where the Word is publicly taught, that they
may be converted?


Chapter Well, then you see that the example of the Kings of Israel (who had power
to compel them to Sacrifice, or to cut them off) applied to earthly Princes, is
gone, as a mere doctrine of man, and not of God. And for compelling men to
hear, that they may be converted; we can learn of no better than of Him, who if
we hear not we shall have a dreadful recompense. He had all power in Heaven
and in Earth for converting souls given unto him, and sent his Disciples, as
his Father sent him, Joh. 20.21. charging them that when they should come into
a City, etc. if they would not receive them nor their Word, to shake off the
dust of their feet for a witness against them, saying, it should be easier for
Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgment than for that City or house. And so
the Apostles went from City to City accordingly. Here were no Temples made with
hands, nor worldly power to compel all to come unto them to hear the Word of
the Lord, but they were commanded to go from City to City, and from house to
house.


Indif. In those days the Magistrates were Unbelievers, but the question is
where Magistrates are Believers.


Chapter Christ had all power needful for that work: if Magistracy were a power
needful for that work, then Christ had not all power; Magistracy is Gods
blessed Ordinance in its right place, but let not us be wiser than God to
devise him a means for the publishing of his Gospel, which He that had all
power had not, nor has commanded. Magistracy is a power of this world; the
Kingdom, Power, Subjects and means of publishing the Gospel are not of this
world.


Ant. A goodly thing indeed that men must go about the Country to preach.


Chapter In your estimation it is base and contemptible; your Pomp and Pride will
not bear this; it is more easy for you to hunt after Promotion till you come
to the highest, in getting to be chief Bishop of Bishops within these
Dominions, and then comes your fall, full low, if you repent not: But the
wisdom of God has appointed the chiefest Officers of Christ's Kingdom, even the
Apostles, thus basely to go up and down to and fro to preach the Gospel; yea,
that worthy Apostle Paul preached this Gospel night and day with many tears
openly and throughout every house, Act. 20.


Indif. But if this be thus, as for my own part I am fully persuaded it is,
then I see the High Commission cannot stand; for, as I take it, it is only for
Causes Ecclesiastical.


Chapter So far as it is over Church Matters, it is most unlawful: for the
Commission for judging and punishing of the transgressors of the Laws of
Christ's Church is given to Christ the Monarch thereof, a part whereof he has
left to his Disciples, which is no worldly Commission or Power, but only the
Power of the Lord Jesus, the uttermost of which Commission is Excommunication,
1 Cor. 5.


Ant. The High Commission is from the King, and dare you once call it into
question?


Chapter If I do take any authority from the Kings Majesty, let me be judged worthy
my desert; but if I defend the Authority of Christ Jesus over men's souls, which
appertains to no mortal man whatsoever, then know you, that whosoever would
rob him of that Honor, which is not of this world, he will tread them under
foot: Earthly Authority belongs to earthly Kings, but spiritual Authority
belongs to that one spiritual King, who is KING of Kings.


Ant. Well, all your pleading will not serve your turn, either you must come to
Church, or else go to Prison.


Chapter I have showed you by the Law of Christ that your course is most wicked, to
compel any by Persecution to perform any service to God (as you pretend.) Now I
desire also to show you, that the Statute Law of the Land requires only civil
obedience, and his Majesty's Writings, maintaining the Oath of Allegiance,
testify the same.

The Law of the Land requires, that whosoever comes not to Church, or
receives not the Sacraments, the Oath of Allegiance is to be tendered to them,
which, that it may be manifest to all, that not only I, but all that profess
the Faith with me, are most willing to subscribe unto it in faithfulness and
truth, I have thought good to express it.

The words of the Oath, Anno 3, Jacobi Regis.

I A. B, do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess and testify, and declare
in my conscience before God and the World, That our sovereign Lord King James
is lawful King of this Realm, and of all other his Majesty's Dominions and
Countries; And than the Pope neither of himself, nor by any other Authority of
the Church or Sea of Rome, or by any other means with any other, has any Power
or Authority to depose the King, or to dispose of any his Majesty's Kingdoms or
Dominions, or to authorize any foreign Prince to invade or annoy him or his
Countries, or to discharge any of his Subjects of their Allegiance and
Obedience to his Majesty; or to give license or leave to any of them to bear
Arms, raise Tumults, or to offer any violonce or hurt to his Majesty's Royal
Person, State or Government, or any of his Majesty's Subjects within his
Majesty's Dominions. Also I do swear from my heart, that notwithstanding any
Declaration or Sentence of Excommunication, or Deprivation made or granted, or
to be made or granted by the Pope or his Successors, or by any Authority
derived, or pretended to be derived from him or his Sea, against the said King,
his Heirs or Successors, or any Absolution of the said Subjects from their
Obedience, I will bear Faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, and him and them will defend to the uttermost of my power against
all Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever which shall be made against his or
their Persons, their Crown and Dignity, by reason or color of any such
Sentence or Declaration or otherwise, and will do my best endeavor to disclose
and make known unto his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, all Treasons and
traitorous Conspiracies, which I shall know or hear of, to be against him or
any of them. And I do further swear, that I do from my heart abhor, detest and
abjure, as impious and heretical, this damnable doctrine and position, That
Princes which be Excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or
murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever. And I do believe, and in
conscience am resolved, that neither the Pope, nor any person whatsoever, has
power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part thereof, which I acknowledge by
good and full Authority to be lawfully ministered to me, and do renounce all
Pardons and Dispensations to the contrary. And all these things I do plainly
and sincerely acknowledge and swear, according to these express words by me
spoken, and according to the plain and common sense and understanding of the
same words, without any equivocation, or mental evasion, or secret reservation
whatsoever. And I do make this Recognition and Acknowledgment heartily,
willingly and truly, upon the true Faith of a Christian. So help me God.
Ant. This Oath was intended for the Papists, and not for you.


Chapter It is not so: for his Majesty at the last Session of Parliam. Anna 1609,
says thus; Some doubts have been conceived anent the using of the Oath of
Allegiance; and that part of the Act that ordains the taking thereof is thought
so obscure, that no man can tell who ought to be pressed therewith, etc. And
therefore if there be any scruple touching the ministering thereof, I would wish
it now to be cleared, etc. And thereupon this Statute was made, Anno 7. Regni
Regis Iacobi, etc. Chap. 6. toward the latter end. And if any person or
persons whatsoever of, or above the age of eighteen years, do now stand, or at
any time hereafter shall stand, and be presented, indicted, and convicted for
not coming to Church, or receiving the Lords Supper, according to the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm, before the Ordinary, or any other having power to take
such Presentiments or Indictments; or if the Minister, petty Constable or
Churchwardens, or any two of them, shall at any time hereafter complain to any
Justice of Peace near adjoining the place where any person complained of shall
dwell, and the said Justice shall find cause of suspicion; that then any one
Justice of Peace, within whose Commission or Power any such person or persons
shall at any time hereafter be, or to whom complaint shall be made, shall upon
notice thereof require such person or persons to take the said Oath. And that
if any person or persons being of the age of eighteen years or above, shall
refuse to take the said Oath, duly tendered unto him or her, according to the
true intent and meaning of this Statute, that then the persons authorized by
this Law to give the said Oath, shall and may commit the said Offender to the
common Jayl, etc. Where we see, that if any take the said Oath at their first
apprehension, they are not to be committed, or if they, being committed, take
the said Oath at the next open Court, they are be set at liberty; if they will
not take the said Oath, to be in a Praemunire, as is at large in the Statute
declared, and as is daily practiced with Papists and others.


Ant. The Kings Majesty requires your Allegiance to be testified by your
coming to Church.


Chapter I pray let me demand this Question; Does the King require my coming to
Church to worship and serve God, or to worship and serve the King? If to
worship and serve the King, I am ready to obey; if to worship and serve God,
which none can do but of conscience, the King himself says he never intended
to lay any thing to the charge of any for the cause of conscience; and this
coming to Church being a cause of conscience, if not he, why do you lay any
thing to my charge for the same? And therefore you wrong his Majesty in thus
affirming; for his Highness requires only my faithful allegiance to be
testified by the aforesaid Oath, and therefore has ordained it, as I shall
show by his Highness own testimony. If I should come to Church, and not in
conscience, but for other respects, as many Papists and other Hypocrites do, to
God it were most abominable; and what faithfulness can be hoped for in such
toward, his Majesty's Person and State? Can any godly wise man think that he
that plays the dissembling Hypocrite with God, that he will do less with men,
and will not work any villainy, if it were in his power? and therefore herein
you compelling me by tyranny, to bring my body whereunto my spirit cannot be
brought, you compel me to hypocrisy with God and man: for if my heart were not
faithful in sincerity to his Majesty's Crown and Dignity, as I take God to
witness (before whom I must be condemned or justified) it is, these courses
would rather harden my heart to work villainy than otherwise.

Now for his Majesty's many Testimonies in his Writings, they are worthy to be
recorded with thankfulness to the Highest for guiding his heart and pen to
write such things.

In his apology for the Oath of Allegiance page 4, he says (speaking of such
Papists as took the Oath of Allegiance) And I gave a good proof that I intended
no Persecution against them for conscience cause, but only desired to be
secured of them for evil obedience, which for conscience cause they were bound
to perform. And page 60. (speaking of Blackwel the Archpriest) he says, I
never intended to lay any thing to the said Arch-Priests charge (as I have
never done to any) for cause of conscience. And page 127. he says, First, for
the cause of their punishment, I do constantly maintain that which I said in my
Apology, That no man, either in my time, or in the late Queens, ever dyed here
for his conscience: for, let him be never so devout a Papist; nay, though he
profess the same never so constantly, his life is in no danger by the Law, if
he break not out into some outward act expressly against the words of the Law;
or plot not some dangerous or unlawful practice or attempt, etc. Where we may
see in short what is the whole sum that he requires.

And in his Majesty's Speech at the last Session of Parliament, Anno Dom. 1609.
where he says he shows his Subjects his heart, he says thus; I never found,
that blood, and too much severity, did good in matters of Religion: for,
besides, it is a sure Rule in Divinity, that God never loves to plant his
Church by violence and bloodshed, natural reason may even persuade us, and
daily experience proves it true, that when men are severely persecuted for
Religion, the gallantness of many men's spirits, and the wilfulness of their
humors, rather than the justness of their cause makes them take a pride boldly
to endure any torments, or death it self, to gain thereby the reputation of
Martyrdom, though but in a false shadow.

A most undoubted Truth; which if be, (as most manifest it is by the Testimony
of the holy Ghost throughout Christ's Testament, as before is proved) then how
cursed are all the rank of you that continually break this sure Rule of God,
thus confidently acknowledge by his Majesty, planting your Church by violence
and bloodshed, forcing many thousands against their consciences to be of your
Church, and to receive your Sacraments, by all the persecutions that would
follow if they do not yield; and those that fear God more than men, and dare
not yield, casting them into noisome Prisons, amongst most wicked Blasphemers of
God, to the wounding of their souls, dividing them from their Wives, Children
and Families, and from their Callings, some an hundred miles and more, utterly
consuming that substance they have, which sustaineth the blood of them, their
Wives and Children; seldom or never affording them Release, but either by
yielding to you against their consciences, or else by consuming their bodies to
death in Prison, Banishment, or the like, leaving them and their Wives to
horrible temptations of Adultery, by parting them and their Wives, and to all
manner of evil, in taking them from their Callivgs, and so leaving them in
continual Idleness. Is Gods Church thus planted? or, do Christ's Disciples thus
plant?


Indif. Oh I see this spiritual power is little inforiour cruelty to the Romish
spiritual power: I pray how, or when was this set up.


Chapter Henry the eight casting off Pope Clement the seventh, and so the Popes
Power, anno 1534, set up this Spiritual Power under him. See Acts and Mon. page
1201, etc.


Indif. I pray you show the likeness between these two spiritual powers.


Chapter I will do my best endeavor, which is but small. First, the Romish
spiritual Power does make Laws to the Conscience, and compel all thereunto by
Excommunication, Imprisonment, Banishment, Death, and the like. This Spiritual
Power does the like, upon the like penalties, as all know.

The Romish Power does give Titles to his Ministers, which are the Titles of
God and Christ, as spiritual Lords, great Bishop, and many more. This spiritual
Power does the like, as all know.

The Romish Power does set up Lords over their Brethren in spiritual things,
unto whom they command Honor, and great Livings to be given, great Pomp and
Pride. This Power does the like, as all know.

I shall not need to speak of this, in that all Books are full, and all
Consciences (except those that are seared with hot irons) convinced hereof. Let
but Mr. Fox, or any others, who have described the spiritual Power Rome, let
but their Description thereof be compared with this spiritual Power, in all
their Laws, Courts, Titles, Pomp, Pride and Cruelty, and you shall see them
very little differ, except in their Cruelties, which (glory be to God) the
Kings Majesty, who thirsts not after blood, has something restrained;
although it is most grievous Cruelty to lie diverse years in most noisome and
filthy Prisons, and continual temptations of Want, their Estates overthrown,
and never coming out (many of them) till death; let it be well weighed, and it
is little inferior to the cruel sudden death in times of the Romish Power in
this Nation.


Indif. It is very apparent it is that image or similitude of that Beast spoken
of, Revel. 13.


Chapter Oh yes, for there is no such Image of the Popish Power under the Heavens
as this. Well, our comfort is, the strong Lord has said, The Kings of the
Earth (by whose Power both the Beast and his Image is supported) shall take
their Power from her, then shall she stand naked and desolate: And to this
purpose his Majesty has a worthy Exhortation to all Princes, etc. in his
Apology, page 103. The words are these: For as she did fly but with feathers,
borrowing as well her Titles of greatness, and forms of honoring her from You,
as also enjoying all her Temporal Livings by your liberalities: so if every man
do but take his own again, she will stand up naked etc. Oh that the words of
God might be accepted of his Majesty, set down by the holy Ghost, Romans 2. Thou
that teach another, teach thou not thy self? For, if he would take but
his own, their Titles of Greatness, and forms of honoring them, and their
Temporal Livings, this Spiritual Power would stand very naked and desolate.


Indif. Well, the hears of Kings are in the hands of the Lord, and he can turn
them as the Rivers of waters: but I desire your advice for my own estate: I
know every one must bear their own burden, I have a long time remained subject
to this Spiritual Power, partly through ignorance, and partly through fear.


Chapter I will first declare into you the Judgments of God against such as submit
thereunto, that so from an utter abhorring thereof you may come out, never to
return thither again. Secondly, I will do the best I can to show you the way
the Lord requires you to walk in, and that only out of his Word.

The Judgments are so fearful as I tremble to think of them, greater than which
is not manifested in the whole Book of God, Rev. 14.9, 10, 11, And the third
Angel followed them, saying with a loud voice, If any man worship the Beast and
his Image, and receive his Mark in his forehead, or on his hand, the same shall
drink of the Wine of the Wrath of God, yea, of the pure Wine that is poured
into the Cup of his Wrath; he shall be tormented in Fire and Brimstone before
the holy Angels, and before the Lamb. And the smoke of their torments shall
ascend evermore, and they shall have no rest day nor night, which worship the
Beast and his Image, and whosoever receives the print of his name.


Indif. I confess these Judgments are to be trembled at; but how do you apply
them properly to such as worship in these Assemblies?


Chapter For the satisfaction of all consciences herein, that it may appear
plainly, not to be gainsaid, let us consider the words of Wisdom, set down in
order as they lie. And first, what is meant by Worship. 2ly, what is meant by
the Beast. 3ly, what his Image is. 4ly, what his Mark is. And lastly, what is
meant by Forehead or Hand.

And first, for Whorship. It is plentifully manifested in the Scriptures, that
it is Service, Subjection, or Obedience to such things as are commanded by God,
or others, as Mat 4.10. Exodus 20.5. Deuteronomy. 13.4. and therefore his servants we
are whom we obey, Romans 6.16. and as the Lord says, If I be your Master, where
is my fear? if a Father, where is mine honor or worship? Mal. 1.6.

Secondly, by Beast, the Scripture speaks sometimes of cruel men in power and
authority; as Dan. 7.17. Luke 13.31, 32. 2 Timothy 4.17. Sometimes of a
blasphemous Spiritual Power exercised by men, received of the Dragon exalting
it self above God, making war with the Saints, and overcoming them; and that
has power over every Kindred, and Tongue, and Nation, so that all that dwell
upon the Earth worship him, etc. And this is the Beast here spoken of, even
that Spiritual Power of Jurisdiction of Rome, which first wrought in a mystery,
and by degrees was exalted, till at last it was exalted to this cruel Beast,
described Revel. 13.1, etc. which Beast opens his mouth to Blasphemy against
God, saying and practizing, that the Commandments that God has given for his
Service, are not to be regarded, but instead thereof, sets up Commands of
his own, unto which whosoever will not be subject, Excommunication and all
cruelty, even unto Death, will ensue, yea even with Gunpowder ere it fail: and
for this his cruelty he is called a Beast.

Thirdly, By Image is meant any form, shape similitude, or resemblance of the
thing spoken of, as Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16, etc. Exodus 20.4. so that wheresoever such a
spiritual power is, as this above described, there is the Beasts Image, as in
England: the like Power or Beast to the first, is not to be found under the
Heavens, in exaltation and cruelty.

Fourthly, By Mark, is meant Profession or Practice, whereby we are know from
others, as Mat. 7.20.1 Joh. 2.3. Joh. 13.35. As Badges of Marks do put
difference between this man's and that man's, in cattle or servants, as by such a
man's Mark we know these are his Sheep, and by such a man's Badg we know this man
belongs to such a great man: so they are said to have put on Christ, that
have received his Baptism, Gal. 3.27. even as a servant is known by putting on
his Livery.

Lastly, Forehead or Hand; the holy Ghost uses that phrase from the Old
Testament, where Gods People were commanded, not only to lay up his Commands in
their hearts and in their souls, but to bind them for a sign upon their hands,
that they might be as frontlets between their eyes, Deuteronomy. 11.18. and 6.6, 8.
the Wisdom of God therein teaching, that the Forehead and Hand are the
apparantest parts of the body, to the view of all men: so that to receive the
Mark in the Forehead or Hand, is to make manifest Profession of him we obey.
The sum of all which is, that whosoever openly professes obedience and
subjection to that spiritual cruel power of Rome, the Beast, or to that
spiritual cruel power of England, his Image, (wheresoever they or either of
them are exalted) such a one, and such persons shall drink of the Wine of Gods
wrath, and be tormented in fire and brimstone, and shall have no rest day nor
night for evermore.


Indif. Your description of the Beast the Papists will deny, so will the
English Lord Bishops and their followess, deny your description of his Image;
but thousands will grant both: and some will deny both, as the Familists, who
say, that Religion stands not in outward things, and therefore they will
submit to any outward service, and they that do not so, but suffer persecution
(say they) are justly persecuted.


Chapter Those Enemies to the Cross of Christ are most of them not worth
information, because for the most part they are such as do with an high hand
sin after enlightening, having forsaken the way wherein they walked, because
they would not bear Christ's Cross; but in that some simple souls may be seduced
by them, let us a little in general compare their Opinion with the Scriptures.

True it is, that Religion stands not only in outward things, for God
requires the heart, and truth in the inward parts: but that God requires not
our subjection (upon fearful punishments) to those outward Ordinances which he
requires, is a doctrine of Devils, as I shall prove.

And first, for the outward Ordinances of the Old Testament, which were merely
shadows, and now are beggarly rudiments, Gal. 4.16. what indignation the Lord
had toward them that transgressed. Nadab and Abihu offering strange fire,
which the Lord has not commanded, a fire went out from the Lord and destroyed
them, Levit. 10.1, 2. The men of Bethshemesh looking into the outward Ark,
which God had forbidden, the Lord slew fifty thousand and threescore and ten of
them, 1 Samuel 6.19. Vzza, of a good intent, leaning his shoulder to the same
outward Ark, which God forbad, the Lord slew him, I Chr. 13 7 -- 10. Vzziah the
King oftering up outward Incense, (which God commanded to be done only by the
Priests, Numb. 18.3, 7.) the Lord smore him with Leprosy until his death, 2 Chronicles. 26. Corah and his company, what fearful Judgments came upon them (though
he a Levite) for presuming to meddle with the Priests Office, the Earth opening
and swallowing them up, Numb. 16. King Saul likewise offering up Incense (in
time of need as he thought) the Lord rent his Kingdom from him, 1 Samuel 13. as
also for his disobedience afterward, touching the fat of the Amalecks Cattle,
1 Samuel 15. How often was the wrath of the Lord poured down upon them
Israelites, because of their transgression of his outward Ordinances, in place,
person, and things? for it was a Law, Lev. 17.3, 4. That who so brought not his
Sacrifice to the place, viz. to the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation,
but offered it up other where, blood should be imputed to that man, and he
should be cut off from among his People: yea, such Sacrifices were esteemed of
God, as offered to Devils, ver. 7. And the Lord caused them to pronounce, (
Deuteronomy. 27.26.) Cursed be he that confirms not all the words of this Law, to do
them: and all the people must say, So be it. Was God thus jealous of Moses's
Ordinances, and is he less jealous of Christ's? Must he dye that despises Moses
Law, and shall he escape that despises Christ's, upon what pretense soever? And
Christ says, It becomes him, and all his, to fulfill all Righteousness in
outward Ordinances, as washing with water, Mat. 3.15. And, whosoever says, he
knows God, and keeps not his Commandments, (which are outward, as well as
inward) he is a liar, 1 Job. 2.4. And whosoever breaks the least Commandment,
and teaches men so, he shall be, called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven,
Mat. 5.19. And whosoever will not hear that Prophet (Christ Jesus) in all
things that he shall say unto them, shall be destroyed out of his People, Acts
3.22, 23. The affections of the soul are to be manifested by the actions of the
body, according to Gods Word, and all other good intents or affections are
abominable. We may not, neither can we worship God with our spirits, and the
Devil with our bodies; for, we are bought with a price, and therefore must not
be the servants of men; but must glorify God with our bodies, and with our
spirits, for they are his, 1 Cor. 6.20. and 7.23. And this may suffice to
satisfy any concerning the overthrow of this cursed Conceit, knowing also that
Christ and his Apostles, and all his Disciples to the end of the world, might,
and may live peaceably enough from Persecution, if this Doctrine might be
observed, viz. Submission with our bodies to any outward service. The Lord
discover such Hypocrites.


Indif. I bless God, I have learned of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 13.8. to say nothing
against the Truth, but for the Truth, and therefore when I see things are
evidently manifested by the Scriptures, am desirous to submit, and not to
cavil. But you know it is pleaded, they have the Word and Sacraments in the
English Assemblies.


Chapter I confess they have the Scriptures, in the which Gods Mysteries are
contained, which are locked up from them, and revealed to his Saints, Col.
1.26. which they woefully pervert to their own destruction: They have also
imitations of Gods Ordinances, as Water, Bread, and Wine, and other things,
which they use after their own inventions; which things make them boast so much
of their Christianity, and of their Church, which makes them reason thus:

We are Gods People, for we have the Word and Sacraments. The Philistims might
better have reasoned, 1 Samuel 5. who had the true Ark of God amongst them;
(these have but a show) We are Gods People, for we have Gods Ark and holy
Oracles amongst us. But I think they had no great cause to rejoice thereof in
the end: No more shall these have in the end, when God recompenceth all that
withhold the Truth in unrighteousness. Gods dealing is not now as it was of
old, he now reserveth punishment to the last day, he is patient, and would have
men repent: but they despise his bountifulness and long-suffering, preaching
peace when there is no peace.


Indif. It cannot be denied, but that the Ministers preach many excellent
Truths, and do bring people to much reformation in many things.


Chapter True, it cannot be denied. For, if the Devil should come in his own
likeness, men would resist him; but because he transformeth himself into an
Angel of light, therefore he deceives. So his ministers, if they should teach
all lies, man would not be deceived by them, nor plead for them; but because
they teach many Truths, people receive them.

But first, for whatsoever they teach, they neither could nor should teach
publicly, their mouths should be stopped, if they received not that their
power to teach such Truths from those the Dragon sends; and therefore none can
receive those Truths from them, but they receive the Devil by whose power they
teach: for, as our Savior says, Mat. 10.40. He that receives you, receives
me; and he that receives me, receives him that sent me. So, he that receives
those the Beast sends, receives the Beast; and he that receives the Beast,
receives him that sent him, that is the Devil. Further. Did not that
Southsayer Balaam teach excellent Truths? Numb. 23 and 24 chapters. Yea, the
Southsayers of the Philistims the like, 1 Samuel 6. Yea, Those in the Gospel
preach in Christ's Name, Mat. 7.22. As many more testimonies might be manifested.

And secondly, For their bringing of people to Reformation, and therein doing
great works. Did not the Southsayers, before recited, 1 Samuel 6. show the
Princes their sin in detaining Gods Ark, and the judgments against them for the
same, exhorting them to send it away, and not to harden their hearts, as
Pharaoh and the Egyptians hardened their hearts? And was not Reformation wrought
hereby? And did not they that preached in Christ's Name cast out Devils, and do
many and great works? of whom our Savior testifies, he never acknowledged
them. But let us a little consider wherein the Reformation consistech, procured
by their preaching, in Drunkenness, Whoredom, Swearing, etc. moral duties,
which things whosoever is not reformed in, shall never see Gods Kingdom; yet
which things many of the Philosophers (that knew not God) abounded in, as they
that know the Stories cannot deny. But do they teach their hearers to hate vain
inventions, and love God's Law? In a general manner of teaching they may, but
if it come to particular practice, you shall see what they will do. Do they
teach any to submit to that one Lawgiver, Christ Jesus, for the guidance of
his Church, and not to Antichrists Abominations? No, they will tell you, you
must sigh and groan, till the Magistrate will reform; for you are a private
person, and must be subject: And if the powerful working of Gods Word and
Spirit prevail in you, to let you see, that the Magistrates not reforming will
not excuse you at the day of account, but that that soul that commits
abomination shall dye, and that rather than you will worship the Beast or his
Image, you will suffer with Christ peaceably, separating your self from such
open profanation as neither can nor will be reformed; endeavoring to square
your self both in your entrance, and walking in Christ's way, unto that golden
Rule that he has left for direction: then the best of all those Preachers and
Reformers will be hot and bitter, laboring with all the turning of devices to
turn you, and withhold you from Reformation: And if they cannot prevail hereby,
then publish you in their privileged Pulpits, where none may answer them, You
are a Schismatic, Brownist, Anabaptist, and what not? to make the multitude
abhor your doings, and not to follow you therein; and some of them (if not all)
under a color, procure your Imprisonment and trouble by their Canonized Lords,
or some of their hellish Pursevants. And such Preachers of Reformation are the
best of them all.


Indif. Oh how have we been besotted in these things for want of true knowledge
and understanding from the Scriptures! how have I and others satisfied our
selves with these things, in that our estate was happy, persuading our selves
thereof! when alas, our fear toward God was taught by the inventions of men;
but the reason thereof was, we judged our selves by our own persuasions, and
not by Gods Word.


Chapter I pray you let not that seem strange unto you, that people should persuade
themselves of their good estate with God, when it is not so. The Israelites,
Gods People, thought their estate good many times, when alas it was otherwise,
as the Prophets declared unto them; yea, our Savior testifies, that they
boasted of God being their Father, when they not so much as knew him, Joh.
8.19. yea, when they were of their father the Devil, ver. 44. The five foolish
Virgins thought their condition good enough, and that they should have been let
in, but it was otherwise, Luke 20. The wicked thought they did God service that
killed Christ's Disciples, Joh. 16.2, Man's heart is deceitful, Jer. 17.9. Who
are more confident of their good estate with God than the Papists,
notwithstanding all their gross abominations? Even so have you and I (God
pardon us) thought beyond all, that we were in a good estate, having such
zealous Teachers, that teach so many excellent Truths under the title of
Christ's Ministers, till we came to examine them, as the Church of Ephesus did,
Rev. 2. then we found them to have no other Ministry than that they received
from the Beast and his Image, which the Dragon gave, Rev. 13.


Indif. Are all, without exception, in this fearful estate to be case into the
Lake, that burns with fire and brimstone?


Chapter All that submit, obey, or worship the Beast without exception; for there
is no respect of persons with God. So says the Lord, If any man worship, etc.
These worshippers under the Beast's Image may be divided into two sorts: First,
those that ignorantly persuade themselves that all that is practiced is good
and acceptable to God: Secondly, those that see and acknowledge many things to
be evil, which they would gladly have removed; but because they cannot without
the Crosss of Christ, partly for that, and partly by the persuasion of their
Prophets (that the things are not fundamental, and the like pretenses) all
submit, and teach men so.


Indif. Some affirm, There be thousands in England that never worshipped the
Beast, etc. but be careful to keep the Commandments of God, and Faith of Jesus.


Chapter Such are not under these Judgments; but if their meaning be of any that
submit to these Ordinances appointed for these Assemblies, such Teachers preach
peace when there is none, strengthen the wicked that they cannot return from
their wicked way, by promising them life, whose reward shall be according to
the reward of such false Prophets, Ezekiel. 13.1. and chap. 14.10. because they
follow their own spirit, and have not received it from the Lord: for thus says
the Lord, Such shall drink of the Wine of the Wrath of God.


Indif. It is also affirmed by some, That in respect of personal graces, some
of the Professors (as they are called) are the Children of God, and may be
communicated with privately, though in respect of their Church actions they are
members of Antichrists body, to whom are Judgments of God appertains.


Chapter This opinion proceeds not from Gods Word, but from man's vain heart, by
the suggestion of the Devil: which, that it may evidently appear, let us a
little consider of it. In truth it is to say, that in one respect they have
Gods Promises appertaining to them: in another respect they have Gods most
fearful Torments (pronounced against that Beast, and that false Prophet, Rev.
19.20.) appertaining to them: In one respect they are Gods People, serving Him
their Master: in another respect the Devils people, serving him their master:
In one respect they shall be saved, in another respect they shall be damned.
But what false doctrine this is, Gods holy Word does discover. Our Savior
says, No man can serve two masters; ye cannot serve God and Riches, Mat. 6.25.
And can any serve Christ and the Beast, God and the Dragon? When Christ shall
come at the last day to give to every man according to his works, will he say
to any one, In respect of thy personal graces I will save thee, Come thou
blessed, (as he will say to all his Children:) But in respect of thy being a
member of Antichrists body, I will damn thee, Go thou cursed, as he will to all
that worship or obey the Beast? Will not Christ Jesus pronounce absolutely
either Salvation or Condemnation to every one? and that according to this word,
Joh. 12.48. so as God in his Righteousness will either justify or condemn
every man: So has He taught us to know, that no Fountain can make salt water
and sweet, Jam. 3.12. And therefore, that by men's fruits we should know and
judge them to be not both good and evil trees at one time, as this opinion
teaches, but either good, or evil: always taking heed, we justify not the
wicked, nor condemn the innocent, both which are abominable to the Lord: And
for any communion whatsoever with them; What fellowship has Christ with
Antichrist, the Righteous with the Wicked, the Servants of the Lamb, with the
servants of the Beast? But I leave this for further answer to thse, who
although they are nearer to this man that has published this opinion than I
am, yet has (according to truth) confessed in writing, That there is nothing
to be expected from Christ, by any member of the Church of England, but a
pouring out of his eternal Wrath upon them. Mr. De-Cluse. Advertis. page 9.


Indif. Well, I praise God, I am much informed in these things; yet one thing
more I will desire your answer unto: The case stands thus with me: In these
things I am betwixt faith and doubting; though the rather I believe these
things you say are true, and that I may never go to these Assemblies again
without sin; but I am not so persuaded thereof, that I dare suffer for it: What
if I should (not having Faith to suffer) for fear of persecution, go to their
Worship again?


Chapter It were your most fearful sin, which I prove thus; and I pray you observe
it well: You must do it, either as being verily persuaded you do well, and then
all this beginning of Light in you should be extinguished, and so your estate
is with the worst, if not worse: or else you must do it, doubting whether you
do well or no: For I hope you will not say, you do it knowing you do evil. If
you do it doubting, the Lord says, It is sin, Romans 14.23. which I hope you
will acknowledge, and not approve your self to do well in sinning, and then God
is merciful to forgive your sin, either this or any other, 1 John 1.9. But if
you say, you sin not therein, doing it doubtingly, you make God a liar, who
says, It is sin, and your sin remains.


Indif. What if I should many times go through weakness?


Chapter If you unfainedly repent, being through weakness, there is mercy with God,
though it should be seventy times seven times in a day, Mat, 18.21, 22. But we
had need to take heed of our repentance. The Apostle says, where there is
godly sorrow for sin, what Care it works in you, yea, what Indignation, etc.
2 Cor. 7. and custom in sin is dangerous, we had need to take heed we be not
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3.13.


Indif. Then you hold, that if any man approve himself in sinning, his sin
remains.


Chapter If any man sin, and say he has not sinned, there is no truth in him, 1 John 1.8. and God will enter into judgment with him, Jer. 2.35.


Indif. Then absolutely I see, that if any man worship the Beast, or his Image,
etc. as before you have showed, he neither has Faith nor Fear of God in him,
what show of Godliness soever he makes. But what say you, may not a man that
separateth from all uncleanness, though he yet see not the way of Christ in his
Ordinances, may not such a man be saved?


Chapter Yes, upon this condition, that he believe in Jesus Christ for his only
Righteousness, and be willing and ready to hear and obey his Ordinances; an
example hereof we have in Cornelius, Acts 10. But if any will not hear that
Prophet (Christ Jesus) in all things whatsoever he shall say unto them, they
shall be destroyed out of his People, Acts 3.22, 23.


Indif. What do you mean by will not hear?


Chapter That when any part of the Way of God is manifested to them, they despise
and contemn it, or carelessly neglect it; otherwise men may not receive some of
Christ's Truth, and yet not be said, that they will not receive it.


Indif. Next after forsaking the ways of wickedness, and embracing Christ for
our Righteousness, what must we do?


Chapter Christ's whole Testament teaches this, and no other way, after repentence
from dead works, and faith toward God, to be baptized with water, Matthew.
16.16. Acts 2.41. and 8.12, 38. and 9.18. and a cloud of witnesses, calling
these the beginnings of Christ, and foundation, Heb. 6.1, etc.


Indif. May none be admitted to the Church to partake in the Ordinances, except
they be baptized?


Chapter If any teach otherwise, he presumes above what is written, 1 Cor. 4.6.
and therefore ought to be held accursed, Gal. 1.8, 9. For there was never true
Church, since Christ was manifested in the flesh, joined together of unbaptized
persons, though some have vainly published the contrary.


Indif. True, I think that cannot be denied, where the persons were never
baptized; but now the members of the Church of Rome, from whence the Baptism of
the Church of England comes, are baptized, Therefore why need they again be
baptized?


Chapter If they be baptized with Christ's Baptism, I will acknowledge they need not
again be baptized: but that the Baptism of the Church of Rome is Christ's
Baptism, that can never be proved; for Christ requires that only his Disciple
should baptize his Disciple, and into his Body: none of which is in Romes
baptism: For Christ's adversaries wash with water, those that are not Christ's
Disciples, into the body, not of Christ, but of Antichrist.


Indif. I confess that the Church of Rome, and members thereof, are the Church
and members of Antichrist, but they use the water and words in their Baptism
that Christ appointed.


Chapter What then? is it therefore Christ's Baptism? The Conjurers used the same
words that the Apostles did, Acts 19.13, etc. We adjure you by the Name of
Jesus, etc. yet abominable was their action. Also, Psalm. 50. Unto the wicked
said God, What have thou to do with my Ordinances, or to take my Word in thy
mouth, etc. Also the Papists use the same words in their Church, that Christ
has appointed to be used in his, as also in their Ministry, Is it therefore
Christ's Church and Ministry? They use also the same words, and washing with
water, in baptizing their Bells, that they use in baptizing their Infants, Is
it therefore Christ's Baptism? If answer be made, Bells are not to be baptized.
I answer, No more are the seed of wicked Persecutors, by our Opposits own
confession. If this were any thing, you should see what would follow: The
Baptism of Rome is Christ's Baptism, because they use water and these words; So
if any use water and these words, as the Jews, or any other of Christ's
adversaries (as the Papists are) then there is Christ's Baptism. Consider this,
and see what truth there is in it.


Indif. Though the Baptism of the Church of Rome should be naught, yet the
Baptism of the Church of England may be good, in that there be many thousands
that were never baptized in the Church of Rome.


Chapter I answer, that the first beginning of the Church of England was made of
the members of the Church of Rome, as is apparent in the days of King Henry
the eight, and afterward in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, after Qu.
Mary's death, and so continues unto this day; and the long continuance of it,
makes it not approvable. And the Papists themselves bid the Protestants prove
if they have, or hold any other Baptism, Church, or Ministry, than that they
have from them, and show it, and they will recant. Besides, the Baptism now
practiced in the Church of England, is no better, no otherwise than that of
Rome: for the Church of Rome baptizeth all the Infants of the most wicked that
are in her Dominions; and so the Church of England baptizeth all the Infants of
the most wicked that are in the Kings Majesty's Dominions; and of this Timber
are both these Churches built; and therefore we may truly say, as is the
Mother, so is the Daughter. And as they are in their first building, so they
are in most of their Laws, Lords, Lawmakers, Courts, and thousands of their
Abominations, insomuch that it is plain enough, the latter is the very Image of
the first; unto which, whosoever submits, or obeys, or maintains their
Baptism, or any other of their humane trash, he shall be tormented in fire and
brimstone for evermore, and shall never have rest day nor night, Rev. 14. And
therefore in Gods fear cast away that cursed action of washing, where was
neither Christ's Disciple administering, nor his Disciple upon whom it was
adminstred, nor Christ's Body or Church baptized into: and obey Christ's Voice,
in becoming his Disciple, and to his Church, that you may be baptized by his
Disciple, and be made a Member of his Body or Church. This only is Christ's
Baptism, and of him acknowledged, and ought to be of all his Disciples, and the
contrary to be held accursed, and in no sort maintained or kept.


Indif. It is objected, That we must cast away that which is man's Ordinance,
and retain that which is Gods Ordinance, namely, Washing, and Water, and Words.


Chapter I deny that any thing in that action was Gods Ordinance or Appointment:
what truth is there in this, to say, That because God appoints Water, and
Washing, and Words in his Baptism, therefore howsoever Water, and Washing and
these Words are used, that is Christ's Ordinance? I confess, Water, and Washing,
and Words are Gods Ordinance, being used as he has commanded, the which I
acknowledge must be held; but this use of them, or action fore-spoken of being
not the use of them, or action appointed of God (as the adversaries confess) is
to be cast away as execrable.


Indif. Further, it is objected, They repent of that which is evil, and retain
that which is good.


Chapter For the better discovering of this deceit, let us consider what is the
evil they confess and that they repent of: say they, An unlawful person
performed an unlawful action upon an unlawful person, this is the evil. Now
this is the question, whether this action, thus unlawfully performed may be
kept, and yet repented of? The Scripture teaches, That not only confessing,
but forsaking sin; in repentance, Pra. 28.13. Can a Thief that has stolen
Goods, repent thereof to acceptance with God, and not make restitution to the
party wronged? being in his power, or having ability to restore; I would know
how this will be maintained? for the one is a greater theft than the other.


Indif. It is further objected, That Jeroboams followers had no right to
Circumcision in their idolatrous estate, yet such as were circumcised in that
estate, were not afterward circumcised when they came to repentance.


Chapter It is their forgery so to object: for, either they had right to
Circumcision, being true Israelites, although in transgression, or else none
had right to Circumcision in the world, no not Judah: For, what can be said,
but that because the ten Tribes were in rebellion against God, therefore they
had no right to Circumcision? May not the same be said in as high a measure of
Judah? was Isreal's sin half so great as Judahs? If it be said, that Israel
forsook the place of Gods Worship, the Temple; so did Judah too, worshipping
under every green tree, and Grove, and high place: whatsoever can be said of
the one, as much may be said of the other. This is a mere deceitful forgery,
raised up by Satan in the hearts of his false Prophets, to deceive themselves,
and them that shall perish, if they repent not, in that they receive not the
love of the truth, but believe these lies, and have pleasure therein;
concluding from this false ground, That because the Israelites in transgression
were circumcised, and after coming to repentance were not circumcised again: So
Egyptians, Sodomites and Babylonians, never having been Israelites, baptized in
the Synagogues of Satan, are not to be rebaptised (as they call it) there being
no comparison betwixt the persons; the one being true Israelites according to
the flesh, Gods People, to whom by Gods appointment Circumcision appertained,
and who should have increased their transgressions if they had not performed
it; and the other true Babylonians, Gods adversaries, unto whom God threatens
his Judgments, for taking his Ordinances in their mouths or hands.


Indif. I see indeed there is no true proportion betwixt the persons in
Circumcision and Baptism; for the one were the persons appointed of God to be
circumcised, which Circumcision taught them the forsaking of their wickedness,
and bound them to the observation of the Law, Gal. 5.3. and they had no cause
to repent of that their action: The other are not the persons appointed of God
to be baptized, but sinned in that their action, and must repent thereof, by
your opposits own confession. But if this be granted, this question arises,
Who shall then baptize after Antichrists exaltation?


Chapter For answer to this: There are three ways professed in the world; One by
the Papists, and their several successors, professing succession from the Pope
and his ministers: Another by the Familists and scattered flock, that none may
intermeddle therewith lawfully, till their extraordinary men come: Another, we
and others affirm, That any Disciple of Christ, in what part of the world
soever, coming to the Lords way, he by the Word and Spirit of God preaching
that way unto others, and converting, he may and ought also to baptize them.
The two former I shall through the help of God confute, and confirm the latter
by the Scriptures.

First, to the Papists and all their several successors, some standing for all
by succession from Rome, some for more, some for less, some for nothing but
Baptism, being of our Judgment for the appointing of their Ministry. To them
all I answer with the words of the Lord, Psa. 50.16. What have Antichrists
Ministers to do to take Gods Word in their mouths, or to declare his
Ordinances, seeing they hate to be reformed, and have cast Gods Word behind
their backs? If they have nothing to do with his Word and Ordinances, then not
with Ministry and Baptism. Besides, God has forbidden that the adversaries of
Him, his Temple, and them that dwell in Heaven, should build, according to that
of Nehem. 2.20. The God of Heaven he will prosper us, and we his Servants will
rise up and build; but as for you, you have no portion, nor right, nor memorial
in Jerusalem.

Secondly, to that fantastical Sect I answer; It is their dream and false
vision to look for extraordinary men, for God has not spoken it: For if an
Angel from Hevven should come and preach otherwise than those extraordinary men
the Apostles have preached, which none else could preach, and which is written
in Christ's Testament, we are to hold them accursed, Gal. 1.8, 9. Which Truth
none need go into Heaven to seek, but every one that searches the Scriptures
may find by the direction of the holy Ghost, which God has promised to all
that obey him, Acts 5. and ask it, Mat. 6.1.


Indif. Now I pray you let me hear your confirmation of your practice.


Chapter As it was in the second building of the material Temple, after the
captivity of Babylon in Caldea; so, according to the true proportion, it is to
be in the second building of the spiritual Temple after the captivity of
spiritual Babylon. Now this is to be observed in the former, that every
Israelite, with whom the Lord was, and whose spirit the Lord stirred up, was
commanded to go and build, Ezra 1.3, 5. though some were more excellent in the
business than others. So now, every spiritual Israelite with whom the Lord is,
and whose spirit the Lord stirs up, are commanded to go and build, and the
Lord will prosper them in rising up and building, though some be more excellent
in the business than others; the beginning of which spiritual building, is,
first to beget men anew by the immortal seed to Gods Word, so making them
living stones, and thereupon to comple them together a spiritual house unto
God, 1 Pet. 2. upon the confession of their Faith by Baptism, as the Scriptures
of the New Testament every where teach, as before is showed.


Indif. It is confessed of many, that any that have gifis may preach, and
convert, but not baptize.


Chapter Such our Savior accounts Hypocrites, and reproves, Mat. 23. that held
it was lawful to swear by the Temple, but not by the Gold on the Temple; by the
Altar, but not by the Offering on the Altar: to whom he says, Wether is
greater, the Gold, or the Temple that sanctifies the Gold? the Offering, or
the Altar that sanctifies the Offering? So may I say, Whether is greater, the
Water and Washing, or the Word that sanctifies the Water?


Indif. What other example have you in the Scriptures, that an unbaptized
person may baptize?


Chapter If there were no other than that aforementioned, it were sufficient. An
Israelite circumcised in flesh, God stirring up his heart, was to build the
Temple made with hands, from the first stone to the last; So an Israelite
circumcised in heart, God stirring him up, is to build the Temple made without
hands, from the first stone to the last, beginning with, Go, preach and
baptize, teaching to observe all that God commands, as Christ teaches his
Disciples to the end of the world. But further, we have the particular example
of John Baptist, who being unbaptised, preached, converted, and baptized.


Indif. But John Baptist was an extraordinary man, it will be objected, for God
spoke to him extraordinarily.


Chapter What then, Is not his practice written for our instruction? God has
spoken at several times after sundry manners, Heb. 1.1, etc. yet all to one
end. As for this of John Baptist, the same God that spoke to John Baptist in
the wilderness his Word, the same God speaks to us in his Scriptures the same
Word he spoke to John; and therefore seeing the Lord has spoken, who shall not
preach and practice according to his Word? seeing now God speaks to no
particular persons; For whatsoever things were written before time, were written
for every man's instruction, Romans 15.4.


Indif. Many famous men, as Mr. Perkins and others confess, that if a Turk
should come to the knowledge of the Truth in Turkey, he might preach the same
to others, and converting them, baptize them, though unbaptized himself.


Chapter True, but this Mystery of Iniquity so prevails, persuading many that
they are Christians, because they had Baptism in their Infancy, when it
appertained not to them, that they think their case is better than the Turks,
though alas, it is much worse; for it shall be easier for the Turks than for
them, if Gods Word be true. Are not all Jews and Gentiles in one estate by
nature? and is there more than one way of coming to Christ for them both,
namely, to be the Sons of God by Faith, and to put on Christ by Baptism? Gal.
3.26, 27. Who has set up his new way, Christ or Antichrist?


Indif. Many of those called Brownists do confess, that they are reasonably
persuaded, that Antichristians coming to the Truth may be baptized; and they
would not differ with you concerning that, but that you deny Infants Baptism;
What say you, may not the Infants of the Faithful be baptized?


Chapter No, except God have appointed it.


Indif. You know it is granted, that there is neither plain command nor example
for it in Christ's Testament, but from the consequence of Circumcision, in that
Covenant that God made with Abraham and his seed, Genesis 17. and other places
agreeing therewith.


Chapter Let us endeavor to put an end to this, if it may be in short. I demand of
you, what Covenant the Lord meanthe here? It must be granted, he means,
either the Covenant of the Land of Canaan, with all the Promises thereof; or
the Covenant of Christ's coming of his lions concerning the flesh; or else the
Covenant of Life and Salvation by Christ: one of these three it must needs be.
Let me have your Answer, or any man's hereto.


Indif. The first and second cannot be pleaded, therefore it must be the third,
namely, Life and Salvation by Christ.


Chapter Well, then I demand, Have the fleshly Children of the Faithful more
privilege to Life and Salvation than the Faithful themselves?


Indif. No, I think it cannot be said.


Chapter Well, then I affirm that the Faithful have right to this Covenant of Life
and Salvation only upon their Repentance and Faith, and not otherwise; and so
have their Children, and not otherwise; except you will say they have greater
privilege thatn the Faithful; or else, that they have Life and Salvation by
their Parents Faith; or else, that they have right and title to it, whether
they repent and believe or no. If any say they have right and title to it by
Gods Promise. I answer, God has promised Life and Salvation by Christ to none
that are under Condemnation, but only by Repentance and Faith: let any show the
contrary if they be able. If any say, as some foolishly have done, being urged,
That it is the Covenant of the visible Church: what Covenant is that but the
Covenant of Life and Salvation made to the Faithful, Christ Body and Church?
And therefore, seeing they are so confounded herein, some teaching one thing,
and some another; some that Infants have neither Faith nor Repentance, but by
virtue of the Covenant made to their Parents: Others teach, that Repentance and
Faith is to be performed of every one that is to be baptized, and that Infants
may repent and believe by their Sureties till they come to age themselves:
Seeing, I say, they are thus confounded herein, having nothing in Christ's
perfect Testament, only some show of a forged consequence, and also that they
agree not amongst themselves; Let us take heed of profaning the Lords holy
Ordinance, administering it where he has not commanded. Many other things might
be said, but this may suffice, seeing much is already written, and more may be
ere long, knowing they have nothing to say but their several conceits.


Indif. I praise God you have given me great satisfaction in these things; What
must we do after our Baptism?


Chapter As the Saints our predecessors did, They that glady received the Word,
were baptized, and they continued in the Apstles doctrine, fellowships,
breaking of bread, and prayers, Acts 2. walking in fear toward God, and in
love in word and deed one toward another, according to the blessed rules in
Christ's Testament; and also justly and unblamably toward all men, that they
may cause their Conversation as well as their Doctrine to shine before men, that
men may see their good works, and glorify their Father which is in Heaven;
without the which conversation all profession is nothing.


Indif. It is a great stumbling block to many, that diverse who profess
Religion, walk corruptly in their conversation, it is a great cause that the
wicked open their mouths against Gods Truth.


Chapter Alas, it is most lamentable! but Gods People must know, it has been and
will be so unto the end of the world: And therefore Christ Jesus has appointed
means for the redressing thereof in his Church, Mat. 18. and 1 Cor. 5, etc. And
we may not justify or condemn any Religion whatsoever by men's personal
walkings. May we say, the Religion of the Philosophers was good because of
their moral virtues? or, that the Religion that Judah and David professed was
evil, because of Judahs Incest, and David's Adultery and Murder, Genesis 38. and 2.
Sam. 11. or the Religion of Christ evil, because that one that professed it,
fell into Incest, I Cor. 5. Gods People had need to take heed of sinning,
whereby to cause the adversaries to blaspheme, for the which God may make them
examples to all succeeding ages.


Ind. I give you hearty thanks for your pains with me in these things, and I
trust I shall not let them slip, but remember them all may life, and put them
in practice.


Chapter The glory and thanks thereof only belongs to God, for to him it is due;
but this I desire you to consider, that the knowing of the Will of God, without
practicing of it, does us rather hurt than good; the Scripture says, Not the
knowers, but the doers are justified, Romans 2.13. Jam. 1.12. And, He that knows
his masters will and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. Many there
be in this Nation (with grief of soul I speak it) that acknowledge and confess
the Truth, but praclise it not, for some respects or other; the Lord Persuade
all your hearts to the speedy practice thereof, and that by many examples that
are left unto you. David that man of God says, I made haste, and delayed not
to keep thy Commandments, Psalm. 119.60. The Disciples, Mat. 4. immediately
without tarrying followed Christ. The three thousand, the same day they were
informed, obeyed the Lord, and were baptized, Acts 2. The Samaritans, Acts
8.12. as soon as they believed were baptized, both men and women. The Eunuch
likewise, ver. 38. The Jailer, Lydia, Paul, and a cloud of witnesses, communing
not with flesh and blood, but obeyed the Lord as soon as they believed. Here was
no staying to hear what this, and that learned man could say against it, as now
a days, but as they were confidently persuaded thereof, they obeyed. And so I
am assured it shall be by little and little, as the kingdom of the Beast
diminishes.


Indif. I hope I shall testify to all, my speedy walking in the steps of these
holy men; but one thing there is yet which bath much troubled me and others,
and in my judgment hat much hindered the growth of Godliness in this Kingdom,
and that is, That many, so soon as they see or fear trouble will ensue, they
fly into another Nation who cannot see their conversation, and there by
deprive many poor ignorant souls in their own Nation, of their information, and
of their conversation amongst them.


Chapter Oh! that has been the overthrow of Religion in this Land, the best able
and greater part being gone, and leaving behind them some few, who by the
others departure have had their afflictions and contempt increased, which has
been the cause of many falling back and of the adversaries exalting: But they
will tell us, we are not to judge things by the effects, therefore we must
prove that their flight unlawful, or we say nothing.

And frist Whereas it is said by some of these flyers, that many of the People
of God fled into foreign Countries, and that God gave approbation thereof, as
Moses, David, our Savior Christ in his infancy, and other, thinking hereby to
justify this their flight. I answer, God preserved Moses and the rest in their
flight, till the time was come that he employed them in his service, then in no
case he would suffer them to fly; as when Moses manifested his exceeding
backwardness to the Lords work, in helping his People out of Bondage, using
many excuses, the Lord was very angry with him, Exodus 4.10 -- 15. And whither
out Savior fly when the time came that he was to show himself to Israel? Luke
1.80. If any of these men can prove the Lord requires no work at their hands
to be done for his Glory, and the Salvation of thousands of ignorant souls in
their own Nation, let them stay in foreign Countries. But I trust Gods People
have learned, not to say, the time is not yet come that Babel should be
destroyed, and the Lords House builded, but that the time is come to build the
Lords House, and not to dwell in ceiled houses, Hag. 1. or any way to seek our
outward promotion; which if it be granted, that the time is come, not only to
come out of Babel, but to destroy her, all these objections are nothing; except
they prove, that when God called any of his People to his Work, they left it
for fear of trouble. This doctrine was not approved of God when the time came
that his Adversaries were to be rooted out, and that his People had gotten some
victory. The Rubenites and the Gadites could have been content to have remained
to their most peace and commodity, Number 32. but Moses said unto them, Shall your
Brethren go to war, and ye tarry here? where fore now discourage ye the hearts
of the Children of Israel, etc. sharply reproving them, as an increase of
sinful men, risen upon their fathers steads still to augment the fierce wrath
of the Lord; and Moses would not be satisfied until they had promised that they
would go with their Brethren to the Lords work, and would not return to their
houses till they had accomplished the same. And the Angel of the Lord does say,
Curse ye Meroz, curse the inhabitants thereof, because they came not to the
help of the Lord, to help the Lord againsst the Mighty, Judge. 5.23. Also,
because the men of Jabesh Gilead came not up to the Lord, to help their
Brethren against the wicked men of Gibeath, all the men were destroyed, and all
the women that had lien by men, Judge. 21.11, no excuse whatsoever could serve.
Did God thus respect his Work and People then, as all must put to their helping
hand, and none must withdraw their shoulder lest others were discouraged; and
is there no regard to be had thereof now, but any occasion, as fear of a little
Imprisonments, or the like, may excuse any, both from the Lords work, and the
help of their Brethren, that for want of their society and comfort are
exceedingly weakened, if not overcome? If answer be made, They perform their
duty in both, that they do the Lords work; the pastor feeding his flock, and
the People walking in fellowship one toward another. I demand, Does the Lord
require no more work of them? does he not require that they should help to cast
down Babel? If reply be made, They do it by their Books. I answer, That may be
done, and their Lights shine by their mouths and conversations also among the
wicked, which is the greatest means of converting them, and destroying
Antichrists Kingdom: They overcame (not by flying away, but) by the Blood of
the Lamb, and by the Word of their Testimony, and they loved not their lives
unto the death, Rev. 12.11. Gods People are the Lights of the World, a City set
on a hill, a Candle set on the candlestick, giving light to all that come in,
Mat. 5 and therefore must shine by their Persons, more than by their Books. And
great help and encouragement would it be to Gods People in affliction of
Imprisonment and the like, to have their Brethrens presernce to administer to
their souls or bodies, and for which cause Christ will say, I was in Prison,
and ye visited me; in Distress, and ye comforted me; and unto those that do not
so according to their ability, Go ye cursed, Mat. 25. If men had greater love
to Gods Commands, or the Salvation of thousands of ignorant souls in our
Nation, that for want of instruction perish, than to a little temporal
affliction, they would never publish nor practice as they do in this thing.

Thus have I in short showed you my poor ability in these things. And for all
other things we hold; as the lawfulness of Magistracy, Gods blessed Ordinance:
And Christ our Savior taking his flesh of the Virgin Mary, by the wonderful
work of the holy Ghost, etc. You may see them in our Confession in print,
published four years ago.


Indif. Many that be called Anabaptists hold the contrary, and many other
strange things.


Chapter We cannot but lament for it; so did many in Christ's Churches in the
primitive times hold strange opinions; as some of the Corinths denied the
Resurrection; and in many of the Seven Churches were grievous things, which the
Lord by his Servants warned them of, upon pain of his displeasure and removing
of his Presence from them; nevertheless, others professing the same general
Cause of Christ, were commended.


Indif. Well, you will yet be called Anabaptists, because you deny Baptism to
Infants.


Chapter So were Christians before us called Sects: and so they may John Baptist,
Jesus Christ himself, and his Apostles Anabaptists; for we profess and practice
no otherwise herein, than they, namely, The baptizing of such as confess with
the mouth the belief of the heart. And if they be Anabaptists that deny Baptism
where God has appointed it, they, and not we are Anabaptists. But the Lord
give them repentance, that their sins may be put away, and never laid to their
charge, even for his Christ's sake. Amen.


AN HUMBLE SUPPLICATION TO THE Kings Majesty; As it was presented, 1620.
To the High and Mighty KING, JAMES, By the Grace of God, King of Great
Britain, France, and Ireland. To the Right Excellent and Noble PRINCE,
CHARLES, Prince of Wales, etc. To all the Right Hanorable NOBILITY, Grave and
Honorable JUDGES, and to all other the Right Worshipful GENTRY, of all Estates
and Degrees, assembled in this present Parliament. Right High and Mighty, Right
Excellent and Noble, Right Honorable, and Right Worshipful;

AS the Consideration of that divine Commandment of the King of kings (Let
Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks be made for Kings,
and for all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and a peaceable
life, in all Godliness and Honesty) does cause in us a daily practice thereof
in our secret Chambers for you all, as in duty we are bound, of which the
searcher of all hearts bears us witness; so let it be pleasing unto your
Majesty; and the rest in Authority, that we make humble Supplications and
Prayers to you, for such our bodily miseries and wants as are upon us; in that
it is in your power to redress them; and especially at this present in this
High Meeting, assembled for the public weal of all your loyal Subjects. Our
miseries are long and lingering Imprisonments for many years in diverse Counties
of England, in which many have dyed and left behind them Widows and many small
Children: taking away our Goods, and others the like, of which we can make good
probation; not for any disloyalty to your Majesty, nor hurt to any mortal man,
(our Adversaries themselves being Judges) but only because we dare not assent
unto, and practice in the Worship of God, such things as we have not Faith in,
because it is sin against the Most High, Heb. 11.6. Romans 14.23. as your Majesty
well observes in these words: It is a good and safe Rule in Theology, That in
matters of the Worship of God, Quod dubitas, ne fereris, according to Paul's
rule, Romans 14.5. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. Medit. on
Lo. Prayer.

If we were in error herein, these courses of afflicting our bodies for
Conscience cause, are not of Christ, but of Antichrist, as hereafter is most
plainly showed; And if no Church be the Rule of Faith, but only the holy
Scriptures; as the learned Protestants do truly confess, and that therefore the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome (that all must believe as the Church believes,
and so practice, or else be cruelly persecuted) be most ungodly, as it is: then
how can they avoid the like censure that practice the same thing, contrary to
their own Judgment? For the learned Protestants do say, it is high cruelty for
the Papists to constrain them to practice those things in Gods Worship which
they have not Faith in, nay, which they know to be evil, with Imprisonment,
Fire and Faggot: and therefore why may not we say, it is great cruelty for the
learned Prorestants to constrain us to practice such things in Gods Worship,
which we have not Faith in? Nay, which we certainly know to be evil, with
lingering Imprisonment, loss of Goods, and what other cruelties they can procure
against us of your Majesty and the Civil State. If your Learned say, they have
the Truth, and we are in Error; that rests to be tried by the true
Touchstone, the holy Scriptures. If they be our Judges, the Verdict must needs
go against us. If their sayings be a safe Rule for us to be saved by, we will
rest upon them; And then why may not the saying of the Papists be sure also,
and they be the Protestants Judges? and so bring us all to believe as the
Church believes. The iniquity of which we have discovered as briefty as we
could; beseeching your Majesty and all that are in Authority, to hear us. It
concerns our eternal Salvation, or Condemnation, and is therefore of great
importance; for what can a man give for the ranfom of his Soul?

Oh he pleased to remember the saying of that great and good man Job, chap. 29.
I delivered the Poor that cried, and the Fatherless, and him that had none to
help him: The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me, and I
caused the Widows heart to rejoice. I was a Father to the Poor, and when I knew
not the cause, I sought it out diligently. I brake also the jaws of the
unrighteous man, and plucked the prey out of his teeth.

Our prayers are, and shall be for you day and night, to that God of glory, by
whom you reign and are advanced, that He will pat it into your hearts to let
these things enter into your thoughts, and then we doubt not (the evidence of
them being such) that you will be moved to repeal and make void all those cruel
Laws (which we most humbly beseech) which persecute poor men only for matters
of conscience; not that we any way desire for our selves or others, any the
least liberty from the strict observation of any Civil, Temporal, or Humane
Law, made or to be made, for the preservation of your Majesty's Person, Crown,
State or Dignity; for, all that give not to Caesar that which is his, let them
bear their burden: but we only desire, that God might have that which is his,
which is the heart and soul in that Worship that He requires, over which there
is but one Lord, Ephesians. 4.5. and one Lawgiver, who is able to save it, or to
destroy it, Jam 4.12, which no mortal man can do. It is not in your power to
compel the heart; you may compel men to be Hypocrites, as a great many are, who
are false-hearted both toward God and the State; which is sin both in you and
them.

The vileness of persecuting the body of any man only for cause of Conscience,
is against the Word of God and Law of Christ: It is against the profession of
your Majesty; against the profession and practice of famous Princes; The
ancient and later approved Writers witness against it; so do the Puritans; yea,
the establishers of it, the Papists themselves inveigh against it: so that God
and all men do detest it, as is herein showed. And therefore in most humble
manner, we do beseech your Majesty, your Highness, your Honors, your Worships,
to consider of it, and do as God directs you in his Word, that cannot lie;
Let the Wheat and Tares grow together in the world until the harvest, Matthew. 13.

And so in humble manner we proceed.

CHAP. I. The Rule of Faith is the Doctrine of the Holy Ghost contained in the
Sacred Scriptures, and not any Church, Council, Prince or Potentate, nor any
mortal man whatsoever.
PRoved, by the Scriptures themselves, which are the Writings of Moses and the
Prophers, the Evangelists and Apostles; these are a sufficient Rule alone to
try all Faith and Religion by: our Reasons are, 1. They are inspired of God,
and are able to make us wise unto salvation, and perfect to every good work, 2.
Tim. 3.15, etc. 2. Because these Writings are written, that we might have
certainly of the things whereof we are instructed, Luke 1.4. That our joy might
be full, 1 John 1.4. And that we might believe, and in believing might have
life, John 20.31.3. We are commanded not to presame (or be wise) above what is
written, 1 Cor. 4.6. For, with this weapon Christ put to flight the Devil, Mat.
4.4. And taught his Disciples, Luke 24.27, 46. And Paul taught Christ Jesus,
Acts 17.2. The Godly are commended for searching the Scriptures, Acts 17.11.
All are commanded to search them, John 5.39. And they that will not believe
these Writings, will not believe Christ's Words, John 5.47. nor one that should
come from the Dead, Luke 16.31. If any ask how we know all, or any of these
Scriptures to be inspired of God? We answer, The ear (says Job 12.11)
discerns words, and the mouth tastes meat for it self; And as the eye
discerns the light of the Sun, so does our Spirit discern these Scriptures to
be inspired of God, and that for these Reasons: 1. In regard of the Majesty,
Wisdom and Grace of them from all other Writings; for there is a great Glory in
these Scriptures, as in the making of this wonderful World, which is most
evidently discerned, Heb. 11.1.2. By their Teachings, which excel all humane
teachings, leading us from Satan, from this world and our selves, to God, to
holiness, faith, love, fear, obedience, humility. 3. The true events of them,
or fulfilling of the Prophesies contained in them. 4. The consent and agreement
of all the parts of them, the like whereof cannot be showed of so many several
Writers since the world began. 5. The admirable preservation thereof against
Time and Tyrants; all which could not extinguish them. 6. The Devil and his
Instruments rage against those that practice the Doctrines contained in them.
7. The Conversion of thousands to God, by the power of their Doctrine. 8. The
Vengeance that has come upon such as have not obeyed them. 9. The
Acknowledgment of them by the very professed Adversaries thereof. 10. The
Miracles confirming them from Heaven. 11. The fight of a Savior to man is only
by and from them. And lastly, the simplicity of the Writers and plainness of
the Writings; for God has chosen the mean, contemptible and despised, to
manifest unto the world his Mysteries, 1 Cor. 1. These are sufficient to
persuade, that those holy Writings are inspired of God, and so able to make
wise unto Salvation, and perfect to every good work, These Scriptures contain
the Law and Testimony; and if any Church, Council, Prince or Potentate speak
not according to this Word, it is because there is not light in them, Isa.
8.20. And we are commanded to hold them accursed, Gal. 1.8, 9. For, Whosoever
shall add unto these things, God shall add the plagues written herein; and
whosoever shall take away from these things, God shall take his name out of the
Book of life, and out of the holy City, and from those things that are written,
Revel, 22.

Much by us shall not need to be written on this Subject, the thing is so
evident, and so generally acknowledged, at least in words, (excepting the
Papists, with whom we have not here to do) only we will add some humane
Testimonies.

Whites Way to the Church, dedicated to two Bishops, page 12. The learned
Protestants affirm and prove, that it is the doctrine of the Church of England,
Artic. 6 chap. That the Scripture comprehended in the Old and New Testament, is
the Rule of Faith so far, that whatsoever is not read therein, or cannot be
proved thereby, is not to be accepted as any point of Faith, or needful to be
followed; but by it all Doctrines taught, and the Churches Practice must be
examined, and that rejected which is contrary to it, under what title or
pretense soever it come unto us. And further they say, p. 1. That the Pope, or
any mortal man should be the Rule that must resolve in questions and
controversies of Faith, is an unreasonable Position, void of all indifferency;
when common sense teaches, That he that is a party, cannot be Judge. And
again, page 17. -- Which is the Church is controversal, which is the Scriptures
is not; therefore let that be the Rule which is out of doubt. And again, The
Scriptures contain the Principles of our Faith, and shall we not believe them?
Or, cannot we know them infallibly of themselves, without we let in the
authority of the Church? This, and much more, the learned Protestants have
written, and sufficiently confirms, that no Church nor man whatsoever may be
the Judge, Rule or Umpier in matters of Faith, but only the holy Scriptures;
and whosoever teaches and practices otherwise, they must hold and maintain
the Papists, Creed, or Colliers Faith, which the Protestants so much in words
detest, page 6. and mention our of Staphilus his Apology, thus: The Collier
being at the point of death, and tempted of the Devil what his Faith was?
answered: I believe, and dye in the Faith of Christ's Church: Being again
demanded what the Faith of Christ's Church was? That Faith (said he) that I
believe in. Thus the Devil getting no other Answer, was overcome and put to
flight. By this Paith of the Collier every unlearned man may try the spirits of
men, whether they be of God or no: by this Faith he may resist the Devil, and
judge the true interpretation from the false, and discern the Catholic from
the heretical Minister, the true Doctrine from the forged.

If the Answer of the Collier, and the Papists Conclusion upon it be not sound,
but detestable, as the Protestants confess, and cry woe unto the Papists for the
same, and that justly; Then is it no less detestable in the Protestants or any
other to require, or any to yield so far in Religion and Faith, that upon such
a temptation he has no better answer to make than as the Collier, to say, I
believe and dye in the Faith of the Church; or of the Prince, or of the
Learned; for, being demanded what that Faith is? if he be not able to prove it
by Gods Word, contained in the Scriptures, it is no better nor other than the
answer of the Collier, The Faith that I believe in. Oh how many millions of
souls in this Nation, not Papists but Protestants, live and dye, and have never
other Faith than this, whereunto they are constrained and compelled by
persecution, without either Faith or Knowledge.

CHAP. 2. The Interpreter of this Rule is the Scriptures, and Spirit of God in
whomsoever.
THe next thing, as the immediate Question from this former, is, Who must
interpret this Rule, because, as is objected, There are many dark places in it
(2 Pet. 3) hard to be understood. Unto which we answer: The two Witnesses of
God shall be the only Interpreters thereof; which are, The Word of God
contained in the same Scriptures, and the Spirit of God, so are they called,
Joh. 15.26, 27. Act. 5.32. First, for the Scriptures themselves, though some
Doctrines in some places be dark and obscure, as Peter speaks, yet the
self-same Doctrines in other places are plain and manifest: For, all the words
of the Lord are plain to him that will understand, and straight to them that
would find knowledge, Pro. 8.9. And knowledge is easy to him that will
understand, Prove. 14.6. Secondly, the Spirit of God; So says the Apostle, 1
John 2.6. It is the Spirit that bears witness: for the Spirit is Truth. And
John 14.26. But the Comforter, which is the holy Ghost, whom the Father will
send in my Name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your
remembrance which I have told you. And Joh, 16.13. Howbeit when he is come,
which is the Spirit of truth, he will lead you into all truth; for he shall not
speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear, shall he speak, and he will
show you of things to come. And 1 Cor. 2.10. For the Spirit searches all
things, even the deep things of God. And ver. 11. For the things of God knows
no man, but the Spirit of God. And 1 John 2.27. But the Anointing that ye have
received of Him, dwells in you, and ye need not that any man teach you, but
as the same Anointing teaches you of all things, and it is true, and is no
lie; and even as it has taught you, you shall abide in Him. And 1 John 3.24.
Hereby we know that He abides in us, even by the Spirit that He has given us.
And 1 Cor. 12.8. For to one is given by the Spirit, the word of Wisdom; and to
another the word of Knowledge, by the same Spirit.

The Scriptures be so plain in this, that the greatest adversaries thereof do
acknowledge the truth of it: only herein lies the difficulty, Who it is that
has this Spirit of God to interpret the Scriptures, which is this sure Rule?
which in the next place is to be handled.

CHAP. 3. That the Spirit of God, to understand and interpret the Scriptures,
is given to all and every particular person, that fear and obey God, of what
degree soever they be; and not to the wicked.
PRoved, Psalm. 25.12. What man is he that fears the Lord, him will he teach
the way that he shall choose. And ver 14. The secret of the Lord is revealed to
them that fear Him, and his Covenant to give them understanding. And Psalm.
107.43. Who is wise that he may observe these things, he shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord. And Dan, 12.10. None of the wicked shall have
understanding; but the Wise shall understand. For God will do nothing, but He
reveals his Secrets to his Servants, Amos 3.7. And Psalm. 119.99, etc. I have
had more understanding than all my Teachers, and than all the Ancients; because
I kept thy Precepts. For he that keeps the Law is a Child of understanding,
Prove. 28.7. And Joh. 14.15. If ye love me, keep my Commandments, and I will
pray the Father, and He shall give you the Spirit of Truth. And ver. 23. If any
man love me, he will keep my Word, and my Father and I will come unto him, and
will dwell with him. And John 7.17. If any man will do his Will, he shall know
of the Doctrine whether it be of God or no. And Acts 5.32. Yea, and the holy
Ghost whom God has given to all that obey Him. And Luke 21.15. I will give you
(my Disciples that obey me, and suffer for my sake) a mouth, and wisdom, etc.
and Luke 12.12. The holy Ghost shall teach you what ye shall say: For, Mat.
10.20. It is not you that speak, but the Spirit of my Father that speaks in
you. And Mark 4.11. To you (my followers) is given to know the Mysteries of the
Kingdom of God; but not to them that are without: For, the Mystery of the
Gospel is made manifest to the Saints, Col. 2.2.

The Church and Saints of God have revealed unto them by the Spirit, the things
that eye has not seen, etc. 1 Cor. 2.9, 10. And they have received the Spirit
of God, that they might know the things that are given them of God. But the
natural man perceives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness to him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned: but he that is spiritual, discerns all things, etc. ver. 14.

Hence is most plain to whom the Spirit of God is given, even to every
particular Saint of God. And it is no private spirit, but even: the public,
Spirit of God which is in him, which enableth him to understand, and so to
declare the things given him of God, 2 Pet. 1.20. That is a private spirit that
is not of God, though it be in multitudes; but the Spirit of God, though but in
one Saint, is not private. Gods Spirit is not private, for it is not
comprehended only within one place, person, or time, as man's is, but it is
universal and eternal; so is not man's: therefore man's is private, though they
be many; Gods is public, though but in one person.

CHAP. 4. Those that fear and obey God, and so have the Spirit of God to search
out and know the mind of God in the Scriptures, are commonly and for the most
part, the simple, poor, despised, etc.
PRoved, Mat. 11.5. Our Savior faith, The Poor receive the Gospel. And v. 25.
I thank thee Father, because thou have opened these things unto Babes; it is
so, O Father, because thy good pleasure was such. And Jam. 2.5. Hearken my
beloved Brethren, has not God chosen the Poor of this world, that they should
be rich in Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom which he has promised? etc. And 1
Cor. 1.26, etc. Brethren, you see your calling, that God has chosen the
foolish of this world, the weak of this world, the vile of this world and
despised, and which are not. Gods dealing is, to give unto the Simple sharpness
of wit, and to the Child knowledge and discretion, Prove. 1.4. The Sprit blows
where it lists, John 3.8. and is not tied to the Learned. Poor persecuted
Micaiah had the Truth against four hundred of King Ahabs Prophets, 1 King. 22.
So had Jeremiah against all the Priests and Prophets of Israel.

The Lord of Life himself in his fleshly being, what was he but a man full of
sorrows, in his Birth laid in a Cratch, because there was no room for him in
the Inn, Luk, 2.7. A Carpenter by Trade, Mar. 6.3. Having not a hole to rest
his head in, Mat. 8.20. And in his Death contemned and despised. His Apostles
in like manner, what were they but mean men, Fishermen, Tentmakers, and such
like, having no certain dewlling place, 1 Cor. 4.11. which the worldly-wise
Scribes and Pharisees took notice of, and reproachfully said, Joh. 7.48. Do any
of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believe in him? but this people that know
not the Law are accursed, ver. 49.

The truth of this is as plain as may be, that the Scriptures being the Rule of
Faith, perfect and absolute, and that the plainness of them is such, as by the
Spirit of God they may be easily understood of those that fear and obey God,
but of none else, and that such are most commonly the poor and despised; for,
if any man want wisdom (be he never so simple) let him ask of God, and he will
give him, Jam. 1.5. Which is also confirmed by humane Testimonies.

The Protestants confess, Whit. page 7. That in the Primative Church the
Doctrines and several points of Religion, were known and discovered by the most
mean of the people, and the Bishops exhorted them thereunto, etc. Also, page 9.
That this Rule is of that nature, that it is able to direct any man be he never
so simple, yea, the most unlearned alive may conceive and understand it
sufficiently for his salvation.

And they relate the Sayings of the Ancient in this thing, page 32. First,
Clemens Alexandrinus: The Word is not hid from any, it is a common Light that
shines unto all, there is no obscurity in it; hear you it, you that be far
off, and you that be nigh. Next him, Austin; God has bowed down the Scriptures
to the capacity of Babes and sucklings, that when proud men will not speak to
their capacity, yet himself might. After him, Chrysostom; The Scriptures are
easy to understand, and exposed to the capacity of every Servant, and Plowman,
and Widow, and Boy, and him that is most unwise. Therefore God penned the
Scriptures by the hands of Publicans, Fishermen, Tentmakers, Shepherds,
Neat-herds, and unlearned men, that none of the simple people might have any
excuse to keep them from reading, and that so they might be easy to be
understood of all men; the Artificer, the Householder and Widow woman, and him
that is most unlearned: Yea, the Apostles and Prophets, as Schoolmasters to all
the world, made their Writings plain and evident to all men, so that every man
of himself, only by reading them, might learn the things spoken therein. Next,
Justin Martyr says: Hear the words of the Scripture, which be so easy that it
needs no exposition but only to be rehearsed. And this the Protestants say was
the perpetual and constant judgment of the ancient Church, etc. And further,
page 21. he alleges Theodoret who writ of his times, You shall everywhere
see these points of our Faith to be known and understood, not only by such as
are Teachers in the Church, but even of Cobblers, and Smiths, and Websters, and
all kind of Artificers; yea, all our Women, not they only which are
Book-learned, but they also that get their living with their Needle; yea,
Maidservants and Waiting-women; and not Citizens only, but Husbandmen of the
Country are very skilful in these things: you may hear among us Ditchers, and
Neat-herds, and Wood-setters discoursing of the Trinity and the Creation, etc.
The like is reported by others. And, say the Protestants, his Doctrine that was
President in the Trent-Conspiracy, That a Distaff was fitter for Women than a
Bible, was not yet hatched, etc.

Oh it were well if the contempt of these pious practices were paled only
within the Romish profession, and were not practiced in and among those that
profess themselves to be separated therefrom: as what is more frequent in the
mouths of many Protestants, yea the Bishops themselves, than these and such
like words; Must every base fellow, Cobbler, Tailor, Weaver, etc. meddle with
the exposition or discoursing of the Scriptures, which appertains to none but
to the Learned? Yea, do they not forbid their own Ministers to expound or
discourse of the Scriptures? read their 49 Canon, which is; No person
whatsoever, not examined and approved by the Bishop of the Diocese, or not
licensed, as is aforesaid, for a sufficient and convenient Preacher, shall take
upon him to expound in his own Cure, or elsewhere, any Scripture, or Matter, or
Doctrine; but shall only study to read plainly and aptly (without glozing or
adding) the Homilies already set forth, or hereafter to be published by lawful
Authority, etc. So that not only Jesus Christ and his Apostles (who are alive
in their Doctrine, though not in their persons) are forbidden all exposition of
the holy Scriptures, or Matter, or Doctrine, not being licensed by the Bishops,
but also their own Ministers, who have sworn Canonical obedience to them. Yet
when they are put to answer the Papists, who practice the same thing, they take
up both Scriptures and ancient Writers to confute it.

CHAP. 5. The Learned in humane learning, do commonly and for the most part
err, and know not the Truth, but persecute it and the professors of it; and
therefore are no further to be followed than we see them agree with Truth.
THe next thing in order is, seeing the Lord reveals his secrets to the
humble, though wanting humane Learning, that we now prove on the contrary; That
God usually and for the most part hides his secrets from the Learned, and
suffers them to err and resist the Truth, yea so far, as to persecute it and
the Professors of it.

And first, let us begin with the Learned Heathen, who were behind none in
humane Learning: the wisemen of Egypt, how did they resist the glorious and
powerful Truth of God delivered by Moses? yea, they resisted it with such signs
and lying wonders, that the heart of Pharaoh and all his people were hardened
against it, Exodus 7.11, 12, 13. and 8.7. And what was the cause of Babels
destruction, but their trusting in the Learned? Isa. 47.13. Thou art wearyed in
the multitude of thy Counself, etc. And Isa. 44.25. I destroy the tokens of thy
Southsayers, and make them that conjecture fools, and turn the wisemen
backward, and make their knowledge follishness. The things of Gods dealing none
of the Learned of Egypt or Babel could interpret, but Joseph and Daniel.

Next come to the learned Priests and Prophets of the Jews, Whose lips should
have preserved Knowledge, and at whose mouth the people should have sought the
Law: But says the Lord, Mal. 2.7, 8. They are gone out of the way, they have
caused many to fall by the Law, etc. Also Isa. 29. Stay your selves and wonder;
they are blind, and make you blind; they are drunken, but not with Wine; they
stagger, but not with strong drink: for the Lord has convered you with a
spirit of slumber, and has shut up your eyes, the Prophets, and your chief
Seers, etc: Therefore the Lord said, Because this people come near to me with
their mouth, and honor me with their lips, but have removed their heart far
from me, and their fear toward me was taught by the precepts of men:
Therefore, behold, I will again do a marvallous work in this people, a
mavelous work and a wonder; for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish,
and the understanding of the prudent shall be hid, etc. And Isa. 56.10, etc.
Their watchmen are all blind, they have no knowledge, etc. And these Shepherds
cannot understand, for they all look to their own way, every one for his own
advantage, and for his own purpose. Also Jer. 8.9, etc. The wisemen are
ashamed; they are afraid and taken: lo, they have rejected the Word of the
Lord, and what wisdom is in them, etc. And Jer. 14.14, etc. and 50.6. My People
have been as lost sheep, their Shepherds have caused them to go astray, and
have turned them away to the mountains, etc. And Micah 3. Night shall be unto
them for a vision, and Darkness for a divination: the Sun shall go down over
the Prophets, and the Day shall be dark over them, etc. For they have no answer
of God: they build up Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity, etc. And
Zeph. 3.4. Her Prophets are light and wicked persons; her Priests have polluted
the Sanctuary, they have wrested the Law.

And in the time of our Savior, How had they made the Commandments of God of
no authority by their Traditions, Mat. 15.6. And Act. 13.27. The Rulers of
Jerusalem (the Highpriests, Scribes and Pharisees) knew not Christ, nor yet
the words of the Prophets, which they heard read every Sabbath, but fulfilled
them in condemning him. And our Savior says, Mat. 11. I thank thee Father,
Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and
men of understanding. And none of the Pharisees nor Rulers believed on him,
Joh, 7.48. And 1 Cor. 1.20. Where is the Wise? where is the Scribe? where is
the Disputer of this world? Has not God made the wisdom of this world
follishness? And ver. 26. Not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty,
not many noble are called, etc.

And for the Learned since the time of our Savior; The Council of Ephesus were
where 132 Bishops: Of Seleucia where were 160 Bps, related by the Protestants:
How grievously did they err, in decreeing the detestable Error of Arrianism?
Who is ignorant (knowing the Histories) that from time to time, both particular
Popes and general Councils, have grossly erred in many things? only one we will
mention, passing by Trent and others; The Council Lateren we mean (Pope
Innocent, 1215.) which for universality was behind none, where were present 2
Patriarchs, 70 Archbishops Metropolitans 400 Bishops, 12 Abbot, 800 Conventual
Priors, the Legates of the Greck and Roman Empire, besides the Ambassadors and
Orators of the Kings of Jerusalem, France, Spain, England, and Cyprus. In this
Council it was decreed, That all Heretics, and so many as do in any point
resist the Catholic Faith, should be condemned, etc. And also that the Secular
Powers, of what degree soever they be, shall be compelled openly to swear for
the defense of the Faith, that they will to the uttermost of their power root
out and destroy in all their Kingdoms, all such persons as the Catholic Church
has condemned for Heretics: and if they do not, they shall be excommunicated.
And if they do not reform within one whole year, then the Pope may denounce all
their Subjects absolved, and utterly delivered from showing or owing any
fidelity or obedience toward them. Again, that the Pope may give that Land, to
be occupied and enjoyed of the Catholics to possess it, (all Heretics being
rooted out) quietly and without any contradiction. Tho. Beacon in his Relics
of Rome, printed 1563. And the Protestands confess, that this imperfection has
hung so fast upon all Councils and Churches, that Nazianzen says, He never saw
any Council have a good end.

Thus are here sufficient Testimonies proved from Scriptures and Experience,
That the Learned may, and have usually erred; and therefore the holy Scriptures
often warn us, To beware of false Prophets, for many are gone out into the
world, Mat. 24. and 1 John 4.

And will not your Majesty, your Highness, your Honors, your Worships, be
pleased to consider of these things? but will your selves submit the guidance
of your Souls to the learned Spirituality, (as they are called) without due
examination by the Scriptures? which if you will still do, we can but bewail
with the sorrows of our hearts; and not so only, But will you with your Power
which God has given you to use well, compel and constrain your Subjects and
Underlings, to believe as the Learned believe, not suffering us to read or
search the Scriptures? Which if you abhor, as being the Romish practice; Will
you do that which is worse, letting us read the Scriptures, whereby we may
know the Will of our Heavenly Master, and have our Consciences enlightened and
convinced; but not suffer us to practice that we learn and know? whereby our
Sin and Condemnation is made greater than the blind Papists, as is proved, Luke
12.47. And not only so, but will you cons^^ain us to captivate our Consciences,
and practice in that, which in our ^^^ls we know to be evil, and contrary to
the manifest Law of the Lord, and that only because the Learned have so
Decreed, (whom you acknowledge are subject to err as well as others) or else
lie in perpetual Imprisonment, and be otherwise grievously persecuted?

May it please you to observe, that the Church of Rome sees and acknowledges
in words, That Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, and has abolished the
Priesthood of Aaron, and the legal Sacrifieces; but the Jews see it not to this
day, nay, the Highpriests, Scribes and Pharisees saw it not, but for the
publishing thereof persecuted Christ the Lord, and his Apostles, unto the
Death; calling their Doctrine Heresy, and them seditious Enemies to Caesar,
etc. For the which we all justly condemn them for their wickedness, so often as
we read the holy History.

And the Church of England sees and acknowledges diverse damnable Doctrines of
the Church of Rome; this among many, That the Scriptures are not the only Rule
of Faith, but that men ought to be constrained to believe as the Church
believes. The Protestants see the iniquity of this, because they see and
acknowledge all Churches are subject to err. But the learned Papists see it
not, but have decreed, That whosoever resists in any point shall be judged as
an Heretic, and suffer fire and faggot: and every Temporal Magistrate that
does not root such Heretics out of their Dominions, shall be excommunicated;
and if he do not reform, he shall be expelled his earthly Possessions, and his
Subjects freed from owing any fidelity or obedience toward him, etc. For the
which height of iniquity, the Protestants and we justly cry out against them
for all the innocent blood that they have shed.

And we see most manifestly, that what soever is not of Faith is Sin, Romans
14.23. And without Faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. And
therefore that no mortal man may make a Law to the Conscience, and force unto
it by Persecutions, and consequently may not compel unto any Religion where
Faith is wanting, as hereafter more largely we prove. But the Learned of this
Land see it not (or rather will not practice it) but for our not submitting
herein, procure your temporal Sword to persecute us, by casting us in Prisons,
where many of us have remained diverse years in lingering Imprisonment, deprived
of all earthly comforts, as Wives, Children Callings, etc. without hope of
Release, till our God (for the practice of whose Commandments we are thus
persecuted) persuade the hearts of your-Majesty, your Highness, your Honors,
your Worships, to take pity upon us, our poor Wives and Children, or His
heavenly Majesty release us by Death. Will not succeeding Ages cry out against
the Cruelty of the learned Protestants herein, as well as they cry out against
the Cruelty of the learned Jews and Papists? yes, we are assured they will, as
many millions do in other Nations at this day.

The Scriptures declare, the cause of the Jews blindness was, not the obscurity
of the Scriptures, but that they winked with their eyes, lest they should see
that which would deprive them of their honors and profits, as Joh. 11.48. And
because, their fear toward God was taught by men's precepts, and because they
looked to their own way, and to their own advantage, and had rejected the Word
of the Lord; and because they builded their Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with
iniquity, and sought their own honor, and not Gods, as before is proved. So
the cause of the blindness of the learned Papists, in denying the Scriptures
the only Rule of Faith, is not the obscurity of the Scriptures, but their
winding with their eyes, lest they should see that, that would bring them from
their honors and profits, and all the forenamed in the Jews. And also as the
Protestants well observe, Whit. page 18. First, That they might make themselves
Judges in their own cause; For who sees not that if the Church be the Rule of
Faith, and their be the Church, which way the verdict will go? Next, for that
the greatest points of their Religion have no foundation on the Scriptures,
etc. So that take away the Scriptures, and establish their Religion; but
establish the Scriptures, and their Religion vanishes; and that Mother of
Whoredoms that glorified her self as a Queen, Rev. 18. shall be consumed; and
her Merchants that were waxed rich through her pleasures and profits, shall
wail and weep, the which they now seeing, shut their eyes, lest they should see
that which would bring them from these honors, profits and pleasures.

In like manner it may easily be judged by every indifferent man, that the
cause why the Learned of this Land will not see, or at least practice, (that
seeing there is but one Lord, Ephesians. 4.5. and one Lawgiver over the Conscience,
Jam. 4.12. Therefore no man ought to be compelled by persecution, to a worship
wherein he has not Faith) is not the obscurity of the Scriptures, but their
winking with their eyes, lest they should see that that would take away their
honors and profits? For, if Bribes blind the eyes of the Wise, Deuteronomy. 16.19.
then Honors and Profits much more: For, who sees not, if none should be
compelled by persecution to worship God in Spirit and Truth ( such only worship
Him, and none but such are required to worship Him, Joh. 4.23.) that these
Learned would lose their Honors and Profits, in being Lords and Lawmakers
over the conscience and souls of men: although your Majesty might lawfully give
them what temporal Honors and Profits your Highness liked of. These are the
true causes of the blindness of the Learned: For so Christ says,: How can ye
believe when ye seek honor one of another, and seek not the Honor that comes
from God alone? Joh. 5.44. And how can men but be blind in gods Mysteries, when
they look to their own way, for their own advantage, and for their own purpose;
for, having rejected the Word of the Lord, what wisdom is in them? they have no
answer of God, that build up their Sion (for so they account their Churches and
Professions) with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity, as before is proved.

If these Learned could free us from the Lords wrath; or, if they might answer
for us, and we be free; it were safe for us to submit our selves, and captivate
our judgments and practice to them; but seeing they cannot so much as deliver
their own souls, And that if the blind lead the blind, both must fall into the
Ditch, Mat. 15.14. and, Every one must give account of himself to God, and be
judged by his own works done in the flesh, and that the soul that sins shall
dye, We dare not follow any mortal man in matters of salvation further than we
know him to agree with the meaning of God in the Scriptures.

Paul the holy Apostle of Jesus Christ, taught, That we should follow him no
otherwise than he followed Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1. Yea, Christ himself sent men to
the Scriptures to try his Doctrine. The Apostles suffered their Doctrine to be
tried, and commend them that try it. And the Protestants confess, Whit. page
127. This Doctrine was never misliked, till a Church rose up, whose Silver
being Dross, and whose Milk, Poison, could not endure the trial: which being
true, that we may try, why may we not also judge and practice according as Gods
Spirit shall direct us in our trial? If a man should drink poison, and know it
to be poison, were he not in a worse estate than he that should drink it
ignorantly not knowing thereof? even a murderer of himself in the highest
degree: So he that drinks spiritual poison, knowing it, (for according unto
men's faith it is unto them) he is in a worse estate, and a murderer of his own
soul in the highest degree. And therefore that Church, or those Learned, that
will suffer their Doctrine to be tried, and yet constrain men to receive and
practice it, when upon examination their consciences are convinced of the
falsehood thereof, are worse, and do more highly sin, than they that constrain a
blind conscience, though both be evil.

We despise not Learning, nor Learned men, but do reverence it and them,
according to their worthiness; only when it is advanced into the seat of God,
and that given to it which appertains unto the holy Ghost, which is to lead
into all Truth, than ought all, as Ezekiah did unto the brazen Serpent, detest
it and contemn it.

CHAP. 6, Persecution for cause of Conscience, is against the Doctrine of Jesus
Christ, King of Kings.
1. CHRIST commanded that the Tares and Wheat (which are those that walk in the
Truth, and those that walk in falsehood) should be let alone in the world, and
not plucked up until the harvest, which is the end of the world, Mat. 13.30,
38, etc.

2. The same commands, Mat. 15.14. That they that are blindly led on in false
Religion, and are offended with him for teaching true Religion, should be let
alone, referring their punishment unto their falling into the Ditch.

3. Again, Luke 9.54, 55. He reproved his Disciples (who would have had Fire
come down from Heaven and devoured those Samaritans that would not receive him)
in these words, Ye know not of what spirit ye are: the Son of man is not come
to destroymens lives, but to save them.

4. Paul the Apostle of our Lord teaches, 2 Timothy 2.24. That the servant of the
Lord must not strive, but must be gentle toward all men, suffering the evil
men, instructing them with meekness that are contrary-minded; proving if God at
any time will give them repentance, that they may acknowledge the Truth, and
come to amendment out of the snare of the Devil, etc.

5. According to these aforesaid Commandments, the holy Prophets foretold, that
when the Law of Moses concerning Worship should cease, and Christ's Kingdom be
established, then all carnal weapons should cease, Isa. 2.4. Micah 4.3, 4. They
shall break their Swords into Mattocks, and their Spears into Sithes, etc. And
Isa. 11.9. Then shall none hurt nor destroy in all the Mountain of my Holiness,
etc. And when he came, the same he taught and practiced as begore, so did his
Apostles after him; for the weapons of his warfare are not carnal, etc. 2 Cor.
10.4. But he charged strictly, that his Disciples should be so far from
persecuting those that would not be of their Religion, that when they were
persecuted they should pray, Mat. 5. when they were cursed, they should bless:
the reason is, because they that are now Tares may hereafter become Wheat: tehy
who are now blind, may hereafter see; they that now resist him, may hereafter
receive him; they that are now in the Devils snare, in adversness to the Truth,
may hereafter come to repentance; they that are now Blasphemers, Persecutors
and Oppressors, as Paul was, may in time become Faithful as he; they that are
now Idolaters, as the Corinths once were, 1 Cor. 6.9. may hereafter become true
worshippers as they; they that are now no People of God, nor under mercy, as
the Saints sometimes were, 1 Pet. 2.20. may hereafter become the People of God,
and obtain mercy as they. Some come not till the eleventh hour, Mat. 20.6. if
those that come not till the last hour should be destroyed because they came
not at the first, then should they never come, but be prevented. And why do men
call themselves Christians, and do not the things Christ would?

CHAP. 7. Persecution for cause of Conscience, is against the profession and
practice of famous Princes.
First, we beseech your Majesty we may relate your own worthy Sayings, in your
Majesty's Speech at Parliament, 1609. Your Highness says, It is a sure Rule in
Divinity, that God never loves to plant his Church by violence and bloodshed,
etc. And in your Highness Apol. page 4. speaking of such Papists as took the
Oath, thus: I gave a good proof that I intended no persecution against them for
Conscience cause, but only desired to secured for civil obedience, which for
Conscience cause they were bound to perform. And page 60. speaking of Blackwel
the Archpriest, your Majesty says, It was never my intention to lay any thing
to the said Arch-Priests charge, as I have never done to any for cause of
Conscience, etc. And in your Highness Expos. on Revel. 20. printed 1588, and
after 1603. your Majesty truly writes thus: Sixthly, The compassing of the
Saints, and besieging of the beloved City, declares unto us a certain note of
a false Church to be Persecution; For they come to seek the Faithful, the
Faithful are those that are sought: the Wicked are the besiegers, the Faithful
be besieged.

Secondly, the saying of Stephen King of Poland: I am King of men, not of
Consciences; a Commander of bodies, not of Souls, etc.

Thirdly, the King of Bohemia has thus written: And notwithstanding the
success of the later time, wherein sundry opinions have been hatched about the
subject of Religion, may make one clearly discern with his eye, and (as it
were) touch with his finger, that according to the verity of holy Scripture,
and a Maxim heretofore held and maintained by the ancient Doctors of the
Church, That men's Consciences ought in no sort to be violated, urged or
constrained; and whenever men have attempted any thing by this violent
course, whether openly or by secret means, the issue has been pernicious, and
the cause of great and wonderful Innovasions in the principallest and mightiest
Kingdoms and Countries of all Christendom, etc. And further his Majesty says,
So that once more we do protest before God and the whole world, that from this
time forward we are firmly resolved, not to persecute or molest, or suffer to
be persecuted or molested any person whosoever for matter of Religion, no not
they that profess themselves to be of the Roman Church, neither to trouble or
disturb them in the exercise of their Religion, so they live conformable to the
Laws of the States, etc.

And for the practice of this, Where is Persecution for cause of Conscience,
except in England, and where Popery reigns? and not there neither in all
places, as appears by France, Poland, and other places; Nay, it is not
practiced among the Heathen that acknowledge not the true God, as the Turk,
Persian and others.

CHAP. 8. Persecution for cause of Conscience, is condemned by the ancient and
later Writers, yea, by Puritans and Papists.
HIllary against Anxentius, says thus: The Christian Church does not
persecute, but is persecuted; and lamentable it is to see the great folly of
these times, and to sigh at the foolish opinion of this world, in that men
think by humane aid to help God, and with worldly pomp and power to undertake
to defend the Christian Church. I ask of you Bishops, what help used the
Apostles in the publishing of the Gospel? With the aid of what Power did they
preach Christ, and converted the Heathen from their Idolatry to God? When they
were Imprisoned and lay in Chains, did they praise and give thanks to God for
any dignities, graces and favors received from the Court? Or, do you think
that Paul went about with Regal Mandates, or Kingly Authority to gather and
establish the Church of Christ? Sought he Protection from Nero Vespatian? etc.
The Apostles wrought with their hands for their own maintenance, traveling by
land and water from Town to City to preach Christ; yea, the more they were
forbidden, the more they taught and preached Christ. But now alas, humane help
must assist and protect the Faith, and give the same countenance; To, and by
vain and worldly honors do men seek to defend the Church of Christ, as if He
by his Power were unable to perform it.

The same, against the Arians: The Church now which formerly by enduring Misery
and Imprisonment, was known to be a true Church, does now terrific others, by
Imprisonment, Banishment, and Misery, and boasts that she is highly esteemed
of the world; whereas the true Church cannot but be hated of the same.

Tertul. ad Scapul. It agrees both with humane Equity and natural Reason, that
every man worship God uncompelled, and believe what he will; for, another man's
Religion or Blief neither hurts nor profits any man: neither beseems it
any Religion, to compel another to be of their Religion, which willingly and
freely should be embraced, and not by constraint: for as much as the Offerings
were required of those that freely and with a good will offered, and not from
the contrary.

Jerome. in Proaem lib. 4. in Jeremiam. Heresy must be cut off with the sword
of the Spirit; Let us strike through with the arrows of the Spirit all sons and
disciples of misled Heretics, that is with testimonies of holy Scriptures: The
slaughter of Heretics is by the Word of God.

Brentius on 1 Cor. 3. No man has power to make (or give) Laws to Christians,
whereby to bind their Consciences: For willingly, freely, and uncompelled, with
a ready desire and cheerful mind must those that come, run unto Christ.

Luther in his Book of the Civil Magistrate. The Laws of the Civil Government
extends no further than over the body or goods, and to that which is external:
for, over the Soul God will not suffer any man to rule, only He himself will
rule there: Therefore wheresoever the Civil Magistrate does undertake to give
Laws unto the Soul and Consciences of men, he usurpeth that Government to
himself which appertains to God, etc. The same upon 1 King. 6. In building of
the Temple there was no sound of Iron heard, to signify that Christ will have
in his Church a free and willing People, not compelled and constrained by Laws
and statutes. Again, he says upon Luke 22. It is not the true Catholic Church
which is defended by the Seculare arm or Humane power, but the false and
feigned Church; which although it carries the name of a Church, yet it denies
the power thereof. And upon Psalm. 17. he says, For the true Church of Christ
knows not Brachium Seculare, which the Bishops now a days chiefly use.
Again, in Postil. Dom. 1. post. Epiph. he says, Let not Christians be
commanded, but exhorted; for he that will not willingly do that whereunto he is
friendly exhorted, he is no Christian: Therefore those that do compel them that
are not willing, show thereby that they are not Christian Preachers, but
worldly Beadles. Again, upon 1 Pet. 3. he says, If the Civil Magistrate would
command me to believe thus or thus, I should answer him after this manner;
Lord, or Sir, look you to your Civil or worldly Government, your Power extends
not so far, to command any thing in Gods Kingdom, therefore herein I may not
hear you: For if you cannot suffer that any man should usurp Authority where
you have to command, how do you think that God should suffer you to thrust him
from his seat, and to seat your self therein?

The Puritans, as appears in their Answer to Admonit. to Parl. page 109. That
Papists nor others, neither constrainedly nor customally communicate in the
mysteries of Salvation. Also in their Supplication, printed, 1609, page 21,
etc. much they write for Toleration.

Lastly, the Papists, the inventers of Persecution; in a wicked Book lately set
forth, thus they write: Moreover, the means which Almighty God appointed his
Officers to use in the conversion of Kingdoms and People, was, Humility,
Patience, Charity, etc. Saying, Behold, I send you as sheep in the midst of
wolves, Mat. 10.16. He did not say, I send you as wolves among sheep, to kill,
imprison, spoil and devour those unto whom they were sent. Again, ver. 7. he
says, They to whom I send you will deliver you up in Councils, and in their
Synagogues they will scourge you; and to Presidents and to Kings shall you be
led for my sake: He does not say, You whom I send shall deliver the people
(whom you ought to convert) into Councils, and put them in Prisons, and lead
them to Presidents and Tribunal Seats, and make their Religion Felony and
Treason. Again, he says, ver. 12. When ye enter into the house, salute it,
saying, Peace be to this house: He does not say, You shall send Pursevants to
sansack and spoil the house. Again, lie says, Joh. 10. The good Pastor gives
his life for his sheep; the Thief comes not, but to steal, kill and destroy:
He does not say, the Thief gives his life for his sheep, and the good Pastor
comes not but to steal, kill and destroy, etc.

So that we holding our peace, our Adversaries themselves speak for us, or
rather for the Truth.

CHAP. 9. It is no prejudice to the Commonwealth if freedom of Religion were
suffered, but would make it flourish.
BE pleased not to hearken to men's leasings, but to what God and Experience
teaches in this thing: Abraham abode among the Canaanites a long-time, yet
contrary to them in Religion, Genesis 13.7, and 16.3. Again, He sojourned in
Gerar, and King Abimelech gave him leave to abide in his Land, Genesis 20, and
21.33, 34. Isaac also dwelt in the same Land, yet contrary in Religion, Genesis
26. Jacob lived twenty years in one house with his uncle Laban, yet differed in
Religion, Genesis 31. The People of Israel were 430 years in that famous Land of
Egypt, and afterward 70 years in Babylon, all which times they differed in
Religion from the States; Exodus 12. and 2 Chronicles. 36.

Come to the time of Christ, where Israel was under the Romans, where lived
diverse sects of Religions, as Herodians, Scribes and Pharifees, Saduces,
Libertines, Theudaeans, Samaritans, besides the common Religion of the Jews,
Christ and his Apostles, all which differed from the common Religion of the
State, which (is like) was the Worship of Diana, which almost the whole world
then worshipped, Act. 19.20. All these lived under the Government of Caesar,
being nothing-hurtfull to the State and Commonwealth; for they gave unto Caesar
that which was his; and for Religion to God, he left them to themselves, as
having no dominion therein. And when the enemies of the Truth raised up any
Tumults, the wisdom of the Magistrates most wisely appeased them, as Acts
18.14, etc. and 19.35, etc.

Again, be pleased to look into the neighbor Nations who tolerate Religion,
how their Wealths and States are governed; many sorts of Religions are in their
Dominions, yet no trouble of State, no Treason, no hinderance at all of any
good, but much prosperities brought unto their Countries, they having all one
harmony in matters of State, giving unto Caesar his due, and for Religion they
suffer one another.

If any object the Troubles of France, Germany, etc. We answer: They are such
as have been procured by the learned, but most bloody Jesuits, who seek to
establish their Religion by blood, for subversion of whom your Wisdoms are wise
to deal in: Yet be pleased not to let faithful Subjects be punished for their
wickedness: But let most severe Laws be made for the maintenance of Civil and
humane Peace and Welfare, as to your Majesty and others shall seem expedient.
And if it be well observed, it is the Learned that raised up all the bloody
Wars among the Princes of the Earth.

CHAP. 10. King are not deprived of any Power given them of God, when they
maintain Freedom for cause of Conscience.
WE know the Learned do persuade that Kings have power from God to maintain the
Worship and Service of God, as they have power to maintain Right and Justice
between man and man; For Christian Kings (say they) have the same power, that
the Kings of Israel had under the Law. For answer to which, First, let it be
observed, the Kings of Israel had never power from God to make new Laws, or set
up new Worships which Gods Word required not; nor to set high Priests, or
Spiritual Lords for the performance of the Services, other than such as God by
Moses expressly had commanded; and therefore the power of the Kings of Israel
will warrant to Kings to make or confirm Canons, set up new Worships, and
appoint Spiritual Lords and Law givers to the Conscience, and persecute all
that submit not to them, 2. Let it be well observed, only the Kings of Israel
had this power, but no other Kings, whose Commonwealths did flourish to them
and their seeds after them to many generations: and it must be granted that he
that is King of Israel now, which is Jesus Christ, (the truth of those typical
Kings of Israel) he has the power according to the proportion; the temporal
Kings had temporal power to compel all to the observation of those carnal or
temporal Commandments, Heb. 7.16. and 9.10. So Christ the Spiritual King, has
Spiritual Power to compel all to the observation of his Spiritual Commandments;
For when he came, himself said, Joh. 4.23. The hour comes, and now is, when
the true Worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth; for the
Father requires even such to worship him. If Christ be only King of Israel,
that sits upon David's Throne for ever, as he is, Acts 2.30. far be it from any
King to take Christ's seat from him. The Wisdom of God foresaw, that seeing the
Mysteries of the Gospel are such spiritual things, as no natural men (though
they be Princes of this world) can know them; he left not Kings and Princes to
be Lords and Judges thereof, seeing they are subject to err, but he left that
Power to his beloved Son, who could not err; and the Son left his only Deputy
the holy Ghost, and no moral man whatsoever, as your Highness worthily
acknowledges, in Apol. page 46. I utterly deny that there is any earthly
Monarch over the Church whose word must be a Law, and who cannot err by an
infallibility of spirit. Because earthly Kingdoms must have earthly Monarchs,
it does not follow the Church must have a visible Monarch too. Christ is the
Churches Monarch, and the holy Ghost his Deputy. The Kings of the Gentiles
reign over them; but you shall not be so, etc. Luke 22. Christ when he ascended
left not Peter with them to direct them into all truth, but premised to send
the holy Ghost unto them for that end, etc.

Further, these Learned allege the Commandments, Exodus 23.33. Deuteronomy. 7. and
Deuteronomy. 13. where Israel are commanded to destroy all the Inhabitants of the
Land, lest they entice them to serve their gods; and to slay all false
prophets, etc. These they collect from the time of the Law, for in the time of
the Gospel they have nothing to allege; for, Romans 13. makes nothing for their
purpose, Caesar being a Heathen King. For answer unto the places of Moses:
first, The sins of this people the Canaanites were full, and the Lord would
destroy them, and give their possessions unto the Israelites; but the sins of
the refusers of Christ, are not full until the end, or last hour, as before is
proved. 2. The Children of Israel had a special Commandment from the Lord to
destroy them; but the Kings of the Nations have no Command at all to destroy
the bodies of the contrary-minded; nay, they are expressly forbidden it, Mat.
13.29.3. The Canaanites would have rebelled against Israel, and have des;troyed
them; but the contraryminded will not rebel against their Kings, but give unto
them the things that belong unto them; not so much for fear, as of conscience:
and of this the GOD of Gods is Witness. 4. The Heads and Rulers of Israel could
command and compel the people to observe those carnal Rites and Ordinances of
the Law; even as CHRIST the Head and Ruler of Israel can compel to the
observations of his spiritual Ordinances of the Gospel; but the Heads of the
Nations cannot compel their Subjects to believe the Gospel; for Faith is the
gift of God; which Faith if they want, all they do in Gods Worship is sin, Romans
14.23. Heb. 11.6. Therefore they cannot compel any to worship, because they
cannot give them Faith; for which cause the Lord in wisdom saw it not meet to
charge Kings with a duty which they cannot perform, God will never require it
at their hands; the blood of the faithless and unbelieving shall be on their
own heads; He that will not believe shall be damned, Mark 16.16.

Again, Seeing it is true, as your Majesty well observes in your Highness
speech at Parl. 1609. That the Judicials of Moses were only fit for that time,
and those persons: And also it is confessed, the Law for Adultery, Theft, and
the like, is not now to be executed according to the Judicials of Moses, nor
directions for the Magistrates of the Earth to walk by; Why should these be any
directions for them, seeing also our Savior and his Apostles have taught the
contrary, as before has been proved? If all false Prophets should be now
executed, according to Deuteronomy. 13. the Kings of the Earth would not only be
deprived of many of their Subjects; but the Cities of their habitation, with
all the Inhabitants of the Cities, must be destroyed with the edge of the
sword; the cattle thereof, and all the spoil thereof must be brought into the
midst of the City, and the City and all therein by burnt with fire, be made a
heap of stones for ever, and never be built again: which God forbid such
execration should ever be seen. And if these Judicials of Moses be not now
directions for the Kings of Nations, we read not in all the Book of God, any
directions given to Kings to rule in matters of Conscience and Spiritual
Worship to God: But often we read that the Kings of the Nations shall give
their power to the Beast, and fight against the Lamb, Rev. 16.14. and 17.2, 12,
13, 14, 18. and 18. 3, 9. and 19.19. as lamentable experience has plainly
taught it.

Thus all men may see there is only deceit in these Learned men's comparisons of
the Kings of Israel in the Law, with the Kings of Nations in time of the
Gospel, in matters of Religion. Much might be written to prove, that Kings are
not deprived of their power by permitting of Freedom of Religion, but are
rather deprived thereof by using compulsion to the contrary-minded, and do sin
grievously, in causing them to sin for want of Faith; but this may suffice, the
Almighty blessing it with his blessing, which we humbly-beseech Him for his
Christ's sake, for his own Glory sake, for the prosperity and welfare of these
Kingdoms, and for the comfort of your faithful and true-hearted Subjects, that
are now distressed by long and lingering Imprisonments and otherwise; who of
conscience give unto Caesar the things which are his, Which is, to be Lord and
Lawgiver to the Bodies of his Subjects, and all belonging to their
outward-man, for the preservation of himself, and his good Subjects, and for
the punishment of the evil; In which preservation, the Church of Christ has a
special part, when their outward Peace is thereby preserved from the fury of
all adversaries; in which respect Princes are called Nursing Fathers, as many
are at this day, blessed be our Lord.

Oh be pleased to consider, why you should persecute us for humbly beseeching
you in the words of the King of kings, Mat. 22.21. To give unto God the things
which are Gods; which is, to be Lord and Lawgiver to the soul in that
Spiritual Worship and Service which he requires: If you will take away this
from God, What is it that is Gods? Far be it from you to desire to sit in the
Consciences of men, to be Lawgiver and Judge therein. This is Antichrists
practice, persuading the Kings of the Earth to give him their power to compel
all hereunto: But whosoever submits, shall drink of Gods fierce wrath Revel.
14.9, 10. You may make and mend your own Laws, and be Judge and Punisher of the
transgressors, thereof; but you cannot make or mend Gods Laws, they are perfect
already, Psalm. 19.7. You may not add nor diminish, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Rev. 22.18, 19.
Nor be Judge, nor Monarch of his Church, that is CHRIST'S Right; he left neither
you, nor any mortal man his Deputy, but only the holy Ghost, as your Highness
acknowledges, And whosoever erreth from the Truth, his Judgment is set down, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8, etc. Romans 2.8, etc. and the time thereof, Matthew. 13.40. and 25.31,
etc. Romans 2.16.

This is the Sum of our humble Petition, That your Majesty would be pleased,
not to persecute your faithful Subjects (who are obedient to you in all Civil
Worship and Service) for walking in the practice of what Gods Word requires of
us, for his Spiritual Worship, as we have Faith; knowing (as your Majesty truly
writes in your Medit. on Mat. 27. page 69. in these words) We can use no
Spiritual Worship or Prayer, that can be available to us without Faith.

This is the sum of our most humble Petition, thus manifoldly proved to be just.
O LORD GOD of Glory, raise up in this High Assembly, the heart of some
Nehemiah, of some Ebed-melech, That may open their mouths (for the Dumb, that
cannot speak for themselves) in a Truth so apparent as this is, lest it be
said, as Isa. 59.16, And when he saw that there was no man, he wondered that
none would offer himself; Therefore his Arm did save it, and his Righteousness
it self did sustain it.

And now we cease not to pray for the King, and his Son, and his Seed, and this
whole High and Honorable Assembly, now and always,

Calling the all-seeing God to witness, that we are your Majesty's loyal
Subjects not for fear only, but for Conscience sake. Unjustly called,
ANA-BAPTISTS

