Edmund Heming's Proposal, Humbly Offered for Raising Eight Millions of Money,
making Good the Qualifications mentioned in his Printed Papers delivered to the
Members of this Honorable House.
IN ENGLAND, according to the most Exact Computation, being an actual Survey in
the Year 1690. the Number of Houses were 1319215 From 1690. to the Year 1695.
is computed to be new built more 10000 Houses Built in all 1329215 Deduct for
Houses empty, and inhabited by Poor incapable of Paying 529215 There Remains
Houses capable of Paying Duties 800000

The Duty for Raising the beforementioned Sum of Eight Millions, is Proposed
to be laid upon one of the most General, Substantial, Useful, and Necessary
Commodities in England, Exempting none from the Duty but the Poor, viz. Upon
BEDS.

l. s. d. There may modestly be computed Five Beds to each of the 800000
Houses, at 2 d. per Week each Bed, will amount to in one Year 1733333 6 8 This
Duty laid for Four Years and a half, Raises 7800000 0 0 The Computation for
Quality may be easily laid so as in Four Years and a half may amount to more
200000 0 0 Which added together, makes 8000000 0 0

The Qualifications of this DUTY made Good.
That the Poor pay nothing to this Duty appears thus: They are to be Excepted
from the Duty, there being 529215 Houses Excused for that purpose. That the
Lands are all clear of this Duty, Is Obvious. That this Duty will neither raise
nor fall the Price of any Commodity, appears thus: The Beds are not Chargeable
in the Tradesmens Hands, but in the Possession of the Buyer: So that this
cannot injure the Seller, neither Raise nor Fall the Price of the Commodity.
That this Duty will yearly increase, and grow greater, appears thus: By the
increase of Families, new Buildings, by Marriages, and Tradesmen setting up in
their Callings, the yearly Increase may go near to discharge the Expense in
Collecting. That this Duty will bring no Tradesman with Complaints to the door
of this Honorable House, appears thus: No Seller of the Commodity being
chargeable with any Duty, more then for what Beds he makes use of in his own
Family. That the King cannot be Wronged of the Duty, nor the Subject
overcharged, appears thus; The Numbering of the Beds in each Family is so
easy, that it is almost impossible to make any Mistake, to the Prejudice of the
King or Subject. That this Duty may be Collected without multiplying of
Officers, appears thus; The Officers that are employed in receiving the Duty
for Births and Burials may Collect this, or those employed in the Land Tax.
Objection, The Numbering of the Beds will occasion Officers to come into our
Houses; that will not be endured. Answer, It is not intended, but the Assessors
shall go from House to House, and the Persons to be charged shall give an
account of the Number of their Beds, and make a true Entry: And if any Person
shall make a false Entry, he shall Forfeit, etc. Obj. It will be too heavy upon
Innkeepers, that lie under Hardships in Quartering Soldiers, etc. Answ. They
shall be charged for no more Beds than their own Families use.

If Two Pence per Week each Bed shall be thought too much, Charge each Bed at
One Penny per Week, which will amount to Four Millions; or laid but for Two
Years, comes to near Two Millions.


