MISCELLANEA; OR, A MIXTURE OF Choice Observations and Institutions, MORAL, and
DIVINE, Composed for Private use.

BEING The Product of spare hours, and the Meditations of J. H.

(...). LONDON, Printed for Thomas Helder, at the Sign of the Angel in
Little-Brittain. 1669.

TO THE Right Honorable ARTHUR, Lord Baron of Mount-Norris* and
Newport-Pagnel, Vicount of Valentia, Earl of Anglisey, Lord Treasurer of his
Majesty's Navy Royal, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council of
England, and Ireland, S. P. D.
My Lord,
YOur known indulgence, even of the meanest Essays to the advance of Piety,
Peace, and Prudence; gives boldness to these imperfect lines to implore your
Lordships Correction; not that this Glowworm means an addition of Light to so
great a Sun, or to instruct a person so transcendently qualified with all
knowledge: it only beggs the dew of your benign aspect, that it may live; and
if by its Glimmerings there may be an increase of light to the darker World, I
have my reward; however this Mite of my first endeavors owes its being to your
Lordships favor; upon whose Person, Family, and Concerns, that all kind of
Blessings may be multiplied, shall be the continued Intercession of him who
prays to be accepted

Your Lordships very Servant in the service of Christ J. H.

TO THE READER
Reader,
THe Influence of the times, giving more then wonted sp^r^ hours, I did Compose
this small Treatise for private use: But hoping this way to serve thee, when
other opportunities may be denied, I have published it. Thou have in it few and
plain words; I only beg it may not be read in haste, but weighed before thou
pass thy Censure; and if it please, and profit thee, I have my end; who am
willing upon any Christian account to be,

Thy Servant J. H.
July 1. 1669.
BOoks Printed for Thomas Helder, living at the Angel in Little Britain.
De jure Vniformitatis Ecclesiasticae; or, three Books of the Rights belonging
to an Uniformity in Churches. In which the chief things of the Laws of Nature,
and Nations, and of the Divine Law, concerning the Consistency of the
Ecclesiastical Estate with the Civil, are unfolded. By Hugh Davis, LL.B. Late
Fellow of New College in Oxford, and now Chaplain to the Lord Duke of
Buckingham. In Fol. Paradise Lost: A Poem, in ten Books. The Author John
Milton. In Quarto. Recreation for Ingenious Head-pieces: or a Pleasant Grove
for their wits to walk in, Of Epigrams, 700. Epitapths, 200. Fancies, a Number.
Fantasticks, Abundance.
With their Addition, Multiplication, and Division. Octavo. ENCHIRIDION,
Containing Institutions, DIVINE Contemplative. Practical.
MORAL Ethical. Oeconomical. Political.
Written by Francis Quarles. In Duodecimo.
MISCELLANEA, OR, A MIXTURE OF Choice Observations.
CHAP. I.
LEt God be the ALPHA and OMEGA, of every day, of every duty, of every act, and
of every enterprise; make him thy first morning thought, when thou do awake,
and thy last evening thought, when thou lie down to sleep; in all thy actions
and undertakings eye his command, implore his assistance, and aim at his
glory; so shall thy labors prosper, thy rest be peaceful, thy life pious, thy
death blessed, thy resurrection joyous, and thy eternal Being glorious.

CHAP. II.
When thou prayest let thy words be few, and endeavor rather a sense of thy
own necessity and divine bounty, then elegancy of phrase. God that knows thy
thoughts, needs not thy Eloquence for his information; and he that plentifully
feeds the young Ravens when they cry unto him, will not deny his Child daily
bread. Never prayer rightly made but was heard, never prayer was heard, but was
granted; and he who has proclaimed himself a God hearing prayer, has promised
to teach thee to pray.

CHAP. III.
SIn is a deceitful poison, fair in color, sweet in taste, but deadly in
operation; look not upon it with delight, lest it hurt thee; taste it not lest
it wound thee; feed not, on it, lest it kill thee; and as thy Saviors blood is
thy only cure, so thy sorrow for it, is the best cordial and thy greatest
comfort; for so often as thou rememberest thy sins past without grief, so often
thou repeatest those sins for not grieving; he that will not mourn for the evil
he has done, gives earnest for the evil he intends to do. Nothing can assuage
that fire which sin has made, but the water which repentance has drawn; and
more joy is promised to repentance, then to innocence: consider when thou
sinnest heaven is grieved, and can thou rejoice? hell rejoices, and can
thou be merry? thy best friends are provoked to turn thine enemies, and thy
worst enemies, are espoused for thy friends; how then comes sin to please thee,
when it displeases God thy Father, when it profits thee so little, and hurts
thee so much? it wounds thy soul, it decays thy health, it impairs thy estate,
it intailes a curse upon thy children unto the fourth generation; in short, it
will exclude thee from all felicity, it will involve thee in all misery, and
for ever ruin thee: Oh therefore sin not.

CHAP. IV.
BEfore the undertaking of any design, weigh well the glory and advantage of
it, with the danger and disgrace that may ensue; if the glory outweigh the
danger, it is cowardice to forbear it; if the danger outweigh the glory, it is
rashness to attempt it; if the balance stand equally poised, let thy own
genious cast it; if thou doubt the lawfulness of thy action, commend it in thy
devotion to divine blessing; if it be lawful, thou shall find thine heart
encouraged by thy Prayer; if unlawful, thy Prayer will be discouraged by thy
heart: that action is not warrantable, that either blusheth to beg a blessing,
or having succeeded dares not return thanksgiving.

CHAP. V.
FLatter not thy self in thy faith toward God, if thou want charity to thy
neighbor, and think not thou have charity to thy neighbor, if thou want
faith toward God; where these two are not together, they are both wanting, and
both dead, if once divided. In thy faith it is not whether it be strong or weak,
but whether it be true; God has not promised eternal life to him that
believes much, but to him that believes; it is not the eldest shall have the
whole inheritance, Gods children are all coheirs. In thy charity it is not how
much, nor to whom, but with what heart thou give; he that gives all he has,
and yet retains a secret desire of keeping part, though he has parted with
all has given nothing at all. God loves a cheerful giver. Not to give to the
poor is to take from him; and to deny God the loan of what he has given thee,
and of what is in his power to take from thee, not to feed the hungry when thou
have it, is the utmost of thy power to kill him; that therefore thou may
avoid both sacrilege and murder, be charitable; and remember there is no soil
so fruitful as the poor man's back, and belly: What thou give in charity, will
return an hundred fold into thy own bosom, or entayle a blessing upon thy
childrens children.

CHAP. VI.
GIve thine heart to thy Creator, reverence to thy superiors, honor to thy
Parents, thy bosom to thy friend; give diligence to thy calling, and ear to
good counsel; give alms to the poor, and glory to God; forgive him that
ignorantly offends thee, and him that having wittingly offended thee seeks
forgiveness of thee; forgive him that has forcibly abused thee, and him that
has fraudulently betrayed thee; forgive all thine enemies, but least of all
thy self: he is below himself, that is not above an injury, and he that spares
himself, teaches God not to spare him. Give and it shall be given thee,
forgive and it shall be forgiven thee; to give and forgive is the sum of all
Christianity.

CHAP. VII.
IN thy apparel avoid profuseness, singularity, and gaudiness; let it be
decent, and suited to the quality of thy place, and purse. Too much punctuality,
and too much morosity, are the extremes of pride; be neither too early in the
fashion, nor too long out of it, nor too precisely in it; what custom has
civilized is become decent, till then ridiculous. Where the eye is the Jury,
thy apparel is the evidence; the body is the shell of the soul, apparel is
the husk of that shell, the husk often tells you what the kernel is; seldom
does solid wisdom dwell under fantastic apparel; neither will the pantaloone
fancy be immured within the walls of grave habit; the fool is known by his pyed
coat.

CHAP. VIII.
LEt thy discourse be pleasing and profitable; be cautious what thou speak,
to whom, how, and when; let what thou speak be neither false, nor
impertinent, nor too much; not false, for God is the Author of truth, the Devil
is the Father of lies. If the telling of a truth shall endanger thy life or
credit, the Author of truth will protect thee from that danger, or reward thee
for thy damage; if the telling a lie may secure thy life or credit, the father
of lies will beguile thee of thy gains, or traduce the security; better by
losing of thy life to save it, then by saving of thy life to lose it; however,
better thou perish then the truth. Be sure thy discourse be to purpose, lest
thou be counted foolish, and thy discourse a burden; let it not be too much,
God has given thee two ears and one Tongue, to the intent thou should hear
much, and say but little; what thou hear thou receivest, what thou speak,
thou give; it is more glorious to give, more profitable to receive; and it is
less shame to be lost in a blushing silence, then to be found in too bold
Eloquence. Suit thy discourse to thy company: all meats please not every palate,
all kind of discourse pleases not every company. Neatly entice every one to
that he knows, to that which likes him best, and may profit him most; so shall
thy company be desired, and thy discourse prized; but cloth not thy language
either with obscurity, or affectation, in the one thou discoverest too much
darkness, in the other too much lightness. He that speaks from the
understanding to the understanding does best: and know when to speak, least
whilst thou show wisdom in not speaking thou bewray thy folly in too long
silence; if thou art a fool, thy silence is wisdom; if thou art wise, thy long
silence is folly. As too many words from a fool's mouth gives one that is wise
no leave to speak, so too long silence in him that is wise, gives a fool
opportunity of speaking, and makes thee guilty of his folly. To condude, if
thou be not wise enough to speak, be so wise as to hold thy peace.

CHAP. IX.
IF thou would have a good servant, let thy servant find a wife Master; let
his food, rest, and wages, be seasonable; let his labor, recreation, and
attendance, depend upon thy pleasure. Be not angry with him too long, lest he
think thee malicious, nor too soon, lest he conceive thee rash, nor too often,
lest he count thee humorous; be not too fierce lest he love thee not, nor too
remiss, lest he fear thee not, nor too familiar, lest he prize thee not; in
brief, whilst thou give him the liberty of a servant, beware thou lose not
the Majesty of a Master; rebuke his faults in private, public reproof hardens
him; if he be past a youth, strike him not: he is not fit for thy service, that
after wise reproof, will either deserve strokes, or bear them: the wages he
has earned detain not from him, lest God withhold thy wages from thee; if he
complain to thee, hear him, lest he complain to heaven where he will be heard;
if he hunger for thy sake, thou shall not prosper for his sake. The poor man's
penny is a plague in the rich man's purse.

CHAP. X.
IF thou be a servant deal justly by thy Master, as thou desire thy servant
should deal by thee: where thou art commanded be obedient, where not commanded
be provident, let diligence be thy credit, let faithfulness be thy Crown, let
thy Masters credit be thy care, and let his welfare be thy content; let thine
eye be single, and thine heart be humble. Be sober that thou may be
circumspect; he that in sobriety is not his own, being drunk whose is he? be
not contentious nor lascivious, the one shows a turbulent heart, the other an
idle brain. A good servant is a great master; and the best way to become a
great and good master, is to be a good and faithful servant; he that is
faithful in a little, shall be ruler over much.

CHAP. XI.
MArry not too young, and when thou art too old marry not, lest thou be fond in
the one, and dote in the other, and repent of both; let thy liking ripen before
thou love, let thy love advise before thou choose, and thy choice be fixed
before thou marry. Remember that the whole happiness or unhappiness of thy life
depends upon this one act; nothing but death can dissolve this knot. He or she
that weds in have, repents oft-times by leisure. Whoever repents him of his own
act, is or was a fool by his own confession. In thy choice, or rather in thine
acceptance of an husband, let him be one that is discreet, and wise, lest when
thou have him, disallowing his parts, thou despise his person, and make thy
life uncomfortable; let his breeding and behavior be answerable to thy
quality, and disposition, lest thou be weary of him at home, and ashamed of him
abroad. Marry not too far above, nor too far below thy quality and fortune,
lest in the one thou be upbraided with thy first condition, or lest in the
other thou expect more observance then will be given, both which create
discontent. Let not his years be short of thine, nor far exceed them; if he be
much elder, he may fancy thee, but thou will take no pleasure in him; if he be
younger, the burden of business will lie upon thy shoulder; thou will dote on
him, but he will disregard thee. By no means choose one that is given to excess
in drinking: the drunkard is qualified for all vice, and a stranger to all
virtue; with him, Blasphemy is Wit, Oaths are Rhetoric, Adultery but a
Frolic, Incest a venial sin, Quarrels are Manhood, Murder is Valor, Friends
are Enemies, and Secrets are Proclamations. Noah discovered that being drunk
which he had kept secret six hundred years. Lot did that being Drunk for which
he did abhor himself being sober. Let not his recreation be his business, for
business is elder brother to recreation, and complement, and ought firstly to
be attended, otherwise folly and penury will be the issue of both. As near as
may be choose one of thy own complexion, and disposition; for where nature has
put antipathy, marriage may, but seldom does create a perfect Union. The
severe melancholy humor condemns the frolic Sanguine complexion, for too
much lightness, and vain; the Sanguine complexion condemns that for too much
Austerity; these but seldom do agree. If thou marry'st him only for his estate,
thou marry'st his estate, not him; if his estate be small, his prudence and
providence with thy help will increase it: There is more danger of wasting an
estate left us, then of impairing an estate we have gotten; he that knows how
to get, knows best how to keep, and how to improve what he has gotten. Be
careful that he be religious, and that he be of thy own religion. That enmity
that is grounded upon difference in religion, is very hardly reconciled, has
sometimes parted, and often disturbed near Relations. Be not overcurious in
his person, so it be comely; if he be deformed, upon view of fairer objects
thou may dislike him; if exceeding fair, others may fancy him to thy hurt.
Let him have no hereditary disease; for that disease we bring with us into the
world, does usually make our life uncomfortable in it, and take us out of it.
If thou meet with such a one as is here described, wisely accept him, and yield
him a suitable respect to his quality; too great a reservation will expose thee
to the sentence of pride; too easy access will condemn thee to the censure of
folly. Things too hardly endeavored discourage the seeker, too easily obtained
disparage the thing sought for, too easily got is lowly prized; when thou have
him, let him know thou art his, and that he may safely confide in thee, and
commit his secrets to thee, even as to his own heart; thou can not enjoy
peace so long as he is discontent; neither can he be at rest, so long as thou
art disquiet; you are now no more two but one. Think not to enrich thy self out
of his estate without his consent, or privacy, it is the way to ruin both. He
is no good husband that denies his Wife convenient allowance, answerable to his
estate and quality; she is no discreet Wife, that desires more. In short, an
understanding Husband makes a discreet Wife, and she an happy Husband.

CHAP. XII.
DEliberate long before thou consecrate a friend; and with four sorts of men
have no serious friendship, with the Ungrateful, the Multiloquious, and the
Coward, and the Passionate angry Man; the first cannot prize thy favors, the
second will not keep thy counsel, the third dare not vindicate thy honor, the
fourth is hardly kept and quickly lost; but if thou find one whom thy
impartial judgment concludes worthy of thy bosom, know thou have found a
jewel, receive him joyfully, and entertain him wisely; be cautious what thou
say, and courteous in what thou do: observe his inclination; if thou find
him weight, lodge him in a faithful bosom, impart thy secrets boldly to him,
and mingle thy thoughts with his, he is thy very self, and use him so; yet be
neither rudely familiar, nor rashly exceptious; the one will breed contention,
the other contempt; if thou firmly think him faithful, thou make him so; the
more trust and confidence thou do repose in him, the greater obligation do
thou put upon him, to be true to thee; and be to him as thou desire he should
be to thee, disclose not his secrets, flatter him not in his mistakes, deny not
his reasonable requests, let nothing but death part thy friend and thee.

CHAP. XIII.
WHat thou desire, consider thoroughly before thou prosecute, weigh the
conveniences with the inconveniences, the charge of the Plow, with fullness of
the Barn; when thou art come to a resolve, neither delay execution, nor bewray
thy intention. Delays are dangerous, and he that discovers himself, till he
has made himself master of his desires, lays himself open to his own ruin,
and makes himself prisoner to his tongue; a word unspoken, is like the Sword in
the scabbard, thine, if vented, thy Sword is in another hand; if thou desire
to be held wise, be so wise as to hold thy Tongue.

CHAP. XIIII.
LEt that Table which God has pleased to give thee please thee; accustom thy
palate to that which is most usual consulting rather thy health then thy
appetite. He that delights in varieties, must often feed displeased, and
sometimes lie at the mercy of a dear market. Common food nourishes best,
delicates please most; the sound stomach prefers neither: what art thou the
worse for the last years plain diet, or what now the better for thy last great
feast? if thou be content with a little, thou have enough; if thou complain,
thou have too much. In the entertainment of thy friend, let thy provision be
solid, and fuller of substance then of Art; be wisely frugal in thy
preparation, and freely cheerful in thy entertainment; if thy guests be right,
it is enough, if not, it is too much; too much is vaninity, enough is a feast.

CHAP. XV.
BE very circumspect in the choice of thy companions. Those we frequently
converse with, have a great influence upon us; either to improve and better us,
or to make us worse. Joseph by being in Pharaoh's Court, learned to swear by
the life of Pharaoh. And ever associate thy self with thy betters. In the
society of thine equals thou shall find more pleasure, in the society of thy
superiors thou will find more profit; to be the best in the company is the way
to grow worse; the best means to grow better is to be the worst there. And keep
no company with the flatterer, the talebearer, and him that is branded with
notorious vice; by the flatterer thou can take no just account of thy self,
for he is ever silent at thy faults, does sooth thee in thy frailties, and
excuse thee in thy follies. From the talebearer thou can receive no just
account of thy neighbor: he that loves to carry tales, reports them after his
own humor, and to please him he makes his report to. If thou keep company with
the third, thou will be supposed to partake with him in his vice, or at least
to connive at him; for be as reserved as thou can be, yet such as thy
companions are, such will thou be thought be be.

CHAP. XVI.
LEt thy recreation be moderate, seasonable, lawful, and such as does become
thee; let it be moderate, therefore spend not too much of thy strength, nor too
much of thy time, nor too much of thy estate, in recreation, thy time is short
and precious: Eternity depends upon thy good improvement of this moment;
yesterday cannot be recalled, and to morrow is not sure. Spend not too much of
thy strength, the end and use of recreation being to sweeten thy rest, and to
renew thy strength for labor. He that wastes his estate to recreate himself,
makes a sport of his own ruin. Let thy recreation be seasonable and a servant
to thy business, lest thou be a slave to it; and remember the servant must not
be greater then his master. Let it be lawful. He that makes a jest of that
which is unlawful, shall be punished in earnest. And lastly, see that thy
recreation be such as does become thee. It becomes not the grave Senator to
dance the Antic, nor Ladies of honor to frisk about a May Pole.

CHAP. XVII.
IF ever God vouchsafe thee Children, and thou desire to see them virtuous, let
them not see their Parents vices. Thou can not rebuke that in them, which
they behold practiced in thee. Till reason be ripe, examples teach more then
precepts: Such as thy behavior is before thy Childrens face, such commonly is
theirs behind thy back; be sure thy passion miscall them not, lest thou
prophecy their fortunes, and curse them not, lest thy curse return from
whence it came; curses sent in the room of blessings are dtiven back with a
double vengeance: If thou have a Son, and an estate for him, keep him not too
short, lest he think thou live too long; and what thou allowest him, let him
receive from thy hand as gift, not from thy Tenants as Rent: keep the reins of
thy estate in thy own hand, lest thou forsake the sovereignty of a Parent, he
forget the reverence of a Child; let his liberty be grounded upon thy
permission, and keep him within the compass of thy instruction; let him feel
thou have the curb, though occasion urge thee not to check; give him the
choice of his own Wife, if he be wise; counsel his affection rather then cross
it, if thou be wise, lest his marriage bed be made in secret, or depend upon
thy grave: If he be given to lavish company, stave him off with lawful
recreation; be cheerful with him, that he may love thy presence, wink at small
faults that thou may gain him; be not always chiding lest thou harden him,
neither knit thy brow too often, lest thou dishearten him. Remember the
discretion of a Parent often times prevents the destruction of a Child. Love not
thy Children too unequally; if thou do, show it not, lest thou make the one
proud, the other envious, and both fools. If nature has made a difference, it
is the part of a tender parent to help the weakest; that trial is not fair
where affection is judge. And choose such employment for thy son, as may stand
with his fancy and thy judgment, lest thy country loose a servant, and thou a
child. To conclude, so behave thy self amongst thy children that they may fear
thy displeasure, rather then thy correction; too much familiarity will embolden
them, too little countenance will discourage them; when thou reprovest them do
it in season, when thou correctest them do it not in passion. As a wise child
makes happy parents, so wise parents make happy children.

CHAP. XVIII.
INsult not over misery, nor deride infirmity, nor despise deformity; the first
shows thy inhumanity, the second thy folly, the third thy pride: he that made
him miserable, made thee happy, that thou might lament him; he that made him
weak, made thee strong to support him; he that made him deformed, gave thee
favor to be humbled. He that is not sensible of another unhappiness, is a
living Stone; but he that makes misery the object of his triumph, is an
incarnate Devil. Take no pleasure in the folly of an idiot, nor in the fancy of
a Lunatic, nor in the frenzy of a drunkard; make them the object of thy pity,
not of thy pastime; when thou do behold them, consider how thou art beholding
to him that suffered not thee to be like unto them: it is not thy merit, but
Gods favor alone, that puts a difference between thee and them.

CHAP. XIX.
Has Fortune dealt thee ill Cards, let wisdom make thee a good Gamester. In a
fair Gayle every fool may sail, but wise behavior in a storm commends the
wisdom of a Pilot. To bear adversity with an equal mind, is both sign and glory
of a brave spirit. As there is no worldly gain without some loss, so there is
no worldly loss without some gain; if thou have lost thy wealth, thou have lost
some trouble with it; if thou art degraded of thy honor, thou art likewise
freed from the stroke of envy; if sickness has blurred thy beauty, it has
delivered thee from pride; set the allowance against thy loss, and thou shall
find no great loss. He loses little or nothing who keeps the favor of his
God, and the peace and freedom of his conscience. But have thou lost any thing,
advise with thy self whether thy loss be recoverable; if it be, use all such
speedy and lawful means (the violence and unseasonableness whereof may not
disadvantage thee in thy pursuit) to recover it; if it be not recoverable,
endure with patience what thou can not recover with pains. He that carnally
afflicts his soul for the loss of a transitory good, casts away the kernel
because he has lost the shell.

CHAP. XX.
LEt not the falling of Salt, the crossing of an Hare, the chattering of a Pie,
the flying of a Crow, or the crying of a Cricket trouble thee; they portend no
evil but what thou fear; he is ill acquainted with himself that knows not
his own fortunes better then they; he has little knowledge of God, and less
faith in him, who knows not his power, or believes not his providence to be
above the portent of these silly things: if evil follow, it is the punishment
of thy superstition, not the fulfilling of their prediction; all things are
lucky to thee, if thou love God, and live in his fear; nothing but is ominous
to the Superstitious.

CHAP. XXI.
AS thou desire the love of God and man, beware of Pride, it is a tumor in
thy mind, that breaks and poisons all thy actions; it is a worm in thy treasure
that eats and ruins thy estate; it loves no man, is beloved of no man; it
disparages virtue by detraction; it disrewards goodness in it self, by vain
glory; the friend of the flatterer, the mother of envy, the nurse of fury, the
baud of luxury, the sin of Devils, and the Devil in mankind: it hates
Superiors, it scorns inferiors, it owns no equals; 'till thou hate it, God
hates thee; therefore be humble. The voice of humility is Gods music, the
silence of humility is Gods Rhetoric; humility enforces, where neither virtue,
nor strength, nor reason, can prevail. Would thou be pleasing to God, and
worthily praised of men, be humble; would thou lay a sure foundation for
preferment, and lasting glory, be humble. That foyl which lies low, is ever
most fruitful, and of greatest value. The tall Cedars are exposed to the strong
gusts of every wind, when the low trees grow secure in the valley. Humility is
the root, and nourisher of virtue, pride is the root of vice and ruin.

CHAP. XXII.
OF all endowments which God has given the sons of men, wisdom is the
principal: seriously to deliberate before we attempt any thing; and having
resolved, neither to delay, nor unseasonably to hasten execution; but accutely
to compare times, persons, places, and things, together. That may be seasonable
now, which will not be so hereafter; that may please and profit this person,
which will displease another; but if thou would be wise, see that the
foundation upon which, the rule by which, and the end for which thy designs
are undertaken, be right; so shall thou either find success in thy attempt, or
a blessing in thy disappointment. Be careful to know, and take thy opportunity
to foresee and prevent future danger, but especially to secure thy principal
concerns, through all changes. The heart being whole, the rest of the body will
do the better; the principal being safe, other damages are recoverable. In
short, be as wise as Serpents, and harmless as Doves. Wisdom without innocence,
is knavery; innocence without wisdom is foolery; the innocence of the Dove,
corrects the subtilty of the Serpent, the subtilty of the Serpent, instructs
the innocence of the Dove; what God has joined, let no man separate; and if
thou desire to be wiser, yet, think not thy self yet wise enough,; if thou
desire to improve knowledge in thy self, despise not the instruction of
another. He that instructs him that thinks himself wise enough, has a fool to
his Scholar; he that thinks himself wise enough to instruct himself, has a
fool to his Master. If thou be not a Prometheus to advise before thou do, be
an Epimetheus, to examine what thou have done; when want of advice has brought
forth an improvident act, the act of examination may produce a profitable
repentance.

CHAP. XXIII.
Have thou any business of consequence in agitation, let thy care, and
endeavor to accomplish it, be reasonable and seasonable. Continual standing
bent weakens the Bow, too hasty drawing breaks it. Put off thy cares with thy
clothes, so shall thy rest strengthen thy labor, and thy labor sweeten thy
rest. And in the diligent use of such lawful means as may conduce to effect thy
design, have an eye to him who alone speeds every action after the pleasure of
his own will: remember the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the
strong; it is not the prediction of those things that are accounted ominous, nor
the influence of the stars so much insisted on, in Judicial Astrology, nor thy
best endeavors, that gives the certain event; but every man's Judgment is from
the Lord; commit thy way therefore unto him, and he will give thee the desire
of thine heart; acquiesce in that issue he gives to all thy endeavors, so
shall thou be the subject of peace, and the object of his favor, whose loving
kindness is better then life it self.

CHAP. XXIV.
RAther be doing nothing to purpose, then be idle, that the Devil may find thee
doing; for whom he finds idle, he imployes. The Bird that sits, is easily shot,
when flyers escape the fowler. Consider the heavens are in continual motion,
the winds blow, and the rivers hasten from whence they came; and shall Man be
idle, who has such an unwearied principle of Action, as is his immortal
spirit! Idleness is the dead Sea that swallows up all virtue, and the self-made
sepulcher of a living man. The Idle man is the Devils hireling, whose livery is
rags, whose diet and wages are Famine and diseases. Idleness is prodigal of
precious time, dulleth the understanding, nourishes corrupt humors in the
body, weakens the brain, and displeases God; there fore be not idle.

CHAP. XXV.
REad not Books alone, but Men; and that thou may better understand the
persons thou do converse with, know there be three principles or motives
which move and incline most men in their principal actings. The first and
greatest is Religion: if thou find a person zealously affected to Religion,
thou shall ever find this person active to propagate and promote his Religion;
and although he may be interrupted by the influence of times, or necessity of
his condition, yet this is the mark he aims at, and as far as opportunity
serves him, he will serve it. The second grand principle of Action like to
this, yet inferior, is temporal interest. Interest will not lie; every wise
man will be true to his own interest. If ever thou discern the interest of such
a one wherein it lies, thou may be sure where to find him; for all his
actions are but as so many circumferential lines, which ever center in this
point. If his interest lie in honor, he will ever be projecting what may
preserve and increase his honor; the like of wealth, pleasure, etc. The third
thing which does sway and bias men in their actings is their natural
inclination and complexion. The Melancholy is ever austere, reserved, silent,
envious, not easily provoked to anger, but if angry, hard to be reconciled,
Superstitious, Jealous; and seldom merry, but when merry, very merry; black and
swarthy. The Sanguine is affable, courteous, pleasant and merry, not easily
provoked to anger, nor long continuing so, fair and ruddy. The Phlegmatic is
dull and slow in all his motions of few words, not curious, but plain and
peaceable, not amorous, but rather the contrary, pale, and white, and inclined
at least to be corpulent. The Choleric is unconstant, free, and liberal, soon
angry, and soon pleased, not to be trusted with secrets, quick of invention,
but not so sollid in judgment, bold, audacious, and given to boasting, of a
yellow or tawny color. Now as any person partakes of any of these, more or
less, so is he more or less subject to the qualities and conditions before
mentioned; and although the bias of his condition, the genious of the time,
the influence of his companions, or the necessity of his employment, may draw,
or drive, him besides his natural temper, yet in this he dwells, and according
to this he is and acts most certainly, and constantly. If thou be to deal with
a Chollerick man, and stir him perchance to some passionate out-stray or
indecency, neither let thy passion kindle with his, nor be dismayed; his good
nature, when the hot blood retires, will be apt to yield and gratify so much
the more; if with a timorous man, thou may awe him with thy interest in some
grandee; if with a Melancholy man, thou may oblige him by intrusting him
with some secret, whereby thou will not only create in him a confidence of thy
being his friend, but thou will make him firmly thine; if with a covetous man,
thou must gain him with gifts, or with hopes at least of gaining by thee. And
mark it, thou shall find for the most part, young men prodigal, the middle-aged
proud, and old men covetous. If thy design be upon a proud man to make him
thine, let him know thine and the worlds admiration of him; this will oil and
supple him, that thou may bend him at thy pleasure; but to the Drunkard
commit no secrets, and of the Envious have a care; for who can stand before
Envy? The injured man does sometimes forget; but the envious man will never
cease secretly to persecute.

CHAP. XXVI.
IF thou be strong enough to encounter with the times, keep thy station; if
not, shift a foot, to gain advantage of the times. He that to prevent a thief
acts the beggar, is not the poorer. It is a great part of wisdom sometimes to
seem a fool; he least fayls in his designs that can meet time in its own way;
yet it is not always safe to comply with every thing the time brings forth,
but adhere to the undoubted principles of equity and reason, always and in
every thing using moderation; for as violence never holds long, so it
exposes the person guilty of it to many inconveniences.

CHAP. XXVII.
BE not censorious, for thou know not whom thou judge. It is a more
dextrous error to speak well of an evil man, then ill of a good man; and safer
for thy judgment to be led by simple charity, then by uncharitable wisdom. And
before thou reprehend another, take heed thou art not culpable in what thou
go about to reprehend. He that cleanses a blot with blotted fingers, makes
a greater blurr. He may tax others with privilege that has not in himself
what others may tax; the censorious will ever be censured. And censure not him
whom the looser world calls Puritan; if he be an Hypocrite, God that knows him
will reward him; if zealous, God that loves him will revenge him; if he be
good, he is good to Gods glory, if evil, let him be evil at his own charges; he
that judges shall be judged.

CHAP. XXVIII.
IN thy pleading with another, ever use calmness; for the stronger thy passion
is, the weaker will be thy argument, and thou the less able to maintain it. Let
the end of thy Argument be rather to discover a doubtful truth, then a
commanding wit: in the one thou shall gain substance, in the other f^oth. Covet
to be truths Champion, at least to hold her Colors. He that pleads against the
truth, takes pains to be overthrown; or if a conqueror, gains but vain glory
by the conquest. Though time or argument may seem to cut the sinews, and clip
the wings of truth, yet even then when it seems dead, it rises as immortal,
with greatest luster, and is that firm center wherein all things repose, that
chart by which every wise Pilot does sail, that rock whereon we rest, that Lamp
which lights our paths that we may go aright, that shield which will defend
us, and that foundation whereon we may safely build all our actions and
expectations.

CHAP. XXIX.
LEt thy religious fast be a voluntary abstinence; not so much from flesh, as
from fleshly thoughts. God is pleased with the fast, which gives to another,
what thou denyest to thy self, when the affliction of thy own body is the
repairing of thy Brothers. He fasts truly that abstaines sadly, grieves really,
gives cheerfully and forgives charitably. And in all religious acts, for thy
manner of performance, be not too much wedded to thy own opinion; but in those
ceremonies of the Church which remain indifferent, do according to the
constitution of that Church where thou art. The God of Order, and Unity, who
created both Soul, and Body, expects Unity in the one, and order in both. It Is
not ceremony, but substance, that best pleases God, who being a Spirit
delights most in that service, which is most spiritual and according with his
will revealed in his word.

CHAP. XXX.
BEware of him that is slow to anger. Anger when it is long in coming, is the
stronger when it comes, and the longer kept; abused patience turns to fury.
When fancy is the ground of passion, that understanding which composes the
fancy, qualifies the passion; but when judgment is the ground, the memory is
the Recorder, and this passion is long retained.

CHAP. XXXI.
HE that professes himself thy open enemy, arms thee against the evil he
means thee; but he that dissembles himself thy friend, when he is thy secret
enemy, strikes beyond caution, and wounds above cure: from the first thou may
deliver thy self; from the last good Lord deliver thee.

CHAP. XXXII.
SEarch into thy self, before thou accept the ceremony of honor: if thou art a
Palace honor (like the Sunbeams) will make thee more glorious, if thou art a
dunghill the Sun may shine upon thee, but not sweeten thee; thy Prince may give
thee honor, but not make thee honorable; if virtue prefer thee, virtue will
preserve thee; but that honor which thy wealth has purchased, is neither
lasting, nor thy own, but is pinned upon the wheel of Fortune; when the wheel
shall turn, thy honor falls, and thou remainest an everlasting monument of thy
own ambitious folly. What money creates, money preserves; if thy wealth decay,
thy honor dies; and consider, that is but a slippery happiness which fortunes
can give, and frowns take away; and not worth the owning, which a nights Fire
can melt, or a rough sea can drown; honor thy Creator, and he will give thee
honor that will endure for ever.

CHAP. XXXIII.
IF thou study Law or Physic, endeavor to know both, and to need neither;
temperate diet, moderate and seasonable labor, rest, and recreation, with Gods
blessing, will save thee from the Physician; a peaceable disposition prudent
and just behavior, will secure thee from the Law; yet if necessity compel,
thou may use both; they that use either otherwise then for necessity, abuse
themselves into weak bodies, and light purses; they are good remedies, bad
business, and worse recreations.

CHAP. XXXIV.
BE not so mad as to alter that countenance which thy Creator made thee;
remember it was the work of his hands; if it be bad, how dare thou mend it?
If it be good, why do thou mend it? Art thou ashamed of his work, and proud
of thy own? God made thy face, to be known by; why desire thou to be known by
an other; it is a shame to adulterate modesty, but more to adulterate nature;
lay by thy art, and blush not to appear what he blusheth not to make thee; it
is better to be his picture then thy own; that addition which thou make of
thy own adds to thy deformity, and provokes God to make thee yet more deformed.

CHAP. XXXV.
IMp not thy wings with the Churches feathers, lest thou fly to thy own ruin.
That God who chose the Tribe of Levi for his Inheritance, promised to be
theirs, and will protect them; if thou deprive him of his blessing, he will
pursue thee with his curse. Impropriations are bold Metaphors, but being
continued are deadly Allegories. One foot of Land in Capite encumbers the whole
estate. The Eagle snatched a cole from the Altar, but it fired her Nest.

CHAP. XXXVI.
BE not unstable in thy resolutions, nor various in thy actions, nor unconstant
in thy affections; so deliberate that thou may perform; so perform, that thou
may persevere. Mutability is the badge of infirmity.

CHAP. XXXVII.
SIt down content with Gods allowance, what ever thy condition be; he knows
best what is best for thee; let thy endeavor be to please him in what thou
do, and to be pleased with what he does. Do thou want things necessary,
grumble not, perchance it was necessary for thee to want; endeavor lawfully to
supply it; if God bless not thy endeavors, bless him that knows what is
necessary for thee: have thou but a little, make it not less by murmuring; have
thou enough, make it not too much by unthankfulness; he that does not
contentedly and thankfully accept the least favor he has received, is
unworthy of the least favor he can receive; and that thou may the better be
content; consider thy own merit, thou do enjoy far more and far better then
thou can deserve; and remember thy self with all thy concerns to be at the
wise, gracious, and absolute dispose of the omnipotent and omniscient God,
whose purposes thou can not vary with all thy fretting and discontent;
thereby thou do only make thy being the more uncomfortable, and add to thy
burden; do thou look on thy right hand, and find some above thee; look on thy
left, and thou shall see some below thee; but if thou have no inferior, wait
but a while and thou shall have no superior; the grave (which hastneth to come
upon all living) makes all equal, and puts a period to all thy pressures.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
ARt thou subject to any great vanity, or secret folly, nourish it not; if it
will be entertained, encourage it not; if it grow stronger yet, more strongly
strive against it; if too strong, pray against it; if it weaken not, join
fasting to the prayer; if it shall continue, add perseverance to both; if it
decline not, add patience to all, and thou have conquered it; however blabb not
thy folly, lest thou appear impudent; nor boast of it, lest thou seem insolent;
every man's vanity ought to be his greatest shame, and every man's folly ought to
be his greatest secret.

CHAP. XXXIX.
TAke heed thou harbor not that vice called Envy, lest another happiness be
thy torment, and Gods blessing thy curse; it being the property of envy ever to
malign an others prosperity. Virtue corrupted with vainglory glory turns
Pride; Pride poisoned with malice becomes envy: join therefore humility with
thy virtue, and pride shall have no footing; vainglory shall find no entrance.

CHAP. XL.
PRovidence is an exercise of reason; experience an act of sense; by how much
reason excells sense, by so much providence exceeds experience; Providence is
the rational Daughter of wisdom; Experience the Empirical Mistress of Fools: if
thou have providence to foresee a danger, let thy prudence rather prevent it
then fear it; the fear of future evils oftentimes brings a present mischief:
whilst thou seek to prevent it, practice to bear it; he is a wise man that
can avoid an evil; he is a patient man that can endure it; but he is a valiant
man that can conquer it. Never fear any thing but what thy industry may
prevent; be confident of nothing, but what fortune cannot defeat. It is no less
folly to fear what is impossible to be avoided, then to be secure when there is
a possibillity of being deprived.

CHAP. XLI.
IF God has sent thee a Cross, take it up and follow him; use it wisely, lest
it be unprofitable; bear it patiently, lest it be intolerable; behold in it
Gods anger against thy sin, and his love toward thee, in punishing the one,
and chastening the oth^s* if it be light, slight it not; if heavy, murmur not.
Not to be sensible of a judgment, is the symptom of an hardened heart; to be
displeased with Gods pleasure is the sign of a rebellious will: And to faint in
the day of adversity, argues thy strength to be but small.

CHAP. XLII.
BE ever mindful of thy latter end, lest Death come upon thee unawares, and
find thee unprepared; and thou repent that thou have lived, being now to dye,
and to dye eternally; expect it, for it will come: if thou expect it as a
friend, prepare to entertain it; if as an enemy, prepare to overcome it; Death
has no advantage but where it comes a stranger, yet come it will, for spend an
hundred years in Earths best pleasures, and after that, an hundred more; to
which, being spent, add a thousand, and to that ten thousand more, the last
shall as surely end, as the first are ended, and all shall be swallowed up in
Eternity: he that is born to day, is not sure to live a day; he that has lived
the longest, is but as he that was born yesterday; the happiness of the one is,
that he has lived; the happiness of the other is, that he may live, and the
lot of both, that they must die: it is no happiness to live long, nor
unhappiness to dye soon; happy is he that has lived long enough to dye well,
he shall live for ever: look upon thy burning taper, and there see the Emblem
of thy life, the flame is thy soul, the wax thy body, and is commonly a(...)
long, the wax (if (...) tempered) can ^ut (...) length, and who can (...) it?
if ill tempered, it (...) the faster, yet last his length; an open window shall
h^s;t^n either; an extinguisher shall put out both; husband them the best thou
can, thou can not prolong them beyond their date; leave them to the injury
of the wind, or to the mercy of a wasteful hand, thou do hasten their end,
but still they burn their length; but puff them out, and thou have shortened
their passage, which else had brought them to their appointed end: bodies
according to their constitution, stronger or weaker, according to the quality
or inequality of their Elements, have their date, and may be preserved from
shortning, but they cannot be lengthened; neglect may wast them, ill diet may
hasten them unto their journey's end, yet they have lived their length; a
violent hand may interrupt them, a sudden death may stop them, and they are
shortened: it lies in the power of man either permissively to hasten, or
actively to shorten, but not to lengthen, or extend the limits of his natural
life; he only if any has the Art to lengthen out his Taper, that puts it to
the best advantage.

CHAP. XLIII.
TAke heed rather what thou receivest, then what thou give; what thou give
leaves thee; what thou receivest sticks by thee. He that presents a gift buys
the receiver; he that receives a gift fells his liberty; if thou give, give
to a right end; if thou give to receive the like again, it is exchange; if to
receive more, it is covetousness; if to receive thanks, it is vanity; if to be
seen, it is vainglory; if to corrupt, it is bribery; if for example, it is
formality; if for compassion, it is charity; if because thou art commanded, it
is obedience; the end and affection in doing, the work gives name to the work
done, whether it be good or bad.

CHAP. XLIV.
CEnsure no man, detract from no man, praise no man before his face, traduce no
man behind his back; boast not thy self abroad, and flatter not thy self at
home; if any thing cross thee, accuse thy self; if any one extol thee, humble
thy self; honor those that instruct thee, and be thankful to those that
reprove thee: let all thy desires be subject to reason, and let thy reason be
corrected by Religion; the way to subject all things to thy self, is to subject
thy passions unto reason, and thy reason unto God; weigh thy self by thine own
balances, and trust not the voice of wild opinion; observe thy self, as thy
greatest enemy, so shall thou become thy greatest friend.

CHAP. XLV.
IF Opinion have cried thy name up, let thy modesty cry thy heart down, lest
thou deceive it, or it thee. There is no less danger in a great name then in a
bad; and no less honor in endeavoring praise, then in deserving it; but if
opinion has lighted the Lamp of thy fame, encourage it with thy own oil, lest
it go out and stink: the chronical disease of popularity is shame; if thou be
once up beware, the way from fame to infamy is a beaten road.

CHAP. XLVI.
LEt the Holy Scripture be thy delight, and daily meditation; let not thy
wanton fancy carve it out in jests, nor thy sinful wit, make it an advocate to
thy sin; it is a subject for thy faith, not fancy; where wit and blasphemy is
one trade, the understanding is bankrupt: and ever use it with reverence for
the Authors sake, who is God over all, blessed for ever, the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost: we are apt to value, study, and desire to understand the books of
godly, learned, and judicious men's making; how much more should we value, and
endeavor to the utmost, to understand these books which are of Gods making:
men's writings are too much mingled with vanity, ignorance, folly, mistakes,
imperfections, infirmities, and corruptions, savouring too much of a carnal
spirit, when most spirirual; but Gods word is satisfactorily full without all
vanity; most wise, faithful, and true, without all falsehood, or folly;
completely perfect beyond all imperfection; most pure and exceedingly refined,
without all corruption: the Penmen thereof not being contemptible or ordinary,
but incomparable and Extraordinary persons. Moses the meekest man on Earth, the
peculiar favorite of God, with whom he talked face to face. King David, that
sweet singer of Israel, that man after Gods own heart. Solomon the King, that
most exquisite Masterpiece for all kind of wisdom, Natural, Political, and
Theological, whom God honored with the building of his Temple, the like
whereof was never seen. Daniel, in whom was found an excellent spirit, and
great dexterity in expounding mysteries and secrets. Paul, who was caught up
into third heavens; in a word, all of them holy men of God, moved by the holy
Ghost. These being the Penmen, how excellent and past compare must their
writings needs be? Who would not value, study, and earnestly pry into them? If
thou consider the manner of Holy Scripture, it is the most inviting, able to
allure the hearts of men and Angels to the study of it; yea to ravish and
transport their spirits in the understanding of it; herein are revealed most
profound and inexplicable mysteries; the nature of the blessed God, simple,
without composition; All-sufficient, without any external addition; immutable,
without all shadow of alteration; eternal, immense, incomprehensible,
omnipresent, and wholly infinite, without all limitation; the unity of essence,
the Trinity of Persons, the Father not being the Son, nor either of them the
Holy Ghost, yet all of them one, and the most holy God. The secrets of Gods
eternal counsels, especially touching the Electing of his own in Christ,
predestinating them to the adoption of Children, when all others are passed by:
The curious order of the Creation to bring his purposes to pass: the permission
of man's fall from the pinnacle of his natural integrity, that thereby he might
take occasion to glorify the height of his Justice, and Mercy, in raising them
up by Christ to a far higher pitch of supernatural felicity. The person and
office of Jesus Christ the Mediator, both altogether wonderful; God and man
united in one person, to unite God and man in one covenant; The Son of God
became the Son of man, that the Sons of men might become the sons of God: A
King, to subdue all our enemies to us, and us to himself: A Prophet, to unveil
the bosom secrets of his father unto us; a Priest, offering up himself for us,
upon himself, by himself; offering up himself the Sacrifice as man, upon
himself the Altar as God, by himself the Priest as God-man; Christ was humbled,
thereby we are exalted; Christ accused, we cleared: Christ condemned, we
justified and acquitted; Christ accursed, we blessed; Christ slain, and we
live: Christ was conquered, that we might be more then conquerors through him
that loved us. What shall I say! in Scripture is revealed, how enemies are
reconciled; sinners justified; aliens adopted; beggars made heirs, and coheirs
with Jesus Christ; and dust and ashes shall be glorified for evermore: here are
unfolded the Covenant of Grace wholly made up of heavenly cordials; the
promises of the life that now is, and of that which is to come, exceeding great
and precious: The comforts of God able to counterpoyze our deepest
disconsolations, and commands surpassing all the Laws in the World, in
holiness, justice, and goodness. Here are discovered the miseries of all in the
first Adam; the felicities of all that are in the second Adam; and the way how
poor Souls are translated from those miseries to these felicities. Here you
shall find God descending to man, in preparing all spiritual privileges for
sinners in and by Jesus Christ, our Savior; in rendering richest grace by
Covenant Promises, and Ordinances; and applying these preparations and renders
actually to the Soul by the Spirit; and man ascending to God by the
spirituallizing of his nature, acting of his faith, aspiring of his desires,
fervency of his prayers, and holy tendency of his conversation; yea, both God
and man sweetly closing together, in a most intimate communion in Christ Jesus,
which is another Paradise, and Heaven upon Earth: In a word, what is there not
in the holy Scriptures? Are we poor? here is the only way to content, which is
the greatest riches. Are we Sin sick? here is a shop of Soul medicines. Are we
fainting? here is a Cabinet of cordialls. Are we Christ-less? here is the Star
that leads unto Christ. Are we Christians? here is the band that keeps us in
Christ. Are we afflicted? here is our solace. Are we persecuted? here is our
Protection. Are we deserted? here is our recovery. Are we tempted? here is our
Sword and Victory. Are we young? here is our beauty. Are we old? here is our
wisdom; while we live, here is the rule of our Conversation; when we dye, here is
the hope of our Glorification. Oh blessed Scriptures! Who can know them, and
not love them? who can love them, and not delight to meditate in them day and
night? who can meditate in them, and not desire to love them; love to desire
them, and both desire and love to understand them? The Sacred Scripture is the
Book of Books; the book of Life, whose original is eternal; whose essence is
incorporeal; whose knowledge is life; whose writing is indelible; whose respect
is desirable; whose doctrine is easy; whose depth is unsearchable; whose words
are innumerable; and only one word All. To conclude, take one instance of the
experience of Mrs. Katharine Bretergh of Bretergholt in Lancashire, Who was
wont to task her self to read eight Chapters a day at least; who in her
sickness before her death fell into great distress of Soul, through an
apprehension of the severity of Gods Justice the greatness of her Sins, wa^ of
Faith in and love to God; sometimes she would cast he^ Bible from her, and say,
It was indeed the book of Life, but she had read the same unprofitably, and it
was become to her the book of Death. Sometimes she would say, Her sins had made
her a prey to Satan, a spectacle to the World, a disgrace to Religion, and a
shame to her Husband, Kindred and all to true Christians; and here she would
weep bitterly; she wished she had never been born, or that she had been any
other Creature then a Woman; she cried out oftentimes, Woe, woe, woe, a weak, a
woeful, a wretched, a forsaken woman; and such like pitiful complaints against
her self, with tears trickling down her cheeks; but at last she was restored to
joys and comforts unspeakable by means of the holy Scriptures: Oh (said she) My
Soul has been compassed about with terrors of death, fear within, and fear
without; the sorrows of Hell were upon me, knots and knors were upon my Soul; a
roaring Wilderness of woe was within me: but Blessed! blessed! blessed be the
Lord my God, who has not left me comfortless. One time she took Bible in her
hand, and joyfully kissing it, and looking up toward Heaven, (she said) Oh
Lord, it is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy
Statutes; the law of thy mouth is better to me then thousands of Gold and
Silver: She desired her Husband to read some part of Scripture, he read the 17
of John, as he read verse. 9. I pray not for the World, but for them which thou
have given me, for they are thine; She interrupted him saying, Oh Lord Jesus
do thou pray for me? Oh blessed and sweet Savior, do thou pray for me? Oh
how wonderful! how wonderful! how wonderful are thy mercies! read on, said she,
the blessedst reading that ever I heard, the comfort whereof does sweeten my
Soul. When he came to ver. 34. Father I will, that they whom thou have given
me, be one with me. Stay, said she, and let me meditate on the goodness of the
Lord, for now I perceive and feel the countenance of my Redeemer, Christ is
turned toward me, and the bright shining beams of his mercy are spread over
me. Oh! happy am I that ever I was born, to see this blessed day: Praise!
praise! Oh praise the Lord for his mercies; he has brought me out of darkness,
and the shadow of death. Oh sweet Savior, shall I be one with thee, as thou
art one with thy Father? and will thou glorify me with that glory which thou
had with the Father before the World was? And do thou so love me who am but
dust and ashes, to make me partaker of thy own glory? What am I poor wretch,
that thou art so mindful of me? Oh how wonderful is thy love, etc. Thus she
continued ravished in Spirit, and triumphing in Gods praises till her last. At
last with a sweet countenance and still voice, she said, my warfare is
accomplished, and mine iniquities are pardoned; Lord, whom have I in Heaven but
thee? and I have none on Earth but thee; my flesh fails, and mine heart also;
but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever; He that
preserves Jacob, and defends Israel, he is my God, and he will guide me unto
Death; guide me O Lord my God, and suffer me not to faint, but keep my Soul in
safety: And with that she presently departed this life. Thus we see how useful
the holy Scripture is to every Christian Soul; and how God thereby gives
comfort to those who are his, when all other comforts fail them: make it ever
therefore thy delight, and thy daily companion; for take all the rarest
writings now extant in the world, none of them all can thus raise up a drooping
Spirit, or disconsolate Soul, from the depth of woe and horror; none of them can
fill the heart thus brimful of sweetest peace; none of them all can thus
enlarge and entranse the Spirit to ecstasies of Heavenly Joy, and ravishments,
through apprehensions of Gods love, and mercy; above grief, above temptation,
above sin, above all fear of Death, that King of Terrors; as this blessed word
of God can: who would not now labor to understand the Scriptures; who would
not treasure up, and kiss, and embrace, and greedily swallow down these
Soul-reviving Cordials.

CHAP. XLVII.
IN Civil things follow the most, in matters of Religion the fewest, in all
things follow the best; so shall thy ways be pleasing to God; so shall thy
behavior be plausible with men; but follow not a multitude in the evil of Sin,
lest thou share with the multitude in the evil of punishment; the number of the
offenders diminishes not the quality of the offense. As the multitude of
suitors draws more favor to the suit; so the multitude of sinners draws more
punishment upon the sin; the number of Fagots increases the fury of the fire.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Has any wounded thee with injuries, meet them with patience; hasty words
rankle the wound, soft language dresses it, forgiveness cures it, and oblivion
takes away the scar. It is more noble by silence to avoid an injury, then by
Argument to overcome it.

CHAP. XLIX.
LEt not mirth be thy profession, lest thou become a make-sport: he that has
but gained the Title of a Gester, let him assure himself the fool is not far
off: wrinckle not thy face with too much laughter, lest thou become ridiculous.
The Suburbs of folly is vain mirth, and profuseness of laughter is the City of
Fools; yet be not too sadd, lest thou be thought sullen; nor too austere, lest
thou be thought male content; not too demure, and precise, lest thou distaste
the company, and incline to melancholy, then which nothing can be more hurtful
to body or mind.

CHAP. L.
Virtue is nothing but an act of loving, that which is to be beloved; and that
act is prudence, from whence not to be removed by constraint is fortitude; not
to be allured by inticements is temperance, not to be diverted by pride is
justice, the declining of this act is vice.

CHAP. LI.
LOve thy neighbor for Gods sake, and God for his own sake, who created all
things for thy sake, and redeemed thee for his mercy sake; if thy love has any
other object, it is false love; if thy object has any other end, it is self
love.

CHAP. LII.
IF thou desire rest unto thy soul, be just; he that does no injury, fears
not to suffer injury; the unjust mind is always in labor, it either
practices the evil it has projected; or projects to avoid the evil it has
deserved.

CHAP. LIII.
COnsider what thou wast, what thou art, and what thou shall be; thy first
being was rude and indigested clay, thy now being is clay refined, but
decaying, and thou hastnest to return from whence thou art, for dust thou art,
and to dust thou shall return. Consider what is above thee, what is beneath thee,
and what is within thee: God's all-seeing Eye is above to observe thee; his
Almighty hand to protect, punish, or reward thee, according to thy doings; Hell
is beneath to tempt thee here, and to torment thee hereafter; within thee is
thy conscience, a thousand witnesses against, or for thee. These considerations
will bring to thy self humility, to thy neighbor charity, to the world
contempt, and to God obedience, which will Crown thee with eternal felicity.

CHAP. LIVE.
CHarity is a naked Child, giving honey to a Be without wings; naked, because
excuseless, and simple; a Child, because tender and growing; giving honey,
because honey is pleasant and comfortable; to a Be, because a Be is
laborious, and deserving; without wings, because wanting and helpless: if thou
denyest to such, thou killest a Be; if thou give to other then such, thou
preservest a drone.

CHAP. LV.
LEt another Passion be a lecture to thy Reason; and let the Shipwreck of his
Understanding be a Sea-mark to thy Passion, so shall thou gain strength out of
his weakness, safety out of his danger; and raise thy self a building out of
his ruins.

CHAP. LVI.
IF thou expect to rise by the means of him whom thy Fathers greatness raised
from his service, to court preferment, thou will be deceived; for the more in
esteem thou art, the more sensible is he of what he was; whose former servitude
will be Chronicled by thy advancement, and glory obscured by thy greatness;
however he will conceive it a dead service, which may be interpreted by thee as
a merited reward, rather then a meritorious benefit.

CHAP. LVII.
IF thou desire to take the best advantage of thy self, especially in matters
where the fancy is most employed, keep temperate diet, use moderate exercise,
observe seasonable and set hours for rest, let the end of thy first sleep raise
thee from thy repose; then has thy body the best temper, then has thy soul
the least encumbrance, then no noise shall disturb thine ear, no object shall
divert thine eye; then, if ever, shall thy sprightly fancy transport thee
beyond the common pitch, and show the magazeen of high invention.

CHAP. LVIII.
SO use prosperity that adversity may not abuse thee. If in prosperity thy
security admits no fear; in adversity thy despair will afford no hope, he that
in prosperity can foretell a danger, can in adversity foresee deliverance.

CHAP. LIX.
IF thou contend with any, let thy contention be rather forced then voluntary,
rather to defend thy self, then to offend; and on thy part, see that the cause
of contention be just, lest the just God contend with thee; strive not in a
matter which concerns thee not, lest the issue be thy shame, and just reproof;
be ever cautious how thou strivest with a mighty man, lest thou fall into his
hands, and he crush thee. The Iron rod does easily break in pieces the Earthen
Pitcher. Be not at variance with a rich man, lest he overthrow thee; for Gold
has destroyed many, and perverted even the hearts of Kings. Strive not in
words with him that is full of tongue, for there is no end of his babbling. And
strive not with an hasty man, lest he do thee a sudden mischief, which thou
can not prevent, and he himself repent when it is too late. In short, as much
as in thee lies be at peace with all men, and the God of peace shall be at
peace with thee.

CHAP. LX.
LEt not thy Fancy be guided by thine eye, nor let thy Will be governed by thy
fancy; thine eye may be deceived in her object, and thy fancy may be deluded in
her subject; let thy understanding moderate between thine eye and thy fancy,
and let thy judgment arbitrate between thy fancy, and thy will; so shall thy
fancy apprehend what is true, so shall thy will elect what is good.

CHAP. LXI.
IF thou desire not to be too poor, desire not to be too rich; he is rich, not
that possesses much, but he that covets no more; and he is poor, not that
enjoys little, but he that wants too much; the contented mind wants nothing
which it had not; the covetous mind wants not only what it has not, but
likewise that which it has; be not therefore too greedy in desiring riches,
nor too eager in seeking them, nor too covetous in keeping them, nor too
passionate in loosing them; the first will possess thy Soul of discontent; the
second will dispossess thy body of rest; the third will possess thy wealth of
thee; the last will dispossess thee of thy self: thou can not serve God,
unless Mammon serve thee.

CHAP. LXII.
IF evil men speak good, or good men evil of thy conversation, examine all thy
actions, and suspect thy self; but if evil men speak evil of thee, hold it as
thy honor; and by way of thankfulness love them, but upon condition, that they
either cease to be evil, or continue to hate thee; however a good conscience
without a good name, is better then a good name, without a good conscience.

CHAP. LXIII.
IN thy recited Meditations, when thou have neither fit companion, nor good
book, to employ thy active fancy, admire the curious works of thy Creator in
his wonderful dispose of all things; cast thine eyes upon the Sun, that
glorious Lamp of Heaven, whose near approach does cloth the mournful Earth in
her summer hue; consider the constancy, the universal benefit of his light and
heat, and admire his Maker; the lesser Stars though they borrow their light,
have their influence upon our Peace, and War, our health, and diseases; the
proud Ocean, whose restless waves threaten a Deluge to the neighboring Coasts,
receives its checks from the small, and shutle sand; and though it seem a bar
to the passenger, yet by a ship is made the speedier passage; the blustering
Winds, who think to control the Mariner, by Art are made to serve his purpose.

1
O Sacred Providence, who
from end to end,
Strongly and sweetly movest!
shall I write?
And not of thee! through whom
my fingers bend,
To hold my quil, shall they not
do thee right?
2.
For either thy command, or
thy permission,
Lay hands on all; thy are the
right and left,
The first puts on with speed, and expedition;
The other curbs sins stealing
pace and theft.
3.
Nothing escapes them both;
all must appear,
And be disposed, and dressed, and
tuned by thee,
Who sweetly temper'st all; if
we could hear,
Thy skill and art, what music
would it be!
4.
Thou art in small things
great, not small in any,
Thy even praise, can neither
rise, nor fall:
Thou art in all things one, in
each thing many,
For thou art infinite in One,
and All.
5.
Thy Cupboard serves the
World, the meat is set,
Where all may reach, no beast
but knows his feed,
Birds teach us hawking, Fishes
have their net,
The great prey on the less, they
on some weed.
6.
Nothing engendered does prevent
his meat,
Flies have their table spread ere
they appear,
Some Creatures have in winter
what to eat,
Others do sleep, and envy not
their cheer.
7.
Each Creature has a wisdom
for his good,
The Pigeons feed their tender
off spring crying,
When they are callow; but withdraw
their food,
When they are fledge, that need
may teach them flying.
8.
Bees work for man, and yet
they never bruise
Their Masters flower; but leave
it, having done,
As fair as ever, and as fit for use:
So both the flower does stay, and
honey run.
9.
Sheep eat the grass, and dung
the ground for more,
Trees after bearing, drop their
leaves for soil;
Springs vent their streams, and
by expense get more,
Clouds cool by heat; Baths by
cooling boil.
10.
Thou have hid Metalls, man
may take them thence,
But at his peril: when he digs
the place,
He makes a grave, as if the thing
had sense,
And threatened man, that he
should fill the space.
11.
Even Poisons praise thee;
should a thing be lost,
Should Creatures want, for want
of heed, their due,
Since where are Poisons Antidotes
are most.
Thy help stands close and keeps
the fear in view.
12.
And as thy house is full, so
I adore
Thy curious art, in marshalling
thy goods,
The Hills with health abound,
the valleys with store,
The South with Marble, the
North with Furrs and Woods.
13.
Hard things are glorious,
easy things good cheap;
The common all men have, that
which is rare
Men therefore seek to have, and
care to keep:
The healthy frosts with Summer
Fruits compare.
14.
Light without wind is glass;
warm without weight
Is Wool and Furrs; cool without
closeness shade;
Speed without pains a Horse;
tall without height
A servile Hawk; low without
loss a Spade.
All Countries have enough to
serve their need;
If they seek fine things, thou
do make them run
For their offense; and then
do turn their speed
To be Commerce, and trade from
Sun to Sun.
16.
Nothing wears clothes but
Man, nothing does need
But man to wear them; nothing
uses Fire,
But man alone, to show his Heavenly breed;
And only he has fuel in desire.
17.
When the Earth was dry,
thou madst a Sea of wet,
When that lay gathered; thou
did broach the Mountains,
When yet some places could no
moisture get;
The Winds grew Gardners, and
the Clouds good Fountains.
18.
Rain, do not hurt my flowrs,
But gently spend
Your honey drops; press not to
smell them here,
When they are ripe, their odor
will ascend,
And at your lodging with their
thanks appear.
19.
How harsh are thorns to
pears! and yet they make
A better hedge, and need less reparation:
How smooth are silks, compared
with a stake,
Or with a stone, yet make no
good Foundation.
20.
Sometimes thou do divide
thy gifts to man,
Sometimes unite; the Indian
Nut alone
Is Clothing, Meat, and Trencher,
Drink, and Can,
Boat, Cable, Sail, and Needle,
all in One.
21.
Most Herbs that grow in
Brooks are hot and dry;
Cold fruits warm kernels, help
against the wind.
The Lemon juice and rind cure mutually;
The Whey of Milk does loose,
the Milk does bind.
22.
Thy Creatures leap not, yet
express a feast,
Where all the guests sit close
and nothing wants,
Frogs marry Fish and flesh,
Bats Bird and Beast;
Sponges non sense and sense;
Mines Earth and Plants.
23.
To show thou art not bound,
as if thy lot
Were worse then ours, sometimes
thou shiftest hands,
Most things move the under
jaw, the Crocodile not;
Most things sleep lying, the Elephant
leans or stands.
24.
But who has praise enough,
nay who has any,
None can express thy works,
but he that knows them;
And none can know thy works
which are so many,
And so complete, but only he
that owes them.
But if the contemplation of these Creatures excellencies seem too low; let thy
divine fancy carry thee to the top of Mount Nebo; and thence take a prospect of
the Land of promise: view those Mansions of Glory purchased for thee with the
precious Blood of God; hear the heavenly Chore of glorified Saints and Angels,
singing Hallelujah to him that sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb for
ever. Consider how the Angels, those glorious Spirits, ready and mighty
Messengers, whose number is innumerable, are sent to encamp about the servants
of the most High, for their protection and safety; let thy Soul bath it self in
those rivers of pleasure, which flow from the refreshing presence of thy
all-sufficient God, and Savior; believe that heart-ravishing complacency which
the Holy One of Israel takes in his Spouse the Church, and in every part and
member thereof; unto whom he has confirmed his love for ever, by the death of
his dear Son, by the everlasting Covenant of his Grace, and by his many
faithful Promises of whatsoever may conduce to her felicity here, or hereafter.
These Meditations will stay thy busy mind that it run not out to vain
Companions, or unprofitable exercise, for its satisfaction; and will fill thy
Soul brim-full of Heavenly Joy.

CHAP. LXIV.
LEt not thy expense exceed thy income, lest thou run in debt; and spend not
too much on hopes, lest thou be disappointed of thy hope, and never recover thy
expense. As it is miserable to live upon the bounty or benevolence of another,
so it is the highest aggravation of this misery to live a servant, in continual
fear of an exacting Creditor; better it is that thou continue in that Estate
wherein God has set thee, though but mean, then for a time to live above it,
and after to be brought low. He that falls from on high is in great danger, and
shall receive more damage then he that keeps low. Remember if God has given
thee Children, or other near Relations, they claim a share in what thou have;
and before thou departest hence, fairly part with all; it being the property of
every good man, not to deceive, or disappoint any, even in Death; if thy estate
mend, thou may live up to it, but not above it.

CHAP. LXV.
LEt the greatest part of the news thou hear, be the least part of what thou
believe, lest the greatest part of what thou believe, be the lest part of
what is true; and report nothing for truth in earnest or in jest, unless thou
know it, or at least confidently believe it to be so: neither is it expedient
at all times, or in all Companies, to report what thou know, or know to
be true; sometimes it may avail thee, if thou seem not to know, that which thou
know. Have thou any secret, Commit it not to many, nor to any, unless well
known unto thee.

CHAP. LXVI.
Have thou a Friend, use him friendly, and abuse him not in jest, or earnest,
conceal his infirmities, privately reprove his Errors; Commit thy secrets to
him, yet with caution, lest thy friend become thy enemy and abuse thee.

CHAP. LXVII.
IF any thing befall thee which thou have neither prudence to foresee, nor power
to prevent, nor means to alter, blame not him that sent it, but bear it
patiently; for look abroad into the World, and thou shall fee some persons, who
neither want discretion to contrive, nor means to effect their designs, yet
fail in their success; others who have neither that power nor wisdom, yet
prosper in what they take in hand: some impute this success to the influence of
the Stars Predominant in their Nativity; others to blind fortune; but it is
safe for thee to acknowledge him, who is the cause of causes, who oftentimes
does give success to the impious and improvident, disappointing the wise and
prudent, that he himself may be acknowledged to be All in All, and that vain
man may have nothing after him; yet the wicked shall not always prosper, but
the pious and prudent shall at length prevail.

CHAP. LXVIII.
NEither despise, nor overmuch value any small thing; despise it not, for thou
know not whither it may grow; even those things, whose beginnings have been
low, have grown great; and thou know not of what use or disuse it may be
unto thee. The Lion having caught a Mouse, upon entreaty, let her go; not long
after, this Mouse hearing the Lion roar, sought him out, and found him taken in
a Net, creeps to the Net, and bites the cords asunder, and so in requital gives
the Lion an escape. Thou know not how far a small matter may hurt or help
thee; yet regard it not overmuch, lest thy mind be over-filled with fear and
care: if thou have an enemy whose power is small, fear him, and have always a
watchful eye upon him, lest thy want of fear make thee secure, and thy security
give him strength, and this strength enable him to overcome thee.

CHAP. LXIX.
OF all the passions of thy mind beware of Love, then which, none is more
unruly, especially, when the Object is unsuitable, or difficult to be obtained;
it will fill thy mind with fear, anxiety, care, and jealousy.

IN Love these vices are, suspions,
Peace, War, and Impudence, Detractions;
Dreams, Cares, and Errors, Terrors, and Affrights,
Immodest pranks, devices, flights, and slights,
Heart-burnings, wants, neglects, desire of wrong;
Loss, continual expense, and hurt among.
Yet if the object of thy affection be truly desirable, and facile, thou
may love, yet so, that friends be thy Counselors, and reason thy conduct,
so shall thou seldom miscarry; Sed vix deo conceditur and amare and sapere; It
is scarce allowed to the Gods, to be in love, and to be wise.

CHAP. LXX.
ABove all things shun Melancholy, as that which will both impare thy health,
delude thy fancy, and discompose thy mind. The Melancholy person is apt to
think that to be which is not, and things to be as they are not, excellently
described by Democritus Junior.

Burton's Melancholy.
WHen I go musing all alone,
Thinking of diverse things fore-known,
When I build Castles in the Air,
Void of sorrow, and void of fear,
Pleasing my self with phantasms sweet,
Methinks the time runs very fleet:
All my joys to this are folly;
Naught so sweet as Melancholy.
When I lie musing all alone,
Recounting what I have ill done,
My thoughts on me then Tyrannize,
Fear and sorrow me surprise;
Whether I tarry still, or go,
Methinks the time moves very slow:
All my griefs to this are Jolly,
Naught so sad as Melancholy.
When to my self I act, and smile,
With pleasing thoughts the time beguile,
By a Brook side, or wood so green,
Unheard, unsought for, or unseen;
A thousand pleasures do me bless,
And Crown my Soul with happiness:
All my joys besides are folly,
None so sweet as Melancholy.
When I lie, sit, or walk alone,
I sigh, I grieve, making great moan;
In a dark Grove, or irksome den,
With discontents, and furies then;
A thousand miseries at once,
My heavy Heart and Soul ensconce:
All my griefs to this are folly,
None so sour as Melancholy.
Methinks I hear, methinks I see,
Sweet music, wondrous melody;
Cities, towns, and places fine,
Now here, then there, the World
is mine;
Rare beauties, gallant Ladies shine,
What ere is lovely or divine:
All other joys to this are folly,
None so sweet as Melancholy.
Methinks I hear, methinks I see,
Ghosts, Goblins, Fiends, my fantasy
Presents a thousand ugly shapes,
Headless Bears, black-Men and Apes,
Doleful out cries, and fearful sights,
My sad and dismal Soul affrights;
All my griefs to this are Jolly,
None so damned as Melancholy.
Methinks I court, methinks I kiss,
Methinks I now embrace my Mistress.
O blessed days! O sweet content!
In Paradise my time is spent:
Such thoughts may still my fancy move,
So may I ever be in love:
All my Joys to this are folly,
Naught so sweet as Melancholy.
When I recount loves many frights,
My sighs, and tears, my wakeing nights,
My jealous fits, O my hard fate!
I now repent, but it is too late,
No torment is so bad as Love,
So bitter to my Soul can prove:
All my griefs to this are Jolly,
None so harsh as Melancholy.
Friends and Companions get you gone,
It Is my desire to be alone,
Nere well but when my thoughts and I,
Do domineer in privacy;
No gemm, no treasure like to this,
It Is my delight, my crown, my bliss,
All my joys to this are folly,
None so sweet as Melancholy.
It Is my sole plague to be alone,
I am a Beast, a Monster grown:
I will no light, no company,
I find it now my misery;
The Scene is turned, my joys are gone,
Fear, discontent, and sorrows come;
All my griefs to this are jolly,
Naught so fierce as Melancholy.
I Will not change life with any King,
I ravished am; can the world bring
More joy, then still to laugh and smile,
In pleasant toys time to beguile
Do not, O do not trouble me,
So sweet content I feel, and see;
All my joys to this are folly,
Naught so Divine as Melancholy.
I Will change my state with any wretch
Thou can from Goal or dunghill fetch,
My pains, past cure, an other Hell
I may not in this torment dwell;
Now desperate I hate my life,
Lend me an halter or a knife:
All my griefs to this are jolly,
Naught so damned as Melancholy.
It Is hard to be cheerful without levity, or serious without Melancholy; we
verge to extremes; inconveniences and snares attend all constitutions and
complexions, (and like Sylogismes Sequimur deteriorem partem) Cheerfulness is
most like to do the body good, and the Soul hurt: that therefore soul and body
may receive good, and no hurt, be cheerfully serious, and seriously cheerful;
while cheerfulness is the sail, let seriousness be the ballast of the Vessel;
if thou want ballast, thou will move too swiftly; if thou want sails, thou will move too slowly.

CHAP. LXXI.
IF through the variety of Objects, and the diversity of occasions, thou can
not take an exact account of thy temper, and inclination, when thou art awake,
consult thy dreams, which though superstitiously abused by some, yet have their
signification; for God reveals secrets in thoughts from visions of the Night,
when deep sleep falls upon men. If thou frequently spend thy sleep in
dalliance, with stolen salutes, and sweet embraces, thy constitution is
Sanguine, and thou have cause to suspect thy self of wantonness; if in chiding,
quarrelling, and finding fault, thy disposition is contentious; if thy dreams
be revengeful, remembering and requiting old antiquated injuries, they point out
thy malice; if they run upon Gold and Silver, contracts, and projects, for the
gaining and increasing of an estate, they argue thy covetousness: some by
dreams have understood the death of Friends at a great distance; yea the very
month and day of their own death; thy genius, if hearkened to, will show thee
strange things when thou (...) asleep, things to come, and (...) which concern
thee, though in agitation at a great distance; yet in this be cautious, though
it be the certain experience of many.

CHAP. LXXII.
IF thou be deficient in estate and thy strength be but small, let thy
discretion supply this defect; gather honey with the Be from every flower, not
regarding the color of the flower, nor the soil wherein it grows; yet with
this caution, that thou leave it as fair and sweet as before. Prudence is
oftentimes of force where force prevails not; if thou can not have a
straight wind to carry thee to thy desired haven, make thy best use of a side
wind; yea rather strike Sail, then perish in the storm: what thou can not
effect by thy self, possibly thou may bring to pass by another, or by another
way; that Fort which cannot be taken by storm, may by a long siege or supprize
be forced to yild. The Dolphin finding himself unable to hurt the Crocodile, by
reason of the hard Scales upon his back, which no weapon can pierce, diveth
under him, and with his sharp Fins strikes him into the belly, being soft and
tender, and so kills him: attempt what thou can, and leave things
impossible unattempted.

CHAP. LXXIII.
IN all thy ways keep in Gods way, and God will keep thee in all thy ways. If
a man traveling in the Kings high way be robbed between Sun and Sun,
satisfaction is recoverable upon the Country, where the robbery was committed;
but if he take his journey in the night, it being an unseasonable time, then it
is at his own peril, he must take what falls. If thou keep in Gods way, thou
shall be sure either of Gods protection from danger, or of satisfaction for thy
damage; but if thou stray out, thou do expose thy self to danger.

CHAP. LXXIV.
BE neither too ambitious of, nor too confident in the favor of great men, for
thereby thou will create many inconveniences to thy self (yet disoblige none)
Sometimes their favor is bought at so dear a rate, that it is not worth the
having; frequently it is but of short continuance, and when his favor is gone,
thou art exposed more the object of his displeasure then before; or perhaps
this great one coming into disfavour with those who are greater then he, thou
art brought down with him; whereas thou might have stood longer, had thou
stood upon thy own legs. A passenger in a Storm, for shelter, betakes himself
to the Covert of a fair spreading Oak, where for a time he finds relief,
till at length, he receives more damage by the dropping of the boughs, then if
he had been exposed to the weather; or a sudden gust of wind happening,
teareth down a main Arm of the Oak, which falling upon the poor passenger,
maimeth or mischieveth him that fled to it for shelter.

CHAP. LXXV.
MAke Gods glory the ultimate end of all thy actions; and God shall give thee
his everlasting glory when all thy actions have an end. A friend gives me a
Ring, i will wear it for his sake; A Book, i will use it for his sake; A Jewel,
i will keep it for his sake, that is, so as may best express my love, and report
his goodness. were we truly thankful to our God, we would then use all his
tokens for his sake, and do all things to his glory: we would eat our meat to
him, wear our clothes to him, spend our strength for him, live to him, and die
for him: however see thou use not his blessings as Jehu did Jehorams
Messengers, or David Goliahs Sword, to turn them against their Master; and
fight against Heaven, with that health, wit, wealth, friends, means and
mercies, that thou have from thence received.

CHAP. LXXXVI.
SEE thou practice, what thou know of the will of God, and that God who has
given thee an heart to do according to what thou know, will give thee an
understanding to know what thou should do; but ever let thy inquiry be after
those truths which God has revealed, and not after curiosities. Where God has
set a boundary (as to the mount of old) seek not thou to pass, lest it be to
thy ruin: Curiosity in this kind has been the Mother of many heresies; when
men has been busily witty, rather to pry into, then believe the profound
Mysteries of God. Think not to dive into the Mystery of Christ's Incarnation,
till thou understand thy own Regeneration: be not like those who busy
themselves to know, where Lazarus his Soul was, when his body lay three days
in the Grave, and in the mean time care not what becomes of their own Souls;
rather bewail, then imitate the many intrusions upon God and the things of God
that have been of late. As there needs a spurr unto good and saving knowledge;
so abridle unto that knowledge which is curious and presumptuous. Blessed is
that knowledge which makes wise to sobriety.

CHAP. LXXVII.
SIn not against thy conscience, lest that which should be thy chief comforter,
prove thy tormenter; and if thy conscience condemn thee, God who is greater
then thy conscience, shall much more condemn thee; be assured, there is no
action, though never so secret, though never so small, that can escape the pen
of this ready Scribe; but all thou do shall be recorded, and that so clear
and evident, that go where thou will, and do what thou can, the characters
thereof shall never be cancelled or raced out, till God appear in Judgment. And
as there is no greater peace on this side Heaven, then the peace of Conscience;
so there is no greater torment on this side Hell then a wounded Conscience.
Though the World should rattle about thine ears, and the waves of affliction
beat never so hard upon thee, yet thou may sit merry at the feast of a good
Conscience, as secure as that child which in a Shipwreck was with his Mother
upon a planck securely sleeping, whom when she awaked, with his pretty
countenance sweetly smiling, asked a stroke to beat the naughty waves, as if
they had been his play-fellows; Oh that sweet harmonious melody, when this Bird
in the bosom sings clear! Oh the Peace and Comfort of innocence, the
tranquillity of a spotless mind! Oh the serenity! No Spanish sky so clear as a
good Conscience. On the contrary Philo Judaeus reports, that Flaccus played
all the parts of cruelty that he could invent against the Jews, for their
Religion; but when the doom of Calligula fell upon him, and he was banished to
Andros, an Island near Greece, he was so tormented with the memory of his
bloody, iniquity, and the fear of suffering for it, that if he saw any man
walking softly near unto him, he would say to himself, this man devises to
work my destruction; if he saw any go hastily, surely this is not for nothing,
he makes speed to kill me; if any man spoke him fair, he suspected that he
would cozen him, and sought to entrap him; if any talked roughly to him, then
he thought that he contemned him; if meat were given him in ample manner, this
is but to fat me as an Ox for the slaughter: thus his Conscience, that he had
so often abused, did ever mind him, that some vengeance was to follow either
from God or Man, or both. If thou sin often against thy Conscience, at length
it will remember thee, (and all the consorts of Music in the World cannot stop
its cry) that nothing but destruction waits on thee; if thou walk abroad,
Sonus excitat omnis suspensum, thou will be afraid of every leaf that shakes;
if thou stay at home nothing but horror attends thee; in the day thou art
struck with variety of sad apprehensions, in the night thou art troubled with
fearful dreams, and strange apparitions: Such is the Hell of a guilty
Conscience.

CHAP. LXXVIII.
BE neither too much affected with the vain applause of the multitude, nor too
confident in their uncertain opinion; for whom to day they cry up, they will
cry down to morrow. None ever more careful in Gods house then Moses, none
deeper in his favor, none more graced with Miracles, none more careful of the
peoples good, or more honored by them, yet if they be once distressed and
straightned in their provisions, they will stone Moses to death, and set up a
new Governor. How did the people at first entertain Paul? even as an Angel of
Light, and were ready to pull out their eyes for him: not long after, harkening
to Seducers, St. Paul was accounted their enemy, and they ready to pull out his
eyes, and give them to their false Apostles: Our Savior Christ shall have
Hosannah to day, and the next day they cry out Crucify him. Nothing more
unconstant, then the Multitude; thou can not tell where to find them, nor
when thou have them; nothing more ungrateful, thou can make no account of any
recompense from them; in short, therefore be as far from desiring their love,
as fearful to deserve their hatred; ruin lies in both; the one will hugg thee
to death, the other will crush thee to destruction; to escape the first, be not
ambitious; to avoid the second, be not seditious.

CHAP. LXXIX.
LEt the providence of the Ant, and the prudence of the worldly wise instruct
thee for thy Souls health; the Ant by Natures instinct lays up her store for
winter; the wise provide a cloak for the wet, a staff for old age, a scrip for
the Journey, and a banck of money to fly to, when occasion serves; see thou
lay up for thy self treasures in heaven, which cannot be spoiled by hostile
invasion, nor wrung from thee by power, nor won by law, nor mortgaged by debt,
nor impaired by public calamity, nor changed by Kings or Parliaments, nor
violated by death it self: get assurance of Gods favor by the lively exercise
of unfeigned faith, the daily practice of serious Repentance, and the frequent
use of fervent Prayer, whereby thou may be enabled to stand in the evil Day,
and bear up with joy and peace in the worst of times, the hour of Death, and
the day of Judgment.

CHAP. LXXX.
SEe thou promise not to thy self more felicity, peace, or comfort from this
world then it can give. A Velvet slipper cannot cure the Gout, neither can a
down bed give ease in an Ague fit; all second causes move in a subserviency to
the cause of Causes: whatsoever is here below, is but a pipe of conveyance from
God the fountain of all good, and there be many ways whereby these pipes
become stopped, many interruptions, crosses, and disappointments attend us in our
best estate. Jonah's condition was but bad at best, to be tossed too and fro in
a dangerful Ship, the bones whereof aked with the violence of every surge, that
assailed it; the Anchors, Cables, and Rudders either thrown away, or torn in
pieces; at length he is cast into the Sea, a merciless, and implacable Sea,
roaring for his life, more then ever Lion roared for his prey, the bottom
whereof seemed as low to him as the bottomless pit, and no hope left to escape,
by Ship, or Boat, no Tabula naufragii, no plank or piece of board appearing
whereby to recover the Land; beside all these, to fill the measure of his
sorrow up to the brim, the burning of Gods anger against his sin, like a river
of Brimstone; this is our case in this vail of misery; we are tumbled and
tossed in a vessel as frail as Jonah's Ship, which every stream of calamity is
ready to dash in pieces; every storm of disease able to split; where oftentimes
neither Anchor nor Rudder is left, neither head, nor heart, nor hand, in case
to give any comfort, where though we have the kindness of Friends, the duty of
Children, the obedience of Servants, the convenience of wealth, and the advice
of Physicians, we cannot use their service; where we have a grave before us
greedy to receive, but never to return us till Worm's have consumed us: But if
the anger of God for our sins accompany all these, it will be a woeful adventure
for that man, when the sin of his Soul and the end of his Life, shall meet
together, as the trespass of Jonah, and his being cast out of the Ship.

CHAP. LXXXI.
DEfer not thy Repentance, lest thou be denied Pardon. Late Repentance is
seldom true. He that has promised thee pardon upon thy repentance, has not
promised life till thou repent; and every day thy Repentance is deferred, thou
have a day more to Repent of, and a day less to repent in. It Is folly beyond
expression, while the Ship is sound, the tackling sure, the Pilot well, the
Saylors strong, the Gale favorable, and the Sea calm, to lie idle at road,
carding, dicing, drinking, burning seasonable weather; and when the Ship leaks,
the Pilot is sick, the Mariners faint, the storm boisterous, and the Sea
tumultuous, then to lanch forth, and hoyst up sail for a voyage into far
Countries. Such is the skill and case of evening repenters, who in the morning
of youth, soundness of health, and perfect use of reason, will not weigh
Anchor, hoyst up Sail, and cut the Cables that withold them from seeking God,
but feed themselves with a fond persuasion that when their reason is
distracted, their senses astonished, all the powers of their mind and parts of
their body distempered, they shall leap into heaven with a Lord have mercy upon
us in their mouths, and become Saints at their death, who have demeaned
themselves like Devils all their life. But think not if thou serve Satan, and
thy youthful lusts, with full dishes; that God will accept the abject scraps of
old age. It Is easier to pass the Foard in the morning when the water is low,
then in the evening when the banks are full. By delay thy account is increased,
thy debt augmented, thy enemy grows stronger, thy self the more enfeebled, and
all the difficulties of conversion daily more and more multiplied upon thee.

CHAP. LXXXII.
AS the wise Physician gives not the same physic to all Patients, nor in the
same proportion, but he fitteth it in quantity and quality to every ones
constitution, strength and disease; giving to one a Pill to purge him, to
another a cordial to restore him; one must be lanced, another must be healed;
one must have sauce to quicken his appetite, another must fast it out, and be
cured by abstinence. Thus the Lord in wisdom deals with the sons of men, he
gives that allowance to every one that he knows to be most requisite,
respecting the person of none, but doing good to all, as their state and
condition does require; one is bettered by liberty, another by restraint; one
being ingenious by nature is made better by benefits, another of a more servile
disposition is made worse, and only mended with threats, and punishments; one
man is fit to be rich, another to be poor; one for the Court, another for the
Cart; thus every one has his Portion, his Station allotted him by God in his
wisdom and goodness. See thou pay God that tribute of praise and acknowledgment
which is due for the portion he has given thee, lest thy ingratitude deprive
thee of his benefits, or lest they prove pernicious. Rivers receiving their
fullness from the Ocean, pay their Tribute by returning back their streams;
which homage, if they should deny, their swelling waters would break down their
banks, and drown the Country.

CHAP. LXXXIII.
HAve frequent and serious thoughts of the last and dreadful day of Judgment,
when thou must appear, and when all thy actions, with all their circumstances,
will be weighed in the balance of equity, by the impartial judge of all; whom
thou can not pervert with bribes, nor persuade with Rhetoric, nor move with
tears; but thy doom shall pass according to thy desert: and if sentence pass
against thee, it can never be reversed, for from this high Court of Justice
there lies no appeal; and as the Sentence, so shall be the Execution, which
will neither be delayed, nor can be avoided. And think not to appear before
this Tribunal in thy scarlet Robe, thy rich attire, or with thy Golden Scepter.
Those sparkling Diamonds, and that curious dress, which may commend thee to the
blind world, will not be valued here; this Sin revenging-Judge knows no
distinction, but of good and bad. It is reported of a Christian King of
Hungary, that being sad and pensive at the remembrance of his sin, and the
thoughts of his appearing before the Judgment Seat of Christ; his brother a
resolute Courtier observing him, and understanding the Cause, made a mock of
it, (as gallants use to do) accounting it nothing but a melancholy dump: The
King replies not at present; but the custom being that if the Executioner sound
a Trumpet before any man's door, that man without delay or further trial, is had
away to Execution; hereupon the King commands his death's-man in the dead time
of the night to sound his Trumpet before his Brothers door; who hearing the
Messenger of death, springs in, pale, and trembling, into his Brothers
presence, beseeching the King to let him know, wherein he had offended him; Oh
Brother (replies the King) thou have not offended me; but if the sight of thy
Executioner be so dreadful to thee, shall not we miserable sinners tremble to
appear before Gods Tribunal?

CHAP. LXXXIV.
AVoid as well the occasion and appearance of evil, as the evil it self. The
appearance of evil will blast thy good name, for men judge according to
appearance; and an evil occasion frequently produces an evil action. Look what
a clear Fountain is to the thirsty, what the shade is to the weary Travelour,
such is occasion to corrupt nature. St. Augustine makes mention of his friend
Alipius, that having resolved never to look upon the Fencers Prizes, was
through the importunity of friends drawn along to the Theater, where these
bloody sports were performed, protesting, that he would keep his eyes shut all
the while he was there; the people giving a sudden shout, he looked about to
see what the matter was, whereupon he became pleased with the sport, which
before he had abandoned. He that touches Pitch shall be defiled therewith.
Remember Dinah the Daughter of Lea, who went forth a Virgin to see the
Daughters of the Land in their sports, and Maygames, but was defiled before her
return.

CHAP. LXXXV.
Busy not thy self in matters which concern thee not; if they succeed well,
thou art not concerned; if ill, thou shall have blame for thy intermedling. God
has given to every Tree its proper work, to bring forth its own fruit; every
Bird to build her own nest; to every man a Calling, which if attended, will
find him employment, and yield him profit; but observe, he that is busy abroad;
either wants business, or neglects his business at home. See thou hasten
not to give counsel in any case, the event whereof is doubtful; if the event
happen according to expectation, it will be imputed to the discretion and
industry of him that managed it; if otherwise, it will be fathered upon thy ill
counsel.

CHAP. LXXXVI.
LEt thy care be to secure thy principal concerns. Lesser damages are
recoverable. Get thy eternal Inheritance made sure, and the evidence thereof
sealed, and it will abundantly answer all the discouragements or allurements
this world can put upon thee. Henry the Fourth late King of France, being told
of the King of Spains ample Dominions, that he was King of Castile; and I
(quoth Henry) am King of France: That he was King of Navarre; and I am King of
France: That he was King of Naples; and I am King of France: That he was King
of both the Cicilia's, Nova Hyspania, of the Western India's; and I am King of
France. He thought the Kingdom of France equivalent to all these. One has more
wit and learning then thy self, yet thou art a Christian; another has more
Gold and Silver, yet thou art a Christian; a third has more honor and better
preferment in the World, yet thou art a Christian; a fourth has richer attire,
goodlier possessions, fairer buildings, and more delicious fair, yet thou art a
Christian; which consideration alone, weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary,
will weigh down all the excellencies and glory this world can give, bear up
against all the necessities, perturbations, and disappointments, this world can
inflict upon thee.

CHAP. LXXXVII.
WHom thou can not know by himself, thou may learn in part by his
companions, for as is the man, such will be his companions, whom he chooses,
and in whom he delights. As light and darkness agree not, but mutually expel
each other, so the unjust man is an abomination to the just, and he that is
upright in the way is an abomination to the wicked. As the chased Deer will not
be admitted of the Heard, for fear the Hounds in pursuit of him, fall on them;
in like manner a knot of bad-good-fellows perceiving one of their society to
become another man, they will decline him, preferring his room before his
company; he shall no longer be welcome in their company, then he is willing to
sing his part in the jovial consort. Augustus Caesar desirous to know the
inclination of his Daughters Livia and Julia, diligently observed who came to
Court them, and perceiving that grave Senators talked with Livia, Riotous and
wanton youths with Julia, he presently discerned their several humors.

CHAP. LXXXVIII.
BE not too ambitious of being a Court favorite, nor too confident in Court
promises, nor too proud of Court preferment; the first will vanish upon the
least disgust; the second is easy to be forgotten; the third does often end in
ruin. Look upon a gallant Ship well rigged, trimmed, and tackl'd, and manned,
and munition'd, with her top and top gallant, and her spread Sails swelling
with a full gale in fair weather, putting out of the Haven into the smooth
Main, and drawing the spectators eyes with a well-wishing admiration; but soon
after the same Ship is split upon some dangerous Rock, or wrecked by some
disastrous Tempest, or sunk by some Leak sprung in her by accident: Such is the
Court favorites condition. To day like Sejanus he dazleth all men's eyes with
the splendor of his glory, and with the proud beak of his powerful prosperity
cutteth the waves, and ploweth through the press of the Multitude, scorning to
fear any remora at his Keel below, or any cross winds from above; and yet to
morrow in some storms of unexpected disfavour, springs a leak in his honor,
and sinks in the quicksands of disgrace, or dashed against the Rocks of
displeasure is split and wrecked in the charybdis of Infamy, and so concludes
his Voyage in misery and misfortune.

CHAP. LXXXIX.
LEt thy serious thoughts of Eternity like a perspective-glass, present it
near; considering thou art always upon the verge of that estate, where time
and change shall be no more. Xeuxis that famous Painter being slow at his work,
and suffering no Piece of his to go abroad without often reviewing; and being
demanded why he was so curious, and so tedious in the use of his Pensil,
answered, that what he Painted, he Painted for Eternity; even so what thou do
shall be transmitted to Eternity; but what thou have will perish with the
using; be careful therefore rather of what thou do, then what thou have;
neglecting rather thy Temporal then thy Eternal concerns.

CHAP. XC.
NEither contemn, nor superstitiously fear the Constellations and Signs of
Heaven! God has set them above thee, to the end, thou should observe them;
he himself sits above them, to the end, thou should not fear them, but him
who is Lord of all; it is true, they are Gods voice, but not easy to be
understood, either what they mean, or whether judgment, or mercy, if Judgment,
whether Sword, Plague, or Famine, or some other effect of the Divine
displeasure; or whom they mean, what Kingdom, Family, or Person; or when they
mean it, whether this or the next, or many years hence; rather hearken to his
voice in the Holy Scripture, which is most certain, and tells thee plain, that
he is long suffering, and of great pity, yet will at length plentifully reward
the wicked doer, and relieve the oppressed.

CHAP. XCI.
TAke heed lest being desirous to become a wit in jest, thou become a fool in
earnest; for commonly they are the trifling things of this World, which serious
men have to do withal, when they have nothing else to do; their greatest
business then being to laugh, and their reward to be laughed at. Some are so
unhappy in having happy wits, that they make their wits their happiness,
jesting themselves out of all that is earnest.

CHAP. XCII.
I Conclude, these my mean Animadversions with the authentic Adagies of the
wisest that ever writ, which if well understood, and duly applied, will serve
and satisfy thee in most of thy concerns, being of Divine Authority.

1. A Prudent man concealeth knowledge, and keeps his mind till afterward;
but the heart of the fool proclaims foolishness, he utters all his mind.

2. He that walks with wise men, shall be wise; but a companion of fools
shall be broken.

3. Devise not evil against thy neighbor, seeing he lives securely by thee;
debate thy cause with thy neighbor himself, and discover not a secret to
another, lest he that hears it put thee to shame, and thine infamy turn not
away.

4. Withdraw thy foot from thy neighbors house, lest he be weary of thee, and
so hate thee.

5. He that is slow to wrath is of great understanding, but he that is hasty of
spirit exalts folly.

6. A soft answer turns away wrath, but grievous words stir up anger.

7. The wrath of a King is as the messengers of Death, but a wise man will
pacific it; for by long forbearing is a Prince persuaded, and a soft tongue
breaks the bone.

8. Many seek the Princes favor, and every man is a friend to him that gives
gifts; a gift in secret pacifieth anger, and a reward in the bosom strong
wrath.

9. Make no friendship with an angry man, and with a furious man thou shall not
go; lest thou learn his ways, and get a snare to thy Soul.

10. He that answers a matter before he hear it, it is folly and shame to
him. Speak not in the ears of a fool, for he will despise the wisdom of thy
words.

11. A prudent man foreseeth the evil, and hides himself; but the simple pass
on, and are punished. Happy is the man that fears always, but he that
hardneth his heart falls into mischief.

12. Remove not the old Landmark, neither enter into the field of the
fatherless, for their Redeemer is mighty. Rob not the poor because he is poor,
neither oppress the afflicted in the Gate; for the Lord will plead their Cause,
and spoil the Soul of those that spoiled them.

13. Rejoice not when thine enemy falls, and let not thine heart be glad when
he stumbleth, lest the Lord see it, and it displease him, and he turn away his
wrarth from him.

14. Whosoever keeps his mouth and tongue, keeps his Soul from trouble.

15. The rich rules over the poor; and the borrower is servant to the lender.

16. Let another man praise thee, and not thy own mouth; a stranger, and not
thy own lips.

17. He that delicately brings up his servant from a Child, shall have him
become his Son at length.

18. Accuse not a Servant to his Master, lest he curse thee, and thou become
guilty.

19. Look not upon the Wine when it is red, when it gives his color in the
Cup, when it moves it self aright: at the last it biteth like a Serpent, and
stingeth like an Adder.

20. There is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor Counsel against the Lord.

(...).
The Table.
Action Chapter. 24. Anger Chapter. 30. Apparel Chapter. 7. Appearance of evil
Chapter. 84. Business Chapter. 23. Busy bodies Chapter. 85. Censorious
Chapter. 27. Censure Chapter. 44. Chance Chapter. 67. Charity Chapter. 54.
Children Chapter. 17. Church Chapter. 35. Companion Chapter. 15. Companions
Chapter. 87. Concerns Chapter. 86. Conscience Chapter. 77. Consideration
Chapter. 53. Content Chapter. 37. Contention Chapter. 59. Countenance Chapter.
34. Court favorite Chapter. 88. Creator Chapter. 6. Cross Chapter. 41. Danger
Chapter. 40. Death Chapter. 42. Design Chapter. 4. Design Chapter. 13.
Discourse Chapter. 8. Discretion Chapter. 72. Dreams Chapter. 71. Enemy
Chapter. 31. Envy Chapter. 39. Expense Chapter. 64. Eternity Chapter. 89. Faith
Chapter. 5. Fame Chapter. 45. Fancy Chapter. 57.60. Fast Chapter. 29. Felicity
Chapter. 80. Fortune Chapter. 19. Friend Chapter. 12.66. Gift Chapter. 43. God
Chapter. 1. Gods way Chapter. 73. Gods will Chapter. 76. Gods glory Chapter.
75. Great men Chapter. 74. Honor Chapter. 32. Holy Scripture Chapter. 46.
Imitation Chapter. 47. Injury Chapter. 48. Judgment-day. Chapter. 83. Chapter.
33. Luck Chapter. 20. Marriage Chapter. 11. Misery Chapter. 18. Meditation
Chapter. 63. Melancholy Chapter. 70. Master Chapter. 10. Mirth Chapter. 49.
Multitude Chapter. 78. Neighbor Chapter. 51. News Chapter. 65. Passion
Chapter. 55.99. Pleading Chapter. 28. Poverty Chapter. 61. Prayer Chapter. 2.
Preferment Chapter. 56. Pride Chapter. 21. Prosperity Chapter. 58. Proverbs
Chapter. 92. Reading Chapter. 25. Recreation Chapter. 16. Reproach (...)
Repentance (...) Resolution (...) Rest (...) Servant (...) Sin (...) Signs of
Heaven (...) Souls health (...) Table (...) Times (...) Thankfulness (...)
Vanity (...) Virtue (...) Wisdom (...) Wit (...)
FINIS.

