Die Veneris, 19. Iulij. 1644.
ORdered by the Lords in PARLIAMENT Assembled, That Mr. Vines has hereby
thanks given him by this House for the great pains he has took in his Sermon
preached before the Lords and Commons, on Thursday the Eighteenth of this
instant July, in Margarets Church Westminster, it being the day of Thanksgiving
for the great Mercy of God in the happy success of the Forces of both
Kingdoms against the Enemies of King and Parliament, near York: And that the
said Mr. Vines be entreated to Print and publish his said Sermon; which no man
is to presume to Print or reprint without his authority under his hand, as he
will answer the contrary to this House.

Jo. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

Die Veneris. 19. Iulij. 1644.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT, That Sir Robert
Harley do give the thanks of this House to Mr. Vines for the great pains he
took in the Sermon he preached at the entreaty of both Houses, at S. Margarets
Westminster, upon the day of public Thanksgiving for the great Victory
obtained against Prince Rupert and the Earl of Newcastles Forces, and he is
desired to publish it in Print.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I appoint Abel Roper to print my Sermon. RI. VINES.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE the Right Honorable the LORDS And COMMONS Assembled
in PARLIAMENT: At Margarets Church in Westminster, upon Thursday the 18. day of
July, 1644. It being the day of Public Thanksgiving for the great mercy of
God in the happy Success of the Forces of both Kingdoms near York, against
the Enemies of King and Parliament. By Alexander Henderson Minister at
Edinburgh.

Job 34. 29. When he gives quietness, who then can make trouble? And when he
hides his face, who then can behold him? whether it be done against a Nation,
or against a man only. Published by Order of both Houses.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Bostock, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard, at the
sign of the Kings Head. 1644.

Die Veneris, 19. Iulii. 1644.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, That Mr. Henderson has hereby
thanks given him by this House, for the great pains he took in his Sermon
preached before the Lords and Commons, on Thursday the eighteenth of this
instant July, in Margarets Church Westminster, it being the day of Thanksgiving
for the great Mercy of God in the happy success of the Forces of both
Kingdoms, against the Enemies of King and Parliament, near York: And that the
said Mr. Henderson be entreated to Print, and publish his said Sermon; which no
man is to presume to Print, or Re-print, without his Authority under his hand,
as he will answer the contrary to this House.

Io. Brown, Cler. Parliament.

Die Veneris. 19. Iulii. 1644.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Sir Robert
Harley do give the thanks of this House to Mr. Henderson, for the great pains
he took in the Sermon he preached at the entreaty of both Houses at St.
Margarets Westminster, upon the day of public Thanksgiving, for the great
Victory obtained against Prince Rupert, and the Earl of Newcastles Forces: and
he is desired to publish it in Print.

H. Elsyng, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I appoint Robert Bostock to Print this Sermon. Alex. Henderson.

A Catalogue of the Names of those Divines, who have Preached before the
Parliament, beginning Ian. 18. 1644. to July 18. 1644.
At a Thanksgiving before the Parliament and City of London.
Jan. 18. -- Mr. Marshall. 1 Chronicles. 12. 38, 39, 40. Jan. 31. -- Mr. Cawdrey.
Prove. 29. 8. Mr. Rutherfurd. Dan. 6. 26.
Febr. 28. -- Mr. B^ylie. Zach. 3. 1, 2. Mr. Young. Psalm. 31. 24.
Mar. 27. -- Mr. Gillespie. Ezekiel. 43. 11. Mr. Bond. Isa. 45. 15.

At a Thanksgiving for the Victory over Sir R. H^ptons Army.
Apr. 9. -- Mr. Ob. Sedgwick. Psalm. 3. 8. Mr. Case. Dan. 11. 32.

At the Thanksgiving for the Victory at Selby in Yorkshire.
Apr. 23. -- Mr. Perne. Exodus 34. 6. not printed. Mr. Carryl. Rev. 11. 16, 17.
Apr. 24. -- Dr. Staunton. Deuteronomy. 32. 31. Mr. Green. Neh. 1. 3, 4.
May 29. -- Dr. Smith. Psalm. 107. 6. Mr. Henry Hall. Matthew. 11. 12.
June 26. -- Mr. Hardwick. Psalm. 126. 5, 6, Mr. Hickes. Isa. 28. 5, 6.

At the Thanksgiving for the Victory over Prince Rupert, and the surrender of
York.
July 18. Mr. Vines. Isa. 63. 8. Mr. Henderson. Matthew. 14. 21.

Errata.
Page 1. line 3, for of, r. in* p. 6 l. 8 for in, r for* p. 7 l. 27, r. a time*
p. 11* marg. ^^^. p. 15 l. 12* for he, r. it. p. 21* l. 4. for thus, r. the.

To the KIRK and KINGDOM of SCOTLAND, Grace to you, and Peace from God our
Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
THree reasons have prevailed with me, to set your Honorable and Reverend name
before this Sermon: One is, That having Preached it before the Honorable
Houses of the Parliament of England, I conceived it more convenient to send it
to you in Print, then to direct it to them the second time, and in so doing I
cannot apprehend any danger of censure: Because the ground of my Calling to
join in so solemn an action, was rather a National concernment then any
personal respect to me, or expectation of any thing that could proceed from my
weakness, worthy of such an Auditory; as is one of the greatest, and gravest
on earth. In this therefore (if I mistake not) I do comply with their
intentions, and still follow their respects. Another Reason is, that after so
long absence not only from my personal charge, but from you my mother Church,
and Native Country, I do willingly take hold of this opportunity to t^stifie
that we your servants for Christ, who have the honor to be in this employment,
do bow our knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the whole
family of heaven and earth is named, that he would grant unto you, according
to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the
inner man* that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith Ephesians. 3. 14, 15, 16.
: And that we cannot enough render thanks to God for you, for all the joy
wherewith we joy, for your sakes before our God, night and day praying
exceedingly, that we might see your face, and (according to our calling and
measure) might perfect that which is lacking in your faith. These. 3. 9. 10.
The opinion of the merit of prayer is abomination, but the principal Theme
and matter of the solemnity of the day, we take for an answer of the prayers
of the godly in the three Kingdoms, and in all the Reformed Kirks; And the
desire we have to see you, is not only that natural instinct, which is to be
found in all of our Nation, whom the cause of God has brought from their own
homes and habitations; but our longing to come unto you with rejoicing,
bringing our sheaves with us, Psalm. 126. 6.
and to find you such as we would: for now we live if ye stand fast in the
Lord 1. These. 3. 8.
. The third reason is, that I may, upon this occasion which God has put in my
hand, communicate unto you my humble thoughts for your good, unto which (...)
thousands of your sons, worthier, then I can have any (...) think my self to
be, have according to the commandment of (...) and their manifold obligation,
devoted and sacrificed themsel^^^ and all that they have; For my part, since I
am not able to (...) my duty to the full, I shall still acknowledge my
Obligation, c^^fesse my debt, and what I have (which is a small proportion to
that which I owe) I shall willingly offer.

The Lord has done great things for you* and by you. His Spirit speaking in
your faithful Pastors, and working in your own hearts, will teach you and
give you grace in wisdom and humility, to compare your present estate under
the light, purity, liberty, and blessings of the Gospel, with the darkness,
corruptions, tyranny and miseries, which our forefathers were covered with
under Paganism of old, and under Antichrist afterward, and which our selves
did endure under Antichristian Prelacy of late. It is true, the present times
are full of sufferings, calamities, losses, and fears; all the three Kingdoms
have drunken, although by equal draughts, of a very bitter cup, such as the
Lord propineth when he is angry with his people, and no man knows when the
end shall be: Yet if we consider what our miseries might have been, if these
our miseries had not been, that we ought to choose affliction, and not impiety
or iniquity, and that all our troubles are but the travelings of childbirth,
to bring forth a Reformation; We will take the saying of Ecclesiastes to be
spoken to every one of us: Say not thou, what is the cause that the former
days were (...) better then these? for thou do not enquire wisely concerning
this Eccles. 7. 10.
. I intend not to see forth the great power and merciful providence of God in
the late seasonable Deliverance, and notable victory never to be forgotten,
that being recent in your minds, and the intent of the following Sermon; We
ought to be thankful for the undeniable presence of God, to stir up our
selves to take hold of him, lest he hide his face and depart from us, and to
go on hereafter with confidence in his Name against the greatest difficulties.

But when I call to mind what has come to pass in these days, since the
beginning of our troubles, and begin to consider the proceedings and results of
Divine providence, contrary to the designs and devices of the Enemies, which
they cannot d^ny, and far beyond the first intentions and particular desires
of such as the Lord has used for instruments in his work, which they do
reverently acknowledge, I may make use of the grave and serious warning of the
Apostle: Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God: on them which f^ll,
severity; but toward thee, goodness, if thou continue in his goodness: otherwise
thou also shall be cut off Romans 11. 22*
. And that we may the more value the goodness of God to our selves, we ought the
more to behold the severitie of God cutting off the pomp, the pride, the
tyranny, and power of the Enemies. I may also with him (although writing of a
matter of another kind) cry out: O the depth of the riches both of the
wisdom and knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his judgments, and his
ways past finding out! for who has known the mind of the Lord or who has
been his Counselor Romans 11. 33, 34.
? Not only in the matter of salvation and damnation; but in the administrations
of his providence, the Lord uses his Soveraigntie, and does what seems good
unto his wisdom: and although we know not the particular reason of every
thing, yet this we know, whatsoever be the weakness of men upon the one hand,
or the wickedness of men o^ the other, that all things are done by him that
rules the world, in great wisdom and Justice, to his own glory and the good
of his Church. Again, when from my sense of my self, and of my own thoughts
and ways (which many thousands may observe, and no doubt do observe of
themselves) I begin to remember, how men who love to live obscurely and in the
shadow, are brought forth to light, to the view and talking of the world, how
men that love quietness are made to stir, and to have a hand in public
business; how men that love soliloquies and contemplations are brought upon
debates and controversies, how men who love peace, are made to war and to shed
blood; and generally how m^n are brought to act the things, which they never
determined, nor so much as dreamed of before; The words of the Prophet Jeremie
come to my remembrance: O Lord, I know that the way of man is not in himself:
it is not in man that walks to direct his steps ( Ier. 10. 23.
): which imply the positive part: That the way of man is in the hand of God,
and that the Lord directs his steps to his own appointed ends; according to
the saying of the wise Solomon (whether speaking of the Decrees of God or of
the word of God) There are many devices in a man's heart, nevertheless the
Counsel of the Lord, that shall stand ( Pro. 19. 21.
). Experiments of things past, are documents of things to come. Let no man
think himself absolute master of his own actions or ways: When thou wast
young thou girdedst thy self, and walkedst whither* thou would: but when thou
shall be old, thou shall stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee,
and carry thee whither thou would not ( John 21. 18.
). Let no man say; I shall die in my nest, in mine own house with my children
about me and under my vvings ( Job 29. 18.
). We will learn I hope by time (if we be not unteachable) to distinguish
betwixt our first and natural will, and our second, our Spiritual, and more
deliberate will; and to say: Not my will, but thy Will be done ( Mat. 26. 39.
). The seven years of ensuing Providence, may carry us as far beyond the
present intentions, whether of the enemies of Religion, or our own, as the
seven yee^s past have done, beyond our former intentions and theirs. The
pulling down of Popery in the Christian world, and the putting down of
Prelacie, and the supporters thereof in Britain, are equally feasible to the
Almighty, who delights to turn our difficulties and impossibilities into the
glorious demonstrations of his Divine Power, and who puts motions into the
hearts of men, which they turn into Petitions, and endeavors, and God by his
Power, brings forth into reality and action, the conception; birth, and
perfection is all from himself.

When I speak of the future, and that which afterward may come to pass, my
meaning is, not that God will always, and throughout the whole work, use the
same individual instruments, experience has already proved the contrary: I
speak of the Collective and successive body, which like a flood, runs in a
continual course, but the several parts pass by very quickly; Joshua must
succeed to Moses, and Eliazar to Aaron, before the people of God be brought
into Canaan, and others must come after them, before the Temple be builded;
each one whom the Lord calls, has his own part. As the course of general
Providence in the World, and of special Providence in the Kirk, goes on
constantly, according to the Eternal Decrees of God, which men may oppose and
clamor against, but can no more hinder then the rising of the Sun, and his
ascending to his strength: So does the course of particular Providence in the
lives of men, which he cutteth off, or continues at his pleasure: Nor should
any man, who has seen the beginnings of this work, offend, or be displeased,
that his days are ended, before it end* more then others, who shall be honored
to be the witnesses of the glorious conclusion thereof, have cause to be
grieved, that they have not seen, or had a hand in the beginnings of it: even
as we have no more reason to be grieved, that our life lasts not longer, then
that it did not begin sooner. No man could know, but his life might have been
as short in Peace, as it has been in war; nor was it in any man's power in
the time of Peace, to choose the manner of his death. It should be sufficient
for us, that we follow the calling of God, that our life is not dear to us,
when he, who spared not his life for us, calls for it, that we are ready to
lay it down in his Cause, and that it shall add to our blessedness, if we
die not only in the Lord, but for the Lord.

Let us therefore observe the Lords Providence, admire his wisdom, and
goodness, adore his Sovereignty and greatness, and cheerfully offer, and give
up our selves to be disposed upon at his will, seeking his glory, and not our
own, and to approve our selves to our own consciences, and not to the world:
This will make us sincere and straight in our course, when others are seeking
themselves, quiet and secure in the midst of dangers, when others, like
Magor-Missabib, have fear round about, and contented in confidence Ier. 20. 3.
of a recompense of reward from God, against the ingratitude of men, when
Mercenaries have not the patience to bear it, because they served no other
master, and had no other thing in their eye, but their wages: a poor
compensation of their pains, and no proportion to the adventuring of their
lives. It is a freq^^^^ observation in history, upon a world of examples, that
such as have deserved best of the publik, have met not only with priv^^i^^
ingratitude, but have often been recompensed evil for good* which has given
occasion to Politicians to enter upon the debate of two questions: One is: what
can be the cause of this so universally known and confessed ingratitude, not
only from particular persons, but from the public. The other is: how it
comes to pass, that notwithstanding this known ingratitude, there be same
found in every age and State, that are more stirred up to deserve well of the
public, nor discouraged, or deterred, by what has befallen others before
them. Concerning the first, amongst other answer^ taken from that corruption,
malice, and envy, which poysoneth the nature of man they allege, that it
proceeds from covetousness, which makes the public to quarrel with them,
that such may seem unworthy of reward, whose great merits they are either
willing or unable to reward. The other they attribute to an heroic desire of
immortal praise, and a divine disposition to do good to all. But our
Profession can answer both in a word, that by a special providence, such as
have deserved well, come short of their rewards from men, that they may learn
in serving of men, to serve God, and by Faith and Hope to expect their reward
from himself, and in end himself for their reward; and that notwithstanding all
the ingratitude of the world, the Lord gives generous spirits to his servants
and stirs them up by his Spirit (the motions whereof, they neither can, nor
will resist) to do valiantly in his Cause. God has made you a fruitful
Mother of many Sons, as England, France, and Ireland may this day bear
witness. Never had your Sons more cause to rejoice in their Mother; for God
has made you honorable: No^ you the Mother more cause to rejoice in your
Sons; for God has put it in their hearts, to offer themselves willingly in and
for the cause of Christ. If some have proved sons of Beliall, void of grace
and natural affection and have provoked you to pronounce a malidiction upon
them, the Grace of God which has made the difference, is the more to be
magnified; and they that stand, as they are the more to be honored, so are they
warned; to take heed lest they fall.

Two things there be chiefly, which will give you peace for the present, and
through the blessing of God, will bring your troubles to a comfortable end; one
is, that when ye hear of Separatists, Semi-separatists, Anabaptists,
Antinomians, Libertines, Socinians, and of the many sects, which Satan the
father of Haeresies and Schisms, in opposition to the intended Uniformity in
religion, has raised in this Kingdom, and which no wisdom under heaven is
able to cure, but by settling the true government of the Kirk by Presbyteries
and Synods: Ye may call to mind, and apply to your selves the wholesome
Counsel of the Prophet Micah, All people will walk, every one in the Name of
his God, and we will walk in the Name of the Lord our God, for ever and ever (
Micah 4. 5.
); He will not have us to promise to our selves an universal consent in
Religion through the whole earth; nor to suffer our selves to be driven away by
the example or sleight of men, and cunning crastinesse, whereby they lie in
wait to deceive ( Ephesians. 4. 14.
): But will have us to walk in the Name of our God, which is nothing else but
to understand, believe, and obey his word, by which he is known as by his
Name; and this he will have us to do, not for some time, but for ever and
ever; and with the counsel of the Prophet join the example of the Kirk of
God, All this is come upon us, yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we
dealt falsely in thy Covenant; our heart is not turned back, neither have our
steps declined from thy way, though thou have sore broken us in the place of
Dragons, and covered us with the shadow of death ( Psalm. 44. 17, 18, 19.
). This testimony of your uprightness and constancy, that no trouble could
move you, so much as in heart, to turn away from the way of God, will be a
well spring of comfort to you in all your troubles, and this comfort (I speak
it to the praise of the free grace of God) belongs unto you: for would ye
have dealt falsely in the Covenant, and forsaken the truth, ye might not only
have escaped all the troubles which ye have sustained at home and abroad, but
also have enjoyed all the Peace and plenty that the world could promise; This I
speak as a natural man, and this indeed is the judgment of the natural man,
looking no higher then this world, and the second causes: But as the Messenger
of God, I may say, had ye dealt wickedly against his Covenant, and blessed your
selves in your own heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the
imagination of mine heart, the Lord would not have spared you, but the anger of
the Lord, and his Jealousy would have smoaked against you Deu^. 29. 20.
.

The other thing that I would to this purpose commend, is that ye would
remember, that besides Haeresie, which opposes the truth professed by the
Kirk, and beside Schism, which destroys the Unity of the Kirk, Profaneness
of heart and life, which is a third p^st, has ever spoiled the holiness of
the Kirk, and is a most high provocation against the most holy Lord God, which
we are all to strive against, as well as against Haeresie and Schism, by
joining the power of Godliness with the Profession and form thereof 2. Tim.
^. 5.
, and by holding the mystery of the Faith in a pure Conscience 1. Tim. 3. ^.
, which some sometime amongst you, having put away (and that with violence done
to their conscience, as the Word dimporteth) concerning Faith have made
shipwreck 1. Tim. 1. 19.
, and have endeavored to bring others upon the Rocks, that they might perish
with them. Spiritual judgments are to be observed no less then temporal,
both because there is more wrath in them, and they are more hardly discerned.
Pelagianisme of old, and Arminianisme of late, is the just punishment of a
formal Profession, Socinianisme, of the neglect of the Son of God,
Antinomianisme, of turning the grace of God into wantonness, Anabaptisme, of
Baptizing of Infants in private, and of the slighting of the Baptism in
public, as if it did not concern the whole Congregation; and Separation, of
the despising of the true Government of the Kirk; so does the Lord send strong
delusions upon them that receive not the love of the truth, and take pleasure
in unrighteousness ^. These. 2. 10, 11, 12.
. I will not excuse the length of this Epistle, because I intended it. I am not
bounded to a time in writing, as I behoved to be in Preaching. I am bold with
you, because I know you. To save you from spiritual judgments, to deliver you
comfortably from your present troubles, and to make you walk worthy of the
grace wherein the Lord has abourded toward you, that you fall not, and that
you may be presented faultlesse before Christ with joy, is and shall be the
humble and earnest desire, and prayer of

Your humble Servant, and obedient Son, in and for the Gospel of CHRIST.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Lords and Commons at Margarets Church in
Westminster, upon Thursday the 18. of July, 1644.
MATTHEW. 14. 21. And immediately Jesus stretched forth his hand, and caught him,
and said unto him, O thou of little faith, wherefore did thou doubt?
MUch is this day required of Your Honors, much of You very Honorable, and
much of us all, beloved of the Lord Jesus Christ. In the times of the old
Testament, the Sacrifices of one Solemnity were much the same with the
Sacrifices of another; Yet when more feasts did meet together in one day as the
Sabbath, the first day of the month, and the feast of Trumpets, Numb. 28. and
29.
all the Sacrifices of the several days were offered in that one day; which
made the greater celebrity. The Lord has this day multiplied his benefits upon
us, as the Loaves and Fishes were multiplied in the hands of the Apostles, in
the time of the distribution John 6.
: for no sooner is the day indicted to give thanks for one favor, but we hear
the news of another, that we may add more fire, and multiply our Sacrifices.

ALthough these words of our Lord, at the first hearing, Why this Text chosen.
may seem not to be much important to the solemnity of the day, yet a twofold
consideration has led me to this choice: One is, because for some time past,
where I had occasion to speak in public, I have been expounding and applying
to our present Troubles, this part of the holy History, expressing the
dangerous tempest, which tossed the Disciples of Christ at Sea, as an Emblem
and representation of the condition of the Church of Christ on earth,
especially in the time of great trouble: herein following the example (beside
many other interpreters) of a worthy instrument of Reformation, who in the
Idolatrous and bloody times of Queen Mary, did upon this Text, in the evidence
and power of the Spirit, write a large Admonition to the Professors of the
truth in England The admonition of John Knox to the professors of the truth in
England.
: And now being by Providence brought on to these words, expressing the
deliverance of Peter out of his special tentation, and leading us toward the
ceasing of the wind, and calming of the tempest, I judged them not unfit for
the present condition, which God by his merciful Providence has brought our
affairs into at this time. The Lord who stretched forth his hand, and caught
Peter, when he was beginning to sink, and soon after, made the wind to cease,
which moved them that were in the Ship to come and worship him, saying* Thou
art the Son of God; the same Lord, even the Lord of Armies, and the God of
battles, has stretched forth his hand for our deliverance, and when he will,
he can rebuke the winds, and by his Word make a comfortable calm, that all
the three Kingdoms may fall down and worship him, saying with one mind, and
one mouth, to the hearing of all the Christian world, Of a truth thou art the
Son of God; which would prove a ground of reforming the House of God
according to his own will: For if they had known the Son of God, the King of
glory, they would not have crucified, but submitted unto him, and done his
will. Another consideration also made me to fix upon this Text: although it
does not hold forth a formal thanksgiving, which is so ordinary in other
places of Scripture, that nothing more; and that which follows here
afterward, is liker unto it, yet it contains the materials, and lays a
foundation of the duty: for it is a notable and seasonable deliverance out of a
great distress, together with a most powerful argument to enforce the duty of
Thankesgiving, taken from the unworthiness of the party on whom it is
bestowed: Why did thou doubt, O thou of little Faith? The depth of our
distress, the greatness of our Deliverance, and the weakness of our Faith,
which has made a great deal of doubting, are fuel to inflame our hearts, and
to make the fire of the Sacrifice to ascend.

In the words going before, Peter had not so much Faith, Paraphrased.
as that when the wind became boisterous, he was able any more to walk on the
water: for through the weakness of his faith, he begins to sink: yet he
has so much faith, that when he begins to sink, he cries out, Lord save
me, and immediately the Lord answers his Prayer, and sends him a present
deliverance in such manner, as he might know it was from himself, for he
stretched out his hand and caught him: but withal rebukes him for the
weakness of his faith, which made him so to waver, that at first he would
assay to walk on the water, and now when he sees the wind boisterous, he
begins to sink.

The Text parts it self in two branches: the one is a Deliverance, Divided.
the other a Reprehension. The branch of Deliverance bears a sweet fruit of
thankfulness, and the branch of reprehension, a more bitter, but very wholesome
fruit of humiliation, which being tasted by us, makes the deliverance to
relish the better with our selves, and the thankfulness the more acceptable to
God: both together make up a composition like unto that of the holy oil and
perfume, Exodus 30. and leads us up to the Mountain of Myrrh, and to the
hill of Frankincense, Cant. 4. 6.

In the deliverance of Peter, there be four things observeable, and appliable
unto our deliverance. 1. The greatness of it, Peter was delivered out of a
great danger: he was walking upon the water, and the wind was boisterous. 2.
The seasonablenesse and opportunity of it, when he was beginning to sink. 3.
The sensiblenesse of the hand of Christ in working it: He stretched forth his
hand, and caught him. 4. The relation of it to the Prayer of Peter, unto which
it was a real answer: Peter cried, Lord save me and immediately Jesus
stretched forth his hand, and caught him. And Fifthly, I take in the matter of
the reprehension, which is the second part of the text, as it relates to the
deliverance: for his unbelief and doubting was the lead that made him sink, but
free grace was the rock that carried him above, and so the deliverance was a
free deliverance; not from his merit, but contrary to his demerite. From these
particulars, I present this observation.

Doct. That who so is wife, and desire to see the loving Doct.
kindness of the Lord in their Deliverance, that they may mutually love the
Lord, and be thankful unto him, are to observe and consider not only the
substance, and (if I may so call it) the bulk and body of their deliverance,
but the circumstances also wherewith it is clothed, and with the train whereof
it comes accompanied unto us. For understanding whereof we are to distinguish
not only in humane actions between one man and another, but in all our actions
toward God, and in all the actions of God toward us, betwixt the action it
self, and the circumstances compassing and clothing it: for although
Jurisconsults, Rhetoricians, and Divines, do differ about the enumeration and
particular description of circumstances, yet all of them with one consent
acknowledge that they are much to be heeded and observed. In our good actions,
where the substance is but small, the circumstance makes a supply. The poverty
of the Widow added much weight to her two mites, which she threw into the
Treasury: Verily I say unto you, that this poor widow has cast more in then
all these who has cast into the Treasury: for all they did cast in of their
abundance, but she of her want did cast in all that she had, even all her
living, Mark. 12 43 44. In all our evil actions, it aggravateth our
transgression, that w^e who are but dust and ^shes, do sin against the
greatest and goodest God, and that for trifles, for things of no worth and
perishing. That we sin against Knowledge, and against Mercy. The distinction
of sins of ignorance, of weakness, and presumption: the excusablenesse and
inexcusablenesse of sin, arises from this ground. In the actions of God
toward us, both the blessings and deliverances which we receive, are much
illustrated and magnified by the circumstances of so great a God, that it is
not lawful for us to endeavor to express how great he is; he being great
without measure, that he should have loved us first, us so small, even before
we were, and such, even his enemies, and so much, and so greatly, that he
spared not his own Son to die for us, spared not his own Spirit to dvvell
with us. Thus we see how this love is magnified and multiplied by the
circumstances which make it a great love, a manifold love, a wonderful love.
So is it also in Divine deliverances both of his people in the times of the old
Testament, of his Church in the times of the New Testament, and of particular
persons in both times. The Circumstances add much light and luster unto them,
to endeare them the more unto us. No man can think upon the deliverance of the
people of God from Egypt, and from Babylon, and of the Christian Church from
persecution, but he must spend a great part of his thoughts upon the
circumstances of the Deliverances. The Deliverances from the Armado, from the
Powder Treason, from the enemy since the beginning of this War, are great
in substance, but each one of them is also admirable in the circumstances. And
who can meditate upon the preservation and deliverance of Noah, of Joseph, of
Moses, of David, of Daniel, of Jonah, of Peter, of Paul, and many others of
old, and of late, but he must be affected with many particular occurrences of
their deliverances? Natural men look to the substance only, and satisfy
themselves in this, that they are delivered, but those that are spiritual,
cannot satisfy themselves in the meditation of the Circumstances, with which
they are deeply affected.

There may be three reasons given, why circumstances of 1. Reason.
this kind are to be observed. 1. Because the Lord God has a Providence in the
smallest things, in things most casual and contingent, and in such things as
are arbitrary unto men, and seem most to depend upon their will and election.
And what he dignifieth with his Providence, we ought not to disdain in our
observation. The poorest of the works of Divine dispensation, is abundantly
rich in our meditation. 2. There is much manifestation of love to the people of
God 2. Reason.
in circumstances, and much Revelation of the wrath of God against the enemy.
When the Godly look upon them, their hearts are wonderfully affected, overcome,
and melted within them; and when the wicked are constrained to hear of them,
they are confounded within themselves, and never more then upon this ground,
do apprehend, that God has been fighting against them, and they fighting
against God. 3. A third Reason may be, because the Lord prepares matter 3.
Reason.
for a Sacrifice of glory and Thanksgiving to himself, not only from the great
bundles and sheaves of his works, but from the small scattered ears of his
Providence: for of him, and through him, and for him are all things.

Upon these and the like grounds, we are to observe the circumstances of the
work of God at this time. The Deliverance and victory it self, is like the
moon shining in the Similes.
night with her borrowed light from the Sun, yet the circumstances thereof
are like the bright Stars, and some of them of the first magnitude,
twinkling, and sending out their light round about for our contemplation and
comfort. The one is the fair and beautiful ground of the work, the other the
embroidery and variety of colors wrought upon it by the hand of God, and laid
before our eyes, that we may behold the manifold goodness, power, and wisdom
of God.

I shall now therefore enter upon the particulars formerly The greatness of
Peter's deliverance.
proposed from the text: of which the first was the greatness of Peter's
Deliverance at this time, which may appear, if we consider these three things.
1. The glory of Jesus Christ: if Peter had perished at this time, it had not
been (speaking after the manner of men) without dishonor to the Son of God:
for being called by him to come upon the water, it would have been attributed
to want of power in Christ, if he had perished, and it was his glory to save
him; and so in this respect the Deliverance was great. 2. The danger he was in:
the raging Sea ready to devour him, he being unable to save himself, and there
being no other to help him, and therefore in this respect, the Deliverance
great. 3. The danger the other Disciples were in: for if they had seen him
sink down and swallowed up, what could they who were still tossed in the ship,
have expected, but to have perished also? and therefore in respect of the
Disciples, it was a great Deliverance. The Lord looks to his own glory, to
the distress of his servants that are like to perish, and to the scandal of
others, and draws them forth of many Waters. Psalm. 18. 16.

2. The seasonablenesse and opportunity of this Deliverance The seasonablenesse
thereof.
is manifest by two things; one was, when the Sea through the boisterous wind
was in the greatest rage; the other was, when he was brought very low in his
own sense. It is familiar in Scripture to compare the Enemies of the Church to
the raging waves of the Sea: when the enemy is most arrogant and proud, and
when the Church and people of God are beginning to sink, then is the
opportunity of the destruction of the one, and deliverance of the other: for in
that nick of time, is the hand and power of God most discernable to his own
glory, then is the confusion of the enemy most terrible, then is the
deliverance of the Godly most vvonderfull, and comfortable. Hence is it that
the Lord, who has appointed time for every thing, and has made every thing
beautiful in his time, keeps this rule in all his great deliverances: he
suffers the wicked to exalt themselves, and to gather strength, he gives
them sometimes Victories in a vicissitude with the people, and thereby hardneth
their own hearts, and the hearts of others that trust in them; (as when the
Magitians brought things to pass, like unto the Miracles of Moses) for how
else should they grow up, and be made ripe for destruction? How should their
cup be filled? He suffers also his own people, and his own Cause sometimes
to be borne down, for how else should they be in due time exalted? But all
this is nothing else but a preparation for a glorious work of Justice and
Mercy in the end. If men would lay this one parcel of Providence to heart,
they would be forced against all their Atheism, to cry out, Verily there is a
reward for the righteous, verily he is God that judges the earth, Psalm. 58.
11.

3. The third thing, it the sensiblenesse of the hand of The sensibleness of
the hand of Christ in it.
Christ in delivering Peter, He stretched forth his hand, and caught him. He
could have saved him by his word only, as Matthew. 8. 8. The Centurion said,
Speak the word only, and my servant shall be healed; Yea without speaking of
the word, by his Divine power: for even when he did speak the word, it was not
his Word, but his Power that wrought the miracle, as when before he said to
Peter, Come, it was not his word but his power that made Peter to walk upon the
water. Yet he stretched forth his hand for diverse causes, but principally, that
it might be known, that he it was that by his power did deliver him. Thus did
he in working other Miracles, as in curing the Lepers, and the sick, that it
might be known, that he himself, and no other did work them, and all to this
effect, that when it is seen that his hand works deliverance, he may have the
glory of it. Wherefore are the Works of God ascribed to the Arm of God, the
hand of God, the right hand of God, the finger of God, but that his power and
efficiency may be acknowledged of us, and that he may have the praise of his
own work? The Lord is a jealous God, and will not give his glory to another.
He gives many good things to the Children of men, and works many notable
Deliverances for them, but the glory of them all he reserves for himself.
Potiphar committed all that he had to the hand of Joseph, and kept nothing back
from him but his Wife, which made Joseph to say (and we in this case may say
it upon greater reason) how can I do this great wickedness and sin against
God? Genesis 39. 9. He is an Usurper, an Adulterer, an Idolater, and Atheist that
robs God of his glory. Thus says the Lord, Let not the wise man glory in
his Wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might; Let not the rich
man glory in his riches: but let him that glories glory in this, that he
understands and knows me that I am the Lord, which exercise loving kindness,
judgment, and righteousness in the earth: for in these things I delight,
says the LORD.

4. A fourth thing to be taken notice of in this deliverance The Relation it
had to the prayer of Peter.
is, the Relation it had to the prayer of Peter. He prayed in his danger and
distress, and the Lord immediately stretched forth his hand and delivered him.
The Blessings and Deliverances which God grants unto his people are much
endeared unto us by this, that they are the answer of our prayers: For beside
the benefit and deliverance it self, our faith in the general is confirmed,
that we worship not an Idol, but the true and living God who hears prayer.
Our special faith is much strengthened; for hereby we know that God hears
our prayer, that through Jesus Christ our prayers and persons are accepted, and
that he is our God.

Hence it is observeable that the Godly, such as Hannah, David, and others,
speak to God in more familiar terms after they had received the answers of
their prayers, then before. Our confidence also is increased. For upon the
gracious answer of our prayers, we can with greater boldness present our
petitions before the throne of Grace. No man makes conscience of prayer, or
endeavors to pray aright, but he makes also conscience and endeavors to
observe the answer of his prayers. Sometimes the present answer of prayer, is
no other but the continuance of the spirit of prayer, which still helps our
infirmities and makes intercession for us, Rom 8. 26. Sometimes our prayer
returns into our bosom, Psalm. 35. 13. where we find the peace of God which
passes all understanding, to keep our hearts and minds through Christ Jesus,
Phil. 4. 7* Sometimes we have no other answer, but my grace is sufficient for
thee: for my strength is made perfect in weakness, 2. Cor* 12* 9. And
sometimes, either a better, or the same thing which we desired, and it may be
with great advantage, is granted unto us: of which there be* many examples
like unto this of the answer of Peter's prayer.

The fifth and last thing which sets forth this Deliverance, It was from
free goodness.
is this, That it was of free goodness, and not from any perfection in him: for
he is rebuked for his doubting as one of little faith. Where we may observe,
that beside the wide difference betwixt believers and unbeleevers, which is a
difference in kind (faith elevating a believer far above natural men and
unbeleevers, as man is above the inferior creatures, and angels above men)
There is a difference in degrees betwixt one believer and another, and betwixt
a believer and himself; insomuch that one is said to be of little faith, and
another to have great faith, and one and the same believer sometimes to have
little; at other times great faith, Peter had faith to walk upon the water,
which was the greater trial, but now when the wind is boisterous, which was
the lesser temptation, his faith proves weak, which was a Progstick of that
which came to pass in his denial afterward Quid aliud ^^t Christum sequi in
atrium pontisicis quam super eisdem fluctibus ambulare cum Christo? et quid
aliud erat tentatio Ancillae quam ventus adversarius? et quid aliud tentatio ex
timore, quam hic submertio ex timore? Musculus, in Matthew. 14.
. I have not a mind nor is it proper for this time to weary your attention
with the many distinctions of faith: that there is a faith which is an habit
and virtue Theological, and a faith which is a special gift: that there is a
faith felt, and a faith unfelt: much less with the distinctions of faith
formed and unformed, explicit and implicit. I would only tell you, that
faith is said to be weak extensively, and in respect of the knowledge of the
things to be believed: thus the faith of the Apostles, while they knew not the
Resurrection of Christ, the faith of Rachab, the woman of Samaria, and many
others who knew but few of the mysteries of faith, was but a weak faith: Or
intensively and in respect of persuasion and application: It was long ere
Thomas was brought to say, My Lord and my God. He that has this weak faith
may be considered of us as he has faith, for weak faith is true faith, and
as his faith is weak: as he has faith he believes and adhereth to the truth
of the word, and in distress prays and cries with Peter, Lord save me* But
as his faith is weakened by temptations and difficulties apprehended by natural
sense and carnal reason, which is the wisdom of the world, and an enemy to
the receiving of the wisdom of God, he doubts, he wavereth, he
staggereth* through a mixture of unbelief, which certainly is the work of the
flesh, whatsoever Papists say to the contrary in commendation of doubting: and
yet such is the goodness and grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that in this night
of darkness, in this winter season, he looks at the root under the ground, and
to the leaf of prayer which it sends forth, when neither fruit nor flower does
appear, and thereupon, he that breaks not the bruised reed, and quenches
not the smoking flax, does deliver his own children, which makes them
afterward when they recover their strengths, to think shame of themselves, and
to admire of his wonderful goodness. Faith sometimes is like fire in the flint,
which to the sense is as cold as another stone, yet has fire in it naturally,
as the soul which is partaker of the Divine Nature, has faith in it
supernaturally: Sometimes it is like fire in the tinder, sometimes like fire in
the match, sometimes like fire in the candle, and sometimes like fire on the
hearth, which enlightneth and warmeth the whole room: But the Lord in
answering the prayers of his people, looks more to the truth then to the
(...). Etym.
degree of faith. The word of doubting (as some have searched into the nature
of it) is borrowed from a balance or pair of weights, the scales whereof move
and waver up and down inconstantly. We have another word Mark 11. 23. which
signifies to dispute or debate, because they who doubt have a dispute and
debate of adverse parties within themselves, like that of the twins which
struggled together in the womb of Rebecca, and makes them to go, and enquire
of the Lord. The nature of faith, Heb. 11. 1. is a subsistence by which the
mind looking constantly at Jesus Christ, is preserved from fluctuating and
doubting, as when the tongue of the Balance stands straight and stable. But
Satan, the old Adam, and the world, come in, and sometimes lift up the one
scale in Presumption, and sometimes bear down the other in diffidence and
pusilanimity. Christ opposes to the one the danger of sinking, and to the
other his Word and hand, that so the soul may be reduced to the stability and
subsistence of Faith. Thus was the wonderful Wisdom, Mercy, Truth, and Power
of the Son of God, manifested at that time, and many times since.

And thus have I made a survey of the five Circumstances The five circumstances
of Peter's deliverance applied to ours.
accompanying this miracle of Peter's Deliverance: all which are very appliable
to that notable deliverance which the Lord has wrought for us, for the public
acknowledgement whereof, we hold this solemn Assembly. First, if it had
pleased the Lord to turn his hand against us, which was stretched out for us
against our enemies, the Name of God had been dishonored, our Armies had been
destroyed, and our selves, that were but in a ship near unto them, had been in
danger to have perished; and thus the deliverance is great.

2. As it was great and eminent, so was it opportune and seasonable: I speak to
them who are acquainted with the posture of affairs: the Enemy had exalted
himself to the top of his pride, and had designed like Belshazzar and his
Nobles, to make themselves merry with the spoils of the people of God, who,
although their hearts were steadfast to the Cause and work of God, yet by divine
dispensation, delaying their desires, and bringing them about in his own wise
and secret way, were brought low, and therefore in the one respect, and the
other, a very seasonable deliverance.

3. The hand of God was sensibly seen in it: specially that when they were
almost lost in the opinion of many of themselves, the Lord brought the wheel
about upon the enemy so marvellously, that it is a wonder, that so many
(although they had been naked men) could have fallen by the sword in so few
hours.

4. That in this the Lord answered the Prayer of his people: He has heard us
since the beginning of our Supplications, he has given grace to continue in
humiliation and Prayer, he has many times returned our prayer into our bosom,
he has made his grace sufficient for us to uphold us, and has given such
victories, as have been large matter of thanksgiving: But in this he has
answered us above our expectation and particular desires at this time: For we
would have been satisfied for the time with the rendering of that beleagred
City, but the Lord has done much, yea, very much more.

5. And we may justly add the last: That the deliverance was of free
goodness: For our faith was not perfect. Were not many of us full of doubting
and fears, yea full of unbelief, that it might have been said of some of us:
Why have ye not believed, O ye of no Faith? And of the best of us, O ye of
little faith, why did you doubt? Our hearts have been wavering, and moving up
and down like a Balance, sometimes presuming, sometimes distrusting, as
wanting that subsistence of faith, which fixes the heart, and makes a
stablenesse and staidness of the soul.

It remains, that we make the right use of this notable The use of this work
of Divine Providence.
work of Divine Providence. To this purpose from the text, and from that which
follows after, and goes before about the same subject; I shall propose three
very necessary duties; and what may serve either for reproof, or comfort, shall
be intermixed, and for brevity be taken in with the duties.

The first we may learn from that which follows, verse Use 1. Thankfulness
in Adoration and Confession.
33. Then they which were in the Ship, came and worshipped him* saying, Of a
truth thou art the Son of God. They neither envy Peter, nor conceive any
indignation against him* for his prerogative in walking upon the Water, which
was not granted unto them, nor do they adore or admire* him, knowing that
without Christ, he could not have been able to save himself. For they had seen
him beginning to sink, and had heard him cry out, Lord save me; only they fell
down before Christ, adoring him, and give him this great testimony: Of a truth
thou art the Son of God. They who before, through the hardness of their
hearts, had not considered the Miracle of the Loaves, Mark* 6. 52* did by this
miraculous work know him, and knowing him* they worshipped him: Nor did Christ
reject their testimony, but by his silence, consented unto, and sealed the
truth of it Quid ergo est quoth. Iudaei dicu ^t cum virum quidem Dei and Prophetam
fuisse, filium vero Dei non fuisse? Si filius Dei non fuit, certe neque vir
Dei, neque Propheta fuit, cum non fit viri Dei ad exhibitum honorem divinitatis
conticescere* Qui^ dicat cum Caesarianum esse pr^bum ac ge^ui^um Caesari
fidelem, qui honorem Casari ^o^^ comp^^entem ob. a^um non repudi^ver^t, sed
ag^ovoris? Muscul. in Matthew. 14.
. The same duty is required of us all: No man is to envy those Worthies, whom
the Lord has honored to be isntrumental in this great work. The Lord does
what, and by whom he will, and whom the Lord honors, it becomes us to
honor, which if we grudge to do, the Lord will honor them the more. Again,
no man ought to offer the fat of the Sacrifice, or the principal praise of the
day unto the instruments: Did not many of them at first begin to sink? and as
many times before, so all of them at that time, were constrained to cry out,
Lord save us: but we must all, and they also with us, fall down before Christ
our Savior, and great Deliverer, and with one heart and voice, say and sing,
Of a truth thou art the Son of God; which he will admit as a praise due unto
his Name, and acceptable unto him, that he may have a Name above every Name.
The humility of Gideon, in answering the pride of Ephraim, was no less
commendable, Take heed to Emulation, and beware of envy.
then his courage against Midian, when he said unto them, What have I done now
in comparison of you? is not the gleaning of the grapes of Ephraim, better then
the vintage of Abiezer? It was the wisdom of Scipio the Roman General, when
two of his Soldiers contended about the Crown (due to him who first scaled
the walls) so hotly, that the whole Army was in danger to be divided, so to
detirmine the question, that the Crown was given to them both, both having (as
he affirmed) climed the wall together. It is observed by the learned for a
rule, that in a contest for priority, and praise, when each party from
self-love, takes the first place unto himself, or from partiality, gives it
to him whom he affects, that he who unanimously has the second voice, is to
be preferred before all: Upon this ground, the sect of the Academiques amongst
the Philosophers has been esteemed the best, because both the Stoics and
Epicureans do give their voice to the Academiques next unto themselves. If a
General of an Army should examine his chief Commanders, who next themselves
did best in battle, it were like that he who had the second voice, were of the
greatest merit: and yet they observe a fallacy and reprehension here; for men
cunningly do incline to give testimony next themselves, unto those that are
not like to come in their way, or to stand in their light. There needs no
such contest amongst us: Let all men, falling down, give the praise unto God,
and be content that the work is done, and they have been faithful in their
performances. What have thou, which thou have not received? What have thou
received, which might not have been given to another, and which may not for thy
pride and emulation, yet be taken from thee, and given to another?

I know the distinction and difference which Moralists Difference betwixt
Emulation and Envy.
make betwixt emulation and envy: that emulation has place in the greatest and
most magnanimous spirits, that he makes them to covet and seek after the best
gifts, that it affects the mind with grief, not because another is unworthy
of that which he has, (for that is indignation) nor because another has that
which himself wants, (for that is envy) but because thou want that which
another has, which beseems thee to have no less then him, and which by thy
industry and the blessing of God* thou might have attained, or may yet
attain unto: As when a Godly man is grieved, that with other Martyrs of
Christ, for whose constancy in the Truth he rejoices, he has not also been
partaker of the glory of Martyrdom: Or when a Soldier is grieved, that with
his fellow soldiers, whose courage and success he congratulates, he had not a
hand in the glorious victory against the enemy. I deny not, but such a pure
emulation may be found in regenerate hearts, and that there may be somewhat
like unto it in a Themistocles, that could not sleep when he began to think of
the Trophies of Miltiades Plut. in Apo.
. Yet would I have it acknowledged, that as emulation and envy are often
expressed by one word in both the Originalls, so does it come to pass that
emulation (such is the base corruption of our nature) does often degenerate
into envy, and seldom is it seen, that he who is much emulous, is not somewhat
envious Ambae (...) sorores a^rae noctis siliae, Hesiod. Illa amulatio est
laudabilis quae non est rivalitui similis. Cic.
. Some kinds of sins do reign and rage most in the time of Peace and
Prosperity, another sort in time of War and Trouble: but envy finds matter
to work upon at all times. It is a Monster of many heads: there is one kind of
it like unto that in Joshua. Numb. 11. 27, 28. and in the Disciples of Christ,
Mark. 9. 38* and in the Disciples of John, Ioh. 3. 26. We are not free of this
kind of envy. There is another kind of it, like that of the Philistims, Genesis
26. 14, 15. which is most diabolical. But besides these, there be other two
sorts of it set on work by Satan at this time, and which all good men would
beware of: One is of those that cannot admit an equal, that would engrosse all
alone, Mat. 20. 11. Acts 13. 44. Another of those that cannot permit any to be
preferred unto them, as in Cain, Genesis 4. 3. 4. In the brethren of Joseph, Acts
7. 9. In Miriam, Number. 12. 2. In Saul, 1 Samuel 18. It was foolishness in the
women and people, yet it was truth in the Nobles of the Medes and Persians,
Daniel 6. 4. 5. The Scribes, Pharisees, Sadduces and people of the Jews, Matthew.
23. 13. Acts 5. 17. Acts 13. 44. 45.

We have an example of both sorts in the Courtiers of Saul against David, and
in Pompey the great, and Julius Caesar Caesar^e priorem, Pompeiusve p^r^m.
. As it is one of the most common, so it is one of the greatest evils in the
world: it being not only most opposite unto Charity; but the cause of
Contention, Mutinies, Lies, Slanders, Sedition, and brings a world of
miseries from the justice of God. No sort of persons have more need to be upon
their guard against this Enemy, then brethren, amongst whom, if once
Emulations, Hatred, and Envy, find place to work division, they become
irreconciliable. Like unto fragments of Crystal glass, which after breaking
cannot be demented again. Because the smallest injury, where kindness is
deserved and expected, and much more envy, is judged to be ingratitude, which
is acknowledged by all, who know the nature of it, to be a manifest injury,
and as intolerable as any other. And of all sores of Brethren none have reason
to take greater heed unto this evil, then such as naturally are strangers one
to another, and of diverse nations, but are sworn Brethren, if the fire of
envy and hatred once begin to burn in their breasts, they want the affection
of natural brethren to extinguish it. The best remedy for such, is the right
embracing of one true Religion, and religiously to remember their Covenant, by
which they are joined to Jesus Christ, and amongst themselves, which will make
them forget that they be of diverse Countries and Kingdoms, and timely to resist
all divisive motions, the mother whereof is Emulation and envy, which I
heartily wish may be as far from us all, as it was from the Disciples of
Christ at this time.

Setting aside therefore with the Disciples all Emulation The Adoration of
Christ.
and Envy, all Admiration and Adoration of men, Let us follow the example of
the Apostles in that twofold duty performed by them: the one is the Adoration
of Christ, the other the Confession of Christ. They have not spoken amiss, who
conceave that there be four parts of the Moral worship of God, according to
the parts of the first and great Commandment, Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy
strength. Mark 12. Luke 10. The first of them is, the attentive consideration
of the works of God by the outward and inward senses. The second is, the right
judging of the works of God by the mind and understanding. The third is, the
congruous and suitable affection of the soul, by the heart which is the seat of
the affections. The fourth is, the testification of this affection in our whole
life, by the actions of the will. Amongst which (for they be many) these two in
the Text are to be numbered: Adoration and Confession, which were the
thanksgiving of the Disciples at this time, and now upon our Deliverance are
required of us. And who is it that beholding the power of Christ in the
greatness of the Deliverance, the wisdom of Christ in the seasonablenesse of
the Deliverance, the jealousy of Christ, who will not give his glory to
another, in the sensiblenesse of his hand in working it, the truth of Christ in
hearing prayer according to his promise, and the mercy of Christ in passing by
so many sins, and so much doubting, would not adore this mighty, wise,
jealous, true, and merciful Lord? When the children of Israel had heard that
the Lord had visited them, and that he had looked upon their affliction, Then
they bowed their heads and worshipped, Exodus 4. 31. After that the Lord had
spoken to Moses of the Religion of the Passover, and the smiting of the first
borne of Egypt, The people bowed the head and worshipped, Exodus 12. 27. When
Iehoshaphat upon his Fast and Prayer heard from the Spirit of the Lord, which
came upon Ichaziel, that the Lord was to fight for Judah, and that they were
only to stand still and see the Salvation of the Lord, he bowed his head with
his face to the ground, and all Judah and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem fell
before the Lord worshipping the Lord, 2. Chron. 20. 18. At the restoring of
Religion and cleansing of the house of God, the King and all that were present
with him, bowed themselves and worshipped, 2. Chron. 29. 29. And shall not we
when the Lord has visited us, and looked upon our affliction, when he has
foughten for us, and slain the strength and firstborn of our enemies, when he
is about the restoring of Religion, and the cleansing and building of his
Temple, shall not we in all fear and reverence fall down and adore before
him, acknowledging his Soveraignitie and our own baseness and unworthines? Let
the whole Church Militant and Triumphant, the twenty four Elders, and the
four living creatures, men and angels, fall down and worship him that lives
for ever and ever, saying, Blessing, honor, glory and power, be unto him that
sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.

The other part of their thanksgiving, is their Confession The Confessing of
Christ.
of Christ. They give him this testimony, of a truth thou art the Son of God.
This they all confess, and were ready to confess before all the world, which
they also did afterward. Of this testimony John says, Whosoever shall confess
that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwells in him, and he in God, 1 John 4. 15.
which is not so to be understood, as if no other truth were to be confessed of
him, but because that maine and fundamental truth was then controverted and
denied by Seducers and Antichrists. The Lord requires of each one of us
according to our place and calling, that we confess and give our testimony
unto such truths as are most called in question. At this time it is required of
the Honorable Houses of Parliament, that they give unto Jesus this testimony,
which is a necessary consequent of the testimony of the Apostles: That Jesus
Christ is the King of his Church, and that it must be ruled by his Scepter.
That the Government is upon his shoulder, without which all our adoration and
Hallelujah, is but like the mocking of him by his enemies, when they clothed
him, sometimes in purple, and sometimes in white, and did put a Crown of
thorns on his head, and in his hand a reed for a Scepter.

No duty better beseems the Honorable Houses of Parliament then
thankfulness: for in thankfulness there be three very eminent virtues suitable
to their place and eminency. 1. Truth, when we acknowledge and profess who
it is, from whom we have received the benefit. 2. Justice, in rendering mutual
duties: As receiving is joined with giving; so is rendering with receiving,
which natural men have considered Charitum num^r^s signific^t ^r^^ actus
distinctos in beneficiis, dare, aeccipere referee; carum nomen affectus quibus
in benefice a^^, etc. Heming. de lege na^.
when they spoke of the three Graces. 3. Wisdom, because gratitude procures
the continuance of favor, as ingratitude, not seeing and discerning favors
near unto us, moves the Lord to remove them, that we may behold them afar
off. So that gratitude has Truth, Justice, and Prudence in it: but ingratitude
is an Untruth, Injustice, and Foolishness. Of all men in the world ungrate men
unto God, are the most false, most unjust, and most foolish men. Far must
this be, far I hope this shall be from the Honorable Houses and from both
Kingdoms.

The second duty which I recommend, is obedience to the Use 2. Obedience to
the voice of Christ.
Commands of Christ against all difficulties and temptations in the way. When*
the Lord commanded the Disciples to enter into the ship, they obeyed, although
he went not with them: and the darkness of the night was approaching, and when
they met with a stormy and contrary wind, it never so much as entered into
their hearts to turn back again. When our Lord commanded Peter to come unto
him upon the water, he gave absolute obedience. Obedience is a principal part
of self denial: by other virtues and graces we deny things of the world, and
the natural delights of the flesh which concern the body; but this makes us
to deny our own will, and our natural reason, and to do the will of God. As a
wild stock, when a sprigg of good fruit is graffed in it, brings forth
fruit according to the nature of the tree, from which the graffe was taken, and
not such as the stock would have borne, if it had not been graffed: So does the
wild stock of our old Adam, when the will and commandment of God by the hand
of the Spirit; is graffed on it, bring forth fruit after the will of God, and
not after our own natural will. The occasional and particular commands of
Christ, for such a time, and upon such occasions, must be obeyed, no less then
universal and perpetual commands, and the transgression of such commands is
no less dangerous in the sad effects which it produces. The examples of
Abraham, Genesis 22. of Moses, Number. 20. 8. of Saul. 1 Samuel 15. of Ahab, 1 Kings
20. of the two men, whereof the one did wound, the other refused to wound the
Prophet. 1 King* 20. of Iehu, 2 Kings 10. of Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 25. and of many
others, are evidences of this truth. My humble desire therefore, and earnest
exhortation is, that in your great wisdom, ye may consider what the Lord
requires of you at this time, and in your Zeal, set your selves to the
performance thereof, without discouragement or delay* against all difficulties,
although you should be tossed with waves and contrary winds at the command of
Christ, yet in the fourth watch he shall come to you and comfort you, and in
the end shall bring you safe to the shore. Do not that which seameth good in
your own eyes, but obey his voice. Add not to the Law, nor detract from it,
but do all that is written, turning neither to the right hand, nor to the
left. And because nothing does the Lord at this time more require, then the
Reformation of Religion, which is long and earnestly expected at your hands by
all the godly; go about it speedily, and put it not off upon carnal reason or
worldly respects. We do distinguish betwixt open hostility and secret
treachery: but we are also to distiuguish betwixt profane policy, and pious
prudence. As the work of God is opposed by open hostility, and which is more
dangerous by secret treachery; so is it hindered by carnal reason and worldly
policy. Men may apprehend, that if they should settle religion presently, many
would fall off, and your affairs should not succeed so prosperously: But I
believe the contrary to be true, that the policy which Jeroboam and the Jews
used in the time of Christ, Ioh. 11. a case not unlike unto ours, brought this
same very evil upon them, which they feared, and did endeavor to avoid by
their policy. Luther used to say, that three things would prove mighty
hindrances to Christian religion. 1. Forgetfulness of the work of God. 2.
Security, which he found prevailing already in his time, and 3. Policy and
worldly wisdom, which would bring all things in order, and c^^e the public
stirs with the counsel of man; to determine Own ratione in sanite.
the present controversies by humane reason, was in his judgment to go mad
with reason. Hezekiah was not guided by policy in his reformation, but removed
the high places, and brake the Images, and cut down the groves, and broke in
pieces the brazen Serpent that Moses had made: For unto those days the
children of Israel did burn incense to it* and he called it Nehushtan, 2.
Kings 18. 4. This he did in the first year of his Reign, in the first month,
and suddenly 2. Chron. 29. 3. and 36. He cared neither for the Philistines,
nor the king of Assyria, both of them rising against him, nor for the Idolaters
in the land, but (which was all his policy) he trusted in the Lord God of
Israel, 2. Kings 18. 5.

Some conceive that because I am a stranger, I may speak more freely then
others; but for this very cause that I am a stranger, I am the more sparing in
my expressions; Yet this much I may say, that there be three things which seem
very strange to me. 1. That any should be found to speak against all the
Reformed Churches, and to draw Disciples after them, unless they had great
evidence of Scripture, or convincing reasons for the novations which they would
introduce. 2. Although some such arise, yet it is a wonder that so intelligent
a people, should be carried away with every wind, and scattered into so many
Sects and divisions, which is a great scandal to Religion, a great sin and
shame to such a people, a spiritual judgment in it self, and the cause of
many other judgments spiritual and temporal, and an argument that this
miserable war is not yet drawing to an end. 3. That reformation is suspended,
because the people are distracted: Reformation being the only mean to reduce
them to Unity.

The third duty which I recommend, is confidence in Use. 3. Confidence in
Christ.
Christ against doubting. This was the Apostle Peter his weakness, both at
this time, and afterward, that he doubted, and was afraid, which made him begin
to sink, and there can be no full and through Obedience, without faith and
confidence. Two things are necessary for this. 1. Self-denial, and renouncing
all confidence in your selves, or your own wisdom, courage, strength, or
multitudes, all which are but the arm of flesh. Psalm. 44. 3, 4 5, 9, 7, 8.
Wisdom will have us to use all good means, but faith will not have us to trust
in them. 2. A firm persuasion, and full relying upon Christ, holding the eye of
our soul upon him continually. John the Baptist, John 3. 33. uses two words to
express the nature of faith and confidence; One is (...) Sir. (...) Cabala,
the word of receiving, which in the Syriack is not every receiving, but a
receiving of a Doctrine sent from God, as Divine, and sent from him. The other
word is more, (...) Sir. Obsignavit, conclusit, has set to his Seal: when the
word is used of God toward us, we know the meaning, but when it is ascribed
unto us in relation to God and his truth, it expresses the testing of our
conscience on the truth of God: that as the Lord seals his testimony unto us
by the Sacraments, and by his own Spirit; so upon our part, our faith and
affiance seals the truth of God, that we acquiesce in it, and close with God,
and the matter is concluded betwixt the Lord and our souls. The writing thus
sealed cannot be reversed, for while the seal is at it, it abides firm, and the
seal is kept by the Lords faithfulness, for our benefit. This confidence
will make us submit to the will of God, and to say, I will bear the
indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he plead my
cause, and execute judgment for me: He will bring me forth to the light, and
I shall behold his righteousness. Then she that is mine enemy shall see it,
and shame shall cover her, which said unto me, Where is the Lord thy God? Mic.
7. 9, 10. Woe is me, for my hurt, my wound is grievous: but I said, Truly this
is a grief, and I must bear it, Iere. 10. 19. This will carry us through all
discouragements: because it makes us to see greater things then the World. It
opposes the wrath of God against the terrors of the world, and the love of God
against the love of the world. This assures us of the presence of Christ in
all our troubles, It is I, be not afraid. The most terrible word to the enemy,
and the most comfortable to the godly. It persuades us, that God cannot deny
himself, nor forsake his own cause, and for our selves, that although this
life, and all things in it should fail us, yet our happiness waits for us.
Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoices: my flesh also shall rest in
hope, Psalm. 16. 9 Much might be spoken here, and to good purpose, of the notes
whereby to try our faith and confidence, whether it be weak or strong, and of
the means to increase it, that it may come to a full assurance: but I have
troubled you too much already, and therefore I shall only desire, that the
recent proof of the mercy of God in our deliverance, may be added to your
Calendar of former deliverances, to make your experience the stronger, that
your hope and confidence may be the stronger for all time to come.

FINIS.
An Excellent Allegory, taken forth of this History by Augustine In his 14.
Sermon, Upon the Words of our LORD.
AS Christ going to the Mountain to pray, gave commandment to his Apostles, to
get into a ship, and to go to the other side; so after his ascending into
heaven, at his commandment the Gospel was to be carried through the Sea of
this world. As the Ship wherein the Apostles of Christ were Passengers, meets
with a great tempest: so the Church of Christ sustaineth waves of persecution,
and is opposed by the various blasts of haereticall winds. As the Disciples do
not straightway forsake the Ship, but did toil in rowing: so the confession of
our faith is not to be forsaken, but the teachers of the Church, both by word
and writing, in the midst of the contrary winds of the world, and of the
blasts of tumultuous Haereticks, are to discharge their office faithfully. Let
the cross yard be set up, and Christ crucified, be looked upon, and let us not
make defection from him, but follow his steps, let us, through suffering and
death it self, press toward eternal glory. Let also white sails, that is, a
pure and honest conversation, be laid hold of. Moreover, although the sea do
rage, the wind withstand strongly, and the surges rise and make a noise, so
that the ship be sore tossed, and covered with the waves, yet is she not
drowned, but runs to the Haven: so may indeed the Church be pressed, but can
never be oppressed: for Christ is praying on high, and beholds his own,
mightily wrestling with the contrary winds: He therefore intercedeth for them,
that their faith fail not, but that they may carry unto the Nations these
Noble, but to humane reason, foreign wares of remission of sins, and the
Kingdom of heaven, through faith in Christ, freely offered to all that
earnestly repent, and amend their lives. Furthermore this small Ship shall be
tossed, and float on the water, till the Lord come, who alone is able to make a
weighty body to walk upon the face of the liquid element, which shall come to
pass about the fourth watch of the night, that is in the end of time, when the
night of this world is, almost spent. In the mean while, although the roaring
Sea do murmur and repine under the seet of the Lord, yet nilling willing, it
is constrained to bear him; so, although the swelling pride and powers of the
world arise together never so high, yet our Head shall trample on their head.
But when Christ comes near unto the ship, before he be clearly seen and
known of his own, he strikes their hearts with a new terror, that they seem
to themselves to see a Ghost: for in the darkness of this night we are not able
rightly to understand the work of the Lord: But when the darkness is scattered,
and all the storm calmed, we shall know him aright, and shall worship him as
the true Son of God, our Redeemer and Savior. It is our part who do live about
the fourth watch, and upon whom the ends of the world are come, 1. Cor. 10. 11.
to provide, lest that by the sudden and unlooked for coming of the Lord, we be
surprised and confounded: for as Christ in one moment, and with one thrust,
brought the ship into the harbor; so before we can look about us or turn our
selves, Eternity shall come upon us; for the Elects sake these days shall be
shortened. Matthew. 24. 22.

FINIS.

