DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
JULY 1. 1691. By Virtue of a Patent granted by King Charles II. for a New
Invention of LAMPS with Unequal Glasses.
THE PROPRIETORS in the said Patent have hitherto undertaken to Light the City
of London and Suburbs, on the Terms following:

I. Each House to pay Five Shillings at setting up the Lamps, as a Fine for
Five Years (being instead of the Charge of providing their own Lanthorn), and
the Undertakers to keep the said Lamps in repair for Five Years at their own
proper Costs and Charges. II. Each House to pay one Halfpenny for every Dark
Night the Lamps shall be Lighted, and the Undertakers to keep them burning from
Six to Twelve at Night.
NOW, the said PROPRIETORS having considered the taking of Five Shillings Fine
in hand for Five Years, does not so well answer their Intentions for the Good
of the Inhabitants, because many may die, and many others may have occasion to
remove, before the Five Years are expired, and so lose the benefit of their
Fines.

THEREFORE, for the greater Ease and Accommodation of the Inhabitants, the said
PROPRIETORS do Propose and Undertake henceforward to Light the Inhabitants of
London, Middlesex and Surrey, from Michaelmas to Lady Day, every Dark Night, on
the Terms following:

I. That upon setting up and lighting every Lamp, the Inhabitants shall each of
them pay Sixpence as a Fine, and Two Shillings and Sixpence Rent, for
Lighting the first Quarter, ending at Christmas; and at Christmas shall pay
Sixpence for a Fine, and Two Shillings and Sixpence Rent, for Lighting the
second Quarter, ending at Lady day, (which is a Halfpenny per Night for
Lighting every Dark Night, and one Shilling Fine for that Year.) II. That for
every Year of the four following Years, the Inhabitants are to pay Sixpence
Fine at Michaelmas, upon the first Lighting, with Two Shillings and Sixpence
for the Quarters Rent due at Christmas following; and at Christmas other
Sixpence Fine, with Two Shillings and Sixpence for the second Quarters Rent,
due at Lady day. III. The PROPRIETORS do not require any Person to take Leases
of them, but only to subscribe their Names to their Proposals.
Note, In Squares, and places where the Houses are very large, there the
PROPRIETORS are to be at liberty to agree with the Inhabitants upon reasonable
Terms, proportionable to their Houses.

Reasons offered to all Gentlemen and Others, for the Encouragement of this
Useful Invention.
I. IF the Inhabitants were to keep the Streets Light from Six to Twelve, with
Candles, it would cost each House One Penny a Night, which is performed by the
Undertakers for a Halfpenny. II. Light is most wanting after Nine a Clock at
Night, all Shops then are usually shut up, and Candles in Lanthorns commonly
are burnt out; and for want of a more durable Light, many abuses are committed.
III. Such Shops as keep open late, have most reason to comply, and pay to these
Lights, it accommodating Trade much better than before. IV. All such as do
agree with the Undertakers, are freed from all trouble which they had before by
Officers; and such as do not, must put out their own Lanthorns, and be liable
to the Officers as before.
All Persons that desire, may be accommodated with the aforesaid Lights by the
PATENTEES at Stationers' Hall within Ludgate, every Tuesday and Friday at Six a
Clock in the Afternoon, and by Mr. John Stubbs their Clerk, at the
Insurance-Office, on the West Side of the Royal Exchange, any day at Exchange
time.

The PATENTEES are
Sir Charles Hara, Knight. Esquires.
Henry Crispe, Ambrose Isted, John Stanion, Benjamin Rokeby, Thomas Apprice,
Simon Harcourt, Clark of the Peace of Middlesex.
Gent.
Thomas Hobs, Hawly Bishop, Richard Chiswell, John Lilly, John Williams,
William Harves, Edmund Hemings, Francis Geary,
The Executrix of William Mellish, Gent. etc.

