THE JEWS TRAGEDY, OR, Their Fatal and Final OVERTHROW BY VESPATIAN and TITUS
his Son, Agreeable To the Authentic and Famous History OF JOSEPHVS. Never
before Published.

By William Hemings, Master of Arts of OXON.

LONDON, Printed for Matthew Inman, and are to be sold by Richard Gammon,
over against Excester-House in the Strand, 1662.

THE ACTORS.
Nero Caesar, Emperor of Rome. Aprippa, King of Jewry: Vespatian Nero's Gen: and
after Emp: Titus Son to Vespatian. Valerio A Roman Captain: Nicanor A Roman
Captain: Ananias High Priest for Jerusalem: Gorion Priest, Joseph Son to Gorion
and Captain of the Jews, Eleazer Seditious Captains of the Jews, Iehochanan
Seditious Captains of the Jews, Simeon Seditious Captains of the Jews, Zareck A
poor Jew, Miriam A Jewish Lady, Peter The Ladies man.
Prologus.
Judicious friends, our Author bids me say,
That he has labored to adorn his Play
With such Varieties; as may befit
The fair deportment of a sober wit.
Stories are strict, and challenge from the Stage,
The true Dimensions of their former Age:
Where Fancy guides the Plot, the Field is wide,
And freely grants what here will be denied;
What Is wanting to his will by this defect,
Your gentle Censures, and more mild aspect
Will fairly answer; Grant him this, and he
Will study to deserve your Courtesy.
THE JEWS TRAGEDY.
Act. I.
Scene I.
Sound Music, and enter NERO, Emperor of Rome, Crowned with a Laurel Wreath;
and attended by Roman Lords, he ascends his Chair by state. NERO. MY Lords of
Rome, since first the auspicious eye
Of Heaven looked singly on our bold attempts,
We never incounter'd fortunes so advers,
Since first our Father Romulus ordained
The Eternal Fire, by vestal Nunns preserved;
And since Religious Numa did create
Our Holy Sacrifices for the Gods,
We never had such signs prodigious;
Our Bulls for Offerings to the Gods of War
Fall dead untoucht by hand of Holy Priest;
And such as wounded dye by sacred Knife,
Their Intralls spotted tell us all is not well,
The God are sure displeased.

I. Lord. Our War, my Sovereign, can import no less,
The Perstans, Grecians, and the Galls revolts,
With ill success in Jewry, these can tell
Most mighty Caesar, that all is not well.

Nero. Now by the Gods I swear,
That sturdy Nation shall repeat their pride.
Have we not sent Ambassadors from Rome
To treat them fair, and to confirm our Truce?
Have we not sent a Bull for sacrifice?
And Sheep for offerings of a sacred Peace,
Even to the God himself whom they adore,
And in his Temple too? What could we more?
Save what we did, to give our Royal Word,
That never heneeforth Roman Prince
Should rule the Nation, but a Native born,
Even their own King Agrippa.
Hear'st thou not yet of his arrival?

2. Lord. Our packets do inform us of his near approach,
Each hour heis expected.

Nero. By heaven I thirst to know the certainty of their proceedings.
Nor can I choose but wonder at the stay of our Vespatian,
I fear all not well with him my Lords:
Haste thee Hostilius to the sacted Priests,
Exit a massenger. Bid them again go offer sacrifice,
I long to see some luckie signs appear.
Shout within. Go know the reason of that shout,
Exit a Lord. The cheerful noise should seem to speak of joy.

Lord. The King of Iewry is at hand my Lord.

Enters again.
Nero. Now by my life he is welcome: go forth and meet him.
And conduct him to our presence.

Exit again. Lord. I shall my lord.


Nero. Now have we half our wish, were but Vespatian here
We had our full desire.

A Flourish, and enter King Agrippa; two of of his Attendants go before him,
bearing his Crown between them, with other follower; those that bear the crown
kneel before the Emperor. K. Agrip. Thus low great Caesar to thy Majesty
Bows Inrges King to do thee fealty.

Nero. And thus low Caesar steps to bid thee welcome;
Welcome Agrippa; take from Caesar's hand
Thy sacred Diadem, with sole command
He puts the Crown upon him, and sets him by him. Of thy rebellious Jews.
But tell K. Agrippa, where are those.
Ambassadors of mine, which lately were
Dispatched with presents to thy Nation,
With sacred offerings, and with flags of peace
Embraced with solemn joy, and safely stowde
Within our Temple; thy Embassage done
With due regards to Romes and Iewrits honor:
But lo the fury of a frantic mind,
The factious Commons in their heat of blood
Have slain thy Roman Lords, and stoutly stand
Rebellious Captains of our holy Land.

Nero. What!


Agrip. It Is true great Emperor, nor was my self secure,
But forced to fly for safety.

Nero. Is It possible? O ye gods!
Rises and goes down. To what a wretched time am I reserved,
That this final handful dares affront me thus?
Where art thou Julius? at whose great command
The utmost ends of Europe did obey.
Where worthy Alexander? that did swear to dwell
Within the circuit of this little Earth:
Behold a wretched caltiff in your room,
Contend despised, rebel'd against. O ye gods what more;
Not able to maintain what you have won.

Lord. Most mighty Gafar,
Let not thy passion rob thee of thy right;
Let Caesar be himself, and then heel see
Himself as great in power and greater in degrees of sovraignty.

Nero. Away thou fawning Cur, upon my life thou Hatterst me.


Lord. My LOrd?


Nero. No more I say. But laugh me to scorn behind my back;
And yet, though I deserve it, take heed thou do it not.
Upon thy life take heed; look to it --

Agrip. Great Sovereign, give Agrippa leave to speak,
Thou can not Mighty Caesar, now behold
Thy self, nor others, with a judging eye;
Recall thy self from passion; and be still
As great in Power, as thou art great in Will.

Nero. Thou gav'st the wound Agrippa, and have healed it;
But yet the loss of my Ambassadors was stranges, 'tvvas [vvonderous strange,
And wondrous daring too; Daring to me; to me I [say it was daring.

Agrip. No more, most mighty Caesar.


Nero. Well; I have done, pardon my have Agrippa;
And you, forget what I have said.

Nero. The News.


A shout within, and enter a messengers. Mossen My gracious Lord Vespatian is
arrived,
And Prays admittance to your royal presence

Nero. Ves^^^ come? Thou brings^ us happy news;
Exit a messenger. Conduct him hither strait; we long to hear welcome nevvs.
He ascends his chair with King Agrippa.
Enter Vespatian with other Roman Lords. Vesp All happiness attend imperious
Caesar:
Peace from the Gods* from Europe victory;
And from Vespatian duty to the King.

Nero. Welcome Vespatian; the Gods are pleased indeed.
raises him. Since with thy Victors brow we crowned stand;
Glad yet our ears more with a true and full relation
Of thy successful voyage.

Vesp From vanquished Persia, mighty Caesar, we
Were by stresse of weather forced to touch
Upon the Coasts of Spain; there we renewed
Our weather beaten Barks with freth supply
Of men and Ammunition: Thence we steor'd
Our course for Gallia and the Britains shore.
The Gauls at our arrival bad declare
What our intentions, whom, and whence we were
We answered, [Mighty Caesar] we were come
To claim obedience to the Roman yoke
The haughty King denied, and stoutly stood
In bold desiance.
Long was the dreadful sight, and doubtful too,
Till at the length thy soldiers won the day,
And forced their stubborn King in spite obey.
From thence great King we fteer'd to Britains shore,
Where we were entertained as was of old
Our famous Julius, with a dreadful noise
Of hiddeous outcries, thieeks, and yellings out
To fright our Soldiers, while themselves made good
Their craggy Clifts with loss of British blood:
Thrice were we beaten of, and thrice again
Recovered footing: yet still great King were forced
To give them ground till thy Vespatian cried,
Fight, fight on your honor, lives, and Casars side,
For mighty Casar fight.
Had thou but seen, great King, thy Captains then,
And Roman Lords come bleeding on again,
Repulse the Foe, and bravely win the shore,
Maintain the On sent stillm, tho still opposed,
Till Chariot waves were drowned in British blood,
There had thou seen their ranks with fury broke,
and them subjected to thy sole command.
This Mighty Caesar is the brief of all
Since thy Commission made me General:

Nero. Blessed he the gods, Vespatian, and be thou
Blessed in the favor of our gracious Brow.
And now again thrice welcome worthy Roman,
Thy valor shall be crowned with full reward
Of fair preferment worthy thy deserts:
We therefore here create thee General
Of all Indea and the Holy Land.
O my Vespatian! I can tell the stories
Will spurte thee on in fury to revenge.
But nowi no more of that --
We will to triumph for our victories;
That done, set open the Gates of Ianus wide,
Exeunt omnes. That bloody war may quel Judea's pride.

ACT. I. SCAEN. II.
Enter Lord JEHOCHANAN, and Lord SKIMEON. Skim. IS the News certain that
Agrippa's fled?


Iehoe. Most certain, and to Caesar for relief.


Skim Tush! let the venom burst, I dare the worst of fates extremity,
Death entertained with fear more terrifies
The frighted soul, then does the fatal blow:
Let Pidgeon-liver'd slaves be tormented thus;
I Will meet it smiling, with as bold aspect
As e're I met the braving enemy.

Iehoc. How full of hidden Ambiguities
Grow these distracterd times!
The factious Commons giddy censure stand
So strange and doubful, that 'twere policy indeed
To sound 'um to the bottom.

Skim. To be a crouching, crawling, fawning Cur,
To lick the lazy bands of prating Priests,
With protestations of integrity
Devoted whole to them:
With true compuction of unfeigned grief
Submissively to crave their gracious pardon:
To paw the ragged multitude with praise
Of their ingenous care and servant love
For preservation of the Commonwealth;
To promise fair rewards to froward fools
Perhaps, with durtie feet to mire with fawnings,
And then be beaten with the shameful staff
Of foul Reproach:
To do all this were to be born a fool,
To live a slave, and dye a coward,
Death! I will stand between the counterbuffs
Of these devouring storms in spite of Hell;
Nor Priest, nor Pesant shall enforce me stoop
An inch to either: as I have lived, I Will fall,
Or freed from both, or rent up root and all.

Iehoc. Or banishment or death we must expect.
Have thou not seen the ragged multitude,
Whose stupid brains are ftust with nothing else
But their mechanic skill, whose highest strain
Of Cunning is to get some musty meat
TO feed the hungry maw, or ragged clothes
TO cover nakedness, proclaim us bloody tyrants?
These are they
Whose strange distractions guided by the voice
Of two or three, proclaim a traitors death:
Now save him strait, and now nor save, nor kill,
Nor yet release him; such their frantic will.

Skim. The doting Priests believe um too:
Death and the Devil! wooed it no^ vex one's very soul
TO be arraigned by these?
In what a hodge podge of confusion
Live Iewry now? Must the rough sword of War
Be guided by the rusty hand of Peace?
TO strike but when, and where, and whom she please?
Must we, whose noble actions have deserved
Our place of Government, by countermand --
Of babbling Priests be taught our lessons how,
And when, and where, and what, and why to do?
Have our unspotted same traduc't by men
Of vulgar note, by painted Butterflyes
That buz the common rumors of the time
And know not why? Death! I could burst with rage;

Iehoc. And I with laughter, to behold the State
And kingdom ruled by a Mecanick pate.

Enter Lord Eleazer musted. Skim See where is the prologue to the bloody Scoente,


Iehoc. Lord Eleazer mufled!


Eleaz. Good morrow to you both.


Skim. The like retor'd from both to Eleazer.
My Lord, this outward guise of face and gesture
May seen to speak some inward discontent.

Elea. Nay more then seems my friends, for seems are show,
But mine is substance: would it were not so.

Iehoc. We will be sharers then my Eleazer.


Eleaz. Nay must, Iehochanan, and deep ones too,
So deep, I fear, your patience will not bear it.

Skim. It mus be deeper than destruction then.
What e're it be u^bosome it.

Eleaz. You are betrayed:
There Is strict inquiry made to apprehend ye:
The City Gates are barred, and strait commands
On pain of death, that no man dare to stand
In opposition.

Skim. We did expect no less.


Elea. Occasions of importance call me hence;
Nor wooed I be discovered in your company:
What the event will be I know not yet;
But fear your lives are aimed at.
A fitter time shall give a fairer scope
To my dicourse and counsel, So sare ye well.

Exit Elea. Iehoc. Our love and thanks go with thee.


Skim. How think thou now, Iehochanan?
Stand'st thou amazed? why, did not thou expect
The fatal blow?

Ieho. Skimeon, I dids nor do I sear to know
What I have heard; the Message unto me
Is but a tale twice told, whose second part
Was told by him, the first by mine own heart.
Unto a soul whose unprepared mind
Dreams not of danger when afflictions come;
How terrible the yleok! the sudden chance
Over whelms the frame of Nature with distraction.
But to a man whose resolution stands
Vnmov'd 'twixt floods of danger and despair,
Whose sturdy stomach beats the Billows off
With Arms of constancy, when every thought
Proves traitor to the breast that gave it life;
To him no mischief fate can strive to do,
But boldly is embraced, and scorned at too.
And such am I.

Skim. I do embrace thee, and with aqual courage
Stand armed for all even'ts.

[Enter Officers, or apprehend them.] Officer. By the High Priests sacred power
and stict command
We apprehend ye both as traitors to the State of Iewry.

Ieho. We do obey. Know thou where L: Aeleazer is? [They deliver their
weapons.]

Offic. We met him even now hard by the Synagogue.


Skim. Befriend us with a Messehger that may
Entreat him come and speak with us; we shall.
Reward you for your pains.

Offic. It shall be done my Lord.


Exeunt: Enter Eleazer. The City up in Arms, Agrippa fled,
The Roman Legate slain, and Rulers banished;
And we his Son next succession;
What can we wish for more? but foft,
This day our Jewish Captains are arraigned:
Now Eleazer is the nick of time,
That thy aspiring thoughts may bravely mount
To Jewri^ Scepter.
How my distempered doubts disturb my brain,
Puzzle my will, excrutiate my soul,
Distract my judgment --! O thou sacred thirst
Of fwelling honor! with what powerful aw
Thou rul'st our erring actions!
Be wary Eleazer, and foresee
What chiefly may oppose or further thee.
If these Commanders dye, where is then thy hope
Of their united Power? No, that must not be,
Their lives are precious, and preserved by mine assistance,
Ties them fast in strength and secrecy.
It shall be so.
Enter Mess. By this time our Father's preparing to the Judgment. --:
I must away to meet with him.
Mess. My honored Lord, the Lord Iehothanan, with due respect unto
your Lordship desires you come and speak with him.

Elea. Tell him, we will be with him instantly.
It Is a I could wish it, to be sent for too!
If I can bring them off, I make them sure mine own.
I will go visit them.

Exit. Enter Mechanics. 1. The zay the Captains shall be rained to day.


2. J neighbor Oliver! but how do they rain um? can ye tell?


1. Marry Neighbor I will tell ye; and for your better destruction, and more
plain and perniciens understanding in the matter, I will deride my speech into
sixten several Sects.


2. Me^cy upon us! hold Neighbor, hold; by no means, I pray; the derision will
be too long of all conscience, and I shall never remember what contains to the
Discourse: Let it be but twofold Neighbor, and I shall reprehend in much
better.


1 Very good Neighbor Timothy, it shall; and I will so handle the matter, that
the whole Discourse shall be derided between you and I.


2. I marry, that will do passing well.


1. Hum-'um, mark neighbor, and medigate upon the matter.


2. I warra Et ye Neighbor.

1. Why look ye Sir,
You are the Benefastor, and I am the Judge:
Now Sir your Benefactor is invited to appear before your Judge,
And to answer to such objections as he shall be justly excused for:
Now sir am I to hear and excuse you of the crime,
And to examine and commend your defense;
And you to accuse your self of all that is alleged against you.

2. Peace Bully, peace; here comes the Judges.


1. Mas! here they come indeed! by and by come your Benefactors I warrant ye.


Enter the High Priest, and Eleazer his Son talking in secret with him: Gorian
Priest, and Joseph his Son, with Attendants: the High Priest ascends the Chair,
the other three sit below. H. Priest. Bring forth the Prisoners.

A Bar set, and the Prisoners brought in. Iechochanan and Skimeon, we do accuse
ye both of treason against the state of Iewry.

Besides, we have been true informed, and that not by the mouth of one, but
many, that those imperious dignities which we out of our pious love conferred
upon you, have most soul abu'sd, by which our sacred Laws are violate, and we
(though innocent) yet stand depraved.


Iehoc. It was, and is the custom amongst the Jews,
That the Delinquent, how e're guilty, yet
He fairly should enjoy the privilege
Of his Accusers opposition.
Nor do I doubt that your obsequious care
And zealous chariry can derogate
So much from nobleness, as to deny
Us fair proceedings.

H. P. What by our sacred power we can, we will.


Skim. First then, we shall desire to be informed
Who our Accusers are, and what the ground
Of our impeachment.
Next we request the freedom of our speech,
That we may fairly quit our selves so far as truth
And our unspotted innocence require.

H. P. We grant thee both. Read their Accusations.

[Roads.] 1. First, you are indicted for a rebellious Muteny against the State
of Jewry. 2. Next, of a most inhumane murder executed upon the Roman Legates.
3. Thirdly, of Hight reason against AGRIPPA you lawful Sovereign.



L. Ieho. We Will answer brief to all..
That we have slain the Roman Lords, it is true;
But with whatservent love and zeal unto your selves,
And to the State of Jewry, may appear,
Most sacred Priest, by our submissions:
For had our loves proved traitor to the State.
Or to thy sacred self in this attempt,
We had by our command sufficient power
To have opposed both thee and that:
But our intents were fair,
It Is not unknown with what a heavy weight
Of sad oppression wretched Jewry stood,
Basely subjected, till by us made free.
And call you this Rebellion?
But when I call to mind that mungril Prince,
That sacriligious thief; that any thing,
Saving the sacred Name of Sovereign:
That Bastard-Issue, sprung from Herod's Race,
Of low descent in blood, obscure and base;
Not once regarded till by Caesar's Power
A snatched the Royal Scepter --

H.P. No more of that.
We gave thee no Commission to revile
Nor had thou power to kill, nor yet to save
Those Roman Legates: What by thee was done
Without our leave was flat Rebellion.
Nor is this all we do object against ye.
Read the Petition.

[One reads.] An humble Petition from the grieved Commons for the execution of
justice upon the two, seditions Captains, Jehochanan and Skimeon. Skim. The
common bawling Curs? O heaven! must we he weighed
with them? with their simplicity? Death! I disclaim from their
Mechanic spleen, and this ignoble trial.

H. P. Read out the grievances in the Petition.


Skim. Sir, I will hear no further.


H. P. Boiles your hot blood so high with our preferment?
We Will quench the fire, and then the heat will swage.
We here dismiss thee of thy place of Government
Now Sir ye are a private man, and we
Have sacred Power, and sole Authority
To save or kill. And, for we will not dive
Too deep into your warlike cruelty,
Nor lean too much to private lenity;
For thy rebellion and thy bold affront
We doom thee banishment:
We give thee three days liberty for thy departure:
And do command thee here on pain of death
Not to approach within our sacred walls, nor yet Iudea's confines

Skim. I must, I do obey.


Exit. H. P. And for you Iehochanan, upon submission of your self to us, we do
release thee: But we charge thee, as thou love thy life and liberty, thou
give us not henceforward any cause of just proceedings: So we dismiss thee.


Iehoc. My humble thanks unto your sacred Power: Nor do I crave more favor at
your hands then I shall strive hencesorward to deserve.


[Exit and excunt Officers and Attendants.] H. P. Now we are private. O
Jerusalem!
Is thy decrepid Age already come!
Or art hou hastened by untimely means
To end thy days of honor?
Is It not strange, that we
Have sacred power to touch their cruelty,
Yet dare not strike!
Iehochanan we know as deep in blood as Skimeon,
Both equal guilty; yet should both be banished
Their equal strength, united with their will,
May much endanger us; mean while we stand
As friend with one that we may both command.
Weep Gorian, weep, or else our hearts will break,
Our eyes will tell more then our tongues can speak.
But I have done, the times are so extreme
We have not leisure to lament our state;
Our sudden danger summons us to sit
In counsel strait to take some speedy course
About our safety.

Go. Heaven give a blessing to our fair proceedings.

[A table brought, and they sts.]
H. P. How truly does experience teach us now,
That fear once grounded in a Commonwealth,
Proves oftentimes hereditary.
The common rumor of Vespatians Host
Strikes terror to the people. O the power
Of this distracted sear! Even death it self
Appears not half so terrible: But we trifle time.
We are informed by sure intelligence,
That he intends within these three days space
Set footing in Judea: How appointed
Yet we know not^ but to be supposed
In all points like unto Vespatian.
O Gorion, how methinks that Name
Begets abortive twins of horrid grief
Within this breast of mine! Those streams of blood
Which by that fatal hand were lately spilt,
Bleeds fresh within my soul.

Gor. So would they do in mine if not repeld:
To grieve our selves with what is impossible
To be represt, is to desire to be
More wretched then we are.

Io. It Is true; it such is Nature that it strives to know
It self in wretchedness, how truly we
Acquire the center of our misery.

H. P. Well, No more of this; now to our present business,
That you are zealous for your countries good
I rest assured: Nor do I doubt your care
And actual courage in a fair desence:
Such I have ever deemed ye.
Nor do I fear but I shall find ye now
The same. Now your attentions, then your fair assents
To what I have to utter.
To broach a war, and not to be assured
Of certain means to make a fair defense,
How e're the ground be just, may justly seem
A wilful madness: Such is Iewries case.
Are not our Towers defaced! our Walls unbuilt?
Our Forces weakened, and our treasure spent?
Our country ruinate, our people too
Imbroile in native blood? O Gorion see,
Judea wars with Rome, Rome with the world.
The world is conquered, and yet Iewry stands
In opposition: Is not this to be
Our own tormenters in self-cruelty?

Go. We know the weakness of our State to be
Unable to resist, yet know not how
To yield, or not to yield, or what to do:
The furious tempest drives us on the Rocks
Of Foreign and Domestic Enemies:
The raving multitude will not endure
To pay the Roman- tribute.

Elea. Where common dangers meet with equal power,
It stands not with our Honors to expose
Our lives and fortunes to a base repulse.

H.P. We will proclaim it death to him that dares
Deny the tribute Money.

Josep. That were to blow the fire that burns so hot already.
Such is our fate that we are forced to sight
With Rome, or with our selves.

H.P. Since so it is, we will not sheath our sword
In our own bosom; we will rather dye
By Roman sword, then native butchery.

Elea. Bravely resolved; nor do I doubt to see
Iudea's ruins, loss and poverty
Made good again with loss of Roman blood.
Entera Messenger.
Mess. Peace to this sacred Meeting, but to Judea bloody wars:
Vespatian with ten thousand horse, and forty thousand foot is now arrived.

H.P. Have thee' immediate to Iehocanan, bid him proclaim Vespacian coming,
command him in our Name to muster up his forces, and to attend your further
pleasure.


Mess. I shall my Lord.


H.P. Is it possible, already come! we must be speedy then in our designs.


Iosep. 'Twere best with speed to send Ambassadors
To crave a truce for some small time whilst we
Prepare our selves in fair hostility.

Elea Shame blast thy tongue, shall Iewry seek
To Heathen Nation? Let their venom burst
Into the worst of malice; we will stand
In terms of equal Honor.

Go. Thy judgment Eleazer is too rash,
Thy youthful blood boils fury in thy breasts
And captivates thy reason unto passion.

Elea. Gorian I tell thee --


Iosep. Joseph tells thee first,
That if thou blast my Fathers tongue with shame
As thou have blasted mine, may Joseph lose his Name
Of sacred Priesthood; but --

H.P. I do command you cease, the blood of strife
Begins already to seize our sacred streets:
I therefore will assign to each by Lot
His several command, nor will my self stand free,
But bear a part in this hostility.
We will, even in the period of our age
Grow strong, again, instam'd with holy rage
Of our dishonor. Within thore, bring forth the Lots.

Elea. To me the country of the Edomites.

One brings Lots, they draw and open them.
Iosep To me Galilee.


H.P. To us Jerusalem.


Go. To all success from Heaven, may each man be
Inspired with holy Zeal Chivalry.

Exeunt omnes. Finit Actus Primus.
ACT. II. Incipit Actus Secundus, Scoena Secunda.
Sound Droms, and enter VESPATIAN and TITUS his Son: VALERIO and NICANOR, two
Captains, with others. Vesp. VALERIO.


Val. My gracious Lord.


Vesp. Since now we are thus happily arrived
Within Iudea's Confines, March thou
To Galilee, say we offer peace
To Iewries Priests from Romes great Emperor;
But on thy life take heed thou speak us not
In too rough Language: Let thy milder phrase
Suit thy Embassage with a pleasing style,
Adorned with powerful Eloquence;
Yet with such graceful brave aspect, that thou
Eclips not Roman Honor.
The^ lews are stout and losty, therefore Art
Shall give the first Alarm: If they refuse,
Let then our Roman Eagle be displaid
With all her sable Feathers, soaring high
Over sad Iudea's desolation.

Val. My Lord I shall obey.


Exit. Vesp. Is the Ammunition safely landed?


Titus My Lord it is, and brought from Antioch, within a days journey of
Gamala.


Vesp. See it be safely stowed, and let our Iron Rams be strongly fitted for
the battory.


Ni. It shall be done.


Vesp. I Will make this sturdy Nation's greatness stoop
To Romes command, or spend my aged blood
In the Attempt.
See there be store of strong Scaladoes too;
VVe'el force their breaches in despite of death,
And raze their sacred buildings to the ground.
Lead on to Galilee.

Excunt. Enter ZARECK. Zare To be a piece of walking c^ay, a thing
Whose highest happiness has ever been
To keep it self alive, and that life too
Not for it self preserved, but others; is
To be worse then a Beast; for they
(However miserable in effect)
Yet live contented, void of Reasons eye;
They cannot see nor seel their misery.
To be man whose wretched life is fraught
As full of fears as minutes, whose calamities
the world laments, and yet not know his plague,
Is to be happy: Why should Nature give
More privilege to beast then man?
Lives there a Deity whose powerful hand
Moves the great Module of this Universe;
And can this be? Soft, Who comes here -- Iehochannan --
I will withdraw my self.
Enter JEHOCHANAN. The Letter shall be writ immediately;
I but the means, the trusty means to send it:
For to begin a work of such importance,
And in the midst, even when the brave design
Grows ripe with action, to be jaded then
Wooed prove a piece of policy to be
Laughed at by School-boyes. What a secret maze
Of hidden danger may the working brain
Securely trade in, if not guided by
The wary judgment! Certainly there is
More crafty wiles and ambiguities
Within this secret trade of villainy.
Then in the world beside: something must be done
With speed and safety.
Zareck blows the Wind^ in that Door. If I reveal the secret to a man
Whose frighted soul shrikes from the undertaking,
I loose my self for ever; and to be
Assured in this, is impossible.
Since then the weighty project must depend
Upon uncertainty, advise Iehochanan
Upon some secret way, whose circumstances
Bar apparent danger -- Stay, that must not be,
To break it to a near Ally,
Were to invite is zealous charity
To countermand the Plot. No -- I must find a man
Whose pining carcass wearied out with woe,
Gapes after Gold; there -- there must be the pill
To work it.

Zare. If my genius fail me not, I am the man: I Will show my self.
a part. Iehoc. Well, I Will about it -- ha!
There stands a fellow whose deject Estate
Proclaims him truly wretched; cruel Fate
Looks frowningly upon him: what a troop
Of sorrows muster in his face, and yet
He looks me thinks as if a did despise
His present Fortune: I Will try what is in him.
Come hither fellow, why did thou gaze even now
With such a serious eye on those despised rags?

Za. Yet these (how e're despised) will not afford
A ragged answer to resolve your doubt;
This ruined outside may for ought you know
Have afair inside: Did your Lordship think
That that was tattered too:
Why what have you to do to question me?
Should I have ask't your Lordship what even now
Your brains were busied on, you would have called
Me saucy fellow for my pains, I Am sure.
And yet behold, Nature has been to me
As freely loving in distributing
Her sundry gifts, as she has been to you;
My Limbs right shaped, my faculties endu'd
With as much vigor as the best of yours;
My thoughts as free; nor is my will confined
With streighter limits then another is:
VVheres then the difference? Is It because I wear
These ragged Robes? why these do clothe me too;
Yours do no more, nay not so much perhaps;
For these (however poor) yet keep me warm
apart.
Iehoc. I have not seen such boldness in such distress.
apart. I Will yet try him further.
Why thou despised wretch, thou pitiful
Patch't piece of misery, made for nothing else
But to be pointed at^ thou nasty thing,
Whose noisome savor poisons those that meet it:
How dare thou be so impudent?

Za. But that I do desire to vex thee more,
I would not answer thee:
I dare! did I but know the way to do it, vex thee to death;
And (for I know 'twill case thee now to rail)
I Will leave thee to thy self.
About to go out.
Iehoc. I prithee stay, by this light I do love thoe beyond expression.


Za. How should I know that?


Iehoc. Do but come back, and I will give thee proof of my affection:
Thy Name?

Comes back. Za. ZARECK.


Iehoc. Take that, and if thou dare but do what I command
Gives him Gold Thou shall not want preferment.

Za. It Is Gold! If I dare do! if perform not what is in man to do,
Let me be curs't into more misery then I have endured.

Jehoc. Can thou be secret too?


Za. I can be any thing.


Jehoc. Hark then, and take a weighty secret from me,
Thou know L. Skimeon?

Za. Very well.


Jehoc. Have heard the time, the manner in each circumstance
Of his late banishment?

Za. I have.


Jehoc. And yet thou see that I have freedom. Now mark:
The fawning Prelates under fair pretense
Of love and liberty, intend my ruin;
My life is aimed at Zareck.
Which (for they dare not publicly attempt,
Fearing the Commons which on my side stand)
They Will act in private; bur Jehochanan
Will live in spite of all their policy.
Thou know the City Gates are slightly kept,
This third succeeding night I have designd
Lord Skimeons entrance with ten thousand men:
This briefly shall acquaint him with the plot
Writes. Which thou shall carry; but as thou love thy life,
Be secret Zareck.

Za. Silence it self shall not be more my Lord.


Iehoc. This done, return again with expedition.
And then -- I, there is the masterpiece indeed,
The Gates, the City-Gates must be surpised.

Za. Let me alone for that.


Jehoc. The watchmen must be murdered Zareck, and I fear
Least in revealing of the plot to many.
We be discovered.

Za. Not for a world.


Jehoc. How then?


Za. I Will do it my self.


Jehoc. Thy self! thou can not.


Za. Tush ^ear not my Lord:
The drowsy whatchmen in the dead of night
(void of suspicion) will be taken napping

Jehoc. Dare thou attempt it then alone?


Za. Rest you secure, if I perform it not
I lose my self, you stand still undiscovered.

Jehoc. Well, I will build upon thy trusty resolution.


Enter a Messenger. Jehoc. To whom thy Message?


Mess. Unto you my Lord.

The sacred Priesthood greets you well, and does command you muster up your
Forces ready to attend their further pleasure.


Jehoc. It. shall be done.
Exit Mess. Vespatian is at hand, and we have power
To raise our Forces; what a blessed hour
This Message came in! Skimeon let in,
Our Forces joind; the Citizens will turn
to us for fear: Now Zareck play thy part,
And I will hug thee for thy precious Art.
Exeunt.
Enter JOSEPHUS and Captains. Josep. What think ye Soldiers, is not Jewry mad
to wage a war with such a potent Prince
Whose territories do extend as far
As Britain, and the Kingdom of the Gauls.

I Cap. I fear the factious Commons are seduc't
And gatherhead against the sacred priests.

Josep. It Is to be feared indeed: I wonder much
The Messenger returns not from Jerusalem:
The News is certain that Vespatian means
To give the first assault to us in Galilee;
We must be therefore sudden in our actions:
I muse what good effect our Letters take.

2 Ca. See here my Lord, the Messenger.


Josep. Of peace I hope, so it may stand with ^onor,
Enter a Mess. thou come in happy time, we shall
reward thy pains and care.

Mess. My Lord, about to deliver your Letters to the sacred Priesthood,
I was prevented by Jehochanan, and dispatched away with this unto your Lordship.
Delivers the Letter, and exit.
Josep. Our Letter's intercepted all is not well I fear.
Opens the Let. and reads Josephus, we have received thy Letters, and know not
whether we may question thy wisdom or thy valor; we will at this time censure
neither, but leave them to a further trial of thy actions: But on thy life take
heed thou treat not with Vespatian for a peaco. So fare thou well, or ill,
which thou deservest: Jehochanan. Called Coward to my face! Oh heaven
Be^^ witness now with what disdainful scorn
I entertain that title!
Jchochanan thou lie, and wou^d to Heaven I were
Within the distance of this trusty Blade
to make it good: Death! have I outlived my reputation?

1 Cap. Nay good my Lord.


Josep. Indeed I trifle time, we have no leisure to be passionate.
You see in what a maze of misery
the State of Jen^y stands; if therefore we
Will pris^ our Honors, or our Countries good,
we must with resolution bid defiance to Vespatian.
If we embrace a peace, we raise a war
Amongst our selves; and so we make a breach
For Rome to enter: Hark! hark! Vespatian is at hand:
Drums best afar off. Courage brave Soldiers, let not Romes command
Abate your valors; make speed to muster up your Forces;
to morrow early e're the break of day,
I mean to give them battle.

Exeunt. Enter an Herald, and VALERIO with a white Flag; the Herald summons
the town to a parley, is answered; and enter JOSEPH and Captains upon the wall.
Valerio. To thee the chief Commander of this place,
And to the rest, my Master bid me say
He sends this Flag of Peace, and wills thee pay
the wonted tributo to the Roman-State: this done,
A does command thy late subjection.

Josep. Bold Roman tell thy Master we defy
His proud Command; nor will Judea pay
The wonted tribute: Bid Vespatian come
Himself, and do his Message.

Val. Rebels take heed, if great Vspatian come,
He comes in blood.

Jo. Proud Roman, tell thy Master, Joseph scorn^
to parley with a meaner then himself;
tell proud Vespatian, that Judea stands
In equal terms of honor with his Lord.

Val. Jew, thou't repent this arrogance.


Io. Roman, I tell thee, ere this Holy Land
Shall yield obedience to the Roman yoke,
Joseph will make the Roman Eagle totter.

Val. Rebel farewell, when next we meet, I Will try
How well thou can maintain this bravery.

Exeunt omnes. Enter Vespatian, Titus and Captains, with D^ums and Colors.
Vesp. How far are we now from Jorpata?


Tit. Within the distance of a League my Lord.


Vesp. What think ye Soldiers, shall we be receive'd in peace?


Nica. My Lord I doubt it.


Ves. Well, how ere it be, we are prepared.


Tit. I give to thee the sole Command
Of the right wing; to thee the left, Nicanor.
My self will stand betwixt ye both,
that I may see your equal Valor strive
For equal Honor in the Victory.

Tit. My Lord -- Valerio!


Vesp. Welcome Valerio, come thou in peace?


Val. My Lord prepare to fight,
the sturdy Citizens intend this night
to bid you battle.

Vesp. What! are they still so stout?
By Heaven I Will scourge their pride.

Val. My Lord, I saw them troop upon the hill,
Not two mile distant: Hark! their Drums do beat,
they march.
Droms beat a far off.
Vesp. Courage my Roman Soldiers, let me see
this day your brave attempts for Rome and me.
They come: Valerio, make good the Vanguard.

Val. I shall my Lord.


Enter Joseph and Captains, with Drum^ and Colors. Jo. What mean thou
Roman, to disturb your peace?


Vesp. Rebel, I do command thee kneel in Cesar's name.


Io. Command thy slaves, for Joseph scorns to bend
Were Caesar here himself.

Titus. How Is that?


Jo. Titus I tell thee, Joseph is a Prince,
Deputed for the State of Galilee,
Royal in Blood; and Caesar is no more,
Nor thou so much.

Vesp Come thou to brave it out bold Jew, with words?
We Will show thee deeds to prove our Honors by, Draws
And when thou see our pedegrees made good
Write thou thine own descent in Roman blood.

Drums beat, and exeunt. They fight within, and enter Titus and Joseph at
several doors, they fight: Joseph retires: And enter Vespatian wounded in the
Leg with an Arrow. Titus. How fares my Father?


Vesp. Lead me aside Titus, I am hurt.


Exeunt. Leads him out. Enter Valerio and Nicanor. Val. The fight was bravely
manned on either part:
Pray Heaven the General be well.

Nica. I saw his silver tresses circled round
With troops of Soldiers, till his valiant Son
Bravely relieved him.

Val. The Jewish Captain bravely stood it out,
Even when his ranks had lest him:
Did thou not see him when he was begirt
With troops of Romans, with what brave advantage
A still maintained the fight? and then, even then
When death stood gazing on him, and his men
Adjudg'd him lost, through what a bleeding Lane
A bravely made his way, and so escaped?

Ni. This way a took; come let us pursue the chase.


Exeunt. Enter Joseph wounded, leaning upon his Sword. Io. This way, or that?
is it so? then I have caught my self, and
must take neither. So -- I must obey --
Lies down. Lie there thou wretched carcass, and prepare
thy self for dissolution. O Heavens! see
the strange desires of base Mortality.
Can thou desire to live, thou wretched Earth,
And see thy Honor dye? O misery
Beyond expression.

Enter Joseph's two Captains. 1 Cap. This way our Leader took.


2 Cap. See where he lies.


1 Cap. How fares my Lord?


Joseph. Even at the Lion fares,
When strong entangled in the Hunters toil,
A chafes his Royal heart with rage, to see
Himself intrapt.
Cry within, follow, follow, follow.
1 Cap. My Lord, we are persu'd even at the heels,
Shift for your life.

Ios. Away and save your selves, my wounds will not give leave.


1. Cap. Come, we will bear you hence.


Ios. Your hands, stay:
Within this Vale there is a secret Cave,
Whose private entrance now o'regrown with moss,
Will hardly be discerned: Lead me to that.

1 Cap. Happily thought of.

They enter the cave.
Enter Titus, Valerio, Nicanor. Titus. It Is beyond my understanding which way
their General has escaped us.


Val. And mine too, my Lord; but sure I am a cannot be far hence^
Nor can a long continue where a is:
Unless Camelion like a feeds on air.

Ti. Well, he is a noble fellow; if thou find'd him Valerio, use him with equal
honor to his worth.


Val. My Lord I shall.


Ti. Tell him on the faith of great Vespatians Son,
A shall be gently used. So fare thee well, I wish thee good success.

Val. My Lord I shall obey.
Exit Titus. What course shall we take now, Nicanor?

Ni. Troth we may wink and choose; our first and second course is all but
Sallets: Physic, Physic Valerio, most inexpressible Physic; why I have walked
my self into such an abstract of abstinence that I can relish ye the distinct
nourishment of the thicker, thinner, and more refined air, and shall in time,
no doubt, attain to the perfection of the Camelions diet.


Val. Prithee be serious now,
And lets pursue the search.

Ni. Contents but by this hand I swear
I will endur't no longer then this night.

Exeunt. Enter the two Captains out of the Cave. 1 Cap. Death, I am almost
starved,
My hungry maw devours my vital blood.
What is to be done?

2. Cap. To make escape's impossible*
We are begirt with Romans round about.

1 Cap. Death, shall we dye like Dogs?


2 Cap. No, in despite of hunger, we will dye like men.
Draws. takes the weapon. Here, take this weapon, and despatch me first.

1. Cap. Stay, swear to be constant in the brave performance.


2 Cap. I do, do thou the like.

Kisses the Sword.
1 Cap. I vow the same: we are agreed,
And now in honor to our brave farewell,
We Will kill our Captain first

2 Cap. Content, let us call him out.


1 Cap. What, ho, Joseph, come forth, prepare thy self to dye.

Joseph comes out with his weapon drawn.
Jo. Are we discovered?


2 Cap. Yes, hunger has spied us in her grannam^ den,
And sent her Sister Famine to devour us

Jos. What means this mad Discourse?


1 Cap. Know brave Commander, we have called thee out
To lead thy Soldiers in the march of death.
As thou have lived, so thou shall bravely dye,
thou art the Prologue to our tragedy.
We mean to kill thee; therefore prepare thy self.

Ios. Villains ye dare nor.


1 Cap. Dare not --

Offers a thrust at him.
Ios. Hold -- ask counsel first of Heaven, and tell me then
Which of your bold rebellious tongues dare speak
So fowl a word: O ye wretched fools!
Where is that better part of man become,
whose nobler Nature hunger cannot touch,
that can endure to feel the Carcass pine,
Yet scorn to yield, till by a power Divine
It Is summoned to obey? Lo, where is your valor now?
Lives it within this wretched lump of earth?
Or is it seated in the sacred soul?
O Heavens! have we power to make
the most despised creature breathing here?
And shall our daring hands presume to take
Away the noblest? For shame remember --

1 Cap. No more, by heaven we will endure no longer:
Think thou with words to alter our intent?
Come, prepare thy self, for we have sworn.

Joseph. Hold -- I do consent:
But let me crave a little time of truce
To make my peace with Heaven

2 Cap. We grant it thee.

Jo. prays apart.
Io. I am resolved to dye:
But ere I do receive the fatal blow,
I do command ye by the sacred tie
Of solemn Oaths, to grant me one request.

1 Cap. Except thy life and ours, we yield to any thing.


Io. I do embrace your offer.
Here, swear on your Honors to perform what I command.

Cap. We swear to do it.

They swear upon his Sword.
Io. Since then our dying minutes do depend
upon each others fatal Execution,
to free each person from the bloody guilt
Of wilful slaughter, I ordain by lots,
Each man receive his death:
the manner shall be this.
Our number in the Cave is forty just,
We will unite our selves by two and two,
then cast by lots which couple shall dye first:
the couple first to dye shall likewise cast
Which of them two shall kill his fellow, then
He that remains shall make choice of one
Of the next lot to take his life away.
This done, each may in order fairly dye
Without the guilt of wilful butchery.

1 Cap. We like thy counsel well, make thou the lots,
And let us to the Execution.
they enter the cave.
Enter Nicanor, and Valerio. Ni. This search is endless, which way now Valerio?


Va. Faith even to bed I think.


Ni. Into what secret angle of the earth
Is this distressed Jew retired?

Va. He Is not above ground sure, or if a be,
He Is metamorphosed to some other shape.
Groan in the Cave.
Ni. Hark, what noise was that?


Va. Your fancy sure, I heard no noise.


Ni. Prithee be still and listen. Hark,

Groan again. I hear it now, let us go forward and enquire the cause.

Ni. Which way came it?


Va. That way:


Ni. Let us go soft and listen.

They go soft along, and Exeunt
Enter Joseph, and his follow with weapons. Cap. Why do thou lead me out?


Io. To kill thee if thou make resistance, thoufool --
Can thou believe that Joseph means to dye
Without his makers leave?
Cursed be that hand that dares be listed up
Against the power that made it,
Even by that sacred power, whose awful name
I dare not utter, it is not I fear to dye,
But to offend so great a Majesty:

Cap. Tush I will not hear thee, prepare thy self to fight,
I am resolvd to dye.

Io. Be wise thou wretched man, and do not fool
thy life away, remember who I am
that has preserved thee in the lot with me,
Beware thou tempt me not too far,
If thou resist me, by all that's good, I vow
to kill thee, and preserve my self.

Cap. Thou have prevaild, do with me what thou will,


Io. Retire we then into the Cave again, left we be discovered


They enter the Cave. Enter Valerio and Nicanor again following. Ni. By this
light I Will follow thhee no further.


Va. Prithee be patient lets search this vale,
And on a Romans word we will retire,
Did thou not hear it since?

Ni. No, or if I did I wooed not tell thee so,
For fear we amble out another night:
But sure I am we are not far remote
From whence we heard it first:

Va. There Is surely some enchantment in this place,
I will enquire the cause:
What ere thou art that in this shady grove
Do shroud thy self from sight, whose dismal voice
Declares the story of some sad distress.
Be thou infernal feind confined here,
To dwell in darkness for a thousand year,
Or be thou some sad soul enforced to dwell
Within this place, till thou return to hell,
Or be thou Goblin, Fairy Elf or Hag,
Or Witch in shape wolf that love to drag
Poor infants to the den; what ere thou be
If thou have power to speak, I charge thee answer me.
Speaks in the Cave.
Jo. If thou will tie thy self by solemn vow.
Not to discover me, I will declare
Both who, and where I am:

Ni. Art thou there old boy?


Val. Tie me to any thing but that, and I will grant it thee,
And swear to do it.

Jo. Art thou a Roman?


Va. I am.


Io. Swear then to bring me safe unto Vespatian.


Va. By all the gods I will:


Io. Tell me thy name,


Va. Valerio.


Io. Make now a Covenant 'twixt thy self and me,
That what thou have protested may appear
Under thine hand and seal.
Write that thou will conduct both me and mine
In safety to thy Lord Vespatian.
Writes, and reaches it to him on the end of his Lance, and th^n Io. and the
Capt. comes out.
Va. To give thee satisfaction I will do it:
Where art thou now?

Opens the Cave. Io. Here.
Doo'st thou not know me Roman?

Va. Art thou that brave Commander of the Jews,
Whose Martial Prowess Rome does so admire?

Ios Lo I am he brave Roman that have stood
The furious shock of my distressed fate;
Behold me now, and whilst thou lookst upon
This lump of earth captivd to thee and Rome,
Know then that Joseph dares, but cannot dye,
Our sacred Law forbids such cruelty.

Va. By all the ties of a true Roman word,
Thou art nobly welcome.

Ni. Welcome to us both.


Io. To both my equal thanks,


N. Where are the Soldiers that escaped with thee?


Io. Dead all, save this, whom I desire you both
To favor as my special friend, and one
Whose valor may deserve your love:
The circumstances of the others loss
We will refer until some fitter time.

Va. Let it be so.
Come my brave Soldier, great Vespatians son
Will joy to see thee safe.

Exeunt Sound Music, and enter a Dumb Show, Vespatian and Titus two Soldiers
follow bearing a Crown, Vespa. conf^rreth with Titus, then enter Valerio and
Nicanor with Joseph and the Cap. they present Joseph to Vespa. Joseph kneels,
Vespatian and Titus embrace him; Valerio and Nicanor whisper with the
Soldiers, take the Crown of them, and present it kneeling to Vespatian, he
refuses twice, they draw and force him to ascend and take it; Titus kneeleth,
Vespatian imbraceth him: Joseph takes leave of Titus and the rest, and exit
with Vespatian, and the Captains consult, and exeunt at the other doors.
Chorus. Romes great Commander, Nero, lately dead,
Behold, now good Vespatians aged head
Enjoyes the Diadem, conceive him now
Ariv'd at Rome there with a solemn vow
Of bloody war, he raises fresh supply
to aid his valiant son in Galile:
Joseph is sent to Rome by Cesars son,
there lives a captive till the wars begun
Against Jerusalem, mean time we pray
Let pleasing music charm the time away.
Finis Actus Secundies.
Incipit Actus tertius, Scena secunda.
Enter Zareck, with Ieho. Letter. THe times steals on apace, I must be brief in
my delivery.

Knock^ within. Who knocks!

Za. A servant to the Lord Ichochanan,


Serve. Your business?


Za. It Is private to yor Lord,


Serve. I will inform him so:

Enter Skimeon.
Skim. From whom thy business?


Za. Read this my Lord, and you shall be resolved.


Skim. My Lord, multiplicity of words protract time, the third night from the
date of this you shall have entrance into the City, be sudden, strong, a bold
farewell.

Reads the Letter. I shall not fail, commend me to thy Lord, and bid him rest
assured of my appearance.


Exit. Za. I will my Lord.


Skim. Farewell, be sudden, strong, and bold; Za. I will be all.
Exit. But it is Ichochanan to work thy fall.

Enter Eleazer. Elea. To be, or not to be, I there is the doubt,
For to be Sovereign by unlawful means,
Is but to be a slave to base desire,
And where is my honor then?
What a strange buzzing of ambition
Pusues my thirsty soul?
O Eleazer! can thy traitor breast
Give harbor to a thought of Paricide*
It is thy father, O the sacred tie
Of filial duty, how that awful name
Affrighteth all my faculties with fear --
With fear? -- of what? -- with foolery by heaven;
If there be ought within this awful name
That can extort obedience from a son,
It Is but the rotten Carcass, there is the thing
That for to please its self begets another,
So does a beast, and yet 'twixt them we see
An equal freedom of society:
As for the nobler part of man we know
That Is of a higher birth, if it be so,
Thus low my knee shall bend, but thou my heart
Bends his knee. Scorn to obey, remember where thou art:
I am resolved, the times are bloody, and the peoples hearts
I hear, are bent on me: Ichochanans the man
that I must fairly close withal, this done,
We shall be strong for opposition.
Soft, here a comes.

Enter Jehochanan. Iehoc. My Lord Eleazer.


Elea. Iehochanan, well met.


Ie. My Lord, if without a breach of manners, I might be bold to question with
your Lordship; I should desire to know the secret cause of your accustomed
sadness, which good my Lord (pardon my boldness) as tender of your Lordships
health and honor, I have of late observed.


Elea. O my Iehochanan, I know thou love me well
embraces him. Nor will I in words or actions give the cause
To say I am unthankful, though I must confess
The greatest part of my requital, is
Too mean for thy deserts, the means Iehochanan,
I want the means to counterpoise thy worth.

Io. O my gracious Lord, your love has ever been
A full requital to my poor deserts:
But, good my Lord, the cause of this your sadness?

Elea. O I have been tormented to the soul,
To see the strange distraction of the times,
To see the sacred City ruled by those
Whose poor decrepid brains are fi^ter far
For drowsing pillows, than for bloody war.

Ie. My Lord your father --


Elea. O that cheating name,
With what a magic spell it does bewitch
The crazy judgment, and besot the soul
With adoration of this lump of earth?

Ie. You know my Lord there is a sacred tie
Enjoins obedience.

Elea. Tush, mere policy,
A trick, a cheat, to keep the world in aw:
Death, I am vexed to think how men are gulled.

Ie. My Lord, I understand not what you mean,


Elea. Thou can not be so dull:
Is It so? I dare not utter now, what I conceive,
O my good Lord remember that your father --
Apart,
Elea. No more, by all that is good I hate the name of father.

Ie. Death, I am discovered
Ie. Now I have found ye Sir, and must have leave
To tell your Lordship that you do me wrong,
From which of all my actions have ye picked
Even but a show of treason to the state?

Elea. How? ye forget your self.


Ie. It Is you my Lord that both forget your slef and me.


Elea. Again?


Ie. Nay I must tell ye, 'twas not for your honor,
Upon the buzzing of some bare report,
To undermine your friend.

Elea. Speakst thou this in earnest?


Ie. I do, and will in earnest, stand
Against that traitor whose presumptuous hand
Dare touch your aged father.

Elea. Ungrateful slave, the traitor I return
With interest of what thou do deserve,
Traitor to me, and traitor to the state.

Ie. This, but to play another time upon me,
Which ended, still Iehochanan's the same.

Elea. Dare thou not stand for Eleazer then?


Ie. I neither dare, nor will:


Elea. Then I dare kill thee.

They draw and sight.
Ie. Hold, art thou in earnest?


Elea. The to'ther bout will tell thee;


Ie. Swear by the honor of a loyal friend,
And I believe it.

Elea. By heaven I swear, and by the sacred tie
Of settled friendship, what my words express,
My actions shall confirm.

Ie. Then thus I do embrace your love. Now my Lord,
What ere the project be,
I vow assistance and fidelity:

Elea. Then take it thus,
Thou have command to muster up thy forces,
Let it be done with expedition,
My doting father has devised this plot
To cheat the Citizens, whose greedy souls
thirst for Vespatians blood; but fearful, they
while thus they gull the people, mean to pay
the wonted tribute money, and with slavish fear
to crave a peace of the proud Emperor.
This on my life is true, but we will prevent it.

Ie. I but the means my Lord?


E. To morrow morning ere the break of day
Muster thy forces to the market place,
there I will meet thee with a warlike troop
Of youthful Citizens, then we will command
On pain of death that none presume to stand
for peace, or for the payment of the tribute money;
This done, what is he that dares deny it.

Ie. My Lord, I do approve of the design,
But fear a potent opposition,
I therefore do advise, that we provide
Some speedy aids to give assistance to
Our enterprise.

Elea. But how shall this be done?


Ie. Leave that to me, mean while be sure to keep the time appointed:


Elea. I will not fail, farewell Iehochanan.


Exit Eleazer. Ie. Adieu my Lord:
Why let the Mungril Curs go play,
And lordly Lions fight.
The braver beast shall win the day,
And so my Lord good night:
But I forget my self:
It Is now about the time the lazy watch
With wary steps begin to walk the round:
And this the night that Zareck must be here,
I will withdraw my self, for what noise is that?

Enter the Watch. 1 W. Come neighbor, come; it is we must stand to it when all is
done.


2 W. I neighbor, we will stand to our tacklings Je. I warrant ye.

The Watch, I'^e steal aside.
1 What was that that went by, neighbor?


2 Where, where, neighbor, where?


1 Marry there, just there something stole along,


2 Was it not a spright, God bless us?


1 No, no, no, 'twas nothing but a diffusion. But as I was saying, neighbor;
it is we must stand to it, because we be not book-learn'd, as they say, they
count us but unlitter'd fellows, but let um say what they will, we are the very
legs of the Commonwealth; for when we be drunk, the City reels fort I Am sure.


2 Mas neighbor, and ye say true.


1 I woo'l stand toot, that a Watchman has more torrity than a Justice a Peace.


2 What wool ye neighbor, how prove ye that?


1 Marry thus I prove it: Yer watchman (taking him in his office of presermity)
may be drunk by torrity of his place, because he watches the City, and no body
watches him, so cannot your Justice. Again, your watchman may issue out, and
reprehend any person for any fribolous offense, as murder, or the like, and for
a feeling, as they call it, let him go without further excommunication, so
cannot your Justice; for when the Benefactor is before him, he must nilli willi
reign him according to the vigor of the Law.


2 How say by that.


1 Nay I heard my neighbor Timothy say, that if all your chief officers should
dye in a night, your watchman should be a Justice a peace himself: nay I tell
ye neighbors, the depth or our places is very high


3 See, see.


1 W. Well* come let us take our stand here, we shall see some vacant fellow,
rambling this way anon, I warrant you.


2 What must we do then neighbor?


1 Marry we must remit um to prison, and then ask 'um whither they were going


3 But what if they run away neighbor?


1 Why then we must knock um down, and bid 'um stand. Nay I warrant ye
neighbor, I have all ye'r points of law Barbatim.


1 This gate neighbor (you wood 'mire to hear it)
This gate -- for I am sure I speak within my compass:
This gate -- Lord how the time runs away, me thinks 'twas e'ne but yesterday.
This very Gate --
Thunder. What was that, what was that neighbor?

2 'Twas a clap of thunder.


1 Man if this weather hold, we shall have a stormy night on it.
Where did I end neighbor, can ye tell?

2 At [gate] neighbor Oliver:


1 Well. Well, this very gate was directed that very night that I was made a
watchman, which did pronosticate (as I may say) the good service that I shooed
do here.

Thunders again.
2 Trust me truly neighbor, if this weather hold, we shall have a soul night
on it as you say.


1. 'Twas e'ne in such a night as this that my neighbor Timothy and I ran away
from the Constable; for I tell ye neighbor, we are not to repose our selve to
the danger of such seasonable weather.


2 Man neighbor I Am e'ne of your mind for that, let us go get some shelter.


1 Content, content.


Exeunt. Thunder, and enter Zareck with a Rapier, and a wrenching Iron. Za. Lie
there a while till I have use for thee:
Lays down the Iron, and goes sofe to the Gate. A, as I could wish it, this
stormy night has driven the watch away
Beyond my hopes; why it may now be done
With ease and safety.
Thunder. Speak louder, louder yet thou dreadful sky,
Whose flaming face speaks terror to the world;
The daring Lion now dares not approach
The craggy mountain to devour his prey.
the ravening Wolf lies lurking in his den,
And howls to hear this strange combustion,
the fatal bird of night, whose dismal voice
Foretells some ill event, cries now for fear:
Nor man, nor beast dares budg, yet unto me
thou art as pleasing as the rosy morn,
Whose lovely cheeks look smiling on the day,
How fit thou come to give assistance too
My brave exploit? for now no sooner shall
the thunder speak, but I will thunder too
upon the gates: now, now the sport begins:
It thunders, and he wrenches the gate. the gates unbar'd, and Edomites let in,
I Will post immediately to the Synagogue,
And there relate with admiration
the strange effect of the late fearful thunder,
till I have mazed the learned fools with wonder:
thunder again, he opens the gates. Again, again, again, once more, and then it is
done
And bravely too, without suspicion.

Enter L. Skimeon with others, with torches, Rapiers, and a Drum. Za. My Lord?


Sk. Thou art a trusty fellow, I will reward thy pains,
Where is thy Lord?

Za. Follow me, I will conduct ye to him.


About to go out. Enter Jehochanan, and others, with torches and Rapiers. Je.
Welcome, my dearest friend, come we will away,
And take our stand within the market place,
Strike up the Drum, the dreadful noise will fright
the drowsy Prelates in the dead of night.

Exeunt. Enter H. Priest and Gorion at several doors in haste, with Night-gowns
and tapers. H. P. O Gorion we are lo^t,
the Rebel Skimeon with his ragged band
of thieves, and Cutthroats, this tempestuous night
Has gotten entrance, Jechochanan I fear
will join his forces too, speak Gorion, speak,
What Is to be done?

Go. We Will take the temple for our sanctuary,
thither the Citizens will boldly come.

H. P. We must be speedy then, O Gorion, we
want time to weep for our calamity.

Enter Mechanics with Weapons. Cap. Come on my brave bilbow blades, my roaring
Renegadoes, and my ragged Ruffians, which side shall we take now?


1 Marry my brave Captain of the ragged Regiment, we will take the strongest.


Cap. Mark me my valiant Mirmidons.


2. Me. Mark him, mark him.


C. I will instruct ye in the Rudiments of war;


1. M. A will instruct us rudely in the war; mark him, mark him.


Cap. When I your brave Commander bid you stand,
Be sure ye budg not, Hum, Hum, Stand:

1 M. Why so we do, don't we?


C. March up in equal rank.


2 M. We are not such fools I trow; did not a bid us stand?


1 M. I marry did a, we wont budg an inch I warrant him.


Cap. By the bright honor of mine Eminence
My reputation will be quite defaced.
I must indoctrinate their dull capacities
With a more ample measure of my meaning:
Advance your Bilbows thus:
They advance. Look over their shoulders. Now faces about.

C. Now Mars defend me, what a rabblement
Of rude disorderd Rebels have I met with all?

1 M. O ho faces about; follow me, follow me.


Cap. Well done my valiant Varlets,
Now march each man with fury in his face,
And I your valiant Don
will lead you on
unto the Market place.

Enter Zareck. M. O ho, here comes one, knock him down, down with him.


Ca. Hold I say, he comes perhaps to join in our Batalio,
Whose side art thou on fellow? speak, why do not speak? Ha.

Za. Your patience, and I Will declare my business.


1 Me. Patience? we scorn patience, we must ma^ch in fury.


2 M. Down with him, down with him, does a talk of patience?


Cap. Silence, I say, ye shallow-brain'd simplicians,
For we are pleased to hear his embassy.

1 Silence, silence, and listen to the emphasis.

Apart. Za. Unless ^ speak in some unheard of style
It Is sure impostible to get fairly off:
Most indefatigable Commander, and cabalistical Captain of this most enormious
equipage.

Cap. The style is most profound, and enigmatical,


Za. From the three Captains of the Regiment
I was commanded to acoast thy greatness:

Cap. Hum, hum, declare the sum of thy concernancy.


Za. I will be most concise,

By the energetical power of this my embassy, I do command thee tell why thou
art up in Arms.


Cap. Thou have concocted the crudities of my stomach into choler, and I am
displeased at thy most profuse evaporation.


Talk thou of commanding fellow, Hah?

Za. Mistake me not, most mighty man at Arms.


Cap. Avaunt thou vapor of indingity,
Go tell thy Lord, I Will parley with himself.

Za. I will return thy most elaborate encounter.


Exit. Cap. Now by mine honor, I am moved with mighty indignation, and will
approach in my fury: Come follow my boys, follow.


M. Follow, follow.


Exeunt. Enter Ananias and Gorion with weapons, and Eleazar, Jeho, Skimeon,
with weapons at several doors. Ananias. Goodness defend me, am I awake? or do I
dream of horror?
Starts back at the sight of his son. Look up ye wretched eyes, and gaze your
fill,
Glut all the greedy faculties of soul
With this prodigiuos sight:
Rebellious boy, I do command thee kneel:
Elea. smiles. By all that is good a laughs, laughs me to scorn,
And still persists, even to my face persists with mockery.
Assist me heaven, and thou distressed earth,
Extend thy forces to the highest strain
Of man's invention; let this fatal hour
Extort the noblest of thine aged power:
Ignoble, irreligious, Paricide,
Monster of men, rebellious runnagate;
By the Celestial powers severe commands,
By filial duty, and the sacred tie
Of Iewries Law, or if by none of, these,
By that eternal vengeance that shall
Fall upon thy cursed head; I do command thee kneel.
Guard me ye blessed ones, and look up
E. laughs. the great affliction of a poor old man.

Elea. I knew the froward humor must have vent:
Now it has eased it self, and will not be so tutchy.
Why thou impetuous fool, can thou expect
Obedience from a Son?
Look, look but upon thy self, and see
Of what decrepped age and misery
thou art composed: Behold the reeling State
Distracted, feeble, sick, and ruinate,
turned topsie-turvy by thy doting brain.
And can thou dream of Sovereignty?

An. O my distressed Fate!
Ungrateful Cur, that have been bred to prove
An open shame to all posterity.
Behold me wretch, and whilst thou look upon
A Sons Rebellion, and a Fathers wrong;
Curse the detested hour that did beguile
Thy erring soul with this pernicious plot.

Elea. Peace dotard, I will hear no more:
the rotten tooth insects the wholesome gunt,
Is noisome, painful, loose and troublesome,
Hinders the growth of that that must succeed,
And must be drawn.

Enter Mechanics. Cap. Come follow, follow my boys, follow.


Go. Welcome my worthy citizens, thrice welcome all.


Cap. Gramarcy old bully.


Go. Behold --


Sk. If ye respect your lives and liberties, hear not the babbler speak.


Go. Behold dear contrymen, behold a man,
Points to the high priest. Your Priest, your Prophet, and your Sovereign:
Religious, wise, and zealous for the state,
Even from his Infancy immaculate.

Cap. Be brief, be brief old boy.
Behold a Son; O heaven! why do I call
Him son? behold a villain most unnatural,
A cursed wtetch, that dares devise a plot
to cheat te State, and cut the Kingdoms throat.

Cap. How Is that? how is that? cheaters and cutthroats, cheaters and
cutthroats, I like not that Barlady.


Me. Look to your pockets boys, look to your pockets, they be cheaters.


Go. O can ye see those precious tears run down,
And not be moved with pity?
Ananias w^^ps.
M. Pity! hang pity, we are Soldiers, we scorn pity.


Ie. Dear friends, wise Citizens, and valiant country men]

Salutes them.
M. I, I, let us alone for Wisdom and Valor.


Cap. Let the circle of thy circumference be moved to his proper place.


1 M. What dee mean I what dee mean? pray be covered.


2 M. Go not too near him Captain, for all this, the more curtsie, the more
craft.


An. Ungrateful slave, dare thou oppose thy self against him that gave thee
life and liberty?


Go. O hear him not dear friends, a will beguile
Your honest understandings.

C. Beguile a pudding, speak on Jocky, speak on.


Ie. That you are zealous for your Countries good,
I nothing doubt; nor do I fear your love
And fair attentions.
Mark then dear Countrymen, mark I beseech you,
And with your deep discretions truly weigh
the scope of our proceedings.

Cap. Hum, hum, begin my man of mettle.


Ie. In the black tempest of a shipwrackt State,
When Prince and People staggered with the load
Of sad Oppression; when the peoples groans,
When Mothers tears, and Infants miseries
Were at the full; where, where was then the man
that durst oppose this strange confusion?
Was it not I, my valiant Coutrey-men?
Behold Iehochanan dare boldly say,
'twas he that forced that bastard King from hence,
that slew the Roman Lords, that did deny
to yield to Romes outrageous cruelty:
It Is not unknown unto the meanest here?

M. What Is that? does a make mean fellows of us?


Ie. Mistake me not, I know ye worthy all,
All men of judgment, wise and valiant all.
Yet give me leave dear friends to let ye know
there are degrees of worth,

M. O ho, we mistoost him, we mistook him, we are mean in worth that is well,
that is well; go on my brave Captain.


Ie. It Is not unknown I say, what heavy yokes
Observe the word dear friends, for it is emphatical.

Cap. Very good, an emphatical yoke.


Ie. What heavy yokes I say have been imposed
Upon this injured Nation.
What loads of sorrows have been laid upon
Our weary loins, and yet ( O heavens) to see
M. O Heaven^ With what strange patience and humility
We have endured it.
Are not your Kings deposed, your freedoms lost,
Your Laws transacted, and your goods despoiled,
Your Wives abused, your children massacred,
Your Rulers banished, and your selves become
A scorn to all posterity?
Will ye be asses still, and bear this heavy load?
Will ye be slaves for ever? Can there be
At least a thought of such stupidity?

M. How Is that! how is that! a calls us slaves and asses:
Down with him, Captain, down with him.

Cap. Hold, hold I say, my ragged rusticks,
For his Emphasis will bear it.

M. His Emphasis bear it! his Emphasis's an ass,
We scorn to bear it; down with him I say, down with him.

Cap. Now by the might of my omnipotence, he that dares strike a blow, a sahll
feel the fury of mine indignation.


Elea. And now dear Contrymen behold the man,
Your Priest, your Prophet, and your Sovereign.

An. Dare thou to boast in thy impiety?


Skim. If ye be freemen let me hear ye cry,
Lord Eleazer, Life and Liberty.

All M. A Freeman, a Freeman, a Freeman; down with old gray beard, down with
gray beard.


Go. Curse on that wicked hand that dares a blow against that sacred head; let
it be seized with death by a Divine revenge;


Or let it ever be
A withered member of impiety.
But if the wicked fury must have vent,
Upon my knees I beg, let it be poured out
Upon this head of mine.
O Eleazer, can thou look upon
the great afflictions of this good old man,
And not be drowned in tears of penitence?
Behold the torrent of his grief is such,
A has not power to express his misery.
A has no eyes to weep no tongue to speak,
No sense to comfort, but a heart to break.
Elea. There Is something in this old enchanters tongue that will beguile me;
peace, I will hear no more.


Go. Then may thou never be heard of heaven.
Behold, the highest strain of misery,
old Gorion begs even of his enemy.

Elea. Peace impotent fool, I say, I will hear no more.


Go. Then thou must stop thine ear, for I must speak:


Elea. Come Soldiers, let us away, hear not the babbler speak.


M. No, no, no, we will hear no impudent old men.


Cap. March on my man of mettle, we will follow thee through thick and thin, up
to the chin In blood, my bonny buntings.

Exeunt omnes, but high Priest and Gorion
Go. Heaven give thee strength to bear this misery.


An. In what a labyrinth of wretchedness
Dwells this forsaken City! how the streets
Swarm with the sons of death! the sons of death 1
O may that name of son for ever dye,
And yet naught but the Name, the wretched Name:
Long my the Substance live: the Substance -- why?
What is the Substance? If the Name be foul,
Farewell the rest for ever. And yer methinks it were
too short a time to take so long a leave:
Stay then, what is the Substance? the Substonce is my son,
Again my son: I Will say it is my self,
My very self divided from my self:
And then methinks it is wondrous strange to see
(And yet it is wondrous true my self to be
A butcher to my self: And then -- if it be so,
Why do I blame a Son -- was it not I.
that gave him shape, and life, his faculties
Of will and reason? to do well or ill, are from above.
Had a been born a beast, a had been free
From such unheard of, cursed cruelty,

Go. How strongly Nature works, ere it can part
With that it woo'de effect.

An. O Eleazer, if thou were not mine,
I could be happy in my misery.
Thou art a villain, yet thou art my son,
My son, and yet a villain; there is a word
Able to make a Fathers heart strings crack,

Go. No more good man.


An. Strange actions I have heard
have sometimes wrought strange alterations.
Were it not strange to see the Sun go back,
Or borrow light of the unconstant Moon!
Were it not strange to see the Cedar bend,
And do his homage to the lowly shrub
Or to behold the stately Lion crouch,
And stand in fear of the dejected Lamb;
If none of these may yet seem strange, behold
A thing more strange; the head must serve the heel,
The Villain Son must stand, the Father kneel.
O Gorion! if one spark of love be left
In that ungrateful breast; or if there be
At least one dram of goodness yet remaining,
this act will penetrate his erring soul,
Startle his Conscience, and amaze the will,
Affright the judgment, and divert the plot,
the bloody plot: O! I am lost with grief,
And do I know not what -- And yet it must be done:
Come, go with me I say, for I will kneel.

Go. Heaven send thee comfort in this ecstasy.

Exeunt.
Enter a Carter with his whip, at one door whistling, and the Lady Miriams man,
Peter, at another. Peter. What, brother ^ennel, what a mutren make thou here.
Nay, nay, nay, I prithee leave thy whewing, and tell me what thou make here
-- apart
no! I Will hold a groat I Will make ye leave anon; why firrah, if thou did but
behold what a pitiful pernicious face thou make with whistling, thou would
take up stones and throw at it.


Pen. Take heed thou do not whistle Peter.

P. O. I thought I should put ye out a tune.
Pet. Why prithee?


Pen. I can hardly endure thy face without it.
If thou should whistle, thou were utterly undone,
I should never for bear throwing at it.

Pet. Well contorted efaith boy!


Ped. Nay I can tell ye Peter, for wit and understanding I am not regenerate,
as they say, for my Father had as much knowledge as any man of his
understanding in the town I woos.


Pet. Well, well, well, I have nothing to do with knowledge and understanding


Pen. The you are a ^ool Peter.


Pet. I am won of your making then, and indeed it may well be for they say won
fool makes many: I think I was even w'ye there for the fool.


Pen. Excellent good efaith Peter.


Pet. Nay I can tell ye, I had a Father too; well, well, I know what
I know; but all is one for (...) -- um, um: But I prithee boy tell me,
tell me what make thou here?
Pen. whistles. By this hand if thou wil^hor leave whistling,
I le throw stones.

Pen. Why can not thou tell what I make here?


Pet. Not I as I am a Gentleman.


Pen. Why thou hearst I make music bully.


Pet. Music with a pox, prithee leave making Music, and make me an answer.


Pen. Marry then I will tell thee what I make here:
I am come to follow the wars my boy:
They say the new Captains entertain all comers,
And I am all on fire to be at it.
O -- methinks I could so pepper thee now.

Pet. Oh -- oh -- prithee hold, or else I shall need to be salted too:
But efaith boy, art in earnest? if thou be, shake hands, shake hands.

Pen. Why thou art not run away from thy Lady too, art?


Pet. No -- but I am sent of an everlasting Errand, and will leave the answer
to my Executors: I Am for push a pike boy.


Pen. Stand close, stand close, here come, the Captains.


Enter Eleazer, Skimeon, and Zareck with a Paper in his hand. Elea. The Commons
are in arms against us Skimeon,
And resolutely take our Fathers part;
Yet he, I hear, gives no allowance to it,
But rhinks with fair persuasions to prevail:
But we are armed with resolution.

Sk. We must be wise my Lord; those aged hairs
Are taught by long experience to entrap
our younger brains; and this may be a plot
to take us at' advantage.
Therefore my Lord, in time let me advise
that we increase our forces speedily:
Let us make know ^ the Proclamation.

Elea. Read the ^^ntents of it once again.


Zareck reads. Whosoever lists to be rid from the bondage of his Master, or
has any injury in his Country; or what servant soever desires to beset at
liberty; or who so cannot abide the rule of his father or his mother; all that
be in debate, and stand in fear of their Creditors, or fear the Jews for
shedding innocent blood* If there be any man that is accused of any notorious
crime, and in danger therefore: To be short, whosoever i^ disposed to rob, to
haunt Whores, to murder, and to live freely at other men's cost, let him come to
me, and I will relieve him. Pet. O rare! I am ravished, I am ravished, the
wenches, the w^nches boy


Elea. I do not like the Proclamation,
the subject sounds too harsh, and will beget
Distractions in the graver Citizens.

Skim. Death, what need we care for that,
So we be strong for opposition.

Elea. Delays are dangerous, and we may be surpised
Indeed upon the sudden: well -- let it be done,
But in thy Name, for I must seem to be
Upright and zealous for their liberty.

Enter the High Priest and Gorion, the High Priest kneels. Ananias, Behold
young man, thy aged Father kneels;
And knnels to thee, even unto thee his Son,
And begs with tears, with tears of bitterness,
the ransom of thy soul, and of the State,
Both lost for ever, ever lost if thou persist.

Elea. Patience defend me, or I shall be o'recom.


Sk. Take heed ye be not caught.


Elea. Caught! is it possible for man to view this sight,
Apart. this most prodigious sight, and not be caught?
O Heavens! Did I not hear him say a was my Father?
Go this passion I hope, will work some good effect. the Carter comes. Have I
not heared him beg, and seen him kneel?
Had a been Jewries slave, a could have done no more.
Is It possible these Rivolets of blood should flow
From such a Fountain. Come hither fellow.
Time and Maturity do seem to say
Pet. He Will hang him sure. thou may have been a Father to a Son:
tell me, had thou e're a son?

Cart. Had, I, and have too, an't like your Worship, or chood be zorry.


Elea. The power of Nature works as strong in thee
As in thy Prince; thou love him too, I know.

Cart. By th'mass I zee your Worship's vilely cunning: I do indeed.


Elea. Could thou afford upon some weighty cause,
(Suppose to save thy life) to kneel unto thy son?

Car. Kads nails, kneel, I scorn that esaith,
Chil make the Looby kneel to me, chil warrant him.

El. Come hither; see thou this old man? Car. Ay,
Can thou believe this man to be my Father?

C. Vather ketha, no by my troth not I.


El. Up thou decrepped lump of vanity.
thou base impostor that would cheat the world
With a supposed Name; thou beastly shame
Of Age and Honor, thou indignity
Unto thy self, and thy Posterity.
Come, come, disrobe thy self, I say, and yield
Whilst he speaks, he disrobes him. these ornaments to him that scorns to kneel:
Here fellow, put um of^; put um on, I say, for I will have it so.
Let our Proclamation be published.

Za. It shall my Lord.


Exit Elea. Skim. and Zareck at one door, and Anna. and Gor. at the other,
weeping, and after them the Carter whistling Pet. St Pennel, 'st Pennel.
The height of his preserment will not let him answer me,
Well, I am astonished to think what honor I shall come too.

Finis Actus primus.
Incipit Actus Quartus.
Enter Titus, Valerio, Nicanor. Titus. NOw Fellow Soldiers, what? Methinks ye
look
Not smiling on Vespatians Son.
Let not the miss of your old Captain strike
Your manly hearts with grief: Come, come let me
See your cheerful countenances speak
My hearty welcome; Courage noble friends,
For know, there is not a dram of worth infused
Within Vespatians noble loins, but lives
Invested here: these lusty Roman veins
Swell high as ere did his, with hopeful pride
Of happy victory; this loyal breast
Harbors a heart as full of Clemency
If gently sought unto; but slighted once,
the daring Lion harbors one more mild,
More merciful the I* I tell ye Lords,
I Will not expect more duty from your hands,
then my deserving actions truly weighed,
Shall justly challenge: And be thus assured,
My aged Father thus far I Will outdo,
there is not a ti^tle of his former promises
to either here, but shall by me be crowned
With fair performance.
To witness which, we give you joint Command
And Martial Power, as next unto our self.

Val. My gracious Lord, the best of my endeavors
Shall strive to merit what your noble hand
Has now conferred; my hearts best blood my Lord
Shall seal my faithful protestation.

Ni. My actions, my good Lord, shall better speak
My humble th^nks, then my unskilful phrase:
Mean time your Lordships pardon for my silence.

Ti. It Is well: Now I must tell ye Lords,
As I have ripped my heart to let you see
My life's Compendium. I expect that you
Should shape your actions to deserve my love:
For I must tell ye Lords, it is not a formal show
of gilded words that can persuade me so:
Let me behold your brave attempts pursue
Imperious victory through seas of blood;
Your panting souls in midst of Massacre,
thirst after Honor, till the reaking blade
cry, it is enough.
Have ye not seen when in a bloody fray
My Noble Father has been left alone,
Alone, begirt with ranks of Enemies,
Whose strong Batalio's kept all rescue from him:
How then, even then when horror infinite
Stood gazing on him with a grim aspect,
How then (I say) his daring countenance
Stood in defiance of them all at once:
How the more danger, still the more he durst,
Like a strange Mastiff fiercely set upon
by mungril Curs in number ten to one,
With angry teeth, and courage bravely bold,
A snarles, and snaps; now this, now that does bite,
And stoutly still maintains the unequal fight
with equal fury, till the bawling cur^es
be quite dispersed: So he,
but with such Kingly awful Majesty,
as if in midst of this confusion
A found but sport of recreation.
Such and so daring must you be my Lords,
to gain my love, and win your country honor.

Ni. My Lord, our lives and Fortunes weighed with either,
We prize at nothing; nor can we desire
more felicity then to enjoy
the least of either.

Va. My honored Lord, your most exact command
will teach us Valor had we never been, trained
in Martial Discipline.

Ti. I like your answers well, saving that yours Valerio,
^avours too much of ^lattery -- and yet
upon life thou art not that way guilty.
And trust me soldiers I am confident
Your words and actions will in all points sympathize:
But we trifle time, and most redeem it
by a strict surveigh of our proceedings.

Enter Joseph from Rome. Ie. From great Vespatian my most honored Lord,
I come to do thee humble service.

Ti. Now by my life thou it welcome, welcome worthy friends
Our Royal Father never could send a man
More deer in our affection.
Thou come as we could wish thee, Joseph;
to morrow we intend to parley with Jerusalem;
thy friendly presence may perchance persuade
thy Countrymen to yield subjection:
If they refuse, by the Majestic power
Of mighty Cesar's sacred Diadem,
I Will scourge their pride with such severity,
shall make the Rebels curse their misery.
Exeunt. Come my endeared friend.
Takes Jo. by the hand. Enter Zareck. The three seditious Captains are at odds,
Each hunts the other's life's yet all do bear
A fair pretense of friendship to each other;
Each seeks for sovereignty; whilst, Sinon, I
With protestations of integrity
And zealous love, do fairly close with all;
For being friends to all in time of league,
'twill be a riddle to the wisest pate,
Whose love I prized most; then I protest
With what obsequious care and ^^^ling pains,
My wits are wearied to design a plo^
Whose wary circumstances may discry
All show of falsehood in the enterprise,
to trip the heels of either enemy;
then show the time, the place, the manner how
to do it: O I am tickled with the fine conceit.
My Father in a fair and good e^tate,
Was by these Rebels robbed and spoiled of all,
And I his son left naked to the world,
poor and dejected, till my working brain
Projected this employment to relieve me;
Since when, I have been busied for revenge:
O how methinks that very word Revenge,
Allaies the fury of my discontent!
But soft; it is much about the time they should be here:
I will withdraw my self.
Zareck stands behind the hangings. Enter Eleazer. I must be wise, and cloth
my pleasing phrase,
With fair pretense of peace and amity.
The blustering wind commands with angry brow,
The toiling travellier to leave his Cloak;
the storm increases, but the pelting man
still gripes it faster, till the pleasing Sun
By gentle rays entreats him lay it down.
Enter L. Jehochanan and L. Skimeon
Ieho. Good morrow to the Lord Eleazer.

A tubla set, and Zareck stands behind the Arras.
Elea. Welcome Iehochanan, welcome noble friends,
Come, sit we down, and each man freely speak
His cause of grievance: Ah my worthy friends,
Dissension is amongst us: Upon my life I dare
presume there is some strange mistake,
For else it cannot be that we should differ.

Ie. Some strange mistake? Indeed my Lord 'twas strange
Your Lordship should mistake your self so much,
And us your friends (your friends! nay more my Lord, then friends,
For friends are formal now:) the strength of your designs:
To send to us a public messenger
to summon us upon command to be
Attendants on your Lordships pleasure!
My Lord, this was not fair nor friendly.

E. Not fair my Lords, nor friendly! which of you
that stood in equal terms of honor with my self,
Wooed lose one tittle of that Dignity
that fairly rank't this state and quality^
Was it for me to say, I wooed intre^t^
Was not the Message public?
Had it been private, you should then have seen
My fair respect, and friendly love to either.
But, as it was my Lord --

L. Skim. Nay, then I must have leave to tell ye Sir,
Your Honor swells too high, and must be qualified
In equal terms of Honor with your self:
My Lord, I dare affirm thus Simeon stands
In equal terms of honor with your self.

Elea. How Is that?


Sim. Nay good my Lord, your Father's yet alive,
And you are then a private man (...) we.

Elea. This -- is in jest, to see how I can poize
A Friends affection, or perchance -- totry the bent of mine.

Sim Your Honor may do we^^ to pass i^ so,
Or else, perchance your Lordship may be angry.
And then -- how much your health may be impaired
With such distemper, may perhaps --

Elea. No more.
I was not wont to be ridiculous:
Nor did I come to hear such airy talk.
If this be earnest, let me hear who dares
pronounc'tagen.

Ie. Who dares! that brave reflects on me,
that dare stand up spurn at that, and thee.

El^. Is It possible!


S. Iehochanan, thou do me open wrong to intercept me:
The cause was mine; to me it did belong
to give an answer. Were thou not who thou art,
I should not take this well.

Ie. Simeon, I am as deep engaged as thou,
And will have leave to prize mine Honor highest.

S. And will have leave!


Ie. I say, and will have leave, and say it again.


S. Death, thou dare not say it again.


Za. Apart, is works, Ie. Dare not!


Elea. I do command ye cease
For shame give over this rash behavior:
Is this a time to broach a Faction,
When Cesars son has conquered Galile^,
And now is marching to Jerusalem

Ie. Command thy slaves, proud man, for I am free,
And will command my self.

E. Villain.


Ie. Thou lie.


E. O my enraged sold, must I endure all this?


S. All this and more, thou must endure me too.


E. Must Simeon?


S. I must I say, and shall:
Could thou dart lightnings from thy countenance,
Thus wooed I meet thee, and outface thee thus.

E. O I am lost in rage, and can endure no longer.

They draw, and a trumpet soun^^ from within.
Enter an Merauld. Her. From Cesar's sons, brave Lords, I come to say
He offers parley to Jerusalem:
The time prefixed is the next morning sun.

Elea. Go tell thy Master we accept it.


H. I shall return your answer.


Exit. El. This is no time to sight, nor will I now
Stand to defend mine honor: But stay,
before we sheath our weapons let us swear
However our private quarrel may proceed,
That we will still maintain each other's part
Against Vespaian's son.

Both: We are content.


E. Your hands.
Lay hands on the Sword. By a true soldiers Honor we do swear,
Fairly to friend each other in the field,
And jointly to oppose Vespatian.

Both: We swear to do it.


E. The same swear I.
I shall expect you both to morrow early.

Both. We will not miss the hour


Exeunt at several ways. Za. The Furies are broke loose, if either fall,
Zarech may rise to be a General.

Exit. Enter Perter with a Sword and Buckler, leading Gorion manicled with an
halter about his neck, apparel'd in a Canvase suit. Pet. Come, come sir, come
away, sir, come away.


G. Nay, prithee friend be not so rigorous,
Give me a little time to breathe a while.

Pet Breathe a while! I, I, I Will breathe ye, I warrant ye.
Come, come follow me, follow me, I say,
Ye shall want for no breathing.

Go. Inhumane wretch, I cannot follow thee:
Thou have already wearied out my limbs
With thy ungrateful usage.

P. Nay, nay, nay sir, all is one for that,
Limbs, or not limbs; I say, Folllow me.
Drags him along, and exeunt.
Beat Drom within, and enter Titus, Joseph, Vallerio and Nicanor at one door,
and the three Captains at the other, and after them Peter, leading old Gorion
in the Halter. P. Come forward I say, a comes like a, Bear to the stake.


Titus. What means this spectacle of misery?


Io. O Titus, it is my Father.
Were thou enthralled in more captivity,
Thus low would Joseph bow to do thee honor.
Jo. kneels, and Go weeps. I never felt my self so far surpised
With sudden passion; Nature is over charged,
And fain wooed have some vent. I fear
I shall forget my self: ^ye Joseph, fie,
apart. Art thou a soldier? So -- now the stream is turned.

Ti. Now my brave Lords of Jewry, which of you stands chief Commander in this
bold Rebellion?


Elea. Rebellion, Titus!


S. Speak that word again,
And Simeon dares reply that Titus lies.

Ti. Should Titus speak't again, 'twere still the same,
Nor is it less spoke once,

Ie. Then know bold Roman, Jewries sons are free,
And scorn to bend to Caesar, or to thee

Ti. The sturdy stick that will not bend, must break.


E. But not with Titus Arm, nor Caesar too.


Jo. A^ dearest countrymen, I come not here
to lift mine arm against Jerusalem,
But to lament it, Lords; for well I know,
the heavens have fore-decreed your overthrow:
The great Caldeans Golden Head is laid,
the mighty Persians silver Arms are lopt;
the Grecians thighs of brass are broken down:
What Is then remaining but those Iron Legs
On which the sturdy Roman Empire stands,
And stamps the World to Powder: Ah my Lords
Will ye contend with Fa^e?

Iehoc. Peace thou base coward, that to save thy life
Have lost thine honor.
Thou come with fawning zeal to beg for mercy.

Joseph. To beg for mercy! then mercy never protect me.
Forgive me Heaven, that I am forced to draw
My sword against my self, my Native countrymen.
Draws.
Tit. Now by my life they come to brave me here.
Rebels, those lordly hearts of yours shall bleed;
By all the Gods they shall --
Deliver up that aged prisoner,
Or by the Roman Powers ye shall repent it.

Schim. Not for the Roman Crown.


Elea. Lead him away to torture.
Come, come, come away sir, I Will tickle him with tortures.

Io. O my distressed Fate!


Ti. Villains, there is not a torture you inflict
Upon those aged limbs, but I Will return
With millions on your own.
Sound Drums, and exeunt omnes.
Beat Droms, and they fight within; then enter Joseph and fights with Eleazer,
and exeunt. Enter Valerio and fights with Jehoc. and exeunt. Enter Nicanor,
fights with Simeon, and exeunt: The three seditious are repulst: then enter
Titus, and meets with Eleazer, they fight: then enter Jehoc. and Simeon at
several Doors: Titus fights with the three: Eleazer cries, kill him:
Jehochanan, take him alive: Simeon cries the second time, kill him: Jehochanan,
take him alive. Eleazer the third time kill him: Jehochanan, take him alive.
Titus makes way through them wounded, and escapes. E. Death and the Devil, why
did ye let him escape?


S. O we are finely cheated of the booty,
And shall be laughed to scorn: Death, I could tear my flesh.

Ie. Stand ye to beat the air with idle words?
Let Us follow close, and find him out again.
Disperse your selves, and follow.
Exeunt at several ways Enter Peter. Call ye this Honor? a pox of honor,
Give me honesty, downright honesty!
Souns, break ones head, and give him no warning!
I wooed not have Honor come so fast upon me neither.
Looks who comes. Im'e pepperd with a vengeance: Farewell Honor,
I Will to my Lady again.

Exit. Enter Titus wounded: Josephus, Valerio, Nicanor, follow. Io. How fares
my Lord?


Ti. Well my Josephus, trust me, passing well:
it is Titus glory to be bathed in blood:
Now by mine Honor Joseph, I am glad
to see such valor in thy Contrymen:
the charge was hot, and bravely seconded.
Did thou not see where I was forced to fight,
to man the Front, that then began recoile.

Io. My Lord I did.


Tit. There my brave Lords, mine Honor lay at stake,
there was I round begirt with Enemies,
and must be ransomed by mine own desert:
O my Valerio! then I called to mind
the great Vespatian: the Tiberius;
then mighty Julius: and then --
Armed with disdain and envy, I assailed
the stout Jehochanan, then Skimeon,
then Lordly Eleazer, then all; and then
Stood all their bold repulses back again.
There I received these wounds; and then, at last
Rapt into rage with fury and revenge,
Sweating, and bleeding, in despite of all
this arm maintained me still a General.
But now no more of this:
A more convenient time shall fitter serve
For this discourse. Come worthy Soldier:
Exeunt o^. My wounds are stiff, I must retire my self.
Enter L. Eleazer with his Rapier drawn. The glorious prey is lost:
Puts his Rapier. Now Eleazer, to thy other business.
I do remember well, a sed, my father was alive:
And then -- as if my fathers life were my disgrace,
A slighted me with scorn -- It must be so,
My father must not live: I am resolved.
Exit. Enter Jehochanan, his Rapier drawn. A pair of precious Villains! By this
light
Puts up his Rapier. I laugh to think how ^inely they are cheated.
The Lordly Eleazer wooed be King;
And so wooed Simeon too. Both aim at me:
But I will live in spite of policy.
Exit. Enter Simeon wounded. The game is ended, and the Deer escaped;
the night draws on apace, and I am hurt.

Exit. Enter Eleazer and Zareck. Elea. The time's within this hour: make haste,
I say,
And fit thy self with instruments of death,
Small pocket-daggers. But be sure thou have
A special care that no over reaching eye
Detect the plot.
Then with a cloak of seeming sanctity,
Deject behavior, visage meanly sad,
Eyes full of tears; but heart replete with blood:
Low bending to my aged father; Say --
What thy more wary wits shall think upon:
But on thy life take heed thou fail not.

Zar. Not for the world.


Elea. The time draws on apace they should be here:
I must disarm my self and wait their coming.
disarms There Is something troubles me, all is not well within.
I would not see him fall: and yet I must.
O Eleazer -- but I forget my self:

Exit. A noise of still music; and Enter the high Priest with attendants,
Guards, and Quiresters: they sing. An Alter and Tapers set: See those buildings
where once thy glory lived in,
with heavenly essence:
See how it droopeth, and how nakedly it looks
Without thy presence:
Hark how thy captive people mourn
With heavy moaning,
and grevious groaning,
For thy being absent,
And for the heathens scorn:
Because thy people are by thee forlorn.
See those tapers, which once enflamed those vapors
Of our sweet Peace.
See those places, where we once enjoyed those graces,
Which now do cease.
O See the Altar whereas we
Enjoyed those blisses,
With heavenly kisses
From thy free love,
And from thy Clemency:
Whilst we did sing to thee mellodiously:
Exeunt Quir. H. P. leave us to our Devotion.

Enter Za. he bows to the high Priest, and declares by sig^s his sons
submission: he lifts up his hands in token of Thankfulness, and weeps.


H. P. Thou comst with happy news: go call him in.

Calls him
Enter Eleazer, and kneels. E. Ah my much wronged Father!


An. This is beyond my hopes: stand up young man:
Heaven give thee pardon for thy great offense.
Where are thy confederates?

E. I would not be over. heard.


A. Dismiss the guard there, we would be private.


E. My Lord, I have a secret to disclose,
Za. looks if none be coming in. Of such importance, that I fear --

A. I will not be disturbed, what ere it be.
For heavens love let me ha'te.

Za. Thou have thine own desire

Stabs him.
A. O Eleazer.


Za. It Is done.


E. It Is bravely done: I will reward the Zareck.


Z. Tush, I am happy in the fine exploit.


E. Now for the crafty close,
puts the dagger into his hand. Conveigh this instrument into his hand.
Be brief, be brief, then it may be supposed
A did this bloody act upon himself.

Exeunt Enter his Atten. and Guard. Atten. My Lord -- ha! -- Murdered;
Curse on that wretched hand that did it:
But see -- O see! a gripes the dagger fast
That gave the wound -- I am amazed
And know not what to think.
Come let us bear him hence.

Exeunt CHORUS. Horror, confusion, hunger, plague and Death
Have seized our Sacred streets, my fainting breath!
Fails me to give the sad relation
Of sad Judea's desolation.
Suppose the famine now to grow extreme,
Within the City walls; The hungry dream
Of food, but taste it not, a Cab is sold
Of noisome dung for thrice the weight in Gold?
A bloody Sword hangs blazing in the Sky?
A Strange and uncouth voice was heard to cry,
Come, let us away from hence? the Iron gate
Ope's of it self to let in Jewries fate:
To tell ye more my aching heart would break,
The sad Catastrophe let action speak.
Enter L. Jehochanan. The famine is extreme;
And will be guile us of our lives and honors.
Enter Chorus Music, and the Lady Miriam Sings In her Chamber. Hark -- hark --
give ear a while and listen.
when the Music has played a while she Sings The Song Weep, O weep, mine eyes,
a flood of tears:
Break, O break, my heart, with endless fears:
Fly hence, fly hence, my soul, from such sad grief;
Then weeping sing, and singing weep to see
Such precious comfort in thy misery.
Ie. This is the Lady Miriam,
She Is rich, she is rich, exceeding rich
And may perhaps have some provision left,
I Will in and rifle her.
She draws her window Curten
La. Ay me, the Lord Iehocanan:
I fear some violence.
Knock^
Pet. Who knocks there?


La. keep fast the door.

Knocks again.
Ie. Open the door Sirrah, or I Will break it open.

Pet. Marry Sir and I Will break your pate then.
Breaks open the door, and goes in. Enter Peter with head broke. Wars, or not
wars, all^ one for that,
For honor will find me out, I see;
I am not so good as my word, he is better than his,
For he has broke the door, and my pate too.
But I Will in and save my Lady from ravishing,
What ere comes on it:
If I take him at it, I Will so pepper him.

Exit Enter Iehochanan with a wallet, dragging The Lady by the hair, and her
little Son following weeping. Boy. Now good my Lord even on my knees I beg:
Use not my mother so unkindly.

Ie. Peace brawling brat;
Confess, confess I say, I know this is not all,
Thou have concealed thy best provision

La. If there be truth in heaven I have no more,
Ah gentle Sir, for pity take not all,
Leave me one loaf to keep my little one.

Ie. Not a bit, bold beggar.


Exit Boy Good mother weep no more.
Exit Lady weeping. Enter Peter. My Lady has sent me to get worms?
But the worms are more liker for to get me
Marry I think if they had me and could speak,
They Would curse the Cook that sent u'm such a breakfast;
For I am so impenirrable for want of moisture,
They had better Seize upon a starved Vserer by far:
Enter Zaruck. I have observed of late a seeming show
Of some distempers in Lord Eleazer:
His looks are wild and stareing: something sure
Does strangely trouble him.

Pe. That Is the Captains man that broke my pate.
And robbed my Lady: now is he studying
Whose throat he shall cut next; I Would best be gone,
I Am pestilence afraid of him.

Za. ^erchance the murder of his Father troubles him.


P. A talks of murder already.


Za. If it be so, I hope 'twill make him mad,
Trembles. And I shall be revenged -- What follows that?

P. A has spied me, I must stand to it now.


Za. What art thou?


Pet. What am I; Why I am hungry, very hungry:
So hungry, that I could eat my flesh,
If I had any flesh to eat.

Za. You are very pleasant, Sir.
Does the music of the time, cause your wits to dance.

P. Ye say right, Sir. If any part of me dance, it is my brains, for they are
always in action: my legs are far enough from't I me sure.


Za. Whither art thou going?


P. No wither, ye see, I stand still:
I think your wits are daunc't out of your head.

Za. Whither were thou going?


P. The man's mad sure: why hither, was I not?


Za. Excellent, In Faith wither will thou go?


P. Marry they were wise could tell that;
I will go whither my legs will carry me:
Marry how far that is I cannot tell;
For I am altogether for the Carriers pace,
I can neither amble, nor trot now.

Za. How accurately the knave answers;
It Is hunger sure has made his wits so nimble.

P. You Are in the right Sir.
For a spare diet, says your Philosopher,
Makes a man fit for study,
But sure a meant to get more vittails.

Za. Better and better -- fellow, what is thy business*


P. What a question's that now?
Why look on my P^is^o my, and read it there.

Za, Is It written in thy forehead, knave?


P. No, but it is written a both sides my face.


Z. Extremity of hunger sure has made him mad:


P. No, no, no Sir; No such matter:
Why hark ye Sir, hark ye; don't you know me?

Za. Not I, by this Light.


P. I cannot much blame ye, for I hardly know my self;
But if I had never known your Lord, ye might a known me better.

Za. Sure that fellow was born with Riddles in 's mouth.


P. Fare ye well Sir, fare ye well:
My Lady said I should get something, though I staid all night:
But I Am more liker to stay till doomsday, for I think I shall not live
Till morning; fare ye well Sir.

Exit Pet. Za. This is sure the Lady Miriams man,
Whom Lord Iehochanan has lately rifled:
Here Comes the Lord Eleazer, I will withdraw.

steps aside Enter Eleazer. Elea. Cozened and cheated, gulled and fooled I am:
O man, man, man most miserable!
How truly vain,
How absolutely base,
Are thy lost actions? yet how infinite
The Se^s of sorrow that thou wadest through,
To make thee miserable.
Ere thy polluted face was yet produced,
To face of heaven, the woeful womb foretold
With griping throws thy native wretchedness:
And when thou were brought forth, what worlds of care
And grief, and pains the tender mother takes
To bring thee up! what tedious days and nights
Are thrown away upon thine infant age:
Then -- when thy fruitful branches bear the buds
Of hopeful youth when understanding blooms
The beauteous blossoms of a riper wit:
What days, and nights, and hours, and minutes spent
On tedious papers, whose enigma's dull
The slender judgment of the youthful brain
Till when -- Maturity proclaims thee man
Then, loomes this goodly vessel on the main
Of mutabilitie, with all the sails
Of honor swelling high. But see -- O see --
A sable cloud of sin with angry brow^
Threatens destruction, now the Venoms burst:
Down with the main, sails ere the gust approach,
Alas, it is now too late, all is over whelmed,
Turned upside down, the pre^ious lading lost,
The shipwrack't soul, for ever, ever lost
in lake of death, Eternal death: Wooed I
Had been destroyed within the house of sin,
The cursed womb, or been abortive born,
Never to have seen that hateful light that sees
My wretched fall.
Cursed be the fantacy that shaped the thought
Of my conception, ten times cursed the act?
The lustful act! ten thousand times the hour
Of my nativity: may that ever be
An hour of horror, plague, and misery.
Za. it works it works.
Enter the Lady Miriam Lady. For charity, good courteous Sir, take pity on a
poor distressed
Lady: Even for the love ye bear unto the womb that bred ye. She kne^

Elea. The Love I bear? the love I bear is hate.
Hate most unatterable* so inveterate,
That I could curse my primogenitors,
S^fut I could curse my father Adam too.

La. A lass Sir I am robbed and spoild of all.
Ah gentle Sir, afford me some relief,
And I will beg a blessing for your sweet benevolence.

Elea. Blessing for me? there is not a scruple left
Among the great weight of heavenly charity,
Vex me no more.

Exit La. Weeping. Eleaz. The Silent tamer of diurnall care^
That charms our weary limbs with sweet repose,
Yields not relief to me? my wearied soul
Lives in perpetual torment; for if I
Chance to get a minutes rest, my frighted Ghost
Sees ghastly Shapes? more horrible then death?
Even now mine eyes grow dull for want of sleep:
Lie there distressed carcass, and forget
Thy self to be in misery.
he Sleeps Enter Persiphone with the three furies, they Cir^le him about, and
Pers^^phone Sings. FRom the infernal Kingdom we
Come to read thy destiny:
Know thy hands imbrued in blood
Must be bathed in Stigian flood:
Mortal thou art damned for this
Down, down, down, down, down,
Down, down, down, down, down,
Down, to the deep Abyss.
Endless shall thy torment be;
Horror, plague and misery
Shall afflict thy sooty soul,
Whilst the tortured spirits howl,
Banished from eternal bliss
Down, down, etc.
Freezing cold and scorching fires
Shall reward thy soul desires.
Loss of heaven shall vex thee too
More then fire and frost can do:
Whilst the furious S^akes shall hiss
Down, down, etc.
Not a thousand ages shall
Expiate thy bitter thrall?
Not a flood of tears assuage
Ought of thy enflamed rage
This thy doom for deeds amiss
Down, down, etc.
Music to thy meat shall be,
Damned fiends shall laugh at thee;
Laugh to scorn thy griping pain,
Laugh to hear thee curse in va^^^
Curse thine endless miseries.
Down, down, etc.
Ho, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho.
Laugh all and Exeunt.
Zareck. Ha, ha, ha, here is sport alone for me,
The murder of his father troubles him
With ghastly apparitions: horror and despair
Pursue thy guilty soul, til I may see
My full revenge in by calamity.
Exit Again, again, again, without I saw
Eleazer rises. The Furies here; the sudden apparition
Has so appal'd my guilty soul, that I
Am lost in terror; all my Vitals shrink
With ghastly fear, my intermissive pulse
Speaks the disorder of my panting heart:
No comfort for a poor distressed man!
Down, down rebellious knees; so stubborn still!
I bear a burden of such massy weight
Wooed crack the mighty Axletree of Heaven,
Yet cannot force these sturdy limbs to bend:
My Ovens mouth is damm'd with dirty sin,
No vent for sorrow; not a peeping-hole
To steal a dram of comfort for my soul.
O -- Eleazer thou art lost for ever.

Exit. ACTUS QUINTUS.
Enter VALERIO. WHat a Devil ails the General!
I have observed in him of late a strange and uncouth
Carriage to his near attendants:
His looks distracted, and his words composed
With strange disturbance -- Sure all it not well:
But I Will observe --
Enter Titus, crosses the stage, and exit with an angry look upon Valerio. Val.
Death, what should this mean?


Enter Nicanor. Ni. Valerio? Well met; saw thou the General lately?


Val. Yes, I have seen him lately,
Heaven bless me from the sight of him again.

Ni. Why man, what is the matter?


Val. What Is the matter!
Why a has star'd me into such a strange distemper,
I shall not be my self this hour again.
A looks -- like Vulcan, when his fiery face
Looks red (with rage) upon the Rival God:
A walks -- by sembreess with such stately gait,
As if a scorned to tread on Casars Earth.
A speaks -- by riddles, and such strange enigmae's,
that sure 'two'd pose old Oedipus to answer.
Have not thou seen him in this musty mood?

Ni. Yes, yes, yes, I have seen him, and self him too,
Pox on's fingers for'^.
He asked me last night what store was in the Magazine:
I told him -- about a Months provision.
A steps him back -- and stares -- and stamps -- and says --
What? -- Is It possible? -- No more?
Why do not speak? -- No more, I say?
Art sure there is no more? Death woo't not speak?
and then his truncheon walks; ^'fu^ had I not warded we^
I had been mall'd, I knew not what to say;
And then a called me ^o^, and went his way.

Va. Now by this hand I am lighter by a Roman dram,
to hear thee in for a share too:
Why now I could sing, or dance,
Or rhyme, or jest, or do any thing.
Stand, stand thou here, and I will act the General.
And do thou speak to me as if he were in presence.

Ni. Content.


Val. Nicanor!


Ni. My Lord.


Val. Come hither:
What store of prisoners were taken in the skirmish

Ni. My Lord --


Ni. My Lord! what nothing ^ut ^^y Lord!
Souns, must I dance attendance on your answer.
Strikes him. Now sir -- what my Lord? --

Ni. Souns, what do you strike me.


Va. Fie, fie, vilely spoken, very vilely spoken,
Ask his Lordship why a strikes?
Why this ^avours of too much arrogance,
and wooed incense him beyond measure:
Ye should rather have said, My Lord,
I am sorry I have trespast on your patience,
Or I crave your Lordships pardon for my du^^ess,
Or the like.

Ni. Pox a patience, and your Lordship too,
Why did ye strike me so hard?

Val. Out upon it, worse and worse by this light,
Limit his Lordship how hard to strike!
Why this were to tell his Lordship what to do,
How to command, and where to punish:
this wooed not be endured.

Ni. I prithee leave thy jesting,
Or by this light I shall fall out in earnest,
and let your Lordship know I am displeased.

Val. Well I have done; but prithee can thou tell
the cause of this distemper?
For in himself (what e're has altered him)
He is a Captain of as mild a nature,
As brave Command, and of as sweet converse,
as Rome has ever bred.

Ni. Faith I am ignorant, nor can I judge the cause. But --


Val. Peace, the General.


Enter Titus. Ti. Valerio!


Val. My Lord?


Ti. Come hither; nearer -- yet nearer -- nearer yet I say,
Souns, must I trumpet my Oration?
Or do thou think my throat's an Organ-pipe?
There has been lately a great outrage done
within the Camp; know you ought of it?

Val. Not I my Lord.


Ti. Take heed I trap thee not, upon thy life take heed:
By Heaven if I do --
I say again, there has been lately acted
A most inhumane murder -- on the Jews --
the Captive Jews that fled to us for mercy;
Know thou ought yet?

V. My Lord, I know not ought, nor ought have ever heard of this inhumane act.


Ti. Nor you? why do not speak? speak I say. Death, if I ask again --


Ni. My Lord, Nor I.


Ti. Nor I! -- what nor I?
Death, are ye so sparing of your speech sir?
Take heed I do not frame an answer for thee;
By Heaven if I do, 'twill cost thee dear the penning.

Ni. My gracious Lord --


Ti. Comma.


Ni. I am --


Ti. Comma.


Ni. Altogether --


Ti. Colon.


Ni. Ignorant --


Ti. Period. Troth I believe thee.


Ni. Of this proceeding:


Ti. What Is all this put together now?


Ni. My Lord!


Ti. My contumelious Coxcomb,
Why was not this misshapen answer given
without distraction? If thy soul be clear,
Why did thy guilty looks proclaim thee evil?
Why did thou vail the face of honesty,
and innocence, within the mask of fear?
Thou were begotten sure in some distraction,
When Nature was disturbed to get a man:
Go -- get thee hence, and get more Faith -- but yet.
look to it, look to it I say, for if I find thee guilty,
thy life shall pay the ransom of thy sin:
Go -- get thee hence -- stay, read that,
going away. He reads. and read it out.
A Catalogue of the Massacre of the Captive Jews, who fled to us for mercy.
Under Valerio's Squadron, four hundred.
Under Nicanor's, five hundred.
Murdered out of the camp and ripped for their Jewels
Which they had swallowed for fear of rifling eleven hundred;
The whole number amounting to two thousand.

Ni. This is strange my Lord.

Gives him the Paper.
Ti. Yes, it is wondrous strange that we
Whose Princely-Valour, Power and Clemency
the world admires, should be so foul abused,
Abused by you, by you I say abused,
And say it again: Death -- if, t^were not so,
who durst attempt? attempt! durst think to do
An act so foul, so most inhumane?
Have we not given the sole command to you?
and you to do what you think fit?
And must we have our Honor now traduc't,
Trampled, and trod upon, through your neglect?
Must we, when we have past our princely word
For fair protection, have our Subjects snatched
By such discorder from our Princely bosom?
By heaven this is not well; I say it is not,
Look to it: look to it, I say, I hear no more of this,
For by a Romans honor if I do -- go to I say, look to it:

Va. Now by my life but this is wondrous strange,
Exit Two thousand Jews destroi'd and we not know'^^

Ni. It Is so; nor can I blame the General.
To be distemperd. But now the storm is over,
Let us by strict inquiry search the truth:
Perchance he may be mis-inform'd, and we abused:

Va. Content, let us about it.
Exeunt Enter the Lady Miriam with a knife in her hand. How tedious are our
days of miseries,
And yet how brief the means to cut them off?
What multitudes of Wretched days and nights,
In whose each minute the affrighted soul
Lives on the wrack of grief and discontent,
W^^'d this small instrument of death dispatch:
And why do I then; VVretched I, protract
My days of misery?
Is It not enough that I have lived to see
My parents slain by native cruelty?
My country Sacked? and my religion Scorned,
My self forsaken, and my stripling live
To ask me food, and I not food to give?
Can I have brains to know, and will to do,
Reason to judge, and hands to help me too*
And still procrastinate my days of wo^
Do It Miriam, do it I say, it must be so:
Goes to stab her self What is it that barrocadoes back mine arm
Nor will, nor brain, nor heart, nor hand are mine;
All stand subjected to a power divine.
Tush -- I am deceived;
Henceforward I nor God, nor good will know:
Religion is a thing fantastical,
And heaven and hell are mere Poetical:
Hence coward fear, it is thou that do command
Mine arm to slack, thou makst my shaking hand
Let fall the fatal instrument of death:
I will no more be subject to thy Law
But in a minute --
Goes to stab her self again Alas how cruel merciful am I,
To free my self from sad calamity,
And leave my pretty child to suffer more,
I Will kill him first -- and that once bravely done,
I Will kill the mother that has killed her son:
Enter boy Now swift occasion tempt us to do evil?
See where the stripling comes,
How pretily a looks upon me: and must I do?
Was ever mother so unatural?
She weeps And yet I must.
My pretty boy: art thou not very sick for want of meat?

Boy. Yes, very sick indeed, and feeble too;
So feeble, I have much ado to go.

La. Had thou not rather die, then live
In this extremity?

Boy. Alas good mother, I am loath to die,
I wood fain live to see you get some food.

La. would therefore live, my boy, Why thou shall be my food*
When I have killed thee, I will feed on thee.

Boy: Good God forbid such Cruelty.
I hope you do not mean to kill me mother

La. Yes, my sweet Lamb, look; here is the knife prepared.


Boy. Nay then I see I shall be killed indeed:
Alas what have I done, what deed so foul
To make you so unkind?
Weeps Indeed I did not think you could have been so cruel.

La. How prettily a talks.


Boy. have I forgotten ought of those respects
That duty binds me too. Or through forgetfulness
Not done that service which you did command;
Is this the cause? O hold, pray hold your hand:
My duty shall observe ye ten times more
Kneels Then ever my obedience did before.

La. How hard a pleads for life; the Gentle Phrase
Weeps again Begins to mollify my cruel breast.
In what a sad dilemma stands my choice:
Affection bids me spare^ affliction strike:
Nor can I well approve? nor yet dislike --
Of either -- Something must be done:
Forgive me heaven, for I must kill my Son.

Boy. O -- I am Killed indeed, farewell.

She stabs him
La. That well sound's ill: -- it is done -- it may be no,
For still a sturs, and sturs -- but now it is done indeed:
Come take him up? -- and Quarter him -- and then
Invite the cruel Captain to a feast,
That they may see a mother eat her Son,
She takes him, up, and Exit. And kill her self before the feast be done.
Come take him up I say.
Enter Eleazer with his sleeves stripped up to the Elbowes, with two Attendants
following. I have washed, and washed, and washed, and cannor wash this blood away
(...)

At. What blood my Lord.


Elea. The blood of batts put out thine eyes:
Doo'st thou not see how red, and fresh it looks?
It Is very not too: reaking hot; so hot
It Scaldes the cunduit pipes of life,
Fryes all my vitalls into Aetna's flames,
And makes a bonfire of my burning heart.
My Spoongy bellows that were wont to blow
Cool fannings to my bodies center,
Are Suffocate with Sulphrous heat* no crany left
To cool a tortured Soul.
Go fetch me Vulcans bellows, they will do it sure;
Or -- if not they,
I'^^ force a passage through this house of clay,
and let in air

At. Lay hands upon him till the fit be past.


E. These flaming Lamps burn red with fury rage
To feel my marrow broil; my singed scull
Reverberates the fury to my brain,
And makes me mad. All this whole mass of man
Is metamorphi^'d to confusion.
Hurry me strait unto the Eolean cave,
That Boreas may bore me through and through
There shall ye see this active torrid Zone
Tug for the mastry with the windy King;
That fire with air, and air with fire may burn,
Till fire and air do into Chaos turn.
The devil sure's a rare Doctor: of ancient standing too. I Will have him sent
for, and -- to bid him welcome a shall break his fast with brains, twill be a
rare breakfast, they are already frying in my scull. For -- to have them cookt
in a Kitchin-pan wooed show poor, and not Suit with his greatness? But let the
Mercurian messenger make have, they will be fried too much else, and then all is
not worth a button. Hark -- hark -- hark -- how the furies laugh to see me
tortured See -- See -- See* where they come from Erebus -- There Is Megara,
Alecto, there Tisiphone? ho ho ho ho: that's not she, it is some bastard fury made
of Air to cheat my fancy. I am abused, I Will not indur't:

Can your inky King
Cure my black soul? my soul, I there is the thing.

At. See now the ^it is past
How temperate he walks. With what a serious eye
A views the heaven, and then the earth: and then
Himself with wonder: As if heaven and earth.
Were there infused: See now a starts again,
I fear another fit.

Elea. The soul's the thing indeed, this but a reaking dunghill:
Stay: what is it made of? it is extracted sure
From the pure Essence of refined air,
Puffed -- for when the wind is gone,
Commend me to the Car^ion carcass.
There Is nothing left but meat for mistress maggot.
Of your Philosophers, give me Pythagoras,
For all the rest are fools: mere fools: dee mark me Sir,
Why may not this same windy soul of mine,
Make music in a musty midwife?
Or in a moldy bawd: O -- twood' do rare in her:
twoo'd make her mumpe out mischiefs by the dozen:
Marry -- of all your beasts -- I wood not be
A post horse: Souns then I should be trotted,
and trotted, and trotted to the devil:
No, no, no, I Will no poast horse.
Enter his Fathers Ghost in white. Room, room, room for the miller:
Man now I think ont, it is as bad to be mil horse:
For he goes round about, and round about,
goes round his Father And round about --

Ghost. Fool: thou art posting to the stage of death!
Adieu, adieu, adieu: expect thy doom.

Exit: Eleaz. by this light a rare miller.
Woe, ho, ho, woe, ho, ho: Miller, Miller.

Exit Atten. We must not leave him.


Exeunt. Enter Jehocanan and Simeon upon the Walls: Sim. their valor yet lives
fresh within the walls:
They man the breaches bravely.

Je. Call ye this valor, mere dunghill cocks by heaven,
S^^ut, put a Coward in the face of death,
Extremity of fear will make him fight,
Fight Valiantly too. Give me the man
That man's a breach in breaking through the rancks
Of Romans foes, their Courages dismayed,
the walls will man themselve:

A trumpet sounds, and Enter Joseph in Complete Arms: Jo My honored Lords, and
dearest Countrymen,
From the right noble Titus I am come
to Offer mercy. Ah! my worthy friends,
Even on my knees I beg you to embrace it.

Jeho. Bring forth the rack and torture the old r^ffin.

Gorion brought out and put on the rack:
Jo. hold -- hold -- O hold. Let not your fury fall
On those decreppid lims, for heavens sake hold,
And here but Joseph speak.

Sim. Torture him I say.


Go: Oh -- O -- O -- Jo. Tortures and torments endless vex your Souls:
O hold -- yet hold, for heavens love hold, not yet:
Go: oh -- O -- O -- Must I endure to see those Sinews strecht,
And not relieve them Must I basely beg,
And kneel? and supplicate: and not be heard?
Wrack on -- wrack on I say! thou cruel wretch:
Tear the distressed Carcass from the soul,
And send it up to heaven to cry for vengeance:
Again they torture him. O I am tortured too,
Go Oh -- And torn in pieces with the spectacles.
Villains, tormentors, Rebels.
they beat him down with a stone.
S. Forsake the walls, and take him.


Enter Jehochanan and Simeon at one door, and Valerio and Nicanor as another,
they repulse the Jewish Captains, and Joseph rises. Va. How fares Josephus?


Io. Hurt my good friends, I thank you for this rescue
they lead him away and Exeunt Enter Zareck. Lord Elazer's mad: there is my
revenge on him.
A comes, a comes:
Now the sport begins.
Enter Eleazer. My conscience is a bawling curr?
Buz, buz, buz: He Is gone, he is gone?
I Will, creep, and creep, and creep away,
And then I Will laugh to think how I have gulld him.
Enter his two Atten. Whist; whist, whist, and catch a mouse.
Zareck?

Za. My Lord?


E. For heavens love help me, Zareck:


Za. Why, what is the matter now?


E. O vengeance, I am pesterd with a Rascal beyond measure: And knocks, and
knocks, and knocks, both day and night to speak with me, and will have no
denial.


Za. Who is it, who is it my Lord?


E. A Sooty fellow, black, exceeding black:
And wondrous lean too. Very lean, and hungry.
And but e'ne now I stole, and stole away:
Could ye but get a truce for some: -- three days,
We wooed be wondrous merry, Zareck:

Za. Methinks we should prevail:
Let Us sooth him in this humor, and we shall have excellent sport anon.

Atten. Content, content:


Za. My Lord, I Will warrant ye, let me alone to deal with him.


El: Ye must be wondrous earnest, for I tell ye, he is a pestilent knave:
Tell him at three days end. I Will hear him all;
Mean while. I Will hide me here:
^ thinde the orras: Exit za. st' st st: Zareck: if a ask for me,
Be sure thou do not tell him where I am.
Stand close. stand close. hah. what is that.

At. A ratt behind the hangings.


Elea. A comes, a comes, a comes.


Enter Za. At. Be not afraid my Lord; it is Zareck comes:


coms out soft. Za. It Is done my Lord I warrant ye.


E. For three whole days.


Za. For three whole days.


E. And nights.


Za. And nights.


El. Gramerrcy boy, In Faith.
There were three fiddlers at a fray,
For scraping of their strings in tway,
And jenkin jobson ran away,
With hay tralolly lolly.
Methinkes it were a rare thing to be a Jig-maker.
Come shall we dance-shall we dance? hay-hay.

2 At. Certainly a will fall into as much extremity of mirth.


Za. I told ye we should have rare sport anon.


E Excellent good In Faith, twill do passing well.
Hark ye boys, hark ye. I have excellent crotchets in my head.

Za. What be they, what be they?


E. Musical, musical crotchets, my bullyes;
And therefore I Will have a noise of fiddlers dwell there
To run division? wilt not do rare my boys?

Za. O passing rare my Lord.


E. Vory good, and then --


1 At. What then.


E. And then will I turn ballet singer.
You shall carry my pack, and you
I Will think of some employment whorthy your deserts.
Will not this be fine In Faith? hah. speak.

2 At. very fine, very fine.


E. And then we will sing, and laugh conscience out of countenance; Fare yo well:
fare ye well, my boys.


Exit. Za. If a should meet his conscience by the way now,
We should have an old racket with him.

1 At. No, no, he will be wholly taken up now with making ditties, Most
inexpressible ditties, we shall have such fustian we meet him next


2 At. Death, I Will lay my life it is he.


E. Bounces at the door. Za. Did not I prejudicate the issue?
What will become of us now?
What shall we do?

knocks again. Elea. Open the door, open the door, ye musty rascals.


At. If we open not the door he will break it open,
And then a will be ten times worse.

Za. Stay, is there no trick to pacify his fury?
Hum -- I have found out one I think will do it.

At. What is it: what is it?


Za. There dwells a fellow not far off:


knocks again. Elea. Rake-hells: hell hounds: open the door.


At. By and by:


Za. Whose Meager looks will surely cousen him:
He is in all description like his conscience:
A wears black too, him we will produce fast bound
To give him satisfaction.

knocks again. Elea. Rogues, Rascals, Cheaters:


Za. Come open the doors, open the door.


Enter Eleazer. Za. Why how now my Lord, what is the matter?


E. My conscience slaves: my conscience.


Za. Has a been at home; has a been at home since?


E. You, you, you, know a has: You know a has rascals.


Za. O perfidious conscience, how did a swear to us
Not to mollest him till the time expired.
My Lord, my Lord, have but a little patience,
And if I bring him not fast bound --

E. 'Vm -- if you do not bandogs
Exeunt: and E pulls back on^. Nay, nay, nay; you shall be pawned for the
reckoning:
I, I, I, will so Jerk ye, if a brings him not,
I will have thee cut out into a town-top, and whipped;
And -- Petrusio^s Skin shall make scourges.

At. Any thing: any thing my Lord: do with me what ye will:
But wooed I were fairly quit: pray heaven they bring the fellow.

E. Nay, nay, nay, I wool do it, and to purpose too.


At. See, see my lord: see where a comes.

they bring on^ bound
E. Hah: is a fast: is a fast bound?


At. I warrant ye, fear not.


E. Look to it?


Za. come foreward man, fear nothing.


Pet. Why does a gape so, will a not bite?


Za. No, no, no, I warrant thee,


P. I am peslance afraid of my nose it hangs but by the Skin.
If a should but touch it 'twere utterly lost.

Elea. Fury, why do thou hunt me?


Pe. What must I say now?


^a. Say, for food.


P. For food.


Eleaz For food? what food will (...) thy hungry (...)?


P. Let me alone to answer now? Pouderd-beef.


Elea. I will have him shut up a Cr^mming, wilt not do well Zareck?


Za. Exceeding well*


Elea. And then I will make him a chopping boy


^. O rare! does a speak in earnest ^ow?


Elea. Petrusio: I will have him ^ed with chopped hay. And then I will cut him
out in steaks for my breakfast.


Pet: A had better feed upon C^w-beef for I shall eat monstrous tuff.


E. Away with him Zareck; ho, ho, ho, I have him fast now. Is It Petrusio:

Exeunt all three with Peter:
At. My Lord?


E. Feed him with a Pitchlork, l^^st a bite th^^ by the fingers.
Ho, ho, ho, I have caught the woodcock in a ^^ring.
Exit. A table brought out, and spread, and Enter Peter. We have rare cheer
toward In Faith,
And I am monsterous sharp set,
But I am pestelence afraid of these same hungry Captains;
If they should invite themselves to dinner now,
What wooed become of me?
One knocks. Here Is one come already, I Will lay my life on it,
Who knocks there?

Ie. Open the door, sirrah.


Pe. It Is he; it is he: I kn^w him by his terrible voice:
Madam madam lady madam;
Here Is my lord Iochy come again.

Ie. Open the door I ^ay.


Pe: By and by*


Knocks again. P. now is the edg of ^ine appeti^e as d^^ as a beetle.
Hay, hay ^eres a whole rabblement of captains:
Why madam-lady.
One knocks at other door. I must open the door, or (...) they will break my pa^e
again.
Opens the door.
Enter L. Iehochanan. Ie. Rost-meat; rost-meat-I smell rost-meat.


P. Pox a your quick sent.-, by and by.

Knocks again, and opens the door.
Enter Simion. S. Death, I am almost starved. A share, a share.
I cry a share, this fellow smells of fa^,
Of precious ^at; firrah confess, confess.
they draw: Laye^ hold on him What have thou (...) to ^^ys

I^. Thou sme^^^ of roast-meat: ^^ave, where i^t*
Where 'ist I say? for I wool have it all.

Pe. They Will eat me up between um sure.

S. Thou sha'^ take me too then: Rascal, go fetch it me.


P. If they don't eat me up, they will pull me in pieces.
Oh -- Oh -- I wool Sir, I wool Sir.

Enter Eleazer with his rapier drawn. E. Give me some food, you hungry
Canniballs.


Pe. Here Is another, here is another.


Ie. Keep off thou frantic fool.


Pe. Why Madam, Lady; look to the Rost-meat* the Captains; the captains.


Ie. Minion Come down; come down I say, or by my life I Will fetch thee down.


Exit. L: Mir. Patience my Lord I pray, and you shall see
She draws her Window curten. That Miriam has reserved a part for you;
A plenteous part, enough to feast ye all.

E. There stands the queen of heaven: what ho! Ch^h^a.
Enter the Lady. Bring forth the baked meats: Come, Lords sit ye down,
Pe: Brings (...)
I Will feed ye with such Cates so rare, and delicate,
And of such sturring nature, you will wonder,
When you shall feel their powerful operation.
See? there is a hand for you; for you a foot;
For you my Lord the heart, the p^e^ious heart.
Now-good my Lords fall to; fall to I pray.
Elea. The heart is raw-and bloody, I Will not eat it: It stur^s-it stur^s.


Rises Lady What stur^?


Elea. My fathers heart, I Will not endure to ^ee;'t.


Exit. Pet. I have a monstrous quame come over my stomach now.


Lady. What; not a bitt my Lord* Ah, my beloved son!
She weeps. How sweet and pleasing was thy Company,
Whilst thou were yet a live? and even in death,
Thou still art sweet and precious; for by thee
These Cruel, Captains are be^ome my friends,
By the I am sustained and kept alive.

Sim. I am amazed:

Rise all.
Ie. Far^ the^ well, thou (...) woman^


Exeunt softly Lady. For shame my Lords, let nor a woman's heart
Out-brave a soldiers: dare ye not ^aste a bit?
Was It not your Cruelty that cau^^d me kill him?
She Weeps. And will ye then refuse to eat apart?

Exit. Peter. Now have I a conceit, that some thing sturrs in my belly.
I am in travail sure: fo my (...) wambles and wambles,
And I shall be delivered on it e^e long.

Exit Pe. Drums beat, and they fight within. Enter Eleazer. E. where art thou
Caesar, where art thou Caesar?
I Will sight with none but Caesar.
Enter Val. Here comes Achilles, brave Achilles:
O -- I am fallen for Ever.
They fight and E:falls.
Enter Lo: Iehochanan: wounded. Ie. Give fire to the Temple; give fire to the
Temple:


Exit The Temple fir'd^ and enter Titus. Ti. Forbear; forbear, ye cursed
wretches; to destroy
Those sacred walls, -- how glorious they appear!
O ye rebellious Slaves! how dare ye tempt
So Great a Deity? By all the gods it burns, it burns*
The raving fire has seized the battlements.
Horrors and vengeance, plagues and punnishments
Seiz on your stubborn souls; it burns, it burns afresh;
The heavens are angry sure, they ^hi^e with me.
Thunder. Forbear-Forbear, thou flaming firmament,
To chide Vespatians son; for it is not he
Has done thee this dishonor.
Exit.
Thunder: Enter Simion, his rap: drawn, with a robe and a crown under his arms.
S. Sure the black mantle of the M^mphitists,
That muzled once the face of Egypt air:
The dreadful darkness of Cimmerian foggs,
Whose neighbor nation to the frozen pole,
For ever's banished from the Glimps of light:
Nor hell it self, nor ought, (if ought there be).
More dark then hell, can be more horrible.
Then is this dreadful night, this night of death.
I heard a mighty voice within the Temple cry,
Come away, come away; Let us depart from hence.
Strange apparitions have been seen by many:
Sure Heaven, and Earth, and hell have all conspired
Our ruin. I am a mazed. within this darkesome dale
There is a secret cave will shelter me.
It Is here this strange disguise perchance may save my life.
Feels about, and Enter^ the cave Enter Iehocha: his rapier drawn. This way, or
that, I know not which to take*
I am perfued one every side, I will take this.

Exit. Enter Valerio and Nicanor. Va. The two Seditious Captains are escape,
But sure they cannot long conceal themselves.
Extremity of hunger will betray them.
Where is the General?

Ni. Retreating to his tent, and wondrous sad
To see the ruins of the Sacred Temple.

Va. He Is of a noble nature; prethy Nicanor
Let us invent some pleasing way
To Cure him of his discontent.

Ni. With all my heart: let us present the Mask
We late intended.

Va. Happily thought of; we^ will ha'^e to night.


Ni. Content; content.


Enter Simeon out of the Cave, with a Robe upon him, and a Crown on his head.
Va. Defend me heaven! what apparition's that?


Ni. Hah: -- let us speak to it.


Simi. Extremity of hunger has compelled
Me to reveal my self:
This strange disguise perchance may save my life:
The Romans are afraid.
Beckons them.
Va. A beckons us; let us go near:
What art thou, that do wear those Kingly Robes?

Sim. I am of Sacred Lineage Romans;
Sprung from the Kings of Judah; sheltered here
To save my life. Conduct me to your Lord the General.

Ni. Lay hands upon him: Now by my life it is Simeon.
Come Villain, we will conduct thee to the General.

Va. Now By this hand this prize was finely caught:
Exeunt, and drag him along two follow This wool please Titus well.

Enter a Drum covered with black, beating a sad Retreat; with black pendants:
Than enter Titus, Gorion, and Joseph, with attendants. Titus. Come good old
man, now on a Romans word
Thou art welcome, nobly welcome:
Come sit down, sit there; nay I will have it so.
Sits by Titus ^rust me I joy to se thee safe at liberty.

Gor. Thanks to my honored Lord.

Tit. How fares thy aged Wife?


Gor. She Is well, my gracious Lord,
But somewhat weak with long imprisonment.

Tit. O my Josephus! how I grieve to see
the ruins of they fair Jerusalem:
But as it is, I give the sacred power
to be disposed by thee.

Jos. Thanks, my most honored Lord.


Tit. Thy Father it grown old, and will desire to spend his days in peace.

A flourish from within. What means that Music?


Exit Joseph and comes in again. Jos. Thy Captains, gracious Prince, desire to
show thee some pastime.


Tit. We do accept it, give them entrance: 'twill relish well to pass our
discontent.


THE MASQVE.
Enter Time bearing an Escutcheon, (...) Roman Champions crowned with Laurel
follow, each bears an Escutcheon: Jehochanan and Simeon follow guarded: Time
presents his Escutcheon to the General. Tit. What Is here? six Roman Champions
leading the world captive: the Motto: Not one; but all: subscribed.
Times winged speed does here present
Six Moral Virtue's fair Event.
Six Roman Champions, whilst they live,
to these Six Virtues harbor give.

The Champions present their Escutcheons in order. Tit. Piety pourtraied in a
black Man^^^, in her left hand a S^or^ an Emblem of reciprocal love, her right
arm stretched over an Altar, with a sword in her hand, to show her resolution
for Religion: the Motto, Semper ea^^^.

Your inventions have done well to give this Virtue priority,
For it is the Basis of our glorious actions:
the firm foundation that our (...) laid
When first a did ordain the Vestal-fires:
It would have been more proper had ye limm'd her
Smiling, and pointing to a sumptuous house
Built on the rolling land: the Motto this,
Sine me peris Impensa: well, the next.
Temperance deciphered in a white Robe, with a sober countenance, in her left
hand a Cornucopia, with this Motto, In abundanti^ abste^io: the next.

Chastity pictured in a green Robe, a Lion couching by her side, she points to
a Lilly: the Mooto, Pares nos sumus.

Friendship binding a fardle of sticks together: the Motto, Concordio regna
florent.

Constancy depainted in a purple Robe, her left hand pointing to the Moon, her
right to her Bosom: the Motto, Mutabile qui^quid extra, nil imus.

Patience limm'd in a Violet Robe, pointing to -- me: Hah, it is not so? it is
so: the Motto, Dispares nos sumus, and under, Sa^ ciro (...) sat bent;

This was a good conceit, it likes me passing well:
For now I see, my Lords, ye will not flatter me:
Well, I Will endeavor to amend it, Lord:
Come, now to your sports.

Music, and they dance: the Mask ended, Time presents the Prisoners, and
exeunt. Jehoch. Mercy, my gracious Lord*

The Prisoners kneel.
Titus. What stately Prisoner's he^, that wears the Diadem.


Je. My honored Lord, this is the cruel Simeon; And this Jehochanan.


Tit. What! art sure it is he?


Je. Most certain, mighty Prince.


Sim. Mercy, my honored Lord.


Tit. Look down, look down, ye powers above, and see
the basest scum of all mortality,
Is It possible to see the Villains kneel,
And beg?
Seven days together let the Slaves be led
In triumph; to be mocks, and scorned, and kick^;
And each day tortured to extremity,
then put them to an ignominious death.

Si. Curses and plagues reward thee.


Exeunt Prisoners and Guard. Ti. Now worthy Gorion thou have lived to see thy
self revenged of all thine injury,


Gor. Ah my good Lord! I joy not in revenge, that I must leave to heaven.


Shout within. Ti. Enquire the cause of that shout.


1. Attendant. More prisoners brought, my Lord.


Ti. Let them have entrance*


Enter Officers leading Zareck and the Lady Miriam Prisoners, another following
leading Peter with an haste^ about his neck, the Lady weeps. 1. Officer. Come
along Sir, Come along^ you have no stomach to go to it.


P^^t. I have more stomach beha'^e to eat, if I had some vittail^ hark ye Sir,
pray do not pull too hard, least ye pull my head off; it is held on by nothing
but skin and dry bones, the marrow is wasted long since; I believe I shall
never hold the han^^^g.


Tit. What Lady's that, whose sad behavior speaks such discontents


Gor. Ah Noble Titus, to relate the story
Of her sad fate, will prove a task too weighty
For a woeful breast to utter --
Let others speak her sad calamity,
Weeps. For me it is enough to weep her misery.

Titus. Rise up distressed woman: by all that is good,
Lady (...) I joy not in so sad a spectacle.
Tell me thy cause of grie^ance: If there be
A way to make thee happy, leave it to me,
And I will see thee righted.

Lady. A way to make me happy? ay the poor wretch:
the world to me is a distasteful thing,
Full of affrighting Objects: pensive thoughts and fears,
Horrors, amazements, anguish, grief and ^ears,
Attend my restless hours: no room is left
For the least hope of comfort: no starting hole
to ease the torture of a wearied soul.
She weeps
Ti. Know thou this Lady, Joseph.


Io. My honored Lord, this is the Lady Miriam^
Extracted from a noble family:
the sad Epitome of grief and misery:
the woeful mother of a murdered? son.

Titus. Murdered? by whom?


Lady Miriam. By me, by this accursed arm, en^ombed here within the wretched
womb that gave it life.


She weeps Peter. Me thinks I feel a great (...) stir in my stomach ^^w.


Lady. Ah my dear son! thy wounds bleed fresh
In my remembrance: the bloody act
Si^^ sad upon my soul ^^^^ghts my guilty breast,
Distracts my working brain: Justice, my Lord:
I cry for Justice against my cruel (...)
And must not be den^e^ (...)
She weeps
Titus. The unpleasing Spectacle disturbs me,
Lead her away, and see her s^f^ly kept,
And gently used; let war^^st eyes
Attend her actions, least she offer
Violence to her unhappy self*

La. Were I at liberty for that, I would not linger out
a moment I hate to live, and yet I feel to die
By mine own hand^ for Heavens love ^et me --

Titus Leadher away; and comfort her.


Lady. Ah! be not so unkind: can ye (...) pi^^y see a Ca^^iffon the wrack of
misery, and not relieve her.


Gorion. Passion I ^ear will over co^ (...), if she persist in this extremity.


Lady. Open a passage to my guilty soul, and send it to eternal vengeance -- or
if there be one drop of mercy le^^ (...) misery, (...) ^o heaven to beg it --

Weeps.
Titus. My soul relents to see (...) A


Peter. That's old gray-beard, that was led a way
Eyes Gorion. by me to tortures, if he remembers me,
I go to pot: 'st Madam, Lady, Madam,
Speak a good word for me.

Titus. What Is he that wears that livery of Death?


Gorion. A servant to the Lady Miriam, the very same
that led my aged limbs to torture,
but by cumpulsion of the rebel Jews:
I therefore humbly beg his pardon.

Peter. I, I, I, must to it, now a has spied me.


Titus. Come hither sirrah.


Peter. Now I go, now I go, now I go, Lady, madam:


Titus. Although I know thee to be guilty of an offense
Deserving death; yet for thy Ladies sake,
And this good man's, I give thee life and liberty:
Loose him, and leave him to his lady's service:
See thou be careful of her preservation.

Lady. Ay me most miscrable.

They take the Halter off.
Peter. O rare! now could I leap out of my skin for Joy.
Come away Madam, come a way:
the sight of the halter makes my stomach wamble.
Come away, I say.

Zareck. A ha, ha, ha, ha; Confusion play thy part,
And hatch up mischief to the highest strain
Of man's invention.

Titus. What daring prisoner's he,
Whose uncouth laughter scorns at misery?

Josephus. The most unheard of piece of villainy
that ever Nature gave a being to:
this is that cursed wretch that blew the coals
Of hot dissension 'twixt the Citizens:
that murdered the high Priest, and promted on
the three seditious Captains to ambition;
that robbed this wretched Lady, and gave fire
to Jewries sacred temple.

Titus. Villain, What say thou for thy self?
Is all this true?

Peter. A broke my pate too:


Za. Ha, ha, ha. -- all this! all this and ten times more
all this is nothing, not the thousand part
Of my unknown designs: did thou but know
the danger that is in me, thou would not venture me
So near thy person.

Titus. Halter him, and lead him to the wrack.
Let him be tortured with the greatest rigor
Can be invented.
They halter him.
Za. Ha ha ha ha -- Could thou devise
As many tortures as have e're bin born
By all the sons of Adam; thus wood I slight
Spurns at it. Both them and thee. --

Tit. I shall unmask this hellish bravery:
Lead him away, I say,

Zar. Thou can not, Roman, in spite of cruelty,
Zareck will triump in the Victory.

Officers. Come along Sir, come along.


Pet. Hark ye Sir, when ye begin to cry Oh --
Remember whose pate ye broke, Sir.

Zar. Peace, Babbler.


Exeunt Officers with Zareck. Tit. Come honored friends, upon a Romans word
You Are nobly welcome: let not Jewrys fall
Descends his throne. Dismay your Princely hearts: Romes General
Will find a way to raise your ruined State.
The gods are just; we must submit to fate:
Take care of that distressed Lady.

Pet. Now do I long to see the Captains at it.


Exeunt omnes, the Lady weeping. Finis Actus Quinti.
EPILOGVS.
THE lofty Buskin, and the learned Bay,
Are not exspected to adorn our Play;
Our Author d^^meth these fair trophies fi^
To grace the raptures of a riper wit.
The stately lines of Sophocles high strain
Flow from the fountain of Minerva's brain^
Instead of Bays, and Buskins, if our style
May fairly merit your deserved smile;
It Is all we aim as; either grant us this,
Or gently pardon what you judge amiss.
FINIS.

