On the most TRIUMPHANT CEREMONY Of his Most Sacred Majesty's Coronation,
CHARLES II.
AS once, in fair Minerva's shield,, the name
Inserted, kept, loosn'd, dissolved the Frame.
So under yours (Dread Sir) I stand, or fall,
Courting your favor, or my Funeral:
Crept near your Crown, t'avoide the Readers curse,
Like beggars change, wrapped in a golden purse:
And this I dared; since he who deepest dives,
May curse his Grammar, for superlatives:
Great as our souls, not as your merits were,
Were our first joys, when first you did appear;
And like the first days Sun, began your course
With a bright World, and Chaos's divorce.
Each then wished quils from Noah's dove to show
Our blood-dround World, her Olive branch a new:
(For Harvey's circulation had been true,
And men had Islands been, and flouted too;)
Each wished his Muse, like Joves great sacred brain,
Teeming Minerva's, then in every vein.
The state (new Christ'ned Kingdom, when your oars
Landed you,) counted Indies on her shoars:
Or else (for it was so changed) could it have swom,
Sure the Land traveled, and you staid at home.
Justly nick named by all, a Popish age,
That sent our Kings themselves in Pilgrimage.
And if that Infant Mirth, whose crutch and chair
Scarce stood a high-lone, between hope and fear
Ventured so far, that scarcely wak't, they run,
And Persians like adored their rising Sun;
Where shall our souls find vent? or where shall we
Be Metamorphos'd to an ecstasy?
Whose hanging sleeves of Mirth, are lately grown
Such robes, we scarce believe, they are our own.
Were but the great Egyptian Queen alive
Who vowed (that should the Emperor survive)
A rigid rape upon her tender heir,
To solemnize her Love, as conqueror
Her passions here, surely would not demurre,
But very joy, would turn her murderer.
Hoop, hoop the Kingdom, or I fear it will burst:
All Worlds strein court'sie, which shall see him first.
The hungry Cities maw, (whose throat is ramm'd
As Crassus's with gold,) now so well crammed,
Surely will fatten, and may learn from hence
Among their pounds, to pay their Caesar's pence.
I wonder not, in stead of painted glass,
Each window now presents a painted face.
For such the glory was, nature sent all
To make this City, seem but one Guilt-Hall:
Or else (there were so many) we might think,
'Twas Noah's Ark, and all the World were in^,
The streets were paved with fire, when MONCK came in,
But when you're Crowned, (Dread Sir) with armed men.
Your Subjects were a worthy sight, but you
As to be seen, were to be rev'renc'd too:
And one might learn, by every weeping stone
(As Hercules by 's Pillars:) you were gone.
Here jealous Juno might have kept her cow,
Had she had half those eyes that wait on you:
Or should your grace demand our sight as spies,
Instead of Ermine you might wear our eyes:
Each street so filled, that like the Trojan Horse,
It swallowed men, but yet without a curse.
The embroid'red gentry, well present the show,
At each ones back, of Pater-noster-rowe.
(Nay I may well allow that for their back,
For each steeds tail outvyes a pedlers pack.
About their hats, the prattling wind presumes
To act a part, and whistles in their plumes:
Their Horses (natures pride,) so stately grown,
They walk, yet scorn the ground, they walk upon:
Prance at the switches Music, and can show
Men may sit still, and yet be dancing too:
On either side, the streets were so well lined,
With valiant foot, that sure the World combined
To save you harmless, and had set them there,
In your defense, full of Religious fear.
Some valiant that they 'de change, had all their breaths
Hippolitus his life's, for Martyrs deaths:
Some young sprung warriors, yet strut up, and down,
Like new shell'd lapwings with a feathered Crown.
All serve, as their conditions owe, to honor you,
Paying (great Sir) your homage, not your due.
A Princes Crown sits Regent over wit,
Nor Lines, nor Language can Decipher it.
But this is such a Text, it seems to dround,
Like the Samaritan in Oil, that wound
That plunged in blood, and makes us reenjoy
A stately Rome, from ruinated Troy:
Here Is Hercules, and Hydra, the other neck,
Did treason dare, once more to blaze in Smeck.
Which providence prevent, but if my bounds
Be to pledge destinyes in blood, and wounds,
Might I but dare to kiss my Sov'raignes cup,
Should death fill brimmers, I would drink 'um up.
THO. HENSHAW. Fellow of A. S. C.


