OCCASIONAL VERSES OF EDWARD Lord HERBERT, BARON OF CHERBERY AND CASTLE-ISLAND.
Deceased in August, 1648.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Thomas Dring, at the George in Fleet Street, near
Cliffords-Inn. 1665.

To the Right Honorable EDWARD Lord HERBERT, Baron of Cherbery in England, and
Castle-Island in Ireland.
My Lord,
THIS Collection of some of the scattered Copies of Verses, composed in various
and perplexed times, by Edward Lord Herbert your late Grandfather, belongs of
double right to your Lordship, as Heir and Executor: And had it been in his
power to have bequeathed his Learning by Will, as his Library and personal
Estate, it may be presumed, he would have given it to you, as the best Legacy:
But Learning being not of our Gift, though of our Acquisition, nor of the
Parapharnalia of a Ladies Chamber, nor of the casual and fortunate Goods of the
World; it must be acknowledged of a transcendency beyond natural things, and a
beam of the Divinity: For by the powers of Knowledge Men are not only
distinguished from Men, but carried above the reach of ordinary Persons, to
give Reasons even of their Belief; not that Men believe because they know, but
know because they believe; Faith must precede Knowledge; and yet Men are not
bound to accept matters of Religion (though Religion be the object and
employment of Faith, not of reasoning) merely without Reason and probable
Inducements.

That the learned Centuries are past, and Learning in declension, is too great
a truth, which may introduce Atheism with Ignorance; for as Ignorance is the
Mother of Devotion amongst the Papists, so it is the Mother of Atheism amongst
the Ignorant; The great and most dangerous design of our Church and National
Enemies, is to make us out of love with Learning, as a Mechanic thing, and
beneath the Spirits of the Nobility and of Princes: Whereas nothing improves
and inlightens the understandings of great Persons, but Learning, and not only
innobles them far above their birth, but inables them to impose on others, and
to give, rather then take advice: The Learned, Generous, and Virtuous Person
needs no Ancestors; And what can so properly be called ours, as what is of our
purchase? Gentiles agunt sub nomine Christiano, was an old Reproach upon the
Primitive Christians, and now Men out-act the Gentiles.

The Goods of this life are all Hydropick, Quo plus bibuntur, plus sitiuntur,
Men are the dryer for drinking, and the poorer for covetousness; no satiety, no
fullness, but in spiritual things: The way of Virtue appeared to the Heathen to
be the only way to Happiness, and yet they knew not many Virtues which are the
Glory of Christianity, as Humility, Denying of our selves, Taking up the Cross,
Forgiving and loving our Enemies, which the Heathen took for follies rather
then Virtues.

As for Poetry it bears date before Prose, and was of so great authority with
the common People and the wiser sort of Antiquity, that it was in veneration
with their sacred Writ, and Records, from which they derived their Divinity and
belief concerning their Gods, and that their Poets, as Orpheus, Linus, and
Musaeus were descended of the Gods, and divinely inspired, from the
extraordinary Motions of their Minds, and from the Relations of strange
Visions, Raptures and Apparitions.

My Lord, Excuse the liberty of this Dedication, and believe me,

Your Lordships Uncle and Humble Servant, HENRY HERBERT.
March 18. 1664/5.
TO HIS WATCH, When he could not sleep.
UNcessant Minutes, whilst you move you tell
The time that tells our life, which though it run
Never so fast or far, you are new begun
Short steps shall overtake; for though life well
May escape his own Account, it shall not yours,
You are Death's Auditors, that both divide
And sum what ere that life inspired endures
Past a beginning, and through you we bide
The doom of Fate, whose unrecall'd Decree
You date, bring, execute; making what is new
Ill and good, old, for as we die in you,
You die in Time, Time in Eternity.
Ditty.
DEep Sighs, Records of my unpitied Grief,
Memorials of my true, though hopeless Love,
Keep time with my sad thoughts, till wished Relief
My long despairs for vain and caussess prove.
Yet if such hap never to you befall,
I give you leave, break time, break heart and all.
Lord, thus I sin, repent, and sin again,
As if Repentance only were, in me,
Leave for new Sin; thus do I entertain
My short time, and thy Grace, abusing thee,
And thy long-suffering; which though it be
Never overcome by Sin, yet were in vain,
If tempted often: thus we our Errors see
Before our Punishment, and so remain
Without Excuse; and, Lord, in them it is true,
Thy Laws are just, but why do thou distrain
Ought else for life, save life? that is thy due:
The rest thou make us owe, and may to us
As well forgive; But oh! my sins renew,
Whilst I do talk with my Creator thus.
A Description.
I Sing her worth and praises, Ey,
Of whom a Poet cannot ly,
(...).
The little World the Great shall blaze;
Sea, Earth, her Body; Heaven, her Face;
Her Hair, Sunbeams; whose every part
Lightens, enflames, each Lover's Heart:
That thus you prove the Sol et homo generant hominem.
Axiom true,
Whilst the Sun helped Nature in you.
Her Front, the White and Azure Sky,
In Light and Glory raised, Ey,
Being o'recast by a Cloudy frown,
All Hearts and Eyes dejecteth down.
Her each Brow a Celestial Bow,
Which through this Sky her Light does show,
Which doubled, if it strange appear,
The Sun's likewise is doubled there.
Her either Cheek a Blushing Morn,
Which, on the Wings of Beauty born,
Does never set, but only fair
Shines, exalted in her hair.
Within her Mouth, Heavens Heaven reside,
Her Words the Soul's there Glorified.
Her Nose the Equator of this Globe,
Where Nakedness, Beauties best Robe,
Presents a form all Hearts to win.
Last Nature made that dainty Chin;
Which that it might in every fashion
Answer the rest* a Constellation,
Like to a Desk, she there did place,
To write the Wonders of her Face.
In this Celestial Frontispiece,
Where Happiness eternal lies;
First aranged stand three Senses,
This Heavens Intelligences.
Whose several Motions, sweet combined,
Come from the first Mover, her Mind.
The weight of this harmonique Sphere,
The Atlas of her Neck does bear;
Whose Favors Day to Us imparts,
When Frowns make Night in Lovers Hearts.
Two foming Billows are her Breasts,
That carry, raised upon their Crests,
The Tyrian Fish: More white's their Foam,
Then that, whence Venus once did come:
Here take her by the Hand, my Muse,
With that sweet Foe, to make my Truce,
To compact Manna, best compared,
Whose dewy inside's not full hard.
Her Waste's an envers'd Pyramid,
Upon whose Cone Love's Trophee is:
Her Belly is that Magazine,
At whose peep Nature did resign
That precious Mould, by which alone,
There can be framed such a One:
At the entrance of which hidden Treasure,
Happy making above measure,
Two Alabaster pillars stand,
To warn all passage from that Land;
At foot whereof engraved is,
The sad Non Vltra of Man's Bliss:
The Back of this most precious Frame
Holds up in Majesty the same:
Where, to make Music to all Hearts,
Love bound the descant of her parts:
Though all this Beauties Temple be,
There Is known within no Deity
Save Virtues, shrin'd within her Will:
As I began, so say I still,
I sing her Worth and Praises, Ey,
Of whom a Poet cannot ly.
To her Face.
FAtal Aspect! that have an Influence
More powerful far than those Immortal Fires
That but incline the Will and move the Sense,
Which thou alone constrain'st, kindling Desires
Of such an holy force, as more inspires
The Soul with Knowledge, than Experience
Or Revelation can do with all
Their borrowed helps: Sacred Astonishment
Sits on thy Brow, threatening a sudden fall
To all those Thoughts that are not lowly sent,
In wonder and amaze, dazzling that Eye
Which on those Mysteries does rudely gaze,
Vowed only unto Loves Divinity:
Sure Adam sinned not in that spotless Face.
To her Body.
REgardful Presence! whose fixed Majesty
Darts Admiration on the gazing Look,
That brings it not: State sits enthroned in thee,
Divulging forth her Laws in the fair Book
Of thy Commandments, which none mistook,
That ever humbly came therein to see
Their own unworthiness: Oh! how can I
Enough admire that Symmetry, expressed
In new proportions, which does give the Ly
To that Arithmetique which has professed
All Numbers to be Hers? thy Harmony
Comes from the Spheres, and there does prove
Strange measures so well graced, as Majesty
It self, like thee would rest, like thee would move.
To her Mind.
EXalted Mind! whose Character does bear
The first Idea of Perfection, whence
Adam's came, and stands so, how can appear
In words? that only tell what here-Tofore has been; thou need'st as deep a
sense
As prophecy, since there is no difference
In telling what thou art, and what shall be:
Then pardon me that Rapture do profess,
At thy outside, that want, for what I see,
Description, if here amazed I cease
Thus --
Yet grant one Question, and no more, craved under
Thy gracious leave, How, if thou would express
Thy self to us, thou should be still a wonder?
Thus ends my Love, but this does grieve me most,
That so it ends, but that ends too, this yet,
Besides the Wishes, hopes and time I lost,
Troubles my mind awhile, that I am set
Free, worse then denied: I can neither boast
Choice nor success, as my Case is, nor get
Pardon from my self, that I loved not
A better Mistress, or her worse; this Debt
Only's her due, still, that she be forgot
Ere changed, lest I love none; this done, the taint
Of soul Inconstancy is cleared at least
In me, there only rests but to unpaint
Her form in my mind, that so dispossessed
It be a Temple, but without a Saint.
Upon Combing her Hair.
BReaking from under that thy cloudy Vail,
Open and shine yet more, shine out more clear
Thou glorious golden-beam-darting hair,
Even till my wonderstrucken Senses fail.
Shoot out in light, and shine those Rays on far,
Thou much more fair than is the Queen of Love,
When she does comb her in her Sphere above,
And from a Planet turns a Blazing-Star.
Nay, thou art greater too, more destiny
Depends on thee, then on her influence,
No hair thy fatal hand does now dispense,
But to some one a thread of life must be.
While gracious unto me, thou both do sunder
Those Glories which, if they united were,
Might have amazed sense, and show each hair,
Which if alone had been too great a wonder.
And now spread in their goodly length, sh' appears
No Creature which the earth might call her own,
But rather one, that in her gliding down,
Heavens beams did crown, to show us she was theirs.
And come from thence, how can they fear times rage
Which in his power else on earth most strange
Such Golden treasure does to Silver change
By that improper Alchimy of Age.
But stay, methinks, new Beauties do arise,
While she withdraws these Glories which were spread,
Wonder of Beauties, set thy radiant head,
And strike out day from thy yet fairer eyes.
Ditty in imitation of the Spanish Enter tantoque L' Avril.
NOw that the April of your youth adorns
The Garden of your face,
Now that for you each knowing Lover mourns,
And all seek to your Grace:
Do not repay affection with Scorns.
What though you may a matchless Beauty vaunt,
And that all Hearts can move,
By such a power, as seems to inchant?
Yet without help of Love
Beauty no pleasure to it self can grant.
Then think each minute that you lose, a day,
The longest Youth is short,
The shortest Age is long; time flies away,
And makes us but his sport;
And that which is not Youth's is Age's prey.
See but the bravest Horse, that prideth most,
Though he escape the War,
Either from master to the man is lost,
Or turned unto the Carr,
Or else must die with being ridden Post.
Then lose not beauty, Lovers, time, and all,
Too late your fault you see,
When that in vain you would these days recall;
Nor can you virtuous be,
When without these you have not wherewithal.
The State-progress of Ill.
I Say, it is hard to write Satyrs. Though Ill
Great'ned in his long course, and swelling still,
Be now like to a Deluge, yet, as Nile,
It Is doubtful in his original; this while
We may thus much on either part presume,
That what so universal are, must come
From causes great and far. Now in this state
Of things, what is least like Good, men hate,
Since 'twill be the less sin. I do see
Some Ill required, that one poison might free
The other; so States, to their Greatness, find
No faults required but their own, and bind
The rest. And though this be mysterious still,
Why should we not examine how this Ill
Did come at first, how't keeps his greatness here,
When it is disguised, and when it does appear.
This Ill having some Atttibutes of God,
As to have made it self, and bear the rod
Of all our punishments, as it seems, came
Into the world, to rule it, and to tame
The pride of Goodness, and though his Reign
Great in the hearts of men he does maintain
By love, not right, he yet the tyrant here
(Though it be him we love, and God we fear)
Pretense yet wants not, that it was before
Some part of Godhead, as Mercy, that store
For Souls grown Bankrupt, their first stock of Grace,
And that which the sinner of the last place
Shall number out, unless the Highest will show
Some power, not yet revealed to Man below.
But that I may proceed, and so go on
To trace Ill in his first progression,
And through his secret'st ways, and where that he
Had left his nakedness as well as we,
And did appear himself, I note, that in Gradus melisunt quo Peccamus nobis.
The yet infant-world, how mischief and sin, Gradus melisunt quo Nocemus aliis.
His Agents here on earth, and easy known,
Are now concealed Intelligencers grown:
For since that as a Guard the Highest at once
Put Fear to attend their private actions,
And Shame, their public, other means being failed:
Mischief, under doing of Good was veiled,
And Sin, of Pleasure; though in this disguise
They only hide themselves from mortal eyes.
Sins, those that both com-and o-mitted be,
Once hot and cold, but in a third degree,
Are now such poisons, that though they may lurk
In secret parts awhile, yet they will work,
Though after death: Nor ever come alone,
But sudden fruitful multiply ever done.
While in this monstrous birth they only die
Whom we confess, those live which we deny.
Mischiefs like fatal Constellations
Appear unto the ignorant at once,
In glory and in hurt, whil the unseen part
Of the great Cause may be perchance, the Art
Of the Ill, and hiding it, which that I may
Even in his first original display,
And best example, sure, amongst Kings, he
Who first wanted succession to be
A Tyrant, was wise enough to have chose
An honest man for King, which should dispose
Those beasts, which being so tame, yet otherwise,
As it seems, could not heard: And with advise
Somewhat indifferent for both, he might
Yet have provided for their Childrens right.
If they grew wiser, not his own, that so
They might repent, yet under treason, who
Never promised faith: though now we cannot spare,
(And not be worse) Kings, on those terms they are
No more than we could spare (and have been saved)
Original sin. So then those Priests that raved
And propheci'd, they did a kind of good
They knew not of, by whom the choice first stood.
Since then, we may consider now, as fit,
State-government, and all the Arts of it,
That we may know them yet, let us see how
They were derived, done, and are maintained now,
That Princes may by this yet understand
Why we obey, as well as they command.
State, a proportioned colored table, is,
Nobility the masterpiece, in this
Serves to show distances, while being put
'Twixt sight and vastness they seem higher, but
As they are further off, yet as those blew hills,
Which the utmost border of a Region fills
They are great and worse parts, while in the steep
Of this great Prospective, they seem to keep
Further absent from those below, though this
Exalted Spirit that is sure a free Soul, is
A greater privilege, than to be born
At Venice, although he seek not rule, does scorn
Subjection, but as he is flesh, and so
He is to dullness, shame, and many more
Such properties, knows, but the Painters Art,
All in the frame is equal: that desert
Is a more living thing, and does obey,
As he gives poor, for God's sake, (though they
And Kings ask it not so) thinks Honors are
Figures composed of lines irregular
And happy-high, knows no election
Raises man to true Greatness, but his own.
Mean while, sugared Divines, next place to this,
Tells us, Humility and Patience is*
The way to Heaven, and that we must there
Look for our Kingdom, that the great'st rule here
Is for to rule our selves; and that they might
Say this the better, they to no place have right
B' inheritance, while whom Ambition swayes,
Their office it to turn it other ways.
Those yet, whose harder minds Religion
Cannot invade, nor turn from thinking on
A present greatness, that Combined curse of Law,
Of officers, and neighbors spite, does draw
Within such whirlpools, that till they be drowned,
They never get out, but only swim them round.
Thus brief, since that the infinite of Ill
Is neither easy told, nor safe, I will
But only note, how freeborn man subdued
By his own choice, that was at first indu'd
With equal power over all, does now submit
That infinite of Number, Spirit, Wit,
To some eight Monarchs, then why wonder men
Their rule of Horses?
The World, as in the Ark of Noah, rests,
Composed as then, few Men, and many Beasts.
Aug. 1668. At Merlow in France.
Satyra Secunda.
Of Travelers from Paris.
BEn Johnson, Travel is a second birth,
Unto the Children of another earth,
Only as our King Richard was, so they appear,
New born to another World, with teeth and hair,
While got by English Parents* carried in
Some Womb of thirty tun, and lightly twin,
They are delivered at Callis, or at Diep,
And strangely stand, go, feed themselves, nay keep
Their own money streightwayes; but that is all,
For none can understand them, when they call
For any thing. No more then Badger,
That called the Queen Monsieur, laid a wager
With the King of his Dogs, who understood
Them all alike, which, Badger thought, was good.
But that I may proceed, since their birth is
Only a kind of Metempsy hosis;
Such Knowledge, as their memory could give,
They have for help, what time these Souls do live
In English Clothes, a body which again
They never rise unto: but as you see,
When they come home, like Children yet that be
Of their own bringing up; all they learn, is
Toys, and the Language: but to attain this,
You must conceive, they are cousen'd, mocked and come
To Fauxbourgs, St, Germans, there take a Room
Lightly about the Ambassadors, and where,
Having no Church, they come, Sundays, to hear
An invitation, which they have most part,
If their outside but promise a desert,
To sit above the Secretaries place,
Although it be almost as rare a case,
To see English well clothed here, as with you
At London, Indians: But that your view
May comprehend at once them gone for Bloys,
Or Orleans; learned French, now no more Boys,
But perfect Men at Paris, putting on
Some forced disguise, or labored fashion,
To appear strange at home, besides their stay,
Laugh and look on with me, to see what they
Are now become; but that the poorer sort,
A subject not fit for my Muse nor sport,
May pass untouched; let us but consider, what
Elpus is now become, once young, handsome, and that
Was such a Wit, as very well with four
Of the six might have made one, and no more,
Had he been at their Valentine, and could
Agree, Tom Rus should use the stock, who would
Carefully, in that, even as 'twere his own,
Put out their jests, briefly, one that was grown
Ripe to another taste, than that wherein
He is now seasoned and dried, as in
His face, by this you see, which would perplex
A stranger to define his years, or sex;
To which his wrinkles, when he speaks, does give
That Age, his words should have, while he does strive
As if such births had never come from brain,
To show, he is not delivered without pain,
Nor without After-throws. Sometimes, as Grace
Did overflow in circles o'r his face,
Even to the brim, which he thinks Sure;
If this posture do but so long endure*
That it be fixed by Age, he will look as like
A speaking sign, as our St. George, to strike.
That, where he is, none but will hold their peace,
If the have but the least good manners, or confess,
If he should speak, he did presume too far
In speaking then, when others readier are.
Now, that he speaks, are complemental speeches,
That never go off but below the breeches
Of him he does salute, while he does wring,
And with some loose French words, which he does string,
Windeth about the arms, the legs, and sides,
Most serpent-like, of any man that bides
His indirect approach, which being done
Almost without an introduction,
If he have heard but any bragging French
Boast of the favor of some noble Wench,
He Will swear, 'twas he did her Graces possess,
And damn his own soul for the wickedness
Of other men, strangest of all in that,
But I am weary to describe you what,
E're this, you can As for the little fry
That all along the street turn up the eye
At every thing they meet, that have not yet
Seen that swollen vicious Queen, Margaret,
Who were a monster even without her sin;
Nor the Italian Comedies, wherein
Women play Boys -- I cease to write.
To end this Satyr, and bid thee good night.
Sept. 1608.
I must depart, but like to his last breath
That leaves the seat of life, for liberty
I go, but dying, and in this our death,
Where soul and soul is parted, it is I
The deader part yet fly away,
While she alas, in whom before
I lived, dies her own death and more,
I feeling mine too much, and her own stay.
But since I must depart, and that our love
Springing at first but in an earthly mould,
Transplanted to our souls, now does remove
Earthly effects, what time and distance would,
Nothing now can our loves allay
Though as the better Spirits will
That both love us and know our ill,
We do not either all the good we may.
Thus when our souls that must immortal be,
For our loves cannot dye, nor we, (unless
We dye not both together) shall be free
Unto their open and eternal peace,
Sleep, Death's Ambassador, and best
Image, does yours often so show,
That I thereby must plainly know
Death unto us must be freedom and rest.
May 1608.
Madrigal.
HOw should I love my best?
What though my love unto that height be grown,
That taking joy in you alone
I utterly this world detest,
Should I not love it yet as the only place
Where Beauty has his perfect grace,
And is possessed?
But I beauties despise,
You, universal beauty seem to me,
Giving and showing form and degree
To all the rest, in your fair eyes,
Yet should I not lo^^ them as parts whereon
Your beauty, their perfection
And top, does rise.
But, even my self I hate
So far my love is from the least delight
That at my very self I spite,
Senseless of any happy state,
Yet may I not wi^h justest reason fear
How hating hers, ^ truly her
Can celebrate?
Thus unresolved still
Although world, life, nay what is fair beside
I cannot for your sake abide,
Methinks I love not to my fill,
Yet if a greater love you can devise,
In loving you some otherwise,
Believe't, I will.
Another.
DEar, when I did from you remove,
I left my Joy, but not my Love,
That never can depart,
It neither higher can ascend
Nor lower bend
Fixed in the center of my heart
As in his place,
And lodged so, how can it change,
Or you grow strange?
Those are earth's properties, and base
Each where, as the bodies divine
Heavens lights and you to me will shine.
To his Friend Ben Johnson, of his Horace made English.
'TWas not enough, Ben Johnson, to be thought
Of English Poets best, but to have brought
In greater state, to their acquaintance, one
So equal to himself and thee, that none
Might be thy second, while thy Glory is,
To be the Horace of our times and his.
Epitaph. Caecil. Boulser quae post languescentem morbum non sine inquietudine
spiritus and conscientiae obiit.
Intelligitur de figura mortis praefigenda.
MEthinks Death like one laughing lies,
Showing his teeth, shutting his eyes,
Only thus to have found her here
He did with so much reason fear,
And she despise.
For barring all the gates of sin,
Death's open ways to enter in,
She was with a strict siege beset,
To what by force he could not get,
By time to win.
This mighty Warrior was deceived yet,
For what he, muting in her powers, thought
Was but their zeal,
And what by their excess might have been wrought,
Her fasts did heal.
Till that her noble soul, by these, as wings,
Transcending the low pitch of earthly things,
As b'ing relieved by God, and set at large,
And grown by this worthy a higher charge,
Triumphing over Death, to Heaven fled,
And did not dye, but left her body dead.
July 1609.
Epitaph. Guli. Herbert de Swansey qui sine prole obiit Aug. 1609.
GReat Spirit, that in new ambition,
Stooped not below his merit,
But with his proper worth being carried on,
Stooped at no second place, till now in one
He does all place inherit:
Live endless here in such brave memory,
The best tongue cannot spot it,
While they which knew, or but have heard of thee,
Must never hope thy like again can be,
Since thou have not begot it.
In a Glass-Window for Inconstancy.
LOve, of this clearest, frailest Glass,
Divide the properties, so as
In the division may appear
Clearness for me, frailty for her.
Elegy for the Prince.
MUst he be ever dead? Cannot we add
Another life unto that Prince that had
Our souls laid up in him? Could not our love,
Now when he left us, make that body move,
After his death one Age? And keep unite
That frame wherein our souls did so delight?
For what are souls but love? Since they do know
Only for it, and can no further go.
Sense is the Soul of Beasts, because none can
Proceed so far as to understand like Man:
And if souls be more where they love, then where
They animate, why did it not appear
In keeping him alive: Or how is fate
Equal to us, when one man's private hate
May ruin Kingdoms, when he will expose
Himself to certain death, and yet all those
Not keep alive this Prince, who now is gone,
Whose loves would give thousands of lives for one:
Do we then dye in him, only as we
May in the worlds harmonique body see
An universally diffused soul
Move in the parts which moves not in the whole?
So though we rest with him, we do appear
To live and stir a while, as if he were
Still quickening us? Or do (perchance) we live
And know it not? See we not Autumn give
Back to the earth again what it received
In the early Spring? And may not we deceived
Think that those powers are dead, which do but sleep,
And the world's soul does reunited keep?
And though this Autumn gave, what never more
Any Spring can unto the world restore,
May we not be deceived, and think we know
Our selves for dead? Because that we are so
Unto each other, when as yet we live
A life his love and memory does give,
Who was our worlds soul, and to whom we are
So reunite, that in him we repair
All other our affections ill bestowed:
Since by this love we now have such abode
With him in Heaven as we had here, before
He left us dead. Nor shall we question more,
Whether the Soul of man be memory,
As Plato thought: We and posterity
Shall celebrate his name, and virtuous grow,
Only in memory that he was so;
And on those terms we may seem yet to live,
Because he lived once, though we shall strive
To sigh away this seeming life so fast,
As if with us 'twere not already past.
We then are dead, for what does now remain
To please us more, or what can we call pain,
Now we have lost him? And what else does make
Difference in life and death, but to partake
Nor joy, nor pain? Oh death, could not fulfill
Thy rage against us no way, but to kill
This Prince, in whom we lived? that so we all
Might perish by thy hand at once, and fall
Under his ruin, thenceforth though we should
Do all the actions that the living would,
Yet we shall not remember that we live,
No more then when our Mothers womb did give
That life we felt not: Or should we proceed
To such a wonder, that the dead should breed,
It should be wrought to keep that memory,
Which being his, can, therefore, never die.
November. 9. 1612.
Epitaph of King James.
HEre lies King James, who did so propagate
Unto the World that blessed and quiet state
Wherein his Subjects lived, he seemed to give
That peace which Christ did leave, and so did live,
As once that King and Shepherd of his Sheep,
That whom God saved, here he seemed to keep,
Till with that innocent and single heart
With which he first was crowned, he did depart
To better life: Great Britain so lament,
That Strangers more then thou may yet resent
The sad effects, and while they feel the harm
They must endure from the victorious arm
Of our King Charles, may they so long complain,
That tears in them force thee to weep again.
A Vision. A Lady combing her hair.

WIthin an open curled Sea of Gold The hair

A Bark of Ivory, one day, I saw, The Comb

Which striking with his Oars did seem to draw The teeth of the Comb.

Towered a fair Coast, which I then did behold. Her side

A Lady held the Stern, while her white hand
Whiter then either Ivory or Sail, The Cuff or smock sleeve,

Over the surging Waves did so prevail,
That she had now approached near the Land. Her ^^^^der.

When suddenly, as if she feared some wrack,
And yet the Sky was fair, and Air was clear,
And neither Rock, nor Monster did appear, Wart Lice.

Doubting the Point, which spied, she turned back.
Then with a Second course I saw her steer Combing in another place.

As if she meant to reach some other Bay,
Where being approached, she likewise turned away,
Though in the Bark some Waves now entered were. Hairs in the Comb.

Thus varying often her course, at last I found,
While I in quest of the Adventure go,
The Sail took down, She had given over combing.
and Oars had ceased to row,
And that the Bark it self was run aground.
Wherewith Earths fairest Creature I beheld, Her face.

For which both Bark and Sea I gladly lost. Her hair put up, and Comb cast away.

Let no Philosopher of Knowledge boast,
Unless that he my Vision can unfold.
Tears, flow no more, or if you needs must flow,
Fall yet more slow,
Do not the world invade,
From smaller springs then yours rivers have grown,
And they again a Sea have made,
Brackish like you, and which like you has flown.
Ebb to my heart, and on the burning fires
Of my desires,
Let your torrents fall,
From smaller sparks then theirs such sparks arise
As into flame converting all,
This world might be but my love's sacrifice.
Yet if the tempests of my sighs so slow
You both must flow,
And my desires still burn,
Since that in vain all help my love requires.
Why may not yet their rages turn
To dry those tears, and to blow out those fires.
Italy 1614.
Ditty
to the tune of A che del Quantomio of Pesarino.
WHere now shall these Accents go?
At which Creatures silent grow
While Woods and Rocks do speak?
And seem to break
Complaints too long for them to hear,
Saying, I call in vain: Echo -All in vain.
:=::=::=:
Where there is no relief; Ec. Here is no relief.
Ah why then should I fear
Unto her rocky heart to speak that grief,
In whose laments these bear a part?
Then cruel heart
Do but some answer give,
I do but crave= Do you forbid to live, or bid to live.
Echo Live.
Ditty.
CAn I then live to draw that breath
Which must bid farewell to thee?
Yet how should death not seize on me?
Since absence from the life I hold so dear must needs be death,
While I do feel in parting
Such a living dying,
As in this my most fatal hour
Grief such a life does lend
As quick'ned by his power,
Even death cannot end.
I am the first that ever loved,
He yet that for the place contends
Against true love so much offends,
That even this way it is proved.
For whose affection once is shown,
No longer can the World beguile,
Who see his penance all the while,
He holds a Torch to make her known.
You are the first were ever loved,
And who may think this not so true,
So little knows of love or you,
It need not otherwise be proved
For though the more judicious eyes
May know when Diamonds are right,
There is required a greater light
Their estimate and worth to prise.
While they who most for beauty strives,
Can with no Art so lovely grow
As she who does but only ow
So much as true affection gives.
Thus first of Lovers I appear,
For more appearance makes me none;
And thus are you beloved alone,
That are pris'd infinitely dear.
Yet as in our Northern Clime
Rare fruits, though late, appear at last;
As we may see, some years b'ing past,
Our Orenge-trees grow ripe with time.
So think not strange, if Love to break
His wonted silence now make bold,
For a Love is seven years old,
Is it not time to learn to speak?
Then gather in that which does grow
And ripen to that fairest hand;
It Is not enough that trees do stand,
If their fruit fall and perish too.
Epitaph of a stinking Poet.
HEre stinks a Poet, I confess,
Yet wanting breath stinks so much less.
A Ditty
to the tune of Coseferite, made by Lorenzo Allegre to one sleeping to be sung.
Ah wonder.
SO fair a Heaven
So fair, etc.
And no Starr shining,
Ay me, and no Starr, etc.
It Is past my divining.
Yet stay.
May not perchance this be some rising Morn?
Which in the scorn
Of our Worlds light discloses,
This Air of Violets, that Sky of Roses?
It Is so.
An Oriental Sphere
Does open and appear,
Ascending bright.
Then since thy hymen I chant
May thou new pleasures grant.
Admired light.
Epitaph on Sir Edward Saquevile's Child, who dyed in his Birth.
REader, here lies a Child that never cried,
And therefore never died,
'Twas neither old nor young,
Born to this and the other world in one:
Let us then cease to moan,
Nothing that ever died has lived so long.
Kissing.
COme hither Womankind, and all their worth,
Give me thy Kisses as I call them forth.
Give me the billing-Kiss, that of the Dove,
A Kiss of love;
The melting-Kiss, a Kiss that does consume
To a perfume;
The extract-Kiss, of every sweet a part,
A Kiss of Art;
The Kiss which ever stirs some new delight,
A Kiss of Might;
The twaching smacking Kiss, and when you cease
A Kiss of Peace;
The Musick-Kiss, crotchet and quaver time,
The Kiss of Rhyme,
The Kiss of Eloquence, which does belong
Unto the tongue;
The Kiss of all the Sciences in one,
The Kiss alone.
So it is enough.
Ditty.
IF you refuse me once, and think again,
I will complain,
You are deceived: Love is no work of Art,
It must be got and born,
Not made and worn,
Or such wherein you have no part.
Or do you think they more then once can die
Whom you deny?
Who tell you of a thousand deaths a day,
Like the old Poets fain,
And tell the pain
They met but in the common way.
Or do you think it is too soon to yield,
And quit the Field?
You are deceived, they yield who first entreat;
Once one may crave for love,
But more would prove
This heart too little, that too great.
Give me then so much love, that we may burn
Past all return,
Who midst your beauties, flames, and spirit lives,
So great a light must find
As to be blind
To all but what their fire gives.
Then give me so much love, as in one point
Fixed and conjoynt
May make us equal in our flames arise,
As we shall never start
Until we dart
Lightning upon the envious eyes.
Then give me so much love, that we may move
Like stars of love,
And glad and happy times to Lovers bring;
While glorious in one sphere
We still appear,
And keep an everlasting Spring.
Elegy over a Tomb.
MUst I then see, alas! eternal night
Sitting upon those fairest eyes,
And closing all those beams, which once did rise
So radiant and bright,
That light and heat in them to us did prove
Knowledge and Love?
Oh, if you did delight no more to stay
Upon this low and earthly stage,
But rather chose an endless heritage,
Tell us at least, we pray,
Where all the beauties that those ashes owed
Are now bestowed?
Does the Sun now his light with yours renew?
Have Waves the curling of your hair?
Did you restore unto the Sky and Air,
The red, and white, and blew?
Have you vouchsafed to flowrs since your death
That sweetest breath?
Had not Heavens Lights else in their houses slept,
Or to some private life retired?
Must not the Sky and Air have else conspired,
And in their Regions wept?
Must not each flower else the earth could breed
Have been a weed?
But thus enriched may we not yield some cause
Why they themselves lament no more?
That must have changed course they held before,
And broke their proper Laws,
Had not your beauties given this second birth
To Heaven and Earth?
Tell us, for Oracles must still ascend,
For those that crave them at your tomb:
Tell us, where are those beauties now become,
And what they now intend;
Tell us, alas, that cannot tell our grief,
Or hope relief.
1617.
Epitaph on Sir Francis Vere.
Reader,
IF thou appear
Before this tomb, attention give,
And do not fear,
Unless it be to live,
For dead is great Sir Francis Vere.
Of whom this might be said, should God ordain
One to destroy all sinners, whom that one
Redeemed not there, that so he might atone
His chosen flock, and take from earth that stain,
That spots it still, he worthy were alone
To finish it, and have, when they were gone,
This World for him made Paradise again.
To Mrs. Diana Cecyll.
DIana Cecyll, that rare beauty thou do show
Is not of Milk, or Snow,
Or such as pale and whitely things do ow.
But an illustrious Oriental Bright,
Like to the Diamonds refracted light,
Or early Morning breaking from the Night.
Nor is thy hair and eyes made of that ruddy beam,
Or golden-sanded stream,
Which we find still the vulgar Poets theme,
But reverend black, and such as you would say,
Light did but serve it, and did show the way,
By which at first night did precede the day.
Nor is that symmetry of parts and force divine
Made of one vulgar line,
Or such as any know how to define,
But of proportions new* so well expressed,
That the perfections in each part confessed,
Are beauties to themselves, and to the rest.
Wonder of all thy Sex! let none henceforth inquire
Why they so much admire,
Since they that know thee best ascend no higher;
Only be not with common praises wooed
Since admiration were no longer good,
When men might hope more then they understood.
To her Eyes.
BLack eyes, if you seem dark,
It is because your beams are deep,
And with your soul united keep*
Who could discern
Enough into them, there might learn,
Whence they derive that mark;
And how their power is such,
That all the wonders which proceed from thence,
Affecting more the mind then sense,
Are not so much
The works of light, as influence.
As you then joined are
Unto the Soul, so it again
By its connection does pertain
To that first cause,
Who giving all their proper Laws,
By you does best declare
How he at first b'ing hid
Within the veil of an eternal night,
Did frame for us a second light,
And after bid
It serve for ordinary sight.
His Image then you are,
If there be any yet who doubt
What power it is that does look out
Through that your black.
He will not an example lack,
If he suppose that there
Were gray, or hasle Glass,
And that through them, though sight or soul might shine,
He must yet at the last define,
That beams which pass
Through black, cannot but be divine.
To her Hair.
BLack beamy hairs, which so seem to arise
From the extraction of those eyes,
That into you she destin-like does spin
The beams she spares, what time her soul retires,
And by those hallowed fires,
Keeps house all night within.
Since from within her awful front you shine,
As threads of life which she does twine,
And thence ascending with the fatal rays,
Do crown those temples, where Love's wonders wrought
We afterward see brought
To vulgar light and praise.
Lighten through all your regions, till we find
The causes why we are grown blind,
That when we should your Glories comprehend
Our sight recoils, and turns back again,
And does, as 'twere in vain,
It self to you extend.
Is it, because past black, there is not found
A fixed or horizontal bound?
And so as it does terminate the white,
It may be said all colors to infold,
And in that hand to hold
Somewhat of infinite?
Or is it, that the center of our sight
Being veiled in its proper night
Discerns your blackness by some other sense,
Then that by which it does py'd colors see,
Which only therefore be
Known by their difference?
Tell us, when on her front in curls you lie
So diapred from that black eye,
That your reflected forms may make us know
That shining light in darkness all would find,
Were they not upward blind
With the Sun beams below.
Sonnet of Black Beauty.
BLack beauty, which above that common light,
Whose Power can no colors here renew,
But those which darkness can again subdue,
Do still remain unvary'd to the sight.
And like an object equal to the view,
And neither changed with day, nor hid with night,
When all these colors which the world call bright,
And which old Poetry does so pursue,
Are with the night so perished and gone,
That of their being there remains no mark,
Thou still abidest so entirely one,
That we may know thy blackness is a spark
Of light inaccessible, and alone
Our darkness which can make us think it dark.
Another Sonnet to Black it self.
THou Black, wherein all colors are composed,
And unto which they all at last return,
Thou color of the Sun where it does burn,
And shadow, where it cools, in thee is closed
Whatever nature can, or has disposed
In any other here: from thee do rise
Those tempers and complexions, which disclosed,
As parts of thee, do work as mysteries,
Of that thy hidden power, when thou do reign
The characters of fate shine in the Skies,
And tell us what the Heavens do ordain,
But when Earth's common light shines to our eyes,
Thou so retir'st thy self, that thy disdain
All revelation unto Man denis.
The first Meeting.
AS sometimes with a sable Cloud
We see the Heavens bowed,
And darkning all the fire,
Until the laboring fires they do contain
Break forth again,
Even so from under your black hair
I saw such an unusual blaze
Lightning and sparkling from your eyes,
And with unused prodigies
Forcing such amaze,
That I did judge your Empire here
Was not of love alone, but fear.
But as all that is violent
Does by degrees relent,
So when that sweetest face,
Growing at last to be serene and clear,
Did now appear
With all its wonted heavenly Grace,
And your appeased eyes did send
A beam from them so soft and mild,
That former terrors were exiled,
And all that could amaze did end;
Darkness in me was changed to light,
Wonder to love, love to delight.
Nor here yet did your goodness cease
My heart and eyes to bless,
For being past all hope,
That I could now enjoy a better state,
An orient gate
(As if the Heavens themselves did open)
First found in thee, and then disclosed
So gracious and sweet a smile,
That my soul ravished the while,
And wholly from it self unloos'd,
Seemed hovering in your breath to rise,
To feel an air of Paradise.
Nor here yet did your favors end,
For whilst I down did bend,
As one who now did miss
A soul, which grown much happier then before,
Would turn no more,
You did bestow on me a Kiss,
And in that Kiss a soul infuse,
Which was so fashioned by your mind,
And which was so much more refined,
Then that I formerly did use,
That if one soul found joys in thee,
The other framed them new in me.
But as those bodies which dispense
Their beams, imparting hence
Those beams do recollect,
Until they in themselves resumed have
The forms they gave,
So when your gracious aspect
From me was turned once away,
Neither could I thy soul retain,
Nor you gave mine leave to remain,
To make with you a longer stay,
Or suffered ought else to appear
But your hair, nights hemisphere,
Only as we in Loadstones find
Virtue of such a kind,
That what they once do give,
B'ing neither to be changed by any Clime,
Or forced by time,
Does ever in its subjects live;
So though I be from you retired,
The power you gave yet still abides,
And my soul ever so guides,
By your magnetique touch inspired,
That all it moves, or is inclined,
Comes from the motions of your mind.
A merry Rhyme sent to the Lady Wroth upon the Birth of my L. of Pembroke's
Child, born in the Spring.
MAdam, though I am one of those
That every Spring use to compose,
That is, add feet unto round Prose:
Yet you a further art disclose,
And can, as every body knows.
Add to those feet fine dainty toes.
Satyrs add nails, but they are shrews,
My Muse therefore no further goes,
But for her feet craves shoes and hose.
Let a fair season add a Rose,
While thus attired we will oppose
The tragic buskins of our foes.
And herewith, Madam, I will close,
And it is no matter how it shows,
All I care is, if the child grows.
The Thought.
1.
IF you do love, as well as I,
Then every minute from your heart
A thought does part:
And winged with desire does fly
Till it has met in a straight line,
A thought of mine
So like to yours, we cannot know
Whether of both does come or go,
Till we define
Which of us two that thought does ow.
2.
I say then, that your thoughts which pass,
Are not so much the thoughts you meant,
As those I sent:
For as my image in a Glass
Belongs not to the Glass you see,
But unto me.
So when your fancy is so clear,
That you would think you saw me there,
It needs must be,
That it was I did first appear.
3.
Likewise when I send forth a thought,
My reason tells me, it is the same,
Which from you came,
And which your beauteous Image wrought;
Thus while our thoughts by turns do lead
None can precede;
And thus while in each others mind
Such interchanged forms we find,
Our loves may plead
To be of more then vulgar kind.
4.
May you then often think on me,
And by that thinking know it is true
I thought on you:
I in the same belief will be,
While by this mutual address
We will possess
A love must live, when we do die,
Which rare and secret property
You will confess,
If you do love as well as I.
To a Lady who did sing excellently.
1.
WHen our rude and unfashion'd words, that long
A being in their elements enjoyed,
Senseless and void,
Come at last to be formed by thy tongue,
And from thy breath receive that life and place,
And perfect grace,
That now thy power diffused through all their parts
Are able to remove
All the obstructions of the hardest hearts,
And teach the most unwilling how to love.
2.
When they again, exalted by thy voice,
Tuned by thy soul, dimiss'd into the air,
To us repair,
A living, moving, and harmonious noise,
Able to give the love they do create
A second state,
And charm not only all his griefs away,
And his defects restore,
But make him perfect, who, the Poets say,
Made all was ever yet made heretofore.
3.
When again all these rare perfections meet,
Composed in the circle of thy face,
As in their place,
So to make up of all one perfect sweet,
Who is not then so ravished with delight
Even of thy sight,
That he can be assured his sense is true,
Or that he die, or live,
Or that he do enjoy himself or you,
Or only the delights, which you did give?
1618.
Melander supposed to love Susan, but did love Ann.
WHo does presume my Mistress's name to scan,
Goes about more then any way he can,
Since all men think that it is Susan. Echo Ann.
What say? Then tell who is as white as Swan,
While others set by her are pale and wan,
Then, Echo, speak, Is it not Susan? Ec. Ann.
Tell, Echo, yet, whose middle's but a span,
Some being gross as bucket, round as pan;
Say, Echo, then, Is it not Susan? Ec. Ann.
Say, is she not soft as meal without bran,
Though yet in great have once from me she ran,
Must I not however love Susan? Ec. Ann.
Echo to a Rock.
THou heaven-threat'ning Rock, gentler then she!
Since of my pain
Thou still more sensible wilt be,
Only when thou giv'st leave but to complain.
Echo Complain.
But thou do answer too, although in vain
Thou answer'st when thou can no pity show.
Echo Oh.
What can thou speak and pity too?
Then yet a further favor do,
And tell if of my griefs I any end shall know.
Echo No.
Since she will pity him that loves her so truly.
Echo You ly.
Vile Rock, thou now grow'st so unruly,
That had thou life as thou have voice,
Thou should dye at my foot.
Echo Dye at my foot.
Thou can not make me do it,
Unless thou leave it to my choice,
Who thy hard sentence shall fulfill,
When thou shall say, I dye to please her only will.
Echo I will,
When she comes hither, then, I pray thee, tell,
Thou art my Monument, and this my last farewell.
Echo Well
Echo in a Church.
WHen shall my troubled soul, at large
Discharge
The burden of her sins, oh where?
Echo Here.
Whence comes this voice I hear?
Who does this grace afford?
If it be thou, O Lord,
Say, if thou hear my prayers when I call.
Echo All.
And will thou pity grant when I do cry.
Echo I.
Then though I fall,
Thy Grace will my defects supply,
But who will keep my soul from ill,
Quench bad desires, reform my Will?
Echo I will.
O may that will and voice be blessed,
Which yields such comforts unto one distressed,
More blessed yet, would thou thy self unmask,
Or tell, at least, who undertakes this task.
Echo Ask.
Since now with crying I am grown so weak,
I shall want force even to crave thy name,
O speak before I wholly weary am.
Echo I am
To his Mistress for her true Picture.
DEath, my life's Mistress, and the sovereign Queen
Of all that ever breathed, though yet unseen,
My heart does love you best* yet I confess,
Your picture I beheld, which does express
No such eye-taking beauty, you seem lean,
Unless you are mended since. Sure he did mean
No honor to you, that did draw you so;
Therefore I think it false: Besides, I know
The picture, Nature drew, (which sure's the best)
Does figure you by sleep and sweetest rest:
Sleep, nurse of our life, care's best reposer,
Natures highest rapture, and the vision giver:
Sleep, which when it does seize us, souls go play,
And make Man equal as he was first day.
Yet some will say, Can pictures have more life
Then the original? To end this strife,
Sweet Mistress come, and show your self to me,
In your true form, while then I think to see
Some beauty Angelick, that comes to unlock
My bodies prison, and from life unyoke
My well divorced soul, and set it free,
To liberty eternal: Thus you see,
I find the Painters error, and protect
Your absent beauties, ill drawn, by the effect:
For grant it were your work, and not the Graves,
Draw Love by Madness then, Tyrants by Slaves,
Because they make men such. Dear Mistress, then
If you would not be seen by owl-ey'd Men,
Appear at noon in the Air, with so much light,
The Sun may be a Moon* the Day a Night.
Clear to my Soul, but dark'ning the weak sense
Of those, the other Worlds Cimmeriens.
And in your fatal Robe, imbroidered
With Starr-characters, teaching me to read
The destiny of Mortals, while your clear brow
Presents a Majesty, to instruct me how
To love or dread naught else: May your bright hair,
Which are the threads of life, fair crowned appear
With that your Crown of Immortality:
In your right hand the Keys of Heaven be;
In the other those of the Infernal Pit,
Whence none retires, if once he enter it.
And here let me complain, how few are those
Whose souls you shall from earth's vast dungeon lose
To endless happiness? few that attend
You, the true Guide, unto their journeys end:
And if old Virtue's way narrow were,
It Is rugged now, having no passenger.
Our life is but a dark and stormy night,
To which sense yields a weak and glimmering light;
While wandering Man thinks he discerns all,
By that which makes him but mistake and fall:
He sees enough, who does his darkness see;
These are great lights, by which less dark'ned be.
Shine then Sun-bright, or through my senses vail,
A day star of the light does never fail;
Show me that Goodness which compounds the strife
'Twixt a long sickness and a weary life.
Set forth that Justice which keeps all in aw,
Certain and equal more then any Law.
Figure that happy and eternal Rest,
Which till Man do enjoy, he is not blessed.
Come and appear then, dear Soul-ravisher,
Heavens lightest Usher, Man's deliverer,
And do not think, when I new beauties see,
They can withdraw my settled love from thee.
Flesh-beauty strikes me not at all, I know,
When thou do leave them to the grave, they show
Worse, then they now show thee: they shall not move
In me the least part of delight, or love,
But as they teach your power: Be the nut brown
The loveliest color which the flesh does crown:
I Will think it like a Nut, a fair outside,
Within which Worms and rottenness abide:
If fair, then like the Worm it self to be;
If painted, like their slime and sluttery.
If any yet will think their beauties best,
And will, against you, spite of all, contest,
Seize them with Age: so in themselves they will hate
What they scorned in your picture, and too late
See their fault, and the Painters: Yet if this,
Which their great'st plague and wrinkled torture is,
Please not, you may to the more wicked sort,
Or such as of your praises make a sport,
Denounce an open war, send chosen bands
Of Worms, your soldiers, to their fairest hands,
And make them lep'rous-scabb'd: upon their face
Let those your Pioneers, Ring-worms take their place,
And safely near with strong approaches got
Entrench it round, while their teeths rampire rot
With other Worms, may with a damp inbred
Sink to their senses, which they shall not dead:
And thus may all that ever they prided in,
Confound them now: As for the parts within,
Send Gut-worms, which may undermine a way
Unto their vital parts, and so display
That your pale Ensign on the walls: then let
Those Worms, your Veteranes, which never yet
Did fail, enter Pel mel, and ransack all,
Just as they see the well-rais'd building fall:
While they do this, your Forragers command,
The Caterpillars, to devour their land;
And with them Wasps, your wing'd-worm-horsmen, bring,
To charge, in troop, those Rebels, with their sting:
All this, unless your beauty they confess.
And now, sweet Mistress, let m' a while digress,
TO admire these noble Worms, whom I invoke,
And not the Muses: You that eat through Oak
And bark, will you spare Paper, and my Verse,
Because your praises they do here rehearse?
Brave Legions then, sprung from the mighty race
Of Man corrupted, and which hold the place
Of his undoubted Issue; you that are
Brain-born, Minerva-like, and like her war,
Well-arm'd compleat-mail'd-jointed Soldiers,
Whose force Herculean links in pieces tears;
To you the vengeance of all spill-bloods falls,
Beast-eating Men, Men-eating Cannibals.
Death priviledg'd, were you in sunder smit
You do not lose your life, but double it:
Best framed types of the immortal Soul,
Which in your selves, and in each part are whole:
Last-living Creatures, heirs of all the earth,
For when all men are dead, it is your birth:
When you die, your brave self-kill'd General
(For nothing else can kill him) does end all.
What vermin breeding body then thinks scorn,
His flesh should be by your brave fury torn.
Willing, to you, this Carcass I submit,
A gift so free, I do not care for it:
Which yet you shall not take, until I see
My Mistress first reveal her self to me.
Mean while, Great Mistress, whom my soul admires,
Grant me your true picture, who it desires,
That he your matchiefs beauty might maintain
Against all men that will quarrels entertain
For a Flesh-Mistress, the worst I can do,
Is but to keep the way that leads to you,
And howsoever the event does prove,
To have Revenge below, Reward above;
Hear, from my bodies prison, this my Call,
Who from my mouth-grate, and eye-window bawl.
Epitaph on Sir Philip Sidney lying in St. Paul's without a Monument, to be
fastened upon the Church door.
Reader,
WIthin this Church Sir Philip Sidney lies,
Nor is it fit that I should more acquaint,
Lest superstition rise,
And Men adore,
Soldiers, their Martyr; Lovers, their Saint.
Epitaph for himself.
Reader,
THe Monument which thou beholdest here,
Presents Edward Lord Herbert, to thy sight,
A man, who was so free from either hope or fear,
To have or loose this ordinary light,
That when to elements his body turned were,
He knew that as those elements would fight,
So his Immortal Soul should find above,
With his Creator, Peace, Joy, Truth, and Love.
Sonnet.
YOu well compacted Groves, whose light and shade
Mixed equally, produce nor heat, nor cold,
Either to burn the young, or freeze the old,
But to one even temper being made,
Upon a Grave embroidering through each Glade
An Airy Silver, and a Sunny Gold,
So cloth the poorest that they do behold
Themselves, in riches which can never fade,
While the wind whistles, and the birds do sing*
While your twigs clip, and while the leaves do friss,
While the fruit ripens which those trunks do bring,
Senseless to all but love, do you not spring
Pleasure of such a kind, as truly is
A self-renewing vegetable bliss.
Made upon the Groves near Merlow Castle.
To the C. of D.
1.
SInce in your face, as in a beauteous sphere,
Delight and state so sweetly mixed appear,
That Love's not light, nor Gravity severe,
All your attractive Graces seem to draw,
A modest rigor keeps so in aw,
That in their turns each of them gives the law.
2.
Therefore though chaste and virtuous desire
Through that your native mildness may aspire,
Until a just regard it does acquire;
Yet if Love thence a forward hope project,
You can, by virtue of a sweet neglect,
Convert it straight to reverend respect.
3.
Thus, as in your rare temper, we may find
An excellence so perfect in each kind,
That a fair body has a fairer mind;
So all the beams you diversely do dart,
As well on the understanding as the heart,
Of love and honor equal cause impart.
Ditty.
1.
WHy do thou hate return instead of love?
And with such merciless despite,
My faith and hope requite?
Oh! if the affection cannot move,
Learn Innocence yet of the Dove,
And thy disdain to juster bounds confine;
Or if toward Man thou equally decline
The rules of Justice and of Mercy too,
Thou may thy love to such a point refine,
As it will kill more then thy hate can do.
2.
Love, love, Melania, then, though death ensue,
Yet it is a greater fate,
To dye through love then hate,
Rather a victory pursue,
To Beauties lawful conquest due,
Then tyrant eyes invenom with disdain:
Or if thy power thou would so maintain,
As equally to be both loved and dread,
Let timely Kisses call to life again,
Him whom thy eyes have Planet-strucken dead.
3.
Kiss, kiss, Melania, then, and do not stay
Until these sad effects appear,
Which now draw on so near,
That did thou longer help delay,
My soul must fly so fast away,
As would at once both life and love divorce:
Or if I needs must dye without remorse,
Kiss and embalm me so with that sweet breath,
That while thou triumph'st o'r Love and his force,
I may triumph yet over Fate and Death.
Elegy for Doctor Dunn.
WHat though the vulgar and received praise,
With which each common Poet strives to raise
His worthless Patron, seem to give the height
Of a true Excellence; yet as the weight
Forced from his Center, must again recoil,
So every praise, as if it took some foil,
Only because it was not well employed,
Turns to those senseless principles and void,
Which in some broken syllables being couched,
Cannot above an Alphabet be vouched,
In which dissolved state, they use to rest,
Until some other in new forms invest
Their easy matter, striving so to fix
Glory with words, and make the parts to mix.
But since praise that wants truth, like words that want
Their proper meaning, does it self recant;
Such terms, however elevate and high,
Are but like Meteors, which the pregnant Sky
Varies in diverse figures, till at last
They either be by some dark Cloud o'rcast,
Or wanting inward sustenance do devolve,
And into their first Elements resolve.
Praises, like Garments, then, if loose and wide,
Are subject to fall off; if gay and py'd,
Make men ridiculous; the just and grave
Are those alone, which men may wear and have.
How fitting were it then, each had that part
Which is their due: And that no fraudulent art
Could so disguise the truth, but they might own
Their rights, and by that property be known,
For since praise is public inheritance,
If any Inter-Commoner do chance
To give or take more praise then does belong
Unto his part, he does so great a wrong,
That all who claim an equal interest,
May him implead until he do divest
His usurpations, and again restore
Unto the public what was theirs before.
Praises should then like definitions be
Round, neat, convertible, such as agree
To persons so, that, were their names concealed,
Must make them known as well as if revealed:
Such as contain the kind and difference,
And all the properties arising thence.
All praises else, as more or less then due,
Will prove, or strongly false, or weakly true.
Having delivered now, what praises are,
It rests that I should to the world declare
Thy praises, DVNN, whom I so loved alive.
That with my witty Carew I should strive
To celebrate the dead, did I not need
A language by it self, which should exceed
All those which are in use: For while I take
Those common words, which men may even rake
From Dunghil-wits, I find them so defiled,
Slubber'd and false, as if they had exiled
Truth and propriety, such as do tell
So little other things, they hardly spell
Their proper meaning, and therefore unfit
To blazon forth thy merits, or thy wit.
Nor will it serve, that thou did so refine
Matter with words, that both did seem divine,
When thy breath uttered them: for thou b'ing gone,
They straight did follow thee: Let therefore none
Hope to find out an Idiom and sense,
Equal to thee, and to thy Eminence,
Unless our Gracious King give words their bound,
Call in false titles, which each where are found,
In Prose and Verse, and as bad Coin and light
Suppress them and their values, till the right
Take place, and do appear, and then in lieu
Of those forged Attributes stamp some anew,
Which being current, and by all allowed,
In Epitaphs and Tombs might be avowed
More then their Escocheons. Mean while, because
Nor praise is yet confined to its Laws,
Nor railing wants his proper dialect,
Let thy detraction thy late life detect;
And though they term all thy heat, frowardness;
Thy solitude, self-pride; fasts, niggardness,
And on this false supposal would infer,
They teach not others right, themselves who err;
Yet as men to the adverse part do ply
Those crooked things which they would rectify,
So would perchance, to loose and wanton Man
Such vice avail more then their virtues can.
The Brown Beauty.
1.
WHile the two contraries of Black and White,
In the Brown Phaie are so well unite,
That they no longer now seem opposite,
Who doubts but love, has this his color chose,
Since he therein does both the extremes compose,
And as within their proper Center close.
2.
Therefore as it presents not to the view
That whitely raw and unconcocted hiew.
Which Beauty Northern Nations think the true;
So neither has it that adust aspect,
The Moor and Indian so much affect,
That for it they all other do reject.
3.
Thus while the White well shadowed does appear,
And black does through his luster grow so clear,
That each in other equal part does bear;
All in so rare proportion is combined,
That the fair temper, which adorns her mind,
Is even to her outward form confined.
4.
Phaie, your Sexes honor, then so live,
That when the World shall with contention strive
To whom they would a chief perfection give,
They might the controversy so decide,
As quitting all extremes on either side,
You more then any may be dignified.
An Ode upon a Question moved, Whether Love should continue for ever?
HAving interred her Infant-birth,
The watery ground that late did mourn,
Was strewn with flowers for the return
Of the wished Bridegroom of the earth.
The well accorded Birds did sing
Their hymns unto the pleasant time,
And in a sweet consorted chime
Did welcome in the cheerful Spring.
To which, soft whistles of the Wind,
And warbling murmurs of a Brook,
And vari'd notes of leaves that shook,
An harmony of parts did bind.
While doubling joy unto each other,
All in so rare consent was shown,
No happiness that came alone,
Nor pleasure that was not another.
When with a love none can express,
That mutually happy pair,
Melander and Celinda fair,
The season with their loves did bless.
Walking thus toward a pleasant Grove,
Which did, it seemed, in new delight
The pleasures of the time unite,
To give a triumph to their love.
They stayed at last, and on the Grass
Reposed so, as o'r his breast
She bowed her gracious head to rest,
Such a weight as no burden was.
While over eithers compassed waste
Their folded arms were so composed,
As if in straitest bonds enclosed,
They suffered for joys they did taste.
Long their fixed eyes to Heaven bent,
Unchanged, they did never move,
As if so great and pure a love
No Glass but it could represent.
When with a sweet, though troubled look*
She first brake silence, saying, Dear friend,
O that our love might take no end,
Or never had beginning took!
I speak not this with a false heart,
(Wherewith his hand she gently strained)
Or that would change a love maintained
With so much love on either part.
Nay* I protest, though Death with his
Worst Counsel should divide us here,
His terrors could not make me fear,
To come where your loved presence is.
Only if loves fire with the breath
Of life be kindled, I doubt,
With our last air 'twill be breathed out,
And quenched with the cold of death.
That if affection be a line,
Which is closed up in our last hour;
Oh how 'twould grieve me, any power
Could force so dear a love as mine!
She scarce had done, when his shut eyes
An inward joy did represent,
To hear Celinda thus intent
To a love he so much did prize.
Then with a look, it seemed, denied
All earthly power but hers, yet so,
As if to her breath he did ow
This borrowed life, he thus replied;
O you, wherein, they say, Souls rest,
Till they descend pure heavenly fires,
Shall lustful and corrupt desires
With your immortal seed be blessed?
And shall our Love, so far beyond
That low and dying appetite,
And which so chaste desires unite,
Not hold in an eternal bond?
Is it, because we should decline,
And wholly from our thoughts exclude
Objects that may the sense delude,
And study only the Divine?
No sure, for if none can ascend
Even to the visible degree
Of things created, how should we
The invisible comprehend?
Or rather since that Power expressed
His greatness in his works alone,
B'ing here best in's Creatures known,
Why is he not loved in them best?
But is it not true, which you pretend,
That since our love and knowledge here,
Only as parts of life appear,
So they with it should take their end?
O no, Beloved, I am most sure,
Those virtuous habits we acquire,
As being with the Soul entire,
Must with it evermore endure.
For if where sins and vice reside,
We find so foul a guilt remain,
As never dying in his stain,
Still punished in the Soul does bide.
Much more that true and real joy,
Which in a virtuous love is found,
Must be more solid in its ground,
Then Fate or Death can ever destroy.
Else should our Souls in vain elect,
And vainer yet were Heavens laws,
When to an everlasting Cause
They gave a perishing Effect.
Nor here on earth then, nor above,
Our good affection can impair,
For where God does admit the fair,
Think you that he excludes Love?
These eyes again then, eyes shall see,
And hands again these hands enfold,
And all chaste pleasures can be told
Shall with us everlasting be.
For if no use of sense remain
When bodies once this life forsake,
Or they could no delight partake,
Why should they ever rise again?
And if every imperfect mind
Make love the end of knowledge here,
How perfect will our love be, where
All imperfection is refined?
Let then no doubt, Celinda, touch,
Much less your fairest mind invade,
Were not our souls immortal made,
Our equal loves can make them such.
So when one wing can make no way,
Two joined can themselves dilate,
So can two persons propagate,
When singly either would decay.
So when from hence we shall be gone,
And be no more, nor you, nor I,
As one another mystery,
Each shall be both, yet both but one.
This said, in her up-lifted face,
Her eyes which did that beauty crown,
Were like two stars, that having fallen down,
Look up again to find their place:
While such a moveless silent peace
Did seize on their becalmed sense,
One would have thought some Influence
Their ravished spirits did possess.
The Green Sickness Beauty.
1.
THough the pale white within your cheeks composed,
And doubtful light unto your eye confined,
Though your short breath not from it self unloos'd,
And careless motions of your equal mind,
Argue, your beauties are not all disclosed.
2.
Yet as a rising beam, when first it is shown,
Points fairer, then when it ascends more red,
Or as a budding Rose, when first it is blown,
Smells sweeter far, then when it is more spread,
As all things best by principles are known:
3.
So in your green and flourishing estate
A beauty is discerned more worthy love,
Then that which further does it self dilate,
And those degrees of variation prove,
Our vulgar wits so much do celebrate.
4.
Thus though your eyes dart not that piercing blaze,
Which does in busy Lovers looks appear,
It is, because you do not need to gaze,
On other object then your proper sphere,
Nor wander further then to run that maze.
5.
So, if you want that blood which must succeed,
And give at last a tincture to your skin,
It is, because neither in outward deed,
Nor inward thought, you yet admit that sin,
For which your Cheeks a guilty blush should need.
6.
So, if your breath do not so freely flow,
It is because you love not to consume
That vital treasure, which you do bestow
As well to vegetate as to perfume
Your Virgin leaves, as fast as they do grow.
7.
Yet stay not here, Love for his right will call,
You were not born to serve your only will,
Nor can your beauty be perpetual,
It Is your perfection for to ripen still,
And to be gathered rathen then to fall.
The Green Sickness Beauty.
FRom thy pale look, while angry Love does seem
With more imperiousness to give his Law,
Then where he blushingly does beg esteem,
We may observe py'd beauty in such aw;
That the brav'st Color under her command
Affrighted, often before you does retire,
While, like a Statue, of your self you stand
In such symmetrique form, as does require
No luster but his own: As then in vain
One should flesh-colouring to Statues add,
So were it to your native White a Stain,
If it in other ornaments were clad,
Then what your rich proportions do give,
Which in a boundless fair being unconfined
Exalted in your soul, so seem to live,
That they become an emblem of your mind,
That so, who to your Orient White should join
Those fading qualities most eyes adore,
Were but like one, who gilding Silver Coin,
Gave but occasion to suspect it more.
La Gralletta Gallante, OR, The Sun-burn'd Exotique Beauty.
1.
CHild of the Sun, in whom his Rays appear,
Hatched to that luster, as does make, thee wear
Heavens livery in thy skin, What need'st thou fear
The injury of Air, and change of Clime,
When thy exalted form is so sublime,
As to transcend all power of change or time?
2.
How proud are they that in their hair but show
Some part of thee, thinking therein they ow
The greatest beauty Nature can bestow?
When thou art so much fairer to the sight,
As beams each where diffused are more bright
Then their derived and secondary light.
3.
But thou art cordial both to sight and taste,
While each rare fruit seems in his time to haste
To ripen in thee, till at length they waste
Themselves to inward sweets, from whence again,
They, like Elixirs, passing through each vein,
An endless circulation do maintain.
4.
How poor are they then, whom if we but greet,
Think that raw juice, which in their lips we meet,
Enough, to make us hold their Kisses sweet:
When that rich odor, which in thee is smelt,
Can it self to a balmy liquor melt,
And make it to our inward senses felt.
5.
Leave then thy Country, Soil, and Mothers home,
Wander a Planet this way, till thou come
To give our Lovers here their fatal doom;
While if our beauties scorn to enjoy thine,
It will be just they to a Jaundise pine,
And by thy Gold show like some Copper-mine.
Platonic Love.
1.
MAdam, your beauty and your lovely parts
Would scarce admit poetic praise and Arts
As they are Loves most sharp and piercing darts;
Though, as again they only wound and kill
The more depraved affections of our will,
You claim a right to commendation still.
2.
For as you can unto that height refine
All Loves delights, as while they do incline
Unto no vice, they so become divine;
We may as well attain your excellence,
As without help of any outward sense
Would make us grow a pure Intelligence.
3.
And as a Soul, thus being quite abstract,
Complies not properly with any act,
Which from its better Being may detract:
So through the virtuous habits you infuse,
It is enough that we may like and choose,
Without presuming yet to take or use.
4.
Thus Angels in their starry Orbs proceed
Unto affection, without other need
Then that they still on contemplation feed:
Though as they may unto this Orb descend,
You can, when you would so much lower bend,
Give joys beyond what man can comprehend.
5.
Do not refuse then, Madam, to appear,
Since every radiant Beam comes from your Sphere,
Can so much more then any else endear,
As while through them we do discern each Grace,
The multiplied lights from every place,
Will turn and Circle, with their rays, your face.
Platonic Love.
1.
MAdam, believe't, Love is not such a toy,
As it is sport but for the Idle Boy,
Or wanton Youth, since it can entertain
Our serious thoughts, and make us know how vain
All time is spent we do not thus employ.
2.
For though strong passion often on youth does seize,
It is not yet affection, but disease,
Cause from repletion, which their blood does vex,
So that they love not Woman, but the Sex,
And care no more then how themselves to please.
3.
Whereas true Lovers check that appetite,
Which would presume further then to invite
The Soul unto that part it ought to take,
When that from this address it would but make
Some introduction only to delight.
4.
For while they from the outward sense transplant
The love grew there in earthly mould, and scant,
To the Souls spacious and immortal field,
They spring a love eternal, which will yield
All that a pure affection can grant.
5.
Besides, what time or distance might effect
Is thus removed, while they themselves connect
So far above all change, as to exclude
Not only all which might their sense delude,
But mind to any object else affect.
6.
Nor will the proof of Constancy be hard,
When they have placed upon their mind that guard,
As no ignoble thought can enter there,
And Love does such a virtue persevere,
And in it self so find a just reward.
7.
And thus a love, made from a worthy choice,
Will to that union come, as but one voice
Shall speak, one thought but think the others will,
And while, but frailty, they can know no ill,
Their souls more then their bodies must rejoice.
8.
In which estate nothing can so fulfill
Those heights of pleasure, which their souls instill
Into each other, but that love thence draws
New Arguments of joy, while the same cause
That makes them happy, makes them greater still.
9.
So that however multiplied and vast
Their love increase, they will not think it past
The bounds of growth, till their exalted fire
B'ing equally enlarged with their desire,
Transform and fix them to one Starr at last.
10.
Or when that otherwise they were inclined
Unto those public joys, which are assigned
To blessed souls when they depart from hence
They would, besides what Heaven does dispense,
Have their contents they in each other find.
The IDEA, Made of Alnwick in his Expedition to Scotland with the Army, 1639.
ALL Beauties vulgar eyes on earth do see,
At best but some imperfect Copies be,
Of those the Heavens did at first decree.
For though the Idea's of each several kind,
Conceived above by the Eternal Mind,
Are such, as none can error in them find.
Since from his thoughts and presence he does bear,
And shut out all deformity so far,
That the least beauty near him is a Starr.
As Nature yet from far the Idea's views,
And does besides but vile materials choose,
We in her works observe no small abuse:
Some of her figures therefore, foiled and blurred,
Show as if Heaven had no way concurred
In shapes so disproportioned and absurd.
Which being again vexed with some hate and spite,
That does in them vengeance and rage excite,
Seem to be tortured and deformed quite.
While so being fixed, they yet in them contain
Another sort of ugliness and stain,
B'ing with old wrinkles interlin'd again.
Lastly, as if Nature even did not know
What Color every several part should ow,
They look as if their Galls did overflow.
Fair is the mark of Good, soul of Ill,
Although not so infallibly, but still
The proof depends most on the mind and will:
As Good yet rarely in the Foul is met,
So 'twould as little by its union get,
As a rich Jewel that were poorly set.
For since Good first did at the Fair begin,
Foul being but a punishment for sin,
Fair's the true outside to the Good within.
In these the supreme Power then so does guide
Natures weak hand, as he does add beside
All by which Creatures can be dignified.
While you in them see so exact a line,
That through each several part a glimpse does shine
Of their original and form divine.
Therefore the characters of fair and good
Are so set forth, and printed in their blood,
As each in other may be understood.
That Beauty so accompanied with Grace,
And equally conspicuous in the face,
In a fair Woman's outside takes the place.
Thus while in her all rare perfection meets,
Each, as with joy, its fellow beauty greets,
And varies so into a thousand sweets.
Or if some tempting thought do so assault,
As doubtful she 'twixt two opinions halt,
A gentle blush corrects and mends the fault,
That so she still fairer and better grows,
Without that thus she more to passion ows,
Then what fresh color on her cheeks bestows.
To which again her lips such helps can add,
As both will chase all grievous thoughts and sad:
And give what else can make her good or glad.
As Statuaries yet having framed in Clay
An hollow Image, afterward convey
The molten mettle through each several way;
But when it once unto its place has past,
And the inward Statua perfectly is cast,
Do throw away the outward Clay at last.
So when that form the Heavens at first decreed
Is finished within, Souls do not need
Their Bodies more, but would from them be freed.
For who still covered with their earth would ly?
Who would not shake their fetters off, and fly,
And be, at least, next to, a Deity?
However then you be most lovely here,
Yet when you from all Elements are clear,
You far more pure and glorious shall appear.
Thus from above I doubt not to behold
You second self renewed in your own mold,
And rising thence fairer then can be told.
From whence ascending to the Elect and Blessed
In your true joys you will not find it least,
That! in Heaven shall know and love you best.
For while I do your coming there attend,
I shall much time on your idea spend.
And note how far all others you transcend.
And thus, though you more then an Angel be,
Since being here to sin and mischief free,
You will have raised your self to their degree:
That so victorious over Death and I ate,
And happy in your everlasting state,
You shall triumphant enter Heaven gate.
Hasten not thither yet, for as you are
A Beauty upon Earth without compare,
You will show best still where you are most rare.
Live all our lives then: If the picture can
Here entertain a loving absent man,
Much more the Idea where you first began.
Platonic Love.
DIsconsolate and sad,
So little hope of remedy I find,
That when my matchless Mistress were inclined
To pity me, 'twould scarcely make me glad,
The discomposing of so fair a Mind
B'ing that which would to my Afflictions add.
For when she should repent,
This Act of Charity had made her part
With such a precious Jewel as her Heart,
Might she not grieve that ever she did relent?
And then were it fit I felt the smart
Until I grew the greater Penitent.
Nor were it a good excuse,
When she pleased to call for her Heart again,
To tell her of my suffering and pain,
Since that I should her Clemency abuse,
While she did see what wrong she did sustain,
In giving what she justly might refuse.
Vexed thus with me at last,
When from her kind restraint she now were gone,
And I left to the Manacles alone,
Should I not on another Rock be cast?
Since they who have not yet content, do moan
Far less then they whose hope thereof is past.
Besides I would deserve,
And not live poorly on the alms of Love,
Or claim a favor did not singly move
From my regard: If she her joys reserve
Unto some other, she at length should prove,
Rather then beg her pity I would sterve.
Let her then be serene,
Alike exempt from pity and from hate:
Let her still keep her dignity and state;
Yet from her glories something I shall glean,
For when she does them every where dilate,
A beam or two to me must intervene.
And this shall me sustain,
For though due merit I cannot express,
Yet she shall know none ever loved for less,
Or easier reward: Let her remain
Still Great and Good* and from her happiness
My chief contentment I will entertain.
Restrained hopes, though you dare not aspire,
To fly an even pitch with my desire,
Yet fall no lower, and at least take heed,
That you no way unto despair proceed,
Since in what form soe'r you keep entire,
I shall the less all other comforts need.
I know how much presumption did transcend,
When that affection could at most pretend
To be believed, would needs yet higher soar,
And love a Beauty which I should adore,
Though yet therein I had no other end,
But to assure that none could love her more.
Only may she not think her beauty less,
That on low Objects it does still express
An equal force, while it does rule all hearts
Alike in the remot'st as nearest parts;
Since if it did at any distance cease,
It wanted of that power it should impart.
Small earthly lights but to some space extend,
And then unto the dim and dark do tend,
And common heat does at some length so stop,
That it cannot so much as warm one drop,
While light and heat that does from Heaven descend
Warms the low Valley more then Mountains top.
Nor do they always best of the Heavens deserve,
Who gaze on it most, but they who do reserve
Themselves to know it, since not all that will
Climb up into a Steeple or a Hill,
So well its power and influence observe,
As they who study and remark it still.
Would she then in full glory on me shine,
An Image of that Light which is divine,
I then should see more clear, while she did draw
Me upwards, and the vapors 'twixt us aw:
To open her eyes were to open mine,
And teach me wonders which I never saw.
Nor would there thus be any cause to fear,
That while her power attractive drew me near,
The odds betwixt us would the lesser show,
Since the most common Understandings know,
That inequalities still most appear,
When brought together and composed so.
As there is nothing yet does so excel,
But there is found, if not its parallel,
Yet something so conform, as though far least
May yet obtain therein an Interest,
Why may not faith and truth then join so well,
As they may suit her rare perfections best?
Then hope, sustain thy self, though thou art hid
Thou live still, and must till she forbid;
For when she would my vows and love reject,
They would a Being in themselves project,
Since infinites as they, yet never did,
Nor could conclude without some good effect.
A Meditation upon his Wax-Candle burning out.
WHile thy ambitious flame does strive for height,
Yet burns down, as clogged with the weight
Of earthly parts, to which thou art combined,
Thou still do grow more short of thy desire,
And do in vain unto that place aspire,
To which thy native powers seem inclined.
Yet when at last thou come to be dissolved,
And to thy proper principles resolved,
And all that made thee now is discomposed,
Though thy terrestrial part in ashes lies,
Thy more sublime to higher Regions flies,
The rest b'ing to the middle ways exposed.
And while thou do thy self each where disperse,
Some parts of thee make up this Universe,
Others a kind of dignity obtain,
Since thy pure Wax in its own flame consumed,
Volumes of incense sends, in which perfumed,
Thy smoke mounts where this fire could not attain.
Much more our Souls then, when they go from hence,
And back unto the Elements dispense,
All that built up our frail and earthly frame
Shall through each pore and passage make their breach,
Till they with all their faculties do reach
Unto that place from whence at first they came.
Nor need they fear thus to be thought unkind
To those poor Carcasses they leave behind,
Since being in unequal parts commix'd
Each in his Element their place will get,
And who thought Elements unhappy yet,
As long as they were in their stations fixed?
Or if they sallied forth, is there not light
And heat in some, and spirit prone to fight?
Keep they not, in the Earth and Air, the field?
Besides, have they not power to generate
When, more then Meteors, they In the Constellation of Cassiepeia, 1572.
Stars create,
Which while they last scarce to the brightest yield.
That so in them we more then once may live,
While these materials which here did give
Our bodies essence, and are most of use,
Quick'ned again by the worlds common soul,
Which in it self and in each part is whole,
Can various forms in diverse kinds produce.
If then, at worst, this our condition be,
When to themselves our Elements are free,
And each does to its proper place revert,
What may we not hope from our part divine,
Which can this dross of Elements refine,
And them unto a better state assert?
Or if as cloid upon this earthly stage,
Which represents nothing but change or age,
Our Souls would all their burdens here divest,
They singly may that glorious state acquire,
Which fills alone their infinite desire
To be of perfect happiness possessed.
And therefore I, who do not live and move,
By outward sense so much as faith and love,
Which is not in inferior Creatures found,
May unto some immortal state pretend,
Since by these wings I thither may ascend,
Where faithful loving Souls with joys are crowned.
October 14. 1664.
ENraging Griefs, though you most diverse be,
In your first Causes, you may yet agree
To take an equal share within my heart,
Since if each grief strive for the greatest part,
You needs must vex your selves as well as me.
For your own sakes and mine then make an end,
In vain you do about a Heart contend,
Which though it seem in greatness to dilate,
Is but a tumor, which in this its state
The choicest remedies would but offend.
Then storm't at once, I neither feel constraint
Scorning your worst, nor suffer any taint
Dying by multitudes, though if you strive,
I fear my heart may thus be kept alive,
Until it under its own burden faint.
What is it not done? Why then, my God, I find,
Would have me use you to reform my mind:
Since through his help I may from you extract
An essence pure, so spriteful and compact,
As it will be from grosser parts refined.
Which b'ing again converted by his Grace
To godly sorrow, I may both efface
Those sins first caused you, and together have
Your power to kill turned to a power to save,
And bring my Soul to its desired place.
In statuam ligneam Overburii.
CErnis Overburi, non aere aut marmore, vultum;
Sed Ligno Hiberno, dic, age, nonne placet?
De C. de S.
HAec anima, ut fuerit terrena libera mole,
Venerit and summo conspicienda Deo,
Talibus and tantis vitiis spurcata, trahetur,
Haud dubium, ad poenam suppliciumque grave.
Viderit: at pulchrum dabitur cum sumere corpus,
Eximium, credo, perdere nollet opus.
Epitaphium in Anagramma nominis sui, Reddor ut herbae.
QUas turgens flos mane decet, quas aruit omnes
Una dies, quas morte cita, nova vita sequetur;
Nonnunquam moritura tamen, sic Reddor ut herbae.
Epitaph. in se Romae factum, 1615.
VEros seu vanos populi ridere timores
Expertus, vitae melioris conscius, intus
Plaudebam, expectans faceret dum fabula finem.
In tumulum Domini Francisci Vere.
ANgustus nimis est lapis pusillus,
Vel, totum, soret ipsa terra, marmor;
Angusta and spolia and Trophaea ficta,
Haec Belgae tulerant, vel illa Iberi.
Cuncta angusta nimis videntur illi,
Qui victor toties mori volebat,
In se, post alios, agens triumphum,
Ut dignum tumulum Trophaea digna
Uni nil poterit refer vero:
Ni sort, ut maneat perenne nomen
Cui mundus spolia, and caro triumphus,
Coelum sit Tumulus, Trophaea stellae.
In diem Natalitium, viz. 3. Mar.
VEre novo lux usque redit qua nascor, at una
Dum tempus redit, and fit numerosa dies,
Ver olim vires renovans, roburque recondens
Aetas fit tandem, tristis hyemsque mihi.
For a Dyal.
DIscurrens dubiae placidus, compendia vitae,
Excipiens tacito gaudia tuta sinu,
Praeteritis laetare bonis, nec saeva futuri
Exagitet miseros cura prematve dies:
Omnis in adversum ruit hora volatque retrorsum
Et velut exhorrens jam peritura fugit.
Dum numerans delet, dumque addens subtrahit, illa*
Quae vitae ratio, calculus atque tuae.
In Answer to the Verses of Guiet for the Pucelle d' Orleans, quasi extempore.
QUod nequiere viri, potuit si faemina, quid ni
Galle, fores tandem tu muliere minor?
Desine, Galle, tuam tandem jactare Bubulcam,
Seu Medaea fuit, sive Medusa fuit.
Si canit ad Bellum, tamen est Medaea vocanda,
Carmina dum rauco concinit illa sono.
Hosts si caesi, tamen est dicenda Medusa,
Dum nimis ad dirae virginis ora rigent.
Virgo sit tandem, sed qualem nollet adulter,
Seu Medaea fuit sive Medusa fuit.
Definat ergo suam Galbus jactare Johannam*
Saltem plena suo non erit illa Deo.
Plena suo vel nulla datur, vel Papa Johanna,
Numine: sit virgo quamlicet illa minus.
In Answer to Tilenus, when I had that fatal Defluxion in my Hand.
QUi possim Phoebum succensum credere? Lauds
Quam facit ut scribas, docte Tilene, meas.
Providus atque manum consulto surripit istam,
Ut melius possem nunc superesse tua.
De Hugone Grotio Arca incluso and a Carcere liberato.
CArcere dum Carcer victus, Tenebrisque Tenebrae,
Vinclis cum demum vincla soluta tibi,
Prosiliens media tandem de mole, videris,
Quicquid mortale est, deposuisse simul.
Pro Laureato Poeta.
AT quorsum Juvenis, si nullo limine clausus
Immistus canibus, saltuque vagatus in omni
Praecipites crebris damas latratibus urgens
Excurrit, secumque nihil non perdere tentat?
An mage grata viri tandem maturior aetas?
Qui furiis agitatus atrox atque omine tristi
Horrida funestis meditatur praelia campis?
In propriam speciemque ruens ita sanguine gaudet
Confessus satis, ut nullus sibi concidat hostis:
Is potiorne domi qui futilis ambit honorem
Inque leves populi gyros proclivis and auram*
Mercatur voces, falsaque cupidine tractus
Incertam dubii sectatur nominis umbram?
Heu fugias qui te fugiunt and far recusant,
Imperium fascesque tuos, quibus undique faustis
Candida supremos designant colla triumphos.
Sed ne nulla tibi demum victoria constet,
En praedam, formosa, tuam, quam porrigit herba,
Et genua amplectens sese ultro dedere victam
Testatur lauroque sua tua tempora cingit.
Nec canos causere meos, (qui symbola certae
Sunt fidei) tanta solitum flammave tremorem,
Immo nec errones tanquam sed lumina fixa
Contemplare oculos, tandem neque Basia spernas
Floridus ut desit color ori, servat odorem,
Aemula pastillis spirabunt labra rosatis
Basia, mellito and se lingua madore resolvet.
Denique seu nostro latitet nova pruna color
Nictet and implexus torvo sub lumine cautus
Arcitenens, mortis tandem seu scena futurae
Prodierim, vitam nobis cum dura negaris;
Ah reddas saltem, nondum satis arsit, Amorem,
Cui senium tempusve fidem cui praeripit ullum.
Ad Sereniss. Regem Gustavum A.D. 1631.
PEr varios terrae tractus and dissita Regna,
Inclyte Suecorum princeps, dum castra movere
Constituis, pacemque pio decernere bello,
Quae te securum probitas, prudentia fortem,
Faelicem virtus praestat, non omine vano
Fecit, ut antiquum Germania libera nomen
Accipiens rursus, se justo vindice tandem
Gaudeat, inque tuos succedat sponte triumphos.
Scilicet, hoc potuit tua, dextera fortis and ultrix
Igneus atque vigor, bello samiatus and ensis,
Quo stricto late rutilanteque fulgidus hosts
Irruis in medios, densam passimque catervam
Discutis, and long percellis quaeque timore,
Ut tibi nec fumi nubes glomerata, nec imo
Excussus pulvis, pila nec confertior instans
Obscurare tuos, validos, vel flectere gressus
Possint, e multo quin numine flamma coruscans
Perstringensque oculos, insultus reddat inanes
Militis, innocuosque ictus, ac irrita tela,
Dum tibi lustratae caecae patuere tenebrae,
Inque tuam lucem caligo cedere visa est.
Inde citata tuum sequitur victoria cursum
Inque gradus haeret certos figitque trophaea,
Auspic^isque tuos illustrior explicat alas,
Queis sursum vecto superas invisere seeds
Inque novum tandem liceat tibi sidus abire,
Clarius Arcturi and fuscae jubar addere luci.
Euryale Moerens.
DEpressae valles piceis irriguae fontibus
Herbae marcidae, caeca praetexentes Barathra,
Maligni colles hirsutis vepribus obsiti,
Aspera montium juga, exesis, hiulca specubus,
Defrugatarum segetum late patentia aequora,
Invisa soli antra, confragosa praecipitia,
Abruptarum cautium nutantia undique cacumina,
Pendulae taxi, cupressi succrescentes feralibus,
Spelaeorum inferna ducentium horrores sacri,
Infaustae stryges, bubulantia stygiae avis omina,
Rauci stridores, torvorum colla anguium sibila,
Prodigialium monstrorum exerta passim capita,
Aspectus truces syderum, diri portenta aetheris
Vosque gementes umbrae, hic testari liceat,
Nihil uspiam fuisse Euryale tristius.
1632.
Mensa Lusoria, or a Shovelboard-table to Mr. Master.
ROboris excelsi tabulatum sternitur ingens,
Aequore productum laevi, quod tramite recto
Procurrens, tandem qua se subducit in imum
Dissecat exilis transversim linea, scena
Unde patet ludi, commisso margin clausa,
Qui bini ternive notam certantibus aptat
Figitur extremo, seu pressus limite jactus,
Seu tremulus nutat, sibi nec constare videtur.
Heic ubi convenient lusores, quisque monetam
Argento cusam, disci formaque Nitentem
Librat in adversam qua ducitur orbita, partem
Perpetuo jactu, sed quae, si forte feratur
Plus justo, cadit in foveam, quae limine summo
Cernitur, at citra septum si tarda fatiscit,
Rejicitur jactus, totus fit and irritus inde.
Ast intra justam datur ut consistere metam
Promovet hic jactum, promotum dimovet ille.
Ad jicit hic alium, sed quem depellere tentat
Nonnullus; Nummos hic obsidet, impetit ille,
Obliquo cursu: Multa cadit iste ruina,
Dum complexa suo funduntur singula nexu,
Et variata vices rerum sors undique versat.
Ludere sic liceat manibus, sic ludere musa,
A studiis fessi quum jam decessimus ambo.
Charissimo, Doctissimo, Jucundissimoque juxtim Amico Thomae Master. Hoc
Epitaph. moerens P. C. E. B. Herbert de Cherbury. 1643.
QUi sis vel fueras, Amate Master,
Lectorem satis haec docere possunt
Quod terris fuit ut molesta vita,
Te dempto, mage sit molesta long,
Quod Coelum fuit ut beata seeds,
Auctum te, mage sit beata seeds.
In terris quid agis fide vacillans?
Si vita probus es, fruere, Lector,
Coelo jam solito beatiore,
Master jam reliquis alacriore.
Vivat in aeternum virtus ac dissita terrae
Lustret, ubique gravi sub Religione refurgens.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 13. lin: penult. for 1668, read 1608. p. 20. l. 18. f. muting r. mutin:
p. 35. l. 7. f. force, r. form: p. 37. l. penult. f. hand r kind: p 39. l. ult.
f. terror r. terrors: p. 41. l. 12. f. imparting r. in parting* p. 47. l. 8. f.
since r. sure: p. 50. l. 11. and 21. f. Melania r. Melaina: p. 62. l. ult. f.
love r. faith: p. 70. l. 22. f. enjoy r. envy: p. 72. l. 18. f. cause r.
caused: p. 76. l. 7. f. foul r. and foul: p. 83. l. 20. f. this r. thy: p. 87.
l. ult. f. nonnunquam r. non unquam: p. 90. l. 1. f. Galbus r. Gallus: p. ibid.
l. 7. f. qui r. qui: p. ibid. l. 8. f. quam r. quum.


