OBJECTIONS AGAINST Edmund Hemming's Proposals
(Now lying before this Honorable House, for Eight Millions of Money, by
laying a Duty on BEDS) Answered, with some REMARKS.
OBjection, That there are not Five Beds to a House one with another, and
therefore the Calculation must fall short.

Answered, That Five Beds to each House, one with another, is as near a
Calculation as can be made, without positive proof; and there being allowod in
the said Proposals above one third part of the Kingdom to pay nothing (as being
deemed poor) then computing the remaining 800000 Houses mentioned in the said
Proposals, which are more large. Now, if some of them have but 2, 3, or 4 Beds
to a House, yet it must be granted, that abundance have 6, 8, 10, 15, 20, or
more, so there can be no great mistake in the Calculation.

Object. That this Duty will fall heavy upon those Persons that depend upon
Lodgers, and they ought to be excused as well as Innkeepers (which are
proposed to pay no more for their Beds then what their Family use.

Answ. Were all private Houses as liable to quarter Soldiers as Inns, it might
be reasonable; but having Power to accept or refuse what Lodgers they please,
there is more reason they should pay; because they receive profit by their
Beds, when others that must pay make no benefit by Lodgings.

Object. This Duty will fall hard upon Day-Labourers, that have a great charge
of Children, and consequently many Beds.

Answ. This is a material Objection, and easily answered, for this Honorable
House may except those Persons, or charge them as they shall see sit.

Object. That to take the Number of Beds in the Kingdom, will occasion Officers
to come into Peoples Houses, which cannot be endured.

Answ. It is not intended, but the Master or Mistress of the House, to give in
their own account of their Beds, to such Officers that will come to their doors
for that purpose: And if any such Person give in a false Account, then to
forfeit -- for each Bed concealed; whereby it may be supposed, no Person will
bazard the forfeiture of -- for wronging the King of Seven or Eight Shillings.

REMARKS.
This Duty may be supposed to reach the Abilities of Men, and may be charged
according to Quality; and so make it a more equal Tax then any heretofore has
been.

This Duty must be allowed to be as good and certain a Fond as can be found
out, being the most general and necessary Commodity in England, for no Man but
would lie upon a Bed or Quilt at Night; and it cannot be supposed, that any
Person would lie without it, on purpose to defraud the King of the Duty.

It is Humbly Conceived, That this Duty will amount to so great a Sum that the
Land might be excused this Year; but if it be thought necessary not wholly to
depend upon this, by reason it may be uncertain, then if (...) the Land pay 2
s. in the pound, (which would make one Million) the Beds would make Six
millions more, allowing Two Millions to fall short in the Calculation.

This Duty, and that upon Land, may be Collected by (...) the same Officers,
but to lay several Duties upon several Commodities, which necessarily must be
if this be not accepted, will create a great Number of Officers, and put the
Kingdom to a vast Expense in Collecting, besides subject to many Frauds.


