

Keep within compass DICK and ROBIN: There is no harm in all this. OR, A
merry Dialogue between two or three merry Cobblers, with diverse Songs full of
Mirth and News, which may very fitly be applied to these times.

By Tho. Herbert.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Lambert, and are to be sold at his shop in
Smithfield, over against Hosier Lane at the sign of the Bunch of Grapes. 1641.

A Dialogue between Dick and Rohin: OR, Two merry country Cobblers.
Dick. WEll met honest Robin, I am glad that it is my fortune once more to
meet with, thee before thou art hanged?


Rob. Why thou whoreson Rascal do thou think ever I make account to be
hanged?


Dick. I if thou be not, I dare to be hanged or thee, if ever thy wise be
pleased.


Rob. When my wife is pleased I think in my conscience the world will be at
an end: 'sfoot I have such a wife as I think the devil has not such another
in his dominion.


Dick. Why, what atles her?


Rob. Prithee Dick tell me, wast thou ever in London?


Dick. Yes that I have, what then?


Rob. And did thou ever hear a thing called Boe. bell ring there?


Dick. Yes that I have by a good token, I once walking in Cheap Side to buy
three yards of black pudding, the Bell made such a humming in my years, as if
a thousand Tinkers had been at work there.


Rob. But did thou sirrah Dick here my Wife: when her tongue is upon the
pin of scolding, (which is almost at all times) thou would think that thou
were a hunting with the Devils Reagles, which were scenting after a City
Pettifogging Lawyer.


Dick. Is she so well verst then in the art of scoulding?


Rob. I dare pawn my ears that Ovid had never better skill in his de Art
Amandi,


Dick. Thou speakst Latin Robin.


Rob. A foolish sentence which I have heard often repeated, which they say in
our vulgar Translation, is the Art of Love.


Dick. I, but is Scoulding her worst fault?


Rob. No, hang her: I caught her not long since lying chick by choule with a
Satin Doublet.


Dick. Thou art in jest art thou not?


Rob. I cannot tell whether I am in jest or no; but I am sure I found her making
me a Cuckold in good earnest. Nay, and I Will tell thee what a trick she served
me too: I like a good honest man, going to make a dis-iunctive betwixt her and
the Satin doublet, she like a whore as she was, very orderly, leapes out of
her bed, and without any mercy at all, snatches up a good handsome
Crab-sticke, and belabored my iacket very handsomely, and when she had done,
she went to bed again unto her Satin doublet, to whom she lay very closely.


Dick. And what did thou do all the while?


Rob. Faith I Will tell thee, when I saw there was no remedy, very fair and
honestly I lighted them with a Candle, for fear least betwixt them they should
make my horns grow crooked.


Dick. Faith, thou had very hard fortune to meet with her.


Rob. Push, I Will tell thee more yet, when we were married first, if I had given
her the least occasion which could be, she would have been up very early in a
morning, when her neighbors did think like a good huswife she had been up
beating of her Bucks, she very courageously was bumbasting of my poor Carcass?


Dick. Can she fight so well?


Rob. Faith for a little while I durst have turned her loose to the strongest
devil in hell for about or two.


Dick. And is she as bad still?


Rob. No, no, (God be thanked) the world's well amended now.


Dick. How did thou do to tame her?


Rob. I Will tell you; at length being resolutely bent with all the might and
power I had, I tide her up to rack and manger, where I kept her so long
fasting, until she swore never to scold, or lift up her hand against me any
more.


Dick. And has she been as good as her word.


Rob. Let her break it when she pleases, I know the way how to feed her
again with the same sauce.


Dick. But leaving of this discourse concerning thy wife: can thou tell me
any news from abroad?


Rob. 'Faith Robin I can tell thee none, but can sing some.


Dick. Prithee do: but be sure thou keep thy tongue within compass.


Rob. Let me alone for that: wherefore open your ears.


Song.
Some say at London there is news.
That great men transport over shoes,
(For which I Am sure the Country rues)
By whole sale.
Some say that Tradesmen are grown sad,
Because of late they were so mad,
To lose the thing which once they had,
True dealing.
And I do also understand,
That Patentees must out of hand,
Be banished from our English land
For nimming.
Dick. Art thou sure Robbin that there is no harm in all this, art thou not
out of compass.


Rob. As sure as I take this Can and drink to thee: I am sure there is no
harm in all this.


Dick. Then prithee lets have the second part to the same tune,


Rob. A Bore I hear of late was caught,
For eating meat and leaving draffe,
He must be better manners taught
By cutting.
Some said in England was the Pope,
But I did ever better hope,
He should be first choakt in a rope,
You know where.

Dick. I drink to thee Robin, I am sure there has been no harm in all this.


Rob. More news I have you yet to tell,
Wherefore I pray you mark it well,
I Will show you what lately befell
To Robin:
He went so much upon the score,
That he could trusted be no more,
Wherefore he ran out of the door
Most swiftly.
From whence he went away to Sea,
Sure he was bitten with a Flea,
For he could not but pity plea,
For cheating.
The Hostess when her guest was gone,
Did wring her hands, and make great moan,
And many times did fetch a groan
For Robin.
O Robin thou art gone, quoth she,
And played the knave thou have with me:
O that I were but now with thee
A scolding.
Then rapt she out an oath and swore,
That she her purse would lend no more
To such as would run on the score,
And cheat her.

Dick. Why but Robin is thy names-sake run away?


Rob. Yes faith Dick that he is, and it is reported, that he fled as swift as
if he had been carried in a Swallows belly.


Dick. Is It possible? I Will tell thee ( Robin) he was as fair a speecht fellow
as one should have heard speak in a Summers day.


Rob. I Will warrant thee he owed more scores than one: or else I know that he
had such friends as would not have suffered him to run away for so small a
trifle as that was.


Dick. It may be so indeed: yet Robin, thou have kept within compass, upon
which I drink to thee, that thou may whet thy whistle: I am sure that there
is no harm in all this.


Rob. Prithee Dick tell me why thou art so cautious of being harmfull?


Dick. So soon as thy song is ended, I Will tell thee,

More news I have yet to relate,
It Is not concerning any State,
But of a Knave and a make bate,
called cutthroat.
His purse is full, and he does wrong;
Alas! he has lived too long:
But now he is in prison strong,
As some say.
He set his neighbors by the ears,
And put them in a thousand fears,
His poor wife she shed brinish tears,
For him knave.
He ruled them like as a Lord,
And bound them with a threefold cord,
And all upon his own accord,
Most basely.
But now he sings in a Cage,
A way to cool his fiery rage,
And some say he must tread a stage,
Called Gallows.

Dick. This was a hundred to one (Robin) Rich, cut throat of our parish.


Rob. The very same.


Dick. 'Sfoot, I knew him very well, he was Constable once was he not?


Rob. Yes that he was.


Dick. He was a devilish domineering fellow: but a pox on him, I have reason
to remember him, through woeful experience.


Rob. Why did he ever do thee any hurt?


Dick. Yes; when he was Constable he made me sit for three whole hours
together with my leg in a Pidgeon hole: look if the very print of the Stocks
be not here still. Well but if the Rope and he be married together, as I live,
I Will not mend a shoe, or boot, but will make holiday on purpose to dance at his
wedding.


Rob. So will many a good fellow more besides thy se^fe: I Will tell thee, our
whole Corporation of Cobblers are resolved that day not to pluck a stitch.


Dick. Have thou any more news to sing, I am sure there has been no harm in
all this?


Rob. A little more, and then I conclude.


Dick. Lets have it.


Rob. As I was walking I did meet
Poor John the Plough-man on his feet,
And as he went he did me greet
Most kindly.
I asked him whither he did go
So fast along? he full of woe,
Did say against a bended bow
To London.
He went to sue for his own right,
For which he wronged was by might,
And forced for to take his flight
From his own.
And now he said was his intent
To go unto the Parliament,
To see if that he could present
His wronger.

Dick. Faith he was the wiser for that, for as I heard the poor man wronged is
sure to be righted there.


Rob. Then by my consent al England should go thither.


Dick. Nay but keep within compass, least harm be found in that.


Rob. You are still so cautions: I pray now my song is ended, show your reason
for it.


Dick. I will because I hear daily many busy fellows talk about that which
nothing concerns them: as that such a Lord has done more than he can answer,
and such a one is committed, and such a one, whilst the Pillory tells him a
tale, he must lend an ear to it: what have such poor shrubs as thou and I to
do with such matters? let every Tub stand upon his own bottom; then may we
talk and spare not, and yet keep within compass.


Rob. Thou say very true.


Dick. Now I have showed you my reason, let us drink the other pot, and sing
thou the other Song, and so we will bequeath our selves to our quiet rest.


Rob. Listen to me then.


You that in quiet mean to sleep,
Be sure your tongues ye silent keep,
For danger in a hole will creep,
By babbling.
Meddle not with state affairs,
Nor those which sit in great men's chaires.
Lest that you chance to lose your ears
For lying.
If we be merry sing a song,
Sweet and merry, not too long,
Drink up your liquor good and strong
In silence.
So shall you sing and sleep secure,
So shall your mirth daily endure;
My counsel for to take be sure,
Good fellows.
And so I bid you all good night:
If that my news it have been slight;
I Will tell you better when it is light,
And Sunshine.
FINIS.

