THE EUNUCH. A TRAGEDY: As it has been Acted with Great Applause.

Written By William Hemmings, Oxon.

Licensed, March 26. 1687. Roger L' Estrange.

LONDON, Printed by J. B. and are to be sold by Randal Tailor near
Stationers' Hall, 1687.

Dramatis Personae.
The Eunuch. The Old King. Clotaire, The Young King. Clovis, His Brother.
Fredegonde, The Queen. Old Brisac. Charles Brisac, His Son. Aphelia, His
Daughter. Landrey, The Queens Favorite. Dumaine, Brother to the Eunuch. Lamot,
His Friend. Burbon, Officers and Soldiers. Lanoue, Officers and Soldiers.
Martile, Officers and Soldiers. Isabel, Ladies Attending the Queen. Julia,
Ladies Attending the Queen. Page. Lackey. Two Watchmen. A Messenger.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Enter Dumaine and Lamot, like two Poor Soldiers. Dumaine. WE are not safe
Lamot, this Bawdy Peace
Begets a War within me, our Swords worn
For Ornament not use, the Drum, and Trumpet
Sing Drunken Carrols, and the Cannon speaks
Health, not Confusion; Helmets turned to Cups;
Our bruised Arms administer discourse
For Tables, and for Tav^rns, where the Soldier
Often finds a pity, not relief: Pl^ tell thee
We are walking Images, the sign of men,
And bear about us nothing but the form
Of man, that is manly.

Lamot. We are c^le indeed.


Dum. Yes my Lamot, and ^he ungrateful Time
As coldly does reward ut, all our Actions,
Attempts of Valor looked into with Eyes
Philmed with Contempt, when ye Gods, ye know,
It is our Gifts they see yet: Oh I am Mad!
The very Bread that lends them Life to scorn us,
Our Bloods have paid for, yet demand a bit,
Or ask of this Old-Sattin-Belly'd-Sir,
Or Madam-Toothless, with her Velvet Sconce,
And you shall hear their rotten Lungs pronounce
The Whip, and Whipstock.

Lamot. Patience, Great Dumaine.


Dum. Lamot, Thou know, I dare be Patient.
With what an equal Temper did I breath,
Under the Frozen Climate of the North,
Where in mine Arms, the Sheets of War, I Slept;
My Bed being feathered with the down of Heaven,
I have lain down a Man, and rise a Snow-Ball;
Yet these have been my Pastimes, which I have born
as willingly, as I received them Nobly.
The Queens black Envy which does still remain,
And peeps through every Limb she bears about her,
Fated to ruin us, does not swell my Gall;
No, nor this willing Beggary I wear
To cloud me from her Malice; by the Gods,
This Bastard-getting-Peace unspirits me,
A greater corrasive to my Active Soul,
Then all past-ills whatever.

Lamot. Cool your Rage,
And be as Wise as Valiant, this is not time
To vent your Passions like a Woman;
A Soldiers Tongue moves only in his Sword.

Dum. You are an expert Tutor and I thank you;
Our Wrongs would add a Spirit to the Dead,
And make them fight our quarrels. Who comes here?
A Flourish, Enter Landrey, 2 or 3 Lords, 2 or 3 Petitioners, who by his
followers are slighted off; they as grived return back again, whilst he passes
on in State. The Minion to our Queen! Oh what a train
The Painted Peacock bears! Death! were I Jove
But only for this Giant.

Lamot. Still intemperate.


Dum. These are the fruits of Peace, upstarts, and slatteries;
Tell me Lamot, can this same Marchant-Man,
Think or Commit a Sin, though never so Horrid
But it is candid over, and from his Vice,
Excessive praise, and plaudites arise.
Were I the King! but he is wilful Blind;
And by the Horns she rocks him fast asleep,
Before the Wanton and hot-Blooded Queen
Should have the License, but to be suspected
With such a Knight of Gingerbred as this is,
A Gilded Flesh-fly; I would lock Her up,
Yea chain the Evil Angel in a Box,
And House her like a Silkworm.

Lamot. Pardon Sir,
The good Old King's unable.

Dum. Worse and Worse,
And therefore must admit an upstart-Page,
Now raised to Honor by his Lawless Lust:
Mayor of the Palace, and the Duke of France;
The next step is the Crown; Oh Peasant State,
When Owls are aired in the Cedars top,
And Daws compare with Eagles.

Lamot. Like to like.
What was our Fredegonde but Golsanda's Maid?
A Princess, (Oh my Soul!) so Heaven'd above her,
That Fredegonde appears a Hell of darkness;
Yet does our Childrick, our old doting King,
Set up a Dishclout against a Diadem.

Dum. 'Twere good the King would Execute them both.


Lamot. Execute them! For his best Blood he dares not;
The no-Chast-Queen is great in Faction,
Followed and Sainted by the Multitude,
Whose judgments she has linked unto her purse,
And rather bought a Love then found it:
She has a working Spirit, an active Brain,
Apt to conceive, and wary in her wills;
Besides, her Sons. (the Pillars of State)
Supports her like an Atlas, where the sits;
And like the Heavens commands our faces beneath her.
She is the greater Light, the King a Star,
Which only glares but through her influence.
A Flourish.
Dum Hark the Thunder of the War; now! out of Tune,
This Peace corrupting all things makes them speak.
What means this most Adulterate noise?

Lamot. Receiv't.
This is a Night of Jubilee, and the King
Solemnly Feasts for his Wars happy success:
Besides his Sons and he are knit again;
We shall have Masks and Revellings to Night.

Dum. Now the Great Gods confound this pick-thank noise;
The Drum and Trumpets are turned flatteries,
And Mars himself a Bawd to grace their Ryots.
Enter the Eunuch with two fair Suits, Hats, Feathers, Rapiers, and all things
answerable, flings them a Letter, and to each a purse of Gold; and after a
little pause departs. What Vision's this? It Is Gold both right and fair;
Sure I dream not.

Lamot. I cannot tell, but he
That takes this from me shall full soon perceive
I do not sleep nor slumber: 'Twas the Eunuch.

Dum. That needs no deciding.


Lamot. What Papers that?
If it be Chorus unto this dumb show,
Read it Dumaine.

Dum. Dasterd Hand, why shak'st thou?
Takes up the Letter and seems to tremble. The Queen!

Lamot. Blasted Dumaine! Give me the Scrowl;
Were she a Fury, nay the Queen of Hell,
Though every word did Thunder I would read it.
He Reads. As ye are Soldiers truly Valiant, we Honor ye; as poor, we pity
ye, and have sent ye that which will render ye as complete Courtiers, as
undaunted Soldiers: Damaine, Lamot, let is suffice we know ye, for our Eye is
Every where, whilst we remember your Works, we shall study to forget your
Parents Injuries: Fear nothing, for your hitherto concealment we will get your
Pardons, and whilst we breath, breath your kind Mistress; if you dare trust us,
and build upon our Fortunes, appear at Court to Night so adorned as shall
become your Honors and our Friends.

Fredegonde.



Dum. How do you relish this? What now Lamot?


Lamot. We Will take the Gracious prosser of the Queen,
She Is Princely vowed our Friend; besides what Ill
Can we expect from her, who might have sent
Her Murdering Minister, and Slain us here
Had she intended foul-play; she is Noble.

Dum. But --


Lamot What but?


Dum. Her Murdered Brothers memory;


Lamot. When he fell, we were too young for Traitors,
Though not for Torments, had we been apprehended:
For in the high displeasure of this Queen
All our Posterity was doomed: Some felt the Wheel,
Some Racked, some Hanged, others Impaled on stakes,
And had not we been then in Wittenburgh,
And past the fury of the Tyrants reach,
We'd added to the Number of the Dead.

Dum. And think you still we shall not?


Lamot By my Life,
It Is Murder to suspect her, we will to Court,
Our Lives are all that we can loose, our fame
No Art can Murder, nor time raze our name.

SCENE. II.
Enter Fredegonde and the Eunuch. Queen. What coference did they maintain with
thee?


Eunuch. None farther then the Language of their Eyes;
They looked on me as if they meant me thanks,
Which their Amazement robbed me of.

Queen. Know thou them?


Eunuch. No, dearest Lady, they appeared to me
Like to the Silent Postures in the Arras,
Only the form of Men with strange Faces.

Queen. Come take them then, they are our Enemies,
Whom I have Angled with that Golden Bait;
Their Parents waded in my Brothers Blood;
For which I Will be revenged of all their kin,
Did they increase as fast as I could kill,
Draws the Curtain and shows a Picture. I Would ever Kill, that they may still
increase.
This Picture drawn by an Italian,
(Which still I keep to whet my Anger on)
Does represent the Murder of my Brother,
For Ravishing this Beauteous piece of Ill;
Points to the Pictures. A Cruel and a Terrible Mistake,
To Murder Clodymer, for Clotair's fact.
For which behold how Fredegond's revenged:
Points still. This old Dumaine and Father to this Maid,
With all his Kindred, Sociates, and Allies
(These brace of wicked ones, and this ravished Whore,
The fair and fatal cause of these events
Only excepted) are here; here in this Picture.
Here Is one bereft of Hands, and this of Tongue,
Finger thy Lute Maria, Sing out Isabel,
Hark Hark, Castrat, the Music of the Spheres,
O ravishing touch! Hark how the others voice
Echoes the Lute, Is It not a Divine softness, Ha, ha, ha!
I do expect they now should rail extremely;
I prithee Scould at me good Isabel,
A little of the Woman; no! Maria,
Within the loathed Circle of mine Eyes
Anchor thy singers; Alas! thy Nails are pared;
Nor has poor Isabel a Tongue to scould with:
Two hory Greybeards in this angle lies,
Will find their way to Hell without their Eyes.
Stabs the Picture. Villains that Killed my Brother, how does this relish thee,
To Execute Men in Pictures? Is It not rare?
Is It not a pastime for the Gods to gaze on?

Eunuch. Were but Crotilda here, and these two Youngsters,
It were a pastime for the Gods to gaze on.

Queen. We find the Eunuch fit for our Employments,
Therefore I will unclapse my Soul to thee;
I Have always found thee Trusty, and I Love thee.

Eunuch. With thanks I ever must acknowledge it,
And lay my Life at my great Mistress's feet
To spend it when she please.

Queen. We need it not
As yet, Castrato, but we may hereafter.
See there is the Platform of great Childricks Death;
And they which must be thought his Murderers,
Our Enemies, and now new Courtiers;
Whom hitherto I have reserved for Policy;
First, that they take away the Guilt from us;
Next, being apprehended, studied Deaths,
The Heads of all our Engineers shall' sit
To invent unheard of Torments for the Slaves;
I long to see them here, here in this frame,
Greeting their Kindreds Bones.

Eunuch. Most Excellent!


Queen. Then I Will commend thee to my Elder Son,
Where thou shall wind into his Secret Thoughts;
As for the Younger Boy let me alone;
And when we have them on the Hip, they shall
Follow their Father unto Hells black Hall.

Eunuch. You are the Goddess of invention.


Queen. Will not this be Brave? Ha! how likest thou it!
Now by this Light I Am taken strangely with thee;
Kiss me, Kiss me, closer Villain:
Fie! what a January Lip thou have,
A pair of Isickles; sure thou have bought
A pair of East Lips of the Chaste Diana's;
Thy Blood's mere Snow broth: Kiss me again.
Now see if you can find these Gallants forth,
And bring them to our presence.
Exit Eunuch, and Enter Landrey. Oh Landrey!
Your Visits have been freer, but I grow Old,
And you Command the Beauties of the time.

Landrey. What means my Noble Mistress? think you the Blood
Runs so degenerate within these Veins,
To stoop to an inferious Embrace,
When I enjoy the best?

Queen. We are Betrayed.
I Will tell thee a good jest Landrey, wilt hear it?
This Morning dressing my Head, my Husband came,
And with his Switch, for he was then to Hunt,
A Gentle stroke he gave me on the back;
My fancy busied then to make me fine,
Supposing it was you that sported so;
Cried, my Landrey, in Story we still find,
The best Knights strike before, and not behind:
The King who always understood too fast,
Quits suddenly my Chamber, what he intends
I cannot guess, unless it be our Deaths,
Which if he speedily perform not, then
Know he shall never, for this Night concludes him;
My Sons I weigh not, thus, they have Rebelled,
And taken Spirit of late to oppose my, will,
And contradict my Pleasure in thy Love,
For which it is not safe that they should Live;
The Kingdoms Heir shall be a Child of thine,
And Kings and Queens shall follow in thy Line.
Oh! are they come, they are welcome, take our word,
Enter Lam, and Dum. very brave, and the Eunuch. A Queens word, Fredegonde bids
ye welcome

Both. Your Highness is as full of Grace as Mercy.


Queen. Rise and follow us, we will be your Guardian,
And Protectress.

Landrey. Madam, who are these?


Queen. Sheep for my Shambles, whom I have fatted up
Only for Slaughter; Things are on foot decreed,
Shall make some Smile to Night, and others Bloed.
Exeunt Omnes.
SCENE III.
Enter Clovis at one Door, Aphelia and a Page with a Light at the Other.
Clovis. My best Mistress, what Angel brought you hither;
For I know my Lions attend your goodness?
Why weep you? Trust me your Eyes seed pearl,
Bracelets for Gods to wear about their Arms.

Aphelia. I am too fond, yet he Swears he Loves me,
I have believed him too, for I have found (...)
A God-like Nature in him, and a Truth (...)
Hitherto Constant. (...)

Clov. Gentlest Sweet, the Cause?


Aphelia. If this should be dissembled, not your Heart,
And having won my Souls affection,
Should on a Judgment more retired to State,
Fling off affection, and leave me in Love,
What Ill-bred-tales the World would make of me?

Clov. That Jelousy I Will strangle, take this Ring
As I that Diamond dazzled by thine Eyes,
Whose Beauties Sickned' cause Eclipsed by thine
Be these the mutual Pledges of our Love,
Our Marriage before our Marriage,
And cursed be they that Separate our Love,
Though France be one, or, what is greater, (...).
Are yor fears over now?

Aphe. I dare no Ill,
And therefore doubt none.

Clov. Hark! The King is coming.

A Flourish.
Enter King, Queen, Clotaire, Landrey, Dumaine, Lamot, Ladies and Attendance;
with the Guard, and Eunuch. King. Approach our Person nearer, for methinks
You Have honest faces, if your Hearts keep touch
To your outward Semblance, you are a pair
Nothing but Death shall force from me.

Queen. Good, Good!
This Physic works.
Aside.
Eunuch. Best Madam, is it done?


Queeen. I my Black Genius, such a fatal Dram
I have administered, will wing his Soul
With expedition to the other World:
His parts Essential, like a wearied Ghost
This Night forsakes his Inn, whence fled and gone,
Who knows where it shall lodge? Mark his looks,
See thou not Death throned in his hollow Eye?
Great Tyrant over Nature: See, observe.

Eunuch. With looks inquisitive I have beheld him,
But can perceive no alteration.

Queen. Thou art a Fool, and want the optique nerves
To pry into my Acts; where I lay trains
Death comes before the grief; The Sulpherous Match
Destroys the Powder with a motion slow
To what I work with: As Antumns aged Leaf,
In youth the prime and glory of the wood,
Not to be graspt by hand, falls with a puff,
And what we could not touch but now, we tread on.
So Childricke.

King. Oh! Lend me thine Arm Dumaine,
Dum. and Lam. both busy about the King. I know not what, but on the sudden,
something --

Qu. How the Nat^-play and buz about the flame
That must Consume them.

Eunuch. Observant Coxcombs!


Clotaire. What Star's Unspher'd and walks upon the Earth,
Making our Night a Noon? methinks her sight
Does Cute Blindness, and lends darkness Light.
Castrate.

Eunuch. Hush! We are observed, My Lord.


Clotaire. What Lady's that?


Eunuch. Which, that French India,
Who Sweats under the Pride she bears about her.
She with whom your Brother holds discourse?

Clotaire. That!


Eun. The Chaste and Beautiful Aphelia.


Clot. Most true, Nature has much befriended her;
Art sure she is Honest?

Eun. Snow's not purer Sir,
No Vestal Virgin at the Altar hears
A Soul so incorrupt, so void of flame
That Is loosly active.

Clot. Eunuch, be our self;
Get but that Lady for me, thou conceivest --

Eun. She dotes upon you Brother, through his means
I Will think upon some Plot.

Clot. Lend me thine Ear.

They Whisper.
King. Deser our pastimes pastimes till another Night,
I am not well at ease.

Dum. Lights for the King.


Eun. Dumaine be wise, thy foot is in the Snare,
Fredegonde hunts, an when she hunts, beware.

Dum. Wel^ warned half armed.


Lam. What says the Slave, Dumaine?


Dum. No matter what, mind we his Majesty.


Queen. My Royal Husband.


King. There is an Aetna in me,
The Air I draw returns illuminate.
Philosophy, thy Element of fire's here.

Clot. and Clov. How fares our Father?


King. Oh I Burn!
Fire, Vesuvius, Aetna, Vesuvius. --.

Queen. His grace grows worse and worse, O my grieved Heart!
Support him Gently Friends, Gently, Gently.

Exit. Om. ma. Eu. and Aphelia. Aphe. I credit your report and will obey,
His mind is Honorable, like his Parentage,
His Single name has armed me, pray lead on.
A Screch within of all together Oh! Oh! Oh!
Eun. Hark Lady! There was a fearful sound,
I sear the King's departed, let us withdraw.

Exeunt. SCENE IV.
Enter Lamot, and the Guard. Lamot. O woe! woe! woe!


Clot. Horror and Death!

Enter Clotaire.
Clov. O dismal, fatal Hour! Enter Clovis.


Enter Queen, Dumaine, Landrey, Ladies, and the rest of the Guard. Queen. With
Childrick, end the World.


Dum. Have Patience gentle Queen.


Queen. Stand off,
Preach Patience to the Sea, when the rude Wind
Swells her ambitious Billows above the Clouds;
And if thou Tutorest them to Peace and Silence,
I Will be as Calm as they.

Clot. The Treason here,
And not the Traitor, quite confounds my Senses,

Queen. Ignorance, dark as Hell; doubt ye the Traitors
I Have brought a pair of Vipers to the Court,
Warmed and relieved them with a sting to Kill us,
Who could be author of this deed but they?
His new Bosomed Friends have slain him. --

Clot. Our Guard,
Lay Hands upon the Traitors.

Dum. O Lamot!
We are betrayed, basely beset with Snares.
They fight back to back against the Gu. and seape.
Lam. Justice fight thou my cause with thine own Sword.


Qu. O Villains! would you let them escape? two Men
To pass the strength of our undaunted Guard;
This made my Soul, this grates my very Gall

King. Make after them, and bring them back again;
Or by my Fathers Soul ye breath your last
Still art thou here Aphelia? Ha! I may
Use my Commanding Power now -- Lead on;
Come Mother, Brother, Friends, pray let us go.
King never received a Crown so full of woe.
Exeunt Omnes.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter Old Brissac and his Page, with a Taper. Brissac. IS she not come from
Court yet?


Page. No my Lord.
I lost her midst the amazed multitude;
Where doubtless frighted with the sudden horror,
She has with other beauties of the Court
Retired her self until the Morning Star.

Bris. It Is very likely so! Yet do ye hear,
Call up your Fellows; I Will not to Bed to Night,
Exit Page, and Enter presently with 2 Serving-men. My thoughts are full of
Tempest, dismal thinkings;
Where is my Son? Why went He not to Court?
Perhaps some Sacrilegious hands have seized on her;
Courts are no Sanctuaries, she is no Vestal:
May be she is safe, then why returns she not?
Why sends she not glad Messengers of Health!
No! No! She Is lost, and I undone for ever!
Run to the Court, they move not, why so fast?
Let me deliberate; that were to give
The Courtiers notice I have lost my Daughter,
Whom they will then suspect, and call her fame
Into an Ill construction; No! no! no!
O my poor Daughter, my Aphelia!
Enter Charles Brissac and Clovis Muffled in his Cloak. Oh Sir you are welcome,
where is your Sister,
I must have her Sirrah and I will,
Where is she, Charles, where is she?

Char. My Honored Father, --


Bris. Tut, Tut, Honor me no Honor,
Nor Father me no Father!
Where i^ your Sister, Sirrah?

Charles. My Sister!


Bris. Your Sister!


Charles. Within Sir, otherwise this Gentleman
Has lost his Labor; he is come to Visit her.

Bris. Hoyday, Hoyday, Hoyday! to Visit her?
Plots, Plots, mere fetches; to Visit her!
What at the dead of Night? when the whole World
Is Sunk in slumber, and our Lusty Youth,
As quiet as the Grave; to Visit her!
O most ridiculous! to Visit her!
Pray Gentleman consider, does your Sister keep
Times so Preposterous for Visits in?
Makes she a day of Night; or has she been breed
As loose as Lais, to love Night-Courtings?
Do not distract me thus, to Visit her!

Char. Pray Sir collect your self, this Gentleman
Even at that Horrid point where the King, fell --

Bris. Why look you now, there is more Mischief toward;
What a World is this?

Char. Saw a Ring drop off my Sisters singer,
Which he had then delivered, but that fright
Which renders men forgetful, made him so;
But knowing where she lived, (so he protests)
He would not Sleep until it were delivered.

Bris. Pray let me see the Ring; Yes it was hers,
And she would say, she would never part with it
But when she meant to Wed, if you have Married her
Or have her promise rivited to yours,
Tell me but where she is, I Will be content,
For I in losing her, have lost my self.

Clov. O my Prophetique Soul, then it is no Idle fear.


Char. How! The Monsieur, what makes he here?


Clov. There Is something whispers me, go not to Bed,
Go not to Bed till thou have found her out:
Be thou my Gonious, or what Powers else,
Suggesting lawful things I will obey thee.
Sleep ever-waking Envy and Mistrust,
Yet things that never knew what Slumber meant;
Ghosts keep your Beds, ye Sentinels of Night,
Goblins and Specters do not walk your round,
A general Lethargy Seize on this Hour,
Yet I alone the Watchman of this Night,
Will wake in spite of Fate. Argus thine Eyes
To find Aphelia and her Miseries.

Exit. Bris. Pretty, in good sadness, wondrous pretty,
Is he in earnest?

Char. Sure he dissembles not.
I little dreamt when I did let him In,
What Person grac^d our Threshold.

Bris. Ha Sirrah!
What a Girl's this to be out of the way?
He Is in Love that is certain, Let me see.
When I was first a Lover as he is,
I Would just such cold fegaries in my Brain,
Such Midnight madness. This puling Baggage
May lose her self for ever, and her Fortunes,
For this Hours absence, go, be gone,
Follow his Royal Person, Comfort him,
Tell him my Daughter will again be found,
And so good Angels grant we meet with her.

Exe. one at one door and the other at the other. SCENE II.
Enter Eunuch lighting Aphelia. Aphe. Into what Laberinth do you lead me Sir?
What perplexed by-ways? I should fear,
Had you not used his Name, which is to me
A Strengh against Terror; and himself so good,
Occasion cannot vary, nor the Night,
Youth nor his wild desire; Otherwise
A Si^^nt Sorrow from mine Eyes would steal,
And tell s^d Stories for me.

Eunu. Do not fear,
You are too tender of your Honor, Lady,
Too full of agaish trembling; the Noble Prince
Is as December frosty in desire,
Save what is Lawful, he not owns that cheat,
Which were you Snow, would thew a tear from you.

Aphe. This is the place appointed.


Eunu. I Will go call him,
In the mean time, please you to rest your self,
Here is a Little Book will bear you Company
Gives her a book, she sits down and reads. 'Till I return, which will be
suddenly
Now Eunuch must the Artumie of Wit,
From the dull Mixture of these leaden Brains
Extract the Elixir of pure Villainy.
Hither I Will send the King, not that I mean
To give him leave to cool his burning Lust,
For Clovis shall prevent him in the Fact;
And thus I shall Endear my self to both:
Clovis Enraged perhaps will kill the King,
Or by the King will perish; if both fall,
Or either, both ways makes for me.
The Queen as rootedly does hate her Sons,
As I her Ladyship; to see this fray
She must be brought by me. It shall be so;
Her breath will stir in them confused Storms,
In midst of whose wild rage, the Court will seem
A G^lgoth^e of Mischief; for her sake
I Will say I set on foot this hopeful brawl,
Whilst she will Hug, and Kiss me for the same:
Thus on all sides, the Eunuch will play foul,
Exit. And as his face is black, he will have his Soul.

Aphe. Poor ravished Philomel, thy lot was ill
She leaves reading. To meet that Violence in a Brother,
Which I in a Stranger doubt: Yet methinks
I am too Confident, for I feel my heart
Burdened with something ominous; these men,
Are things of Subtle Nature, and their Oaths
Unconstant as themselves -- Let me proceed.

Clot. Methinks I stand like Tarquin in that Night
Enter Clo. Mussled. When he defiled the Chastity of Rome,
Doubtful of what to do, and like a Thief
I take each noise for an Officer.
Though I do know it is a deed of Death,
Condemned for Torments in the other World,
Such tempting sweetness dwells on every Limb,
That I must venture my Essential parts
For the fruition of a moments Lust:
Oh Pleasure dearly bought.

Aphe. Clovis may prove unkind, alack why not?
He Is but a man. Say he should offer foul,
The Evil Counsel of a Secret Place,
and Night his Friend, may out-tempt his will:
I dare not stand the Hazard, Guide me Light
To some Untrodden Place, where poor I may,
Wear out the Night with sighs till it be day.

Clot. I must be bold and resolute; Sweet Maid,
He meets her. Fair, Virtuous Damsel, Hail.

Aphe. What man art thou,
That do thy Countenance bury in thy Cloak,
And hidest they face from Darkness and the Night?
If thine intents deserve a Musler too,
And that thy thoughts dare non allow themselves.
Withdraw, and Act them not, what art thou? speak,
And wherefore came thou hither?

Clot. Would thou know?
I came to find one Beautiful as thou,
And am a man willing to please a Woman.
Nay, nay, you must not leave mo thus.
She profers to go off.
Aphe. Must not.


Clot. No, must not, it is I that speaks it Lady.


Aphe. I know thee not.


Cloth. But I must you, yes and the right way too,
Which is the acquaintance surest.

Aphe. Help, Help, Help!


Clot. Nay, nay, nay, none of your Prick-Songs Lady,
If you rise a Note, or beat the Air with Clamor,
You see your Death.
Draws his Dagger
Aphe. What Violence is this?
Why do you threaten War, fright my soft peace
With most ungentle Steel, what have I done
Dangerous, or am like to do? why do you wrack me thus?
pulls her along. Mine Arms are Guilty of no crime, do not torment 'em,
My Hands and they have joined in Prayer together
For mankind that is Holy; if in that Act
They have not Prayed for you, mend and be good,
The fault is none of theirs.

Clot. You guess my Mind
What Earthquake shakes you thu?
She trembles as ama^ed. Come do not seem more Holy then you are,
I know your Heart.

Aphe. Let your Dagger too, Noble Sir strike home,
And Sacrifice Soul to Chastity,
As white and spotless as her Innocence

Clot. This is not the way. -- Know you me Beauty?

^
Aphe. The King!


Clot. The same, Rise up and put off sear.


Aphe. I dare not sear, it is Treason to suspect
My King can think an Ill, worse to Act it:
I know you are God like good, and have but tried
How far weak Woman durst be Virtuous

Clot. Pretty Simplicity, thou art deceived:
Thy Wit as well as Beauty wounds me, and thy To^^^
In pleading for thee, pleads against thy self:
It is thy Virtue moves me, and thy Good,
Tempts me to Acts of Evil: were thou bad,
Or loose in thy desires, I could stand
And only Gaze, not Surfeit on thy Beauty;
But as thou art, let me not see thy face,
I Am desperate grown in Ill, and must enjoy
thee, or not thee thy Life.

Aphe. I offer it.
You are my King and may Command my Life,
My will to Sin you cannot, you may force
Unsancted deeds upon me, Spot my fame,
And make my Body suffer, not my mind.
When you have done this irreligious deed,
What Trophy, or what Triumph will it bring,
More then a living Scorn upon your Name?
Do not believe this deed can lie concealed,
For Kings appear when they are Throned in Sin,
Like to prodigious Creatures in the Air,
At which all Tongues are mute, all Eyes do stare.
Is It not a Single Ill which you commit:
What in the Subject is a pe^ty fault
Monsters your Actions, and's a soul offense:
You give your Subjects License to offend
When you do teach them how.
Enter Clovis and Charles.
Clot. Good, Ill applied:
Aside. I will endure no longer, come along,
Or by the curious Spinstry of thy Head,
Which Nature's cunning'st singer twisted out,
I Will drag thee to my Coach: Tempt not my fury.

Clov. Can I endure this; O my Salt Blood
Leap from my Bosom, up into the Air.
Unhand me Charles, and render me my self,
Lest I forget my self on thee.

Char. Great Prince,
Remember it is your Brother and the King.

Clov. Oh that I could forget it, and shake off
Duty at once, and Consanguinity,
That like a Whirlwind I might rush upon him,
And bear him to Destruction -- Monster of men,
Thou King of Darkness, down unto thy Hell,
I have a Spell will lay thee, Honesty,
And this abused Goodness: Is It not enough
That thou have wronged Crotilda, ravished a Maid
A Virgin of that Purity of Life,
Might Saint Her here on Earth; but will thou add
Unto thy First a Second Violence?
The Gods must not forgive!

Clot. I despise thee;
If thou would gain our Love, be a Brother,
And aid me in my longings.

Clov. Be a man;
And shake a Nature off, that needs must damn thee:
O set a Period to Sins Progress here,
Proceed not in these Courses, lest you grow
As Great in Sin as Scepter.

Clot. Traitor, Boy!
Thy fate moves in those words.

Clov. Is It even so;
Then Guard thy self our King, for I am quick
As Lightning, or the thought that Executes.

Char. Hold hold, my Lord, forbear; Call in more aid,
Ring out the Alarum-Bell, Call up the Court,
Bestir thee Eunuch, whilst interpose
My Body to the fury of the Storm.

Exit Eun. Alarum-Bell. Qu. What means this sudden outcry? Oh my Sons!
Hold, Hold! Part them good Gentlemen.
Ent. Qu. and Ladys Guard, Landrey
Clot. Mother you are a trouble, stand from mine Arm,
Let me cut off Rebellion in the Spring,
Lest it beget a harvest that will prove
Fruitful in Treason, Braved by a Subjects hand.

Qu. Though Nature by Precedence of Birth,
Made thee his King, it therefore follows not
His Murderer; wherein is our Clo^^^r^
Greater then Clovis? Know, the self-same Blood
That Spirits thee, makes him as Valiant,
The difference lies in Anno Domini.

Eun. Accurate Mischief, Fluent Villainy.

Aside.
Qu. I grant thou art his Elder; by which Law
Thou art born his Subject, not his Equal, Clovis;
For Clotaire is thy King, and Subjects hands,
Without the deep and dangerous Trayto^^ Name,
May not advance against their Sovereign, Head.

Clot. Neither shall his without correction:
Upon him Slaves.

Qu. Hold, I Command ye hold.
O Clotaire, thou art of a Valiant Soul,
And will thou basely thus beset thy Brother?
Fear Argues spirits most degenerate,
And that thou searest the advantage argues i^
Oh set not on thy Slaves; if he must dye,
Let thy hand Sacrifice, not Butcher him.

Clot. That Argument Sounds harsh; shall Clotaire, fear?


Eun. Exquisite Philter, Poison to the height.

Aside.
Clov. Sacrifice me, it is not in his Power.


Qu. We hope so Clovis; yet thy Brother King,
Is as an Earthly-God, his Will, his Law,
His Power uncircumscrib'd, unlimited,
For Kings have will as uncontrolled as fate,
And Majesty can look a Subject dead.

Clov. How look me Dead? I do not fear his frown^.


Qu. I Grant thee as great a Basaliske as he;
As he is meetly man: but as thy King,
Divinity does prop him; he stands sure
That builds on that Foundation: Yet I know
Thy Sword's as Sharp as his, and where it lights
Imprints as much of fate, thine Arm as strong,
Thy Spirit as daring, and thy will as prompt
To any Action that may right a man.

Clot. He is your Darling, you do well to praise him;
When I have slain him, Write his Epitaph.

Clov. My Epitaph, this Pen of Steel shall first,
Write on thy Heart, thine end.

Eu. It Operates.
The Venomed Potion of a Woman's Tongue
Is more sublimed then Mercury.

Clot. Our Guard
That let us a Traitor pull me by the heard:
They fall upon him with th^r Halberts and he is Slain. Cut him to pieces
Rascals.

Qu. O my Son!
Villain, thy Hands have made these holes, for which
The winged Vengeance of a Mothers Curse
Subtler in Operation then Lightning,
Strike through thy Body every Limb a Death.

Eu. How cunningly she spits her Poison forth,
I know her Soul is Light, she is glad he is Dead,
And joys in the opportunity to Curse the killer;
For which she gains the name of Pious Mother:
Here Is pretty Woman Villain, dissimulation.

Aph. If they have slain him, wherefore do I Live?
O my swoln'n Heart.

Clot. Bear hence these Corpse, withal
Remove that Siren from our wandering Eyes,
Landrey and 2 or 3 Lords more seem to Solicit for Aph. And Cage her in a
Dungeon, hence begone,
Bear her to Prison, reason not the Cause
A Kings Prerogative's above his Laws.

Exit. Aph. Be merciful, and lead to Death, away;
Since he is gone, it is to Dye, to stay.

Exeunt Omnes, manen^ Queen, Landrey, Eun. Qu. Now we begin to slourish, this
black Night
Is only lighted by our stars, that smile
Upon these actions, and rejoice to see
Thee our sole Favousite so near a Crown:
But tell me Landrey, how did I play the Mother?
Did not I present a Niobe, in passion,
Did thou not fear an Inundation.
A deluge of Salt Rhume?

Land. You had no costive Eye, that I dare say,
For certainly you wept.

Qu. Yes; as a good Actor in a Play would do,
Whose fancy works as if he waking dreamt
So strongly on the object that it Copes with,
Shaping realities from Mockeries;
And so the Queen did weep: By this good Light
I think I could become the Stage as well
As any she that sells her Breath in public.
Come shall we Act Landrey?

Land. Act great Lady;
What Play shall we Enact?

Qu. Dull Landrey,
Nothing that is new, Old Plays you know are best:
Eunuch is our Bed ready.

Eu. Great Queen it is.


Qu. Come then my Joy to Bed, where we will sport,
And laugh at Death, which Triumphs in the Court.

Exeunt Mane^ Eunuch. Eu. Go sleep your last; I Will straight unto the King,
And he shall take them in the very Act;
And then to Cover my Discovery
I Will set on fire the Queens Bedchamber,
That so I may disturb them more secure,
And yet the Plot not mine: I Will tell the King
Unless he present Help, his Mother burns.
About is then, this is a happy Night;
The more it works their Woe, more's my delight

Exit. ACT III.
SCENE I.
Enter the King and Eunuch. Eun. LOok how it flames! I fear some Treachery;
Beat at her Chamber Door, cry it aloud,
Knocks at the Door. And let your Voice be Thunder to this Lightning.
Cry Fire, Fire, Fire! The Court is all a Hot-house.
Fire, Fire, Fire!

Clot. Great Queen, Royal Mother, open your door,
Lest you do sleep for ever, Mother awake.
The God of sleep lies heavy on her Eyes.
Force open the door, Fire, Fire, Fire!
again.
Eun. It Is fortified against strength, you must call louder.

Clot. Mother, Queen, Mother, awake, awake!
Your sleep was never liker death then now:
Lady, Great Princes, Fire, Fire, Fire!
again.
Enter Queen above in Night attire and Landrey. Qu. What Saucy Groom
Exit Eunuch. Beats our offenceless doors thus daringly,
He Would better roused a sleeping Lioness,
Then thus to have broke our slumbers.

Clot. Look,
The Fire will give you Light, it is I your Son;
Ely from that Chamber, else you are but dead,
Your Court is all a bonefire.

Qu. Let it burn.
I Have lost my Credit everlastingly,
aside. I will not move a-foot.
aloud.
Clot. You must be forced then.
beats at the door.
Land. Where are your wits now in necessity,
Softly. We shall be taken, and you shamed for ever;
Bethink, Bethink your self.

Qu. I have't, it shall be so; there put on that,
Appearing in his Brothers Warlike Shape.
Thou will amaze, and so pass by him safely.
aside. Do not appear to me, I did not wound thee;
aloud. Seek out the Beds of those that caused thy death,
And howl to them thy pittfull Complaint.

Clot. Whom do you hold discourse with, with the Air?
Bethink your self, this is not time to dally.

Qu. Oh, my Son, such horrid apparitions, full of dread have I beheld, have
quite unwitted me:
Your Brothers Ghost, fearfully terrible,
Has thr^^^ ^his dismal night appeared to me:
His Wou^^^ did bleed, just as our Clotaire caused them,
To those (...) points, and calls Aphelia
To bear (...) companyi' the other World,
Or else (...) ^ightly haunt us in our sleeps;
Thrice d^^be ^^y Revenge, and with that word
Sprang (...) the roof, which now stands bare to Heaven,
Where (...) did rain down fire which here we see.

Clot. Behold in comes.


Enter Landrey in Armor. Qu. Oh fear it not my Son.


Clot. What art thou that usurp'st this dead of night
In me^tal like the ai^? Why art thou sent
To cast a horror on me? If thy Soul
Walks unrevenged, and the grim Ferry-man
Deny thy passage, we will perform thy rights;
Oh do not wound me with such piteous signs
Lest I dissolve to air, and like thy self
Astright fool-Mortals: If thou desire
Aphelia's death, to appease thy troubled Soul,
Make some consenting sign and so depart,
Thy sight afflicts my Soul.

Exit Landrey. Enter Queen. Qu. How fares our Son?


Clot. Oh I am full of faintings, nothing but Aphelia?


Qu. She must dye, you see it is requisite.


Clot. Would he had asked my life first.


Enter Eunuch. Qu. Why should you be so fond upon a Woman,


Clot. Woman's the least part in her, she is all goddess.


Qu. 'Twas your offer;
Remember there is no jesting with the gods.

Eu. What might this mean? ha? where are my brains?

Clot. I had forgot my self, your pardon Mother:
Bear her from me this Jewel, I esteem
gives her a Jewel. Equal with life, it was my Brothers Picture;
And with it, this, that she prepare to dye
Tell her, and if you can be moved to sorrow
Express it in your tears, it is not I
Pronounce this fatal Sentence against her life,
But the hid will, and Providence of Heaven;
Against the which to be offended, were
As impious as not obey. Castrato stay,
Exeunt ^nines manet Eunuch who profers to go out. And with thy Council cure
thy dying Prince,
Thou art my bosom, Eunuch, and to thee
I dare unclasp my Soul: What Is to be done,
This is a damned Spirit I have seen
And comes to work my Ruin.

Eu. What Spirit?


Clot. My Brothers Spirit in Arms, here it came forth,
Here, from my Mothers Chamber as I knocked.

Eu. Was it in Armor said you? what in Armor?


Clot. Yes in the Armor he was used to wear
When we have run at Tilt, 'till our cleft Spears
Have with their splinters scared the Element.

Eu. That Armor as I well remember, I did leave
In the Queens Bedchamber, as yesterday
After the Triumphs and the Turnements,
Having unbrac't the Prince: it is even so.
Why this is a ridiculous Passion.

Clot. My state requires thy tears, and not thy mirth.


Eu. The Devil came from your Mothers Chamber Sir,
She has a Circle which can raise a Spirit,
A Mars in Armor too; she is a Venus,
And through your License Landrey is no Eunuch.

Clot. What killing sense thou utterst,
There Is something in it I would understand
And yet I dare not. Landrey! how know thou this?

Eu. Since I have gone so far I Will tell you.
I looked in at the Keyhole, and I saw
Him in your Mothers Arms, as sportingly
As e're I saw your Father.

Clot. Thou have shot Poison through me:
False with Landrey her sometime-Page!

Eu. Even with the same.


Clot. It Is not impossible,
My Mother always had a scanted fame,
aside. His thoughts to have been mine: I am distracted.
Was he the fearful Vision that I saw?

Eu. Upon my life he was.


Clot. But wherefore would they have Aphelia dye?


Eu. There lies the Mystery,
They fear you will accept her as your Queen,
And frustrate their intents, who but expect
Your hoped for death, that they might so become
(What now you would cross) Lawfully Man and Wife
And Govern in your Seak.

Clot. This carries show of truth, or is it a lie
Well shaddow'd by a Slave? I cannot tell;
My Mother certainly is not so bad,
It is a sin to think it: Hence, avoid my sight,
Thou sower of debate, thy Seeds are strow'd
On steril ground, and therefore ill bestowed.
Exit.
Eu. Is It even so? work and about my brain
I Am lost for ever if not close again.
Exit.
SCENE II.
Enter Dumaine, Martel, Burbon, Lanoue. Lanoue. Are all your Troops well
furnished against resistance?
Are your men bold and daring? resolute
To run your hazard? indifferent rich, not poor
That only fight for Bread? such often betrary
The sinews of a well-knit Plot for gain,
When these as well fight to desend as win.

Dum. Noble Lanoue;
Mine know, nor fear, nor death; Souls of that fire
They Will catch the Bullet flying, scale a Wall
Battled with Enemy, stand Breaches, laugh
The Thunder of the Canon, call it Music
Fitter a Ladies Chamber then the Field;
When over their heads the Element is scaled,
Darkened with Darts, they will sight under the shade,
And ask no other roof to hide their heads in;
They fear not Jove, and had the Giants been
But half so spirited they had dethroned him.

Lan. They Are Soldiers fit to sack a Kingdom then,
And share the spoils between them.

Bur. Were it come to that sport once --


Mar. Burbone it must, or some of us must fall.


Lan. Where shall we first attempt?


Dum. The Palace.


Burb. I say no, it is dangerous.


Dum. It is the safest course.


Mart. Believe it not, for it is full of hazard.


Dum. So is the general enterprise in hand.


Mart. But this of certain ruin,


Lan. Give us a reason why you would invade
The Palace first, and we are satisfied.

Dum. Now you speak like your self:
Then understand, Lamot lives still at Court
Disguised like a poor Chyrurgeon,
To whom the Prince being delievered
to be Embalmed and Bowel'd, finding life
Yet in his Corpse, which may he is very Skillfull;
Has balsom'd all his wounds and cured him.

Lan. And what of this? This makes against us quite.


Dum. I did but even now receive this letter,
Which constancy affirms it from himself.
He says it is not known in Court, the Prince to live
gives Lan. For diverse reasons best known to themselves,
And herein does require of secresy;
Therefore dear friend divulge it not.

Lan. He says the Princes supposed funeral
This day is solemnized with greatest pomp,
And that Aphelia dies a sacrifice,
That hour he is buried, on his Hearse:
What if we made attempt to save the Virgin?

Dum. That must not be, better she fall alone
Then all of us together; and now best Friends,
Let Us behave us bravely; it is no base act
We undertake, but our whole Countries freedom
From slavery and bondage, Men of worth stand bare
To Pages, and gilt butterflies, besides the Queen
Will grave us all, rather then want sport
In spilling Humane blood; come let us withdraw,
And lay the Platform of this mighty work:
My Soul sits smiling in me I Divine,
Though now it lowre we shall see Sun will shine.
Drum.
SCENE III.
Enter Clovis, and Lamot disguised like a Chyrurgeon. Recorders. Clov.
Strephon, for so thou nam'st thy self, thou'st made
Thy Prince thy Subject, by this timely cure,
This is the hour I must be buried living,
And with me the Fair Aphelia, Strephon
Is it so?

Lamot. Nay this the very Minute,
Hark, I hear them coming --
a dead March within.
Clov. Lend me thy Cloak
Here we will observe the Mourners.

Recorders. Enter King, Fredegond, and attendance, and Eunuch at one door in
Mourning as after the C^p^ of Clovis; at the other Aphelia led by two boys, a
Headsman before as to Sacrifice, all in White, the Hearse is set down between
both the Companies, Aphelia we pin^ at one End, and the King at the other, who
after a little pause speaks as follows; after these Old Brissac weeping.
Clot. Thou Royal load of Honor, burden of grace,
Fitting an Atlas Shoulder, which he groans
More then the Spheres and Sweats thy weight not theirs;
Let me bedew thy Hearse with pious tears,
(Balm to thy wounds) repenting ones;
Behold this spotless sacrifice, a virgin,
As pure in thought as vesture, an oblation
To ransom Jove and Heaven had they been taken,
And so we yield her up.
gives her to the Headsman.
Bris. Oh my good Lord,
This is conspiracy against an old man's life,
Have you no other way to murder me
But to begin with Her? Why must she dye?
Because she is fair? or that --

Clot. Brissac, peace:


Clov. What Pagent's this?

the King takes the Sword from the Headsman.
Lam. Contain your self
You may prevent the danger when you please.

Clot. Behold the Conquest of thine eyes Aphelia,
France at thy foot, tread on his Royalty,
Or if thy Nature knows not to forgive;
the King kneels and lays the Sword at Aphelia's feet. Which to believe were
impious, take this Sword
Send me a willing, willing sacrifice,
To Appease the troubled spirit of this love.

Qu. O Eunuch that she would take him at his word.

aside.
Clot. I find (...) speaking pity in thine eyes,
Which thence will drop upon thy gentle tongue
And cry, In peace long live my Sovereign.

Aphe. Long live Clotaire, long live my Sovereign.


Clot. The Motions of the Spheres move in that tongue:
Turn all your Sables into suits of Joy,
Your dirges into sprightfull wedding airs:
Why looks our Court so sad, is this a time
To anchor your aspects unto the earth?
By my blessed self he is a traitor to the height
That does not straight Salute her as his Queen.
they sting off their Mourning Cloaks.
Om. Long live Aphelia, Queen of France, and us.


La. Do you hear this? what are you Planet-struck? Glovis, Prince, Monsieur.

the Cardinal contracts them.
Clot. Cardinal --


Lam. Now, now, prevent them yet, are you a stone?
Have you a working Pulse? O Statue-Prince
Thou art undone for ever.

Clov. Where am I?
Awake! for ever rather let me sleep:
Is this a Funeral? oh that I were a Hearse,
discloses himself. And not the mock of what is Pageanted.

Clot. Amazement quite confounds us, Clovis alive!


Clov. Oh that in nature I could find an art
Could teach me to forget, I ever loved
This, her great masterpiece. Oh well built frame
why do thou harbor such unhallowed ghests
To house within thy bosom, Perjury?
If that our Vows are registered in heaven
Why are they broke on earth? Aphelia
This was a hasty match, the subtle air
Has not yet cooled the breath, with which thou swor'st
Thy self into my soul; and on thy cheeks
The print and pathway of those tears remain
That wooed me to believe so: Fly me not,
I am no Spirit, touch my active pulse
And thou shall find it make such harmony
As youth and health enjoy.

Eu. The Queen, she faints.


Clov. Is there a god left so propitious
To rid me of these fears? still lot her sleep;
For if she wake (O King) she will appear
Too Monstrous a specter for frail Eyes
To see, and keep her Senses.

Lamot. Are you Mad?


Clov. Nothing so happy, Strephon, I would I were.
In times Swift-progress, I despair the hour
That brings such comfort with it; I should then
Forget that ever she was pleasing to me,
I should no more remember she would sit
And sing mo into Dreams of Paradise,
Never more hang about her Ivory Neck
Believing such a one Diana was;
Never more dote she breaths Arabia,
Or Kiss her Corral Lip into a paleness.

Clot. Clovis what is past we are content to think
It was spoken by our Brother, and not our Subject,

Clov. I had forgot my self; yet well remember
Yon Gorgon has Transformed me into Stone,
And since that time my Language has been harsh,
My words too heavy for my tongue, too earthly;
I was not horn so; Trust me Aphelia
Before I was possessed with these black thoughts
I could sit by thy side, and rest my head
Upon the rising pillows of thy Breast
Whose natural sweetness would invite mine eyes
To sink in pleasing slumbers, wake and kiss
The Rose-bods that afforded me such bliss.
But thou art now a General Disease
That catest into my Marrow, turn'st my blood
And make my Veins run Poison, that each sense
Groans at the alteration. Am I the Monsieur?
Does Clovis talk his sorrows and not Act?
Oh man be womanized; were thou not mine
How comes it thou art his?

Clot. You have done ill,
And must be taught so; you Capitulate
Not with your equal, Clovis she is thy Queen.

Clov. Upon my Knees I do acknowledge her,
Queen of my thoughts, and my affections,
O pardon me if my ill tutored tongue
Has forfeited my Head; if not, behold
Before the Sacred Altar of your Feet
I lie a willing Sacrifice.

Aph. Arise:
And henceforth C^^nis thus instruct thy Soul;
There he^ a depth in face, which earthly eyes
May faintly look into but cannot f^those
T^^^^ had my Vow 'till death to (...) thy Wise,
You (...)
A^^^ (...) bestowed.
^
A long-farewell to Love; thus I do break
breaks a Ring Your Pledge of broken faith. And with this Kiss,
The last that ever Clovis must print there
Un-kiss that Kiss which sealed it on thy Lips:
Ye Powers ye are unjust, for her wild breath
(That has the Sacred tie of Contract broken)
Is still the same Arabia that it was.
Nay I have done; beware of Jelousy;
I would not have you nourish jelous thoughts,
Though she has broke her says to me, to you
Against her Reputation, she will be true;
Farewell my first Love Lost, I Will choose to have
No Wi^e till death shall wed me to my Grave,
Come Streph^n, come, and teach me how to dye,
That gav'st me Li^e so unadvisedly.

Exeunt Clov. and Lam. Clot. 'T was mine I sent it to Aphelia;
the King here beholds in Landreys Hat the J^wel he sent by his Mother to
Aphelia. Mother I Have found your ^inion; but no more,
The time's not ripe: something I must do --

Qu. Call back the Monsieur, let him not
Depart so full of grief.

Clot. Mother content your self;
Let Clovis that way go, this way will we,
He Is great with grief, we with felicity.

Exeunt omnes mauent Qu. and Bunuch. Qu. Mischief grows lean Castrato, all our
Plots
Turn head upon themselves; my brain's grown weak
And in this Globe the Policy's not lest
To kill a Worm unseen; I am undone
And all my Plots discovered:

Eunuch. This is Strange.
Some commick devil crosses our designs,
How else should he revive? or you, prepared,
Nay, in the arms of Landrey, when desire
Had made you all a Venus, meet events
So barren in their expectations?

Qu. There lies the grief Castrato; had the Court
(So I had quenched these burning flames)
Been buried in her cinders I had not car^d.

Eu. But yet Landreys escape does qualify
The nonperformance.

Qu. That sits smiling here:
It set my brains upon the ten^ors, Eunuch,
Was It not a rare device?

Eu. And was not I
As fortunate to leave that Armor there?
But now what is to be done?

Qu. My dull Aetiope
I will instruct thy blackness, learn to know
My reputation's sickned, and my fame
Is looked into with narrow eyes at Court,
Therefore it is thus decreed: I will remove
And sequester my self from Company.

Eu. Good.


Qu. Thou know where Childrick kept his Concubine
To none discovered but thy self and me,
For which they are no more.

Eu. Right.


Qu. There will I
And my Landrey securely spend our time;
Revell, embrace, and what not my Eunuch?
The Cave that leads unto the Postern-Gate
Which Childrick made will give him entrance
No eye acquainted; being thus retired
What Lust inslam'd must be by Lust un-sired.

Eu. Excellent Mistress I applaud your brain.


Qu. I will away to night, I cannot brook
These loathed Nuptials, they have undone
My hopes on earth for ever; therefore away,
Acquaint Landrey with these designs.

Eu. What else?


Qu. If by the engino of thy stronger brain
Thou could remove --

Eu. Aphelia, or the King,
Monsieur or all, is it not so my Queen?

Qu. Thou have a brain which does engender thoughts
As regal as our own; which does beget
A race of rare events; what pity it is
Thy body should be sterril, since thy mind
Is of so pregnant and a fruitful kind:
Farewell remember me.

Exit. Eu. Remember you, you shall be thought on, sear it not.
And now bethink thee Eunuch, all thy Flots
Find fruit less goodness, only in the King:
His Worship walked into the other World
Like a tame Sucking-Child that died of the Pip.
The trouble is behind, my hare extends
To the whole Family, I must root them up;
And Beldam first with you: But how? but how?
It in her proud desires, I prevent
Her Lust this Second time, before the Third
She may repent and save her loathed Soul,
Which my Revenge would Damn; yet were she crossed
Her Lust, being now at full flood within her,
And no way left to quench her burning flames,
Her dryer Bones would make a Bonefire
Fit for the Devil to warm his hands by.
Ha! Shall it be thus? No it must not be;
Nor must the high and mighty Queen Aphelia
This Night Enjoy her Bridegroom, I must set
Some Mischief instantly on foot to cross it,
If I miscarry in it, Story shall tell
I did attempt it bravely though I fell.

Offers to go off, and met with the M. and La. Clov. Diswade me not Castrato! I
have sought thee
Through every angle of this spacious Court,
I Have business to impart.

Eu. And so have I.


Clov. Mine are of Honorable consequence
And do require thine aid.

Eu. So does mine yours.


Clov. Aphelia is --


Eu. Your Brother's Wife, and you
Would fain enjoy her too? Why sir you may,
But time must work her.

Clov. Eunuch thou art wide,
Those vanities of Love are quite Extinct,
Revenge does swell the Monsieur, and his thoughts
Which burns within him must be quenched with blood,
See thou this Letter, it is a script I seign'd,
shows him a Letter. For I can Counterseit Aphelia's hand,
The King has banished Landrey from the Court
Because he wore the Jewel which he sent
To his Aphelia, light suspicious
But this shall aggrevate: find thou the King,
Show him this note, it does express great Love
To Landrey from Aphelia and withal
It mentions the Jewel as a gift
To gratify her servant, this to the rest
Of poison he has sucked already in
Shall so inflame him, that the Court shall burn
Too Hot for his Aphelia

Eu. Think it done:
But now your aid, since that your mind is bent
On Honorable deeds, here is one will try you.

Clov. What is it Eunuch?
If that is bare an honorable Name;
Though death stood gaping wide to swallow me
I will not shrink nor fear.

Eu. Noble: Hear't then.
Your mother's loose, and this night renders up
Her body unto lust if not prevented,
I can direct you how, and where, with whom,
If you will be tame, be tame, dishonou^ blots
Your Princely Parentage.

Clov. My soul finds the Man
Is It not Landrey?

Eu. The same.


Clov. I Will tear him all to pieces,
Whore my mother? Eunuch lead the way,
In what thou shall prescribe, we will obey.
Exeunt Omnes
ACT IV
SCENE I.
A Bed. Enter Clotaire Solus. Clot. WHat vulture gripes me here: ha, what art
thou?
If thou be'st jelousy, mount and be gone;
Fly to the vulgar bosom, whose cheap thoughts,
Despair their own performance; in a King
Thou show a Nature retrograde to Honor.
Suppose she gave the jewel, must in follow
She therefore is disloyal, poor consequence
A bubble for a boy to play withal.
I am resolved; Hark I hear her coming:
O Juno what a gate and look is there?

Soft Music. Enter Aphelia, Isabel, Julia, with Tapers as having Aphelia to
Bed. Aph. Mock me not Ladies with this Ceremony,
For I am sitter to attend on you,
I am become a Servant and a Slave
To every moody Passion of my Lord:
Pray leave me, all that is behind
I can perform my self.

Isa. Great Queen of France.


Aph. That name of Queen sounds strangely in mine ears,
It Is like a Language that I once could speak,
But now have quite forgot, call not me Queen;
All Gilded Royalties I Will quite renounce,
And all my study shall be how to dye:
Empress of woe, and Queen fo Misery.

Jul. You must not weigh these things so deep,
Your Lord is of an honorable spirit,
And you will see how calm he will return,
Blessing your bridal b^d with fruitful Issue.

Aph. No, No.
The Saffron-colour'd Hymen frowns upon me:
These Tapers too were lighted at a Pike,
As ^it attendants on the Grave, not Bed.
Juno deny; her presence at this match
And all the ill pres^gi^g Birds of Night
Sing satal Req^iems for a bridal song
Oh Ladies, is not this ominous?

Clot. Yes my Aphelia if that rugged fate
Lie in a kiss then it is ominous,
Her kisses melt upon my lip: if sin
Have so much heaven in it, I Will be a sinner.

Aph. I hope your sears are satisfied now,
You bare a brow so pleasant.

Clot. What pretty foolery is this Aphelia?
I am not jelous, for by all that is good,
I cannot think thee evil; go be gone
Ex. manet Clot. Unharness your Lady for these wars,
We Are of the Camills and sight naked.
Ye powers that favor lovers, infuse apt Strength,
Though every Nerve and Sinew of this frame
Make me all pleasure; and unto the Bride,
Add every vein a Venus; guide me light,
Where in one Bed lies all the Worlds delight.
What knockings this? Castrato, what is the news?
knocking within, Enter Eun. Deliver Briefly, for I am in have.

Eu. Not yet in Bed? oh happy, happy minute:
Until this hour I never was fortunate,
I have preserved my King, my Prince, my Patron,
From the loose ardor of a Strumpets Bed.

Clot. What Is this?


Eu. I deal not now on doubts; your wise is loose
Dishonest as the Suburbs, I am loath
To nominate her Whore though it be true.

Clot. True! --

amazedly.
Eu. Leave this lethargiz'd passion, which benumbs
Your nobler nature; turn your eyes on these;
gives him the Letter. Whose Character is this?

Clot. Ha! let me see:
This is Aphelia's hand, the very same
Which I have often seen Clovis peruse
In his Loves amorous pursuit.

Eu. Real the Contents.


Clot. A Letter that she loves Landrey, with thanks
For his so often visits; which she repays
With the rich Jewel sent her by the King,
Wishing a perpetuity of embracements;
Ten thousand Ravens croak in this black paper,
How came you by it?

Eu. I saw it drop from Landrey, but never thought
Before I perused it, what it did contain;
Which finding, in my duty I was bound
To save my Prince from ruin.

Clot. Follow me
Black vengeance steel my heart with cruelty.
Exit. I Will take her sleeping thus; it cannot be,
a Bed thrust forth with Aphelia in it, Enter Clot. again and the Eunuch. Do
but behold her face, and thou shall read
What we call virtue there and modesty;
Here is a look would persuade cruelty
To sigh and shed a tear, bribe Nemesis
To knot her Steely Scourge with plumie down,
And Jove himself to call her vice a virtue.

Eu. A book of Devils may have the cover gilt,
Treason lies cabben'd in the smoothest brow,
The Devil can assume an Angels form,
Your Wife is fair, but fair to do you harm.

Clot. Peace Villain, thou that infects all peace.


Eu. Why are you thus distempered? let not truth
Make you so wild a Tempest; were it false,
Or that I shought the ruin of your house
Your youth and honor, then it were a time
To swell beyond all charming down:
But being truth!

Clot. Hence dog, avoid my sight,
Fly where the under-world, ill versed in kindred,
Promiscuously combine without distinction,
Where every man is every woman's husband,
Or where it is thought a curtesy to have,
A fellow-sharer in the marriage bed:
These were a People that might bare with thee
And sit for thee to dwell with; hence, away,
And if thou love thy life acquaint thy feet
With such by paths that we may never meet.

Exit. Eu. This Prince is of a nature mild and gentle,
His mother's milk's too fluent in his eyes,
And much I fear his resolution;
Yet I will work him forward; she awakes;
I Will after him and bring him back, if then
She escape his rage, Hell has no power with men.

Exit. Aph. Oh, oh, oh, help, help, my Lord, my Lord, my Father,
Oh my Lord.
Bless me Divinity, 'twas but a Dream;
Ha! the light gone, who waits there, Isabel, Julia, Isabel.
Enter Isabel.
Isab. That was my Ladies voice; calls she for help?
I cannot blame her, were I in her place
I should do so my self; the Prince looks like a bungler.

Aph. Isabel.


Isab. Did you call Madam?


Aph. Saw thou nothing Isabel? where is my Lord?


Isab. Is he absent? I cannot blame her then to call for help;
I should do it my self; so near a good turn, and delayed,
O it would mad me; a Prince, a Puppet would have
Been more manly; How do you Madam?

Aph. All stands not well;


Isab. I believe that faithfully.


Aph. O Girl, I Have past the dismal'st part of night
That ever made soft fancy fo^l.

Isab. If all Brides should be so sool'd, I Would forswear Marriage.


Aph. Methought I saw my Father in a Vault,
His silver hair made crimson by his blood,
My Brother at his Hearse upon his knees
Taking a solemn Oath for his revenge,
Yet all this while so fancy fooled my sense
Methought that I was here, when on the instant
My Lord in preparation for my bed,
Was by an ugly Fiend ravished from hence
And hurried to destruction, here I waked,
And trust me Isabel, I scarce believe
But what I saw was real. Heard'st thou nothing?

Isab. I heard discourse of People in your chamber
Not half an hour since: but they went forth
And to my seeming full of discontent,
But know not who they were.

Aph. Oh it is true, help me Isabel,
I Will to my Fathers, my Prophetique soul
Sits like a Mine of Lead within me,
Come Girl.

Isab. This sad fight
Besits a funeral, not a bridal night.

Exeunt. SCENE. II.
Enter Clotaire and the Eunuch. Clot. Eunuch I Am resolved, I will be cruel
Since she is desil'd, and like a Crystal Well
That has her spring poisoned by the enemy,
Of which it is death for the besieged to taste,
Such are adulterate waters. Castrato
What read'st thou in our brow?

Eu. A foolish grudging of the mother still.


Clot. A settled resolution my black Saint
Not to be altered by the brackish tears
Which flow in pregnant eyes of easy woman,
My honor calls for vengeance, and I Will do;
looks on the Bed. Ha, how! she is gone, and I have lost mine anger too.

Eu. But whither is she gone, to some new Groom,
Who being fooled in expectation
Will make thee Cuckold on thy wedding night.

Clot. Thou have awaked me, I Will know where she is;
Hell nor her darker deeds shall hide her from me:
Who waits? La-key.

La. My Lord.

Enter La-key.
Clot. Where is thy Lady? where is Aphelia?


La. She Is even now gone forth.


Clot. Forth! with whom?


La. There was one with her, but whether man or woman
I am uncertain; but sure it was a man,
she would not dare to venture out so late else.

Exit La-key. Clot. Get to thy rest
I Will take thy word Eunuch for the Kingdoms wealth.

Eu. Oh do you begin to credit now,
Now when perhaps it is too late.
This comes of patience.

Clot. Turn patience into fury, love to hate;
My softer temper to a heart of Steel;
Respect to Wedlock and the Sacred Vow
Made before the Holy Alter to the Priest,
Thus I do fling ye off; Revenge shall move
About our Bridal-bed instead of Love.

Exeunt SCENE III.
Enter Clovis, Strephon, and the Watch. Clov. Upon your lives let no man pass
that way.


Watch. We shall obey in all.


Clov. If he resist or offer violence
In his escape, knock out his brains.

Watch. We Will do our best my Lord.


Clov. There Is your reward, be careful and be gone.
Ex. Watch. You shall possess the Cave: my self will in
And visit these night-revellers, such sport
I will administer, shall make them dance
Lauolto's in the air; this shall Fiddle to them:
Have you the Habit Strephon?

Lam. With these hands I did dis^robe the Statue of your Father.
And they are ready.

Clov. Landrey, blood does swell
The Monsieur's thoughts, to send thy soul to Hell.

Exeunt. SCENE IV.
Enter Landrey solus. Music above plays. Lan. The air's perfumed, each room
through which I walk
Baqu^^s the (...) ^s^s, courts the appetite
Hole open. O^ every la^^l^y that makes up man
To complement (...) into Paradise:
If then Elysiun^'s h^^e, where are those shades,
Those blessed apparitions Poets feign?
Appear my goddess and out-sing the Poets.
Enter Fredegonde. Reality of fancy, that exellest
The faint expression of a lazy tongue
Whose roof is housed with flesh, to tell thy worth,
Tongues tipped with Immortality would faint in it.

Qu. Excellent servant, what House do you write to?
Poet and Actor both! why this sudden gaze?
he looks admiringly on her. Your cases are too narrow for your eyes,
Pray keep your optiques Sir, for Venus service.

Lan. No,
I Will play the Prodigal with my precious sight,
And spend all on you; to view your second
Were such a happiness, after tho which,
It were a sin to see more.

Qu. Bless me Rablais!
And all ye foster fancies of the French,
What ails the man! my Landrey-Laureat?

Lan. It is my Queen that is Laureat, whose blessed sight
Creates a Poet; this divine feature
Heaven only framed to make men ingenuous.

Qu. Is this Extempore? or have you hired
Some Hackney-Muse acquainted with the road
Of vulgar exorcisms, to charm sweet Beauties?
Take up at this speed, else your Muse will founder.

Lan. Founder and have her foundress by! with patience
Hear but these poor expression of your worth,
Which faintly Paint forth your perfections,
And you shall bless my Muse.

Qu. We Will hear your Jigg,
How is your Ballad Titled? come pronounce.

Lan. From head to foot my Mistress been
Lan. rea^^, Far excelling beauties Queen.
Had Jason but beheld her hair,
The Golden-Fleece had never seemed fair.
Those Stars (which Mortals suppose eyes),
Were ascendant in the Skies:
When it fell to Venus lot
That little Cupid was begot.
Her tongue, (in which the Spheres do move
Organ of divinest Love)
Was by Apollo framed, that he
From: hence might learn more harmony.
Who notes her teeth, and lips, discoloses
Walls of Pearl, and Gates of Roses,
Two-leaved-doors that lead the way
Through her breath to Arabia;
To which would Cupid grant that bliss
I Would go a Pilgrimage to kiss
Those hills of Snow which on her breast
Rise swelling with a double Crest.
Mate Parnassus mountain, whence,
The Muses suck their Eloquence.
Those Parts which we will not discover,
He Will imagine that is a Lover.
Like Juno she does go,
Like Pailas talk, and sow,
Like Venus in her bliss,
Each kiss a Cupid is.
And her hands are as White as snow.
From head to foot etc.

Qu. Leave these aerial viands, taste of what
Is here substantial; How like you the fruit?
kisses her.
Land. Let me for ever dwell upon these lips;


Qu. You are too greedy of those rarities;
And must be dieted, lest surfeting,
Your Appetite should sicken and so dye.

Lan. Dye on your Lips, oh deathbed for a Jove
Whose buried here his grave's immortal Love.
Here will I dwell and know not age nor sorrow.

Qu. Yet Childrick knew them both.


Lan. A Frosty Prince
Begot on January by a Dutchman,
And worthy of those flames he now indures.

Qu. What noise is this? guard me divinity.


Enter Clov. from under the Stage in the old Kings habit, Land. flys off, the
Qu. swoons: he flings ^ffkis habit and holds her up. Clov. What has my rashness
done! she is my mother
My conscience tells me I was much too blame
Thus to delude her senses; she returns.

Qu. Oh Childrick I confess 'twas I that killed thee,
These hands administered that fatal dram
Which set thy soud on wing.

Clov. What do I hear?


Qu. Oh do not snatch my soul from out the world
Till I have bathed it in repenting tears
And made it fit for Heaven.

Clov. She faints again.
Enter Strephon at the hole. O Welcome Strephon, lend thy gentle hand
Which Master's Nature, and does life restore;
Beyond the art of Esculapius,
Apply thy gentlest medicines.

Lam. Let us withdraw, my life Sir answer hers if she miscarry.


Exeunt omnes. SCENE V.
Enter the Watch. 1. Stand close, stand close, I heard a kind of bussling e're
while.

2. Bussling, and they come this way here is that shall bussle them.

3. Peace, peace; he is drunk and will betray us all.

Enter Lan. Lan. I am betrayed, the Monsieur seeks my life,
All ways against my escape are sortify'd.
Oh cruel Fortune, Bawd to time and Fate
That soothest us up to make us ruinate.
Ha, what is here? great goddess pardon me,
he finds the habie and puts it on. I have offended against thy deity.
This shall delude the Watch; thrice blessed hap
That thus deliverest whom they would entrap.

2. I will no stand, or I cannot stand, I say
they pull the drunken Watchman to be quiet. I see a voice, d'^e think I Am
drunk, what is
That horrid smell, what is that?

1.3. Bless us oh bless; diabolo, diabolo, diabolo.


Exeunt. 2. The devil, what devil care I; keep off devil,
I say keep off; I do not fear thee: are you sneaking
Back, you cowardly rogue do you budge; I hate a cowardly
Devil as I hate a drunkard, take you that.
knooks him down.
Lan. Oh, oh, oh.


2. Oh, oh; I Will warrant you I Will make you cry oh: what a devil
Made you in my way: I will now see what money you carry
About you: men say the Prince of darkness is a Gentleman;
By'r Lady he ha good clothes on, but yet for all that
He may have no money.

Enter Clovis, Strephon, and the Queen. Strephon with his false Beard off. Qu.
I know not where he is, or if I did,
Before I Would yield him up to thy revenge
I Would dye ten thousand deaths.

Clov. Strephon, Strephon,
For so I still must call thee, thou have seen,
And heard those things delivered, that do splie
My heart in sunder, yet amongst these griefs
Which sit like Mines of Lead upon my soul
There is one corner of my heart that joys
Thy innocent blood has escaped butchery.
Thou glorious light that in thine natural orb
Did comfortably shine upon this Kingdom,
How is thy worth eclypsed? what a dull darkness
Hangs about thy same? in all this piece
To every limb whereof I once paid duty,
I know not where to find my Mother.

Qu. The devil and disobedience blinds your eyes.


Clov. Oh that I had no eyes, so you no shame:
Murder your Husband to arrive at Lust,
And then to lay the guilt on innocents:
Blush, blush thou worse then Woman.

Qu. Ha, ha, ha.


Clov. Hold my heart,
You're impudent in sin, has your proud Page
Made you thus valiant? tell me where he is,
For if you dally with me, know this hand
Shall pull him from thy heart though cabbin'd there.

Qu. How dare thou cloth thy speech in such a phrase
To me thy natural Mother?

Clov. My Mother!
Adulterate woman, shame of Royalty
I blush to call thee Mother: thy foul Lusts
Have taught me words of that harsh consequence
That stigmatize obedience, and do brand
With mis becoming accents filial duty.
Deliver quickly where this Leacher is,
Here housed he must be, for he cannot 'scape,
Lest wildness conquering my safer sense
Thrust forth my hand into and act of horror,
And leave you breathless here. Will you disclose?

Qu. What French Neronian Spirit have we here?
Insolent boy will thou turn Parracide?

Clov. The Justice of my cause would well excuse me,
Is I should execute: speak Murtheress,
Where have you mewed your Monster?

2. Here lies the Monster; O rare Monster; two beards, I Will pull
On this too that is certain, two heads O delicate dainty Monster.
What a brave Monster shall I be, the Constable himself.
he in the Habit of Child. offers to steal by. Cannot make a better Monster, I
will steal by these, get
Me home, sell these gay clothes, buy half a dram of Justice
And be a Monster of the Peace immediately.

Clov. Will you confess, or -- drop oh mine eye balls out
And thou my sollid flesh dissolve to earth.

Lam. How fares it with your Grace? Great Monsieur speak.


Clov. Look there Lamot see thou that horrid shape,
Which I unjustly did but now usurp;
Looks it not like the King, Lamot what say thou?
Shall I go kneel to it, call it honored Father,
And beg a pardon for my trespass done?
It would depart, but I will call it back:
Stay thou blessed spirit, Royal father, thru,
Behold thy son, thy Clovis on his knees,
O pardon gentle spirit pardon me.

2. That Is my good Boy, rise, but do you hear sirrah,
Put no more tricks nor gulls upon me; my son,
I have but one and he is three quarters rogue by this time;
He Is e'n as like thee as over he can peep,
Bless my Boy, I like him n're the better for it

Clov. What strange illusion's this? what art thou, speak,
Or I will nail thee dead against the wall.

2. Just such another Rogue have I to my son as this;
He has his very words too, thou art mine own,
I wonder where I got thee, can not thou remember?

Lam. Villain?
How came thou by that babit? who ar't, speak?

2. Is it the Monsieur? I have made a brave hand on it then;
Lord, Lord, see how good clothes makes us forget our selves:
My name is Potshot, my trade a Cobbler,
One of the Constables Watch in extraordinary;
And if you will believe me Mr. Monsieur,
It went against my stomach very much,
That you should daro presume to call me father,
Oh, oh, oh, oh!

Colv. Tell me how thou came by those clothes? I Will pardon thee.


2. Truly I came lawfully by them, for I stole them,
The devil and I fought 15 hours for them,
He broke my head a dozen times at least;
At l^st I mauled the rascal, and he lies there.

Lam. Behold my Lord, the Woodcock's in the gin,
Here lies the great Landrey.

Qu. O horrid sin.


Clov. This habit might have ruined all, Lamot,
But Goblin now you're caught; what is he dead?

Lam. Scarce hurt my Lord; how is it Sir, look up?


2. Is not the devil dead?


Clov. Hold hold, you have done well.


2. Then whistle Jack-a-dandy.

Enter Eunuch hastily.
Eu. Where is the Queen?


Qu. Here Eunuch as thou see in misery.


Eu. On my heart, how came they hither? Lamot too?


Qu. All that I know is that we are betrayed.


Eu. I Will set them packing fear't nor; My good Lord

whispers with Clovis.
2. Do You hear friend Lucifer, what Cat's your father?
How many lives have you got, ha diabolo?

Clov. Thou art a faithful servant.


Eu. Sir, the Rebels.


Clov. Give them a nobler title, by my life
I do applaud their courage, come they on?

Eu. Yes, and Br^ssac is made their General.


Clov. A hopeful Youth fraught with nobility,
And all the graceful qualities that write.
Man truly honorable, mine injuries.
Have stirred him up to this.

Eu. His father's dead.


Clov. Trust me I Am sorry for it, grief has broke his heart.
And mine Castrato, too: can thou imagine
Who was the authors of our father's death?

Eu. Am I betrayed, then, lend mo confidence,
I Am sure I cannot blush; Royal Sir, whom?

Clov. Our Mother and Landrey, and this Lamot.
They meant should bear the blame: this was Strephon.

Eu. It Is wondrous strange, Would I were fairly off.

aside.
Clov. But what news with Aphelia, and her Bridegroom?


Eu. As you could wish, he is full of ielousy,
No Frenchman e're was more Italian,
I Have wrought him bravely on, your Physic works;
Hither I Have brought Aphelia too: tomorrow
You shall hear further; sport I Will warrant you.
What will you do with these?

Clov. Castrato, thus:
Nature forbids me spill my Mothers blood,
And Landrey is unfi^ for my revenge,
For I must study torments for the slave,
Therefore I give them upto your tuition
Until we shall return victorious.

Qu. Observe you that, there is some comfort yet.

aside to Lan
Clov. Then we will determine of them; if we fall
Let Clotaire point them out a funeral;
Reward this fellow largely with our Purse,
His merits are 2000 Crowns, perform it.
gives him a purse.
2. The Lord preserve my Son, I mean the Monsieur,
I truly did I, I was overjoyed,
And knew not what I said, no truly Son.
If I can keep all this wealth without running mad,
Then Potshot may become an Alderman:
Drink I adore thee, drink good fellows all,
Sometimes we rise by drink, but oftener fall.
O me, what a rare thing it is to be a Monster.

Exit. Clov. A moral drunkard. Go away with them,
And on your life let them not stir from hence.
Exit Eu. Qu. and Lan. Now my revenge grows to maturity,
We Will to Dumaine, Lamot, and join with him:
Now France, thou lie a bleeding, thou shall prove
What it is to cross the Monsieur in his Love.
Exeunt omnes
ACT V.
SCENE I.
Drum. Enter Charles Brissac, Dumaine, Burbon, Lanone, Martel. Dum. For certain
then the Princes are at odds.


Bris Yes, and grounds the marriage of my Sister.


Burb. The ulcerous State is ripe, and we must lance it.


Bris. The King does whore my Sister; she is not his,
But true and Lawfully the Monsieurs Wife.

Dum. Did not one Strephon wait upon the Prince?


Bris. Yes, such there was, but little noids'd at Court.


Dum. That was Lamot our fast and noble friend.


Burb. I wonder that we hear not from him yet.


Lanoue. There Is some design on foot that hinders him.

a shout within.
Dum. What means this noise? Martel step forth and see.


Bris. The Monsieur! O death we are surpiz'd,
again, crying the Mons. the Monsieur, etc. Suddenly snared, let each man to
his charge,

Burb. Hark still the noise increases.


Lanoue. By the sound
again. This is a shout of joy, and not of dread.
Enter Martel, Lamot, and Monsieur.
Bris. What news Martel?


Mart. You may inform your self.


Mon. Brissac, Dumaine, Burbon, and the rest,
Think not I come a Traitor to your Camp,
I cannot gild my speech with eloquence,
If this will serve you, so; I am a friend.

Bris. The Monsieur welcome, and his worth will grace
The dignity of this days work in hand.

Mon. My almost Brother once, suffice, I thank you
And fairly greet this brave assembly,
Whose souls do look for stirring opposits,
When your resistance I fear will be slender.

Bris. If we obtain a glorious victory,
Without a crimson tincture of the Field
it will be better: therefore I think it sit
We set upon them e're they be prepared,
Twill save much blood on both sides.

Mon. Be it so,
again the Monsiear within. Let us reform the Land, not overthrow.
We will about it straight, lead on before.
Exeunt omnes.
SCENE II.
Enter Eunuch solus. He draws a Curtain where Landrey sits bound at one end of
the Table, and the Queen at the other. Eu. Here sits our Beldam, dieted for
venery:
And by her, her Landrey, not surfeited;
Her Ladyship's allowed a moldy crust,
He stinking water to piece out his life;
Between them both they banque^ like one Slave
Condemned perpetually to the Burdello.
They think I know not that they thus are used,
When it is only I that use them this.
How wickedly they look, on I could laugh,
To hear them rail at other's misery.
He curses her, and she sooth curses him,
And both each other damn for their offenses.
Learn ye that pamper up your flesh to Lust,
The Eunuch in his wickedness is Just.
They sleep too long, and take too much of ease
I must awake ye, play and play aloud.
Hoboys within.
Qu. A Mischief take the keeper, hardened dog
Whom no distress can melt or molify,
The cruel King does not deny us sleep.

Eu. Most gentle Queen,
I am not guilty of these harsh voiced words:
Your wilder sense hurles at me; you mistake.
I am your Eunuch one that weeps for you.

Qu. Oh Castrato, wast not those tear, in vain,
Come hither and I Will catch those falling drops
Which prodigally overflow their banks,
There Is nectar in thine eyes, oh let me drink it.

Eu. Though I be tortured for it, I Will relieve ye.


Exit. Qu. It has quenched half my thirst to find some pity,


Lan. One bit of bread tho it were gray with age,
Hoary and crusted with a Second bark,
Would seem a Banquet to my empty Gorge.
Oh, I am worn to nothing with this want,
Such emptiness has hunger made of me
That you may draw me on another man.
Some bread, some bread.

Enter Eunuch with Wine and Meat, he Cong^es to the Quem with great Ceremony.
Qu. Oh thou art welcome, quick dear Eunuch quick;
Away with form and ceremonious duty:
Respect in this is too respectless.

Eu. Oh give me leave, I will begin a health,
^e sips. It Is very good, exceeding pleasant wine.

Qu. Do thou deride my sufferance?


Eu. No not I.


Qu. Give me the drink then, I Am all flame and fire.


Eu. Say you so, say you so, then you must pardon;
I love your safety, and its dangerous
To drink while you are hot, pray cool and tarry.
In the mean time I will begin to you.
How tart and pleasant this is to the pallat,
A Sweeter Pheasant Christendom affords not.

Land. I thank thee Eunuch, protheo give it me.


Eu. You Will let me taste it for you, will you not?
Are you so hasty: still you are too hasty,
Gentle sir is will digest the better.

Land. More, more, that is excellent.

he unlooseth his arms a little that he might feed himself.
Eu. Madam here is for you now.


Qu. May heaven reward thee for it, oh it is rare.


Eu. How do you like your banquet great Landrey?


Land. Beyond compare.


Eu. And you your drink.


Qu. The Gods taste not the like.


Eu. Ha, ha, ha, ye have both eat and drunk abominable poison,


Qu. Ha?


Land. How?


Eu. It Is true I tell you oracle,
There Is not an hour's life between ye both,
The poyson's sure, I did prepare it for you;
And have my self taken an Antidote.
What say you to the other bout now with Landrey?
I can procure another meeting for you,
Indeed I can; think you not whoredom sweet
Now you're a dying? is not your soul at ease?
The murder of your Husband's but a toy,
A f^^a-biting, alack you feel it not.

Qu. Oh Villain, Villain, Villain.


Land. Inhumance slave, treacherous rascal.


Eu. Goods bobes, are you at Liberty?
Land. goes from his Chair. How got you loose? a knife too, hoyty toyty.

Land. Faintness for want of food, I fear will trap me,
Yo'r very nimble Rascal;
Land. falls following the Eu. at a short turn, and being down, the Eu. gets
upon him and disarms him.
Eu. Oh Lord sir, you know the cause,
I Am lighter by a stone or two then then you,
Yet I am weight enough to keep you down;
Stir and thou dy'st, now sir what fay you to me?
How do you like your Princess? is she gamesome?
Did she apply her self like an apt whore
Unto your loose embraces?

Qu. Dog, let him rise.


Eu. Pardon me great Madam I beseech you.
Under your Graces favor be it spoken,
He is our cushion and I Will sit on him;
I do not altogether weigh a man.
As I live dead, pressed to death without Stones;
Stark dead; a very strong-hearted Monsieur,
What say you to his Statue now in Ginger-bread?
It were a Monument too good for Landrey.
But sit thee there again: Once more to you,
sets him in the Chair again, Who, if your Poison do not work too fast,
Shall see more sights like these before you dye,
Your Organ-pipe's already out of tune,
I Will leave ye a peeping-hole, through which you shall
leaves the Curtain half open. See sights shall kill thee faster then thy
poison.
I am prepared now for Aphelia's death,
All things are ready, and behold the King;
Enter Clot. sadly. Now for my part.

Clot. I am too pityfull, a watery flux
Which soft and tenderhearted men call tears
Stand on mine eyes, and does express a nature
Too like my barer, it is now with me
Full Tide in sorrow: my Cint^ia governs strongly;
What do the wise,
Castrato, call this moisture, which presumes
To mediate betwixt my wrath and me?

Eu. Expressions of a weak and silly nature,
Passions of fools and women; are you a man
And bear so tame a soul, such a smock-spirit?
The Distaff owns more spleen, more noble anger:
Pray let her live until the Pages write,
And hopping Ballatire's voice Rhimes upon you;
This will sound bravely, will it not?

Clot. Bring her in.

Enter two leading Aph. in her pertticoat as to be tortured.
Aph. Use not such violence good Gentlemen
I Will walk a Lamb to slaughter, not repine
At any torments ye shall put me to;
Only be modest; commend me to my Lord,
I doubt I never shall behold him more;
For by the Calculation of your looks
I have not long to live.

Clot. Confess and turn thy fate, give me to know
With what foul Monster thou have wronged thy soul,
Seam-rent that holy weed, Virginity:
And ease me of a load that bears more weight
Then what my youthful sins have heaped upon me.

Aph. If ever. --


Clot. No more of that, it tends to madness:
I Will force it from thee, bring forth the tortures there,
a pan of co^ls and searing-Irons. I Will try if in these fiery instruments
There lies a tongue which better can persuade
Confession from thee, these red hot, applied
Unto thy breasts, shall there extract
All future hope to suckle lawless Issue;
The poisonous springs which from these hills arise
Shall have their fountain head damned up by these.

Aph. I Have heard you sweat that you were poor in words,
And knew not to express the happiness
Which you conceived was habitable here:
How much my Lord is altered from himself!

Clot. It Is thou art altered: True, Aphelia,
That whilst thy purer thoughts did awe thy will
I loved like an Idolater; I was possessed
That these two twins, these globes of flesh, contained
All that was happy both in earth and heaven;
In this I could descry the milky way,
The Maiden Zone that girds the waste of heaven;
In this the seat of Paradise, and how
The wanton rivolets played about the Isle
Which puzzles Geography: All this I could
In thee my sometime chaste Aphelia
Find and rejoice in, but thou art now
An undrest Wilderness, wherein I walk,
Losing my self'mongst multitudes of beasts
And salvage actions: come dispatch.

Aph. Sir --


Clot. I Will hear no more.


Aph. Heaven will then,
And though it be an ear far distant hence,
Both hear and pity me: Oh my loved Lord,
Should but a dream work on my fancy
That you were thus to suffer as I am,
It would conspire to kill me with more speed
Then these your threatening Ministers, alas!
I'do force a gentler nature in the Steel,
And with my rainy eyes weep out the heat,
Which as it dies should hiss it self to scorn,
For offering to contain but sire to hurt you;
And will you then, a bold spectator stand,
Smiling at what I suffer? Shed but one tear,
Or counterfeit a sorrow for my sake,
A little seeming woe, and I shall dye,
Sick of your kindness, not your cruelty.

Clot. Oh my soft temper, her sweet harmony
Will melt me into fool.

Eu. Oh this is brave,
A whining Cuckold.

Clot. Whore, will you confess?
Speak or I Will break thy heart.

Aph. My gentle Lord.


Clot. Ungentle whore thou lie, I am not gentle,
Thou can not catch me more with oily sounds,
Speak swiftly to my words, whose whore art thou?

Aph. My gracious Prince, I dare not call you husband,
Your actions do forbid, which write me slave
And not your equal: if to be your wife
Has plucked this misery upon my head,
Or caused in you this frenzy, put me off;
I will endure it patiently; but if e're --

Clot. The old tune this, come come the Irons there.

they sear one of her breasts.
Aph. Oh, oh, oh, cruel my Lord, unmanly,
I Will not blaspheme, no nor think ill of Heaven;
Although my injuries would half persuade,
Gods are not, or are deaf to Innocents.
Drum. Enter a Messenger hastily.
1. Mes. Arm, arm my Lord, the Castle's walled about
With living Clay, three times ten thousand men.
Approved Warriors, souls of Blood afire,
That only know to do, and not to suffer,
Make head against you; believe me sir,
A braver troop, and spirits more resolved,
Life never put in action.
Enter another Messenger.
2 Mes. Fly, fly my Lord.


Clot. Villain it is no Language for a Prince.


2 Mes. Then stand upon your Guard, yet that is as bad,
Drum. The Castle-walls are made of walking Steel,
And you but tempt your death in your escape
If you stay here provoked.
The Monsieur like the god of war bestrides
A bounding Courser, who is therefore proud
To be so backed as knowing whom she bears.
So Centaur-like he is anchored to his seat
As if he had twined with the proud Beast he rides on,
And were incorporate with the Steed that bears him;
He grows unto his Saddle all one piece
And that unto his Horse, who thus unmoved
Sits like a Perseus on his Pegassus
Stable and fleet.

Clot. Is he joined with them too?
Then doomsday is at hand, I see my ruin,
Go to the Castle-walls, and Summon them
To render an account of their intents,
Away I say be gone: Cone hither Eunuch,
Look here is a Pislol, in whose womb lies doath,
A heavy leaden sheep.

Eu. Would you I should
Try the conclusion here? make her confess
By other instruments her horrid guilt?
In this there is too much mercy.

Clot. Her me speak,
I Will trouble her no further, let her sin
Be punished from above, I Will wait heavens leisure:
Here Eunuch take thou this, it was prepared
For the adulterate Landrey; here receive it,
And if thou love me, use it upon me;
Come shoo^ me through, I know I shall be slain,
If not by thee, yet by the enemy;
And therefore to prevent the bitter scorn
Of the insulting foe, which is a death
So full of horror to the conquered;
No tyranny is like it, use this handful,
The wholsomest weed that nature can produce
In the large storehouse of her providence
Can show no simple like it, for this cures
At once the sickness of the mind and body.
Thou shall; I know thou will, I prithee take it,
It is not murder (tender hearted fool)
That thou committest, rather a sacrifice,
For which heaven will reward thee.

Eu. I never was liker to express my self
Then at this minute; do not betray me tears;
The Eunuchs nature must be harsh and cruel;
Though I do undertake this deed,
Bear witness heaven it is against my will.
takes the Pistol.
Aph. O spare him Eunuch, spare, save my Lord.


Eu. Peace foolish woman, it is thou killest thy Lord.
Were It not for thee he might live long and happy;
Pray let me kiss your hand, and take my leave
Of my best, best Master.

Clot. Do It and be sudden then -- ha, what means this?

he whips away Clotairs Sword.
Eu. Marry Sir this it means,
That if this fail this shall perform the deed,
Think not but I will kill you, do not fear,
I am the excelent'st alive at these toys,
Look here my cousened fool I do not bungle.

Clot. Are these dead then?


Eu. As sure as you live, pray ask them else,
Unless this Eves flesh, too intense in heat,
Be lingering still behind: she is scarcely dead,
But in her dying cars I Will howl this noise:
Look Queen, here is the top-branch of all thy family,
Mark but how kindly for thy sake I Will use him.

Clot. Then I perceive I have been much abused,
So has my dearest Lady, oh, my heart.

Eu. Oh do you so? do you so?


Qu. Oh oh oh!


Eu. There broke a Strumpets heart.


Clot. How fain would I preserve my self from death
Since my Aphelia's chaste, to think her false,
Not that I feared the so, made me despair
Of furture comfort: Eunuch spare my life,
I will forgive thee, and reward thee too:
Remember who it is that sues to thee.

Eu. In that remembrance I have lost my self:
I cannot strike him, my relenting heart
Erns on his Princely person; take your Sword,
But on condition Clotaire; thou shall swear
By thy descen^, thy Princely Parentage,
By the wronged souls of all those Innocents,
By thy Lust sacrific^d, by Aphelia's self,
Or any thing the soul shall hold more dear,
Upon receipt to guide the fat^l point
Directly to my heart: My time is short,
a Drum beats within. Quickly dispatch, resolve to do or dye,
And what shall grieve thee more then all the rest,
Aphelia shall bear thee company.

Clot. To save her life I Will undertake this deed.


Eu. I Will teach thee to the speedy in the fact:
Remember how thy noble Father died,
Into thy bosom cast thine in ward eyes,
And view what sorrows I have heaped on thee;
Behold thy Mother murdered by this hand,
Look on this Innocent, and let her wrongs
Prompt thy slow hand to this most timely slaughter;
I cannot brook delay.

Clot. Take thy reward.
A Heathen and a Traitor dye with thee.

Eu. A Christian Heathen Clotaire if thou will,
Made so by thee, read that and break thy heart.
stings him a note, he stands amazed.
Clovis. Force open the door,
Enter the Army. Seize on his Royal Person, now Clotaire
Thou art the Monsieur's prisoner, Tyrant say
Where is Aphelia your Adulteress?

Bris. O my dear Sifter.


Clov. O most horrid sight; my mother and Landr^y both murdered.


Dum. Here lies that Villain Eunuch: Hell hound up:
Wnose hauds have slain thy Mistress?

Eu. No^e of mine.
They Are near allied to thee that did this deed,
Ch^o^ilda and a woman.

Dum. Villain thou lie my sister's gone a weary pilgrimago
And for this twice five years (With grief I speak ti)
Been wandering none knows where.

Clot. What am I?
What strange and uncouth thing?

Eu. A Ravisher;
And better to inftruct thee in thy self
Had not Corotilda been incestuous.
the King offers to kill himself.
^um. Hold hold your. Royal hand, what will
You do?

Clot. What else but follow her? shall Clotaire live
A Capt in to his Brother, slaved in sin,
Inthral'd in wedlock, that is incestuous?
A Ravisher, and Murderer of his friend,
There Is no way left to rid me but my Sword
Or all these ills at once. Oh my Chrotilda:
falls upon the Eir. weeping.
Dum. My Sister?


Clot. Ay Dumain: no Eunuch she,
No Sunburned vagabond of Aetiope
Though entertained for such by Fred^gond^;
I say here lies thy ravished sister, slain
By me the Ravisher.

Dum. Hold, hold my heart.


Eu. I forgive thee Clotaire; freely forgive thee
And let Aphelia do the like to me:
I bare to her no malice; only this,
I would not have her to enjoy the man
That had so near relation unto me.

Clov. This writes thee perfect (...).


Eu. Lend me thy hand Clotaire h^ve I thy hand;
I should have killed thee King, and had put on
A masculine spirit to perform the deed:
Alas how frail our resolutions are,
A Woman's weakness conquered my revenge,
I Would Power enough to quit my parents wrongs:
And they which should have seen me act my part,
Would not believe I should so soon prove Haggard:
But there is something dwells upon thy brow
that did persuade me to Humanity:
Thou Injurest me, and yet I spared thy life,
Thou injurest me, yet I would dye by thee;
And like to my lost sex, I fall and Perish.
she dies,
Clot. Speak for ever, speak Chrotilda.


Dum. Farewell great Heart,
My sister's in mine eyes, this brave revenge
Should have been mine, and not thine act, Chrotilda,
Away salt Rhume, Chrotilda laughs at thee,
Her spirit was more manly.

Aph. I must weep too,
Her injuries and mine are so near kin,
That they must bare each other Company
In tears of blond and death. Brother I faint,
And my grieved heart too long with death oppressed,
Would gladly seek a way to find out rest.

Clot. Art thou joined with her too, against thy self?
Will my Aphelia leave me?

Aph. For ever King,
The hand of heaven lies on me: for I feel
My inward and external injuries
Wrestle with life, in which Contention
My soul is worried by that tyrant death,
I must forsake thee Clotaire.

Clot. Stay a while,
It is unkindly done to leave me thus:
Oh she is gone, for ever, ever gone,
she dies. And I stand prating here between them both,
The fatal cause of death unto them both.
Will thou not break proud heart, I prithee break,
Prove not a Rebel to thy Prince like these!
It Is well there is some Loyalty in thee yet,
he falls into a Chair betwixt them both Thou art commanded by me:

Bris. Gracious Liege.


Clot. Charles I have injured thee, and thee Dumaine,
Can ye forgive me.

Dum. Good your grace
Call back your spirits, think what is to be done.

Clot. I consider well; and the great King
The quondam Monsieur, shall not deny me this:
Half of the Honors of the dead Landrey
We do conser on thee; the other half
Be thi^e Dumaine, Charles shall be Duke of France,
Thou of the Palace Major: this is our will.

Dum. Great King you are not so near your death.


Lam. Forfende it heaven.


Mons. Look up thy gracious Brother.


Clot. I begin to faint,
A Darkness like to death hangs on mine eyes:
Give me thy hand Brissac, and thine Dumaine.
Good Gentle souls, when ye shall mention me,
And Elder time shall rip these actions up,
Dissected and anotomized by you,
Touch sparingly this story, do not read
T^o harsh a comment on this loathed deed,
Lest you enforce posterity to blast
My name and memory with endless curses:
Call me a honorable murderer:
And finish there as I do.
he dies
Dum. O Noble Prince
Whose fame was ver^ essence to his soul,
That gone, the other fled: choosing to dye
Rather then live a Prince ^nfamy.

Mons. A heavy spectacle of grief and wot,
Have we beheld since our arrival here;
Take up the body of the King, and these,
Which for his sake on either hand lie slain,
They shall be buried in one monument:
And take up these: this was a Royal Queen
When virtue steered her thoughts, but we may see,
When we turn foes to good, to vice a friend,
a dead March and Recorders. We sall like these, and like these, thus we end.

Exeunt Omnes. FINIS.

