THE SECOND PART OF THE PRINCIPLES OF THE ART MILITARY, Practiced In the Wars
of the United Provinces. CONSISTING OF THE SEVERAL FORMS OF BATTLES,
REPRESENTED BY THE Illustrious MAVRICE PRINCE of ORANGE of famous memory. AND
HIS HIGHNESS FREDERICK HENRY PRINCE OF ORANGE, that is Captain General of
the Army of the high and mighty Lords the STALES GENERAL of the United
Provinces. Together with The order and form of Quartering, Encamping, and
Approaching, in a War offensive and defensive.

The second Edition newly corrected and amended by Captain HENRY HEXHAM,
Quartermaster to the Regiment of the Honorable Colonel GORINO.

Printed at DELF in HOLLAND, By Antony of Heusden, ANNO 1642. Cum Privilegio.

TO THE TRVELY HONORABLE, AND HIS NOBLE LORD, GEORGE GORING, BARON OF
HOSPERPOINT, VICE-CHAMBERLAINE TO HIS SACRED Majesty, and one of his Majsties.
most honorable privy Council.
MY LORD,
ACcording to my promise and weak ability I had composed and finished this
second part of the Principles of the Art Military, for so much as consernes
the duties of the Officers of Field, belonging to an Army, and the diverse
orders, and forms of embattailling of Horse and Foot represented in the field
at several times, and in sundry places by the two famous Generals of our age,
Maurice Prince of Orang of happy memory, and Frederick Henry his highness
the Prince of Orang that now is our victorious General, together with the
order of Quartering, Encamping and Approaching in a War Offensive and
Defensive: This I undertook with a great deal of labor and charge, and
gathered it out of diverse good Authors, for the instruction and informing the
Judgments of such, as are lovers of this noble Art Military, and having
heretofore bin dedicated to my honorable Colonel your Son, having tasted of
your Lo: bounty both for my Atlas Majours, and some other of my Military
books more then of any noblemans in England to show and acknowledge a grateful
mind, therefore this second Edition comes in most humble wise, to crave your
Lo: gracious Patronage, as one to whom I acknowledge my self much bound unto,
and so praying to the Almighty for your health and increase of honor. I rest

Your Lo: servant ever to Command HENRY HEXHAM.

An Index, Of the contents of this second part, and how the Boockbinder is to
place the Cards.
OF the Provost Marshall of an Army, page 1. Of the Marshall of a Regiment, a
Quartermaster General, and a Quartermaster of a particular Regiment, page 2.
Of a Trench-Master, an Inginier and a Clark of the Victuals page 3. Of a
Carriage-Master, and a Muster-Master page 4. Of the Sarjant Maiour to a
Regiment page 5. Of a Lieutenant Colonel, and a Colonel page 6. Of the Sariant
Maiour General of an Army page 7. Of a Sariant Maiour of a Brigade* or a great
Corporal of the field page 8. Of the General or Master of the Ordnance, and
of the Clark of the Munition and Matterialls page 9. Of the Lord Marshall of
the Field page 10. Of the office and charge of the Lord General of an Army
page 11.12.13 In what order an Army ought to march over a Campagny, narrow
passages, woods, and Rivers page 14.15.16. Of the Quartermaster General, of a
Commissary General, and of a Lieutenant General of the Horse page 17. Of the
charge and Office of the General of the Horse page 18 Of the ordering and
forming of a Devision, or a Battaillon of Foot or Horse page 19 Of the Form
of an Army of 24. thousand foot and six thousand Horse ranged in Battle ray
as the figure demonstrates page 20. Next follows the several forms of
Battles of Horse and foot, which have bin shown in the low Countries since
Anno 1600. till this last year 1642. and are all to be placed Alphabettically
from A. to X. one after another between pages 20. and 21. Of the order and
form of encamping of an Army page 21.22.23.24. Of the quartering of a Devision
or Regiment of foot according to the order of his Highness the Prince of
Orange page 25. Note that between the pages 26. and 27. the figure of a
Regiment of foot is to be bound page 26.27. Between pages 28. and 29. is to
be bound in the figure of a Regiment of Horse 28.29. Between page 32. and 43.
which is false figured, the figure and form of a Camp quartered, that is
between letter H. and I. page 32.33. Of all manner of Approches and their
profiles pages 33.34.35.36.37.38. Note that this sheet i. should have bin
figured 33.34.35. and 36. Note that between pages 38. and 39. the figure of
Approches is to be bound Of Counter-Approches page 40. Of all sorts of Bridges
page 41.42 Of Galleries and their Appurtenances page, 43. Note that between
pages 44. and 45. is to be bound the figure of a Gallerie. 44.45. Of Mines and
Counter-Mines page 46.47.48.49. and 50. Of all sorts of Palisadoes,
Barrocadoes, quadrant Footnailes and Bears page 51. Of turn Pikes page 52.53.
Of Retrenchings of Inward cuttings of page 54.55. and 56.
Hoe de Boeck-binder sal de Caerten van dit tweede deel binden.
1. Tusschen fol: 20 en^ 21 all de Caerten van Slachorders, van letter A. to
X. Anno 1642. 2. Tusschen fol: 26. end 27. de quartier van even Regiment te
voet. 3. Tusschen fol: 28. en 29. de quartier van even Regiment te Paert. 4.
Tusschen fol: 32. en 33. de quartier van even heel Legher. 5. Tusschen fol: 38.
en 39. de Caert van Approches. 6. Tusschen fol: 44. en 45. de Caert van even
Gallerye end Mynen. 7. Tusschen fol: 54. en 55. de Caert van Retrenchementen
end af-snijdinge.
THE SEVERAL DVTIES OF THE OFFICERS OF the field belonging to an Army.
And first of the Provost Marshall of an Army.
BEcause in the nature of his Office he is to execute all directions and
commandments, that he shall receive from the Lord General, or Marshall, he
shall be enjoined to give his attendance upon the Lord Marshall. It is then his
office to publish all Proclamations, Orders and Decrees of the Generals, and
all things else that are to be notifyed to the Troops, as the Lord Marshall
shall command him: He shall see them published in the Generals Quarter, and
before the Head of every Regiment, being attended upon, by the Provosts of
every Regiment.

He shall have the keeping of the Prisoners in the Army, that is to say, by
himself and his men, he shall keep the chief Prisoners which are to be brought
to Justice, and shall direct the Provosts of every Regiment, how the Prisoners
in their charge shall be kept.

He shall have thus far forth command over all particular Provosts of the
Army, and they shall give an account to him of all their Prisonners, of the
quality of their offenses and of the informations against them, yea, as often
as he shall direct and give up a note as well of his own prisoners, as of the
rest, once every week to the Lord Marshall.

He shall attend every Court day at the Generals, or the Lord Marshals, if it
be held there, and shall bring his Prisoners that are called thither, safely to
the Court, with such informations and witnesses as are to be brought in against
them, and shall after they have bin heard, and proceeded withal, bring them
back in safety, and so keep them till he has attended and known the further
will of the General, or in his absence, of the Lord Marshall: Also he shall be
bound to have his Executioner, a place of execution, and all things belonging
unto it, whenever, or wheresoever he shall be commanded by the General or
Lord Marshal, and he shall see the said executions so commanded, to be duly
performed.

The Provost Marshall shall have thus far commandment over the Victuallers of
the Army, that he shall assign them their Quarter in every Regiment, and shall
appoint what Victuallers are to attend every Regiment. Also he shall give order
to the particular Provosts of every Regiment, that they see no victuals sold
but at convenient hours, and that the prices of victuals and beer be
reasonable, and every Kan of Beer, sold at that price as he has marked upon
the Barrell-head, and as it is appointed him.

It is further incident to his office, to have account brought unto him of all
prises of Cattle, and other victuals that comes into the Army, and that the
preyes, as soon as they are brought into the Quarter, shall be showed to him,
and by him to the General, or the Commissary General of the victuals, because
it may be known whether those preyes be lawful, and how they ought to be
divided.

He shall by the particular Provosts of every Regiment and his men, cause all
entrails of Beasts that are killed in or near the Quarter, and all other
garbidge and filth to be buried without the Camp, and to see in all things
else, that the Quarters be kept sweet from noisome smells, and the places
adjoining clean, and that the places for easement be pricked out at such a
convenient distance, as he shall in discretion set down, and that he himself,
as often as he can conveniently, shall visit the whole Quarters, and to that
end, he shall cause the provosts of every Regiment, and his own men, to visit
the several parts of the quarters every day.

He shall have all his fees, as well in preyes that are taken, as for the
oversight of the victuals and beer, and of all things else, which do properly
belong to the provost Marshall of an Army.

Of the Marshall of a Regiment.
THe masshall of a Regiment is to receive and keep safely all such prisonners,
as are committed to his charge by the Chiefes, Captains, and officers of the
Regiment, and if they be called to Justice, shall bring his Prisoners to the
Marshall General, to be carried from thence to the Council of War.

It is also the duty of the Marshall of a Regiment, to take special care that
all women, lacqueis, servants, bread, and Aqua Vita sellers belonging to the
Regiment, shall march after their own Regiment, and not before, or upon the
flancks thereof.

It is his office likewise to set such prizes upon Beree and Victuals, as the
Lord Marshall or the Serjant Majour General shall appoint him, which order he
shall receive from the Provost Marshall of the Army, and that he sees it be
duly executed within the circuit of the Regiment, and that the Sutlars do not
sell their beer and victuals above the set rate, least they should grate upon
the Soldiers: After the Captain of the watch has gone the first round, he is
to see that the Sutlars keeps no tippling or drinking, to commit any disorder in
the night, but make them put out their candle light and fires: During the time
of divine service he is to go the round, and see that there be no tippling or
disorders committed in the Quarters.

The Office of a Quartermaster General.
FIrst he is to be at all removes, and before the taking up of any quarter, is
to attend the General, or the Marshall of the field, to receive his
directions, where, and in what place the Army is to be quartered, and how the
Avantguard, the Battle, and the Reere, shall be distinguished.

Having received then his directions, and the Army drawing near to the place
assigned, he and the Quartermasters of every Regiment, rides before with a
Guard of Horse and some firelocks, to view and make choice of the Ground, where
the Army is to be quartered, and there ordaines a quarter for the General, the
chief Officers of the field, and their trains, together with the Regiments of
every Tercia or Brigade, and gives out the ground, and houses to the
quartermaster of each Brigade, and they to the Quartermasters of the particular
Regiments, who draws out the quarters in that order and form, as the Lord
General has prescribed, and as the figure thereof following shall demonstrate.

It is also his office to direct the Quartermaster of every Regiment, that in
laying out their quarters, they observe that form which the General has
commanded, that is proportion for proportion, and to see that all places of
arms, streets, sallies, and all things else, be answerable, and sees that
every quarter be made according to that model.

The Office of the Quartermaster of a Regiment.
THe quartermaster of a Regiment in all charges is to attend the quartermaster
general to receive his directions, and takes the place, ground, and houses
appointed by him for the quarter and lodging of his Regiment, and then draws
out his quarter, for the companies his Colonels, and the officers of the field,
and for every Captain of his Regiment, according to the order of their march
and their seignorities in the Regiment, distributing and giving to a Sariant of
every Company of the Regiment, who are to assist and attend him, the depth,
length and breadth, of the quarter with the distances of the alarm place
between the head of the quarter and the trench, and the true distance between
devision and division of the regiments, as also when the regiment is to be
quartered in Villages, and houses, he is also to observe that form and
directions which the quartermaster General shall give him.

The Office of a Trench-Master.
BEcause as Quartermaster he shall know the Ground that is laid out: so he is
to exercise the office of the Trench-master in the Outworkes of the quarter, as
he does of Quartermaster within, these two offices having affinity the one with
the other, and therefore he must set out distance between the quarter and the
Trench, or Rampire, with the breadth and depth of the ditch, and the height of
the Trench, be the quarter altogether entrenched or in part, as he shall
receive his direction, either from the General, or the Marshall, as also the
proportion of all outworks, as Flanks, Mounts, Batteries, and other works that
shall be appointed.

As it is shown what is the duty of a Trench-master in encamping: so in
marching he is to give direction for the making of ways or Explanadoes for the
passing of the Troops, and marching of the Ordnance and Carriages, according
as he shall receive his order, from the General or Marshall, provided that in
making ways for the Artillery, he take the Quartermaster along with him,
assigned by the General of the Ordnance for that purpose and that the Carriage
master or conductor of the Artillery and carriages, go also with him.

In all Approches he is to take charge of the Trenches, and other works made in
them, and after he has received direction from the General or Marshal, he
shall give directions to all those that work, and see that the works be made in
such sort as they are appointed: In which service both Pyonniers, workmen, and
commanded men shall obey him.

Of an Inginier.
AN Jnginier ought to be a man very skillful and experienced in Arithmetic,
Geometry and the Mathematics, and before he begins to break ground, or runs
his lines of Approches, he ought to consider well the situation of the place,
and to have regard to the propriety and nature of the place, whither it be high
ground, low, plain or hilly.

By day he viewes well the ground, that he may the better run his approches by
night, in setting out his sticks and marks, that he may place his men, to get
speedily into the ground with the more safety, and as he advances to make the
Corpses of Guard, and the batteries upon the most advantageous places, for if
he should mistake his ground, and not run his line and approach well by
turning and winding it, and carrying it from the Bulwarks, Flanks and outworkes
of a Town or Fort, he may endanger the lives of many men, and therefore it
behooves him to be very circumspect and careful, but of this we will speak
more at large, when we come to handle Approaches.

The Office of the Commissary General of the Victuals.
HE is to take charge of all the Victuals prepared for the Army, as well by
water as by land, and to see either by himself or his Ministers the proportion
of Victuals to be duly distributed to the soldiers, and Mariners, as the
General or the Admiral shall direct him.

All Pursers, Stewards, and all other, that shall in any ship have charge, and
the oversight of the Victuals (as also all under Commissers and Conductors of
victuals by land) shall upon the discovery of the extraordinary wasting,
spoiling, or miscarrying of Victuals, presently give notice thereof to the
General, or to the Commissary General of the Victuals, that he may presently
take order about them.

Wheresoever the Army shall land, march, or lodge, all the victuals found in
such places, shall be seized upon by him, and a proportion set out by him for
the present use of the Troops, there quartered, and the rest reserved as part
of the general store and Magazine of victuals, and to that end, he himself
shall go, or send an under officer, or the clarke to attend the Lord Marshall,
or Quarter master general, when he goes to view and appoint him his quarter.

He shall keep a list of all the Bakers, Millers, and Butchers in the Army, and
of all others that are used about the provisions of Victuals, that he may set
them on work, as the occasion, and the service may require.

All ovens, and instruments of mils, for grinding, baking, or for preparing,
bestowing, carrying, or for the preserving of Victuals and provisions, shall be
under his charge, and he shall have authority to use and dispose of them for
the public service.

Jf any prizes of Victuals shall be taken at Sea or by Land, the Commissarie
General of the Victuals shall take a note and inventary thereof, and appoint
some officer of his to take charge over them.

Jf any preyes be taken by Land, he shall likewise keep an inventary of them,
and view them himself, and shall make the devision, as the General shall
direct him, or in his absence; the Marshall of the field.

He shall give out no Victuals but by special order and warrant from the
General, and from time to time, he shall give up unto him a perfect account of
the Wast, spoiling, or miscarrying of Victuals, either in the Army by Sea, or
by Land.

The Carriage Master his Office.
HE is with as much authority to order and marshall all the Carriages of the
Army, as the Sergeant Majour General is to marshall the Troops.

He shall see the carriages of the Munition first placed in the best and safest
places, next the carriages and train of the General, and the chief officers
of the Field, the next by turns: but because the encumbrances of Carriages may
often times disorder the whole troops, he shall receive his directions from
the Seriant Majour General of the Army, where his charge shall march, though
the particular disposing and ordering of the carriages be left to himself.

He shall have three several men, or officers under him called Conductors, to
attend upon the several devisions of the Carriages, as sometimes upon the
baggage of the Avantguard, the Battle, and the Reere: sometimes upon the
Carriages of the munition and Ordnance; the Generals and chief Officers
carriages, so that in the order of the march, they shall be divided into three
bodies, and he shall have some smiths, carpenters, and wheel-wrights attending
upon every several division: His best order in marshalling the carriages, will
be to observe the same order, as the Sariant Maiour does in marshalling the
Regiments which by the Provost Marshall of every Regiment, he may give notice
to all those that go along with the carriages.

His direction being given, he shall oversee the whole order of March for all
the carriages, and shall cause the Provosts of the several Regiments to keep
the same order.

The Muster Masters Office.
HE having received his orders, he shall make a general muster of the whole
Army before it be embarked, or marches, and keep a perfect list of the number
of Arms, whereof he shall deliver a true list to the General, that he may
know the strength of the Army. He is to make reviewes, as often as the
General, or in his absence, the Marshall of the Field shall appoint him, and
alter his list, as he sees it alter in strength, and to keep notes of the
alteration, betwixt every muster, and of the diminishing of the strength of the
troops, that is to say, when men are slain upon service, and what are dead of
sickness, and what men are run away, or diseharged by pasport.

He shall be obeyed and respected in the execution of his office, no Colonel
or Captain shall refuse to show him their men, whenever he shall require
them, either from the State or the General.

Of the three chief Officers of a Regiment, and first of the Seriant Majour.
THe Sariant Maiour of a Regiment ought to be a valliant man, an old Soldier,
and one that is well experienced in the way of his profession: upon all
occasions his place gives him access to the General, to the Marshall of the
Field, and to the Sariant Majour General of the Army, to know, how and in what
manner his Colonels Regiment is to march, whether in one body alone, or else in
two devisions joined with others.

Whereupon he gives order how the Regiment is to be marshalled and ordered, in
what form the Companies are to draw, and when upon any service they are
disbanded, how to really them again, as is required.

He receives his orders and commands either immediately from the General, as
is said, or from the Marshall, or Sarjant Maiour General, whether the Regiment
be to march in the Avantguard, Battle or Reere, he ought to have some knowledge
how the Country lies, through which the Army is to march, whether over a
spacious Campaignie in battle, or through narrow passages, woods, over rivers,
or the like, by drawing out of files, as the ground and passage will afford, as
also what order and form the Regiment is to keep, if they should be charged
with Horse, have Ordnance playing upon them, or being troubled with baggage.

Jn the presence of his Colonel and lieutenant Colonel, he is to be an
assistant to them in seeing all orders and directions executed and performed,
and in the absence of them both, to have the same authority and command, as the
Colonel or Lieutenant Colonel shall have.

In marching or embattailing he shall keep as near the midst of the
Regiment as he can, either in the Front, the Reere, or upon either flank, so as
he may best overlook and observe the order of their march or embattailling.

The Regiment being drawn up in devisions, he gives to every Captain and
Officer his place, according to his Seignority, and withal commands the
Drum-majour and the other Drumms to beat a March, and to move all at an
instant, and sees that the Soldiers keeps well their ranks and files, and
none to disbandie themselves, or straggle.

He is to come every morning and evening to the Sarjant maiour General of the
Army or to the Sarjant Majour of that Brigade or Tercia, to receive the word
and orders from him, if there be no extraordinary cause to hinder him, and when
he has received the word from the Serjant Majour General, or from the Serjant
Maiour of the Tercia, his Colonel and Lieutenant Colonel being present in the
quarter, he gives them first the word and the orders, and afterward delivers it
over to the Sariant of every Company of the Regiment, drawn in a ring,
according to the Seignority of their Captains, which are to come and attend
upon him for the same.

As he does receive directions for marching, embattailling, viewing of ground,
and placing of Guards, from the Sariant Maiour General, or the Sariant Maiour
of that Brigade: so he is to deliver them over to the Captains, and Officers
of that regiment, and to call upon them to whom it appertains, to see them
duly executed.

Every night he is to visit all the guardes of that regiment, and to keep
duly the turns of their Watches, and marches, (that one Captain or Company
may not do more duty then an other) as also in sending out Troops upon
service, to the end that both the honor and the labor may be equally divided.

It is also his duty to speak for ammunition, as powder, bullets, and match,
and for victuals for the regiment if there should be any want, and to see them
equally distributed to the Companies, according to the proportion given out,
and finally to give order and proportion for the number of workmen, or
commanded men of the regiment which are to go to work.

Of a Lieutenant Colonel.
THe next place above a Sariant Maiour is a Lieutenant Colonel, which is an
honorable charge, when his Colonel is present he is to obey him, in seeing all
the commands and directions that are delivered by any public officer, or such
as shall be within the authority of a Colonel himself, to be duly executed in
the absence of his Colonel, having as absolute command and authority over the
Regiment as the Colonel has himself,

In marching or embattailling if the Regiment consists but of one devision,
whenever the Colonel is in the head of his Regiment, his place is to bring
up the Reere of the Regiment, but if it consists of two devisions, then the
Colonel leads the first, and the Lieutenant Colonel the second, but when his
Colonel shall be in the Reere marching from an Enemy, his place is then to be
in the head of the Regiment.

Jf the Regiment consists of two Battaillons his devision is to quarter and
lodge on the left hand of his Colonels, and himself in the Reere of his own
Company.

Of a Colonel.
THe Colonel of a Regiment has a very honorable command, and is called in
Spanish Maestro del Campo, that is, one of the masters of the Field, and
therefore ought to be a man of authority and respect, having absolute command
and authority over the Captains and Officers of his Regiment, and all such are
to respect and obey his commands, as fully as they would do the chiefest
Commanders, and ought to love and honor him, which his valor, wisdom and
discretion will acquire him.

Also he is to see, that all orders, commands and directions, which are
delivered him by the public Officers of the Army, for guards, marches,
quartering, or any thing else, as for matter of Justice, for ordering of the
Troops, and furtherance of the service, be duly executed and performed within
his own Troops: Further, if he himself do find any mutiny, or any
discontented humors tending to mutiny, extreme outrage or disorder, or shall
be by any of his Captains, Officers or Soldiers informed of any such thing,
he shall forthwith advertise the Lord General or Marshall of the Field: And if
he find any other fault, negligence, or swarving from the directions or policy
of the Army set down, he shall straightway acquaint them by whom such direction
came, or was to come unto him, or some other superior Officer, and shall
produce the party so offending with the Witnesses and Proofs, that order may
be given forthwith, and Justice done: And if he fail to give this information
of any thing he knows or hears of, he shall be thought deeply faulty, and if
any such things pass without his knowledge, he shall be thought of worse
government then befits a man of his place and charge.

Upon marches the Colonel shall be at the end of his Troops, that is, next to
the Enemy in the head of his Regiment going toward an Enemy, and in the Reere
coming off, and is not to go from thence, except it be for the ordering of his
Troops, or for some extraordinary occasion, as to attend the General, or the
chief officers of the field.

He is also to see and command the Officers of his Regiment, that their men be
well armed and duly exercised.

A Colonel being one of the chief Officers of the Field, ought to be called
to take council and advice with the General, especially when any piece of
service is to be done, or in the day of Battle, which concerns his charge,
where he may freely speak his opinion, and give his advice touching matters of
weight and importance, and though his opinion may be good, yet if the most
voices be of the contrary opinion, and that things in the execution thereof
fall out ill and contrary to his own opinion, he ought nevertheless to give
way and yield to the plurality of voices, and wholly obeying his General be
ready to execute all his commands, giving thereby to understand that the
contrary opinion held by him in the Council of War, was neither for want of
courage nor affection.

A Colonel also ought to give all respect, love, and obedience to the General
of the Army, the Lord Marshall, and the Sariant Maiour general of the Field,
as having charge from the General to give out orders, as also to quarter and
appoint alarm places, the place of Battle, for marching, choosing of Guards,
and sending out of convoies. Moreover the Colonel once every week, may call
together all his Captains to enquire of all offenses happened in his Regiment,
and examine duly the nature and quality of such offenses, and to prepare the
cause for a more short and easy heareing in a Marshall Court, for all Colonels
are to repair to a court of War as often as they shall be warned, as an
assistant to the Lord Marshall, and the president of the Council of war, for
all causes that shall be questioned there, belonging to the Justice of the Army.

Finally in quartering, or lodging, if his Regiment consists of two devisions,
his quarter is in the devision, that is between his two battaillons assigned
for his Regiment, because he may give best and speedy directions to the whole,
this shall be shown more particularly, when we come to draw out the quarter
for a Colonel and his Regiment.

Of the Sarjant Majour General of an Army.
THe Office of a Sariant Maiour General of an Army is a place and charge of a
high degree, whose command is full of action, and therefore he ought to be an
able, a wise, a grave and able person experienced in the way of his profession.

He is to come to the Lord General or Lord Marshall for his orders and
directions for all watches and Guards that are to be placed, and upon the
charge of a quarter or a remove he is to march with the Lord General or
Marshall in the Avantguard (after he has seen the Troops settled in the order
of their march) and to view well the places appointed him by the General or
marshall for the placing of the Guards, upon the very first Arrival of the
Troops.

Having received the word, and his orders from the General, or the Marshall,
he gives them to the three Sariant Maiours of the Tercias, called also the
three Corporals of the Field, and they give both the word and orders to the
Sariant Maiours of every particular Regiment.

He himself in the beginning of the night, after the warning piece is gone
off, and that all guards are settled, he is to visit them, and gives order to
the three sariant maiours or grand Corporals of the field, which attend upon
the Avantguard, the Battle, and the Reere, at what time they (or some chief
Officer of the field) shall go the grand round, and if he or they find any
thing amiss, or any thing extraordinary discovered, either when he goes
himself, or one of the three Sariant Maiours of the Brigades, or any other
chief Office, they are to give him an account of what they find amiss, and he
is to advertize the Lord General or marshall therewith.

In a day of Battle or any kind of skirmish or fight, he is to receive his
directions from the Lord General or Marshall, and to see them duly executed.

Also in a day of Battle he has the ordering and disposing of the devisions
and battaillons, according to that form which the General shall command him,
and upon all occasions must be active and stirring up and down, to spy out
all advantages, which might offend an Enemy, and wisely to foresee all
disadvantages which might bring the Troops into any disorder or confusion.

Moreover he is to be the chief Officer with the Quartermaster General which
is to be at the Randevous for the disposing of the Troops of Horse and foot,
as also by giving out orders for the providing them with ammunition and
victuals.

And being arrived first at the Randevous, he is to give the Lord General and
the marshall of the field to understand the state of the army, that the Lord
General thereupon may give him command and direction, how and in what manner
the army is to be ordered, and afterward gives order to the sarjant maiours of
the Tercias, and they to the Sarjant maiours of every regiment for the
providing of ammunition victuals and all things necessary for the ordering of
the mareh.

He ought to be well acquainted with those passages and ways throw which the
Army is to march, and does commonly march himself in the head of the
avantgard, having some light horse and firelocks to attend him, and to send
out some troops to discover the ways and passages for the discovery and
preventing of Ambushments, having the Captain of the pyoniers and his men to
wait upon him, and the quartermaster General, for the making and explaining
of ways for the Army, that they may not be surprised on a sudden, and drawing
near unto the place of quartering or encamping, he and the quartermaster
General riding before, do view and choose out such ground and villages as may
be most commodious for the lodging and quartering of the Army.

To conclude, he is to have absolute command over the three Sariant Maiours of
the Brigades, otherwise called the three grand Corporalls of the field, who are
to be his assistants and his mouth, as he is the mouth of the Lord General, or
the Marshall, and therefore has a vigelant eye over all things, and sees that
the Generals commands delivered to him be strictly kept and observed.

The office of the three Sarjant Majours of the Tercias otherwise called the
three Corporals of the field.
THe States Army by order from his highness the Prince of Orange is commonly
divided upon a march into three Brigades or Tercias. In French he is called Le
Marshall, or Le Sarjant Majour de battaille, and in English one of the great
Corporalls of the field. A Sariant Maiour then of a Tercia does receive his
order immediately from the Lord General himself, or the Lord Marshall, but
most commonly from the Sarjant Majour General above mentioned, To wit, in what
form the Brigade or Tercia is to be ordered, and how many regiments of foot
and horse are to march under it, and with what ordnance and baggage. He
assigns and shows them the place, where they are to draw out in battallie,
and receives order from the Sarjant Majour General whether they are to march
in the Avantgard, the Battle, or the reere, so that in marching every one of
these three shall attend upon his Brigade, and several devisions, and in the
absence of the Sariant Maiour general see that the order of marching and
embattalliing be duly kept and observed. And every one of these three Sariants
maiours de Brigade are to be at the command of the Colonoll General or he that
leads and commands that Brigade or Tercia, and is to be sent to the Lord
General the Lord marshall or Sariant Maiour General upon any ocasion which
belongs to the present service.

These three Sariant Maiours of the Tercias are to be lodged as near the
Sariant Maiour General as conveniently may be. And these three which attends
upon the Avantguard the Battle and the Reere with the Sariant Maiour shall make
choice of ground for the placeing of guards, and assign them to the Sariant
Maiours of every Regiment, they are to go the Round and to visit the guard
commonly every night, and at such an hour as the Sariant Maiour shall appoint
them either by day or night.

Jf any of these three Sariant Maiours of the field shall find any want of
powder munition or victuals, either in the Avantgard, Battle, or Reere, as well
upon a march, as when the troops are quartered or during a fight. He is
presently to advertize the Sariant Maiour General with the said wants, and
then by his direction shall go with an officer of every Regiment of that
Tercia to the General or Lieutenant of the ordnance, or to the commissary
General of the ammunition or victuals.

To conclude, he having received his orders from the Lord General the Marshall
or the Sariant Maiour General gives them to the Sariant Maiours of the
particular regiments but because the word and the orders are to be sent to
quarters far distant one from another, the Sariant Maiour of every regiment
cannot come conveniently to the Sariant Maiour General. Therefore the Sariant
Maiour of the Brigades are to attend every morning and evening upon the Sariant
Maiour General, of the Army to receive their orders and to carry the word to
the several quarters, whether the Sariant Maiour of the regiments comes to
him, and from him receive the word and orders.

Of the General, or Master of the Ordnance.
HE has the charge of all the Artillery, Arms, Munition, Ingiens, Materials,
and Jnstruments of work, yea of all things belonging to the Ordnance, As
beddings, platformes, carriages, and whatsoever else appertains to the Office
of the master of the Ordnance.

Under the Lord General he has absolute command over all officers
appertaining to that Train, as the Lieutenant of the Ordnance, the Controuler,
the Clark, the Gentlmen of the Ordnance, The Master-gunners, Armorers,
Munitions, Ingeniers, Captains of Pyoniers, and Mineurs, over all Smiths,
Carpenters, and Wheelewrights, as also over all Artificers, and attendants upon
the train of the Artillery, Munitions and Matterials.

The General of the ordnance (after the places for batteries are chosen and
assigned him by the General of the Army) he is to observe, command and direct
the making of Bedds and platformes for the ordnance, he is also to give
direction for the making of ways and explanadoes, for the bringing up of the
ordnance to their batteries and to see that the batteries be made
Cannon-proofe, and the port-holes so that the ordnance may most annoy an Enemy.

And after he is once commanded by the General to begin a battery, he is to
give order to his inferior officers to play and beat with the ordnance upon
such and such places till the Lord General, gives direction to the contrary,
and as occasion and ground is gained to advance and remove the ordnance to
nearer places. Also in a day of battle or fight he is to choose the most
advantageous places for the planting of ordnance where they may gaul or offend
an enemy most, and to have a vigilent eye, that all things be done in good
order.

All the Artillery and carriages belonging to the train of his office upon a
march o^ quarter to be in the safest place of the Army, and therefore are to
take place before all other carriages unless some of the Ordnance be drawn to
march in the Avantguard, Battle, or Reere, or to some other places: where the
necessity of the service may require.

He is to make laws and orders for the well governing of the officers of his
train and all officers appertaning to his charge, with which he is to make the
General acquainted, that he from time to time may know the state of the
ordnance, and of all things else belonging thereunto, and to take care that the
service of the land be not defrauded.

Of the Commis or Clark of the Munition and Materials.
THe Clarke of the Munition, and Materials, Marches under the train of the
General of the ordnance, he by order from the General or Sariant Maiour
General is to give out all munition, as Powder Match, and Bullets, to the
Regiments, and Captains according to the list or proportion commanded him by
the General, and as he receives his bullet from the Sariant Maiour General,
which orders being given out the Sariants of every company repaires to his
quarter and lodging to receive it, and to give him an acquittance under their
hands for the receipt thereof. Likewise he is to take an account what powder,
bullets, and match is shot away and spent in the Approaches and Trenches, and
the Colonel which commands there gives him a note how much was spent the night
and day during his command there, because he is to give up an account to the
States and General how many barrills of powder, bullets, and match was spent in
the said approches.

More over, for entrenching outworks and Approches he is to deliver to the
quartermaster of every Regiment so many materials, to wit, Spades, Showels,
Axes, Pickaxhes, Hatchits, and bills, as there are workmen Commanded out of
every Regiment and company which are to go to work, which Materials the
quartermaster of every Regiment is to pass his hand for, and to distribute
them to the several companies, and when the work is ended to deliver them up
to him again or to give him a reconing how many were broken or lost upon
service that the commis may render an account to the States.

Of the Lord Marshall of the Field.
THe Lord marshall of the field is in command and authority next unto the Lord
General, as is (as it were) his Lieutenant and mouth, and therefore having so
eminent a place, he ought to be acquainted with all the duties of the officers
of the field: especially with the Generals office it self, because there is
such an affinity betwixt them, as having absolute power to command the Army in
the Generals absence, and may oftimes be employed to command the Army
himself, as commonly the marshals of France do.

His office is also to see that Justice be duly administered, and that the
Laws, Articles, and ordinances of marshall discipline be strictly kept and
observed, that all banishments, and proclamations, coming either from the
General, or the Council of war, be published, and excecuted, and by his
authority, to cause malefactors, and offenders, to be punished for an example
of others. And seeing that all he does is for the generell good of the whole
Army, he ought to be feared, honored, and respected of all men, and in no wise
contradicted, seeing it is his proper charge to take care that the policy and
discipline of the Army established by the General, be exactly kept and
maintained under his authority.

All quarrels and duels happening between officer and officer, soldier, and
soldier either of horse or of foot, ought to be brought before him, seeing it
is his office to right the wronged, and to punish the offender, or by his
wisdom and authority to appease and compose them.

The Lord Marshall also when the Avantguard is drawn out, and are ranged in
battallie while the battle and the reere are dislodging, he sees and commands
that both horse and foot march orderly and in their own place.

And with some choice troops marches before the Avantguard, and considers the
ways and passages, as Valleys, Rivers, Marras, Boggs, Mountains, Hills,
Hedges, Woods, Hollow and Narrow ways, throw which the Army is to pass, that
he may order the march accordingly as also to send out Scouts, Guides, Spies,
to discover and get inteligence from an Enemy.

He marches also in the head of the army, Sometimes with the Sariant Maiour
General, the quartermaster General, and the quartermaster of the Regiments,
as men experienced to view and make choice of the ground wherein the Army is to
be lodged and quartered.

He observes also the order of marching, quartering, and fighting, the three
chief things belonging to an Army, and sees and commands that the march,
quartering, and fight, be conformable to that order, which the General has
prescribed, and the devisions, and Troops being ranged in battallie, he is
full of action, and considers the place and soil of the ground, the advantages
of the Sunn, Wind, and dust, and how the troops with the most advantage may
be brought to encounter an Enemy, taking care that the order commanded by the
General be not changed, and when the troops are engaged in fight, he sees that
they be duly seconded, and relieved, and being overlaid or charged, to cause
them to retreat orderly for the avoiding of disorder and confusion, having a
watchful eye upon all casualities which may happen, for what the Lord General
ordaines, the Lord Marshall sees performed and executed, to the end, that both
their desires may take one and the same effect. For when commanders undertakes
a war, and fights with council and judgment, and sees all things also
executed with wisdom, discretion, and valor, giving the succes to God, no
man can then be blamed.

The Lord Marshall also ought to be acquainted with the Generals design, and
whether he is resolved to fight with an enemy or no. To consider whether he is
to charg an enemy in the Front, in the Reere, or on the flanks, to hinder them
from quartering, and to send out convoyes for the cutting off, of his Victuals
and provisions.

He ought to consider likewise how an Enemy lies encamped, which way he can
come to attempt him, whether he is to march, and whither his dessigne tends,
what order he keeps, with what Troops he may hinder or annoy an Enemy, or
being once engaged in fight, where and how he may best second and relieve his
own men, either with horse or foot, to place and bring up the devisions of
Musketeers, where they may most offend and gaul an Enemy, and the bodies of
Pikes may with the most advantage be brought to give a charge, or a shock.

Also to understand and get intelligence of what force and strength an Enemy
is, what baggage, carriages, and encumbrances he has, and from whence his
victuals and provisions are to come, to know whether any more forces are to
join with him, and how and in what manner he may break their conjunction.

He is also to have in a readiness, an exact Mapp of that Country through
which the Army is to march, and a description of all the ways, rivers and
passages, through which the Army is to pass, having also by him good Guides,
which are well acquainted with the several passages of that Country and place.

The Lord Marshall likewise, with the Sariant Maiour General, ordaines and
appoints all places for watches and Guards, either of Horse or Foot, which
they assign to the three Sariant Maiours of the Tercias, and they to the
Sariant Maiours of the Regiments, and the places which they are to maintain and
make good, also for alarme-places, and the choice of ground to fight a battle
in, for the most safety and defense of the Army.

In the day of battle he must be stirring and full of action to give orders
and directions where need most requires* and to (...) both officers and
Soldiers to acquit themselves like men.

Upon a march or the Army being encamped, he ought to counsel Tradesmen and
victuallers, which bring provisions to the army, and gives command that they be
not wronged and abused by the Soldiers, but that they may sell their
commodities peaceably: Likewise he gives order by his authority to the Provost
Marshall General, and to the particular Marshalls of every Regiment, that they
set reasonable rates and prizes upon victuals and beer for the good of the
poor Soldier.

There are diverse other points appertaining to the office of the Lord Marshal
of the field which for brevities sake I omit.

The Office and charge of the Lord General of an Army.
A General has absolute command over the whole Army, and is to know and
understand well the several duties and charges of every inferior Officer
under his command, and ought to be a personage of great experience, wisdom
and discretion, and capable to discern and choose the best of different
opinions, which may often fall out in the councils of war.

He ought also to be a personage descended of some noble House and Family,
which will give a luster unto his command, and a man of undaunted courage and
authority, severe and austere in his command, and to be greatly feared,
honored, and respected, a man full of resolution and magnanimity in the day of
battle, and constant and resolute in desperate cases, happy in his dessignes
and enterprises, but above all religious, fearing and invocating God to be
propitious and favorable unto him, to bless his designs, and to pray unto
the Lord of hoasts to give him knowledge, understanding and policy to govern
his army well, and that he may keep it in good order, and under good
discipline, whereby it may become not only capable of vanquishing, but also
victorious, which depends alone upon the Almighty power of the Lord of Hoasts,
and that neither good nor badd success should make him change or alter his
Countenance, but upon the hottest services to give out his orders and
directions with temperance and moderation, without impatience, choler, cruelty
or emulation against those that are under his command, especially those who
have gained honor, and deserved well, which he ought rather to advance and
reward, which will make him to be honored, loved, and respected of all men.

A General also ought to be qualified with these excellent virtues, as
wisdom, valor experience, providence, constancy, authority, and liberality,
and should well ponder and consider the occasion which might move him or engage
him into a fight, or to give battle to an Enemy, he ought to be sparing and a
good manager of the lives of his men, and not rashly and unadvisedly to hazard
his Troops, for he may as well vanquish by policy, in putting on the Lions
skin, and foreseeing all advantages and disadvantages, as by surprising an
Enemy unawares, as by laying hold upon an advantage, when their Troops are in
disorder, when they are dispersed, when they are dishartened, harryed and
wearied out, when they are pinched with hunger, thirst and cold, and such like
casualityes which may befall them.

Also by seeking to divert, amuze and devide their Army, while he keeps his
own in peace, concord, and unity, which is one of the chiefest points of
War. To gain time and advantageous places, to prevent and hinder an Enemy
from possessing them, and to seek by all means to break an Enemies dessigne,
and with all expedition to put his own into execution, and to premeditate and
to overweigh with a thousand things, which depends upon the war, having a
vigilant eye upon all occasions, for the Art Military has many difficulties
attending upon it, and one is not able to express the many hazards, straights
and plunges which befalls this profession.

He ought not lightly to hazard his men either in skirmishes, or in a battle,
unless he be forced to it, and that upon very good grounds and advantages: for
having flesht his men in small occasions, it hartens and embouldens his men,
and gives them the more encouragement, and assurance of good success, for they
perceiving the valliant, wise, and able carriage and conduct of their leaders
and Commanders, especially of their General, this makes them fight bravely,
and gives them hope of victory.

A General also ought to take the grave Council and advice of his Chiefes and
Commanders, and (as is said to make choice of the best, and yet not to make
known his own resolution, for many a brave attempt and enterprise has been
broken for want of Secrecy, and if he should reveal it to some intimate
friend: yet to do it as sparingly and reservedly as he can, by which means he
shall gain knowledge and experience, and in an instant will be ready to lay
hold upon such and such occasions as may execute his resolution. and there by
make him capable of prevailing.

A General ought to take care, that his Army be not wearied out, and
fatigated overmuch, which breeds sicknesses, and causes the weakening thereof,
to see and Command that the Regiments be well armed, and duly exercised in all
the several motions of war, that Justice be readily executed, to be
favorable to good men, and severe against Euill-doers and Offenders. It is
also the Office of a General to give Charge, that the Army be provided with
Victuals, amunitions, and other things belonging to the war.

A General ought to speak diverse languages, for having to do with sundry
Nations under his Command, being able to speak unto them in their own
language, this gives a great deal of Contentment.

Moreover, he ought to be learned, a good Mathematician, and well seen in the
points of Fortification, and to have excellent Inginiers about him, that are
careful in running the lines of Approches, for the preservation of the lives
of men.

It is requisite also, that he should have good Guides, and spies about him, to
get him intelligence of the State of an Enemy, and ought to spare no money that
way, for the breaking of an Enemies dessigne, and for the advancing of his own.

A brave General also considers, that the force of an Army consists not in
the multitude of men, but in Valliant and well experienced soldiers, and
Officers, which are well instructed, and trained up in the use of their arms,
and knovves that Victory consists not in many Troops; but that an Enemies
army being stronger then his, as has often happened by observing of good order,
and dicipline choosing of advantages of VVind, Sun, and Ground together with
the ready obedience of his men, in executing of his Commands, and by
experience in their profession, they become more bold and confident in fight,
so that an old beaten soldier, knows by heart, what his Chief and General
will require of him.

As a General should be beloved: so likewise he ought to be feared, and of the
two among. Cammon soldiers, rather to be feared, for the most part of them,
vvil be sooner restrained from doing evil for fear of punishment, then for any
love they bear to their General.

To conclude, he ought to be experienced in the beleegring of Towns, and
Forts, to view all places of advantages, and where an Enemy may most offend
him, to forrifie his Camp strongly with lines of Circumvalation, Forts and
works upon it, to know the site, and situation of a town, how, and in what
manner those within are able to defend it with men and munition, to cause his
Inginiers to be very circumspect, and careful how they run their lines, to sap
forward to the weakest part of the Town or Fort, which he intends to become
Master of, with diverse other things requisite in a brave General, which for
brevities sake I will omit.

NOW FOLLOWS IN WHAT ORDER an Army ought to march in over a Campaigne, narrow
passages, Woods, and Rivers.
HAving shovvne the several Offices of the Officers of the field, it rests
now to speak something in what order an Army ought to march.

The Army then being come to the Rendevous, or being to disencampe from any
place, the afternoon or evening before the breakeing up of it, orders is given
out, that the Soldiers shall be provided with Munition, and so many days
Victuals, as the General shall Command.

But an Enemy being near at hand, when the General will conceal the^
breakeing up they dravv into Arms silently, without sounding of Drum, or
Trumpet.

The General being attended upon before his Lodging, by the Sariant Majour
General, the Quartermaster General, the Captain of the Pionniers and some
other Officers.

The most part of the Army, being drawn into Arms, the General gives
Command to the chief Inginier. Quartermaster or some other, to throvv down
the Trench, fill up the Ditch, and to make such gappes in it, that whole
devisions, and Battaillions may march through them.

After the Trench is cast down, the General, or the Sariant Majour General
from him, gives order that the Avantguards shall draw forth, and march a good
distance without, and there to stand, and make a halt, till the Battle, and
the Reere be also drawn out, in observing a con venient distance between
them. In the interim the Ordinance, Carriages, wagons and baggage that belongs
to the Army, are likewise drawn out, and put into order. And the Guides,
Scouts, and Pyonniers sent out before into the Country, to discouver and to
set out Sentinels of Horse upon all passages, and heigths, while the Army is a
marching forwards.

The Master of the Ordinance being present, Commands where the Ordinance and
the train of Carriages belonging to them shall march. And gives order to the
Conductours, and Inferior Officers, to march forward, as the nature and
propriety of the ways will permit. And if there be any rough ways, which are
to be explained, he Ordaines the Captain of the Pioniers, and his men to make
them plain and even, likewise all the wagons of Ammunition, and Victuals with
the baggage, are put in order by the Carriage Master and conductours of the
train: but the wagons and Carrs belonging to the horse, they are ordered by
their Officers, to march according to the seignority of every Regiment.

How the Artillery, and the Carriages are to March.
The Ordinance marches first with all the Carriages, and the Pyonniers are
always by them, having noe other wagons mingled among them, and so march in
their order only with one wagon before them, laden with spades, shovels,
Axses, hachets, hand biles, and other instruments to make the ways, and to
explain the ground and ditches, after which is drawn an Instrument, which
does make a rut upon the way, to show which way the Canon is to pass. The
lesser lighter pecces of Ordinance laid upon their Carriages follows the said
Instrument, and afterward the great pieces drawn upon block-vvaggons when
there is no danger: but expecting to be encountered by an Enemy, they dravv
them upon their Carriages for fear of loosing time in mounting them, least an
Enemy might fall suddenly upon some part of the Army. Next after the
Ordinance follows the wagon with Instruments, and Tools for Carpenters,
and Smiths, the wagon laden with Bullets, powder, and match, and after
them wagon with Pikes and muskets, all which being passed; then follows
the wagon belonging to the General of the Ordinance and his Inferior
Officers. And after them all the wagon laden with munition for the
Ordinance, and the Army, the wagon laden with Victuals, provisions, and
wagon for the sick and hurt, and last of all the baggage, belonging to the
Officers of the whole Army.

But when necessity requires, some Field pieces marches before in the head of
the Army when an Enemy is expected to fall on, with which there marches
some wagon laden with powder, match, and Bullets to be used upon any
occasion.

All the Ordinance, carriages, and baggage being thus ordered, and the army
divided into the Vantguard, the Battle and the Reere: the Sariant Maiours of
the foot Regiments, and the Commissaries of the Horse Troops, having order,
shows which way they are to lead the Troops, that they may give noc
hindrance one to an other, and the General, or the Sariant Maiour General
gives Command, that the Vantguard shall begin to march, and sends out before it
Guides and light horsemen, to discouver the passages: yet so, that they ride
not so far before: but that they keep alvvaies within sight of the
Vantguard, that upon the discouverie of an Enemy, they may advertize and givi
them vvarnin of it in time

The Vantguard then (as is said) has commonly some small pieces of Ordinance
marching before it, which likewise may happen before the Battle, and in the
Reere of all with a greater number of horse, and foot, as the necessity may
require: so that the three Tercias of the Army, are all of the^ provided with
Ordinance, where it is thought most needeful and where it is imagined an
Enemy may give an attempt, either upon the Front, the Reere or upon either of
the Flanks: for which one can give noe certain rule, but must defend
themselves in that place, where the occasion presents it self.

When a Campagnie, Heath, or Field is spacious and large, then one may march in
full Battle by divisios, and close by one an other in good order, which an
Enemy perceiving, it may be he dares not offer battle, otherwise every
devision, and Battaeillion may march by it self with more ease and liberty,
then when they are joined close together: yet so that in case of necessity
they may easily be drawn up together, as likewise the Ordinance, and baggage
drawn to that place, where they may be safest, and best defended by the
troops, if an Enemy should give an attempt upon them.

The wagon ought to be drawn up, and ranged into eight, or ten rancks
close one to an other, that they may march without hindering one an other, and
the Ordinance may march upon one of the flanks of the Army, and some Field
pieces before if necessity should require, without hindering, or putting the
rest of the wagon into disorder, which the Master of the Ordinance, or the
Carriage Master, ought to Consider well, and take a special care of.

The Chief Officer which Commands the Reereguard, gives order that some
Troops of light horsemen shall march with in sight of the whole Reere,
especially, when they are to pass over a Heath, or Campagnie: but the
Country having mountains, hills, and valleys in it, then the horse may be
commanded to march sometimes in the Vantguard, and sometimes in the Reere of
all the Army, and keep such vvatch, and sentinels upon the highest places,
that an Enemy may not discouver the strength of the Army as it passes, or in
what order it marches.

When the army is to march throug some narrovv passages, the Vantguard is
commonly strengt hened with some foore, or Ordinance drawn up before it,
least an Enemy migt surprise it, and marches the^ by files, and draws up as
the condition of the place will permit. In like manner the Reereguard in
places of danger, ought to be strengthened, as also the Battle to be ranged
into such an order, that the Ordinance, and Baggage, being placed in the
midst, may come best to serve, and relieve the other Troops, from whence
they may send Harquebussiers (as occasion serves) to attend both upon the
Vantguard, and che Reere, and as the ground will best afford.

In case that the ways and passages be so narrovv, that the Ordinance,
Carriages, and baggage takes up so much time, that the Vantguard cannot be
easily seconded by the Reereguard, then there may be appointed some Troops of
Reserve, which may march along with the Carriages, and Baggage, to be
disposed of in such a sort, that they may the better relieve those Troops,
which should be overcharged by an Enemy.

Upon such an occasion, one ought to consider and observe well, the nature,
and condition of that passage, throug which the Army is to march, whether
there be any vvindings and turnings in it, or other intrieate ways, as
through vvoods, hills, and valleys, where an Enemy may best lay his
Ambuscadoes: therefore upon every such turning, or cross way, a troop of
horse, and some foot ought to be placed upon it, to guard there, till the
Ordinance, Carriages, and Baggage be past and out of danger.

How one is to march through a wood.
But in passing through a Forest, a great vvood, or a Grove, there ought to be
placed good store of Horse upon the ways that goes into it, and where the
Army is to pass, to round and guard it well, a svvel on the one side, as on
the other. And if there be any plain or open places in it, the Horse are to
overspread it, and to dravv there up in Battle for the seeuring of the
passage, till the Ordinance and Baggage be al past, and that the foot, and
Horse follovv, which are appointed as a Reserve to bring up the Reere.

The Army then having passed through a vvood, and come again into a plain
Campagnie, or Field, some Horse are to guard the way that comes out of the
vvood, till the Horse troops are drawn up in those Fields, and are possessed
of the heigths thereof.

How, and in what manner an Army is to pass over a River.
When an Army is to march through a Country, wherein there are Rivers, and
Brooks* the States Army carries continually along with the^ some ten or
twelve boats having plancks* Sparrs, Beams, anckors* and Cables laden in
them, and upon those Block-Waggons that are drawn with some te^, or twelve
couple of horse, which coming to a river, they presently take them down,
casts out their anckors* and lays them over the river, as broad as it is, and
as many as they have use of joining them together, laying the beams, plancks,
sparrs, and boards upon them, and so in an instant, claps over a bridge, over
which the Army Ordinance, and Carriages may pass without danger Sometimes
also for expedition sake they lay over bundles of floate, or slag bridges bound
up in Canvass, as also they make a bridge with Barrels and Hogsheads, in laying
sparrs and planckes upon them, being clasped and fastened hard together: so that
foot and horse, and some small Field pieces may march over them.

A Bridge then (having good Inginiers, Carpenters, and workmen) is presently
made over a River, or a brook, for the securing whereof, there are certain
pieces of Ordnance, drawn up, and planted by the river side, to play upon an
Ennemie, if they should force the passage over it, and likewise dravve up some
Harquebussiers, lighthorsemen, firelocks, and musketeers, to give fire upon an
Enemy, while the bridge is a making. As soon as the bridge is laid over, some
firelocks, halfepikes, and horse marches first over it, to maintain and make
good the other side of the river, till all the Army and carriages be come
over, and takes also along with them four or five small pieces of Ordnance,
to scour the passage, a vvaggon laden with powder, and ammunition, and some
Pionniers to make the ways, hedges, and ditches, plains, and expecting an
Enemy at hand commonly cast up a trench, or a work on both sides of the
bridge, having some 500 Soldiers to guard it, till the Army and all the
Carriages and Baggage be passed over it.

Now if an Enemy should seek to oppose, and (...) your passage over it, the
Ordinance horse, and firelookes above mentioned, are (...) ^^rposely upon the
Riversside, to free the passage, and to clear the Coast.

HAVING SHOWN THE DUTIES OF THE Officers of the Field, touching the Infanterie
or foot, before J show the several forming and making of Battles. It is
necessary that I briefly speak some thing of the Officers of the Field, which
commands the Cavallrie or Horse troops, which are these, namely.
Of the Quartermaster General.
THe Quartermaster General of the horse, has the particular Quartermasters of
every troop as his assistants to ease him, and to help him to discharge his
place, either when the troops are lodged in howses, or formally quartered in
the field, from him they receive their orders, and billets for their troops,
chaulking the name of their Captains upon the doors of every house, where the
troop is to lodge. The further duties required in a Quartermaster General,
are described in this second part, in speaking of the Quartermaster General of
the foot.

Of the Commissarie General.
The Commissarie Generals place ought to be given to a soldier of great
experience, who has bin bred up in the wars, being a man of valor wisdom
and discretion: in a Co^missarie General is required also vigelencie,
dexterity and an ability to compose Quarrels, and punish disorders which may
arise between officer, and officer, soldier, and soldier, what he cannot do
by fair means, he has power and authority sufficent to punish them. It is
also his duty to give out orders, to appoint guards upon avenues and passages,
to keep a list of all guards, Convoyes, and other actions, to receive orders
from the General, or the Lord Marshall of the field, to give it first to the
General of the horse, and afterward to the Quartermasters of the troops, that
they may give them to their Captains and superior officers: also to range,
and embattaille the horse in that form, and order, which his General, or
Lieutenant General shall find good, in whose absence he commands the Horse.

Of the Lieutenant General.
The charge of a Lieutenant General of the horse is of great authority, and
reputation, and therefore he ought to be a man of great experience, valor, and
wisdom, careful, and diligent for the well ordering of the troops, because
he commonly marches, with them, and lodged among them. He must have knowledge
of the ways, and passages through Countries, and choose the best way, least
meeting with an Ennemie, lying in Ambuscado, upon a march, he may give him a
blow. Therefore, he must always have his mind buyssied upon the motions of
his Ennemie, discovering from what part they may annoye him, be it either
foot, or horse; in how many hours they can march unto him, by what passages
they may assault him, to send out Scouts and Spies to give him true
intelligence, that he may be provided for them, against some sudden attempt.
To give encouragement to officers and soldiers in the day of battle, to
carrye themselves bravely, to charge home, and to find out all advantages, to
break and route their Ennemie. He ought not only to carry himself lovingly
to the soldiers in hearing them willingly: and assisting them in their
necessities, but also to punish offenders severely, which will make him to be
both feared, loved, and respected.

Of the General.
The General of the horse is one of the principal chiefs of an Army, who
ought to be a Soldier of great experience, and valor, and for the most part a
personage descended of a noble familly. Yea a man of a high spirit and
command, for under his charge are the finewes of the principal forces of an
Army, from whose magnanimity, valor, and wi^edome procedes many times good
success, when occasions are offered, which are for the most part executed by
the horse, especially in the day of battle, who charging in good order upon an
advantage, may happily rout an Ennemie, and get the victory, whereas contrary
wise, by the disorders of the horse, it may breed great confusion and loss of
men.

The General of the horse ought to take particular notice, not only of the
Captains and officers, but also of every gentleman and soldier that carries
themselves bravely in the face of their Ennemie, and to honor and respect them
in public, which will encourage others to do the like, and when occasion
present itself, to advance them to military charges. Contrariewise to punish
Delinquents. and such as do not their endeavor, in doing whereof, he shall be
honored, loved, feared, and respected of all men: last of all, by his high
command, he gives command for the due exercising of his troops, and helps in
them their necessities.

To conclude, the proportion, or gross of the States horse, answerable to
their foot, consists in eighty troops of horse namely Curassiers, Carrabins
and Harquebusiers, two Companies of Curassiers and two Companies of
Harquebusiers being joined together, according to his highness order make a
battaillon or a Devision: These also being formed and ordered into ten
Regiments, may be drawn as the foot are into three Brigades or Tercias,
making the Avantgard the Battle and the Reere, as you see them ranged in the
first figure, by observing their true distances.

What a goodly show it is, to see these 80 troops of Horse drawn into three
brigades, the General commanding in the head of the Avantgard, the Commissarie
General in the battle and the Lieutenant General in the Reere, being bravely
mounted, well armed with their skarfes, and 160. Trumpetters sounding Tantara
in honor of their prince, and Country I leave it to the report of those,
which have seen it.

Also of what excellent use, and service horse may be off in the day of
battle, for the breaking of foot, as also upon execution, for the cutting off
of Convoyes, gayning of passages, and the beating in of an Ennemie salying out
of a Town beseiged. I will leave to the testimony of history, and here will I
shutt up this second part.

FINIS.
FIRST. OF THE ORDERING AND FORMING of a Devision, or a Battalion, and then the
form of an Army of thirty thousand Horse, and Foot raunged in Battle.
THe ordering of a Regiment, according to his highness the Prince of Orange
his co^ma^d, has bin shown already in the first part of this book, namely,
that Companies being made into even files, and ten deep, four or five
Comapnies, joined together make a division, to wit, the Pikes are drawn first
into one body, and then the Musketeers into an other, standing in their true
distance of three foot in file and Rank, and 18 foot distance between the
Pikes and the Musketeers, this is the first order. The second is, when the
Musketeers are equally divided, as near as may be, and drawn up on the
right, and left flanks of the Pikes, there to give fire by Ranks, or to march
away, as these two first figures marked with number 1 and 2 do show.

Now the fittest number of men to make a devision of, is accounted to be 500.
Pikes, and Musketteires, that is, 25 files of Pikes, and 25 files of
Musketteires, or more, or less of the one or of the other, as they fall out.

This number being so embattailed makes an Agile body, and the best to be
brought to fight, and two of them being joined near one an other, can best
second, and releive each other, better the^ your great Phalanges, which are
unweeldy bodies, the experience whereof was seen in the Battle of Nieuport:
for being once broken, and routed, they can hardly be reallyed again, and
cannot bring so many men to Fight, as the Lesser Bodies do.

Many of these Devisions being drawn together make a Tercia, or one of the
third parts of an Army, and three of them the whole.

For all the Officers and Soldiers of an Army, are divided into three parts
called Brigadoes, or Tercias, each of them having a several name, to wit, the
Vantguard, the Battle, and the Reereguard.

Now that Tercia, which is to march first, is called the Vantguard, that which
marches in the midst the Battaille, and that which comes up last the Reere.
Every one of them upon a march every day taking their turns interchangeably:
for the second day of the march, the Battle becomes the Vantguard, and the
Reere the second day has the Battle, and the third day the Tercia which had
the Reere the first day is the Vantguard.

Moreover, each Tercia may likewise be subdivided into a Vantguard a Battaille
and a Reere, to the end each of them with the more convenience may be orderly
brought to fight, and by that Chief which commands them.

Therefore, the Battaill one of the Tercias of the Army, being placed in the
midst, that of the Vantguard, may be drawn on the right, and the Reere on the
left flank of the Battaille.

Now the number of the devisions, which each of these Tercias have, are
ordered, and divided after this manner, two devisions before, two in the midst,
and two behind, standing above, as you may see in some of the figures of the
Battles following, having six or 7 devisions placed in evetie Tercia. The
seventh being uneven, is placed as a Reserve behind the Reere, to second the
others in time of need.

The first devisions of the Tercias standing in a right line, are to give the
first charge, according to the order of their March.

The second devisions standing likewise in a right line, makes likewise the
second troops and the third part of the Battle.

Now these devisions are also ordered and joined, that if the first should be
overcharged and come to give ground then the second are to come up, and to
releive the first, yet in such a distance, as they may not hinder one an other
in marching by them, but find place to come up betwixt the first.

The third devisions are to be placed directly behind the second, in a distance
twice as as the second is from the first, that if it should happen* that the
first division should stand behind the second, that then the third might have
room enough, to put it self into good order.

The Horse Troops are commonly ordered, the one half on the right, the other
half on the left flank of the divisions, and Battaillons of foot, as the
first figure of an Army demonstrates.

And sometimes there may be Battaillions of Horse interlaced, and placed
betwixt the intervals, and distances of the Foot, as the ground and necessity
may require. For, if an Enemies Horse should be ranged between his
Battaillions of foot, it is needful then, that the other side should observe
the fame form likewise, and have horse to encounter horse, least they should
break in upon the foot divisions, and so by this means they may with the
more convenience second, and relieve one an other, otherwise the Foot being
overlayd with an Enemies Horse, having not Horse at hand, to charge and second
them, might be casely routed and overthrown, and though and Enemy have not
placed Horse between their battaillions of foot, yet it may easily be done,
according to the discretion, and foresight of the General. All which shall be
clearly demonstrated to the Eye by figure first in beginning with an Army of
six thousand Horse, and 24, thousand foot embattailed into three Tercias, with
their several divisions, and afterward I will show the grounds and platformes
of the Battle of Nieuport in Flanders, fought (Anno 1609) between Prince
Maurice of famous memory, and Albert Arch Duke of Austria, and then proceed
on to represent unto you the forms of Battles shown by the Prince of Orange
abouesaid, and his highness brother the Prince of Orange that now is till Anno
1635, which may give some satisfaction to those, which are desirous to follow
the profession of a Soldier.

The Demonstration of the figures following, marked with great A. and B.
THe two first figures, marked with the figure 1 and 1 are two Divisions of 25
files of pikes a piece, and ten ranks deep, ranged in Battaille.

The second two figures noted 2. and 2. are two Divisions of musketeers,
consisting also of 25 files a piece, and 10 Ranks deep as abovesaid.

Now if you are desirous to alter this form, and divide your Musketeers into
two parts, then you may draw up 13 files on the right flank, and 12 files on
the left flank of the Pikes, and giving them their true In tervals and
distances for the Musketeers to fall away, then there are two divisions made
of a Regiment, and they stand as is showed underneath, marked with the figure 3.

The figure B represents the form of an Army embattailed, consisting of 24
Regiments of foot, each Regiment making two divisions of 100 men, and 20
divisions of Horse, Curassiers, and Harquebusiers, each division consisting of
300 Horse, making six thousand Horse in all ranged into three Tercias, with
the true number of feet, and distances between them, as the figures shows.

Note also, where the gentle Reader sees a P marked within the Division, that
signifies Pikes, and the division underneath are musketeers marked with the
Letter M.

To conclude, the Horse are noted in French with C for Cavallerie, and in
English with H for Horse.

The figures that are Colored are distinguished thus. The Pikes with a yellow,
the Musketeers with a green, and the Horse with a red color.

THE ORDER AND FORM OF QVARTERING and Encamping of an Army.
HAvings howne the figures of General Forms, and orders of embattailling,
ranged in the wats of the united Provinces, under the Command of his Excellency
Maurice Prince of Orange of famous memory, and his Highness Frederick Henry
Prince of Orange, our Captain General that nowis: I will proceed on and show
how, and in what manner an Army ought to be encamped, with the sevetall
divisions of their quarters, beginning fitst with a Company of Foot, and
Horse, then with a Regiment, and afterward an Army entrenched, and last of all
come to handle Approches, and all things depending thereupon, for the beseiging
and taking in of a Town or Fortress: which for the most part, I have
translated out of Mr. Adam Fritach, an excellent Mathematician, in his book
printed. Anno 1635.

THE FIRST CHAPTER.
Of three sorts of Camps or Leagers.
THere are three kinds of Camps, The first is called in Latin Castra
Temporaura, that is, A Camp which stays not long in a place, but removes and
changes every day: the second Castra Strataria a settled Camp, which
environeth a Town, or a Fortress with intent to take it in, and the third is
called Castra Sustentoria, a Camp lying upon a passage, or river to stop and
hinder the incursions of an Enemy from getting into a Country.

The Camp which dislodgeth every moment is called Castra Temporanea.
This Camp is also called a Flying Leager, hiving no certain place of abode,
but at every motion, is continually to attend an Enemy upon every remove, and
this Army is to encampe, when the Enemies Army encampeth, and therefore is
called a Flying Camp, because it is to hinder the Enemies progress.

A Camp having a trench Cast up about it, or beset with Turn Pikes and
Palissadoes.
Now for a Camp, which is ready to remove upon an instant, we understand that,
which takes up a quarter only for one night, which form requires a great
deal of wisdom, and circumspection, especially when it is to march, or
Quarter not far from an Enemies Country. Therefore, it is very necessary,
that the General sends out before, a good number of Horse, to view, and
inform themselves of the nature, and condition of that place, where the Army
is to Quarter that night, for the accommodation where of, they ought to choose,
as near as possibly may be, a place situated in a plain Feld, to which the
Army being come (and that in good time by day, the Quarters shall be made
near unto the a dioyning villages) if there be any and the Horse lodged about
them, in places of danger most suspected. A camp may be encompassed with a
Trench 4 foot high, and 3 foot broad for their more safety against an Enemy,
which otherwise might give an attempt upon some part of the Army. The moorish
grounds, where is Enemy is not feared, that may be beset with Turn Pikes, or
with Palissadoes, which may be taken up again, when the Camp removes.

After the Thenches are in defense, the Soldiers begins to make their huts of
forks, lathes, withes and straw, or for a night only with sticks and boughs,
or such things as they can get, the carriages and wagons laden with Ammunition,
Materials, and Victuals are to be lodged in the midst of the Camp, with a
small trench cast up round about them; but some pieces of Ordinance are to be
planted upon those avenues and passages, where an Enemy may best give on upon
the Camp when the watches, and the Sentinels are disposed of, the rest of the
Army goes to take their rest, the next morning at the break of the day and at
drums beating the Army dislodges, and every one makes ready for to march
away, while the trench is a Casting down, lest an Enemy, which follows the
Army might lodge in the same quarter.

But if the Army is not to march through an Enemies Country, and that one is
assured they cannot come near unto the Camp so soon it is not necessary to
environ the Camp with trenches, but the Soldiers are either Quatered in
houses* or feilds next adjoining to them, in disposing of guards, and Sentinels
in every place needful, and this order of march observed every day, till the
Army is come unto that place, which is resolved to be beseiged; where then a
formal, and a settled quarter called Castra strataria is made.

Castra Strataria and the proprieties thereof.
The propriety of this Camp may be observed well out of the Instructions of
Veget in the 22 chapter of his fust book, as also in the Castrametation of
Hygnius Gromaticus, according to these observations following.

First, that the Quarter be made in safe place, that is, where there are no
hills and heights, which may command and serve as an advantage to an Enemy,
when he resolves to relieve the Town, or Fort beseiged, or to assault the
Camp; for being lodged and fortifying himself upon them, he may easily
overlooke the Camp, and then it is subject to be played upon by an Enemies
Ordinance.

That it be made (if it be possible) near unto some brook or river, which may
commodiously serve, as well, for the watering of Horse, and Cattle, as also for
the Soldiers, and by which, with shipping, or boats one may bring up Munition
with provisions, and Victuals to the Camp, by the help of a running river, or
the wind for the saving of excessive charges, when one is driven to bring them
up to the Army by Convoyes, and wagons, which oftentimes causes a dearth in
the Army: for commonly Victulars, and Sutlars raises the price of their
Victuals, and commodities, according to the lengh of the way, if they be
constrained to bring them up by wagon hire. Besides, it is a great advantage
for a Quarter, to lie by a river side, because sometimes the water may be
carried round about the Camp, which will make it stronger, then if it were
lodged in a plain Field, and fortifyed with some small Forts, and Redoubts; so
that all that charge is saved in making of works, if the Camp may
commodiously be enclosed about with water. I say nothing of the great stink,
caused by dead Horse, and beasts, as also by Butchers and their shambles, which
like wise is avoided by the help of Water, neither are men so subject to
sickness, and pestilence, which takes away many times a greater number of
people, and weakens an Army more, then if it were assaulted by an Enemy. For,
the prevention of which inconvenience, the Carrions, panchescand garbidges of
Beasts are cast into it, and carried away with the stream, and the Butchers
quartered in the most remote parr of the Camp.

One must also have a special care, that there be no thick-bussches, and
woods about it, where an Enemy may lie in Ambuscado, or fortify themselves
without any hindrance, which would keep a Camp in Continual fear, of being
assaulted by an Enemy out of a wood.

To make choice then of the sit places, to encampe and Quarter in, those
are held the most commodious, which are situated in a plain Field, seeing an
Enemy may be discovered a far of, having then time to draw into Arms, to
oppose them, and that the Canon may play upon them, in case an Enemy would
attempt to assault the Camp by force.

As many sicknesses are engendered by stanch, end the putrefaction of the air:
so likewise many are caused by Moorish grounds, Marras, and bogs, in regard of
the damps, and fogs, which rises out of the waters, as also poysonable
vapors, arising out of marshie grounds, where upon the Soldiers hutts are
built.

Therefore one ought to be well informed, before a quarter or a camp be made
for an Army, whether those grounds be covered or overflowhe with water, which
may often happen in Autumn, or Winter, which were a great annoyance, and hurt
to the Camp, if it were driven to stay there all winter, and that one knew not
the Condition of the place. Again, it may serve for some use to help the
beseiged, or those which come to relieve the Town, when they may turn the
water by some places into the Camp, or can cut some dikes or Seabanques, or
keep up the water by banks, and sluices, to make it overflow the Campagnie,
which will bring a greater dammago to the Camp, then fire would do, therefore
one ought to consider, and ponder well all these things, and to think upon
some remedy to prevent these inconveniences.

One ought also to make choice of such a place, which yields good store of
grass, and hay for Cattle, and straw for the acco^modation of the Soldiers;
because the want of fourrage for Horse, will constrain them to fetch it far
by convoyes, which is dangerous for the Soldiers, when an Enemy lies upon the
snap for them, and their Horses in those places, where they are driven to fetch
their fourrage, which one is forced to do with great Convoyes, and excessive
expenses. Also there must be care taken, that there be no want of wood for
fyring, and building of Soldiers buts, as also straw serving for the same use.

A Camp ought not to quartered too near the Town Beseiged, lest the Enemy
may reach it, and do great annoyance to it with his Canon, neither ought it to
be quartered too far of, but that one quarter may with expedition relieve one
another, as also those which work in the Approches, if the beseiged should
sallie out upon them, therefore the furthest, and the nearest distance for the
better safety of the Camp, is to lie without Canon shot.

The Circumference, measure, greatness, and largnesse of a Camp, ought to be
answerable to the greatness or littleness, of it: for one must not take a
place too little for a great Army, neither a place too great for a small
Army: for the one will not be able to defend the Camp, because of the
smalnesse of it, and the other not able, and sufficient to defend a great place.

Finally, it is a point of great consequence for a Camp, to have all the
avenues, and passages that comes to it well guarded, so that an Enemy cannot
lodge near it, to hinder the provisions and Victuals which comes to it, for
want where of many times an Army is forced to rise.

A Camp then being endowed with all these Proprieties, no question but it is
well settled. But seeing that such places are seldom found, which answers to
all these proprieties described above, one must accommodate themselves,
according to the propriety of the place, and repair that by Art, which is
wanting by Nature.

If there being any hills, or heigths in it, you must quarter, and lodge upon
them, when the nature of the place will afford it, or if there be any other
commodious place near unto the Quarter, it ought to be taken in, and
environned with a Trench, and a Redoubt made in it, and Ordinance planted upon
it. But this height being situated upon a passage, or place of importance* a
Fort is made upon it in taking away, as much as possible may be all advantage
from an Enemy.

The seige of the Bosch may give us an exsample herein, where was a height
situated upon the way, as you go to Vliemen, and toward the Longstrate, upon
the top of which hill, a fouresquare Fort was made with four Demy-Bulwarkes,
and besides a Crowne-worke before it, and before that as a surplus, there was
made a Horne-worke, all which works were nevertheless environned with the
line of circumvalation, which encompassed the whole Army: for the Enemy could
hardly assault the Camp on this side, because the hill lay so, that it
commanded all the grounds about it.

When there is no River, then all necessaries, and provisions must be brought
to the Camp by wagons, whereupon care must be taken, that the waggonmen and
Sutlars set not too high a price upon their provisions, and Victuals, which
might cause a Dearth and scarcity in the Army.

For the avoiding of stincks and noisome smells, the dead Carions of horses, and
other Beasts ought to be carried and buried far off without the camp and
quarters, to which order also the Butchers are subject, for the carrying away
of the panches, and Entrails of the Cattle which they kill, and to bury them
in pits without the camp.

The woods, thickers, and groves, which stand not far from the camp, ought
to be taken in within the Trench, when it may conveniently be done with asmall
charge, which wood and timber may serve for firing, and other good uses. But
when they lie too far of, and cannot have all within the Compass of the line
of Circumvalation, which may be dammageable to the Camp, then they are cut
down, and burnt, lest an Enemy might lay any Ambuscadoes in them.

Also, having a water, or a river, which may be stopped by the Beseiged: so
that in time, it might overflow the Camp, one ought to take a singular care by
hindering it, and casting up of some bank to stop, and carry it about the Camp,
to discharge it self elsewhere, which necessity, and experience will teach one.

All these things then being maturely considered, and overweighed, after one is
well informed of the nature, and condition of the soil, lying about the Town,
or Fortress, which is to be beseiged, and being come within two or three Durch
miles of that place, the Quartermaster General before the Army rides out with
some 80, 100, or a greater number of Horse, as necessity may require, to view
the town, or Fortress to be beseiged and considers well the soil and grounds
that lies about it, and draws a draught and platform of them, that he may the
better distribute, and give out the several Quarters.

All Quarters are not alike over all, and of one and the same form, but one
must accommodate himself many times, according to the site of the place; for
sometimes one must content himself with one Quarter alone, and otherwhiles the
Camp may be divided into two, three, four, or many quarters.

The Form is also diverse, seeing one must govern themselves according to the
situasion of the place, The largnesse must be answerable to the number of the
Regiments, which are to be Quartered, and which shall be handled in the next
chapter.

THE SECOND CHAPTER. OE THE DEVISION OF HVTS FOR Officiers, Soldiers, and
Sutlers.
TOGETHER, With the true measure and distances of them, according to his
Highness the Prince of Orange his new Order for a Regiment, and for the
quartering of the Captains in the Reere, for the preventing of fire, and
disorders,
BEfore we come to the division of the ground, appointed for the Quartering of
a regiment of foot, it will be necessary to discribe first, how much ground,
commonly a Company of 120, or of a 150 and of 200 heads must have, which may
serve then as a General rule in the distribution of the quartering of several
Regiments, containing diverse Colors, and Companies under them.

First for a Colors of 120 foot, there is ordained three hundred foot deep.
But the breadth must be according to the number of the heads in a Company,
which are some more some less: For a Company of 100, or 120 heads must take up
24 foot inbredth, that is, two rows of Huts, and a street betwixt them, a
Company of 150 must have 40 foot in breadth, to wit, three rows of huts and
two streets, and a Colonels Company of 200 heads, requires 56 foot in
breedth, that is four rows of Huts, and three streets, besides the back
streets, which are between Company and Campany.

As for Example, the Quartermaster has given him a Paralellogramma of ground,
which is 300 foot deep, and 24 foot broad for a Company of 120 heads,
which he devides thus, from the Lieutenants and Ensigns huts downward to the
Sariants huts in the Reere, of the Sariants hutt, and the boughs of the
Captains hutt: next the Captain has allowed him 40 foot in depth and some
20 foot btoad (because a passage for the Soldiers must not be stopped up) for
him to build in, Then between the Reere of the Captains, and the Sutlars
hutts, there is a large street of 40 foot made for the passage of men and
wagons, and for fear of fire. And last of all, there is 20 foot allowed for
the depth of the Sutlars huts, to wit, ten foot for the forepart of his hutt
for eating and drinking in, and 10 foot for his Kitchen, and this is the
distribution for a Company, which must take up (according to the Princes new
order) three hundred foot in depth.

The breadth of a Quarter, is according to the number of the Heads of a Company.

In the depth of 180 foot for the two rows of huts above menrioned, there may
be made in each row, twenty or two and twenty Hutts with a distance of two or
three foot between every Cabin, for the avoiding Eues-droppings and a little
trench to receive the Water made betwixt thim.

The doors of the Lieutenants, and Ensigns Cabbins commonly opens toward the
Front, and the Arms, and the Alarm place, but the Sariants toward the Reere.

The Soldiers doors open opposite one to an other, that upon any occasion
they may presently draw out into Arms, all which parts shall be discribed in the
figure for a Regiment (of ten Companies) following.

HIS HIGHNESS THE PRINCE OF ORANGE his new Order, and Form for Quartering of
a Regiment of ten Companies of Foot, to wit, the Colonels being 200, the
Lieutenant Colonels 150, and the Captains 120 Heads.
THE DEMONSTRATION.
A Is the Colonels Hall, Gallerie, and Pavillion. B Are two Hutts for his
servants, C The Kitchen. D Two Hutts for the Butlar, a Cellar and a pantrie. E
The Stable. F A place for his Wagons. G The Captains Hutte. H The
Quartermasters. I The Preachers Hutt. K The Chirurgians Hut. L The Lieutenants
Hutts. M The Ensigns Hutts. N The Crutch for the Musketts. P The Crutch for
the Pikes. Q The Alarm placc, which is 200 foot between the head of the
Quarter and the Trench. R The Provost-Marshals Hutt and Prison. S The Sariants
Huts. T The Backstreetes between each Company. V Is 20 foot between the
front and the furthest side of the Pikes. The breadth of the whole quarter for
these 10 Companies, is 436 foot. The Coronells division, 84 foot.
THE FORM OF QVARTERING OF A REGIMENT of Horse, consisting of five Troops,
according to the Prince of ORANGE his new Order, the Captains being quartered
in the Reere. THE THIRD CHAPTER.
FOr every Cornet of Horse, there is ordained (as the foot are) a depth of
300 foot, the breadth is not alwais a like, but must be given according to the
greatness, and smalnesse of the number of heads, serving under the said Cornet.

A Cornet then containinge hundred Horsemen, must have a place of 300 foot
deep, and 70 foot broad, wherein they are to lodge, and content themselves.

The Captains Hutt of the Troop, with his boughs is 70 foot broad, and 40
foot deep, being a part of the 300 foot abovesaid.

Between the Reere of the rows of the Horsemens Huts, and the Captains,
there is a street of 20 foot, and the two rows of the Horsemens Huts (as the
foot is) is 180 foot deep, to wit, from the Lieutenants, and Cornets, Huts in
the front, to the Quartermasters and Corporels in the Reere, which makes in all
two hundred foot deep, and 70 foot broad, the room for the Huts in each row
is ten foot, after which there is a small street of 5 foot, in which the
Huts have their doors, and commings out. For the Horse there is a space left
of ten foot broad, seeing that the Cornet consists of no more then of 100
horse, so that there are placed 50 Horse in one row, and 50 in another, and
every Horse is allowed 4 foot in breadth, and 10 foot in depth, which is the
space also appointed for his Master.

Between the Captains Hut, and the Sutlars, there is also a street of 40
foot for the same reason, as we have discribed in the Quartering of foot,
after which there is a place for the Sutlars Huts, which is answerable to the
breadth of the Cornet 70 foot, and for the depth of his fore Hutt 10 foot, and
for his kitchen 10 foot more allowed him, so that the true dimension for the
Quartering of a Troop of 100 Horse, is 300 foot deep, and 70 foot broad.

But a greater Cernet consisting of 140 heads, (or it may be 150) then they
have given them a row of Huts more, so that they must have in all three rows,
of which the last standing alone, is separated from the second by a street of
10 foot, which reaches from the hutts of the second row, and the Horse are set
behind this new row, after which (as before) there is a depth of 10 foot for a
Horse, and a small street of 5 foot, and for the Huts of the Horsemen
likewise 10 foot, whence follows, that the breadth for a Cornet of Horse of
140 heads takes up 105 foot, for the two rows taking up 70 foot, if you add
thereunto the two streets, the one of 10, and the other of 5 foot, with the
distance left, for the Horse, and the Horsemen, making 20 foot, it is in all
35 foot, upon shall then have the breadth of 105 foot for a Cornet of 140
heads, and the depth of 300 foot as before.

Note that every Horse has his head standing toward his masters hut, that
upon any occasion his Master may go directly to his Horse, without going about
his hut.

The space being deep enough for the huts, they need not build them closse
one to another, but leave a little distance of a foot and a half, or two
foot at the most between the Hutts: but between every fifth and sixth hutt,
there is an open space left of some 6 or 8 foot, for the Horsemen to draw out
of, if necessity should require.

The Hutts which the Horsemen build, are built in the same manner as the foot
are, saving that they take up more room, for the depth of the Hutts for the
foot, is but 8 foot, and the Horsemen must have ten.

The two first Hutts in the head of the Quarter is appointed for the
Lieutenants, and the Cornets, and the two last in the Reere are ordained for
the Quartermasters, and the Corporals.

Before the Horse, (between the Hutts and the streets) there are mangers made
for the Horse with boords, or plancks fastened and nailed together, which stand
upon posts driven into the ground, and have S^iles covered over them, from the
one side to the other, and because many Horse are of such a nature and
condition, that they will not stand together, there are posts tied between
them, that they may not strike, and hurt one another.

Now if there be any likelihood, that it may prove a settled Camp, or Leager,
then they may also build Huts for their Horse, to keep them from cold and Sun.
Th^se Huts are covered with straw, as the Horsemens are, but are open before
and behind, (because every Horseman may have an eye to his Horse) so that they
are but only covered over head on both sides, which coverings are also made
oftentimes with such Sails, as Tents are commonly made of.

But the Horse being come to such a place, are commonly lodged and quartered
first in Villages, houses, and barnes, if there be any thereabouts, at
leastwise till they have built them huts for themselves, and their Horse. But
finding no Houses, Stables, and Barnes, or such like accommodations for them,
then they will be constrained to let their Horses stand uncovered, till they
have built their own Cabins, which being done, then they may make their Horses.

The Ichnographie of a Quarter for a whole Regiment of Horse, Harquebusiers and
Curassiers, consisting of five Cornets, each of a hundred heads, shall be
demonstrated in the figure following.

THE DEMONSTRATION.
ADrs, is the Colonels, Sarjant Majours, and Captains Huts, being 70 foot
broad, and 40 foot deep.

Li, and Cor, are the Lieutenants and Cornets Huts in the Front of the Quarter.

Qu, and C, are the Quartermasters, and Corporals Huts in the Reere of the two
rows.

r a, c g, a Street of 20 foot, between the Quartermasters, Corporals, and
Captains Huts.

a b, and g i, is the depth of 180 foot, for two rows of Huts, from the
Lieutenants, and Cornets Huts in the Front, to the Quartermasters and Corporals
in the Reere.

a k, b c, p g, and h i, is the breadth of ten foot for the two rows of Huts.

k b, c d, o p, q h, is the streets between the Huts, and the stables for the
Horse, being 5 foot.

m n, e f, is the great street of 20 foot, for the whole troop to draw out in.

From b to t, is a large street of 40 foot, for fear of fire, between the
Reere of the Captains Hat, and the Front of the Suttlers.

C n, is the Suttlers Huts, that is, 10 foot for the forepart, and 10 foot for
the afterpart for their Kitchins.

Note, that a Colonel of Horse is allowed no more ground, then a Captain of a
troup is, only this preheminencie he has, to be quartered in the midst, and
if his troop be stronger, then a private Captain is, then (as is abovesaid)
he is allowed him more ground, and another row of hutts, and thus much for the
Quartering of a Regiment of Horse.

Of Particular Quarters.
BEsides, the Quarters above mentioned, there are also Particular Quarters in a
Camp, which ought to come into consideration, to wit, The Generals, The
General of the Ordinance, the Quarter for the Canon, Carriages, and wagons,
as also some other Quarters, which shall be discribed as falloweth.

The General has a square place of Ground given him, which as a Regiment is
300 foot deep, and 600 foot broad, and his Tents and Pivillions set up,
and disposed of as the General, and his Tent-master shall think fitting.

Also there is given to the General of the Ordinance, a depth of 300 foot,
and a breadth of 480 foot for him, and his train of Ordinance, Officers, and
Handie crafts men to Quarter in, having a little trench cast round about it.

In which ground also, is built a four square Redoubt with hair cloth over
it, to lay in powder, and Fireworkes, for fear of fyring, and to keep them
from wetnesse, and rain seeing they are not so combustible and will not take
fire so soon, as straw, or sails will.

There is also a place ordained of 300 foot in breadth, and depth for some
chief Officers of the field, which are not lodged within the Regiments.

The wagons also have a certain place given them, that they may give noe
hindrance to the Camp. The depth is also commonly 300 foot, but the breadth
must be answerable to the number of wagons.

The Market place, where Marchands, Victulars, Tradsmen, Butchers, and Bakers
are lodged have a depth also of 300 foot given them, and is some 400 foot
broad, in the midst whereof there is an open place left for the market place,
and the sides are divided into rows of hutts and streets. They make
ordinarily eight rows of hutts, whereof four are set upon the one, and four
upon the other side, every hutt being ten foot broad, and between every two
rows of hutts, there is a street left some 20 foot broad.

The first two Rows of hutts next to the market plaee, are appointed for
Mercers woollen and linen Drapers, and some other choice wares. The Tavernes,
and Ordinaries takes up the second, the third are for handicrafts men, and
fourth for Butchers, and Bakers.

There is likewise a vacant place left for the lodging of Volunteers and
Strangers, which has noe certain measure, but must fall out, sometimes more
and sometimes less as occasion serves, and this is the description of a
quarter, or Camp, both in general and particular, as near as may.

The Ichnographie of a Camp. THE FOVRTH CHAPTER.
THe Quartermaster General makes first a Scale, which will serve for a sheet
of paper, fitting it according to the proportion, as the said paper will bear,
either greater or lesser, and then makes a draught upon it. According to the
measure of his Scale, he draws out upon this, some parallel lines of 300
foot deep, which shows the depth of every quarter, with some other parallel
lines of some 50, 80, or 90 foot, as the ground will afford, and the divisions
between Regiment and Regiment.

Afterward he marketh upon a paper, every one of the said quarters, and
Regiments a part, according to the proportion of the same scale, as one has
drawn the lines above said, and then cut it of so that they have all one depth
of 300 foot, and the breadth according to the list of the number of the
Companies of every Regiment, and how many foot every Regiment and quarter will
take up. It were better to take a piece of past board paper and then make and
cut out also upon the said paper, the depth the breadth, and the name of the
Regiment the Colonel and person to whom the quarter belongs; doing the like
in all the other quarters. These littles papers being so cut and ordered, one
may put and lay them again upon the paper with the parallel lines abouesaid,
even till they he laid according to your desire, and let them be as they are
fitted. One must nevertheless have a care, that the Generals quarters be in the
midst, and that there be a convenient space without his quarter, as well
before, as on both sides, as the figure following will show marked with the
letter A, where the General is lodged in the midst of the Camp, and the
breadth of his quarter, according to this scale is 1250 foot, and the depth as
is said 300.

The quarters are separated one from an other by streets, and divisions some
less some more, as the ground will give it, as somewils 500, otherwhils 80,
92, or 100 foot between quarter and quarter, as you may see in the figure
following.

Finally the Quartermaster General takes first the breadth and depth of the
whole quarter, and Camp, and draws it out (as io taught) upon a paper. The
breadth here takes up 3000 foot and the depth 2000.

The draught of the camp being drawn upon a paper, and the whole quarter
designed, it will be easy then to lay them out in the field.

How one must mark and lay

Out the quarters in a field.

To this end, the Quartermaster General has a chain divided into
Rhyn-landish foot and Rodds at 12 foot the rodd, and an instrument used in
fortification, or at least a wodden cross with four right angles, and a good
number of Beackons with banroles upon them, called Quarter beackons, whereof
the statues are painted, and are some nine, or ten foot long, and sets up one
of these angles of every quarter*

Being come into the field, in which he is resolved to encampe the Army, first
he lays out the circuit of the General quarter, with four exterior lines in
such sort, that every corner of the quartes makes a right angle.

After one has measured out the four lines abouesaid, he sets up four
quarter Beacons, and then begins to lay out every quarter a part, according to
the proportion, which he has marked in this paper: but to the end one may not
err, he puts upon the little cut paper the number of every quarter, with which
also the Beacons are marked, by which means the same quarter is bounded in the
field, and the number is painted, or cut upon the Beacons. It will not be
amiss, to have always four of them of one number, which may easily be known
by the Beacons, in case they were all of one color. All which is demonstrated
in the figure of a Camp where the Beacons are set up, and noted with the
figures 1, 2, 3, and 4.

The duty of a Quartermaster of a Regiment.
AFter all this is done, and every particular quarter drawn out in the Field,
every quartermaster distributes the ground to the Companies of his Regiment,
according to the Iehnographie of the figure of 10 Companies shown before for a
Regiment; In laying out of his quarter, he uses a line of 300 foot long and
every eight foot is marked for the depth, and breadth of the huts and streets,
sticking down into the ground at every eighth foot a bough, or stick, as well
in the front as in the reere of the quarter, giving also to the Colonel his
ground in the midst of his regiment. But first the Quattermasters ptikes out
the ground before and behind for the Captains, and gives there the breadth of
the street between the Sarjants in the reere of the soldiers huts, and their
own as likewise the depth, between the Captains boughs the Sutlars huts,
marking out first the four angles of his quarter, by setting into the ground
his quarter staves and flaggs of his Colonels colors.

The duty of a Sarjant.
THe quarter being so laid out, then the Sarjant of every Company kilspits it,
and divides and makes the partition of the huts to the Gentlemen and soldiers,
which they prick out by line and small boughs, or sticks stock into the ground,
and so divides the rows of huts and the streets among them, every hut having
some 4 or 5 foot in breadth, and for uniformity sake 8 foot deep, and thus
the ground for a whole Regiment of what number so ever the Companies be, is
marked and drawn out in a field, as the figure of a Regiment for 10 Companies
before mentioned demonstrates.

The other quarters to wit, for horse, officiers, ordinance, and carriages are
marked by number and letter in the camp following.

The Alarm place.
THere is left round about the circuit of the whole quarter, a parallel on all
sides some 200, or 250 foot between the front of the quarter and the trench,
called an Alarm Place, for the soldiers to draw out into Arms, into Parade,
or when any Alarm or commotion happens, the Camp or quarter being environned
with a Trench, and a Parapet of six foot high, six foot deep and three foot
in the bottom, and the ditch 8 foot broad.

The soldiers of every Company are commonly commanded to make this trench,
parapet, and ditch before their quarter, or where it may fall ont, because it
serves for their own defense, which the soldiers are to do, for their own
safty, without giving them any money for it.

There is assigned by the Quartermasters to every Regiment, how much ground
they must cast up, according to the commission and strength of every company,
which proportionally is equally divided among the companies, that one company
do no more work then an other. In doing of which, the Captain and Officers of
a company are to ouersee it, that the trench be done well and with expedition.
Now the whole circu^ference of the quarter, being measured out by line, and
kilspitted, there is a general calculation made, how many Regiments there are
in the camp, and how many companies each Regiment has, that one may know how
many hundred companies there are in the army. And then by the rule of 3
(knowing the line and circumference) and the number of companies, say, the
number of all the Regiments, and Compagnies which are to make upe the line of
Circumvallation, amounts to so many feet, or rodes, how much ground then must
a Regiment of ten companies have that contains so many men. This calculation
being made, the companies of every Regiment draw out so many men, after the
Quartermaster has furnished them with materials, which is quickly done, seeing
the men are relieved, and many hands (as the proverb is) makes light work,
and will make have, that they may have time to build their own huts and cabins
to keep them under covert.

The quarters being thus fortified, and the line of Circumvallation made a
double ditch for horses and strong Redoubts, Horne-works, Crowne-works,
Batteries, Half-moones and Spurs upon the commanding places of most danger (as
yout shall see in the Ichnographies of the lines of Circumvallation before the
siege of the Bosch, Mastrick and Breda which shall be shown (God willing) in my
third part of this book, all these things then being done, after the
demonstration of this Camp, we come next to handle approches.

THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE several Quarters in this Camp.
A Is his Excellenties quarter, which is 300 foot in depth and 125 in breadth.
B Is the Lords the States quarter being 300 foot in depth and 342 in breadth. C
The General of the ordinance and Magazin 300 foot in depth and 800 in breadth.
D The quarter of the Carriages and wagons. E The quarter for Merchants,
Tradsman and Victulars. F Mons. Chastillon quarter being 14 Companies making 28
Rows of Huts 300 deep and 500 foot broad. G Mons. Bythunes being 13 Comp.
making 28 Rows 300 foot deep and 500 in breadth. H The Freeses being 5 Comp.
making 15 Rows 300 foot deep and 235 foot broad. I Sir Horace Veres
Regiment being 14 English Comp. making 31 Rows 300 foot deep and 548 broad.
K Mons. Cicils Reg. being 7 Comp. making 15 Rows 300 foot deep and 292
broad. L Colonel Ogles Reg. being 8 Comp. making 16 Rows 300 foot deep and
308 broad. M Mons. Fulchs being 6 Comp. 18 rows 300 foot deep, and 300
broad. N My Lord of Bach-louch being 6 comp. 12 rows 300 foot deep and 244
broad. O Colonel Egmont his Reg. being 6 comp. 12 rows 300 foot deep 244
broad. P 7 comp. Wallons commanded by Count John Ernest 14 rows 300 foot
deep and 276 broad* Q Count Ernest Lord Marshall 10 Comp. 25 rowos 300 foot
deep and 450 foot broad. R 6 Comp. of Hollanders 12 rows 300 foot deep nnd
242 broad. T Prince Henry Generrll of the Horse 4 Cornets 300 foot deep and
476 broad. V Capt. Qwicht 3 Cornets 300 foot deep and 250 broad. W Mons.
Market Lieut. General 4 Cornets 300 foot deep and 349 broad. X Mons. Ryhoven
4 Cornets 300 foot doep and 340 broad. Y Men's. Bacx 4 Cornets 300 foot deep
and 340 broad. Z Mons. Wagheman 3 Cornets 300 foot deep and 253 broad. aa
Mons. Quaet 3 Cornets 333 foot deep and 350 broad. bb Mons. la Sale 4 Cornets
330 foot deep and 340 broad. cc Mons. Stakenbrouck 4 Cornets 300 foot deep
and 340 broad. dd The Drost Sallant 4 Cornets 300 foot deep and 340 broad. ee
Peter Pany commanding the Princes guard of Horse 1 Corn. 300 foot deep and 100
broad.
OF ALL MANNER OF APPROCHES, AND their Profiles, with the definition what
approches are. THE FIFTH CHAPTER.
THe Approach by which one approaches safest toward a Town, or a Fortress
besieged, are certain hollow ditches; called Trenches dug into the Earth,
whereby one may approach near unto a Town, or a fortress covertly, without
any great harm, if the lines be carried well, and kept from the sight of an
enemy.

In approaching one ought to consider well; 1. The situation of the Town or
fort to be besieged. 2. The propriety and form of the approach. 3. The
beginning and distance of them, and fourthly their profile.

1. For the Site of the place, one ought to consider well the propriety, and
nature thereof, whether the ground be high, low, hilly, or plain. In plain
and even ground, one may find four kinds of Earth, to wit, 1. a Clayie and a
solid Earth, 2. Sandy, 3. a Spongie and rotten earth, and 4. moorish and a
marchie ground which may be covered and lie under water, having no firm
foundation to work upon. Secondly, hilly places whether they have a solid
foundation, 3. Sandy, and 4. Stony. Also one must take into consideration the
Forests, woods, ways, ditches, hills, and such like things, as may lie round
about it, or go toward it.

Of four wanner of Approches.
FIrst, if one can not make choice of such ground as they desire, then one must
take it as it falls out, whence there follows diverse manner of Approches; for
if it be good ground, then they run their lines directly from the left hand to
the right, and from the right hand to the left, continuing it alternatively
till you come to your distance desired, the half of which trench is dug into
the Earth, and the other half cast up with a parapet raised upon it, which
serves as a blind to keep your men from the sight of an enemy, and thus you
continue your approach by windings and turnings, till you come to the
Counterscharfe, and moate of the Town besieged, and this kind of approach you
use in good and firm Earth.

The second kind of Approach is that, which is made in a Sandy ground, which
you may run in the same manner with windings, and turnings as you did the
first, saving that your parapet will not hold with sand, and therefore, because
Sand is not so good to work upon, and will not lie so firm as other Earth
does, but will cost more labor, and require more time then solid Earth,
therefore one must approach nearer and nearer by setting up of Gabions.

The third way has another difference, then those two above mentioned, for
sometimes one may find good Earth, and Sandy mingled together, yea, and
somewhiles a Marras on both sides, in so much that one shall have but a narrow
way, through which one is to carry his approach, and as in the former you cannot
run your lines from the left hand to the right, or from the right hand to the
left, so in this you are driven to run a line directly upon the Town or
Fortress besieged.

Now this manner of approach carried in a right line, is not so laboursome and
chargeable as the others before-named, which are run with oblique lines: but
the greatest labor is, such an Approach must be made deeper, then the former,
and do require a double trench and parapet, whereas the others have but a
single one, and ever and anon there must be blinds set up because this kind
is more dangerous, and in this approach the one half of the Earth is set up
with a parapet on the one side, and the other half on the other side.

The Approach which is made through moorish, and marchie grounds overflowne, is
almost impossible, by reason of the inconstancy of the water, which rises,
and falls according to the season, and which causes many inconveniences: for
when one expects dry season, the weather may alter and prove rainie and
stormy, which may not only hinder the approach begun, but also fill the
trenches with water, therefore in such cases, one must accommodate themselves,
according to the weather, and use the wisdom, and experience of jngeniers
herein, for the preventing of these inconveniences.

As the half of an ordinary approach, is dug into the ground, so the other
half is cast upon ground: this kind being made over water and Marras, having
no firm foundation, the foundation of them is laid by filling up the water
with bundles of Boughs, Brush, faggots, and such like things, having Earth cast
upon them, to settle them, and make them lie fast, and the Earth being brought
upon wheelebarrowes from some other place, a parapet is raised, and blinds set
up, that the workmen, and Soldiers may work and be in more safety, which
guards it.

The fourth difference of approach, is also made by Earth brought from some
other places, having Fagots, Brush, Bavins, and planches laid upon it, with
parapets and blinds set up.

Fifthly, having want of good Earth, and finding great store of Sand, then the
parapet must be made with Gabions, and Cannon Baskets filled with Earth.

The sixth and last manner takes its original from the former, and is made
with Redoubts in joining the one to the other.

And if your meet with a stony place, then you must help your self with
Gabions, and fetch your Earth from some other place, as you did in marchie
grounds.

These are all the several kinds of Approches, that we have mentioned here in
this Chapter, which one cannot make without difference and judgment, because
the one is more laborious, and dangerous then the other, as we have taught.

But to the end all inconveniences may be avoided, one must first inform
himself well the nature of the place, through which one is resolved to run an
approach, and take a special care, that no error and faults be committed
through ignorance, which may loose time expense and labor, and may cross the
happy successie of an Army, for it were an absurd thing, of one should make
that approchin a moorish ground, which is to be made in a plain place, where
there is good Earth, where one has elbow room, and space enough to run oblique
lines, or when one would make them above the ground, when there is Earth enough
to be dug out of the ground and cast up.

Besides, one ought to consider well, the distance of the first breaking of
ground, between it and the Town or Fortress to be approached to, that one
begins not roo near, nor too far off, for the beginning of the Approches
being too far from the Fortress, one looses both time and pains, when one
begins to break ground from a place which is in safety.

On the other side, to begin an approach within the sight of an Ennemie, one
cannot so well defend himself from musket shot, because the Musketeers may
take a surer mark, then when they shoot at Randum, and it will be hort for the
workmen, before they can get into the ground, besides the workmen cannot be
so well seconded, and relieved without great danger, especially if the besieged
sallies out, and gives them hort Alarmes, so that they must be presently,
relived, or else they will be driven to quit the approches and to retire, if
they be not seconded betimes.

The distances between the beginning of an Approach, and a Fortress.
HEnce one may clearly understand, the distance of the Approach to the Town or
Fortress besieged, and the place where one begins to break ground first,
ought to be as far, as a musket can well carry from the outworks of the
Fortress, which may be about some 90, 80, 70, or 60 rod at 12 foot the rodd,
or as the nature of the place will afoard it.

The beginning of an Approach.

or first breaking of Ground.

When one would begin an Approach, there must be choice made of 200, 300, 400,
or 500 lusty soldiers, which are used to work, now besides the ordinairies
arms, which they carry, they take down alo^g with them into the approches
spades, shovells, pickaxses, and others materials necessary for work, and are
set in order by the Ingenier in that place, where the Approach begins, and to
the end they may begin with the more safety, they have diverse guards of Foot,
and horse standing up and down, here and there to defend them, if the besieged
should sally out upon the workmen, and because they may make a good beginning,
first they cast up a Redoubt or two, from whence the trench and approach is run,
which are environned with a parapet, and a good ditch, and the sides of the
redouts made some eigt rods square, as you may see in the profile of trenches.

Indeed, sometimes as occasion may serve, they make demi Bulwarks, or it may
be Whole Bulwarks, for which one takes a Profilie answerable to the
greatness, for when they are little one makes use only of the Profile of
ordinary trenches, and when they are great their Profile must be likewise
correspondent unto them.

These works and Redouts serve for a Retreat to the workmen, if an Enemy
should make a great sallie upon them: for being retreated into the said
Redouts, they may resist an Enemy, and stopp them, till they are seconded, so
that such Redouts are very necessary. For if the workmen had not a place to
retreat into, they would beforced to betake themselves to their heels, and to
abandon and loose their work.

But the Inginiers which are employed therein, ought to use all the skill,
industry, and experience they have to run their lines in such a sort, that
those which are in the trenches and approches may not be discovered and seen by
an ennemy. In a word, they may run their approches with the more safety, and
as much expedition as possbile be toward the place, or part of the Fortress,
which de General desires to become master off.

There are two principal parts in a Town or Fortress, one of which must be
battered, if one is resolved to take it in, and that is, either a Curtain, or
a Bulwark.

What part of a Fortress ought to be approached to.
IT is not good to approach to a Curtain, which is defended by the two next
Bulwarks, and their flanks, when you are to expect an enemies Canon
continually on both sides of you, especially, when you would give an assault
upon it; for afterward it may easily be cut off. Besides that the moate is
broader before the Curtain, the^ in other places whence it follows
manifestly, that there is no advantage in approaching upon such a place.

But a Bulwark is the safest, and best to be approached to and taken in: my
reasons are these first the moate is not so broad and large, as it is before
the Curtain, and a Bulwark has but a single defense, coming from the Bulwark
opposite to it, which may be better beaten upon by Batteries then the Curtain
can. Moreover, a Bulwark has but a little defense of it self, because on may
be forced to retire from it, and to make new works, and cuttings of behind
that part which is quitted. And because there is no so much space, as is within
the curtain, the fortification there of is more painful, and more
incommodious, and therefore it is better to approach to wards Bulwarks, then
curtains, which is found by practice, and daily experience.

There are other works belonging to a Town, or Fortress, as ( Crown-works,
Hoorn-works, Tenailles, Ravelings, Halfe-moones, and others. The manner of
carrying of approches will be clear and easy enough, when we come to show an
approach by figure upon a Town or Fortress which is to be taken in.

After one has naturely resolved, whether he will run an Approach upon a
Curtain, or a Bulwark. The Ingenier being present at the breaking of the
ground, is to show and inform the workmen well, how they are to run their
line, and as necessity requires, being of diverse lengths, but most commonly
some 20, or 40 rod long, or sometimes shorter or longer and broken and turned
as often as is necessary. The line then being laid out, and marked they divide
and place the Workmen in order, that they may not hinder one another.

Now they give to every man the length of four or five foot, and every one
makes as much have as possible may be, to get into the ground, for the
avoiding of the danger whereunto he is exposed, while he stands upon the open
field, therefore the Earth, which he diggeth he casts it up before him, and
with all expedition makes a hole like a grave: it is needless that at the
first breaking, the ditch should be any broader or deeper then three foot, for
the Earth being cast up three foot above the Ground, and the ditch likewise
three foot deep, a man then has covert enough.

The Workmen then being got into the Ground, they enlarge and deepen the
Approches as necessity requires, but those which are fardest of from the Town,
they need not be so deep at the beginning, as when they come nearer to the
Fortress. The breadth of the Approches ought to be some 10 or 12 foot broad,
as may be found necessary: yea, sometimee one is constrained to make them
larger, least they might be to narrow, in regard wagons may be driven through
them, with materials necessary for the Gallerie, as also Canon which must be
drawn down, and mounted upon the Batteries.

But by how much larger the Approches are made, by so much ought the parapet of
the Trench to be heightened, that the Enemy may not discover the Soldiers that
are in them.

Especially one ought to heighten those points, and windings, where the Line
turns, otherwise it may prove very hurtful and dangerous.

While the Soldiers are busied in making of the Line, others are employed in
making of a Battery, to hinder the Enemy from Sallying out.

When the night is past, there are fresh workmen sent down to relieve the
first, and to enlarge, heighten and repair that nights work, unless some of
them are willing to connue their work, and these commanded men, are to have
ten stiuers a piece, whieh the Quartermaster of every Regiment, who delivers
the matterials does solicit for, and pays them.

After the first nights work (or it may be the same) there are Corpse de guard
made, to putt a good number of Soldiers into, where they keep their Maine
guard, which are made sometimes within the lines, with which the Corpse de guard
ought to be Parallels, or else upon the point where the line turns, and
sometimes without the Approches, to which the Corpse of guard are joined to them
by a line of Communication: so that they lie three or 4 Rod from them.

It is not always needful that these Redoubts be made square, but one may
make them long-wise, or else with 5 Angles, and after diverse other manners, as
the Ground will best afford.

Most commonly one works by night, that they may receive the less harm, and
that the day following the work may be repaired.

When one line is finished as abouesaid, and that it must be run no further
that way, the Inginier turns the line another way, (bearing it from the Town
or Fortress) and places the Workmen in order as abouesaid, in continuing so
by windings, and turnings. till he has got something near unto the Fortress
beseiged, and making good the Line continuly with Corpse de guards and
Batteries.

But the nearer they approach unto the Fortress, the more subject they are to
danger, so that their pay is increased every day, as the Approach is advanced,
seeing they hazard their lives for it, they have a half Rixdaller a night,
sometimes a whole Rixdaller other-whiles a Rixdaller and a half, yea sometimes
ten Rixdallers for an hours work, if it be very dangerous.

Finally when you are approached with your trench so far, that you are
continually in the sight of an Enemy, and where you cannot get any more ground,
but with great danger, they make use then with an other manner of digging, or
an Approach called commonly a Sapp, which is made in this mannet following.

When a resolution is taken, to approach unto a Curtain, or a Bulwark, you
run a right line upon that place, which you intend to assault: as for example,
suppose it were upon the Demiface of a Bulwark, in such sort, that it lies
without the flancking blows of the Fortress.

A man then kneeling upon his knees, digs to get into the Ground, and casts up
the Earth before him on both sides, with a short spade, toward that part of
the Fortress, till he has dug three foot into the Ground, and that he is
covered with the Earth, casting always the Earth like a moald before him
toward the Town, and on that side, where the most danger lies, he ought to
cast up the Earth so high that it may be able to shelter those, which comes to
repair and make the Sapp larger. After the first man which makes the Sapp is
got into the ground and covered with earth, he advances forward and continues
the Sap, till he has got some six foot, and then follows another Sapper
presently, who repaires and enlarges the ditch to the breadth of six foot,
while the other advances forward three foot further in breadth and got so deep,
that he is always covered with the Earth, which he casts up before him, and
the other follows him continually enlarging the dich from three foot to six.
After him comes a third man, which finishes the whole Sapp, and gives it the
convenient height, depth, and breadth answerable to the first approach. But one
must have a singular care, that the approches and Sapps be not dug so
deep, as that water may rise in them, but that they may always remain dry
upon firm ground, which the condition of the ditch will show it: For when the
water within is very deep, and the declinatio^ high enough, one may make the
Approches as deep as the ditch, when the water that is in it, is distant from
the plain Earth.

Touching the manner of Working, an Agreement is made with certain worke-men,
because a greater number of worke-men cannot work in so narrow a passage, they
take on five or six worke-men, and give them 4, 5, 6, yea, sometimes more as
six-dallers apeece, as they can agree with them, and as the danger is little,
or great.

In this manner of work, being come so near for the safeguard of the
Musketeers, which are to give fire, there are musket baskets set up upon the
top of the Parapet of the approches, closse one to another filled with Sand or
Earth, between which the Musketeers puts out the noses of their muskets, to
give fire upon the besieged.

And because the Approches, the nearer you come to the Fortress are made much
deeper then at the first breaking of ground, there are one or two foot Banks
made for the soldiers to mount up upon, and to discharge their muskets or
firelocks.

As for example, the figure following numbered 153, is the part of a Town or
Fortress upon which we are to run our approches, and that upon firm and good
ground.

The First Example.
For as much as the Fortress is environed with a Corridor or a Counterscharfe,
one must not take the distance from the great Rampart, but from the
Counterscharfe, and begin the Approches some 90 rods distance from the
Corridor, because one may with the more safety put the spade into the Earth.
Therefore one begins the first line of approach from the letter A, and runs
it to the letter B, being some 30 rods long or thereabouts. The beginning of
the line is fortified with a Redoubt marked with the letter C, into which the
workmen (if the besieged should fall out) may make their retreat, and into
which also the guards for the workmen may retire. The first line turns at B,
taking its beginning near unto the Corpse de guard D, and runs to E, being some
30 rods in length, where an other Redoubt is made marked with the letter F, to
hold a guard in it, and because it might be dangerous to run this line any
further, it turns from F to G, and from G to H* where another Corpse de guard
is made. For the nearer you approach unto the Fortress, the more the approches
must be strengthened with guards and batteries. Besides the Approches there
ought to be made deeper, and higher, because you come nearer the Enemies,
Canon, and his Musket shot, which may shoot the surer upon you, here then you
begin to set up Musket baskets, and make foot-bankes to your Approches, that
the Soldiers may get up to them when they are commanded to give fire.

When one is approached so near by means of these turnings and traverses that
the remainder may be run with a long Traverse, then one begins to Sapp from H
to I, from which also one may make another line to approach unto the other side
of the same Bulwark, or also the other Bulwark, as the line from I to K,
shows. Behind these lines the Musketeers gets up allwaies to discover, and
shoot at those that would peep into them.

There are likewise two Redoubts made on both sides for guards, as the letters
N and O, do show.

In the Interim a Sapp is begun, that runs toward the Bulwark, which one is
resolved to mine in, and which is made in the same manner, as we have described
above, when you sapt into the Counterscharfe, and that you are come to the
brinke of the Moate, then you are to fill and damme it up, and to make a
gallerie, and blinds which we will treat of when we come to speak of a
Gallerie.

While you are busied about making your approches, diverse batteries are made
here and there, which serve partly to spoil the Ramparts and partly to
dismount and hinder the Enemies Canon from playing upon you, and to keep the
besieged in awe, that the workmen may work with the more safety, as you see by
these fix Batteries noted in the figure 153, and thus much for Approches upon
good ground.

We have divided the approches, which run in a right line into three sorts:
The first is in a narrow way* an earth which may be spitted out somewhat deep,
and yet nevertheless without turnings and Traverses: The other is when you
cannot dig into the earth, but there is, or you shall have water presently,
as happens in low and moorish grounds.

The Second Example.
When you are to approach unto a Fortress in a right line, and that the nature
of the way through which you are to carry your approches, is of such a
condition, that you cannot digg into the earth with spades, then you must do as
is shown in the figure 154, where they are covered with earth both on sides,
and are made a little deeper then ordinary Approches. Now seeing the danger is
greater in this kind, then in the first, and that a right line causes you to
be continually in the sight of an Ennemy, you must prevent, and avoid that
danger by making of blindes, which are either made of bundles of rise, or
brush* or with thick oaken planckes four or five inches thick, and as in this
figure you may see, for what use they serve.

The third Example.
There where one cannot digg, as in Marras and moorish places, a foundation
must be made with sinkers, that is bundles of boughs bound fast together, upon
which (as is said) earth is cast. Upon this foundation one makes Traverses and
Blinds with Gabions as you may see in the figure 155.

These Gabions are also filled with earth and made so strong, that they are
Canon proof, one may set up also a double row of Gabions, which sometimes
have earth cast about them.

The breadth of such Approches is from 4 to 8 rod, as the place is narrow or
broad* and as necessity and danger requires, but the Ordinary breadth is no
more but four or five rod. One must have also a care, that one Traverse ends
there where another begins, to wit, there where an alley is left.

The like manner of Approches were made at the seige of the Bosch on Count
Ernest his side, to which as being a new found-worke, it got a new name, and
was called the Great Gallerie.

This manner of Approach may be used also in a stony ground, where one cannot
digg the earth because of stones.

The Fourth Example.
Again you meet sometimes with a foundation, which one cannot pass through
dryshod, and cannot get deep enough into the Earth, but one is forced to
approach in that manner as is represented in the figure 156 in taking the
nearest way, which may be to approach unto the Fortress, and the Approches is
made of that Earth, which is dug about it, in stead of setting up of
Gabions, and as in the former Approaches the traverses, and blinds were made of
Gabions, so here they are made with whole Redoubts: in the midst whereof there
is a gape or a Sallie, made in such sort, that the one Redoubt is joined to the
other* the greatenesse of every Redoubt, being some six or eight Foot in
length* and as much in breadth.

Such Traverses are oftentimes made so strong, that they are able to resist a
Canon-bullett when they have Earth enough, for sometimes they are made six
foot, but the height of them is not always alike, seeing they must be made
higher there, where most danger is.

The gates are made in such sort with a falling plancke, that they may be
drawn up, and shut, and are of that height, and breadth, that a wagon may come
through them.

It is a thing impossible to describe all the manner of approches, because they
are so mixed and of such great diversity.

Neither is the ordinary way of approches always a like, because the one are
made deeper, and larger then an other: but commonly they are from 8 to 14 foot
broad, and three or 4 foot deep in the earth, or thereabouts: the Basis of the
earth laid upon it, in stead of a parapet, ought to be between seven and eight
foot.

We have propounded as an example for them two Profiles, marked with the
numbers 157, and 158, whereof the greatness, and measure of them, is noted
with letters and numbers in this table following:

THE DEMONSTRATION.
FIGVRE. The Profile of the Figure marked. 157 158 The inferior breadth of the
Approach. AB 9 12 The depth of the Approches. FB, EA 3 4 The Talud or Slooping
exterior. FD, 1 2 The Talud inferior of the Approches. CE, 1/^ 1 The Breadth
of the Approches above the Earth. CD, 11 15 The Basis of the Parapet above the
Earth. LC, 8 10 The Talud exterior of the parapet. KL, 1 1/^ 2 The Talud
interior of the parapet. GC, 1 The height exterior and interior of the
parapet. IK, GH 3 4 The Top of the parapet. HI, 6 7

We have expressly omitted the foot-banks, because they are not made in the
beginning of the Approches, which ought to be made in the Approches after
diverses manners sometimes this way, and sometimes many as occasion may serve.

OF COUNTER-APPROCHES. THE SIXTH CHAPTER.
THE Beseigers having approached near unto a Town or a Fort, it behooves then
the beseiged to look well about them, and not to be idle, but stirring, and to
do their uttermost endeavor to hinder, and offend their Enemy.

The defense which is made against these Approches is rightly called Counter
Approches.

This defense also is made after diverse manners, first when the Beseiged are a
great number, so that oftentimes they are able to fall out, and make Sallies,
which they ought to do as often as may be, notwithstanding that they loose men,
which of necessity must happen, because the Beseigers are much more stronger
then the Beseiged, and have far more forces, then those which are within the
Fortress.

For by this means the Enemy will be hindered, and his Approaches slowly
advanced, being many times beaten back, and constrained to retire into his
works, during which Alarm, they cannot advance forward their works, neither
can they begin them again, till the Beseiged are retreated.

They ought to have a singular care, when one makes a Sally, that their men be
not exposed to slaughter, but must be commanded to fall on with discretion,
advantage, and profit, to the end that the Town or Fort beseiged be not bereft
of their men by foole-hardinesse, rashness, and imprudencie.

For a Fortress which wants men, may be compared to an empty purse which has
no money in it. It lies much upon the endeavor of the Horse, which are in
Fortresses, for making of Sallies, and which ought to fall out oftener then the
Foot, because they can fall on and retreat with more speed, and though some
be lost, yet the hurt will not be so great, as the loss of foot, which must
be husbanded, and spared as much as posible may be, to repulse the assault of
an Enemy.

The second manner of defense is made by Canon, which must play continually
from all places upon the workmen and Approches, to do them as much harm as
possible may be, whence it comes to pass, that the Workmen are amazed and
frighted, when they see many of their fellow workmen fall and slain miserably
by the Canon, which will abate their courage, and make them work more faintly:
in such sort, that an Enemy is driven to leave of their work, till such time
as the offensive side have made Batteries, against the Beseiged.

But when it is not feisible, they must be constrained at last to break up,
and quit the seige, otherwise if they continue, it will be exceeding chargeable
to them, because no men will undertake the work, but such as will be soundly
paid for it.

For every man hazards his life, when Ordinance and Musketteirs play
continually upon him, and a man will not venture his life for nothing, but will
sell it at as dear a rate as he can: besides in so doing, it prolongs the time
for an Enemy, so that a Fortress may sometimes be relieved, or when Winter, or
bad weather comes on, they may be forced to abandon the Siege.

The third manner is by making of all sorts of Outworkes, and in taking up
the Ground, whereunto an Enemy Approches, which may be made during the siege,
and while an Enemy Approaches, as by making of Ravelings, Halfe-moones,
Horne-workes, Tenailles, and Traverses: for all these works may be made, while
an Enemy advances his Approaches toward a Town or Fortress, but it were
better they had bin made before the Town was beseiged, for the gaining of
time, and saving of charges, which might be employed in other works.

The fourth manner is when the Beseiged make Counter Approches, whereby they may
resist an enemy that he may not get into the Outworkes and Counterscharfe with
his approches, where to hinder him, they must cast up some Traverses, and other
lines running them from their outworks, as it were to meet the Enemies works,
and so make them get ground (as it were by peece-meale) till they come to the
Fortress: But nevertheless one must observe well, that they must be carried
and made so, that they may always flank upon the Beseigers works, and
approches, and that the Approchers may do them as little harm as may be,
always making them so, that they lie open toward the Town or Fort Beseiged.
from whence they are to be defended, and must be so carried, that they may give
no advantage to an Enemy, when he takes them in, and see that they may be
flanked from the Town and Fort both with Canon and Musket.

At the last seige of Bergen op Zoom, there were many such Counter Approches
made, wherewith the Beseiged gauled the Enemy shrewdly, insomuch that he was
not able (notwithstanding the loss of abundance of men) to get a foot of
ground of them, having chests in the Counter-Approches which played continually
with musketeers and firelocks upon the Enemy, and casting fireworks among
them, taking up also the ground and advantageous places before the Enemy could
approach unto them, which did disharten them much, for as soon as Prince Maurice
of happy memory, came to Rosendale with his Army to relieve the Town, Marquis
Spinola seeing no hopes of getting it, after the loss of twelve thousand men,
was driven to rise without it, and quit the seige.

OF ALL SORTS OF BRIDGES, ESPECIALLY, your flagg, or Bulrush Bridges. THE
SEVENTH CHAPTER.
UPon an expedition of war, when of necessity an Army is to pass over a
River, or a Brook, there are commonly carried Boats, or sloopes upon Wagons,
as has been taught before, having Beams, or Boards, all necessaries laid in
the Boats to be used, first they take down the Beams and Posts, and then the
Plancks, and Boards, which is done in a trice, when all things lie in order,
sometimes they carry only Boats, and sometimes only plancks. To make then a
Bridge over a River, first these Boats (as many as you shall have use off to
lay over the River) are launced into the water, which are bound together with
ropes, and fastened with Cables and Ankors in the bottom over, which sparres
and beams are laid, and then plancks and bords laid orderly upon them, for men
to march over. There are likewise such kind of bridges made with great boats
in Fortresses lying upon a river side, when an enemy is feared, and where one
dares not make any other bridge for it is drawn up every night like a
drawbridge, that if an Enemy had any enterprise upon that place, he might not
pass over it.

There are made likewise bridges over the moates of the outworkes of a
Fortress: but an Enemy being approached near unto the Fortress having made
batteries to beat them down, these bridges are broken down in the outworkes,
and sally bridges made, to which they cannot do much harm, for the making of
which, one takes some Barrels, or Hoggs-heads bound about with iron, and
pitched, unto which rings of iron are made fast for to put posts into them, by
which means these Barrels are joined together, and locked one to another, upon
which there are laid planckes for men to pass over and repasse, and if one
would take them up in the night, they do it in such a manner, that they are
soon sundred one from another. An Enemy cannot so easily spoil such a Bridge,
because it lies even with the water, and if one part of it should be shot a
pieces, one may presenly help it again, with other Barrels and posts.

There is an other kind of Bridge, over which one may give an assault, whereof
some of them are borne upon wagons, and others upon boats, and are made after
the manner of Draw-bridges, saving that they are lighter, and are drawn upon
the wagons, or boats upon which they are laid, but when one is to use them,
then they must take them down. Read the Treasury of the Mechanic Secrets of
Augustine de Ramely: The Artillery of Diego Vffano, and the Theater of the
instruments of Henry Leysing, which treat of these things at large.

But of all Bridges none are found more necessary and useful then those that
are made of flaggs and Bulrushes. For all others require great charges,
especially when some Ingenier takes some old invention from an ancient Author,
and gives it out for a new one: for it is reason such a one should be
recompensed, because of his invention, and afterward becomes a directour for
the making of it, as though no other could be made, but that which he has
invented, and so by this means makes his benefit of it, and his count and
reckoning according to his desire, by making a bridge at such a high rate and
charge, that makes his masters purse light, and his own heavy. But if you
look narrowly upon it, you shall find it to be an old invention, as one cast
off, and serves for no use. The like does happen here, for when you consider
well many new invented Bridges, made with great skill and industry, yet
nevertheless they serve for little or no use. But your bridges made with
flaggs, or bulrushes, are nothing so chargeable, and yet nevertheless of great
use: we will show here in few words, how they are, and in what manner to be
made.

The matter whereof they are made, are called in Dutch Biesen, in French a
Ionc, in Latin Iuncus, and in English a Bulrush. This rush grows in Rivers,
waters, Brooks, some four, five or six* foot high, and is commonly found in
brook pits Marras, and wet places, especially by Rivers sides, whereof also
many times houses are tharcht. The nature of this bulrush is to float above the
water, and are used (being bound up in a bundle) when boys learnes first to
swim, putting them under their arme-pits.

This Bridge above mentioned is made with this rush after this manner
following, when they are ripe and grown to their length, then they must be
plucked up, and well dried, and when you would make such a Bridge, you must
bind up these Bullrushes in round bundles, or four square, whereof the sides
must be some ten inches broad, and about four or five foot long.

Now having got good store of them, one makes a hurdle of them, enterlaced with
small withs, 5* foot broad, and 7. or 8. foot long: Upon this hurdle one lays
and binds in order the bundles, one after an other, and afterward one takes two
long stakes, a little greater then a pike, which is fastened to the hurdle,
drawing and binding these bundles fast one to another, which are likewise bound
with canvas, at the end of the hurdles one fastens at both ends two or three
rings made with withs, to join and fasten the joynctures of this bridge
together.

These kind of Bridges are of excellent use in Seiges* chiefly in places where
one is resolved to take in a work upon a sudden enterprise, and would not be
at the charge of making a Gallery.

When one is resolved to take in such a work, those which are appointed to
force it, being well armed as is requisite, being come to the brink of the
moate by the means of the Approches, which are brought thither, they send out
before some venterous Soldiers, which carrying this bridge lances it into the
water, and joins the pieces together withal expedition (and while the
musketteirs gives fire as fast as ever they can) till they have laid it over
the breadth of the moat, and fastened it on the other side, which being done,
the Soldiers goes over it, and strives to enter by all means to take in the
work, as they are commanded.

But if there be any mine made ready, they stay the putting over of the Bridge,
and the falling on, till the mine be sprung, for fear of breaking the Bridge,
and that it might spring backward.

When the beseiged are resolved to make a sally, they may likewise make use of
these kind of Bridges, all other commodities and utilities, necessity the
mother of such like inventions will show you.

Now for the better understanding of all things touching these bridges above
described, we have represented them in the figure 159. where you shall see how
they are made fast, on that side which is to come into the water.

But they are to weak, where you are to put over a broad moat, such as are
before Towns and Royal Forts, over which one must pass, before they can come
to the Wall, for these serve only for some sudden piece of service, and
therefore it is needful to make use of some other invention called a Gallery,
which is of excellent use though chargeable, and which we will handle in the
next chapter following.

OF GALLERIES. THE SEVENTH CHAPTER.
VEgecius in the 16. chapter of his fourth book, describes a certain kind of
work, which the Ancients called Vinea, and says it was a work made of plancks
joined together, some eight foot high, seven foot broad, and sixteen foot long,
the roof or top whereof was covered with boards, and hurdles interlaced
together, and the sides with Boughs, in such wise that it could not be spoiled
with stones, over which also was laid thick Oxen hydes, newly killed, or
coverlids of hair cloth, to keep them from firing, (whence it happens, that we
make use of such coverings in our modern wars, for to hinder the force and
violence of Gunpowder, because they are not so easily spoiled by fire (as has
bin said above) and these works being in a readiness, one makes use of them
to their advantage.

When they have made good store of them, then they join and fasten them
together, and the Beseigers being blinded and covered under them, begin their
approches to the wal^ and sapp under the foundation of them to make them fall.

There is no work which resembles more rightly this invention of the Ancients,
then our modern Galleries: The preparation, the use, the height, the breadth,
are almost all alike, and do agree so together in all things, that we must
needs confess our Gallery is no new invention, but was in use among the
Ancients, and which of late years has bin renewed again.

For if one considers nearly their structure, the Vinea of the Ancients was
made with timber and plancks, and our Galleries for the most part are made with
posts and plancks joined together: That had also posts to rest upon for its
foundation, and this has also great posts to bear up the weight of the whole
work: The sides of the Ancients Vinea was fortified against the force of the
Balists, because they were laid with hurdles and boughs, wreathed together, but
our Galleries are covered with plancks, and earth cast upon them, so that they
cannot be spoiled by Canon: The Vineas were kept from firing by the help of
Oxehides wherewith they were covered, and the sides of our Galleries have earth
cast about them, that fireworks may do them no harm.

These Vineas served to come to the wall, to sapp it, but our Galleries are
brought to the Basis and Barme of a Rampart, to make a mine in a Bulwark, and
so to blow it up.

The hight and breadth of the one and the other do not differ much, but it
seems the length is differing, though in effect it differs not much; For the
Vinea the joints of them being fastened one to another were reasonable long, but
our Galleries are set up with plancks and posts and as it were makes but one
piece joined together.

Whence it appears, that our Gallery is not wholly a new invention, but has
been in use of old, though in some things it is altered and changed.

We will now take it in hand, and show after what manner it must be made* with
all the appurtenances thereunto belonging.

When an aproach then is brought so far, where a Sap is to begin not far from
the Town or Fortress beseiged, and that one is sapped to the Counterscharfe,
then one sees how a Gallery may be put over the moate. For the effecting
whereof, one must make provision of many things necessary thereunto, and first
of all get good store of longbrush and bundles of boughs, to fill up the moate,
with a great number of plancks and posts joined and made together like a
Gallows, all of them having one height and breadth, which are so framed and
made by the Carpenters before they are brought down into the Aproaches, tha one
may either take them asunder, or pin them together without any great labor,
for being brought thither, where they are to be used: It is easily done by
marking the joints and pieces with one and the same number which they may fit,
and join together without any great difficulty.

Such a Gallows has five pieces, to wit, two posts which stand upright, one
croswise over them, which ioynes the other two together, and two props or
supporters of timber to bear the cross post up, the two posts are set upright
being 8 or 9 foot long, and are cut half a foot in the upper end of them, for
the cross beam, or post to rest upon the other two posts, and to join them
together, and a foot and a half at the lower end is sharpened and set fast into
the Ground, so that it remains seven foot high for the top of the Gallery. Yo
shall see the form of it set out in the 160 figure following, whereof the
length of them from a b to c d are each of them 9. foot long, and the breadth 6.
or 7. inches, the half of this breadth at the uppermost end of these two posts
is cut the length of half a foot, to lay the cross beam upon them, which
ought to be cut in the like manner, having the length of ten foot, or
thereabouts, for the longer this cross post is, the broader will the Gallery
be, and the better for the soldiers to march five or fix in front, when they
are to give an assault upon the breach, the greatness is answerable to the two
others, being marked with A C. Now forasmuch as these posts are made in such a
manner with joints that they may soon be joined together or severed, they
cannot be so firm as those which are joined and pinned fast together by force,
without being afterward taken asunder, especially, because of the great weight
which they are to bear, therefore there are props made to support the cross
post, as you may see by E.F. and G.H. marked in the 160. figure, all which
being done, and all the pieces joined and pinned fast together as is fitting,
every piece is marked, and holes bored through them to fasten them together in
a little time, when there is occasion to have them set up.

Of the Bords and Planks for a Gallery.
AFter this you must provide in a readiness good store of Fir boards and
plancks, which must be as long as the two posts, or rather four or five inches
longer, so that if the distance between post and post be 5 foot broad, then
these plancks must be five foot, and a half long: for the odd half foot is
divided into two equal parts, taking up three inches on either side of the two
posts, into which holes are bored, to nail the plancks and the posts fast
together.

The ordinary space between the posts joined together is commonly 4. or 5. (but
seldom) six foot in breadth, which oftentimes is changed according to the
condition of the place, and as the danger is great or little.

The thickness of the plancks is without any certain measure, because it is
needless to make them all of one thickness, for it may so fall out, that
sometimes you must use a thick planck, and some whiles a thinner is fitter to
stop a hole withal, as occasion may serve.

Now for the joining and fastening of your posts together, you must provide
good store of oaken pins, and bore all the holes with a borer, to the end the
holes may not cleave, now all these pins ought to be of one bigness.

Also in Galleries there are used nails some greater and longer, as you shall
have use for, some of them are 4. or 5. inches long for to nail the plancks
with, which covers the sides: some other 6. or 7. inches long, which nails the
props into the posts, you must have good store of them of all sises for to use
them, when necessity shall require. Your ordinary wheel-barrowes and shovels
are here of exellent use, but you must have shovels that have longer hafts then
ordinary, to cast the earth a good way into the moate, which cannot be so well
done with short hafts.

Jn this place one ought to make use of thick plank-blinds, which we have
mentioned in the chapter of gabions and blinds, which serve for a very good use
in Galleries, as we shall show you hereafter.

A Gallerie raised without, being covered with Earth, is represented unto you
in the 161 figure.

After you have sapt through the Counterscharfe, and that you are come to the
edge or brinke of the moate, and resolve to lay a Gallerie over it, you must
first of all provide good store of these bundles of long brush before
mentioned, brought down in wagons, and abundance of wheele-barrowes, to fetch
Earth into the Gallerie, to cast these things into the moat, and to fill it up,
even to that place, where you intend to make a Mine, and in so doing, you shall
by degrees fill up the moate, and make a good foundation for your Gallerie to
rest and stand upon.

But because any cannot cast and lay these bush-faggots in order, as one would,
you shall meet with some venturous soldier or another, who for money will
adventure in the night to go out at the mouth of the Gallerie into the moate,
to lay them in order. And to the end they may not be seen by the Enemy, one
must observe well to make the perpendicular of the face of the Bulwark, which
will be the shortest way to come unto it.

The moate then being filled with these long bundles, and fagots of Brush
abovesaid, so that one may cast Earth upon them brought from the next sap, the
workmen fetches good store of Earth in wheel-barrowes upon plancks laid in the
Gallerie, and brings it to the mouth of the Gallerie, casts it upon a heap and
then two or three workmen which are appointed to work in the mouth of the
Gallerie, casts it into the moate to settle the fagotts. This Earth cast up in
the form of a heap, serves to cover and make a blind for the workmen only
before, but not on the sides* and therefore they must be constrained to make
blinds on that side which is most dangerous, til the posts be set up, yea
oftentimes they must make blinds on both sides of the Gallerie, if an Enemy
flanks it from two places. After this one begins to set up one of the posts*
joined and pinned together as has been taught, and as you may see in the 160
figure. And sets some men continually to fetch Earth in their wheele-barrowes,
others from the top of the heap casts the Earth with their Tong-shovels into
the moate, and gets more ground to set up the other past, for having got a
matter of five foot or there-abouts, they set up the other past joined
together as is said, after they have set forward the blinds for to cover the
sides of it: which two posts being set up, then they nail the plancks fast to
both sides of the Gallerie, and they set only the others upon it without
fastening them by covering the side only with Earth, which may be beaten down
by the Enemy, till it is able to resist a Canon bullett, and then casts Earth
above the Gallerie, about a foot or a foot and a half high, which must be
spread, and laid even, to the end, fireworks may not lie upon it, and spoil
the Gallerie by fyring of it.

It happens sometimes, that one side of the Gallerie is out of the Enemies
sight, and cannot be beaten down with their Canon* in such sort that one needs
not cover it with Earth and then that time and charge is saved, unless it lies
so, that an Enemy can set fire on it with pitch ropes and other fire works,
or spoil it with his Canon, which lies in his Outworkes, which being so, then
of necessity, you must cover that side, till it is able to resist the Enemies
Canon.

And because it would be very dark if the whole Gallerie were covered with
Earth, and so very incommodious for the workmen, therefore to help that on the
safest side, there are little windows or holes made of a foot high, and a
foot and a half long, between every three or four posts joined together, to
give light into the Gallerie.

This work is continually advanced and the heap raised by the workmen, which
cast the Earth into the moate in a great quantity before them, having always
a singular care, that the heap from whence they cast their Earth grows not
too low, least the workmen be discovered. Afterward they set up the third
posts joined together in the same manner as has been said, and make fast the
boards, and planks to them, this labor must be continued till the Gallerie is
advanced even to the very soote and barme of the Rampard.

All which is shown in the 162 figure where a Gallerie is made and covered, as
also to show that one of the posts joined and set up, which must be nailed to
the other with planks, and the heap of earth behind, which the man stands and
works is also here pourtrayed out. When the Gallerie is brought over almost to
the very foot of the Rampart, then one may come to it with more safety, for
then the heap is taken away, and a blind made of thick oaken plankes to begin
a mine into the Bulwark.

At the lower end of these posts abovesaid, as you may see from B to D, there
is an other post besides of the same greatenesse, which cannot be seen,
therefore we have purposely omitted it, but will remember to speak of it,
when we handle the making of the posts and palisadoes.

THE EIGHTH CHAPTER. OF MINES.
AS a Gallery is an ancient invention, so likewise Mines, which we make at this
day have been heretofore in use amongst the Ancients also: And this is the last
thing wherewith the besieged are troubled.

A Mine then according to the definition of Vegetius, is a Cave by which one
makes secret goings under the Eearth, to come by night unawares to a Fortress,
or by which one diggeth into the foundation, and bowels of a wall, or of a
Bulwark, underpropping the earth with posts of wood, and laying under it dry
wood, for when they would make a hole in the wall, they set fire on this wood,
which being burnt with the props, the wall fell down, and the Besiegers being
in a reddinesse attending the fall of the wall, ran presently up by that
breach, to assault the Fortress; which is understood also of our modern Mines
which we make in by blowing up the powder that is laid in them, whence it
appears clearly, that this is also an ancient invention, being a little
changed, and amended at this day.

This mineing (or digging under the earth) is called in Latin Cuniculus, of
which name ancient Writers, as Julius Caesar, Livius, and Curtius make often
mention of in the description of this Stratagem, it signifies a Moole from
whence the name is taken, because the Mines made under Rampards and Bulwarks,
resembles the holes and passages which Mooles makes under the earth. There are
others which derive this name from the Latin word Cuneus, because the Mines
are made in the fashion of a Wedge, which is thick at the beginning, and
diminishes little by little, even as the Mines which make a rupture in those
places where they are made, may be compared to a wedge, which cleaves a piece
of timber in sunder. Mines were of old called Cuniculary. He that is desirous
to know more thereof, let him read Vegetius and Vitruve, who have written of
Military inventions among the ancients.

We will here describe in a few words, how our modern Mines are made at this
day.

The last means for the forcing of an Enemy besieged, to make him yield, is
this making of a Cave or Mine under the earth, which is begun and finished (as
is said) after you have brought your Gallery over to the Barme, or foot of a
Rampard or Bulwark.

But before it is begun, you must have all things necessary, and in a
reddinesse, for the effecting of this work, first of all ye must have Spades,
Shovels, Pickaxes, and all kind of Masons tools, with all things requisite to
pierce and break the Wall, wherewith the Rampart is made.

Afterward, one prepares props to support, and bear up the Mine from falling
or sinking, being two, or two inches and a half thick, the length of them
being not alike, because the entrance into the Mine is made higher then toward
the end of it. One is furnished also with fur planks, for to line the Mine
within, as above, that it may not sink and fall down, for it must be set with
planks on all sides, as well as the foundation, especially if the earth be
moulding and vvettish.

But before you begin to make your Mine, it will be necessary that you know
the condition of the place, that is, whether the Bulwark be hollow and vaulted,
or whether the foundation be laid with Branchages, Logs, or borne up with
Piles: and whither water may not spoil your Mine, if you should mine too low.
In case that the Rampard or the Bulwark into which you intend to mine, were
laid with logs, or supported upon great Piles, which happens ordinarily in
moorish and rotten places, upon which you must build your Bulworks, and
Rampards; or when one can get no other Earth but sand: you must try and get
out all these Piles with Cables or ropes by winding them out with an instrument
ordained for this purpose. Now you must pierce and pull out these loggs by such
ways and means as is known unto Miners, for the making of a way and a
chamber to lay your Gunpowder in. When you are assured that you cannot dig no
deeper, but that shall come to water, then you must raise your Mine a little
higher, to the end the powder may lie dry in it.

The Miners then beginning to break into the wall, do carry their Mine so
close, and secret as possible may be, that the Besieged may not hear any
noise, or gather any notise, where the mine is made, and how it runs: for if
they do, without all question, they will make a Counter-mine to discover and
spoil your Mine begun, so that you shall be driven to begin a new one in
another place, as has happened many times.

The height, and the breadth of the Mine must be made in such a manner, as you
may only lay in the Barrels of powder, for it ought to be no higher, nor no
broader, because your intention is, but only to chamber your powder in it, and
therefore it must needs be so high as a man, and no higher, but that a man may
only work in that upon his knees, and that he stoops lower, when he goes to
lay the Powder into its chamber.

The height then must be but 4, or 4 foot and a half high at the most, and the
breadth but 3 and a half. or four foot, according to which measures, the props
and the planks are framed, vvherevvith you are to underprop the Mine.

When you begin to mine into a Rampard or Bulwark, you take out the earth, and
carry it away in a vessel, or a pall of leather, which is light, in handing it
one to another, till it be brought out of the hole, or entrance out of the
Mine, and laid in the Gallerie, to the end the Enemy may not see it, and guess
where abouts your Mine is.

The Master-miner, which has the conducting of the Mine, ought to be a man of
great experience, how he ought to carry it, lest he be mistaken, and so make it
in a place, where he ought not to make it. Therefore he must have knowledge of
a Compass, and how the needle stands, that he may carry his Mine aright. He
ought also to have skill in Geometry, to the end he may know of what height he
must carry his Mine, according to the proportion of the Rampart.

The nearer he comes unto the place where he is to make his Chamber, the
narrower ought the way of the mine to be, in such sort, that it must be no
broader or higher at the entrance into the Chamber, but that a Barrel of
powder may scarcely pass through the way for the straighter and the narrower
the passage is into the Chamber, the easier the Mine is stopped.

The place where the Chamber is, ought to be so made, that the powder does not
break neither the one, nor the other side* but that it may blow the earth
upward. Nevertheless sometimes the Miners are commanded, to make their Mine
so, as it may blow the earth into the Fortress, or else without which may be
done, if they make that side, which is to be blown up, not so thick as the
other: for the nature of powder is such, that it makes the greatest operation
always toward the weakest place, and though it blows it up ordinarily: yet
commonly it searches most often the place, where it may break out soonest in
to the air, which appears both in your Canon and Muskets.

The bigness of the Chamber is diverse, for it must be made according to the
greatness and proportion of the wall or Rampard: nevertheless one must
observe, that it be made as narrow as possible may be, and yet must have room
enough to lay the Barrels of powder into it: the ordinary height is some six
or seven foot, and the breadth four or five foot.

When the Chamber is ready, then you lay in your Barrels, the number whereof
cannot be so precisely discribed. For one Rampard is greater then an other, in
so much, that a greater quantity of powder is requisite more for one place then
an other. The common opinion is, that a Barrel of powder will blow up a rod, or
twelve foot of Earth. The Barrels are laid in such order, that in the
twinkling of an Eye, they take fire all at one time, which causes a greater
operation then if one Barrel should be blown up one after another. After that
your powder is chambred, the with all expedition you must stop the entrance
into the chamber, with thick and strong planckes, and stopp it hard, and ram
it in with good Earth, and leave a little hole or train, to lay some powder in
it, which train is carried to the very end of the mine, and stops up the
passage of it with firkins of Earth, that the air may neither come in or out.
For the stronger the Mine is stopped, it will take the greater effect. All things
then being in a readiness, it is left so till one is commanded to give fire
to it.

In the 163 figure is represented unto you a mine marked, A B C D E, is the way
upon the Bulwark, E is the entrance into the chamber, F G H and I, is the
chamber it self, wherein the powder is laid.

Here a question might be moved, whether mines ought to be carried with right
lines, or crooked? The answer is, that mines, which are carried in a right line
are sooner made, but because they take not so good effect, the other are to be
preferred before them, which are made with oblique lines. For the windings and
the turnings of them, adds strength unto them, that the powder has not so much
force to break the stopping. Now suppose that it should break the stopping D:
E: the rest therefore is not broken, because the force of the powder is kept in
by the Earth marked D, and driven back to blow upwards, or finding no vent to
turn back again, where it was laid. But in a right line when the powder
breaks the stopping, the effect thereof is hindered and deminished, for it is
certain, that the stopping, which is made newly is not so firm as the old
settled Earth, which has lain a long time in it.

OF COVNTER-MINES THE NINTH CHAPTER.
WHere there is an Offensive War, there is also a Defensive, as appears by
mines: for the Beseiged having discouvered them, which one has prepared for
them, and that there is no hope left, but waiting for the Springing of an
Enemies mine in their Rampard, and to give them an assault, then they are to
stand upon their defense, and beginn to make mines also, which they either do
to offend an Enemy, or to defend themselves by them. Therefore we must
understand here, three kinds of mines to wit, the works which are made to
find out an Enemies mine, 2: The Countermines, which are made to spoil an
Enemies mine, and 3 the cutting off of a Bulvvarke or a Rampard within, of the
two former, we will treat in this Chapter.

For the first kind of Countermines, we understand those works, and mines,
which are made to discover, and find out an Enemies Mine, and to kill the
miners in it.

After one has found it out, as also for the casting down of the same work,
and the taking away of the powder chambred, the Enemy will find himself
deceived, when he thinks to spring his Mine, attending the operation thereof
in vain, because the powder is stolen out of it.

For to find out an Enemies mine, there are two manner of vvayes, the one
which was used by the Ancients, and the other practiced at this day.

Vitruvius in the said Chapter of his tenth book, describes the manner of the
Ancients, and says that the Cite of Apolonia, being besieged, and the
Besiegers having made some Mines under the earth to assault the Citizens, on a
sudden within the vvalls; the Citizens being advertised thereof, were
extremely affrighted thereat, and began to faint and lose their courage:
because they knevv no remedy to prevent it, and could by no means find out the
place where the Mines were made. But Trypho Alexandrin, which lived in that
age, the Architector of this City, caused to be made along under the vvalls a
great many ditches, and vvithall some Mines under the vvalls continuing them
beyond the Enemies, as far as one could throvv a stone. He caused to be
hanged in these ditches vessels of Copper, under th^se places, where the Enemy
wrought, which made a noise, by reason of the moving of the earth, vvhereupon
he found out the Enemies Mines, and filled Cauldrons of brass full of boiling
water, and melted pitch, to power it down through those holes upon the heads
of his Enemies mines. He cast down also men's dung, which was mixed with hot
sand and gravel, which he did by night into the Enemies Mines, into which he
had made diverse holes, and by this means slew a great many of them.

Herodotus in his Melpomina makes mention of a Tinker, which dwelled in the
City of Barca, besieged by the Persians, who discovered the Enemies Mines by
the means of a Buckler of Brass, which he hung in diverse places against the
wall, and so found out at last the place under which the Enemy mined.

But at this day to find out an Enemies Mine, they use to make
counter-ditches, as has been said, and before a Mine is begun* it is necessary
to be informed, after the manner of the Ancients of the place, which may be
undermined by an Enemy. But Mines are searched out after diverse other vvayes.

Some are of the opinion, that round about the vvalls, and Bulvvarks of a Town
or a Fortress, (to wit, when the fortificatio^ is first begun) one should
make hidden caves, and passages under the earth, by which one might discover,
and find out an Enemies mine. But this me thinks is not good, because the
vvalls and Bulvvarks are made thereby slender and vveake, and these caves and
being made with posts, and planks, vaults in tract of time are subject to rot,
and and the Mines afterward falling down, all that labor is lost. Also it is
dangerous to make vauts in Rampards, and Bulwarks, seeing it is to be feared,
that such a work is not durable, since it must bear up so great and ponderous a
weight, besides it will cost excessive expenses. And though these
Counter-mines should be thus made and ordained: yet it is not certain, but
that an Enemy in myning may meet just with one of these Mines, and so take his
way and advantage, either over or under it, and so leatt this Counter-mine
alone.

A second opinion is this, and some finds it good, that one should hang trees,
and other bushes in them, which are found often in the Rampards of the Cimbri,
which being stirred with the least motion, gives a sound, whereby one may find
out the place where the mine is. But this is a thing uncertain, because the
least gale of wind, will easily shake these bushes, and branches of trees. And
if they do so this must be done in a still and a calm vveather, when there is
no vvinde stirring. And therefore I answer, one ought to search out an
Enemies mine at all times, for it were an absurd thing, for one to stay from
finding an Enemies mine out and till a calm time comes, who will advance (as
much as possible may be) his work, without staying for still or fair
vveather. Therefore this way serves but for little use.

A third and a better way, and which is the ordinary way, is to set a drum in
the place suspected, with some Dice, pease, or beans upon the head of it,
which upon any stirring, will leap upon the drum, when it stands over the
place where one works. Nevertheless you must not let it stand in one place
only, but remove it now and then from one place to another, yea so often,
till you are assured of the place, which is shaken by the work which is made
under it. Some make use of a Basin of litany filled with water, and imagines,
that the mine is there, where the water moves, but that is uncertain as that
of the Cimbri is, spoken of before, but that of a drum is held to be the best
and surest way. Notvvithstanding one may make good use of Basins, when they
are set upon a Rampard, as a drum with peace or other things. For by such a
means one may know the place, which is undermined. The use of Basins
without all question, took its Original from the Invention of a Kettle,
whereof we have spoken even now.

A fourth opinion besides these which is in use also; is a great long iron
Borer, to bore into the Earth, wherevvith those which searched the Earth, bores
a hole with it into the Rampard, and laying his ear to the hole to listen well
if he can hear any noize, which is practiced in suspected places. Many other
Inventions are invented by necessity the mother of practice.

To resist then the mines of an Enemy, one makes use of this practice
following. After you have curiously searched out the Enemies mines, and that
you are assured of the place under which they are hid then you may find them
out without all question, and nothing remaynes then, but to make a
Counter-mine against them, which is made in the same manner as we have
discribed in the former chapter, treating of mines, to wit, by underpropping
the Earth with posts and laying planks betvveene them, that the Earth may not
tumble down. Now because one is not assured to meed just with the Enemies
mine which may be made either too high, or too low, therefore you must make
many, till by one of them you have found it out, and are come to the Chamber to
take away the powder.

When an Enemies mine is carried so secret, and hidden, that one cannot find
it out, then the besieged must of necessity resolve to quit that part of the
Rampard or Bulwark under which they suspect there is a mine, and so cut it of
inwardly. But for their advantage they make ready also their Countermine made
in that place, and chambers their powder attending the effect of the Enemies
mine, and when he springs his mine, then they retire themselves into their
new work cut off, and the Enemy being lodged in that piece of the Bulvvarke
or Rampart, which they have quitted, then they blovv up their Countermine, and
slay all those, which they find in it.

The like also is done in outvvorkes, and Counterskarfes, when one is driven
to quitt them, and that one cannot keep them any longer.

OF PALISADOES, PALES, TVRNE-PIKES* BARRICADOES, QVADRANT-TANTERNAILES: AND
BEARS. THE TENTH CHAPTER.
We have often made mention of Palisadoes and the use of them, especially
when they are struck into the ground about dry moates, for then they serve, in
stead of water against the sudden assault of an Enemy, so that not only the
moates before great vvalls, and Rampards, ought to be set with them, but also
all Outvvorkes must be fortified with them.

They are likewise of excellent use in the Field, when trenches are set round
with them, and struck in round about Forts, and works, which lie in the
most dangerous places.

They are of no less use also in Fortresses, especially when the Beseiged are
constrained to make cuttings off within a town, or Fort: moreover they are
good to be struck in upon the topp of Breaches, whereof we will treat in the
next chapter.

These Palisadoes then are made in this manner follovving, one makes choice of
good and strong Sparrs being some 3 or 4 inches in Diameter, but of several
lengths, according to the place into which they are to be struck, whereof
some of them may be 5, 6, or 7 foot long. Now the lovver end of them must be
sharpened and pointed, and the upper end flatt, that they may be driven into
the ground with a mallet or a beetle: one bores also a hole some 3 or 4 inches
under the head of the Palisadoe, and an other some three inches under the first
hole, and a third hole on the side through the midst of the two others, in
such sort, that the nails, which are driven through it, resemble as it were
the corners. In some also they use to drive in two nails, so that they are
not struck in a right Angle, but rises a little toward the head of the
Palisadoe. The length of these nails, must be some eight or twelve inches,
and so bigg, that they cannot be easily bowed or broken, and the Head which is
driven into the Palisadoe is some-vvhat greater, then that which sticks out,
which ought to be very sharp.

When you are to use these Sparrs, whereof you must have good store, you take
first of the shortest size, being but five foot long, and strick in a long
rank of them, as you shall find necessary. They are driven into the ground
the depth of a foot and a half, or sometimes more, according as the Earth is
conditioned, and thus you shall make your first rank: then you shall drive in
an other rank of Palisadoes, being six foot long, which are set behind the
first rank, to the end they may run in a right line with the first, but must
be struck in a little sidelings, to the end, that their nails may fill all
places necessary, and the heads of these Palisadoes, ought to stand about
half a foot higher, then the others: In the same manner you drive in the
third rank, which must be half a foot higher then the second, and thus you
may do, if you will drive in a fourth rank, yea as many as it pleases you.
These Palisadoes are represented unto you in the 164 figure.

For the Palisadoes, which are used against assaults there are two sorts of
them. The first is that sort of Palisadoes which are set upon the Parapets of
Forts, Outworks, and Redoubts, for to hinder an Enemy that they may not so
soon assault or scale a place: these ought to be 3 or 4 inches in Diameter,
and some 6 or 7 foot long, whereof the half past is driven into the Parepett,
and the other half stands upright.

For the other sort, those great headed piles or pales, clasped together with
chains, and plates of iron, which stand always upon Ra^pards and Bulvvarkes
covered with a little roof against the time of necessity, when as an Enemy
seeks to assault a Fortress. For by this means he is repulsed, when he
would scale a Rampard, because these Palisadoes, or logs being cast down a
wall, annoyes greatly the Beseigers, in regard of their weight, which they
are not able to resist, though they be armed with head pieces.

OF PALISADOES, PALES, VRIZ-RVYTERS, CAVALLIERS DE FRIZE, Called in English
Turne-piks. THE TENTH CHAPTER.
We have observed in our declaration of Original names whence, the
Cavalleries De Frize took their name: to wit, at the siege of Groeninghen in
Frizeland, where they served for great use, by stopping and hindering the
Enemies horse, when they came to relieve the Town, and then got this name of
Vrize ruyters in Dutch, Cavalliers de Frize in French, and Frize Horses or
Turne-pikes in English, and besides the stopping of a sudden charge of Horse,
they are of excellent use, to be clapped on the topp of a breach, or some vveake
place of a Trench, or a wall, and good store of them ought to be carried along
with an Army on wagon, to be set up in some Avenus, or passages, to stop
and hinder the sudden attempt of an Enemy, when one has no time to cast up a
trench.

In Fortresses they are also of greater use then chains or Bars, which
crosses the streets, For a man may skip over a chain, and a good Horse will
leap over it: But being beset and crossed with Turne-pikes, neither Foot nor
Horse are able to pass over them, seeing they have staves and sharp points
through them on all sides. They may be set up also in the streets of Suburbs
and other places instead of Bars, and where some broad places are to be
kept, in joining many of them together, which is done ordinarily in the
expeditions of Wars.

They are made in this manner following, you take a tree of firm wood, which
will not cleave, where of the Diameter is five or six inches, and some 10, or
14 foot long, which is made with six corners, so that it has six sides, and
in the midst of these sides, one bores three or four inches one from another
cros-wise, and the^ puts through these holes round javelings, whereof the
Diameter is an inch and a half, or at the most two inches, the lengt of them is
six or size foot, and so made, that they are all of one length, which are made
of a strong and a firm piece of timber, which will not easily bend, nor will
be weakened by rain, these are thrust through these holes, so that they are of
a just length on both sides, and have as many javelings on the one side, as on
the other: so that the Turnepike is alike over all, and falls alvvaies after
one fashion, as it lies, and as one would have it. Both the ends of these
javelings are headed, and sharp pointed with iron, and the ends of the tree
are plated about with rings of iron, that the tree of the Turnepike may not
cleave and in the midst of both ends there are rings and clasps made to tie
two or three of these Turne-pikes together with chains, if occasion should
serve, all which is represented in the 165 figure.

Where there are some Banks near unto a Fortress or water, where Shipping may
pass to and again, or where a water may be vvaded through, there are made
pales or Barricadoes, represented in the 166 figure, which are made with
Sparres of strong vvood, squared out, being some 4 or 5 inches big and some
nine or ten foot long, which are set between 2 great posts, about 5 or 6
inches one from another, as ye may see in thee 166 figure.

The fouresquare Tanternailes is a very necessary thing for defense, having
alvvaies one of the points standing upvvard. For they have four points as
sharp as a nail, whereof three stands upon the ground, and the fourth
howsoever it lies, standing bolt upright. They are of diverse greatness, for
those which are commonly used in this Country, are lesser then those which are
cast into a Moate. The point whereof 3 or 4, or 5 inches long. A Fortress
ought to have good store of them for to cast them into a moate, into a
Falsebray, or upon a Breach, because they prick and hurt shrodly the Soldiers
feet which strives to enter. They are represented to you in the 167 figure.

Your Dodanes or Bears made of stone or brick are set upon a bank by a river
side, to keep the water from overflowing, (or running out of a moat. The
Duchess calls it a Bear, because it represents the shape of a Bear, but the
French term it des d'Asnes, and of one word corrupted Dodanes, that is, an
Asses back* because it has some resemblance of an Asses back, upon which
disobedient Soldiers, who committed some notable offense must ride upon some
hours one after another, which we call in English a Wooden horse, and has
the fashion of an Asses-backe.

Master Simon Stephens, Prince Maurice his old Mathematician, in his new Book
of Fortification, and Sluices, makes mention of some great faults committed in
the making of these Bears, because the foundation, which should sustain and
bear up this ponde^ous Work, ought to be exceeding strong, and foundly laid,
for otherwise the expense, and the labor which it costs will be cast away in
vain. For the preventing whereof, he gives good council to sink into the
bottom of the moate, piles or Mast trees bound fast together and of one and
the same bigness and length, which will make a strong and a firm foundation,
whereupon afterward you may build your Bear.

It must be made a good deal higher, then the water, when the tides, or the
rivers are swollen up to the very banks, and it must be made so thick, that it
may be able to resist the force and violence of the water, and the stones and
bricks so laid and plaistred together, that the water cannot eat or soake
through it^ And because these Bears in moates might serve as a way to straddle
over and get into the Town or Fortress by, at both ends there is two
palissadoes set the one upon the bank, and the other one either side next the
Moate, as you may see in the 166. figure before which also is struck into the
ground, many other small palissadoes of 4 or 5 foot length before mentioned.
But the top of the Bear is made with a sharp Edge, and in the midst of it a
little round turrit to hinder, and keep back those that would clime over it:
Sometimes there are made two round turrets when it is made over a broad water
or moate, the figure 168. will show you the pouretrature of such a Bear.

OF RETRENCHINGS, OR INWARD CUTTINGS OFF, AND HOW ONE MUST RESIST AN ASSAVLT.
THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER. Interior.
THE Art of Fortification is not only of perfect Fortresses, provided with all
kind of Outward-workes, but also has besides an other use, seeing that it
teaches also how one ough to prepare and furnish a Town or Fortress with new
works, When the others are ruinated. This part of Fortification is called in
French un Retrenchement Interieur, in Latin Recessus, and in English an Inward
Cutting off: because such works are made to no other end, but to make a
Retreat into, when the others are lost. For, when one cannot maintain, and
defend a whole work, or a part thereof, because an enemy striveth with all
his power to become master of it one must then resolve, when he is driven out
of one work, how he may retire into another, and defend himself again,
against the assault of an Enemy, because it would be very hurtful to defend
one self, when he lies open to an Enemy.

This Inward Cuttings off is of two sorts, the one in Outworkes, the other in a
Fortress it self.

Besides, it is in General or particular.

We will first handle the Cuttings off, which are made in outward works, which
are the first, which an Enemy seeks to take in, and afterward the Cuttings
off, which must be made in a Town or Fortress it self.

Touching a general cutting off, it is only used in Crown-works, Horn-works,
or Tenailles.

The same is also of two sorts* Regular, and Irregular.

A General cutting off is, when a work is made in all things like unto that,
which is Cut off, in such sort, that a Crown-worke is made within a Crown-work,
a Horn-work within a Horn-worke, and a Tanaille within a Tanaille.

Irregular cuttings off of outward works, is that which is that which keeps not
the form of the work, which is cut off within, yet Nevertheless shuts up
the work with a continued Parapet.

A particular cutting off is, when a work is made out of broken works, or
severed one from an other, in such wise that there is made one, two, or three
Reuelings, in stead of a Horn-worke, or two Demi Bulwarks.

You must observe well, touching every kind of cutting off here set down, that
they may have a good defense, and if it be possible, that they may also be
defended from some other places, and that they lie open to that side which
looks into the Town or Fortress besieged.

A General cutting off in Crown-works is done as follows, one falls backward
some 20 or 24 foot, yea more or less, according as the condition of the place
is, and as necessity requires, and one maks the work within it, like unto the
other which is cut off. And though his work being cut off, is lesser then the
other, yet it will give an Enemy enough to do when he shall attempt the taking
of it in. Your Crown-workes are made commonly after the proportion of a small
Fort Royal, where the proportion of the Polygones are of 5550 or 45 rodd, When
you resolve to cut off a work a little more inward, it will become narrower in
a regard of the great work, yet will be great enough to defend it self

The General Cuttings of Crown-works, will cost no great labor, which may
easily be shown, in regard it is very common. An example thereof you may see
in the 169 figure: The cutting off being made, one is forced to make a ditch,
between the work quitted and the cutting off, which ought nevertheless to be
done, because one takes the Earth out of the ditch, to make up the cutting off
withal: one must observe also that this cutting off must be made, as strong as
possible may be. The cuttings off are maid only, while an Enemy is approaching
toward you, but also when Towns and Forts are first fortified.

Your General cuttings off in Tenailles does not differ from that which is made
in Horn-works, saveing that one make a Tenaile, in stead of a Horn-worke.

The particular cuttings off of Horn-works is after so many ways, that one
cannot show here all the kinds of them. A Cutting off is represented unto you
in the 171 figure, where a Horn-worke is cut off, and two Revelings made in the
sides of it, which are defended by a third, which are behind the others: and
though they have a sufficient defense of themselves, yet the defense of the
other Reveling is added to them over and above, and is defended from the
Tenaille, which is after it.

Besides this, there is another kind of cutting of a Horn-worke shown in the
172 figure. In imitating these cuttings off one may make many others, as
necessity may permit, and as an Enemy attempts upon you, all which is
impossible to mark out here.

A General cutting off a great wall or Rampard is used very seldom, because
the Besiegers and the Besieged will at last grow weary thereof, Nevertheless,
this happened in the seige of Ostend, which lasted three years, three months and
odd days: for as soon as the Enemy had got into the wall by sapping and
springing of mines, they presenly had an other Cutting off ready to entertain
them: in so much that dureing this seige, there were many Counter-approches
against approches, Counter mines against the Enemies mines, so that the Enemy
could not get for a long time sarcely an inch of ground upon our men, for there
were above forty mines sprung on both sides and when the Earth fell out, men
fought for that and turned up the Earth against them, for these General and
Royal cuttings off, lasted, till the Enemy had got more then half the Town,
before they gate over the whole. And though such a seige, and such a great
cuttings off, happens but seldom, yet you shall see an example thereof in the
figure 173, where is shown how one ought to quit a whole part of a Town, or
Fortress, with the Curtain and Bulvvarks, and how one by a cutting of a
Bullvvarke, or a Curtain is more usual, whereof we savv an example at the
seige of the Bosch in the Vucher Bulvvarks as also the last year at the seige
of Breda where both the Ginnekeis and Haghish Hornvvorks, with both these
Bulvvarks, were most dangerously cut off Now to represent unto you some
cuttings off, which you may see in the 173 figure marked with A, B, and C.
The letter C shovvs you how one ought to quit a whole Bulvvark, and how you
ought to make your Capital line after a Bulvvark is cut off.

Likewise other kinds of cuttings off of Bulvvarks, are represented unto you
in the figure 174, 175, 176, 177, and 178, after which manner, you may make
many others and change, and order them, as an Enemy comes near you, and as
the commodiousnesse of the place shall require.

It happens also sometimes that Curtains are cut of inwardly, wen as an
Enemy may assault them with advantage, because of their length. You may then
cut them of as is shovvn in 172 figure, when you have time enough to cut them
of Royally. But if time vvil not permit you to make a royal fortification,
then you must make use of Traverses.

It is impossible to cut of a False-bray, because of the little space, which
is in it. Notvvthstanding one may cast up some Traverses in it, especially on
that side, which the Enemy seeks to take in, and toward which part he
would advance his gallery, to the end you may not give too much to an Enemy,
but keep and maintain the place as much as possible may be. For the Besieged
may lay hold on the same advantage, as their Enemy does, when he is once got
into the False-bray, and though when he is in that they may cover the roof of
it with planks one may nevertheless set fire on it, and disaccommodate the
Enemy on all sides.

As for other works as Revelings and Halfmoons, you may see how they are cut
of after the same manner, as the Bullvvarks are, if the work which is to be
cut of be great enough and have place enough in it to be cut off.

But forasmuch as all this here shown, concerns principally the defense,
which ought to be considered in ordinary Fortresses, so one must have a
special care to the materials whereof these works are made: for in making of
them, you must choose the best Earth that is to be got, which will make your
works the stronger.

In outworkes you may always take in the earth, which is dug out of the
moate^ But because that sandy earth, or earth mingled with sand, is not so
good, it is lyned with rise, or Brush, which is laid betwixt and upon it.

In great Bulwarks, where there is not Earth enough, and besides that is sandy,
it must be laid with rows of Brush, driving them in with stakes, and sparrs
of houses shot down with Canon. But when the ground is so sandy, that you
cannot work it alone, then you must lay dung, and straw, and other things
betwixt it to make it hold together, and you must wet the Earth as many times
as is needful. You may fortify your Parapets with Gabions, when you cannot
make them otherwise, and likewise you may set great musket baskets upon the top
of the Parapet, that it may be covered the better.

In Outworks one may make use of the ordinary Profile, when you have time
enough to make cuttings off, or you may make them long before hand. But the
works which are made in great have, have no certain rule: howsoever, you must
make them as strong as possible may be, and as means, and time will give you
leave.

Touching the cuttings off of Bulwarks and Curtains, one can give likewise no
certain rule, only this you must ever have a care, that all inward works and
cuttings off, lie open toward the Town or Fortres with this proviso also, that
they be not made so high, but that the great works may overlook and command
them: For if the Rampard of the cutting off be lower, then the high Rampard of
the Town, then the Enemies Canon can do it no great harm, because they are
defended from the great Rampard. Again, the Enemy cannot discover the place
and the form of the cutting off, according to which one may govern themselves
otherwise. It is certain also, that one cannot beat an Enemy from a high
place, which is near at hand because he is blinded and covered with the Wall or
Rampard.

All these things being finished, when one is assured, that an Enemy is ready
to spring his Mine, which cannot be found out, one must then strengthen, and
double the guards in every place, and bring your canon to those places, where
they may most gaul and flanck the enemy. One ought to have an eye, as well on
other places, as only upon the Breach, which is made by the springing of the
mine. For an Enemy hopeing that he may have drawn, the most of the forces in a
Town or Fortress to defend the Breach, may attempt some other place of the
Fortress, which is not thought upon and so become master of such a place,
which is not provided with a sufficient defense.

After that the Breach is made, the Besieged must expect to be presently
assaulted, which they must maintain and make good as long as possibly they
can, by defending the breach courageously, in doing whereof, they must throw
down from the top of it, abundance of these Sqare tanter-nailes spoken of in
the chapter before, for to annoy and prick the Enemy, when he seeks to mount up
and to enter it.

Upon the top of the Breach also, if they have time they may cast up a
brest-worke, as Sir Francis Vere did in Ostend, or set up some turn-pikes, to
hinder the Enemy for entering, and to strike in some Palissadoes upon the top of
it, having Clubs, Flails, Stones: and Ashes, to offend them.

It is necessary, when the Enemy strives to enter it, that the soldiers fight
courageously, and that the officers should encourage them with their presence
to carry themselves like brave men, that being a place to gain honor in, by
giveing them also premises of reward, and when they grow weary, to see that
they be seconded with fresh men, which stand in readiness behind the Rampard,
to relieve them.

When they are not able to maintain and defend the breach any longer, then
they must retire into the cutting off, and take a new courage, and a heart of
grace, in fighting behind a new Rampard in making resistance as long as ever
they are able, and thus much for the second part.

Two divisions of 25 files of Pikes standing in their order in Rank and file
making 500 men.
Order de Bataille de 24000 d'Infanterie, et 6000 de Cavaillerie, Ordonne en
trois Brigades, duquel le Front de A. B. a 5054 pieds.
Order de Bataille en Flandres verse Nieuport, dressee l'An 1600. le 2e.
Iuillet. par le Prince d'Orange Maurice.
Order de Bataille de l'Archeduc Albert en Flanders verse Nieuport le 2e Iuillet
l'An 1600.
Order de bataille d'Infanterie, ordonne par le feu Prince d'Orange Maurice, de
tres boute memoire l'An 160^.
Premiere form de l'Ordre de Bataille devant Rees, le 23e. Septembre 1605.
Order de Bataille de 37 Compaignies de Cavaillerie devant Rees, le 23.
September. 1614.
Premiere form d'ordre de Bataille devant Iuliers dressee l'an 1610. e
merchant depuis Vorstenberg.
Second form de lordre de Bataille dressee depuis Vorstenberg verse Iuliers le
22e Aoeust 1620
A Form of Horse Embattailed before Gulick Anno 1610. Order de Bataille de
Cavaillerie devant Iuliers l'An mill six cent et dix
An other form of Embattailing Horse shoune before Rees by his Exce 1621 Order
de Bataille de Cavaillerie devant Rees, ordonne par son Excce. en october 1621.
Order d'Infanterie en bataille devant Rees l'An 1614 duquel le front est: long
2200 pieds, et la bauteur 740 pieds.
Autre Order d'Infanterie en Bataille devant Rees l'an 1614 duquel le front est
long 2750. pieds, et la bauteur 1160. pieds.
Premiere Order d'Infanterie en Bataille devant Doormick l'An 1621.
Second Order de Bataille de Cavaillerie, et Infanterie, Ordonne par Son
Excce. devant Doornick le ^e. de September.
Infanterie en Bataille.
Autre Order d'Infanterie en Bataille.
Order d'Infanterie en Bataille pres Nimmege. 1624.
Order de Bataille Ordonne par le Prince Henry a Walwic.
Ordre-de-Bataille de toute L'Armee, Ordonne par Son Altezze, devant le sort de
Voren le 4e. de Iuin 1642.
The form of the Battle, which his Highness showed before Breda anno 1634.
the Front is 8495. foot.
The form of Battle shown by his Highness at Maersen the 10e. of June 1635:
the Front is 5050 foot.
Quartier d'un (...) d'Infanterie de dix Compaignies, selon l'Ordre de son
Altezze: le front a 434 pieds.
Quartier d'un Regiment de Cavaillerie de 5. Compaignies selon l'ordre de son
Altezze le front a 430 pieds.
Figure d'Une Armee en Campaigne; avec ques sa Cavaillerie et Infanterie, selon
l'Ordre du feu Prince d'Orange.



