OBSERVATIONS UPON HISTORY.

BY W. H. Esquire.

LONDON Printed by T. Cotes, for Will. Cook, and are to be sold at his shop,
near Furnivalls-Inne gate in Holborne. 1641.

TO THE READER.
THe world must forgive me my trouble, and perhaps its own; if I throw my
self on censure by this public Edition of my private study. These
observations are history, such as surprised me in the reading, and which least my
memory should betray me, I committed to writing. They are singular accidents,
and therefore more powerful to arrest the eye, and make the imagination stand
amazed at the vicissitude of time and fortune. And where can Phylosophie find
such sober precepts as out of history? History, that faithful preserver of
things past, that great instructor of the present, and certain Prophet of the
future. By it we may discover the print which former ages made, and treading
that, know how to avoid the bywayes of error and misfortune. By it we are
taught the value of humane things, by contemplation of the frailty and ruin
of which we are elevated to the love of the Eternal. For when we read the
subversion of Empires, and look for those great Princes who commanded them,
and find not so much dust left of them, as may serve the smallest wind to
sport with, what variety of power is not confounded? What authority with most
famed Monarchs can secure it self, to the least complacence, when the proud
manreades the folly of all those cunning Arts which advance to greatness, but
never could protect from ruin? And who can look cloudie on his own poor
fortune; when he finds that the too much favor of Princes, like the too near
rays of the Sun, tans them they shine upon? Neither can discontent find
entrance into that soul, who by a just valuation of what is transitory
resolves fortune has not in her gift what may ennoble, nor in her rage what
may debase a well ordered mind.

This History instructs us to; which maturely read by a Sober spirit, has
power in the uncertain Sea of fraylty, to settle man fixed against all the
injures of nature has depraved us to.

Farewell.
OBSERVATIONS UPON HISTORY.
Of Henry the seconds association of his eldest Son to the regal Throne.
MAude the Empress, by the weakness of her Sex, lost that Crown she had
title to in being sole Daughter to Henry the first. The ungrateful English
opposing power against infirmity; and violating that oath they had sworn to
her succession; as if fealty could not be obleiged to woman: and the more
politic regards had authority to dispense with the more honest. Yet did her
son prevail, and Anchored in the Haven of that Monarchy; from which so
various tempests such broken tides, and so many shelfs and rocks, had barred
her. For the very Genius of this Nation by a strange dotage on the male heirs,
has still bin cruel to the female, when they had a son able for government.
Henry the seventh, like this great Henry, not disputing the title of a mother,
when youth and action raised him to be acceptable to the Kingdom: though in
that some contempt reflected on her reverend weakness. So little did the
appetite of power regulate it self by the straight rule of conscience.

But Henry the second disdained this disordered voting in the people; who were
in danger as easily to misplace Authority, if fancy should mis-leade them to
doat unlawfully: since in how dangerous a Doctrine an unwarrantable president
instructs posterity? And with what little difficulty the multitude breaks
all duty, if by an awful hand not kept to the most severe? The liberty of
such elections having been ever of ruinous consequence to that Nation which
maintains it.

Among many gallant sons to leave the Kingdom no dispute about the choice,
he gave order for coronation of his eldest, thereby to exempt the people from
the trouble of an hereafter suffrage. For since the violent entrance of his
great grand father, William the Bastard, on the government of England; passion
had disordered succession, and no Prince but might challenge in his tyranny, a
descent from the first usurper. But King Henry brought justice to the throne,
and making claim to the Monarchy by a straight line, with more earnestness
endeavored to continue it to posterity.

But when policy shoots too far, her arrows fall ever wide; for humane
judgment has no sight into the future, and mistakes when it endeavors beyond
a lawful distance. The wit of man delights to find eternity in a moment; and
to build a lasting edefice on a quickesand. For what Arts can perpetuate
Monarchy, and how frail a reed is all our wisdom to support an empire?
This very cunning in King Henry proved such folly, that his friends were
enforst to pity. For while in the pomp of this Coronation he seemed even to
survive himself, and see his eldest son succeed: which happiness no Prince
here had for long time attained. A sudden Devil (for what else can we term
ambition?) was raised, which no exorcisme of a parents awe had power to lay.
For this new honor created new passions, and the son having equal title
with the Father disdained to want equal greatness. Why should he be made a
mockery of Princes, and wear the Diadem without the power? why should he be
thought worthy the throne, and not the Scepter? why should his youth active to
great attempts, be frozen up by the cold advice of a declining father? If it
was wisdom to raise him to so eminent a degree; why wanted he justice to
exercise it? Unless his father designed to make the most serious act of
government, an interlude of mirth; and convert the Church into a stage to
represent the Comedy more to the life. But though this was intended only for
a Pageant; yet did it behoove him in this first appearing to the world, to show
himself far above the scorn or sport of either his enemies or friends.

This was whispered in his ear, and the discourse pleasing the vanity of his
passion, soon won authority on his reason. For with how little remorse is
the conscience persuaded when the least appearance of justice priviledgeth
ambition? what thoughts at first he feared to trust his heart with; by this
advice he enlarged to his tongue: and from private discourses, he began open
complaints; so that he took confidence to urge his father to a resignation of
his Kingdom and other Provinces, which with so eminent a fame he hitherto had
governed. Nor was a powerful faction wanting both in England and abroad, who
though at the inward tribunal of their judgment they condemned so unnatural
ingratitude, yet outwardly did applaude the young Kings most crooked ways:
which easily are made straight to opinion, when they carry in them matter to
foment hopes of innovation.

The father endeavored by reason to calm this tempest, and advised the son not
to anticipate vexation; for how smoth a brow soever Majestiepretended; the
inward aspect must needs prove rugged. Since no command is happy, if not
innocent. The least train of wicked policy undermining the firmest edifice
of empire. That hereafter when the Fathers death shall prepare the passage to
the sons government, the entry not being violent might be happy and carrying
with it no cloud of sinister practices, might shine glorious. For the present,
he entreated that patience which the Divine Law commanded; and all humane
customs had still observed. Withal he persuaded him to tame his wild
ambition: ambition; which if natural, is a sickness destroys the body it
possesses: if infusive, a venom, ministered by the most malicious, against
which there is no antidote but ruin.

That his association into the Kingdom, was not prejudice the present
authority of the Father, but to confirm the greatness of the son in future.
That it was high ingratitude to retribute disobedience for so unexampled a
favor.

But reason forced by strongest arguments was to weak to prevail against those
many Castles built high in the air of his vain thoughts. And seeing his
desires battered by his fathers just resolutions when he expected no
resistance; pride persuaded him to seek remedy abroad, and to force what he
could not entreat. Suddenly therefore he conveyes himself and all his
passions to King Lewis of France, whose daughter he had married, but never
bedded: King Henry the Father carefully providing against the consummation of
those Nuptials; least his Son might by the alliance increase in power and
dependencies. But this pollitick bar which divided the young Princes mature
for love, created rage in the young King, disdain in the Lady, in Lewis
discontent, but in Queen Aeleanor (Henry the fathers wife) an impious
jealousy. For she who in her youth had made forfeite of her honor, and in her
lust (repugnant to Christian Laws) chose a Sarazen for her Lover; interpreted
this restraint of the young Kings wife, to a vicious design in the old King
and that all the cautions pretended were only with the more artifice and
secrecy to secure the fruition of his injurious pleasures. And she seemed to
have ground for her suspicions in the much liberty of his former life; which
seldom had in his restraint condemned that action dishonest, which his blood
prompted was delightful.

This calumny wrought the old King into the peoples hard censure, and brought
compassion to the young King, whose injuries seemed of that quality as might
authorize disobedience. So that not only Lewis of France who as being a
Neighbor King, was concernd to foment that discord: but even many of the
subjects to the Crown of England prepared their Arms for an unnatural war*
The chief heads of which Rebellion at home, were the Earls of Chester and
Leicester: who to give their King despair of any sudden quiet, fortified
their Castles and other strong holds, with so much Art as if they designed to
perpetuate mischief. And what encouraged them to danger, was, beside hopes of
greatness in the change of government; confederacy with the King of Scotland;
by whose power joined to that of France, they doubted not either to advance
their fortunes by war, or make an honorable retreat by peace. For when did
unquiet subjects presume to arm, without promise of aid from foreign
Princes? And when bad attempts with them proved unsuccessefull; what stranger
but disavowed all underhand dark intelligence? But the wonder of this
mischief was, that Richard and Geoffrey brothers to the young King entered into
this conspiracy; as if the blood of Princes had not flowed according to the
course of Nature: and the eminency of birth, had elevated them above the Laws
of filial Duty.

To wrest justice to either quarrel, both betrayed themselves: for infamy and
rage shot no arrow to wound the others honor but repercussively flew back.
Even he who most apparently proved himself injured, being guilty: and no man
safe to fame, who had best title to defame his enemy. So unhappily had nature
cimented them, that their fortunes and honors could admit no disunion: and
none could triumph, but when part of him was ruined.

The Father amazed at the irreligious quarrel; forgot not nevertheless, that
he was to maime himself if he destroyed his enemy: and therefore by most
loving addresses courted his Sons to more peaceful thoughts. He urged them
to return to duty, with confidence that he retained a mercy greater than
their error. That their demand should end in no denial, provided that Reason
gave it moderation; and that they would not chide with time, which yet enlarged
their father life That from their best confederates they could expect nothing
but the breach of faith: and who could be more interessed to advance their
business than a father? All other allies only dissembling friendship to
entrap their youth: and nourishing this discord to dissolve all the Ligaments
of our Empire, and purchase safety at the cost of our ruin.

But no persuasion could humble the young Kings desires, his cause now
justified by a general sentence, and his Army increast by an universal
confluence of his confederates. For into conspiracy of mischief, how easily
are men drawn, who value the justice of the quarrel at the rate of their own
profit?

All the territories belonging to the Crown of England were now on fire: the
King of France with the unnatural sons wasting Normandy and Aquitain; the
King of Scotland with the disloyal Lords destroying England. In the meanetime,
the innocent people were offered a victim to both their furies; and the honest
labourer forced to the sweat of war, to obey the passions of those Lords,
whose quarrel he understood not. So cruel is the fortune of the vulgar, that
they can make no just account of their own lives or states, when Princes are
pleased to follow the disorder of their rage. For at the expense of the common
blood highest discords are maintained; and at their loss chiefly the ambition
of the Mighty is purchased.

Victory at length brought the old King to the Majesty of a Father: and the
young King inclined to obedience, when by overthrow of the King of Scots and
the English rebels he found his faction weakened. For adversity has a more
powerful Oratory, than all the wit of Piety, to persuade the proud from their
usurped height. And seldom can we stoop to confess our frailty, till
compelled by some accidental weakness. But the Father had his arms open,
when ever the Son would throw himself into his embraces; never wanting
affection to entertain humility. And concord was thus restored: when the Son
perceived his inabilitie longer to continue impious; and the father found that
his revenge would be most cruel to his own Nature. The young King was to
consummate his marriage with the Daughter of France (for in all tragedies the
amorous business acts a part) with an allowance great as the dignity he wore,
but no Sovereign power. For the Father gained by this treaty from his Son,
the liberty to live a King.

All discor'd by this agreement appeared rooted up, when indeed nothing but
the branches were cut down: For no free delivery of all the prisoners taken in
the late battle, and fully re-invested in their greatness: no over liberal
allowance, no solemn protestations of a Father could win authority with the
Son. New disgusts on the least grounds were built, by his own unquiet
spirit, and the suggestions of cunning instruments. For he wanted that absolute
power his title challenged: from which he was debarred by his fathers life and
fortune: they who had adherd heard to his disobedience expected recompense for
mischeife: and he unable to pay them for their sins, rewarded their humor
with discontent. His disease of mind was incapable of cure: for no Phificke
without the mixture of his Fathers vital blood could minister relief; and
that the old King preserved against all practice: And to a resignation of
Empire, no Argument could persuade him; not willing to encoffin himself in a
Church solitude till death enforced him.

At length unquiet thoughts destroyed the young King who disdained to live and
not to reign: and since he could be only the mockery of his own title, he
was willing not to be at all. For while with his brother Geoffrey he was in
arms against his Father, and found no success to his designs: a violent
fever with a flux seized, and admonisht him he was to dye: which he entertained
with little horror, till at last the conscience of his many crimes frighted
him with apprehension of that world he was suddenly to travail to. The rack
which put his soul to the extremest torture was the injury he had contrived
against his father: which he redeemed by humble penitence: for the old King
sent his signer, whether he durst not trust his person: and assured his son a
pardon; which gave courage to his death and made him with less trouble resolve
for his last account. Having by his preposterous association into the
Sovereign title, created to his father disquiet and repentance, and to
himself only enlarged the shadow.

The death of Richard the first, King of England.
THe several parts of humane life are distinguished by our vices. The
smoothness of youth is tyrannized by sensual pleasure; the body growing to
more strength ambition engages to action: but when age inclines toward the
grave: Avarice, preposterous to reason, forces man then to reckon upon
treasure, when death threatens to cancel all the bonds, and Out him from the
world with no more gaietie than at his birth he entered. Thus are we mocked by
our own sins; vainly providing for the safety of life, when the tomb
lays claim to our wrinckles, and infirmity holds before our eyes Times
houre-glasse, with the last grain of sand ready to fall down. The soul
busying its thoughts with setting long leases, when it is suddenly to be turned
out of its own weak cottage.

Richard the first of England varied not from this common path; having stained
his youth with lust: honored his maturer years with triumphs: but leaning now
toward age, permitting Avarice to be night the glory of his former actions. And
so vainly did this wretched vice mis-governe him, that as wandering by the
conduct of an ignis fatuus, he followed the acquisition of an imaginary
treasure. For while he pursued the punishment of some Rebel Lords in Poitou,
who had assisted, contrary to alleigance, the French Kings affairs during the
late vvarres; he was informed that Widomer a Vicount of base Britain, had
possessed himself of much wealth: fortune unavvares to his endeavors, having
lead him to a secret cave, wherein foolish Avarice, or fear of some sudden
surprise had buried vast treasures.

This severe pursuit thrust the distracted Lord into several passions, which
councel'd him rather to foregoe his alleigance than his fortune: and knovving
how safe even innocence and integrity are against the assault of power; he
having no such vvarrant fled into Limosin (a Country which owed to King Richard
no obedience but what his just title and sharp sword did force) and in the
strongest town there he enclosed himself, and the purchase of that treasure
which created him so many fears and so little safety. By the communication of
his gold, he brought the townsmen into association of his danger: for where
they are interested in a regard to profit; what tie has fealty upon the
conscience, and how little is a life esteemed, when money (that supreme
felicity of fools) is concerned?

The King disdained thus to be opposed, threatening ruin and devastation to
that place, which could so easily sell its homage; and in the heat of rage and
power he assaulted it, ventring for a poor bargain, the Crown of England and
his principalities in France and Ireland For if his life miscarried in the
attempt; what interest could death reserve for him to Empire, who wanting
children despaired even to survive in that imaginary vanity? But when did
passion take advice of truth? Or when powerful Avarice inclined to revenge;
what reason could give a bound to mischief?

But the Town resolved to oppose: since no conquest could bring more
desolation, than to yield to that passion which has no affinity with mercy.
And while the King when violence received repulse, labourd by Art to master the
place, an envenomed Arrow, shot by a revengfull hand, struck him into the
shoulder. Which wound being dressed by a rude unskilful Surgeon, made the
anguish insupportable to any man whom rage armed not with a new kind of
patience. For neglecting all complaint, he so seriously used his wit and
courage to prosecute his design; that within twelve days he brought the town
to yield to mercy: Where after narrow search, he found the treasure he so
vainly followed, a deceitful vision that misled him to his ruin.

This conquest finished he began to acknowledge he was but man: for death
commanded him away, and he obeyed the summons. Then he found another law to
overruled his spirits, and being to appeal from the severity of the eternal
Justice, he labored in himself to practice mercy. And in this short
intervall between the glorious thoughts of life, and his last hour, he left
his virtue an example to the most religious, as his valor had been an envy
in the most ambitious. For when the Paracide, in a pride of the high mischief
he had committed, refused to lay fault on error: but impiously aver'd he did
that great sin to revenge his Father and two brothers slaughtered by the
King: the King forgave him with so much piety, that he rewarded even the
Executioner: and conjured his servants that this unhappie man might enjoy the
comfort of his revenge, and survive a Trophee of so eminent a mercy. But this
pious Testament had no obedient Executors; the King no longer obeyed than he
had liberty from death to command. For justice then unsheathed her sword, and
least the example of too much favor might afterward become an injury, the
Paracide was fleade and hanged upon a gibbet: In the horrid silence of his
punishment more effectually expressing his own treason and the Kings mercy.

Before this holy Prince parted with his life, by much penitence he parted with
his sins. For highest courages fall lowest when overcome by supernatural
grace. And how vast a progress toward heaven can a soul so illuminated make
even in a moment? For the immence bounty is not tied to measure, and how can
the quantities of time prescribe to the Eternal?

His testament bears evidence to posterity, that his mind was no way dazel'd
looking down on death from the highest precipice of Empire. For discreetly he
made distribution of his command and treasure: to John his brother, he
bequeathed his Kingdom, neglecting the weaker years of Arthur, and having
more regard to the peoples safety than the right of blood: To his Nephew
(though then Emperor, he left one part of his treasure, the other to his
servants; and the third to the poor, whom the wealthy never think their
friends till death.

His body he disposed too, though corruption still challenges that legacy,
and commanded it at Fonteverard to be laid prostrate at his fathers feet, that
even after death he might crave him pardon whom in life he had unnaturally
offended: To Roane in testimony of his love, he gave his heart; that great
undaunted heart, which being more valiant than that of man, and the heavenly
spirits wanting proportion for the comparison was forced to permit it self to
be called a Lions heart. But his entrails he bequeathed to Poeters: to
obrey'd it to posterity with its ingratitude, as which by many treasons was
rendered unworthy to receive any Nobler part of so great a Prince.

The battle of Varna, between Vladislaus King of Hungary, and Amurath the sixth
King of the Turks, 1444.
THe prevailing virtue of John Huniades (the greatest Captain of that age) by
continual victory humbled the proud Monarch of the Turk so low, that peace
was sued for to the Christians. Which Vladislaus condescended to, imposing such
conditions as if Fortune had made him Conqueror. And indeed it was sought with
an earnestness, so far beneath their former arrogance: that it was received
at first either as a high contempt or dangerous stratagem. But when time
assured this overture to be no counterfeite: Vladislaus demanded that Amurath
should withdraw all his Forces and Garrisons out of Servia, and restore it to
George the Despot: delivering with that Country to the long exiled Prince his
two sons, whom the Turk kept prisoners, and whose eyes in hatred to the
father had been put out. That he should never after make claim to Moldavia
and Bulgaria which Countries the fate of the last war had won to the
Christians: That he should no way molest the Hungarians or invade any part of
their dominions. And that he might not only part with territory, but even
with money to purchase this peace, he was to pay forty thousand Ducats to the
King, and in recompense have Carambey his Bassa, not long before taken prisoner
by Huniades restored.

This peace the most honorable that ever Christian Prince made with the
Turkish Sultan, was interpreted ill and Vladislaus thought rather to have
sought his own quiet, than the glory of the Christian name. For in so high a
tide of victory it could not be but a poor design to secure his fortunes by
treaty with an Infidel, whom necessity could only make religious, and whom
want of power could only preserve a friend.

This consideration incited Julian the Popes Legate, and agent for other
Christian Princes in this cause, to persuade Vladislaus to repent his former
peace; and to settle his Conscience without scruple to prosecute the war. For
what Religion could obleige him to preserve an oath of faith, with him who
only endeavored by pretense of fidelity to entrap him? Or why should a nice
piety hinder the growth of Religion? Or to what purpose should only one party
be obleig'd, when experience instructed him that the Turk never swore but to
tie the Christian and enlarge himself? But now was it more than ever impious
to have peace, when all men concurred to advance a war so holy: where victory
was an increase of Religion, and even to be overcome the highest triumph of the
soul, since it assured a Martyrdom.

And beside the assistance of heaven, whose cause they fought, and whose
soldiers they were; all polliticke regards concurred to assertaine the ruin of
the Ottoman Empire: which not to do upon the too tender conscience of a
league, was an injurious piety, which only merited reproach for a reward. For
John Paleologus Emperor of the East, was then prepared with mighty Forces, and
protested that in religion to the Christian cause, he had refused by making
peace to endeavor his own safety. Many Princes likewise of the Turks invited
the Hungarian to this war; desirous rather to abate the overgrowne Empire of
Amurath, then to continue the splendour of their Sect with danger to their
state. For religion has but a slender tie upon that soul, which is overruled
by ambition or private interest. And where maintenance of command was
concerned; what wonder if Mahometans labored the Christians, common enemies of
their law into association? Moreover all the States of Italy had prepared for
the present war, sending their fleet into the Hellespont to join with the
Grecian Emperor, that the Turk on both sides assaulted might in neither meet
with any thing but ruin.

As for Amurath himself; age and evil fortune had thrown him into despair,
and that confined him to a solitude: where in an impious piety with certain
Monks, counterfeite base coin of the right Christian stamp, he tired his
time away, and expected an ugly death. The whole government of that usurped
Empire, now by resignation of the Father under Mahomet but fifteen years of
age, fitter for a School and obedience to Tutors than the manage of war
against as able Soldiers as the most warlike age ever boasted.

But these regards only looked on policy; that which made the Conscience
free from obligation to preserve this league Sacred, was a former made with the
Princes of Christendom. With whom to break faith, was Sacriligious; and to
maintain it with an Infidel, sinful and ruinous. Unlawful oaths being
vicious in the making, but far more in the performance. He who swears the
burning of an Altar commits a crime: but his absolution comes far easier if
repentance make him perjured, then if obstinacy render him sacrilegious.

Easily was the conscience of Vladislaus untyed from his former league: the
appetite of glory and extent of Empire oftentimes taking as soon away all
scruple from the soul, as the most sober resolution of Divines. For Huniades
(upon whose valor and fortune the success of the war depended) had promise
of the Kingdom of Bulgaria: and who not miraculously awed by virtue, will not
endanger to be but a bad Christian to become a powerful Monarch? The Despot
of Servia had his hopes too, of a more settled principality, and some extent of
power; and that made his Religion which never much troubled his preferment;
dispense with an oath, himself had been the chief actor to work Vladislaus
to. But above all Scanderbeg that miracle of true and happy courage animated
to this war: promising to bring 30000. Soldiers both for strength of body
and observation of Discipline excelling the most famed of Europe.

This joint power, in so much security of Amurath precipitated Vladislaus into
war, which he managed with as much good order and secrecy, as a business so
general could admit. For first present notice was given to the Italian fleet
now in the Helespont, that it should no way retire upon any rumor of peace.
Then was it mutually agreed that Scanderbeg should at an appointed day meet in
Servia, and there both Armies join in the common cause.

The season of the year might have detered any man, from this attempt in the
depth of winter. Considering when the King was come into Bulgaria, and had
numbered his men; Dracula Vayvod of Valachia dissuaded any farther progress
into that Country, Scanderbeg not yet come with his Forces, being in command of
an enemy, who used often to Hawk, with a retinue more populous than his
Army. But ambition and presumption grounded on former good success, deafen'd
him to sober council: so that he went on as if heaven had been tied by
miracle still to come down to his succor, Which obstinacy when Dracula
perceived he presented the King with two lusty young men to be his guides
through the Country, and two swift horses to serve him for flight upon the
worst of fortune: desiring his Majesty since contrary to his long experience
he violently was carried into so inevitable a danger, that he would accept
that gift which might be of advantage if that happened, the very thought
whereof he trembled at: But withal he prayed that this present might prove to
be given to vain, whereby his prayers would appear to have taken effect.

But no ill aboding language abated his confidence: and Religion which before
detered, now gave courage: for what at first was held a resolution doubtful to
Conscience, became from dispensable to be lawful, and in fine meritorious. So
uncertain is the judgment of man; that frequently those designs, which carry
the deformity of sin at the first sight, become by long acquaintance of the
eye, amiable, and win upon us by the apparencie of virtue. Mistake either
deluding in the first encounter; or error betraying upon a long discourse. For
practice of sin begets confidence, and when punishment wants swiftness in
the execution, it loses by little and little upon the belief.

The noise of this Army weakened Amurath out of his devout dream; and fearing
his enemy might force him to that solitude, he voluntarily had undertook,
again he entered upon the government. Which he found running into disorder by
the weak age of Mahomet; no just title or hopeful youth creating authority to
that Prince, who wants virtue to make his subjects believe him their superior.
Amurath suddenly gathered in Asia a vast power, and presently marches to
transport it into Europe. Two parts of the world being brought together to
decide the great quarrel between these two Princes. But the Hellespont was
stopped by the Popes and the Venetian Galleys; and the distracted Turk began to
fear his command was to be imprisoned in the third part of the then known
earth. To enlarge himself he marched by the sea side up the Streights of
Bosphorus; where he found the Merchant ships of Genoway, ready to traffic
with him: who transported his Army, selling Europe for a hundred thousand
Ducats. Though some lay this crime to the Graecians, who were possessed of the
strong holds upon the Bosphorus, and whose faith the Turks gold corrupted so
far, that in the event every man became a Traitor to himself.

The Turkish Army past the Streights, the King of Hungary began to prophecy
danger and entreat advice. Those violent Spirits who disdained the enemy a
far off, approaching now somewhat near, too much over-valued him. Passion,
like some Opticke glass, that presents a man at one end a Pigmie, at the other
a Giant, never faithfully informing the understanding. They who with most
swiftness had ran thus far, wanted not now the same motion to carry them
back. And the King though he never failed in courage, was not unwilling to
have provided for his safety, with some hazard of his honor. But the brave
Huniades opposed, and let him know that the number of the Turk was over-macht
by the courage of the Christian; and that the Almighty, who disposes victory,
delighted in so just a cause to appropriate the honor of the day to his own
power. That the happy course of their attempts hitherto had instructed them,
how feeble that enemy is, and how weak armed, who brings to the battle the
inward horror of a wicked conscience That they with whom now the conflict was
to be, were no other but those effoeminate slaves, who had yielded to the
Hungarians still matter of triumph.

Vladislaus was not uneasy to be persuaded to danger, and when he perceived
there was no retreat but must suffer the scandal of flight, he resolved his
life to want weight, if put into the scale with honor. He left therefore the
order of the battle to Huniades; who to frustrate the advantage, the Turks had
in number ordered his Army so that on side was a marsh, on the other the
Carriages, and at the back a steep hill. Thus out of danger to be encompassed
by the multitude of his enemy he entertained the battle; and performed so well
the part of a great Commander, that the Turks began to despair and the
Christians to presume of victory: when old Amurath seeing his soldiers ready
to fly, and by the example of former overthrowes misdoubting the present
fight, pulled out of his bosom the League of late entered into, and solemnly
sworn by Vladislaus, and holding it in his hand with his eye fixed upon the
Crucifixe (which the voluntary Christians bore for their ensign) cried out to
Christ to revenge the perjurie of his people, who without just cause had
violated the faith they in his name had given, and to show himself a God now
his honor was concerned.

The prosperity that so flattered the Christians began through the disorder of
the Clergy men, and over confidence of the zealous soldier on the sudden to
change and the King engaged by too much courage among the thickest of the
Ianizares was slain, and with him the glory of the day fell to the enemy.
For his head fixed upon a Lance, being presently shevved a spectacle of terror,
the Hungarians who should have drawn revenge from so barbarous an object,
lost all courage: As if Religion to God had not equally animated them, with the
zeal they owed the Prince. But there is a strange kind of more than humane
virtue in the presence of a King, who as the soul quickens the body of an
Army; which if he miscarries becomes an unactive dead lump. A King whose
presence is vital heat to the loyal but lightning to the Rebellious.

Huniades by flight reserved himself to farther fortune: but Julian perished
there less wounded by the enemies cymiters than the reproaches of the
Christians, who obrayded him to have persuaded with breach of league; to enter
into this fatal war. Which had it ended in victory the world would have said
that Christ disdained to regulate success according to the vain invocation of
Amurath, and that it Religion is not so ruinous to it self, as to command
observation of faith with a faithless enemy, whose very law enlarges him to
perjurie.

The loss of Constantinople of the Turk.
THe great City, Mistis of the Eastern World, which gloried in bearing the
name of Constantine the Great, was now after eleven hundred years commanded by
another Constantine. But age and fortune made it now the common pity, which
had been the envy of all the most Noble towns of the habitable earth. For
Cities like humane bodies have their diseases, and death is their fate, cruel
to them as us. The vast extent of its command was straightened to a small
circuit; and it appeared only its own monument: serving the Inhabitants for
an empty boast, and strangers for History. It had been often attempted by the
Turkish power, who disdained the Christians even a titular Empire, having
forced away all those large Provinces, that heretofore preserved it formidable.

Mahomet, was now enterd upon the Turkish government and the Neighboring
Christians, were comforted in the change: Amurath the father having assured
them, by a long cruel Reign, that no Prince could succeed more dangerous.
Moreover this new King, was by the Mother a Christian which gave them hope (who
were willing to entertain any) that his youth had received good impressions of
Religion. But he soon assured the world that his blood by the mixture was
grown so impure, that it rejected all thought of a Divinity that might curb
it, when invited either by lust or ambition. And he has left it disputable to
Posterity to the tyranny of whether passion he more slavered himself. But
the latter was of far worse consequence: which persuaded him as soon to
attempt the ruin of Constantinople, as he entered on his own Kingdom. It
being a Law enacted by the unruly pride of that family, not to believe their
command glorious unless unjust; as if Rapine and injury were the two supports
of Empire.

At first he entertained friendship with the Christians: having two regards,
revenge and treason. The King of Caramania had provoked his rage, in wanting
patience to smile when he was injured: whose punishment was the first
resolution of his government. And this dissembled friendship was the easiest
way to work the Christians to security; which would be a charm to make them
dream of safety. But they soon found themselves betrayed for Mahomet was no
sooner released from the design of his revenge, but presently resolved on his
ambition. Constantinople was prepared against, and with the more fierce desire:
In regard the conquest would not only possess him of the most Imperial City
of the world, but raise him above the victories of his Father and Grandfather
Bazazet, who in vain had attempted it. In which contention Mahomet showed that
having no competitor for greatness among the living, he was forced to rival
with the most eminent conquerours of the dead. And no family producing spirits
worthy enough, he was constrained to contest with his own: by out-shining the
glories of his Ancestors, to make his memory the wonder of all History, and the
envy of posterite.

The Spring opening the ways for an Army he gathered three hundred thousand
Soldiers; the least part of which were the natural Turks, or renegades:
Christians were the maine bulk of that fatal body, and they only such whom
his command and tyranny enforced to the most unjust executions, but
voluntaries out of Germany, Hungary, and Bohemia, whom hope of prey and
entertainment invited to betray the honor of their Religion. Men who coveted
the wars to satisfy their Avarize by Rapine, having no honest ways to
subsist: Men who believed their souls as temporary as their bodies, and who
mocked their Savior by carrying his name, when they fought against his cause.
Men whose memory is only safe in an eternal darkness.

The poor Emperor Constantine, having no treasure and therefore no friends;
sought by his Ambassadors to the Princes of the West, to move them by Religious
compassion to participate his dangers. But they had their quarrels at home,
hopes to encroach upon their Neighbors territory: Jealosie of another growing
power: Subjects not perfectly regulated to obedience: and other small excuses
begot a ruinous neglect of the common cause. With much solicitation the Pope,
the King of Naples, and the state of Venice condiscended to furnish out thirty
Galleys in defense of that place, for which what Christian should not blush,
not to have hazarded a life? But this assistance was no more remedy than
treacherous comfort of a Physician to a patient past all cure: For it only
served to please the imagination of the wretched Emperor; who like a man now
drowning was willing to catch at every smallest hold. For this aid, which
could not have been of strength to resist such an opposition, failed him too.

But what title had the Graecians to complain the neglect of strangers, who
were so cruel to themselves? In the public danger, every man threw the care
of his safety on his Prince, yet taxed his want of providence; grumbled
against his smallest impositions; and denied supply when instructed in their
perils: no man conceiving himself interessed to support the falling Empire,
though certain to be overwhelmed by it. If declaration were made of Turkish
Forces levied, it was presently suspected a state bug-beare to surprise the
people with unnecessary fears. If the enemy took the field, the Emperor was
calumniated of underhand confederacies. If upon undeniable appearence of
invasion, contribution for defense was required; the over politickes whispered
it nothing but a State-ambush to seize unawares without Legal Order, the
treasure of the Empire. Thus when a Kingdoms sins have procured an
universal desolation by the just sentence of the eternal Judge: the
delinquent is blinded by his vices, and becomes his own executioner.

Already was Mahomet, Master of one of there elements the water paying him
tribute. For before he laid siege to the City he built such strengths upon the
Streights of Bosphorus, that the rich trading to Caffa and other Ports upon the
Euxin sea was interdixted. So that the Empire acknowledged a maime, the
Merchant disabled to furnish the Exchequer with the former customs. And the
insolent Turk, grew wealthy by frequent surprise of such vessels, which to
their own repentance and ruin continued traffic. For what dangers threatened
by a remorselesse enemy, and a more cruel sea can deter the covetous?

The enemy drawing near the City, the Emperor in haste made levy of what
Forces he could in so short a time and so great a danger. Six thousand
Graecians he pressed, in whom he hoped the sense of liberty would quicken the
sense of honor: and three thousand Venetians, Genowayes, and other of Europe
he entertained; making choice of Iustinianus an adventurer of Genoa, (who with
two tall ships manned with four hundred Soldiers, having scowred the Seas by
accident, came to Constantinople) to be General of all the Forces destined for
the last defense of that Empire.

And certainly while the least probability of success gave life to courage,
no man performed more acts of great direction and admirable resolution. But
when fortune absolutely forsook the City; he forgot his Spirit; and gave
proof to the World, that no humane vetue can long triumph over ruin, unless
by heaven miraculously supported.

For while there was any spark glowing of the ancient Roman fire, with which
the City first became the glory of the East; Iustinius made victory incline
from the vast Turkish multitude to the defendants, strong only in honor of
that cause they were to fight. So far did courage despise number, that
Mahomet entered into sober council, whether the attempt might not end in
loss: and the chief Bassa persuaded safety in a retreat, by the example of
his great progenenitors. But emulation in the inferior Bassas urged young
Mahomet to danger, to which the ambition of a proud nature violently forced
him. As if heaven had forsook the defense of whatever place, the lust of his
pride had desire to violate.

And indeed such fortune at that time prosper'd mischief that the Earth
appeared abandoned to his tyranny. For when the vast labor of this seige
threatened the Turks to expire in reproach of the Assailants: the Haven keeping
one side of the City secure from ruin, and open to relief, in regard a
strong chain, and many great shippesbarr'd the enemies fleet all admittance.
A Christian, witty to invent highest treason against that Majesty his
professision obleig'd him to observe, instructed the Turk upon certain
engines, by Land, to conveigh his Navy into the Port of Constantinople. Which
passage opposite both to Nature and Religion; extended first to the terror,
then to the overthrow of the poor defendants. Who perceiving the Earth made
Navigable, and the enemies vessels to sail upon dry land; became astonished and
submitted their courages to the miracle of that power which triumphed over the
Elements.

Yet in the hourly expectation of death, the wretched inhabitants of the
City, omitted not the trades of life: and the enemy ready even to make prey
of all their substance; the Merchant busied his thoughts in continuance of his
bargains, and congratulated the smallest gain: the builder raised up his
glorious piles, as if not threatened to be his monument; and the rich man
reckoned upon the unnatural generation of his moneys, as if no insolent thief
endangered the principal. For though the Emperor fearing so fierce a war
from the most formidable Prince of the earth, labored to make his peace with
heaven by prayers and fasts, and all those humble acts to which ancient piety
instructs us; yet no commanded devotion could expiate the vices of a licencious
City, some fondly believing it a point of valor to dare, in so visible a
danger to be vicious: As if there were a cowardice so abject, as that
captivates the mind to sin.

While any hope remained, the Emperor disdained to give his courage over to
despair: and exhorted the tradesman to forsake unseasonable labor to work
his own defense: who fullenly made answer, that it was to no purpose to fight
upon the walls, and afterward to starve in his house. And the Corn masters,
upon a general complaint for want of bread, brought their grain in to the
Emperor to be divided indifferently among the people, with so averse a mind,
as if they had designed it only to supply the enemy, when at his entrance
into the Town, they were to be enroul'd his slaves. But the private wealth of
the inhabitants was on no conditions to be borrowed in the general cause,
every man desirous to admit the barbarous insolences of a new government;
rather than to part with that treasure, which they were shortly for ever to
forseite, and which then well ordered might have prevented so famed a
desolation. But the Emperor at so sad a necessity, for got the ceremonies of
Religion, and made bold with the wealth of Churches, to pay the Christian
Soldier, least it might be destinated to a more profane abuse.

But no endeavors could support an Empire ruined by the battery of an
overpowerfull enemy, and undermined by its own vices. For the Turk made
frequent breaches, and gained even when repulst with loss: for if the
slaughter of five Turks procured the death of one Christian (considering the
inequality of the number) yet had the Emperor justice to complain. For his
men lost were irrecoverable; whereas the Infidel (as Cadmus is fabled) seemed
to have sowed the dragons teeth upon any repulse, new armed men growing up out
of the earth in his defense.

Frequent assaults on every side brought the City to hope no honor but in
ruin: for to servive it self and become the seat of blasphemy; were to
resemble the punishment of a soul in hell, and grow more miserable than not to
be: That subsistence far more horrid than to suffer the labourer to plough up
the rubbish of the most envied Palaces. But this happiness was denied, a long
continuance in vice prepared the way to the most powerful impiety, that ever
swayd the world. This City like a ship overcome by tempests. yielded at length
to a Sea of enemies which entered through the breaches, and suncke it for ever.
In one of which Iustinianus having received a wound, lost his spirit; and by
flight endeavored a poor reprieve of a disgraced life: for who that was
interess'd in the quarrel could outlive that siege and retain his honor?

Constantine the son of Helena, allied in name and title, but not in fortune
to the first Constantine) in the throng of those who yielded to the violence of
the Turkish Army, perished; undistinguisht among eight hundred, who pressing
for life became their own murderers. But the narrow scrutinie of the Turk and
his own ill fate, denied him even the honor of being unknown: so that as his
life was more eminent his death had greater ignominy. For having that day his
imperial habit on; it only served to obrey'd his ruin, and sequester him for
more scorn from the vulgar. His head they presently severed from his body, to
make a common reproach of what had been so awful in its diadem. And in the
cruelty of that mirth, all hope and courage of the defendants perished. The
City three days lay prostitute to the license of the conquerours: who were
witty to invent new mischiefs to please their barbarous wantonness. And well
might they congratulate the fortunes of their victories; for never did so much
treasure become a prey to so much rapine: and never did such ancient greatness
fall to so low a slavery; honor became a contumely, former wealth served only
to aggravate future poverty: and beauty far more cruel than wrinckles,
betrayed it self to the most loathed deformity.

Of the War called the Commonweal in opposition to Lewys the eleventh of
France.
Several designs drew diverse Princes (who had relation to the Crown of
France) into league against Lewys the eleventh: and though no man endeavored
but his own interest, the Common weal was pretended. For no hypocrisy
disguiseth with more cunning; since rebellion, is so monstrous to the eye of
conscience, that it blusheth to appear it self, and therefore wears a vizard
which oftentimes betrays the ignorant. Every man in taking Arms protested
this war contrived to work a more honest peace: as if sin could smooth the
way to virtue, and the conspiracy of many tempests calm the Ocean. But the
plot of every Prince was at the public cost to purchase to his broken or
unquiet fortunes more profitable conditions: and the good natured vulgar with
little trouble gave themselves liberty to be deceived.

Charles the Kings brother, Charles Earl of Charolois, Francis Duke of
Britain, and John Duke of Burbon, were the heads of this monster; for what
other title can we give Rebellion? The Kings brother disdained the narrow
revenue of Berry; Charolois the forced delivery of many towns in Picardie
heretofore morgaged to the house of Burgundy; Britain was commanded to
desert those ancient privileges bequeathed him by his Ancestors; and Burbon in
vain had solicited payment of that portion Lewys designed him with his sister.
Every inferior Lord likewise had discontent enough to warrant to his passions
the most unjust attempt. For Lewys of France had been so ill a husband of
opinion, that the world gave small reputation to his carriage: and having at
his entrance to the government supplanted all the Officers of the Crown, and in
their places planted those whom his favor had selected, the better part of
France, envied or contemned his choice. For the ancient dependancies by this
remove were weakened; and they who subsisted high in Authority, imagined no
death so wretched as this privation. Disgrace therefore made them resolve on
honor; which since no other way, they designed to buy with danger. For the
Royal favor could smile on no man, but whom the whole world beside disdained
as unworthy the least regard. What misled the people to tumult, was a pretense
to releeve the many impositions which lay heavy on the merchants trade, and
the laborers sweat. But when the silly vulgar by mutanie endeavored release
of payments; how near resembled they the Ass, which to ease her burden cast
it down into the water? Forgetting that the load was wool which taking wet
contracted weight, and that she was a beast created to labor.

King Lewys perceiving this storm with so much violence brought upon the very
morning of his government: contrived at first to oppose it; and in some small
encounters showed himself no way defective in courage: however his much wit
with so much caution overruled the motions of his spirit, that posterity has
brought his valor into question. But being to make head against so united a
power, he found his people as slow to their Sovereigns defense, as they were
rash to unlawful Arms. Every man believing his interest concerned to subvert
that edifice of power, which he suspected to be built on tyranny. Which
persuaded all degrees of men to run into this war, though the hazard was of
the whole estate, for supporting the immunitie of the least part of every man's
particular.

Lewys finding this defection so universal, entered into distrust of his own
forces: fearing them, who had the strongest tie of Duty, to have the weakest
tie of Love. And where affection Arms not the Soldier, how unsafe is the
greatest General, in the best ordered Army? For dis-affection to the
Commander disorders suddenly the highest actions: and how poorly he betrays
himself, who hopes to advance his designs by terror? Lewys therefore flies
from his Native subjects to Auxiliaries; and to teach France obedience, brings
in Forces from Italy. The Duke of Millain liberally concurres to this Service,
sending five hundred men at Arms and three thousand foot under the command of
Galeas his son. And with this power he presents his advice, That he should
yield to any conditions to divide his enemies, and be careful still to
preserve his men.

This Council was of more service to Lewys his affairs, than all the Armies
he could have levied in his Duchy. For by this he kept his Majesty entire,
and referred nothing to the uncertainetie of fortune. He spared the effusion of
his subjects blood: whereby his people were not in danger by their losses to
hate that Sovereign power had chastised them. But the former part of his
advice was a stronger battery against the enemies design, than all the
Artilery of that age could make. For to divide their Forces was to destroy
them, and to bring them into jealousy of each other was to make each the
others executioner: By which he was secure at the enemies cost and danger, to
work his own triumph. Then for yielding to conditions, it was safer in Lewys
to descend one step beneath Sovereign command, than to be enforced to fall
down all the stairs. And having both wit and courage he could not doubt but
occasion would present him with a mean to recover, if not to transcend his
former height.

Variety of chances brings soon both Armies to desire to remit nothing to
chance, and the war having made both losers, peace was equally sought. And
though want of victuals extremely afflicted the Burgonion Army; yet did
Lewys not dare to take the advantage: the rage of hunger being sometime an
animation though for the most it discourages. Lewys therefore having had no
great fortune at the hazard of war; desired to change his game and try how he
could play his cards in peace: where the cunning gamester is secure at a long
sitting to be the winner. And therefore upon the first overture entertaines the
treaty, which suddenly took effect; No demand of the Princes receiving the
least denial. But at the conclusion of this peace, what was at first
pretended, was never mentioned: the people whom hope of ease of taxes had
engaged to this war, being no way regarded. For they were the same wretched
vessel still, whom every tempest moves to danger, but no calm ever secures
from wrack.

To his brother he grants the Duchy of Normandy, a proportion beyond his very
hopes. To Charles Earl of Charolois he restores all the Towns upon the Some.
To the Duke of Britain he confirms the County of Mountfort, with promise
of money to defray the charges of his enmity. On the Count S. Pol for having
been the great engine in moving these disorders, he bestows the Office of
Constable. To the Duke of Calabria he promises men and money for the recovery
of his Kingdom of Naples; so desirous he was at any rate to buy his absence.
To the Duke of Burbon he gives assurance for the portion due to him in marriage
with his sister. And to every great man who had been in opposition, he
contributes largely: since the event of war might have been uncertain to
make asure bargain by this Treaty of peace.

Thus at Lewys his cost, every discontented Lord attained his aim, and
triumphed in the fortune of his design. And so far was this agreement the
ambition of both parties, that when the Earl of Charolois allured by the
pleasure of Lewys his endearing Language, was engaged into his power, and the
Burgonion Army gave their General lost, Lewys returned him back with all the
ceremony of love; disdaining an advantage that might suffer the blemish of
treachery.

Actions of so extraordinary a virtue strangely conduce to the fortune of a
Prince: for they create him high in reputation; which keeps Soveraignety
entire; and beget confidence to his after proceedings, which whether just or
unjust are by that successful. For as to virtuous men faith is natural, so
to the polliticke the practice of it is necessary. For how can any design
prove fortunate, when the contriver is held in distrust? Pirates and
Politicians, as common enemies to mankind, obnoxious to the selfsame
jealousy: no man embarking his fortunes with either, but whom desper tion
forces, or liberty invites.

This accord changed the face of France; the brow smooth with joy and
acclamations, which had bin wrinckled with so many troubled thoughts. Every man
retreates to his private entertainements: and discor'd no longer cimenting
them, they divided their business, according to particular interest. Charolois
returns home, and finds employment for those passions the ambitious never
want. He takes possession of the towns assigned him, and triumphs in recovery
of a small Country, whose unquiet pride, the world wanted extent to limit. Yet
did he carry still a vigilant eye over his great enemy, knowing that mighty
spirits overruled by ill fortune, disdain that humility they are forced to.
And though convenience or necessity bend them down to low conditions; it
seldom obleigeth the conscience longer than fortune restraines the power.

Lewys was not well pleased with debasing Majesty to the irregular requests of
them, who ought not to have prescribed their Prince. And since to oppose them
all was unsafe, it was convenient to destroy one by one: that the revenge might
be more secure and less observed. For those wounds are most mortal that
bleed inward; and waters which raise least noise have the greatest depth: The
shallowes of Princes actions sounding loudest to popular judgments: but where
the understanding has the chiefest agitation, the greatest attempts proceed
with least disturbance.

His resolution was therefore to begin his revenge with him, who was nearest to
his person; those contents being scarce heard which are spoken a far off: but
the least whisper pierces, when the voice, approaches too near the ear.

The late Duke of Normandy afflicted him most, in regard nature tied his
memory to a continual torment, that preposterously his younger brother had
prevailed. For those disgraces obrey'd us most, which we suffer where we have
good title to claim respect. And between brothers the distance is so little,
that the sense of honor grows too tender: which makes the least touch pierce
the very quick. Lewys therefore compelled him to an exchange of Normandy for
Gaien; either by remove, to prevent his growth in Faction, or by shifting him
from one command to another: in fine to leave him none.

But this Art was presently discovered; and the divided reunite: bringing
Lewys into the same fear and danger. Which with much dissimulation he
prevents: And by overpleasing Charolois and Britain he gains liberty to
oppress underhand his brother. Which was with less difficulty conived at; in
regard Charles now made Duke of Guien, was of an easy spirit, desirous to
master an evil fortune, but fearful to effect it with hazard. Moreover he
naturally abhorred war, either in Religion or compassion, and the complexion of
that time was troubled: Men only safe who feared no danger', and such Princes
only secure of peace, who were not frighted at war. Then which was his ruin,
any probable conditions of safety, made him renounce confederacy with
turbulent unquiet men. And who can hope from others participation of danger,
who never entertain friendship but for necessity? Or who will adhere to his
fortunes who deserts himself; and no longer loves a confederate than he is
useful?

This inconstancy in the Duke of Guien laid him open to King Lewys; who
finding that his brothers life quickened so many disorders in France, gave way
(if History be not unjust in censure) that he should dye. But nature yielded
little hope to effect the business, the remedy therefore of the present
troubles was to be sought from Art: and so well was the plot contrived, that he
sicken'd and dyed for the quiet of the Kingdom; for his death broke all those
intellegences had been held so long in France: and the confederate Princes
began to think on a new way of greatness, not by disturbing their Neighbors
Kingdom but by quieting their own subjects. A greatness not destructive to
their enemy, but effective to themselves: Which creates a triumph more
glorious because more innocent. For power does never shine unclouded, which is
maintained by dark designs, or obscure dishonest Arts.

Of Charles the fifths resignation of Government.
CHarles the fifth, Emperor of Germany, singular in the pre-eminence of life,
disdained to tread the beaten way of Princes, now declining to his grave. In
all enterprises he still appeared superior to fortune, to whose mercy he
resolved to leave nothing in his age: least that giddy power loathing
infirmity and wrinckles, might have distasted him and forgot her flattery. But
his courage did rise yet higher, and vanquished death it self: Death that great
Tyrant which adornes its dark Palace with the spoil of Kings, and devests
the Proud of all the gaudie circumstance that swells their greatness. Death
was only left him now to conquer: three parts of the world had seen the
Trophies of his fortune, and all had submitted but death. To which since
inevitably he was doomed to pay the common debt; yet he contrived it so, that
it should be small loss to him, who had nothing now remaining but his body,
and that weakened by time and sickness.

To Brussells he summoned all the Nobility of the seventeene Provinces, and
solemnly cancelled that sacred obligation they owed him as their Sovereign.
To his son Phillip, to that purpose sent for out of England, he gave those
Countries and their homage. It Is true, he wept, but they were tears of wonder;
his virtue not only astonishing that great assembly but even himself: the
example was so new, it forced him to an extraordinary expression, with which
his courage never had been acquainted. For Noblest spirits in such an ecstasy
weep as fast, as weaker souls out of foeminine softness.

Two months after he had made this essay upon his virtue, he gave perfection
to the great work, and to his son made transaction of his dominion over the
rest of his Kingdoms, Provinces, and Islands, both in this and the new world.
Which was with greater concourse of Princes, as the business was of larger
extent and more value. For to this Troegi-Comedie came spectators from all the
world, in regard the Scaene was so new, and the Actors the most eminent of that
age, and perhaps as Noble as any other ever gloried in. Nothing was left him
now but the Empire, which soon after he renounced sending to his brother
Ferdinand King of the Romans, the Imperial Crown and Scepter, by the hands of
William, Prince of Orange. Who though he appeared unwilling to this Office,
loath to see his Prince buried thus alive; yet with small scruple he afterward
rent from his Sovereign King Phillip a great part of the Low Countries, and
endangered them all. Thus with a complement of regret the Subject often
appears in just things troubled to obey: who can dispense with all duty when
his own ambition is concerned; and justify rebellion with pretense of lawful
liberty.

Charles having nothing left him now, but what lives yet, the memory of his
many victories; retired to private lodgings till the wind served fair to wait
on him into Spain. And soon he found in his first solitude it was but his
shadow had made him appear so mighty: For being now nothing but himself, he
took justly his own height, and confessed he was but man. The swarm of those
Courtflyes who had quickened in the heat of favor; appeared no more, now his
aspect though more clear wanted the former vital warmth. The wonder past,
every man forsook him who had left his glory; and as honor or profit directed
them, began to beat new paths. For what truth had in vain heretofore
labored to persuade, now he acknowleged: when he so suddenly perceived, that
the supreamest virtue, not made awful by authority, can never keep it self
high in regard, nor attract the applause of men. And though his son King
Phillip let fall words on the Anniversary of this resignation which seemed to
tax his Father to have as soon repented as done this glorious Act of virtue;
yet who can believe in so constant a mind so poor a frailty? Perhaps he was
a little amazed at the change: and the Son who was enamored on that Empire,
his Father had resigned interpreted the wonder to repentance. Nor can we but
imagine that Charles was somewhat astonished at the steep descent he had on
the sudden made from so high a precipice: though it was with a far other
passion, then tortures them who are thrown headlong down by death or fortune.

When he landed in Spain, he kissed the earth, whether he had brought his own
to Sepulture: and made his lips do penance for some few trespasses his
youth was guilty of. He acknowledged it the common parent in that homage: and
confessed how high soever we are in growth, and however wide our branches spread
themselves; our root is still in the earth, till age, the Axe, or some,
violent tempest pluck us up: and afterterward envious time takes away even the
Print that ere we florisht there

At Burgos, where he expected the sudden payment of some moneys for discharge
of his attendance, he expressed a just disdain, perceiving the Officers slow to
serve not him but his necessity. And his title was honest to that passion: for
ingratitude cannot be forgiven by a mercy less than heavenly, and he was yet
apparrell'd with his earth. Of all the immence revenues of so many wealthy
Kingdoms, he had reserved to his own use, but one hundred thousand Crowns
annually, for that small time he was to outlive his greatness. And this was
not paid but with trouble: for the living grudged to allow any tribute to the
dead, among whom Charles was to be numbered when he ceased to Reign. But this
ill nature of the world served him to good purpose, for it comforted him that
he had forsook all commerce with that which servilely obeyed him only, when
as a Master, he heretofore commanded it.

This hastened his final retirement to a religious house of the order of S.
Jerome; which was seated in a most wholesome air, that he might not cowardly
seem to desire to dye, when he had given over to command: And in this his
valor out-did all former example; that after resignation of so large an
Empire, he could patiently studdie the Arts to live, and contract his business
to so narrovv a room; who had made nine journies into Germany; six into
Spain, seven into Italy, four into France, ten into the Lovv-Countries, two
into England, and as many into Afric. But when he fixed here, his ambition
out-ravail'd in two years, all the labor of fifty: for his thoughts
disdaining to measure earth or Sea, which Geographie can give account of; made
hourly their ascent beyond the fancy of Astrology. Whether the humble only
can climb, whom Piety rackes till they acknovvledge themselves dust and sin.

Entered into this solitude, he felt a war within him, of more terror than
that with which he had avved the World. For now he was to fight alone,
where no confederate Prince came to his assistance, no subjects tendered their
lives with their obedience; but even his passion who should have been his
slaves, with his flesh a great part of himself revolted, and conspired his
trouble. This combat ended in a happy victory; humane industry strengthened
by Divine grace triumphed over weakness, and inthroned him above his Rebels.

Yet had he still in his mind a soft echo of the former noise of war:
those hours he borrowed from heaven, to solace himself on earth, were
recreated with martial sports. Which was either to make a mockery of his
heretofore most serious stratagems, and all the business of the warlike: or
else to exercise his time in the Mathematickes, which had much enamored him
from his youth. For Iannellus Turrianus, a great Master in that knowledge, did
usually delight him with miracles of study, making little armed men muster
themselves upon the Table, and Artificially move according to the Discipline of
war:which was done so beyond example, that the superior of the house,
nothing read in the Mysteries of that Art, suspected it for witchcraft.
Neither was Charles himself unapt to work the little wheels of watches, and
to make a clock up, which as it struck did warn him what vanity it was, to
reckon on the succeding moment.

And now this great Sun grew near his night. But desirous to outlive his
funerals he obtained to see them solemnized before his death. A sad
curiosity, to be a mourner to himself; and understand how short a pomp
waits on the most mighty to the grave. The hearse was raised furnished with all
the vanity of hatchments, which told the world, over how many wide Kingdoms
his power had intended: and to what a streit lodging it was now shruncke up.
The Mourners assisted, and perhaps with as deep a sorrow, as would have
pierced them, had his grief been serious: while he with a sober mirth beheld
the last Scaene of all his glory personated; and found what an empty honor
Princes labor for in the sweat and hazard of all their victories. For what a
no comfort to the ashes of the conqueror is the triumphs of his life: since
only Christian virtue maintains traffic between earth and heaven.

But death disdained to be made a sport to the greatest spirit of that age:
for this odd pastime soon became serious, and he found he was to dye in
earnest. Which he per formed with the like cheerful look; for there was
neither honor that endeared nor beauty that enamored him to the world: and
this two years silence had given him a taste of heaven. He therefore without
despute parted with that little of the earth, he had reserved, and which in
this retirement he had punished, till it grew subordinate to the soul. And
though he had quitted all interest to Empire, yet would not heaven let him dye
without his comet. For as he sickn'd a new star appeared: which gained in
brightness as he declined toward death, and pointing its glory on the
Cloister vanished as he expired: the poor comet unable longer to shine, when
this greater star was darkened, from whom it derived its luster.

FINIS.
Imprimatur

Tho. Wykes.
November. 12. 1640.

