A true Copy of a SPEECH Spoken to HIS SACRED MAJESTY, CHARLES The Second: In
St. Paul's Churchyard, as His Majesty passed from the Tower of London to
White Hall the day before His Royal Coronation, April 22d, 1661.

By James Hewlett, one of the Children now remaining in Christ Hospital.

LONDON, Printed by James Flesher, 1661.

Dread Sovereign,
HIstory tells us, that such piercing Rays darted forth from King Philip's
countenance, as dazzled the eyes of Demosthenes the Orator so much, that his
voluble tongue forgot its duty, and was locked up in silence.

Much more might I fear the like to befall me, being now before so glorious a
Sun, as may well dazzle the eyes of so poor a Nothing as I am. Who am I, that I
should adventure to invite the ears of so great a Majesty to so contemptible a
sound, and the eyes of such a Glory to the beholding my self, and these vile
Abjects? But I have heard, that as there is a Majestic Glory in Your Person,
so there is a Royal Goodness in Your Disposition. This has emboldned this
poor Dust to beseech You to accept of two Mites from these the lowest and
meanest of all Your Subjects.

Our first Mite is the expression of our Joy for Your Majesty's wonderful
preservation in Your absence, Your safe arrival to us, and Your presence among
us. This Year may well be called The Year of Wonders; and this Day of your
Solemnity may be termed the Birthday of England's Happiness, and therefore
deserves to be registered in the Calendar of the hearts of all Loyal subjects.

We have all seen those Magnalia Dei plainly discovered, and have observed the
wheels of Divine Providence in a seeming contrariety; yet the motion at last to
be true and regular. Blessed be that God, that in the midst of all our dismal
Conflagrations did provide your Majesty a Zoar to rest in, and now at last has
so calmed those storms and State-Convulsions, that You may this day encircle
your Royal brows with a glorious Crown, and be advanced to your Throne in much
Serenity.

But Mites, as they are of no great value, so they are pieces of no great
quantity: I shall therefore offer up our second, which is a Mite of prayer, and
then cease to put farther stop to this days Solemnity.

We have two Petitions, the one to, the other for your Majesty. We humbly
beseech you (Most Dread Sovereign) that as at first EDWARD the Sixth, who once
swayed the Scepter of this Kingdom laid a foundation for the reception of
poor Orphans, who have since been upheld by all Your Royal Ancestors,
especially Your late Father of blessed Memory; so You would shine upon us
still by Your gracious favor and Princely indulgence. There are above Eleven
hundred of us, part whereof have in the name of all, presented themselves this
day as lively Monuments of God's mercy, and real Objects of Christian charity:
for whom through the pious care and faithful industry of the Right Honorable
the Lord Major, Aldermen, Governors, and liberal Benefactors, a Table has
been spread, and other Necessaries both for Soul and Body afforded, even in
the midst of those Exigencies, that exposed others to Want and Penury.

But I am afraid any longer (Most Gracious Sovereign) to detain your Royal
ears with childish Smatterings. I have done.

Heaven grant You long to live, and prosperously to Reign over us, that when
You have finished God's work, having sat upon this Earthly Throne Beloved, You
may leave it Lamented.

In the mean time let Orphans echo forth with grateful acclamations,

God bless King CHARLES the Second.

