A SERMON PREACHED In His MAJESTY's Chapel-Royal AT WHITE HALL, Upon the 26th
Day of July, 1685.

BEING The Day of PUBLIC THANKSGIVING to Almighty God for His Majesty's late
Victory over the Rebels.

By HENRY HESKETH, Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

Printed by Command.

LONDON, Printed for Jo. Hindmarsh, at the Golden Ball, against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill. 1685.

IMPRIMATUR,
C. Alston, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a saeris domesticis.

A SERMON PREACHED In His MAJESTY's Chapel-Royal AT WHITE HALL, Upon the 26th
Day of July, 1685.
1 PET. II. 13. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's
sake.


WE are invited by a Gracious and Merciful Providence to double the service of
this Day, to add incense to our common sacrifice, and to wing our devotion and
praise to Almighty God, with a pious and grateful reflection upon a fresh
Deliverance; which it may be, nothing but that mighty Redemption could exceed
or equal.

A Deliverance of our Gracious King, and the whole Royal Family; of our Princes
and Nobles; of our Church and Religion; of our Government and Laws; of our
Lives and Fortunes, and whatever can be thought valuable or dear to Christian
men.

Were an Orator to manage this argument, he could not possibly want matter to
enlarge upon, his hardest task would be to know where most aptly to pitch, and
to methodize those thoughts which would crowd in so fast upon it.

All the common Topics from which men use to show the becomingness and duty of
Praise, and from which they endeavor to raise it to the highest pitch, were
natural here, and would come in without the least art or force.

Both the baseness and ingratitude of the Rebellion; the dismal and deplorable
effects that would have followed, had it succeeded, and the immediate and even
visible interposition of Providence in the defeating of it.

I am very sensible the enlarging upon these were a popular entertainment, and
would be grateful enough in some common Audiences.

But I think you something above these things, and know that your own thoughts
have anticipated the most of what I could say upon them, and have therefore
designed to treat you with something that I take to be more generous and manly.

To recommend that to you, which (I am sure) will be the most substantial and
acceptable expression of your praise for what is past, and the most effectual
securer of us all from such things for the future; and that is, to comply with
the Advice given us in this text, to submit our selves to every Ordinance for
the Lord's sake.

I do not come to preach up Loyalty in this place, nor am so impertinent as to
think there is need of doing so; but I hope I may be allowed to preach up
Religion, and recommend the practice of that which is the truest support of
Loyalty, and every thing else that is acceptable to God, or of benefit to Man.

It is for want of this that we ever hear of Rebellion, or are disturbed with
the unwelcome interruptions of it, and it is by a due practice of it, that we
shall be effectually secured from these things for the future.

It Is this which is intended to be the service of this day: by this we shall
best answer the purpose of its institution, and most acceptably admire and
adore that great Providence that has called us to it; and therefore I humbly
beg that you will hear me with your wonted clemency and candor a few words.

The Argument that I purpose to discourse from these words, is to state the
true Ground of Christian Loyalty and Subjection, which is said here to be
Religion and Conscience, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man, (...),
for the Lord's sake, that is, out of immediate duty to him, and conscience and
respect to his Command.

Whatever else there is observable in the Text, will fall in, upon our
considering this main purport and design of it.

In the prosecution of this Argument, I shall endeavor to do these three
things:

1. I shall briefly make good the Ground of the Argument, and show that
Religion and Conscience does really oblige to this Subjection.

2. I shall remark some of the advantages of being subject upon this reason.

3. Make some short deductions from this for our own benefit and improvement.

Only if it might not entrench too much upon my time, and your patience, I
would crave leave, in order to my argument, to state the Notion of Christian
Subjection, as it is described here by St. Peter; and this the rather, because
it would give me a fair occasion of reflecting upon two things, under which the
Men of Republican and turbulent Spirits seek to shelter themselves.

1. Then I observe, that when our Apostle speaks of Subjection here, he intends
it equally to the Persons and Laws of Kings and Governors, and makes no
distinction at all between them; in these words he seems to mean their Laws,
and in the words immediately following he expresses their Persons, To the
King, and to those that are sent by him.

I know no reason to oppose one of these against the other, or to distinguish
between submitting to them. Subjection to the one, implies Subjection to the
other, in the sober sense of all the World; and every honest heart will take it
to hold true both ways: He that submits to the King, will submit to his Laws,
and he that submits to his Laws, cannot resist, or offer violence to his Person.

And yet we have had, (and I wish only have had) such nimble Sophisters, as
can put a difference between these both ways.

Some that can talk high of Allegiance, of deference and a mighty respect to
the King, of being as good Subjects as any, but yet make bold to desecrate his
Laws, and despise his Authority, when their Interest, or humor is crossed, as
if honor to the one would be secured without respect to the other.

And we have others as quick sighted the other way, that can distinguish
between the Authority and Person of the King, and make a pretended respect to
him in his political Capacity, an excuse for Violence against him in his
Personal; that can raise Arms by his Authority against his Person, and use
those Arms against the Man, in defense of the King.

Sophistical miscreants! as if Authority would fight against it self, or
Murdering of Kings could be in any sense allegiance to them.

The Ignatian Wits never were Authors of a more subtle distinction, or a
neater way of cheating Conscience than this, and if they did not prescribe to
our dull Tramontains in this, it might be expected they would call some men so
no longer.

I am sure the Scripture was never so nice, as to distinguish between them, and
had David known of any such difference, he needed not have been put to any
dilemma, the case had been plain, and the resolution easy, he might have slain
Saul, and yet have preserved the Lord's Anointed.

2. Another thing with as much Evil art and subtilty collected from hence, is,
that Kings and Governors are (...), things of humane, yea of the peoples
Creation; this is the Palladium of the Republican cause, and that in which the
rude strength of the Leviathan consists, and no place of Scripture (that I know
of) has been pressed to serve it like this.

I confess I should not much wonder, to hear downright Atheism maintain this,
(I know it does others as absurd and irrational,) nor to hear those give this
account of the Original of Government, that have given a more senseless one of
the Original of man, if multitudes of Men spring up so like many Mushrooms out
of the Earth at once, then perhaps this account might be consistent, and I will
never wonder if they that believe the one swallow the other also.

But to have God drawn into the Conspiracy, and his word suborned to serve an
Hypothesis, that it is every where so express against, is intolerably fulsome.

And yet I wish this were the only instance, in which any forced expression,
and any obscure way of speaking shall be made to confront the most plain and
obvious Doctrines of holy Scripture, when it is the interest of some Men to
have such things believed.

But these things are only previous to my design and argument, to which I now
directly proceed, i. e. to lay down the true ground of Christian Loyalty, to
fix it upon a principle that will keep it steady in this giddy and wavering
Generation; now this is the being subject upon reasons of Religion, upon
principles of Conscience and duty to God, which our Apostle means here, by
submitting for the Lord's sake.

1. The First thing I proposed on this, was to make good the ground of my
argument, show that Conscience does immediately oblige to this, and that if men
have a true respect to God Almighty, and a regard to the duty that he has made
necessary, they must thus submit.

And a very little I hope will suffice upon this, in such an Audience, for if
the 5th Precept in the Decalogue be moral, and eternally obliging, and if
either the Jewish or Christian Church may be allowed to have understood the
sense of it: or if the plain Precepts of the New Testament may be allowed to be
any rule of Conscience, and God's immediate Commands to lay any obligation upon
it, then it is most plain that men are as immediately tied to this in point of
Conscience, as any other duty whatsoever.

So that let Conscience be as free, as men assert it to be, and accountable
unto God only, as they love popularly to speak, in this we desire no more to
be granted, and are ready to join issue upon it.

For if Government be God's own immediate institution, and Kings specially
commissioned and constituted by him, if he have guarded them with Laws, and
charged all to be obedient to them on pain of Damnation, and his highest
displeasure, then I am sure if Conscience be an honest respect to God and his
Laws, and any thing more than the opinion and fancy of every private Person, it
must necessarily oblige all men (that follow the conduct of it) in this
instance.

Now whether these things be so or not, I am content the most biased, and even
perjudiced Persons judge, when they have read seven verses of the 13th to the
Romans, and five verses in this Chapter, where it is plain if either the great
Apostle of the Circumcision, or of the Gentiles understood the obligation of
Conscience, or may be thought able to direct the obedience of it, we need not
contend farther in this matter; though (if need were) we might summon the Old
Testament, the Doctrine and Example of the Blessed Jesus in the New, the
consonant Doctrine and practice too of the ancient and best Christians to vouch
the truth of all this.

2. But the thing is plain, and I proceed to represent the advantages of fixing
Allegiance and Loyalty upon this principle.

I know too well, how forward some men have been to represent Religion an Enemy
to Government, and to reproach the Doctrine of Conscience, as a nearer Plea for
Rebellion and resistance; and I would to God, that some men's practices who have
pretended so much to both, had not given unthinking men too much cause for such
surmises.

But I do not understand why this ought to prejudice my present argument,
unless we cannot distinguish between the truth and hypocrisy of a thing, nor
will allow any men to be truly honest, because there are abundance of Knaves in
the world.

Allow me that Religion is a real thing, and Conscience more than a bare Name,
(and methinks these are no very hard Postulates to beg in a Christian
audience,) and then I will be content to argue the advantage of it to
Government, with any thing, that the men of sense and reason (as they please to
call themselves,) shall set up in competition with it.

All I purpose to say, I shall reduce to these three heads of advantage only.

1. The first is the keeping men steady, and fixed in their Loyalty and
subjection.

2. The second is the satisfaction and security of Princes.

3. The third is the securing the divine Protection and Blessing, which after
all five Stories, is the surest Firmament of Kings, and Government too.

1. To the purpose of keeping men steady and constant in their Subjection and
Loyalty.

It is a sad contemplation to consider, how desultory and fickle the humors
and tempers of men, especially the great crowd of them, generally are: But it
is something sadder to consider, that there should never be wanting evil and
designing men to put an evil ferment into their tempers, and to poison their
Allegiance and Duty to their Prince. And yet the worst of all is to consider,
how ready the multitude usually are for such insinuations easily prejudiced
against their Governors; pleased to hear any ill Stories of them, and apt to
Idolize those that set up for Assertours of their Liberties and Rights, though
in the end they find them always the greatest betrayers and inslavers of them.

Now in this state of things, what can fix this volatile temper of men, and
keep them steady to their duty, in spite of their own inclinations, and the
sorceries of factious rebellious Men, like Religion?

There are but four things I can think of, to come into the competition in this
case; Tower in the Prince; Interest, Honor or Gratitude in the People. Now,
alas! what can any of these do in comparison of Conscience?

Power were a sure way, were it inherent only in the Person of the Prince, and
every King like another Sampson, able to destroy whole Armies of Rebels by his
single strength. But while it is lodged in others, there will be need of
something to secure it there, otherwise (as the Great Augustus said once) Kings
may be as unsafe amidst their Armies as without them; and 'twere well if no
instances could be given in which that great Monarch was a true Prophet.

As for Interest, it is so uncertain and changeable a thing, that the same
reasons that now enduce men to be Loyal, may, if the Scene should change, and a
better offer be made, prevail with them to be Rebels and Traitors.

Those that followed our Lord for the Loaves, soon forsook him; and those that
follow his Vicegerent, for the same reasons, are in danger every hour to do so
too; things are but at an ill pass, when Subjects will continue Loyal only
while they are obliged; and when every little person shall make head against
the Court, if he be not advanced and rewarded, as his own ambition and avarice
tells him he ought to be.

And what is Honor among the greatest part of men, but a name and a shadow? a
thing that hangs upon Popular breath, and shifts as often as that wind that
maintains it. It is a happy thing when it is reputable, and the mode to be
Loyal, and when to shoulder a man's Prince shall be publicly infamous; but he
that is Loyal upon this principle only, owes his Loyalty to that which
fashions his Clothes, and may possibly change the one as easily as he does the
other.

Gratitude and thankfulness to a Prince are eternally due from all his
Subjects, and a good foundation to build Loyalty upon; and it is certain their
returns of duty can never exceed their receipts and obligations: but whoever
saw a community truly thankful, or observed a sense of the greatest favors
from their Prince, to continue much longer than their short shouts and
acclamations?

We need not look far, or search distant Stories for evidence of this; we our
selves have seen how little a goodness, next to Divine, in two Royal successive
Instancers of it, has been able to effect upon some tempers; and what other
use an ungrateful generation has made of it, than to animate their implacable
rage the more, and to hope for the easier success of their Rebellions and
Treasons, sinning the more securely and boldly, because grace did abound, and
repudiating all the indulgence and favor of their Prince, as cowardice in him,
as over-rulings of Providence, or infatuation from the Lord.

In a word, Loyalty hangs but loosely upon men of no Religion and Conscience;
and if they chance to continue good Subjects, their Stars, and not their
Principles, are to be thanked for it, as the Moralist said of some men's
constitutional virtue, (...); so we may say of some men's accidental and chance
Loyalty, it owes it self to Fortune and Providence, and the good luck to escape
trial; and certainly he whose virtue lasts but till a temptation assault it,
will not last very long in this age.

2. Another advantage of fixing Loyalty upon the principle of Religion and
Conscience, is the satisfaction and security of Kings themselves; I do not mean
of their persons, but of their own minds.

It is certainly very just and equal, that Kings who watch and take so much
care for their People, should have some compensation for that care, at least
something to sweeten and alleviate the burden of it. As of all men living
Kings have the hardest task incumbent on them, so of all Kings those find that
task most uneasy, that watch and labor for ungrateful Subjects; make their
days toilsome, and their nights restless, in caring for them, whose respects
they are not so secure of, but that they may repay all their trouble and care
with falsehood and treachery.

The Royal Breast will always have Anxieties enough, occasioned by the ambition
and avarice of Rival Princes; but certainly those Subjects are most unworthy,
that double those Anxieties, by causing jealousies of their own faithfulness.

And for my part, I do not see upon what reasons that Prince can be free from
these jealousies, that sees his Subjects live without any fear of God, or sense
of Religion; but instead of owning soberly the Obligations of Conscience and
Duty to God, making it too often their business to ridicule and buffoon them.

It was a rational way that the Emperor Constantius once took to make
experiment of his great Ministers, and (in consequence of that to cashire all
those, that upon his pretended invitations renounced Christianity, and returned
to Paganism; giving this reason for so doing, That those that were not
faithful to their Religion and their God, would hardly be true to their King;
and I wish it were considered whether that Wise Emperor spoke reason in this
or not.

What security can you have of those that dare be treacherous to their God? or
why should you think an Oath of Allegiance should hold that man, who contemns
the obligation of his Baptismal vow? That Sampson that could snap asunder new
Cords, would not easily be bound with green Withs; and he, whom all that is
Sacred, cannot oblige, and upon whom the mighty arguments from eternity can
take no hold, why should we think the weaker motives of fashion or honor can
prevail long upon? He that dare impiously fly in the face of his God, and
profane every thing that bears his character upon it, why should he revere it
only in his Prince? I will not deny but such a thing is possible, but I ask
what security can the Royal Breast have that so it will be?

Then only we give rational assurance of our loyalty and faithfulness to our
King, when we show the same to that God, whose Vicegerent he is, and whose
Character he bears; and (to use the reverse to that of our Savior) then only
shall we be trusted, and counted faithful in the lesser, when we are seen to
be so in that which is greater: But if all our vows and mighty obligations to
God hold us not fast, who will think that our Protestations and Oaths to Man
should be counted inviolable?

3. And lastly, I urge Loyalty upon Conscience upon this mighty advantage, viz.
the endearing of divine Providence, and securing that blessing of Heaven, which
is the firmest stabiliment, and the greatest safety both of Prince and People.

I take it for a certain truth, and an Article of Natural Religion and Belief,
that after the utmost care and policy of men, stabiliment and safety is of the
Lord; and that unless God watch the City, the Watchman waketh but in vain. And
there have been so many signal remarks of this given in all Ages of the World,
that unless Man deny the Faith of all History, and can resolve all the events
and issues of things (even the most miraculous and surprising) into blind
chance, they must be convinced, that there is a Superior Power that
over-ruleth and orders all these things, as himself pleases; that there is
no Power or Wisdom against God; and that after all the counsels and devices in
the heart of Man, the counsel of the Lord, that shall stand.

And methinks (of all people in the World) we in this Nation should not be now
to learn this, nor be contended with about the belief of it, who have seen so
many visible interpositions of Providence in behalf of our King, our Church,
and our Nation: those strange and sudden changes of things, and those mighty
deliverances effected, which nothing but the right hand of God could bring to
pass.

It were well worth considering therefore certainly, how we may secure the
influences and blessings of the same Providence still; and whether there be any
so certain a way to this, as acting honestly upon Principles of Religion, and
Conscience to God in all the instances of our subjection and duty to our King;
the doing duty in singleness of heart, as unto Christ; as unto the Lord, and
not to men only, as the Apostle excellently advises Servants.

For in such a case we approve our selves to God as his Servants, of whom he
will never fail to take care; we render our Duty and Allegiance God's cause,
and go the best way to engage his maintaining of it.

For God is always ready to bless his own Institutions, and will never fail to
bless those that keep religiously close to them; and when we honestly revere
these, we shall find he will bless us in our subjection, and bless him too to
whom we are subject; for good Subjects may make good and happy Kings; I wish
good Kings could as easily make good and happy Subjects: And certainly, to
preserve that due respect and honor to God, by whom Kings Reign, and out of
that respect to pay a religious fealty and subjection to them, is a sure way to
draw down his blessing upon both, and entitle both most certainly to his
protection and care.

3. And now I beg leave to put a period to this discourse in the last thing I
proposed, and all the improvement I intend of it, shall be in these three short
Inferences.

1. From hence we may inform our selves of one great reason of the unsteddiness
of men in their Allegiance and Loyalty in this age.

The sickleness and unconstancy of English men is grown into a Proverb, and
has too justly rendered us vile and cheap in the esteem of other Nations; but
there are few instances in which it more justly does so, than our instability
in our Allegiance to such a King, and subjection to such a Government, which
all (but our selves admire, and envy us for.

For my part I can resolve the cause of this into nothing so rationally, as
want of true Religion, and due respect unto God, unless it be a divine
infatuation, and this evil also be of the Lord.

No People talk more of Religion, and yet I fear few practice it less, we have
wrangled and disputed so long about it, till we have quite lost it; and had
God, and Conscience so long in our Mouths, that our hearts have almost
forgotten that there are any such things; and it is not to be much wondered at,
if such men do not greatly revere God's Institutions, or if they do, that they
are not very zealous and steady in doing so.

I know not how a House should stand without a Foundation; nor what great
difference there is between standing upon a floating Sand, and no Foundation at
all; there is no great thing to be expected from him that is Loyal upon
uncertain and shifting reasons; he that chances to be Loyal, may chance to be
a Traitor; and he that is subject upon changeable reasons, will upon the
change of those reasons, change his subjection into Resistance.

It is very well, and we ought to adore the good Providence of God for it, that
men may be Loyal now upon all these lower reasons; that our circumstances are
so happily changed, that even our Interest combines with our Duty, and is
complicated with it; but such duty will scarce hold out in the day of
temptation, or stand, if what supports it chance to fail.

Then are men to be relied on (as I said before,) when their Allegiance is upon
Principle, and their Loyalty the effect of true Conscience; when men honor
their King, because they love their God, and dare no more become Rebels, than
they dare be Atheists; when they revere their King as an imbodied kind of
Divinity, the Image and Character of the great God; who resents any disrespect
or injury we do our Prince, as done against himself who will strictly require
it, and severely punish it; and who counts himself blasphemed, when his great
Minister is so.

These are arguments that will hold men fast, and keep them close to their
duty; preserve them against all the batteries and charms of Rebellion, and all
the enchantments of factious and seducing men.

2. From hence we may learn what to think of those men, that plead Religion for
Rebellion, and Conscience to God for resistance against the King.

There are two great degeneracies of Christian Religion at this day, justly
chargeable with this egregious Prevarication, and it is not easy to say which
are more so; their Faces (like Sampson's Foxes) look two ways, and they would
be taken to be at the greatest enmity and distance; but it is notorious they
have united in setting the Christian world in a Flame; and I am persuaded no
Places can hope long to enjoy Peace, where they are freely permitted to earth
and propagate.

If any chance long to do so, it is in spite of them, and their Principles
too, which are so very dangerous in their nature, so directly in their
consequences introductive of disturbance and confusion, that if any Persons
leven'd with them continue good Subjects, it is because their hearts are better
than their heads, or the Vipers are under some powerful charm.

We have been loudly alarmed in this Nation with the effects of both, and
(unless we be infatuated) may with our own experiences fortify our selves
against their Importunities; if our reason were not able to secure us, yet our
experience may, and warn us against attending to those men, who may court us as
fair, as the Hiena does the Shepherd, but whose embraces we have found to be as
terrible and deadly.

There has been great disputing about Religion, and contesting the marks of a
true Church; I think it would be one good way to reduce the contest to this
question, and put the debate upon this issue; and I am very sure a Church that
teaches Doctrines that any way vacate a standing Law of Religion, and dispense
from obedience to it in any case, may safely be condemned as Antichristian, how
much soever it may pretend to infallibility on the one hand, or purity on the
other.

It is a sad Story, that any that call themselves Christians should become
Rebels and Traitors; but to plead Christianity for being so, is a great deal
worse: it is bad enough to violate the Laws of our holy Profession, but to
traduce them, and make them a Cloak for our Villainies, and such horrid
Villainies too, is a Sin next to that which is impardonable.

Were this a place fit for a Satyr, or did my Religion permit me to bring a
railing Accusation against any man; I might be pardoned, if I did a little
warmly inveigh against our late Rebels, and indeed the whole race of them for
nigh fifty years, for this grand prevarication, the making Conscience a cloak
for maliciousness, and suborning the Religion of the blessed Jesus to abet such
barbarous Villainies, as have scarce been done by Pagans and Infidels; there are
not names bad enough for such Profligates, unless they be those of that cursed
Apostate Spirit, who is always a Devil, but never more so than when he assumes
the form of an Angel of light.

3. And Lastly, this may be of good effect to indear Religion to our
Governors, which is so serviceable to Government; and engage all us who are
Subjects to mix Religion with our Loyalty, and show our selves to be good
Christians, as well as good Subjects; yea to be the one, that we may be the
other; I press not the first of these, and we are all happy that I need not;
blessed be God we have a Defender of our Faith; a Prince to whom it has so far
approved it self, as to engage his Royal word for its protection; in this all
honest men rejoice and triumph, and bless God for the security of it; no men
ever doubting the sincerity of it, but those whose own guilt and hypocrisy
render them always suspicious, and diffident of all men.

But I beseech you give me leave to press the second, and effectually prevail
with us all to make real Conscience of Religion, and duty to God; not only
that we better may, but while we do express it to our King; to become good men,
as well as good Subjects, and to show that our being the one, is the effect of
our being the other.

I do not in this go about to recommend to you that whining, whimpering,
noisie, scrupulous, formal Religion, that is nothing but the shame and
hypocrisy of it, and which (I fear) prejudiceth many against it, as an
ungentile unsociable thing, unfit for Courts, and men of address.

But I mean that true, solid, substantial Religion, that consists in a great
sense of our God, and a care to approve our selves to him in generous and
worthy actions; in Justice, and honesty, and great charity; in scorning to do
an ill thing, or to debase our selves by any of those mean and pitiful vices
that Grooms and Porters now rival their Masters in.

Give me leave to remember you of two or three things, and I have done.

I have told you already, that this will be the most acceptable expression of
the present praise; and I tell you now, it is the only one. A truly religious
heart is the only Altar from whence God will accept any sacrifices; and pure
hands are only fit to offer them* true Piety is the only thing that clears
the air, and causes our incense to ascend and appear before God; but Vice
raises storms and thick vapors, which hinder its ascent, and cause it to roll
back upon our own head, in pitchy and black smoke, the sad indications that our
Persons, and our Sacrifices are equally odious to him.

But I would have leave to add something more; you cannot be ignorant what a
character our Enemies endeavor to fix upon us, and under what disadvantage
they represent all Loyal Subjects, while they glory in themselves as the only
godly and sober part of the Nation.

I thank God the charge is not so just, nor the guilt so general as they
invidiously represent it; but they that are so prodigal of kindness to
themselves, are always sparing and niggardly to others; and no wonder to see
those men industrious to lessen other men's reputation, that have nothing but
that to raise their own upon.

But yet certainly a good use might be made of this, and in this we might cause
our false accusers to benefit us; by rendering us more careful of our lives,
and more solicitous to cause our light to shine before men, that the World may
see our good works, and see also how unjust those men are that do so
maliciously and falsely accuse us; and as our Apostle advises us in the verse
just following the text, By well-doing to put to silence the ignorance of
foolish men.

Again, I beg you to consider what a Religion you profess, and of what a Church
you call your selves Sons; a Church that instructs you truly in your duty to
God, and Caesar too; and never knew how to dispense with one, under pretense of
the other.

A Church that teaches Subjection and Loyalty without any reserve, and a
necessity of real holiness, without hopes of commutation.

A Church that knows no more how to absolve impiety against God, upon the
reason of Loyalty to the King, than to hallow or allow Rebellion against the
King, for the interest of the Church, and advancing the Scepter of Christ, as
some have loved to Cant.

A Church, and Religion that indulgeth no manner of vice, that sets Traitors
and the profane Rebels and Debauchees in the same rank, and threatens the same
sad portion to both.

Finally, Let me leave this one great thing with you, that in our case of
Subjection, both the great arguments in the text combine, and it is hard to
say, which is the more visible and obvious, to submit for the Lord's sake, and
to do it for the King's sake too; to submit for the Lord's sake, who has so
remarkably appeared for him; and to do it for the Kings sake, who so worthily
deserves it from us.

Shall I be allowed to say one thing, without offense, or imputation of base
flattery or design. That if ever King might expect cheerful Obedience from us
for his own sake, or challenge it for God's sake, that happy Prince that
governs us may do it justly; whom Providence has still attended, and Miracles
of it guarded through so many Storms, and at last landed him safe, and set him
upon a steady Throne.

And who is kind to us to the utmost of our wishes; in such an instance, and to
such a measure, as past ages have scarce seen, and future ones will sooner
admire, than believe.

It was Gamaliel's argument in a less obvious case once: Let us take heed of
fighting against God; and yet God had scarce so fully appeared in that case, as
in ours; he had begun indeed to display his Power, and immediate interposition
in behalf of the Apostles and their doctrine, and it greatly affected that Wise
man, and awakened his care.

Lord! how plain and visible is the argument in our case? and how effectual
ought it therefore to be upon this generation? when the greatest favor and
kindness upon Earth invites, and when Miracles from Heaven command our
subjection?

What shall we say of those men, whom neither bands of such Love, nor chains of
such Miracles can draw to their duty? What can we say or think, but that the
same chains of darkness, in which Devils themselves are bound, are reserved for
them for ever?

I conclude with that of the Prophet almost in a like case, Isa. 26.11. Lord,
when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see: (when it scatters confusions and
plagues upon Traitors and Rebels; and when it showers down Miracles of
blessing upon the head of thine Anointed, and his Servants under him) but they
shall see and be ashamed, confounded at their envy, and overwhelmed with their
own black despair; sinking under their own guilts, and perishing under their
own remediless anguish and horror.

While the King shall rejoice in thy salvation, O Lord! and in the mercy of
thee the most high God, he shall not miscarry; and while all his true and
faithful Subjects that honor thee in him, and him for thee, shall wash their
steps in blessing, rejoicing in those signal deliverances and salvations that
thou vouchsafest us here, and in pious and humble hopes of that Eternal
salvation hereafter: Which we humbly beg in the Name, and for the Mirits of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: To whom with thee, O Father, and thine Eternal
Spirit, three Persons, and one God, be ascribed by us, and thy whole Church,
all honor, glory and praise, now and for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

