portrait of Thomas Sutton Obijt December. 12o. 1611 Aetatis Suae 79. Thomas
Sutton. Deo Dante Dedit.
F.H. Van Houe. Sculp.


Domus Carthusiana: OR AN ACCOUNT OF THE MOST NOBLE FOUNDATION OF THE
CHARTER-HOVSE NEAR Smithfield in LONDON.

BOTH Before and since the REFORMATION. WITH THE Life and Death of Thomas
Sutton Esquire the FOVNDER thereof.

And his last WILL and TESTAMENT.

To which are Added several Prayers, fitted for the Private Devotions and
Particular Occasions of the Ancient Gentlemen, etc.

By SAMVEL HERNE, Fellow of Clare-Hall in CAMBRIDGE.

Bona Fama est propria Possessio Defunctorum.

LONDON, Printed by T.R. for Richard Marriott, and Henry Brom, at the Gun in
St. Paul's Churchyard, the West end, MDCLXXVII.

IMPRIMATUR,

Antonius Saunders, Reverendissimo Archi-Episcopo Cantuariensi a Sacris
Domesticis.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER in GOD, GILBERT, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
his Grace, etc. TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, RIGHT REVEREND, AND MOST WORTHY
GOVERNORS OF THE Charter House.
May it please your Lordships,
AS your Honors bear a particular Relation to that Goodly and Noble
Foundation, whereof I design to give an Account: I had been unjust if I had
deprived your Lordships of the Patronage of That, which is confirmed unto you
by a Royal Hand; for which you have his Majesty's Letters Patent. Therefore, in
your most Noble Breasts is justly lodged the Right and Management of this
glorious and weighty Benefaction: and the Trust is so judiciously seated, that
all Wise men conclude, our Generous Founder added more Glory to the Reformed
Religion, by choosing such Honorable Patrons, than ever he could expect from
the single Instance of his own Bounty; and so he is become a double Benefactor.

I find, since the first Foundation, a considerable accession of Revenues,
added by the care and diligence of your Lordships Wisdom: as also a numerous
Train of Excellent Orders, made for the better Government and Regulation of the
Members therein contained.

After all this, I could not satisfy my self, why all these Great and
Magnificent Actions should lie dormant, and be buried within the narrow bounds
of this Religious House, and not appear to the World in their full Beauty and
Proportion: Nor could I render any tolerable Account of this long continued
Silence, unless your Lordships labor to be as Eminent for Humility, and a
generous Contempt of Glory, as you have approved your selves for Fidelity and
Conduct.

Upon this Account I am bound to beg your Honors Pardon, seeing I not only
begin this way to Trespass; but also add another Crime, by presuming to
undertake a Labor so much above my feeble Strength and Capacity: However, I am
resolved in some measure to have a regard to my Duty (as well as I can) and
recommend that to Posterity, which it would be a Sin to conceal. For I must
needs declare, I could do no less than pay this humble Acknowledgment to the
lasting Glory of our Founder, the deserved Honor of your Lordships, and the
Memory I owe to that Place, wherein I had the Happiness to be Educated.

How often has the warm Influence of your Religious Cares visited these Walls
of Retirement? and refreshed the fainting Spirits of the poor Inhabitants: This
cannot but make you the happy Returns of Joy and Glory hereafter. For the
Interrogations at the last Day will relate to those Duties, which now are the
kind Purposes, and constant Entertainment of your Souls.

That Heaven would graciously bestow on your Lordships, a long Life, and a
continued Happiness, with all the Blessings of this, and the endless Joys of
that World to come, is the hearty Prayer of

Your Honors most humble and most faithful Servant, Samuel Herne.

THE PREFACE.
I Serve no other ends in piecing together these few Collections, than to give
an honest Instance of my Duty and Thankfulness: for wherever any Obligation
lies upon a man, common honesty leads him to endeavor to pay the Debt. Now,
seeing it is impossible for me, according to my small Talent, to discharge the
Total Sum, I am resolved, as much as in me lies, to make this public
Acknowledgment, viz. to be just and thankful. For the Apostle makes Ingratitude
the Compendium of all Impiety, 2 Timothy 3.2.
in these two words, unthankful, unholy.

Thus you see the plain reason why I bestow my thoughts upon the Memory of this
Great man: to whom I, and many others owe all we can express, (not that I
reflect upon the silence of any man, who, for ought I know, may in his private
Closet give more substantial Testimonials of his Thankfulness, than I can, by
this faint endeavor, in a public way) besides, though in general, all men,
who receive favors, are bound to be thankful; yet I am apt to think, every
single man has as much right to choose the way of expressing his Thanks, as he
has a propriety to his Complexion and Fortunes.

In digging up the Foundations of Ancient and Religious Houses, it is usual to
find Vrns and old Relics of Men and Times; sometimes the uncorrupted Carcass
of a great and celebrated Person: These and the like Curiosities are thought
worthy to be exposed to common view; if so, this I hope may in part excuse my
present Attempt. For occasionally searching in the Dust and Foundation of the
present Charter House; now and then I could not but meet with a Leg or an Arm,
some strokes of the Ancient Model, some few fragments of the old Foundation:
But at last I met with the Original Grants and Charters for this Carthusian
Monastery, in the most elaborate Works of that Excellent Antiquary of our Age,
Mr. Dugdale.

Why therefore should I be so rude, as not to take notice of Sir Walter de
Manny, whose Memory the very worms dare not assault? Brit. p. 117.
Says Cambden. Fuerant Regnante Hen. 8. (fas sit meminisse) avitae pietatis
monumenta, etc. Ille autem, quasi Torrens rupto aggere, irruit; Orb stupente,
and Anglia ingemente, omnia funditus prostravit: p. 311.
Latifundia sibi arripuit, quae piissimo instituto, ad Dei gloriam consecrata,
and in Sacerdotum Eleemosynis, Pauperum refectione, captivorum Redemptione, and
Ecclesiarum reparationibus, per Ecclesiae scita expendenda, etc.

I know an Attempt of this Nature is an Employment far beneath men of singular
Parts and high Achievements, yet in the advancement of Knowledge some body
must moyl and drudge, some Persons must clear, and labor in the Foundation,
who, though they seem buried alive, and make no flourishes above ground, yet
they prove full as useful and beneficial to mankind. Thus men awake Antiquity,
by searching into Dormitories, and places of long repose: thus they bring
Mortar and unpolisht stone to be made smooth by a more curious hand, to be
placed in order by the sk^ll of the Great Surveyer. Much of the same nature I
conceive these lose and rude Collections to be, and that they would puzzle the
skill of another Inigo to bring them into shape and figure.

That which some Historians complain of, is my comfort; they say, to write soon
after the matter of fact, is to tread too close upon the heels of time, etc. I
am glad I speak to the face of Time, for many Persons are now alive, who knew
the Founder, he having been dead not above 66 years; so that if it be my
misfortune to transcribe any Errors, I hope they may be discerned, and I will
engage they shall thankfully be amended.

Some small pleasure and satisfaction may possibly be found in things of this
nature; for I have heard say, that he, whose understanding is not elder than
himself, loses the noblest Inheritance of his Ancestors, and stick's in the
worst kind of minority. Some wise men therefore have thought Works of this
nature very necessary for the improvement of Virtue and Goodness; for, Example
is observed to have more force and virtue among men, than the Legislative
Power, the Fundamental Laws of States and Kingdoms: what penal Laws, Courts of
Judicature, the Rods and the Hatchet, are designed to effect by Legal Force and
Compulsion, that Example will perform, with the unresisted eloquence of its own
nature, without the formidable Retinue of Guards and Tumult: According to the
Kings of Israel, so varied the Worship of God, for, Examples are the Springs
from whence human actions derive their motion.

The power of the Laws may pursue and seize upon the body; but Example
surprises and attacks the soul; it invades and charms the mind with the secret
Magic of love and imitation: It represents virtue to the world, not in faint
and languishing colors, but moving, full of life and vigor: It propounds
Reason not as imperious and tyrannical in its precepts, but eloquent and
attractive in its Operations. Thus the great difficulty of Obedience is
mastered, and made easy by our desire of imitation.

I thought therefore it would not be amiss (when I undertook this innocent
diversion at spare hours) to propound our great Founder to the World, as a
mighty Example of Charity and Benevolence. For it is no small Honor to our
Country, that we can give such a famous Instance of the warmth and richness of
its Soil, when, without any auxiliary Charity, by the scattering of a single
Hand, it has brought forth so much piety, such unparalled Benevolence.

Yet these great men meet with some strokes of misfortune, from the ruder Ages
wherein they live; for as the highest Mountains are most subject to the storms
of Thunder, and the batteries of Hail: so these who are placed on high, are the
usual marks at which the Instruments of Envy and Malice are level^d: Some men
love to look on the knotty side of the Arras, and take little notice of the
comely figure that is wrought upon the right side of the Hangings. The same
indignities and affronts were offered to our generous Founder, or at least, it
was so suspected (which are fully wiped off in the body of his life) But what
will not the licentious Stage traduce? when Socrates himself was the unexpected
subject of Aristophanes's Buffoonry.

I wish we could find many Suttons so long lived to their Country, by their
Fame and Munificence; and so long lived to themselves by their temperance and
sobriety. If he seemed to the world something too sparing, this may suffice at
present;

Si non errasset, fecerat ille minus.

The Instances I bring of the Carthusian Order, are faithfully taken from
Petrus Suitor, one of their own Fraternity. If any Person be more curious, Lib.
de vita Carth.
be may read Johannes Morocurtius's Poem upon the Life of Bruno, in four Books,
printed at Antw. 1540. 4o. and now to be found in the Oxford Library.

The helps I found in the composure of Sutton's life, were many of them
scattered here and there, laid hold on rather by chance than direction; For the
World has not been so kind to this Great man, as to represent him to the open
view, with those graceful lines and fair advantages his Actions really have
deserved.

Sir Richard Baker, Dr Heylin, and Mr. Fuller say little of him, and that
little very full of mistakes, for they call him Richard Sutton, and affirm he
lived a Bachelor, and so by his single life had an opportunity to lay up a
heap of money; whereas his dear wife is, with much honor and respect, mentioned
in his Will.

Others give him bad words, say he was born of obscure and mean Parents, and
married as inconsiderable a wife, and died without an Heir: but then to give
some reason for his Wealth (having no time nor desire to enquire into the means
of his growing rich) to cut short the business, they resolve all into a
Romantic Adventure; they say it was all got at a lump by an accidental
shipwreck, which the kind waves drove to shore, and laid at his feet, whilst
the fortunate Sutton was walking pensively upon the barren Sands. They report,
in the Hulk Coals were found, and under them an inestimable Treasure, a great
heap of Fayery wealth. This, I fancy, may go for the Fable, and his farming the
Coalmines (as may be seen hereafter) for the Moral.

The Errors of the former, and dreams of the latter, will be sufficiently
discovered by the following History of his Life; some Remarks whereof I had
from creditable and worthy men, bred in this Foundation long ago: Others by a
Commemoration Sermon of Mr. Burrel's, preached in a fit time to declare the
truth; for several of the first list of Governors were then living, and one of
the Founders Executors, viz. Sir Richard Sutton. This I have by me in print.

I had likewise assistance from the Records of the House, and lastly from an
Anonymous and Imperfect MS. left, not long since, in the Booksellers hands,
which did me very good service.

I shall now only offer a word or two in the behalf of good Works, and then
proceed to the Historical part.

Nothing is more pleasing to him, who is the Giver of good Gifts unto men, than
to see his own Blessings rightly placed, and bestowed upon Objects of pity and
compassion; Moreover, by this we show our thankfulness to God; for, the truest
Notion of Gratitude, is never to give an occasion that our Benefactour should
repent that he bestowed his Bounty upon us.

By Charity also we do good to men, we oblige and endear our Neighbor; we
imitate the good Angels, nay our Savior himself, who went about all Judea
doing good; though his Estate and Kingdom was not in this World, yet among his
few Disciples, he chose one an Almoner to scatter his Benevolence, and to
distribute his small Treasure: Love and Charity are as necessary to the
well-being of States and Communities in the Body Politic, as union of parts is
in the material and Philosophical World.

Furthermore, by acts of mercy and pity, we are kind to our own selves; for no
good man can, without grief, behold the gaping wounds of a poor Lazarus, this
makes his bowels yearn, and his own Soul bear a part in sorrow, so that by
healing his sores, and binding up his wounds, by relieving his pain, and
refreshing his spirits, he eases his own mind, and does an office of kindness
to himself: and this seems to be the proper sense of the Prophet, When thou
see the naked, cover him; that thou hide not thy self from thine own flesh.

Lastly, nothing more secures our Interest in Heaven, nor gives a fairer Title
to the blessed Mansions above; for the Scripture informs us, that at the great
and terrible day of Judgment inquiry will be made, Whether we have fed the
hungry, and clothed the naked? visited the sick, and redeemed the prisoner? for
Charity is so requisite, in order to our well being in the other world, that
Abraham would hardly think himself now in heaven, had he not a Lazarus in his
bosom.

It may be these Arguments were the cause of so much good, that is found of
this nature in the world; for I believe we read of few or no Hospitals before
the Plantation of Christian Religion. Nor is this a private fancy of my own,
but partly gathered from the silence of former Ages in reference to these works
of Charity; and partly from several barbarous Instances of State Policy, which
were enjoined to prevent the necessity of such Structures, and Provisions for
needy people.

These were customary in many Countries, and gravely prescribed by Aristotle
himself, in these words; Lib. 7. Pol. cap. 16.
(...). (...), etc. which may be thus Englished; As for the destroying or
bringing up of Children, there should be a Law that none might bring up any,
who were imperfect or lame in any of their Limbs; and for the avoiding of too
great a number of Children (if it be not permitted by the Laws of the Country
to expose them) it is requisite to set down how many a man may have; and if any
have more than that prescribed number, there must be used some means that the
fruit may be destroyed in the Mothers womb.

Several, who were sick and weakly, having no means of subsistence, and hopes
of human pity, did make Sale of their lives, that upon their recovery, both
they and their Posterity should be slaves to him that was at the expense of the
Relief. If any person happened to be lame or blind, he thought it in vain to
endeavor to move the compassion of barbarous and self-ended men; therefore
their custom was to lay violent hands upon themselves, to put a period to their
miserable lives and wretched fortunes. This was the lamentable effect of Pagan
uncharitableness.

But when once Constantine the Great appeared, enabled with the Riches and
Authority of Empire, he bravely redressed all these horrid and inhuman
practices, Eusebius. Hist. Lib. 10.
and erected many structures for to entertain and refresh the sons and
daughters of pity and compassion. This excellent example Julian the Apostate
could not but applaud and imitate, as may be seen by his Letters sent to the
Proconsuls and Cities of Asia, persuading them to follow the examples of
Christians in this matter; and though he reigned alone scarce two years, yet he
left many monuments of Charity behind him.

After these Reigns, the good and pious Emperors were strangely forward in
this way of Charity, and their Benefactions became almost incredible. Nay, the
very Turks now are famous for it; and it seems not only a good act of kindness
and piety among them, but also a wise forecast, and prudent consideration. For
no Turk is solicitous to provide for the future condition of his family, lest
he should provoke the jealousy of the Grand Seignour, and be crushed in a
moment; therefore they usually leave their Children to cut out their own
Fortunes, who, if they should prove maimed or sickly, are in these places
provided for.

They have one Hospital at the entrance of Mare Majore, coming from Bosphorus,
which was founded by Solyman's Daughter, the Wife of Rustan Bassa, and by her
endowed with 8000 Ducats per An.

There is another built by a certain Bassa in the Isle of Phermena, not far
from Delos, in Greece, in the Reign of Mahomet 2d. who conquered
Constantinople; it is endowed with 12000 Ducats per Ann.

A third is at Constantinople, begun by Mahomet 2d. and finished by Bajazet his
son; it enjoyes 60000 Ducats per An.

These, with many others in the Turkish Dominions, are erected to entertain
sick and lame people, men who are unfit for labor, and whose conditions
require Relief. The Governors of their Hospitals usually walk out, and desire
wearied Travelers, and that sort of people which commonly line the Highways,
to repair hither, and accept of the kindness and refreshments of the charitable
House. Many of them are, by their Establishments, to receive persons of any
Religion, which is certainly a generous instance of kindness and civility. Near
these Foundations commonly a Mosque or Temple is erected; as now upon Mount
Sinai, and elsewhere; for those that are relieved are required to pray there
for the Soul of the Founder: the place where they intend to raise such a work
of Charity, is frequently made choice of in some solitary and retired place, to
avoid vain glory. Their Charity likewise extends to the Inhabitants of the Aerie
and Watery Elements, for they hire men to feed fishes in common Rivers, and with
expense purchase the Release of encaged Birds.

We read likewise of five goodly Hospitals in Fez; and of a Persian King, who
caused a Mosque to be built in Armenia, at the foot of that Mountain whereon
Noah's Ark rested: this is a Receptacle for men of all sorts of Religions and
Complexions, Christians and Turks, Moors and Arabs: here all are entertained
three days and three nights, with much kindness and freedom; and for its
maintenance it is endowed with 40000 Ducats per Ann.

Thus we may observe the rise and spreading of these Instances of Benefaction;
how much it redounds to the honor of Christian Religion, that as it at first
out of its excellent Principles began this work, so now it does continue it,
and provokes the emulation of all Countries. For the honor of our own Nation,
I shall conclude with the words of Dr. Willet in that part of his Synopsis, p.
1243.
called the Catalogue of Good Works, in the Defense of Protestant Charity.

I trust I have made it good, that more Charitable Works have been done in
these 60 years of the Gospel, than in the like time in Popery; I think they
cannot show in any Age almost a Million bestowed in Works of Charity; more than
forty Hospitals, above twenty Free schools and more than ten Colleges and
Churches.

Thus ( says he) is the slanderous objection of the Papists answered, who said,
That Protestants do no Good Works, but are rather Enemies to them.

THE CHARTER HOUSE.
IN that fatal year,
When Prodigies familiar were:
Ills and Distempers in the East began,
And nimbly over Europe ran:
When living men amazed, beheld the dead,
And Carkases over all the world were spread:
Thou, Walter Manny, Cambray's Lord,
The bravest man that blind Age could afford,
Did take compassion on the wandering Ghosts
Of thy departed Friends;
Did consecrate to the Lord of Hosts,
Thy Substance for Religious Ends.
Thy Bounty, at the best
Gave only scattered ashes rest.
Sutton took care of the better part
And did consummate it with wondrous Art,
By the large Issues of his boundless heart.
We grant, ye both to us from heaven were sent,
Yet one's a dead, the other a living Monument.
2.
Where sorrow dwelt, and tears bedewed the earth,
From whence the bitterest weeds derived their birth;
Where grief and sighs were thickest found,
And Death had Chambers under ground,
Where sad Relations sorrow'd all around.
In that very House of mourning, now
The sweetest Charms of life do grow:
Therefore no more can we
Call this a Vale of Misery.
No more let History say,
It is a Charnel house, or Golgotha:
Unless we mean, where skulls, with cost and pains,
Have been enriched with wisdom, and with brains.
3.
Vainglorious Rome!
Could Heaven be purchased, and the Joys above,
By what you dream will meritorious prove?
We have the noblest Instance here at home.
Sutton, the best of Givers, whose large mind,
By no Red-letter'd Model was confined,
He has erected in the Highest Sphere
The largest, and the noblest Mansion there,
Where thy great Babel never will appear.
4.
We heard and read of Charity before,
That England was its magazine and store:
When our Forefathers strove
Religiously who should exceed in Love;
Who should attempt the greatest Good:
Till a mis-guided Zeal did so abound,
And cover all the richer ground,
That numerous streams did swell into a Flood.
They broke the Banks, which should their force withstand,
And proved injurious to the neighboring Land.
5.
Then the Reformation came,
and drained our Channels dry;
It gave Religion a new Name,
and served to clear our sky:
A while few kind showers were found
To fall upon the British ground.
The late abuse of Charity withheld
Some time its useful growth;
That Superstition might not yield
A Nursery of Ignorance and Sloth:
The ground was rank, and therefore all that fell
Of rain and moisture here below,
About the Convent and the lazy Cell,
Did into useless Thorns and Thistles grow.
6.
But since we hear that Charity
(Just like the Orange Tree)
From a distant Climate come,
Leaving a warmer Air at home,
Ventured on our Inhospitable Isle,
Before she knew we had so clean a Soil.
At first this Stranger was scarce known,
In City, Country, Camp or Town;
She lived abroad, she stood aloof
Far from any Mansion House:
She found the searching Air unkind and cold,
She seemed to languish in the stiffer Mould.
This wa'nt a place for her to thrive,
No not a place to live,
All over shivering and timorous;
Therefore she begged the favor of a warmer Roof.
7.
All pale and wan, she lay upon the ground,
Gasping for want of breath:
Her Eyes began to close, her Pulse to cease,
Her trembling Soul to steal away in peace,
The common symptoms of approaching death.
Yet when the Searchers came, they found
That she was only in a swound:
Chasing her Lim^ benumbed with cold,
The Native heat
App^^^d and kindly did great.
She wo^ks^ And in a plea^^ honor told
All she had seen above,
How every Region there is filled with love:
She saw the Throne,
And Him that sat thereon;
The eternal Springs from whence does flow
All the good we find below:
Spying poor Lazarus in the Patriarch's breast,
She knew 'twas Heaven, the place of everlasting rest.
Then from a tedious Trance she did revive*
And i^ a Demonstration that we live.
8.
Rome's blind Devotion, like the Mole,
Before did work and labor under ground;
As if Religion had its birth
From the hollow Caverns of the Earth:
Where you may find the Cloistered Soul
In Superstitious fetters bound.
The purest Lamp of Life they place
In solitary shade below;
In the dark enteries of Hell,
Those dens and vaults, where Snakes and Adders dwell:
As if the greatest part of Christian Race
Were born to shameful misery and woe.
These Romish Batts live in a daily fright,
Ever avoiding human sight;
A strange Religion which abhors the light!
9.
But our Great Patron void of all
The trifling Fopperies of Rome;
Their sly Reserves, and whispering Wall,
The grand Reproach of Christendom.
He bravely has secured our just Retreat,
The Reputation of the British State,
And placed Religion in its proper Seat:
And now Triumphant Arches may be spared,
When such a lasting Monument is reared.
So God has placed the Rainbow in the sky
A memorandum of the Flood,
To advertise Mortality,
At once that he is just and good
10.
The Youth and Aged, as they lay
Objects of pity in thy way,
Besought a helping hand:
Children untaught to make their moan,
And old Age almost speechless grown,
When succor they demand;
Point not to Thee in vain,
To read those lines of sorrow, which complain
With Lazarus, they begged a Crum,
Or Belizarius, a small Sum,
But thy large Alms did an Exchequer drain.
Alas! thy free and generous mind
Disdained to be confined:
When thou do give,
It Is that whereon whole Nations might live,
Like Macedon's great Man, when thou do pity,
Thou stretchest out thy hand, and giv'st a City.
11.
What Argument could draw Thee hence,
To gratify the Reason, or the Sense?
What pure and endless joys must that man find,
Who freely left to us a Paradise behind?
A Paradise, wherein we see
No tempting Eve, and no forbidden Tree:
All things are open, all are free to taste,
All masculine, and innocent, and chaste;
Here Is nothing naked and forlorn,
Exposed to punishment or scorn:
All things are clad; and thus it Paradise exceeds,
Instead of Figleaves we have nobler Weeds.
12.
Plenty here has chose her seat,
Here all things needful and convenient meet:
Every week are hither sent
Inhabitants of the watery Element.
When I met Creatures in a throng,
And found they hither came,
Seeing so vast a number crowd along;
Methought they went to Eden for a Name.
13.
Thy very Wilderness is fruitful too;
Every Walk, and every Grove,
Bears the fresh characters of Love.
Here Is nothing wild; all things increase and thrive:
In just obedience to you,
That which was barren, now has learned to give.
O bounteous Heaven! at thy Command,
Fourscore Patriarchs here
Wander many a year,
Until they move unto the promised Land.
14.
Here they from Heaven are sed,
By an Almighty hand are led,
No Pharaoh them to trouble:
Yet still they have the Pillar and the Cloud,
All that is useful and (...) good;
Only their Tents a'nt Portable.
Their greener years were spent in war,
Each Nestor bears a loyal scar.
But now the field is won,
All war's noise and tumults cease,
They all retire, no clashing's heard,
But from each gray and reverend beard,
The sacred Oil does in abundance run:
Like Brethren, they live long lives in peace.
15.
Here Crashaw's pious Muse was bred,
In this Religious place lived she;
Free from disquiet and complaint,
Which trouble, and distract the busy head;
Such peaceful paths his Infancy did tread.
Here the great Cowley's Poet, and his Saint,
Was taught the Elements of Speech and Piety.
Cowley, he was the Subject of thy Pen;
That Pen, which did bewail the end
Of thy most dear, and most lamented Friend:
For thou did but desire,
(when he was snatched from us frail men)
A modest portion of his sacred fire.
Yet some may say thy Charity was blind,
Because it has thy modesty outran;
For thou have proved so kind
T'embalm and bless that very man,
Who left Religion and his Friend behind.
It Is true, alas! had he not stepped aside,
But in his Mothers bosom died;
Had his Muse not wanton been,
Nor fled unto Loretto's shrine,
He might have long since this begun
From smaller Numbers his eternal Song.
16.
Here our first James, that wore the British Crown,
Wearied with acclamations, and the toil
Of travel, to unite this long divided Isle;
Entered, withal the Noble Train he ^ed,
Within these walls three nights he laid his thoughtful head;
Until he did advance into the Town,
Until another Palace was prepared.
As Princes came from far to view the Throne
Of Mighty Solomon;
So Scotland's King moved many a tedious mile,
Drawn with the Fame of this Great Pile:
He came, and saw more than ever he had heard.
17.
Exactly on the South I saw
A comely Structure show its head;
And when I questioned, whose abode
It was? I heard the Law
And Gospels read:
I saw twice forty Elders: drawing nigher,
I heard the Music of the sacred Quire:
And then I knew it was the House of God.
18.
The Image of thy boundless Soul,
Where e're our gazing eyes do roll,
Is the fair object of our view:
To Youth, untaught to number years,
To active youth well near its prime,
In glorious Visions it appears:
The Aged too still dream of you,
Although they are even worn out with time.
Here Innocence and Piety,
Are fed and nursed by Charity;
Here the tender Plants do grow,
A handsome and a graceful show.
There the tall and Aged Oak
In patience waits the fatal stroke:
Which, as it falls, must lie
Until it approach Eternity.
19.
Sickness and death are almost strangers here,
No ill-foreboding Comet dare appear;
Whilst Nedham's nigh they cannot kill,
No Carthusian blood can spill.
In vain they tempt his known and mighty skill;
In vain they make a needless strife:
All, that belongs to human life,
To every Limb, to every Nerve,
To fortify, repair, and long preserve,
He knows it all:
And then for shame, why do we call
The Seat of Health an Hospital?
H'as traced the Infant from the womb,
Through all his changes, to the Tomb:
H'as planted here the Tree of Life, that Fate
Has no Commission for to enter:
Here no contagious ills dare venture,
While this great Aesculapius guards the Gate.
20.
He that Robs thy Treasury of Love,
Shall feel the Scourge of Heaven above:
And (as to Scripture) if we strive to add,
It Is thought a Crime a most as bad;
For then our Benefactions are in vain,
We empty Cockles in the boundless Main.
To thee alone (Great Sir) we pay this Right
Of Thanks: Thy arge and crowded Store
Will entertain no more;
No, not the Widow's Mite:
And yet thy Charity's not bestowed in vain,
For many Ages hence it will be found again:
Thy Bread is cast upon, and covers all the Main.
20.
The Influence of thy mighty Zeal
Does warm these Northern parts,
Dissolves the Ice, and softens all our hearts:
Thy Love amazes all the Roman Spies,
It warms our Clime, and dazles all our Eyes:
And, what is more, in this fair solitude,
Thou, by a Miracle
Do now instruct and feed a multitude.
So that if Saints above can understand, and see
How things are acted in this Vale of Misery:
Thy Charity to us must still increase,
For there, they say, 'twill never cease:
Though all thou had on Earth was given,
Yet thou have Blessings to bestow
On us poor Mortals here below,
As thou art made Lord Almoner of Heaven.
The CONTENTS.
Of the Old Foundation.
AN Account of the Rise and Original of the Carthusian Order, Cap. 1. Page 1.
Of the Rules and Constitution of the Order, c. 2. p. 7. Of their
Transplantation and Number in England, c. 3. p. 12. Of the Charter House, or
Carthusian Monastery near Smithfield, c. 4. p. 15. Of their Fabulous Miracles,
c. 5. p. 22. King Edward the Third's License or Grant for the Foundation of the
Monastery, p. 30. Bulla Urbani Papae. p. 32.
Of the New Foundation.
Sutton's Life, p. 37. The Occasions of his growing Rich, p. 40. Knott the
Jesuit's unjust Censure of him, p. 45. Sutton's Death and Funeral Solemnities,
p. 54. Bishop Hall's incomparable Letter to stir him up to Charity, p. 59. An
Act of Parliament to erect the Hospital at Hallingbury in Essex, p. 69. King
James's Letters Patent to alter the Situation, p. 85. Ecclesiastical
Preserments in the Governor's disposal, p. 87. Simon Baxter, Heir in Law to
the Founder, enters an Action of Trespass against the Governors, p. 88. The
Cas^ ^^atea on both sides, p. 89. Sir Francis Bacon's Letter to King James, to
overthrow the Foundation, p. 96. The Opening of the House, p. 109. An
Establishment made, whereby all the Officers and Members in the House are to be
regulated, p. 110. Concerning Assemblies and Committees, p. 116. The Election
and Duty of a Master, p. 120. Of the Preacher, p. 123. Of the Physician, p.
125. The Register and Solicitor, p. 126. The Receiver, p. 129. The Ma^ciple. p.
130. Schoolmaster and Usher, p. 135. The Auditor, p. 141. Allowances to the
Members, p. 145. A Confirmation of the King's Letters Patent, by an Act of
Parl. for the removal of the Hospital, p. 154. The first List of Governors, p.
70. The names of the present Governors, p. 176. A Patent for a Governor, p.
177. Of the number and nature of the Members maintained, p. 181. The Warrant
for a Pensioner, p. 182. How to obtain a place for an old Man or Youth, p. 189.
A Warrant for a Lad, p. 190. An Account of the increase and present state of
the Revenues of the House, p. 193. The Founder's Will, p. 200. Orders for the
Pensioners, p. 231.
Carthusian monk Ordinis Carthusiani Monachus. F. H. Van. Houe fec


Of the Old FOUNDATION OF THE Charter House.
CHAP. I. An Account of the Rise and Original of the Carthusian Order.
IN the year of our Lord 1082, at what time Gregory the Seventh was Bishop of
Rome, and in the Sixteenth year of the Reign of King William the Conqueror, we
are told there happened in Paris a very strange and wondrous accident: the
Relation whereof I find much after this manner. Bruno a German, born at
Cologne, of an ancient and worthy Family, by his studious life and successful
endeavors, obtained so great a reputation among learned Men, that he was at
length prevailed with to visit France, where he was honorably chosen
Philosophy Professor of the University of Paris: Not long after chancing to be
present at the Funeral Solemnities of one of his dear Friends, a Man, as far as
mortal eye could discern, of a fair and untainted reputation: On a sudden,
whilst they were celebrating the Office for the Dead, and were come to that
part of it, Responde mihi: the Corpse began to move, and raise it self upon the
Bier, and was heard at several distances of time to utter these lamentable
words; I am arraigned at the Bar of God's Justice: my final Sentence is already
past: And I am condemned to Eternal Torments.

It Is easy to imagine what a great Consternation this unexpected Revelation
wrought in the minds of the People; but especially it troubled his familiar and
learned Friend Bruno, who could not but be surpised with grief and melancholy:
thinks he, if so virtuous and religious a man can perish, and be for ever
undone, what must become of me? If my loving and faithful Companion, who was
eminent for Justice and Piety, if so fair a complexion'd Soul scarcely can be
saved, where shall I, who am unrighteous, appear? If the unwelcom sight of one
damned Person so much disturbs all men who behold him; if one single instance
of God's vindictive Justice create so much confusion in our Spirits, then how
painful will be the torments of the lowest Hell, where crowds and throngs,
where an innumerable company of despairing Souls lie panting under the heavy
load of sin, and do in vain echo forth one another fruitless Lamentation? If
the condemnation of another so much concerns and ruffles my discomposed mind,
then what a storm must I expect, when my trial does approach, and punishment
lies at my own door?

After this, or the like conflict with himself, Bruno resolves to alter the
frame and course of his life, and to that end prevails with six more Spectators
to join with him: by name, Laudvinus, two Stephens, Hugo (who was also their
Chaplain) and two Laics, Andrew and Garinus. These seven religiously
determined to retire from the World; to absent themselves from the noise and
hurry of business and tumult, and to seek some convenient place where they
might spend the remainder of their days, in Exercises of Piety and Devotion, in
Corporal Austerities, and in a severe and mortified course of Life. After some
travel they came into the Diocese of Grenoble, to a place called Carthuse, in
the Mountainous parts of a vast Wilderness, whereof they obtaining an
assignation, by the consent of the Bishop they erected a Monastery. The
following Poem was written in Old time by one of their Order, which I here
insert for the satisfaction of the Curious.

Miraculum, quod Instituto huic initium praebuisse dicitur, a quodam Monacho
ita describitur.
SIste viator, and hos oculis percurrito versus,
Mira leges, cuivis exhorrescenda, salutis
Cui sit cura suae, Historia testata fideli;
Fors vitae his ratio melior sumetur agendae.
Anno octogeno supra mill, atque secundo,
Paris^is; Doctor pietatis nomine clarus,
Doctrinaeque simul, moritur: mox funus honor
Justo quo fieret, quisquis celebratior urbe
Tota erat, huc adiit: intentis omnibus una
Funebri officio; defunctus vertice paulum
Sublato e feretro, clara tristique profatur
Voce: "Dei justo sum Judicio accusatus.
Obstupuere animis, oculisque, atque auribus omnes,
Quippe ad inauditum, tamque admirabile monstrum.
Proin statuunt corpus tumulandum luce sequenti,
Qua multo affluxit populus numer osior, orta;
Sollicita attoniti nimirum corda tremore.
Rursum effertur humo condendus mortuus, Ecce
Erecto est sursum capite haec in verba loquutus:
"Justa Dei de me dudum Sententia lata est.
Jam magis atque magis cunctis horrescere mentes,
Corda pavere magis novitatis nescia mirae.
Alterum and usque diem conservandum esse cadaver
Consulto placuit, populus quo consluit omnis:
Indocti, docti, juvenesque, senesque, puellae,
Matronaeque graves, merito rumore stupendo
Exciti, officium jam Funebre tertio adornant.
Stant cuncti, arrectique comas, artusque trementes,
Cum prope putre caput jam attollitur altius, atque
Flebiliter tremula prorupit voce suprumum.
"Justo judicio Christi sum condemnatus.
Demum inopina viri tam docti, tamque probati
Damnati, cunctos valde sententia terret,
Incertos quid agant, desperantesque remittit
Nennullos, multa, aiunt, Judicium Dei abyssus.
Bruno vir eximius Doctrina and Religione,
Consternatus eo, qui omni admirabilis Urbi
Extiterat vivus, qui se quisque alter Olympo
Esse videbatur dignanduc, judice Christo,
Damnato, rationem aliam disquirere vitae
Festinat: comites alii sex se associarunt:
Deserit extemplo populumque, Urbemque frequentem;
Post ad Eremitae casulam devenit, ab illo
Judicii horrorem aeterni qui evadere possit,
Scitatur: mox is respondet verba Prophetae,
"Ecce elongavi fugiens loca sola habitavi,
Omnes unus amor statim succendit Olympi;
Itur ad Hugonem, qui erat inter Episcopus omnes
Unus amore Dei flagrans, populique salutis
Commissi cura, noctesque diesque fatigans.
Quid veniant paucis exponunt ordine verbis,
Secessum votis orant ardentibus aptum.
Multa Dioecesi illius loca inhospita norant,
Desertosque vacare foris habitacula montes.
Audit vota lubens, facilisque precantibus ultro
Una abit in montem, cui adhuc Carthusia nomen,
Viderat is siquidem pridem per somnia Christum,
Aedificare sibi pergratam his montibus aedem:
Seque huc Steliarum septem splendente ducatu
Accersi: proin hic communi protinus aere
Tecta vi^is, Templumque Deo properata locantur.
Hic bonus Hugo a Deo versatur, saepe libensque,
Ut crebro officii monitus discedere, nolens,
Invitus san^, Brunon^ urgente, relictas
Cogatur pasturus oves, ita Sancta placebat
Consuetudo hominum superis devota seorsum.
Jure ergo Duos parili celebramus honor,
Ut Carthusiaci veneranda exordia coetus:
Qui dedit hos versus, saltem hoc mercedis habeto,
Lector uti dicas, pia men's in pace quiescat.
CHAP. II. Of the Rules and Constitution of the Order.
AS soon as ever these seven Pilgrims were entered into the City, Hugh the
Bishop dreams that he saw seven Stars fallen at his feet; which afterward
climbed over diverse Mountains, and then stood still in a certain horrid and
obscure place. At this time it was that they happily arrived at his Palace, and
obtaining leave to confer with him, they discover the intentions of their
journey, and humbly desire the Directions of so great and good a man, for the
prosecution of their designs.

About the distance of ten miles from the City of Grenoble, arises a certain
high Mountain in a wild manner encompass't with Woods and Thickets; which is
called Carthuse, (from whence this Order takes its name, as another does from
Mount Carmel) The ascent to this Hill is so difficult, that it is reckoned an
Emblem of the way to Heaven; so high, so steep it is, and craggy: Nature has
bestowed upon this Monastery a double Entrance, the one is called the
Carthusian Bridge, where two hilly Banks raise themselves to an incredible
height, and join at the top. The other is full of danger and wonders, being a
wearysome and uneasy passage four miles long between two rocky and mountainous
risings. Hither came these seven Converts with much pains and difficulty under
the happy conduct of the aforesaid Bishop; and here was to be the Plantation of
Bruno's Piety and Holiness: The Bishop gravely pronounces En Vester hic locus.
And then they kneel down, and offer up the Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving
to Almighty God.

The Reasons why a Mountain was made choice of, rather than a Valley, to be the
Habitation of this Order, are many: for say they, we are now nearer Heaven:
here the Patriarchs of old did inhabit: when Abram went to Sacrifice, he
ascended the Mountain: and thus did Lot when he escaped the anger of the Lord:
Moses went up to the Mountain to receive the Law: here lived Elias, and the
Sons of the Prophets.

This Mountain they compare to Mount Sinai, because here Bruno gave them their
Rules and Constitution: sometimes to Mount Oreb, for the renown of their Zeal
and Charity: to Seir, because they are fortunate, and have spread over most
parts of Christendom: to Moriah (mons visionis) because there the Holy Father
beheld the Seven Stars: to Mirre (mons amaritudinis) because of their severe
discipline and rigor of life: to Mount Sion, Tabor, and Olivet, etc. These are
the usual Comparisons, chiefly founded upon their Marginal Notes of Humor and
Fancy.

As for the number Seven, it must not pass without some figurative Comment.
These are the Seven Angels with the Seven Trumpets, Rev. 8.6.
to declare War and Destruction to the sinful World. The Seven Steps that were
seen in Ezekiel's Vision; the Seven Candlesticks to enlighten the World; and
lastly the Eyes of the Lamb.

I shall not farther take notice of their playing with this wise number, but
proceed to their Orders.

They are obliged to wear Shirts made of Hair: never to feed upon flesh: on
Fridays to eat nothing but bread and water: to live asunder in particular
Cells; and thither to have their Diet singly brought them: except on some
certain Festival days, when they dine together: not to entertain any Converse
with each other, but upon statutable times: none to go out of the Monastery but
the Superior and Procurator, and they only to solicit the concerns of the
Covent: from this rigorous way of Life, some imagine the name of their Order to
be derived from Caro tusa, now Cartuse, from their Austerities and
Mortification of the Flesh.

Their Habit is a white loose Coat, with a Cowl of the same; but when they go
abroad, they have a Case of black Stuff over it: their Heads are shaved, just
as the Benedictines are: Their particular Cells are low built, and do contain
three or four several Rooms, on the ground-floor only; having behind each of
them a little Garden environed with a high Wall: their Diet is brought to them
by Lay-brothers, and put in at a little Door in the Wall, near the entrance
thereof: unto which there is a Lock, the Key whereof is kept by him that serves
them. At the Hours of Public Prayers they meet in the Quire: Women are not
permitted to come within the Precincts of their Monastery; nor a man to speak
with any of them, without special license given by the Superior. The Lay
Brothers are not shaven, but their Hair on the Head is cut short, and round,
their Habit being the same with the Monks, saving the Scapular; which reaches
but a little below the middle, and is girt close to them.

Which Institution by Bruno was, as Polydore affirms in the Year 1080. but
others, upon better grounds, affirm in 1084. As to their Diurnal and Nocturnal
Offices, they observe the Rule of St. Benedict. As for their Number, they have
not anciently exceeded Thirteen, in any one Convent: they often glory in this
Number upon these Accounts: As first, because it includes the Decalogue and
Trinity: then it bears an allusion to Jacob and his Sons: as also to our
Blessed Savior and his twelve Disciples. This Order frequently I find listed
under the Patronage of St. John the Baptist.

CHAP. III. Of their Transplantation and Number in England.
1. Coenobium Withamense. THey first were brought hither by King Henry the
Second, Anno 1181. and the Seven and twentieth year of his Reign: at which time
he founded a Monastery for them at Witham in Somersetshire; whereof Hugh Bishop
of London was the first Prior. This Convent was founded to the Honor of the
Blessed Virgin, St. John the Baptist, and All Saints. 2. Hentonense. In the
Four and twentieth of Henry the Third, the Lady Ela Countess of Salisbury, at
Henton in Wiltshire. 3. La Salutation Mere Dieu. That at the Charter House. For
this I design a particular Chapter. 4. Beauvaleense. In the time of Edward the
Third, 1343. Nicholas Cantilupe Lord of Ilkeston, founded a Religious House for
Carthusian Friars, at a place called Fair valley in Nottinghamshire. 5.
Coenobium Sanctae Annae. In the Reign of Richard the Second, 1381. we find
another founded by William de la Souche, called the Monastery of St. Anne near
Coventry. 6. Kingstonense. In the same Kings Reign Michael de la Pool, Lord of
Wingfield, Founded another of these Convents at Kingston upon Hull in
Yorkshire, 1378. 7. Mont-Gracense. In the time of Richard the Second, Thomas de
Holland, Duke of Surrey, Earl of Kent, and Lord of Wake, founded another at a
place called Mount-grace in Yorkshire: And dedicated it to the Assumption of
the Mother of God* 8. Eppeworthense. At Eppeworth, beyond the Isle of Axiholme
in Lincolnshire, was erected the fourth Carthusian Monastery of this King's
Reign, wherein they did most flourish: it was built for the Honor of the
Visitation of the Mother of God. 9. Sheenense. Anno Dom. 1514. Henry the Eighth
erected the last Monastery of the Carthusians hard by his own Manor House
Sheen, in the County of Surrey, and called it, The House of Jesus of Bethlehem
of Sheen.


CHAP. IV. Of the Charter House, or Carthusian Monastery near Smithfield.
With an Account of the particular occasion, and Author of the Foundation.
THE Founder hereof was the brave and renowned Man at Arms, Sir Walter de
Manny, Lord of the same place, and born in the Diocese of Cambray, now one of
the Seventeen United Provinces: He was first Banneret, and then made by King
Edward the Third the 46th. Ashmole Inst. Gart.
Knight of the Garter; (not as Speed, one of the Founders) His Arms three
Cheverons Sable, the Field Or.

I shall begin with the first mention of him in our Chronicles, and so trace
him down to this his Noble and Magnificent Benefaction.

Edv. 3. Anno 11o. He was sent Ambassador to the French King; which was no
mean Employment for him, either as he was a Gentleman or a Stranger: In this
Voyage he courageously lands his men on the Isle of Agnes, on purpose to
revenge the Death of some English men, who not long before were slain by the
Inhabitants, when they came for fresh water: Here he made a general slaughter;
and takes the Earl of Flanders his Brother, Captain of the Island, Prisoner.

His next martial performance, was in company of Henry Earl of Derby, Duke of
Lancaster, into Gascoign and Guyen: where these two only attended with Five
hundred men at Arms, and some few Archers, did mighty things, vanquished the
Enemy, and recovered many walled Towns and Castles.

It chanced that the Countess of Montfort, Sister to Louis Earl of Flanders,
like an undaunted Virago, put on Armor, and leads and encourages her People,
to repel the common Foe: She desires aid of the King of England, and has it
granted under the conduct of no less a man, than the Lord Walter de Manny: Not
long after, the King himself fighting with the French, that he might not be
known in Person, puts himself and the Prince under the Colors and Defense of
the same Invincible Warrior. This may suffice for a small description of his
Strength and Valor, I shall now proceed to the occasion of this singular
Instance of his Piety and Beneficence.

He lived in an Age wherein all things seemed as wonderful as himself: Ann.
1345. on the Conversion of St. Paul, a great Earthquake shook Germany,
wherewith many Villages and Castles fell down, likewise Stones mixed with Rain
fell out of the Air: Moreover, the same day many public and private Houses
fell at Venice: afterward the Earth was shaken more or less fifteen days:
whereof it happened that almost all Women with Child were delivered before their
time. And after this a noysom Pestilence (called Inguinaria) invaded the
People; the venom of the Disease was so deadly, that scarce one in an hundred
escaped alive. It began first in Scythia, there raged along the Coasts of the
Sea Pontus and Hellespont; at length through Greece and Illyria, it came into
Italy.

1346. A great Vapor coming from the North-part, to the great fear of the
Beholders, was seen in the Air, and fell on the Earth. And the same year
certain small Beasts in great number fell from the Element in the East; through
whose corruption and stench there ensued a great Plague, which for three years
reigned over the whole World: First creeping into Asia, from India; was
vehement in England, Florence, Germany, and all Europe: The Jews were thought
guilty of it, by poisoning Fountains, and therefore they were burned every
where.

1349. The Eighth of the Calends of Febr. in Noricum, on that side it is joined
with Pannonia, Illyrium, Dalmatia, Carinthia, and Istria; there was a great
Earthquake in the Evening, which lasted forty days: Six Cities and Castles were
overthrown, and swallowed up. In London the Plague was so vehement, that in a
place called Charter-house-yard, were buried of the better sort of People Sixty
thousand, says Cambden in his Britannia. (Middlesex. p. 311.

Ibi floruit opulenta Carthusianorum aedes a Gualtero Manny Hannonio posita:
Qui summa cum laud sub Edv. 3. bello Gallico meruit: Celeberrimumque fuit eo
loco ante Caemeterium, in quo grassante peste, 1349. Londino sepulta fuerunt
plusquam quinquaginta hominum millia, quod inscriptione ibi in aere p^steris
fuit testatum.

In this dismal time it pleased God to stir ^p the heart of this Noble Knight
to have respect to the danger that might fall, in the time of this Pestilence,
then begun in England, if the Churches and Churchyards in London might not
suffice to bury the multitude: Wherefore he purchased a piece of ground near
St. John's street, called Spittle-Croft, without the Bars in West-Smithfield,
of the Master and Brethren of St. Bartholomew Spittle, containing Thirteen
Acres and a Rod, and caused the same to be Enclosed and Consecrated by Ralph
Stratford Bishop of London, at his own proper Cost and Charges. In which place
in the year following ( Stow reports) were buried more than Fifty thousand
Persons, as is affirmed by the King's Charter, and by this following
Inscription which he read upon a Stone Cross, sometime standing in the
Charter-house-yard.

An. Dom. M. CCC. XL. IX.
Regnante magna Pestilentia consecratum fuit hoc coemeterium, In quo, and infra
septa praesentis Monasterii, sepulta fuerunt mortuorum corpora plusquam
quinquaginta millia: praeter alia multa abhinc usque ad praesens, Quorum
animabus propitietur Deus. Amen.

Here, not long after, he caused a Chapel to be built, wherein Offerings were
made, and Masses said for the Souls of so many Christians departed. And
afterward, Ann. 1371. he founded an House of Carthusian Monks, which he built
in Honor of the Salutation of the Mother of God, as may be seen at large in
the King's Charter, and the Pope's Bull, which I have annexed.

This Pestilent Disease continued in one place or another, till the Year 1357.
at which cessation the Bishop of Norwich, the Earl of Northampton, Earl of
Stafford, Sir Richard Talbot, and Sir Walter de Manny, sailed over into France
to make a Peace, which they did for a year only.

But after many long and happy years, when the Prince of Wales, eldest Son to
Edward the Third, died at Bourdeaux, the Prince with his Wife, and other Son
Richard, came over into England, then in the year 1371. died our worthy Hero
at London, and was buried in the Monastery of the Chartreux, which he had
built, leaving behind him only one Daughter, married to John Earl of Pembroke.

Thus departed the generous Soul of this pious Founder, thus he desired to
sleep in peace among his Carthusians in the Fields, (as (...) M. ss. terms them
in the Cott. Libr.) and left such a Monument of his Bounty to Posterity, that I
suppose it no Crime to make this Honorable mention of Him: For at the
Dissolution of Religious Houses, this was valued at Six hundred forty two
pounds four pence half penny. If any person be offended at what is said,
because he lived in a dark and gloomy Age, I refer him to the Preface of that
great Man Cambden, in his Britannia.

Sunt, ut audio, qui Monasteria and eorum Fundatores a me memorari indignantur:
dolentu^ audio, sed cum bona illorum gratia dixerim: iidem indignentur, imo
forsan oblivisci velint and majores nostros Christianos fuisse, and nos esse:
cum non alia Christianae eor um pietatis, and in Deum devotionis certiora, and
illustriora uspiam extiterint monumenta: nec alia fuere plantaria, unde
Christiana Religio, and bonae literae apud nos propagentur, utcunque saeculo
corrupto averruncanda filix in illis plus nimio succreverit. CHAP. V. Of their
Fabulous Miracles.
AS we ought not to detract from the Good Works and Piety of our Forefathers;
so likewise we are as much obliged to avoid the Snares and Superstitious
Fancies wherewith they were entangled: therefore here I intend fairly to lay
down some of their dear and profitable Miracles in the same form and Character
as I find them registered by themselves.

Peter Suitor is so mightily taken with all the Circumstances of this Order,
that he gave himself the trouble to write a large History of his Brethren.

O heavenly and miraculous Carthusians! whose Dormitory or Cell, is a
representation of Noah's Ark, which rested upon the top of Ararat! This is the
Ark of the Testament, wherein is not only contained, but practiced too, all the
Ten Commandments!

It Is manners to begin first with the Founder of their Order, and give him his
share of Miracles, whither true or false let the Reader judge.

Bruno was scarce cold in his Grave, before his dead Corpse showed more Virtue
than the living Man, for hard by his blessed Tomb, a rare Medicinal Spring
appears, which has power to cure all manner of Distempers: This is
methodically recorded for the Fountain of Health, and of all the succeeding
Miracles.

In the days of Guigo, the Fifth Carthusian Prior, happened this following
Mirac^e: When a very devout Brother of this Convent (his Name is modestly
concealed) in the dead time of a Tempestuous Night, lay in his bed thoughtful
and serious, meditating on things above, a throng of Devils, in the shape of
grisly Boars and wild Hoggs, rush violently into his Cell, and there make a
hideous and frightful noise, standing all around the panting and almost
expiring Saint, preparing their keen and monstrous Teeth to rend and devour
him: you must imagine that the honest Friar fell to his Beads, tumbled over his
Conjuring Ave Maria's, and cross't himself all over, to save every Limb and
Member; (alas! the most senseless and vain preparation for another World) this
would not do, for another rough and ghastly Demon, of a large and unwonted
size enters the Room with cruel State, with all the Pomp and Formalities of
Death: (the Historian supposes he was Lucifer) This formidable Fiend, with
flaming Eyes viewing his Herd of Infernal Swine, not yet having seized upon
their Prey, he thus rebukes them with a terrible voice, Quid facitis segnes?
cur istum necdum rapuistis miseri? in frusta cur nondum discerpsistis? But when
they plead want of power to effect the Contents of their Commission; he adds, I
my self, the Black Prince of Darkness, will perform that work which your
Cowardice could not accomplish: Then rashly unsheathing his black and murdering
Talons, he draws near, and with a barbarous grin, discovers a double rank of
bloody Executioners: yet before the trembling Friar could be in the pounces of
the Bird of Prey, Lo the Blessed Virgin darts like Lightning from her abode in
Heaven, to rescue Her Carthusian Darling and Devotee: entering the Cell, she
brandishes her white Wand, gives the Word, and they all are compelled to repair
to the Shades beneath: Then after a holy Exhortation, that he should persevere,
and live more rigidly, she, like one of the Poetical Goddesses* arduum repeti^t
Olympum.

If these Stories are swallowed, and go down glibly, then the next shall have a
dash of Design and Profit: Now for Prayers for the Dead, and Invocation of
Saints.

This same Carthusian piously undertakes to instruct a young Man in the
Doctrine and Principles of Christianity, to the eternal good and salvation of
his Soul: nothing could be more good and innocent, nothing more flexible and
towardly than this small Disciple, so that it pleased God to think him fit for
Heaven, and to take him to himself: the loss of so pretty and sweet a Companion
could not but disquiet the Religious Tutor. He prays and macerates himself with
self denial and rigid discipline; his grief so far increast upon him, that the
good natured Lad took compassion of his old melancholy Master. He descends from
his Habitation above, wrapped up in a flame of Light, and thus revives his
fainting mind; O most kind and loving Father, what ails thee? don't look so
cloudy and mopish: do not you know that I am your Foster-child? look upon me
and talk with me as you used to do: Thus much comfort I can impart unto you,
that, if you enquire concerning my present state and condition, your chaste
love, your undeserved compassion, the virtue of your frequent and earnest
Prayers have lifted me up into Heaven: And now I am settled in that Condition
wherein I can repay all your Spiritual cares, now I am in a capacity to be
beneficial to you: And so he vanished.

Now, lest single Miracles should prove a sign of Barrenness, take a whole
Cluster together.

One Anceline, a Member of the same Order, after death trebles the wonder.

First of all, when they were burying this precious Saint, when all things
appeared mournful and solemn, a sudden flash of heavenly flame kindled all the
Lamps of the Church (which were only lighted on great days) and made a most
brave and glorious show.

Not long after a Noble youth, who was troubled with an Ague and the
Falling Sickness, was perfectly cured by drinking the Wine with which his dead
Body was cleansed: This would hardly have been swallowed, without a good
draught. Nay, they affirm that the very Cup retained its juggling Virtue a great
while.

At last, this Anceline had so perfectly learned his trade of Wonder-working,
that he could forestall the Resurrection. For when a young Child, three years
old, was by an unhappy accident drowned, the Parents immediately bring him to
this most famous Sepulcher, by the virtue of which he is revived, snatches up a
Staff in his hands, bow's civilly like a good Boy, and away he marches.

Pray now let England come in for a share, shall our first Carthusian Prior dye
ingloriously, and be buried in dull silence? Vous Avez: Hugo Prior of Witham
(afterward Bishop of Lincoln) was not there attending on thy Funeral two
Kings, many Earls, three Archbishops, fourteen Bishops, one hundred Abbots,
and Miracles Innumerable? So, so; enough for one Man. Yet France would fain
have robbed us of the Virtue of this Saint, by placing his Statue near the Walls
of Paris, which ruined all the Physicians in France, by curing all sick Persons
who passed by.

Now for a Trial of Skill more than ordinary. I would not give a Farthing for
him, if he were not Master of his Art; if he could not lay the Spirits he has
raised; if he cannot, like the Philosopher, dismiss the Magnetical Troops, by
rubbing his Steel upon the contrary Pole: The Scene opens.

There chanced to dye a certain Carthusian Friar, a man of so much holiness and
integrity of Life, that Miracles grew as thick about his Tomb, as the Briars
and Thistles which Alexander found about that of Achilles; he performed so many
Miracles after his death, by curing the blind and the lame, as many Distempers
as a Bill of Mortality contains: Insomuch that it proved to be of a very bad
Consequence; for there was so great a conflux of People, and they so
importunate to enter, that the Convent had but little time to serve God in, and
perform the Rules of their Order. Upon which account, one Janceline, the Tenth
Prior of Cartuse, undertakes to lay this inconvenient and troublesome Spirit,
after this manner: These are the words.

In virtute Sanctae Obedientiae praecipio, Fili, ut eam, quam vivus obedientiam
observasti, etiam nunc exhibeas, nec miraculum amplius ullum deinceps facere
praesumas. It seems the busy Imp was but an ordinary Member in the Fraternity,
and therefore was bound to his Canonical Obedience.

One Tornerius Johannes, upon the complaint of a Countryman, that he had
unadvisedly cast some Writings of concern into the Fire, bid him go to the
Flames, and take them up again whole and entire; and commanded him withal to
tell no man of the Miracle: And the Profane Historian adds, But he spread it so
much the more.

Now listen to a visible Stretcher;

A certain young Man at Mentz in Germany, being a while upon trial in a
Carthusian Convent, dislik't it, and resolved to leave the Order, and return to
his Secular Condition: But before he left them, he thought it convenient to pay
his Adoration to the Blessed Virgin; as he was taking his Farewell, the Picture
was visibly seen to whirl round, and turn its back in disdain upon the
Apostatized Novice: These are his words;

Cum autem quasi extremum valedicturus eam salutaret, Imago ipsa visibiliter se
regyrans, suum conspicienti Novitio dorsum vertit. Carthusiense Coenobium in
Suburbio Londinensis Civitatis, La Salutation More Dieu, nuncupatum. Licentia
Edvardi tertii de Fundatione ejusdem.
Rex omnibus ad quos, etc. Salutem.
Vol. 1. Monast. Anglic. page 961.
SCiatis, quod de Gratia nostra special; concessimus and Licentiam dedimus pr^
nobis and Haeredibus nostris, quantum in nobis est, Dilecto and Fideli nostro
Waltero Domino de Manny Militi, quod Ipse and soli suo proprio, viz. in quodam
loco extra Barram de West-Smithfield, London, vocat. New cherche hawe, quod
quidem solum de nobis non tenctur in capite, quandam demum Monachorum Ordinis
Cartusiensis, viz. de quodam Priore and certis Monachis ibidem, La Salutation
de Mere Dieu, in honor Dei and B. Mariae Virginis Fundare, and 20 acres terrae
cum pertinentiis de sol^ praedicto, una cum quadam Capella and aliis Domibus
supra terram praedictam aedificatis, dare possit and assignare praefatis Priori
and Monachis, and Successoribus suis pro inhabitatione sua ibidem facienda, ad
Missas, Orationes, and alia Divina Servitia, pro salubri statu nostro, and
ipsius Walteri and Margaretae Uxoris ejus, dum vixerimus; and pro anima nostra,
and pro animabus Progenitorum and Haeredum nostrorum: nec non animabus eorundem
Walteri and Margaretae, Antecessorum, and Haeredum suorum, cum ab hac luce
abstracti fuerimus, and animabus Aliciae de Henaud, and Michaelis Northburgh,
nuper Episcopi Londinensis, ac omnium Benefactorum ipsius Walteri, and omnium
Fidelium defunctorum in Capella, and domibus praedictis juxta Ordinationem
ipsius Walteri inde faciendam, celebrandas, and faciendas in perpetuum.

T. Rege.
Apud Westminster. 6. die Febr.
Bulla VRBANI Papae.
Urbanus Episcopus Servus Servorum Dei, Ex autographo in Curia Augment.
Dilectis Filiis, Priori, and Conventui novae Domus, Matris Dei, prope
Londonias, Ordiins Cartusiensis, Salutem and Apostolicam benedidictionem.
EXhibita nobis pro vestra part petitio continebat, quod dudum faelicis
recordationis Clementi Papae Sexto, Praedecessori nostro, exposito, quod
quondam Walterus de Manny Miles, Cameracensis Dioecesis, tempore quo mortalitas
hominum vigebat in partibus Anglicanis, locum, seu fundum quendam prope
Londonias acquisiverat, quem de licentia Ordinarii, in Coemeterium pro
sepultura Pauperum, dedicari, and capellam in eodem fundo aedificari fecerat,
opere sumptuoso: in quo Collegium 12 capellanorum, and unius qui praesset
iisdem, ordinare de bonis propriis, and sufficienter dotare disposuerat; ac
eidem Praedecessori supplicato, ut eidem militi fundandi and dandi Licentiam
hujusmodi concedere dignaretur: Idem Praedecessor Episcopo Cantuariensi, and
Episcopo Londinensi, non expressis nominibus, vel eorum alteri, dando per suas
Literas Facultatem, Collegium juxta Ordinationem utriusque, vel alterius
ipsorum, de Perpetuis Capellanis, vel Ministris usque ad dictum vel alium
minorem numerum, prout eidem militi videretur; ac Persona, quae eidem Collegio
praeesset faciendum in dicta Capella, fundandi tamen dote sufficienti dictae
Capellae, de bonis ipsius militis, primitus assignata, jure Parochialis
Ecclesiae, and cujuslibet alterius semper salvo, ad Instantiam ejusdem militis
duxerat concedendum. Ac Insuper uniendi, ea vice eidem Collegio instituto prius
and dotato, tria Beneficia Ecclesiastica in Regno Angliae consistentia, quorum
fructus centum librarum sterlingorum summam, secundum taxationem decimae, non
excederunt, ad cujuscunque Patronatum spectantia, Patronorum ad id consensu
accedente, prout in iisdem Literis ejusdem Praedecessoris before continetur:
Et demum prout eadem Petitio subjungebat, bonae memoria Michael Episcopus
Londinensis and idem Miles, praedicto Collegio nondum instituto, Conventum
duplicem Monachorum Ordinis Cartusiensis in loco praedicto mutato proposito
dicti Militis, fundaverunt. Quare nobis humiliter supplicare fecistis quatenus
iisdem Archiepiscopo and Episcopo, similem uniendi domui seu conventui vestro
Beneficia Ecclesiastica cum cur a, vel sine cur a, ad summam ducentarum
librarum Sterlingorum, secundum taxationem Decimae ascendentia, in dicto Regno
consistentia; ad quorumcunque etiam Laicorum patronatus pertineant, dummodo
Patronorum ad id accedat assensus, and ipsa Beneficia dictam summam non
excedant, facultatem concedere dignaremur: Nos igitur, vestris in hac part
Supplicationibus inclinati, Venerabili Fratri Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi
uniendi hac vice, duntaxat authoritate Apostolica, Ecclesias Parochiales, seu
Beneficia Ecclesiastica, ad quorumcunque, etiam Laicorum, Patronatus
pertinentia, dummodo Patronorum ad id accedat assensus, and jus Patronatus post
Unionem vobis remaneat, ac eorum fructus, Redditus, and Proventus ducentarum
librarum Sterlingorum secundum taxationem decimae, valorem annuum non excedant,
dictosque Priorem and Conventum, vel Procuratores suos e rum nomine, post
unionem hujusmodi, cedentibus vel decedentibus Rectoribus ipsorum, and
Beneficiorum, qui tunc fuerint, vel alias Beneficia ipsa quomodocumque
dimittentibus; in Beneficiorum ac jurium, ac pertinentiarum praedictorum
corporalem possessionem inducendi, and defendendi Inductos, amotis quibuslibet
detentoribus ab iisdem, ac faciendi ipsis Priori and Conventui, de ipsorum
Beneficiorum Fructibus, redditibus, proventibus, congruas portiones ad ipsius
Archiepiscopi vel Ordinarii arbitrium, (super quo ipsius Archiepiscopi and
Ordinarii conscientiam oneramus, taxandas; ex quibus si sint Ecclesiae
Parochiales, perpetui^l icarii per Priorem, qui erit pro tempore, and conventum
dictae domus, ad Beneficia eadem praesentandi, commode sustentari, jura
Episcopalia solvere, and alia iis incumbentia onera sustentare: Contradictores
Authoritate nostra, appellatione postposita, compescendo, non obstantibus si
aliquis super provisionibus sibi faciendis de hujusmodi vel aliis Beneficiis
Ecclesiasticis in illis partibus, Speciales vel Generales, Apostolicae Sedis,
vel Legatorum ejus Literas impetravit, estamsi per eas ad inhibitionem,
reservationem, and decretum, vel alias quomodolibet, sit processam: Quas
Literas and Processus habttos, and quos per eos post unionem hujusmodi habert
conttgerit, ad dicta Beneficia volumus extendi. Sed nullum per hoc iis quoad
assecutionem aliorum beneficiorum praejudicium generari and quibuslibet
Privilegits, Indulgentiis. and Literis Apostolicis, Generalibus vel
Specialibus, quorumcunque tenerum existant, per quae praesentibus non expressa,
vel totaliter non inserta effectus earum impediri valeat quom ^olibet, vel
differri, and de quibus quorumque totis tenoribus habenda sit in Literis
nostris mentis specialis, plenam and liberam tenore praesentium potestatem
concedimus.

Datum Romae. Apud Sanctam Marinum trans Tyberim pridie Idus Decembris,
Pontificatus nostri Anno primo.
An Account of Sutton's Foundation, with his Life and Death.
THOMAS SUTTON Esquire, Founder of King James his Hospital in the
Charter House, was born at Knaith in Lincolnshire, in the year of our Lord
1531. which was the Four and twentieth year of Henry the Eighth.

Though he was born, rather to give Honor to his Family, than to borrow any
from it; yet his Blood was conveyed to him through many noble Saxon Veins, in
Cheshire, Lancashire, and Worcestershire: For, notwithstanding the Danish and
the Norman Conquests, yet in the time of the latter, we find one of this Family
Sherif in those Parts, a Person of a fair and honorable esteem in the World:
And this advantage a Man well descended has above all others, unless he
degenerate, that the Great Actions of his Ancestors will not let him sleep
until he has outdone the Original.

The Course of this Ancient Family (like the River Alpheus) a while ran
silently under Ground, while at last it sprang up in Lincolnshire, in the time
of Henry the Seventh, under Dudley, as notorious for Cruelty and Exactions, as
our Founder is for Mercy and Compassion.

His Father was Edward Sutton, Son of Thomas Sutton, Servant to Edward the
Fourth. His Mother was Jane Stapleton, the Daughter of Robert Stapleton
Esquire, of the most Generous and Worthy Family of the Stapleton's in
Yorkshire. Ancestors, not so low, that his Descent should be a shame to his
Virtues; nor yet so great, but that his Virtue might be an Ornament to his
Birth.

Mr. Cox (afterward Dr. Cox, Almoner to King Edward the Sixth, and Bishop of
Ely under Queen Elizabeth) brought him up three years at Eaton, four years in
Magdalen and Jesus Colleges in Cambridge; to each of whose Children, surviving
at his Death, Mr. Sutton gave 10 l. for a Legacy: and as a thankful
Acknowledgment of the Benefits he received from those places of good Learning,
he nobly bequeathed 500 to each College.

Soon after he was placed in Lincolns-Inne, as a Student, that he might want no
part of Learning becoming a Gentleman. Not long after, almost tired with a
Sedentary life, desire of Travel increasing with his Knowledge, he went to
visit Foreign Nations, and obtained the perfection of several Languages.

Half of a year he tarries in Spain, two in Italy, one in France, and then he
passes into Holland, and the Low Countries; from whence, after a year or two
spent in the Italian Wars (for he was at the Sacking of Rome, under the Duke of
Bourbon) he returned, accomplished with experience and observation: Then he was
admitted to the Earl of Warwick and the Earl of Leicester's service. To the
former he was a Steward, to the latter a Secretary; and to both he approved
himself so able and faithful, that they declared him fit for more Public
Employments: as after appeared by their helping him to Farm the Northern
Coalmines, and that upon no other Security than his own Word.

He was quickly spied out by his wise and noble Sovereign Queen Elizabeth (one,
who knew where to bestow her Favors, and who deserved her Bounty) by her he
was made Master of the Ordnance at Barwick, which Office he enjoyed Fourteen
years; in token whereof there are two Pieces of Ordnance carved in Stone, and
set upon the Chimney-piece, in the great Hall in the Charter House.

Then he was chosen Play Master to the Northern Army; and afterward one of the
Commissioners for the Sequestration of the Lands of the Northern Rebels: in
opposition to whom, he showed himself a wise Man in disposing so advantageously
of the Berwick Forces: And a valiant Man in his Actions and Conduct.

Some years after he became Victualler to the Navy, and some Garrisons in the
Low Countries; one of which was Ostend, which, by the help of some Fishermen,
he relieved very strangely, and to his own great Advantage: to which Town he
left in his Will 100 l.

Lastly, he was a Commissioner for Prizes, under the Earl of Nottingham, Lord
High Admiral of England, who gave him Letters of Mart against the Spaniard,
from whom he took a Ship richly laden, worth Twenty thousand pounds.

Having by these profitable Imploys laid the Foundation of a good Estate, upon
some misunderstanding between him and the Northern Nobility, he retires to
London, to enjoy and improve it; where his Riches increased, and came upon him
like a Tide, by the just Arts and Methods which he used.

He brought with him to London the Reputation of a mighty monied Man, insomuch
that it was reported, That his Purse returned from the North fuller than Queen
Elizabeth's Exchequer: (here he was made a Freeman, Citizen, and Girdler of
London.)

His Payments were thought as sure as her Pensions; the readiness of his money,
and the fairness of his dealing, laid the grounds of a mighty Reputation; for
now he is looked upon by all men, he has the first refusal of the best
Bargains, of Sales, and Mortgages, which were more frequent in a dead time of
Money, as that was. Here possibly he got acquaintance with several Lords
Servants, whom he remembers in his last Will, and piously relieves them.

He was also resorted to by Citizens for money; and indeed Mr. Sutton became the
Banker of London: being called upon so much, that he was persuaded to help
others too, in the putting out of their money. Once he thought of setting up a
Bank in London, like that in Amsterdam; where People might take up money, at so
moderate an Interest, as should not eat out their Labor, nor waste the heart
and life of Trade, by making the care, pains, and ingenuity of the Borrower,
sweat, and toil, for the sole benefit of the Lender: Therefore he lodged a 100
l. in some honest men's hands to lend to poor people, weekly or monthly, by
small sums upon good pawns, while he lived; and when he dyed, he left 1000 l.
to the Chamber of London, to be yearly lent to Ten young Tradesmen without
Use. Besides, he ordered his Executors to abate half a years Interest to all
his Debtors, when they called in his money.

Thus did this great Man wax rich and known, which made him to some evil-minded
persons, the object of Envy: and he finds not the Shadow of that Charity in the
World, which he showed in Substance and Reality.

Some urge that he served himself too much upon the hopes many had entertained
of being his Heirs: by receiving those Gifts, which some covetous Friends,
miserunt in hamo, by easily purchasing those Lands which they expected should
return with Interest. I do not understand the unreasonable presumption of men,
to name and adopt themselves their Neighbors Heirs, and, if they confirm it
not, they shall be branded with Injustice: The Wisdom of the Serpent is as well
required, as the Innocence of the Dove. He that strives to outreach his Friend,
is justly caught in his own Snares.

Others strongly believe he was the Subject of Ben. Johnson's mirth: Which (if
it were true) is no real Scandal to this good Man, when all things just and
honorable, sacred and of good report, are shamefully exposed to the lewd
affronts of a bold and licentious Stage. Besides, it is probable the Poet never
intended what they think. For in that Age several other men were pointed at,
and who was the true Person, was then a matter of doubt. If the Poet designed
to injure the Fame of Sutton, he was first of all an ungrateful Wretch, to
abuse those hands which afforded him Bread, for he allowed him a constant
Pension: And secondly, he disowned his very Handwriting, which he sent to our
Founder, in Vindication of himself in this matter.

In the late unhappy times, another sort of Enemy appears, and will hardly
suffer this pious Benefactor to lie quiet in his Grave: The Revenue made a
great noise, and proved something melodious to the ears of the commanding
Party; therefore they endeavor to find out a way to subvert the House,
Foundation and all. No better Plea than the old Popular Argument (used before
against his Sacred Majesty Charles the First, of ever blessed memory) Popery,
Popery: It Is presently whispered about, That Sutton dyed a Papist; That the
House was built upon naughty, Popish ground; That all the Walls were full of
Tapers and Crosses; That it was designed to Jesuitical ends and Purposes; That
there was a great Vault underneath, which reached almost to Islington, and (for
ought they knew) it might be full of Powder and Malignants, Plots and
Superstition, all conspiring against the Good Old Cause.

At this time, Edward Cresset Master of the Hospital, by his Interest in that
Party, interposed, and laid that storm, for which he received public Thanks
from the Lords the Governors, Anno 1660.

This Freak hardly deserves consideration, especially proceeding from that sort
of men. Mr. Sutton was too well known for this Project to take effect: He was
an Honest and Religious Protestant, constant and exemplary upon all occasions
at the Public Service of God, regular and strict in Family Duties, accustomed
to Prayer, reading the Scriptures, and very solicitous in his choice of a Holy
and Learned Chaplain: His thoughts were usually Heavenward; in his
Ejaculations frequently desiring God, That as he had bountifully blessed him
with a plentiful Estate, so he would be pleased to direct him in the disposal
of it. This he has been often overheard to say, walking in his Garden. His
Thoughts were not only Divine, but his usual Company were Ministers of God's
Word; for there is no Writing scarce of his, to which there is not the hand of
a Divine or two: Or else he visited the Fatherless and Widows, the Impotent and
Indigent, and in a great measure kept himself unspotted from the World.

Now that which seems most wonderful is this, That men professing the
Protestant Religion, should endeavor to pull down one of the greatest
Monuments of the Reformed Religion, it being the common Argument whereby we use
to prevent the Papists extravagant Relations of Good Works.

Had he been a Red-letter Man, Mr. Knott the Jesuit (in his Answer to Dr.
Potter's Book, called Charity Mistaken) would never have vented this following
Reproach: But he must be crucified between these two:

Do your Hospitals deserve so much as to be named? Have you any thing of that
kind, in effect, of particular note? saving the few mean Nurseries of idle
Beggars, and debauched People; except Sutton 's Hospital, which (as I have been
informed) was to receive no profit, till his death: who also dyed without
Children, Brother, Sister, or known Kindred; so that per adventure, it was
escheated to the King, etc. At length he says, He could tell us of the
Annunciata at Naples, which spends Three hundred thousand Crowns, viz. above
Eight thousand pounds, per Annum, feeds and cures One thousand sick persons;
Nurses and entertains Three thousand Sucking-children, etc. Then he gives a
hint of another famous Hospital in Rome, called Sancto Spirito. To both which
Instances Mr. Fuller does as reproachfully reply, by saying, That the Infamous
Disease of Naples might well cause the erection of so mighty a Structure; and
as for that at Rome, the wonderful plenty of unlawful Issues, Children basely
born, did require so great a Receptacle.

I question not but both are too blame for where ever we find any sparks of
goodness and piety, though they lodge in the breast of a Turk or Jew, Papist or
Protestant, yet it is but common Justice to afford every man his due praise.

It Is easy also to discover the Jesuit's mistakes: for first Mr. Sutton
intended to reside upon his Benefaction, as Master of it; though it pleased God
sooner to take him to himself, to admit him into the Land of Promise.

Then his Kindred were known far and near, for Simon Baxter, Son of his Sister
Dorothy, endeavored to overthrow the Settlement of the Estate, as being next
Heir in Law; as after may be seen at large.

His other Objections concerning penuriousness, shall be answered in another
place. Here now I could to purpose recriminate, but that I am sensible it is
disingenuous and uncharitable; and widens the Breaches of Christendom.

Let the froward World endeavor to defame and calumniate, to bespatter all
that is good and laudable; yet certainly, we ought to rise up in the
Vindication of him, who taught us to speak, to proclaim his Charity by which we
live; to commend that Temperance, which affords us affluence and plenty; to
admire his Self-denial, who was to do little less than a Miracle, to feed a
Multitude.

There are few such Usurers who design to receive their interest in Heaven; few
such Benefactors, whose comprehensive Bounty embraces all Mankind, from the
Cradle almost, to the grayest Head; from the tender and helpless Youth, to the
most Impotent and Infirm old Age.

Had our Founder gained that by unlawful Usury, which he disposed to pious uses
(which is a sin almost to suppose, unless we had evidence) yet Restitution is
the best sign, and the greatest testimonial of sincere Repentance; and where
particular Restitution cannot be made to the parties wronged, God requires it
should be given to relieve the poor.

Thus Zacheus, Luke 19.8. upon his Repentance and Conversion, made an Overture
of Restoration to all that he had wronged, nay fourfold, and gave half of his
Estate to Souls that were in want; this is recorded for our Example.

But this Accusation can lay no hold on Mr. Sutton; for his Estate was gotten
by Trade and Offices, and never laid out for Interest until his years
admonished him to quit his business, and leave it for younger and more active
people, who could not undertake it unless he lent them money: and what Injury
did he to any man to let him have that at 6 l. per Cent. which he was able to
improve to 30 or 40 per Cent. Besides in his latter time his money was chiefly
laid out upon Annuities.

It was observed, that when he lent money, he would enquire how it was spent,
and if he found that it was laid out for Necessaries, Food, and Raiment, he
never could be persuaded to take any Use. No doubt but he rose by the Steps of
Thrift and Frugality, by being diligent in a lawful Calling; nor was he
Prodigal because he intended to be Magnificent.

Observe this Story which is told of his Parsimony: Whilst he was busied in
Foreign Trade and Commerce with other Nations, he contracted a Familiar
Acquaintance with a Merchant, his Companion in Travel; who, though he did equal
Sutton in Trade, yet had not so well learned the Elements of Thrift: For when
on a Journey, he called for his Pint of Wine, Sutton called for a Gill: and for
every other Liquor doubled the Quantity. At length this Merchant dies, and by
Computation leaves an Estate of Fifty thousand pounds; which Report coming to
Sutton's Ears, he said, Alas! I always pitied him, I thought he would dye no
rich man.

This was, in the person of his Friend, to correct the Surfets and
Extravagancies of a Profuse Age: For a rich man is no way happier than another
man, but that he has more Opportunities ministered unto him of doing more good
than his Neighbors. Therefore Diogenes ask't of the Thrifty man but a half
penny, of the Prodigal a pound; the former, he said, might give him often, but
the latter would shortly have nothing to give. Good Husbandry is the fuel of
Liberality. He chose rather to deny himself in his Superfluities, to retrench
vain Expenses, that he might be able to refresh others in their day of sorrow;
not to rake from others wants, that he might riot, and rejoice in their
miseries.

The Fame and Credit of our Generous Founder, brought him to share in many
Offices at the Court, and at the Custom-house, where they had occasion for his
money: for when an Industrious man has once raised his Fortunes to a
considerable pitch, he there grows rich apace, by sharing in the constant
Labors of many of the under sort of men.

He was a sharer in several public Farms, a Partner in Foreign Adventures,
especially in Muscovy and Hamburgh; insomuch that he had no less than Thirty
Agents abroad.

Thus he toiled and wrought, as if he coveted all; and gave away, and he
desired nothing: He looked upon himself a^ if he desired Steward of the Great
God, thriving, as all should, not for himself but others: unwilling to lavish,
what he could spare from his own occasions, on Pride or Ambition, the Luxury
and Vanity of a trifling World, when God appointed it, to be the Portion of his
Fellow Creatures.

Mr. Sutton, according to the Methods of Wise men, who mean to be wealthy,
appointed his Ordinary Expenses to be but half of his Incomes, when they were
at the lowest; and when they increased he ordered a third part, and at the
highest, he determined to be charitable to an eighth part, or thereabouts,
while living: When his Estate was Two thousand pound per Ann. he designed one
Thousand for himself and Family, in Housekeeping and Board-wages; Two or Three
hundred pounds for Charity; Four hundred pounds for Law and Physic, and many
other necessaries; the rest for extraordinary Emergencies, not thinking it any
way dishonorable, to have a Personal Inspection over his own Affairs.

He was happy in a Wife, as well as Estate, which was advanced by her near
Twenty thousand pounds. She was the Lady Popham, and so enjoyed the Wealth of
great Rich Popham. He had no Issue by his Beloved Wife, for God Almighty had
designed him a numerous train of Children, to be adopted into his Family, and
nursed up tenderly, as if they came from his own Loins.

His Addresses were manly and taking, his Discourse clear and full of
Eloquence: He did not interrupt his Resolutions with fearfulness and too much
caution, nor deprive himself of the great Instrument of Action, Trust, or
Belief. These good Qualifications, with the glad Circumstances of a large
Fortune, and a long Age, near 80 years, in a Peaceable and Flourishing Reign
(after the troublesome days of Queen Mary; and before the late unhappy
Rebellion) could not but conspire to make him Considerable.

The Benefices that were in his Patronage, he dearly bought, that he might
bestow them upon men fit to be burning and shining Lights in the Church of God;
One of which Divines was Dr. Fish of Hallingbury in Essex, who has often
testified Mr. Sutton's Integrity in this point: He received his Presentation of
Him, Ann. Dom. 1610. and heard him say, That he never desired any thing of a
Minister of Gods Word, but his Prayers, and the due performance of his Office.

He was a good Parishioner where he had Land and no Living; as well as a good
Patron where he had both: encouraging all People by his early presence at
Church; doing good Offices, as repairing Churches, and decently adorning those
holy Places, where God has said his Name shall dwell.

He was remarkable for the Compassion and Relief he bestowed on the Widows and
Children of good Ministers: and this more particularly incited to by the
excellent Examples he had seen of Charity of this Nature in the Low Countries.

He was very Temperate, moderating his natural Appetite by Abstinence; he was
sober and vigilant, and moderate in all his Recreations: The outward Ornaments
of his Body were clean and becoming, neither starch't or curious, neither
careless or nice. These were not so properly the Comforts of his Soul, as the
Sweetness of his Life; hence proceeded health of Body, clean Strength, a good
Complexion, and a graceful and treatable Disposition.

As a Master, he was careful and diligent to enquire how his Servants performed
their Labors, for the dust of the Master's Shoos, is the compost to improve
the Soil: and his Love appeared to his Servants by making a comfortable
provision for them; for at this day, many of the Tenants to the House, are
descended from those who were Servants to the Founder; and the common Reason
they give of their good Bargains, is; That they hold them as Rewards of their
Ancestors Service. Yet it lies in the power of the Governors to advance the
Rent, which in some places has been done, though with great moderation; and
this rather to quicken than dishearten the Tenants.

It is not intended by this Character of Mr. Sutton, that he should be free
from all blemish; that he should be another Bonaventure, in whom, some affirm,
Adam did not sin. All things have a mixture of corruption here below, nay, it
is riveted in our very Nature: The fairest Figure must have some flaws, and the
most beautiful Image some unhappy strokes; therefore he, as all other men, was
subject to the like Passions: Whatever were his failings, common Charity should
endeavor to hide his Infirmities, who was content to spread his Garments over
so great a multitude.

After a numerous train of Worthy and Religious Actions, in a good old Age,
within One of 80 years, he died at Hackney, in the County of Middlesex, December.
12. Ann. Dom. 1611. He had for some time labored under a Feverish Distemper,
which wasted him away, and brought him into a lingering Consumption; this,
attended with frequent and sharp fits of the Stone, and violent assaults of the
Colic, made him Surrender up his Soul to that God, on whose power the Life of
all Depends.

From Hackney, he was removed, December. 16. to Dr. Law's House (one of the
Executors mentioned in his Will) in Paternoster Row, and from thence was
conveyed to his Grave with all the Pomp and Solemnity, which might become the
Funeral of so great a Man: Six thousand people attended his Corpse through the
City, whose passage lasted six hours; until they came to Christ-Church, where
his Body lay till his Foundation at the Charter House was finished (which was
about Three years) Ann. Dom. 1614. from whence he was in a decent manner
removed, December. 12. in the aforesaid year: Upon which day is duly kept an
Anniversary Commemoration, a Sermon is appointed with a Gratuity to the
Preacher. The first who preached on that Occasion was Mr. Percival Burrell,
Minister of the House, upon Luke 7.5. He has built us a Synagogue: The Sermon
was primed Ann. Dom. 1629.

After Sermon the Auditors repair to the Public Hall, where the Bounty and
Magnificence of our Noble Founder is gracefully set forth in a Latin Oration,
by a Youth of the Foundation, whom Sutton has taught to speak.

Thus have we brought our Founder to his place of Rest; where, in the Chapel,
on the North side, is a Noble Monument, Erected by his Overseers, with this
following Inscription on a fair Marble-stone, in Golden Letters.

Sacred to the Glory of God.

In grateful Memory of Thomas Sutton Esquire, late of Castle-Camps, in the
County of Cambridge, at whose only Cost and Charges this Hospital was Founded,
and Endowed with large Possessions, for the Relief of poor Men and Children: He
was Born at Knaith in the County of Lincoln, of Worthy and Honored Parentage:
He lived to the Age of 79 Years, and Deceased December. 12. 1611.

Let us now consider what particular Motives were applied to persuade and mould
the mind of this good Man to design this Great Benefaction: as also what
Objections and Inconveniences were proposed to hinder the Progress of the Work.

Dr. Willet, who lived at Barkway, not far from Mr. Sutton, and was much
consulted by him, would often say, That his Thoughts had eaten his Bowels, had
he not unbosom'd some of them to his Friends. The Doctor advised him to be a
Benefactor to Chelsey College; a Place intended for the convenience and
maintenance of Learned Divines, who should study and write Controversies
against the Papists, Erected Ann. Dom. 1610. Dr. Sutcliff Dean of Exceter, was
the first Master; Mr. William Gambden Clarencieux, and Mr. John Heywood Dr. in
Law, Historians, were fellows of the College: The Reversion of some Lands in
Chelsey, held in Lease by the Earl of Nottingham, was all the Encouragement
this College found; whose Endowment Dr. Willet proposed to Mr. Sutton, or the
erection of a new College to that purpose of his own.

Another Proposition of the Doctors was taken out of King James his Letter to
the Archbishop for the digging of a Trench out of the River Lee, to erect
Engines and Waterworks, to conveigh Water in close Pipes under ground, unto the
City of London, and the Suburbs thereof, by an Act of Parliament, 7. Jacobi.

But both these proved ineffectual: Then Mr. Hall, Minister of Waltham in
Essex, afterward made Bishop of Exeter, sent him this following Letter.

Sir,
I Trouble you not with reasons of my writing, or with excuses: if I do ill, no
plea can warrant me; if well, I cannot be discouraged with any Censures. I
crave not your pardon, but your acceptance: It is no presumption to give good
Counsel, and Presents of Love fear not to be ill taken of Strangers: my Pen and
your Substance are both given us for one end, to do good: these are our
Talents, how happy are we, if we can improve them well! suffer me to do you
good with the one, that with the other you may do good to many, and most to
your self: you cannot but know, that your full hand and worthy purposes have
possessed the World with much expectation: What speak I of the World! whose
honest and reasonable claims yet cannot be contemned with honor, nor
disappointed with dishonor. The God of Heaven has lent you this abundance,
and given you these gracious thoughts of Charity, of Piety, looks long for the
Issue of both, and will easily complain of too little, or too late: your Wealth
and your Will are both good; but the first is only made good by the second: for
if your hand were full, and your heart empty, we, who now applaud you, should
justly pity you: you might have Riches, not Goods, not Blessings; your Burden
should be greater than your Estate, and you should be richer in sorrows, than
in metals. For (if we look to no other world) what gain is it to be keeper of
the best Earth? that which is the common Coffer of all the rich Mines, we do
but tread upon; and account it vile, because it does but hold and hide those
Treasures: whereas the skilfullest Metallist, that finds and refineth those
precious Veins for Public use, is rewarded, is honored: the very basest
Element yields Gold. The Savage Indian gets it, the Servile Apprentice works
it, the very Midianitish Camel may wear it; the miserable worldling admires it,
the covetous Jew swallows it, the unthrifty Ruffian spends it; what are all
these the better for it? only good use gives praise to Earthly Possessions:
hearing therefore you owe more to God, that he has given you an heart to do
good: a will to be as rich in good Works, as great in Riches; to be a Friend to
this Mammon, is to be an enemy to God; but to make Friends with it is Royal and
Christian: His Enemies may be wealthy, none but his Friends can either be good,
or do good: Da and acc^pe, says the Wise man. The Christian who must imitate
the high pattern of his Creator, knows his best Riches, to be Bounty. God, who
has all gives all; reserves nothing: and for himself he well considers, that
God has not made him an owner, but a servant; and a servant of servants not of
his goods, but of the giver: Not a Treasurer, but a Steward, whose praise is
more, to have laid out well, than to have received much: The greatest gain
therefore that he affects, is an even reckoning, a clear discharge: which since
it is obtained by disposing, not by keeping, he counts reservation loss, and
just expense his trade, and joy. He knows, that well done faithful Servant, is
a thousand times more sweet a Note, than Soul take thine ease: for that is the
voice of the Master recompensing; this of the servant presuming: and what
follows to the one, but his Master's joy? and what to the other, but the loss
of his Soul? Blessed be that God, which has given you an heart to fore-think
this, and in this dry and dead Age a will to honor him with his own; and to
credit his Gospel with your Beneficence. Lo! we are upbraided with barrenness:
your name has been publicly opposed to these challenges; as in whom it shall
be seen, that the truth has friends, that can give: I neither distrust nor
persuade you, whose Resolutions are happily fixed on purposes of good; only
give me leave to hasten your pace a little, and to excite your Christian
forwardness to begin speedily, what you have long and constantly vowed. You
would not but do good, why not now? I speak boldly the more speed, the more
comfort: neither are the times in our disposal, nor our selves. If God had set
us a Day, and made our Wealth inseparable, there were no danger in delaying now
our uncertainty either must quicken us, or may deceive us. How many have meant
well and done nothing, and lost the Crown with lingering? whose destinies have
prevented their desires; and have their good motions the wards of their
Executors; not without miserable success: to whom, that they would have done
good, is not so great a praise, as it is dishonor, that they might have done
it: then Wrecks are our Warnings: we are equally mortal, equally fickle. Why
have you this respite of living, but to prevent the Imperious necessity of
Death? It is a woeful and remediless complaint, the end of our days has overrun
the beginning of our good Works: Early beneficence has no danger; many joys:
for the conscience of good done, the Prayers and Blessings of the Relieved, and
the Gratulations of Saints, are as so many perpetual Comforters, which can make
our life pleasant, and our death happy; our evil days good, our good better:
all these are but lost with delay: few and cold are the Prayers for him that
may give: and in lieu, our good purposes foreslow'd are become our tormentors:
upon our Deathbed little difference is betwixt good deferred, and evil done:
good was meant, who hindered it? will our Conscience say: There was time enough,
means enough, need enough, what hindered? did fear of envy, distrust of want?
alas! what Buggs are these to fright men from Heaven? as if the envy of keeping
were less than bestowing: as if God were not as good a Debtor, as a Giver. He
that gives to the Poor, lends to the Lord, says Solomon. If he freely give us
what we may lend, and grace to give, will he not much more pay us what we have
lent? and give us, because we have given? that is his bounty, this is his
justice: O happy is the man that may be a Creditor to his Maker! Heaven and
Earth shall empty, before he want a Royal Payment: if we dare not trust God
while we live, how dare we trust men, when we are dead? Men, that are still
deceitful, and light upon the Balance: light of truth, and heavy of self-love:
how many Executors have proved the Executioners of honest Wills? how many have
our eyes seen, that after most careful choice of Trusty Guardians, have had
their Children and Goods so disposed, as if the Parents Soul could return to
see it, I doubt whether it would be happy: How rare is that man, who prefers
not himself to his dead Friend, profit to truth? who will take no advantage of
the Impossibility of the account? Whatever therefore men either show or
promise, happy is that man that may be his own Auditor, Supervisor, Executor:
as you love God and your Self, be not aefraid of being happy too soon. I am not
worthy to give so bold advice, let the Wiseman Syrach speak for me; Do good
before thou dye, and according to thine ability stretch out thine hand, and
give: defraud not thy self of thy good day; and let not the Portion of thy good
desires pass over thee: Shall thou not leave thy travels to another, and thy
labors to them that will divide thy Heritage? Or let a wiser than he speak,
viz. Solomon: Say not, to morrow I will give, if thou now have it: for thou
know not what a day will bring forth. It has been an old Rule of
Liberality, He gives twice, who gives quickly: whereas slow benefits argue
uncheerfulness, and lose their worth: who lingers his receipts, is condemned as
unthrifty: he who knows both, says, It is better to give, than to receive.
If we are of the same spirit, why are we hasly in the worst, and slack in the
better? Suffer you your self therefore, Good Sir, for God's sake, for the
Gospel's sake, for the Church's sake, for your Soul's sake, to be stirred up by
these poor lines, to a resolute and speedy performing of your worthy
intentions. And take this as a loving Invitation sent from Heaven, by an
unworthy Messenger: you cannot deliberate long of fit Objects for your
Beneficence, except it be more for multitude, than want: the Streets, yea, the
World is full. How does Lazarus lie at every door? how many Sons of the
Prophets in their meanly provided Colleges, may say, not mors in olla, but
fames? how many Churches may justly plead that which our Savior bad his
Disciples, The Lord has need? and if this infinite store has made your choice
doubtful, how easy were it to show you, wherein you might oblige the whole
Church of God to you? and make your memorial both eternal and blessed: or if
you had rather, the whole Commonwealth?

But now I find my self too hold, and too busy, in thus looking to
particularities: God shall direct you, and if you follow him, shall Crown you.
Howsoever, if good be done, and that betimes, He has what he desired, and your
Soul shall have more than you can desire. The Success of my weak, yet hearty
Counsel, shall make me as rich, as God has made you, with all your abundance.

God bless it to you, and make both our Reckonings cheerful in the Day of our
Common Audit.

Never man received Advice more kindly than Mr. Sutton, and blessed God for the
return of his Prayers in the Garden. He never was inclinable to Dr. Willet's
former Proposal, upon these accounts: he understood the Patrons of Chelsey
College were few, nor was his design to be an additional Benefactor, but a
Founder. Besides, he plainly saw those Enemies to the work, who thought they
lay in secret: and what was more, he perceived it was looked upon with a
jealous Eye by the Universities, as a disparagement to them. Then, other
Divines and Churchmen thought they were undervalued, because the Fellows of
this Foundation were likely to gain Privileges prejudicial to them. And
lastly, the Politic Statesmen did dislike the Project, suspecting Court
Divinity, and History, from a College. This is supposed to be the place meant
by the Incomparable Cowley, in his excellent Instructions toward the
Institution of a College.

Nor to add a City-Hospital could he be induced (though much solicited) the
poor of those places being likely to be well provided for, by the daily
Legacies of such, who were not in any capacity to do so great things as himself.

Being thus solicited by others to perform that, which he had long since
resolved within himself; and having observed how many hopeful Youths miscarried
for want of competent Means for their Education; and how many ancient
Gentlemen, having the same tender Breeding with their Elder Brothers, yet have
but the slender Fortunes of a Younger Brother; that they were too generous to
beg, not made for work (whose ingenuous Natures were most sensible of want,
and least able to relieve it) but were cast away, and brought to misery for
want of a comfortable Subsistence in their Old Age: Therefore he resolved to
prevent, by his memorable Charity, as far as he could, these growing
inconveniences. The blind Devotion of former Ages had so abused the ends and
designs of Charitable Works, that King Edward the First (as well as Theodosius
the Emperor) made a Law of Mortmain;) whereby it is made unlawful for any man
to bestow Land of such a value to any Religious or Charitable use without
license from the King, of Mortmain in Parliament.

This Law of Amortization in the Emperor's time, much grieved many good men:
For St. Jerome thus complains to Nepotian, I am ashamed to say it, the Priests
of Idols, Stage Players, and Common Harlots, are made capable of Inheritance,
and receiving Legacies, only Ministers of the Gospel are barred by the Law thus
to do, and that not by Persecutors, but Christian Princes: neither do I
complain of the Law, but am sorry we have deserved it. To the same purpose is
that of St. Ambrose, Ep. 31. deploring the State of the Clergy.

Upon the account of this Law, Mr. Sutton was forced to petition his Majesty K.
James and the Parliament, March 10. 1609. for leave and license to erect and
endow an Hospital in the Town of Hallingbury Bouchers, in the County of Essex.

An Act of Parliament granted to Thomas Sutton Esquire to erect an Hospital at
Hallingbury in Essex, etc.
HVmbly beseeches your Majesty, your loyal and dutiful Subject Thomas Sutton
of Balsham in the County of Cambridge Esquire, That it may please your most
excellent Majesty, and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in
this present Parliament assembled, to enact, ordain, and establish, And be it
enacted, ordained, and established by the Authority aforesaid, That in the Town
of Hallingbury, otherwise called Hallingbury Bouchers in the County of Essex,
there may be builded and erected (at the costs and charges of your Suppliant)
one meet, fit and convenient House, Buildings, and Rooms, for the abiding and
dwelling of such a number of poor people, men and children, as your Suppliant
shall name, limit and appoint to be lodged, harbored, abide, and be relieved
there; And for the abiding, dwelling, and necessary use of one Schoolmaster and
Usher to instruct the s^m children in reading, writing, and Latin and Greek
Grammar, and of one Divine and godly Preacher to instruct and reach all the
rest of the same House in the knowledge of God and his Word, And of one Master
to govern all these persons of, in, or belonging to the same House; And that
the same shall and may be called and named the Hospital of King James, founded
in Hallingbury in the County of Essex, at the humble petition and at the only
costs and charges of Thomas Sutton Esquire, And that the right reverend Father
in God Richard, now Archbishop of Canterbury, and his Successors Archbishops
there, Thomas Lord Ellesmere Lord Chancellor of England, and such as after him
shall succeed to be Lord Chancellors or Lord Keepers of the great Seal of
England, for and during the time they shall so continue or be in the same
office, Robert Earl of Salisbury Lord High Treasurer of England, and such as
after him shall succeed to be Lord Treasurers of England, for and during the
time they shall continue or be in the same Office, The Reverend Father in God
Lancelot Bishop of Ely, and his Successors Bishops there, Richard Bishop of
Rochester, and Dean of the Cathedral Church of Westminster, and his Successors
of and in the same Deanery of Westminster, Sir Thomas Foster Knight, one of the
Justices of your Majesty's Court of Common Pleas usually holden at Westminster,
Sir Henry Hobart Knight, your Majesty's Attorney General, John Overall Doctor
of Divinity, Dean of the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul in London, and his
Successors Deans there, Henry Thursby Esquire, one of the Masters of your
Majesty's Court of Chancery, Thomas Fortescue, Thomas Paget, Geffrey
Nightingale, and Richard Sutton Esquires, John Law and Thomas Brown
Gentlemen, and such others as shall be from time to time for ever hereafter
chosen and nominated in and to the places and steads of such of them as shall
decease, by your Suppliant during his life, And after his decease by the most
part of them which then shall be Governors of the said Hospital, to be and
succeed in and to the place and places of him and them deceasing, shall and may
be the Governors of the said Hospital, and of the Members, Goods, Lands,
Revenues and Hereditaments of the same at all times hereafter for ever. And
that the same Governors and Hospital shall for ever hereafter stand and be
incorporated, established, and founded in name and in deed a body politic and
corporate, to have continuance for ever, by the name of the Governors of the
Hospital of King James, founded in Hallingbury in the County of Essex, at the
humble petition, and at the only cost and charges of Thomas Sutton Esquire, and
that they the said Governors may have a perpetual succession, and that by that
name they and their Successors may for ever hereafter have, hold, and enjoy the
Manors, Lordships, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments hereafter
mentioned, without any license or pardon for any alienation of them or any of
them, and without any license of or for Mortmain, or any other Law or Statute
to the contrary notwithstanding, That is to say, your Suppliants Manors and
Lordships of Southminster, Norton, Little Hallingbury, alias Hallingbury
Bouchers, and Much Stambridge in the County of Essex, with all their and every
of their Rights, Members, and Appurtenances whatsoever, And also all those your
Suppliants Manors and Lordships of Buslingthorpe and Dunnesby in the County of
Lincoln, with their and either of their Rights, Members, and Appurtenances
whatsoever, And also all those your Suppliants Manors of Salthorpe, alias
Saltrop, Chilton, and Blackgrove, with their and every of their Rights,
Members, and Appurtenances in the said County of Wilts, And also all those your
Suppliants Lands and Pasture Grounds called Blackgrove, containing by
estimation two hundred Acres of Pasture, with the Appurtenances in Blackgrove
and Wroughton in the said County of Wilts, And also all that your Suppliants
Manor of Mihenden, otherwise called the Manor of M^hunden in the Parishes of
Wroughton, Lydgerd, and Tregoce, in the said County of Wilts, And all that your
Suppliants Manor of Elcombe and the Park called Elcombe Park in the said
County of Wilts, And all that your Suppliants Manor of Wattlescote, otherwise
called Wigglescote, otherwise called Wiglescete, otherwise called Wikelscete,
in the County of Wilts, And all that your Suppliants Manor of Wescote,
otherwise called Wescete, with the Appurtenances in the said County of Wilts,
And also all those your Suppliants Lands and Pastures, containing by estimation
one hundred Acres of Land, and threescore Acres of Pasture, in Wiglescote and
Wroughton in the said County of Wilts, And also all that your Suppliants Manor
of Uffcote with the Appurtenances in the said County of Wilts, And all those
your Suppliants two Messuages, and one thousand acres of Land, two thousand
acres of Pasture, three hundred acres of Meadow, and three hundred acres of
Wood with the Appurtenances in Brodehinton in the said County of Wilts, And
also all those your Suppliants Manors and Lordships of Camps, otherwise
called Comps, otherwise called Campes-Castle, otherwise called Castle-Campes,
situate, lying, being and extending in the Counties of Cambridge and Essex, or
in either of them, or elsewhere within the Realm of England, And also all that
your Suppliants Manor of Balsham in the County of Cambridge, with all and
singular the Rights, Members, and Appurtenances thereof whatsoever, And also
all that your Suppliants Message and Lands situate and being in the Parishes
of Hackney and Tottenham in the County of Middlesex, or in either of them, with
their and either of their Rights, Members, and Appurtenances whatsoever, which
said Message was lately purchased of Sir William Bower Knight, and the Lands
in Tottenham now or late in the tenure or occupation of William Benning Yeoman,
and also all and singular the Manors, Lordships, Messuages, Lands, Tenements,
Reversions, Services, Meadows, Pastures, Woods, Advowsons, Patronages of
Churches, and Hereditaments of your Suppliant whatsoever, situate, lying, or
being within the said Counties of Essex, Lincoln, Wilts, Cambridge, and
Middlesex, or any of them, with all and every their Rights, Members, and
Appurtenances whatsoever: And also all your Suppliants Letters Patents,
Indentures, Deeds, Evidences, Bonds and Writings concerning the Premises, or
any of them, And all such Conditions, Warranties, Vouchers, Actions, Suits,
Entries, Benefits, and Demands as shall or may be had by any person or persons
upon, or by reason of them, or any of them, except those your Suppliants
Manors or Lordships of Littlebury and Hadstock in the said County of Essex:
And except all your Suppliants Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in Littlebury
and Hadstock aforesaid, or in either of them, And that the said Governors and
their Successors by the same name shall and may have power, ability, and
capacity, to demise, lease, and grant their Possessions and Hereditaments, and
every of them, And to take, acquire, and purchase, And to sue and be sued, And
to do, perform, and execute all and every other lawful act and thing, good,
necessary and profitable for the said incorporation, in as full and ample
manner and form to all intents, constructions, and purposes, as any other
incorporations or body politic or corporate, fully and perfectly founded and
incorporated, may do, And that the same Governors and their Successors for the
time being, may have and use a common Seal for the making, granting, and
demising of such their demises and leases, and for the doing of all and every
other thing touching or in any wise concerning the said Incorporation, In which
Seal shall be engraven the Arms of the said Thomas Sutton your Suppliant: And
also that it may he further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, and be it
enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That your Suppliant during his life, and
the said Governors and their Successors for the time being, or the most part of
them, after his decease, shall and may have full power and lawful authority to
break, alter, and change the said Seal: And that your said Orator during his
life, and the said Governors and their Successors for the time being, or the
most part of them, after his decease, shall and may have full power and
authority to nominate and appoint, and shall and may nominate and appoint, when
and as often as he and they shall think good, such person and persons as he and
they shall think meet to be Master, Preacher, Schoolmaster, Usher, poor Men,
poor Children, and Officers of the said Hospital, And when any of them by
death, resignation, deprivation, or otherwise, shall become void, shall and may
within one month next after such avoidance, by writing under their said Common
Seal, nominate and appoint one or more learned, godly, discreet and meet men
and persons to be Master, Preacher, Schoolmaster, Usher, poor Men, poor
Children, and Officers in the places of them, and every of them so deceasing,
resigning, or otherwise becoming void, And that in case the said Governors and
their Successors for the time being, or the most part of them, shall not within
one month after such avoidance make such nomination and appointment as
aforesaid, That then, and so often, and in every such case, from and after the
decease of your said Orator, it shall and may be lawful to your Majesty, your
Heirs and Successors, by your Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England,
to nominate and appoint some meet, godly, and learned men in and to the places
void by such default of the said Governors and their Successors for the time
being, or the most part of them, as is aforesaid: And that it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said Master, Preacher, Schoolmaster, Usher, poor People,
poor Children, and Officers of the said Hospital to remain, assemble, be, and
cohabit together in the said House, Buildings, and Hospital: And that it may be
further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, And be it enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That your said Suppliant during his Life, and that the said
Governors and their Successors for the time being, or the most part of them,
after his decease, shall an may have full power and authority, under the said
Common Seal, to make, ordain, set down, and prescribe such Rules, Statutes, and
Ordinances for the order, rule, and government of the said Hospital, and of the
said Master, Preacher, Schoolmaster, Usher, poor Men, poor Children, and
Officers, and their Successors, and for their and every of their stipends and
allowances, for or toward their or any of their maintenance and relief, as to
your said Suppliant during his life, and the said Governors and their
Successors for the time being, or the most part of them, after his decease,
shall seem meet and convenient, And that the same Orders, Rules, Statutes, and
Ordinances so by him, them, or any of them made, set down, and prescribed as
aforesaid, shall be and stand in full force and strength in Law, the same not
being repugnant nor contrary to your Majesty's Prerogative Royal, nor to the
Laws or Statutes of this your Majesty's Realm of England, nor to any
Ecclesiastical Canons or Constitutions of the Church of England then in force
and use: And that your Suppliant during his life, and the said Governors and
their Successors for the time being, or the most part of them, and such of them
as your Suppliant shall thereto appoint and nominate, shall and may, after the
decease of your said Suppliant, have full power and authority to visit the said
Hospital, and to order, reform, and redress all disorders and abuses in and
touching the government and disposing of the same, And further to censure,
suspend, and deprive the said Master, Preacher, Schoolmaster, Usher, poor Men,
poor Children, and Officers for the time being, and every or any of them, as to
him and them shall seem just, sit, and convenient, So always that no
visitation, act, or thing, in or touching the same, be had, made, or done other
than by your Suppliant during his life, or the said Governors and their
Successors for the time being, or the most part of them, after his decease, or
by such of them as your Suppliant shall thereunto nominate and appoint: And
also, that it may be further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, and be it
enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the said Preacher and Minister of the
Word of God, which shall be placed in the said Hospital to and for the uses and
purposes aforesaid, from time to time hereafter shall and may enter into, have,
hold, and enjoy the Rectory and Parsonage of Hallingbury aforesaid, in and to
his own proper use and behoof, for and during so long time as he shall be
Preacher and Minister there, without any other presentation or admission,
institution or induction, And that no Lease shall hereafter be made of the said
Parsonage, or of any part or portion thereof, other than such as shall
determine and end when and as soon as any such person as shall be the Preacher
or Minister of and in the said Hospital, when the same Lease shall be made,
shall decease or resign, leave or be put out and removed from his said place of
Preacher or Minister of and in the said Hospital, Saving always and reserving
to your Majesty, your Heirs and Successors, and to all and every other person
and persons, bodies politic and corporate, their Heirs and Successors, other
than your Suppliant and his Heirs, and the person and persons from whom the
same were purchased and their Heirs claiming only as Heirs, all such Estate,
Right, Title, Condition, Claim, Possession, Rents, Services, Commons, Demands,
Actions, Remedies, Recoveries, Terms, Interests, Forfeits, Commodities,
Advantages and Hereditaments whatsoever, which they or any of them shall or may
have, or of right ought to have, of, in, to, or out of the premises, or any of
them, or any part thereof, as if this Act had never been had or made, Other
than Fine or Fines of or for any Alienation of the premises, or any part or
parcel thereof, And other than respits of homage, or Fines for Non-payment of
respit of homage, at any time hereafter to be demanded, And other than Title
and Right of Liberty or Liberties to enter into the same, or any of them, for
or by reason of any Statute heretofore made for, concerning, or against any
Alienation or Mortmain, prout per eundem actum inter alia before apparet.

Not long after, Mr. Sutton changed his mind, and was desirous to purchase my
Lord of Suffolk's House near Smithfield formerly a Carthusian Monastery,
Founded (as before is mentioned at large) by Sir Walter de Manny: At the
dissolution of Abbeys by King Henry the Eighth, at the rasing of Convents, a
peculiar Clause was added to the Commission, impowering them particularly to
rate the Charter House in London, which amounted to 642 l. 0 s. 4 d. ob.
yearly. And the Prior was enjoined to renounce the Popes Supremacy, and
acknowledge the King, but he chose rather to lose his life, and was hanged at
the Gate. Then this Monastery and Duke's Place was bestowed upon Sir Thomas
Audly Speaker to that Parliament which dissolved these Houses. It passed from
him with his sole Daughter Margaret, by marriage to Thomas Howard Duke of
Norfolk, and so by Descent to Thomas Earl of Suffolk.

This was the place which Mr. Sutton thought convenient for his intended
Foundation, and the rather because it had been formerly employed to Religious
ends. At length he purchase 't it by the Name of Howard House, otherwise called
The late dissolved Charter House, near Smithfield in Middlesex, consisting of
Four or Five Courts, a Wilderness, Gardens, Orchards, and Walks thereunto
belonging, with Pardon Churchyard, and the two Messuages adjoining, called
Willbeck, with all Buildings, Closets, Ways, Waters, Services, Rents, Wages,
Fellons Goods, Outlaws, Fugitives, Liberties, Reversions, Emoluments and
Appurtenances, known to belong to the said House, or other the mentioned
Premises, paying down for the same Thirteen thousand pounds, May 9. Jacobi. 9.
1611.

And on the 22 of June following settled the Hospital designed by the aforesaid
Act at Hallingbury, by Letters Patents at the Charter House. The Letters
Patents under the Great Seal are in my Lord Coke's Reports.

The Sum of the Letters Patents of King JAMES for erecting Sutton's Hospital
at the Charter House.
1. THE Purchase is mentioned, bought of the Right Honorable Thomas Earl of
Suffolk. 2. The Charter House conceived to be a fitter place than Hallingbury.
3. The Governors are incorporated, and have full Authority to purchase, take,
receive, etc. 4. Sixteen Governors appointed by Name. 5. The Master to be one.
6. The Governors to have a Common Seal. 7. Not to transfer the Lands to any
other use, nor to let longer Leases than for 21 years. 8. If any Governor
dies, or is removed, the residue surviving are to remain Incorporate; and the
Major part have power to elect, nominate, choose, and appoint a Successor. 9.
Election of a new Governor to be made within two months after a Vacancy. 10.
The Governors have full power to assign and appoint such number of poor Men
and Officers as they shall think fit. 11. The number of Old Gentlemen and
Children, to increase, and they maintained, according to the increase of the
Revenues. 12. Mr. Sutton during his life, with the Governors to execute. 13.
The King to nominate a Governor, after default made by the Governors for two
months. 14. Governors empowered to make Statutes under the Common Seal. 15.
They may visit, punish, or displace the Master, Preacher, or other Officers of
the Hospital. 16. The Hospital, Master, Preacher, and other Officers, exempted
and freed from all visitations, punishment, and correction, to be had, used, or
exercised, in or upon them, or any of them, by the Ordinary of the Diocese for
the time being, or by any other person whatsoever, but the Founder and
Governors.
(This last Instance is quoted by the Learned Seldom, Lib. 1. de Synedriis,
cap. 13. p. 541. treating of the power of Excommunication, where he seems to
favor Erastianism; Exemplum est illustre in Fundationis Ptochodochii
Suttoniani juxta Londinum Instrumento, etc.)

Ecclesiastical Preferments in the Governors Disposal.
1. At the Charterhouse, 2. Balsham, 3. Castle-Camps, 4. Horsehead 5.
Hallingbury, 6. Dunsby, 7. South-Minster, 8. Cold-Norton, 9. Little Wigborow,
The Present Incumbents.
Mr. Patrick. Dr. Templer. Mr. Hall. Mr. Eade. Mr. Sherwell. Mr. Johnson. Mr.
Ford, Mr. Turbridge.


By these Letters Patent, the Governors are charged to give and bestow the
Spiritual Promotions upon those Scholars who have been bred in the House, and
are qualified for them, before any other persons whatsoever.

In pursuance of the Letters Patents, Mr. Hutton, Clerk, Vicar of Littlebury,
was appointed by Mr. Sutton, to be the first Master after himself: and then
ordered a Conveyance of the Estate to the Governors: both which Instruments are
at large in my Lord Coke's Rep. lib. 10.

Thus far our Noble Founder proceeded in his life time; but it pleased God to
take him to himself three years before all things were completed, therefore
they are mistaken, who report he was an actual Master in this his Foundation.

But scarce was the Founder cold in his Grave, before troubles and disturbances
arise, and many private persons intend to share the Revenues: For one Simon
Baxter, Mr. Sutton's only Sisters Son, encouraged by some hungry and corrupt
persons, who were to partake with him in the Spoil, attempted, as next Heir, to
take Possession of the Charter House, and the whole Estate annexed to it: But
failing in his attempt, by the vigilance and care of one Richard Bird (first
Porter of the Charter house, and appointed by the Founder himself) he enters an
Action of Trespass against the Executors of Mr. Sutton, and the Governors. The
last day of Trinity Term, 10. Jacobi, in the King's Bench, for a violent Entry
made by the said Executours and Governors, May 30. the same year. The Case had
in it diverse points of Law started to overthrow the Settlement, which are here
summed up.

1. Objection, By the Parliament, 7. Jac. the Hospital was founded at
Hallingbury in Essex: the Incorporation after by the King's Letters Patents is
void, and the Charter House is not given by the said Statute, because Sutton
purchased it afterward.
2. Sutton, who had License to Found an Hospital, before the Foundation died.
3. The King cannot name the House and Land of Sutton to be an Hospital, because
in alieno solo. 4. Every Corporation ought to have a place certain, but here
the License is to found an Hospital in or at the Charter House, before that
Sutton made it certain, there was no Incorporation: Also the place of
Incorporation ought to be certain, by means and bounds, and a place not known
will not serve. 5. The King intended to make a Corporation presently, which
cannot be, before that Sutton name a Master: Governors cannot be, until there
be poor in the Hospital. 6. The Foundation cannot be with the words Fundo,
Erigo, etc. and before such a Foundation, a stranger cannot give Lands unto it.
7. Sutton calls it in his Will, His intended Hospital. 8. The Master was named
at Will, when he ought to be for Life, and have Freehold in the Land: Also the
Hospital must be founded before a Master be named. 9. The Bargain and Sale made
by Sutton is void: 1. Because the money paid by the Governors in their private
capacities, shall not be considered as in their public capacities. 2. The
Habendum is to them upon trust, which cannot be in a Corporation. 3. Because no
Hospital before was founded as this.
10. The King cannot make Governors of a thing not in being.
To which was Answered,
1. The Preamble of the Act, whereby, and in many places of the Act, it appears
that the Incorporation was to be in futuro, when it shall be erected; and the
Statute does not give Lands unto it, but power to give without License of
Alienation or Mortmain: And it appears by the Letters Patents, that the
Erection precedes the License. 2. The License is to him, his Heirs, Executors,
at any time hereafter; and the words of the Incorporation are in the present,
and so the Incorporation precedes the Execution of this License. 3. Though the
King gave the Name, yet it was upon Sutton's previous consent, for the King did
it at his suit. 4. The King makes an Hospital of the Premises, for that it is
certain: and to that which was said, a place uncertain cannot be an Hospital;
it was answered, The Charter House was named: To the Essence of a Corporation
these things are requisite. 1. Lawful Authority to Incorporate by Common Law,
as the King himself, by lawful Authority of Parliament by the King's Charter,
and lawful Prescription. 2. The Persons, either Natural or Political. 3. A
Name. 4. A Place. 5. Words sufficient, but not restrained to a strict sense.
5. A Corporation may be without a Head, as if the King Incorporate a Town, and
give power for the choice of a Mayor, they are a Corporation before Election.
6. It is a sufficient Corporation, though the Hospital be but in potentia; for
the Temple was a Corporation in the time of Henry the First, and yet was not
built till Henry the Second's time: But here the House was built before. 7. The
first Founder in Law is Donour, when the King gives the Name, and designeth the
Place; the Donation most properly belongs to the Founder: But if the King
leaves out the nomination of the Party, there many times (though not of
necessity) he uses the words Fundo, Erigo, etc. But in truth the Corporation
is made by the King's Charter, and the Founder is but an Instrument. 9. The
money paid by some of the Governors in their private capacity, is good: but the
payment was as Governors, and so they are acquitted: 2. a Rent was reserved,
which was a good consideration: 3. a Bargain and Sale was to be upon Confidence
and Trust. 10. They may plead that they are seized in fore, although then it be
not in esse; In Answer to the Precedents, some are Explanatory, and some
Negatory, ex Consuetudine Clericorum.
This being the Case, it was argued shrewdly on the Plaintiff's side,

By Sir Francis Bacon Solicitor General. Mr. Gualter of the Temple. And Mr.
Yelverton of Grays Inn.


And on the Defendants side, the Hospital, etc.

By Mr. Hubbard Attorney General. Mr. Hutton Sergeant at Law. Mr. Coventry of
the Inner Temple.


But, nevertheless, an Adjournment was made of it, from the Kings Bench to the
Exchequer Chamber, where it was solemnly argued by the Judges of the Land: Sir
Robert Hutton. Sir Augustine Nicholls. Sir John Doderidge. Sir Humphrey Winoh.
Sir Edward Bromely. Sir John Crook. Sir James Altham. Sir George Snig. Sir
Peter Warberton. Sir Laurence Tanfield Lord Chief Baron. Sir Edward Coke Lord
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas.


Sir Thomas Flemming Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench, was then sick, and
so not present.

Here it was judged (with the great applause of all that heard it) for the
Defendants, the Governors of the Hospital.

The Plaintiff, being but a man of ordinary quality, was judged to have reason
to be content with a tolerable provision for him, suitable to his degree: viz.
he had allotted to him the Manor of Turback in Lancashire, consisting of a
fair ancient House, two Parks, and large Demeans, plentifully stored with
Timber; valued at 350 l. per Annum Rent of Assise, together with a Rectory,
worth 100 l. per Annum in the same County; and 300 l. by Will.

Thus was this great Difference at Law decided: 1. For the Honor of the
Protestant Religion, that has produced such a Work of Piety and Charity, as
never was in the Christian World, all things considered; for it was the
Erection of one Private man, who bequeathed a mighty Estate to this pious Use.
2. It was for the glory of the King, to whom, ex congruo, and condigno, it was
dedicated, that it might bear his Name, engage Him in its Institution, and His
Royal Successors, in its future Patronage and Maintenance. 3. For the increase
of Piety, that men in this Age, be not deterred from Good Works. 4. That
Justice and Mercy might come together, Righteousness and Peace kiss each other.


That every Person may have his due esteem, we are to understand, that much is
owing to the lasting memory of Sir Edward Coke, who, like a firm Rock, stood
between that and danger, he outweather'd the storm, and broke the fury of
interested and mercenary Eloquence. At one time it was almost crushed, by the
hungry hopes and violence of some Self-seeking Courtiers, which made that
Oracle of Law more warm and positive in his Determinations.

He endeavored, and brought it to pass, and he deserves a Monument of greater
Honor among us, than he found in the Church of Norwich: And if it were lawful
to annex the Succession of a Governor to any (but the Royal) Family: 'Twere
pity the Name of so Honorable a Patron should ever be out of the List, of the
Right Honorable the Lords and Governors of the Charter House.

Among those who were Enemies to this Religious design, I find Sir Francis
Bacon writing this following Advice to King James: Vide Resuscit.

May it please your Majesty,
I Find it a positive Precept in the Old Law, That there should be no Sacrifice
without Salt: The Moral whereof (besides the Ceremony) may be, That God is not
pleased with the Body of a good Intention, except it be seasoned with that
Spiritual Wisdom and Judgment, as it be not easily subject to be corrupted and
perverted. For Salt in the Scripture is both a figure of Wisdom, and lasting:
this comes into my mind, upon this act of Mr. Sutton, which seems to me as a
Sacrifice without Salt; having the Materials of a good Intention, but not
powdered with any such Ordinances and Institutions as may preserve the same from
turning corrupt; or at least from becoming unsavory, and of little use: For
though the choice of the Feoffees be of the best, yet neither can they always
live; and the very nature of the work it self, in the vast and unfit proportion
thereof is apt to provoke a mis-imployment: it is no diligence of theirs
(except there be a digression from that Model) that can excuse it from running
the same way that Gifts of the like condition have heretofore done: For to
design the Charter House, a Building fit for a Prince 's Habitation, for an
Hospital, is all one, as if one should give in Alms, a rich embroydered Cloak
to a Beggar: And certainly a man may see, tanquam quae oculis cernuntur, that
if such an Edifice, with Six thousand pounds Revenue, be erected into one
Hospital, it will in a small time degenerate, to be made a preferment of some
great Person to be Master, and he to take all the sweet, and the Poor to be
stinted, and take but the Crumbs; as it comes to pass in diverse Hospitals of
this Realm, which have but the names of Hospitals, and are but wealthy
Benefices, in respect of the Mastership; but the poor, which is the propter
quid, little relieved: And the like has been the Fortune of much of the Alms
of the Roman Religion, in the Great Foundations, which being begun in
Vainglory and Ostentation, have had their Judgment upon them to end in
corruption and abuse. This Meditation has made me presume to write these few
Lines to your Majesty, being no better than good wishes, which your Majesty's
great Wisdom, may make something, or nothing of.

Wherein, I desire to be thus understood, that if this Foundation (such as it
is) be perfect and good in Law: then I am too well acquainted with your
Majesty's Disposition, to advise any course of power or profit, which is not
grounded upon a right.

Nay further, if the defects be such, as a Court of Equity may remedy and cure:
Then I wish that, as St. Peter's Shadow did cure Diseases, so the very shadow
of a good intention may cure the defects of that Nature: But if there be a
Right, and Birthright planted in the Heir, and not remediable by Courts of
Equity, and that Right be submitted to your Majesty, whereby it is both in your
power and grace what to do: then do I wish, that this rude Mass and Chaos of a
good Deed, were directed rather to a solid Merit, and durable Charity, than to
a blaze of Glory, that will but crackle a little in Talk, and quickly
extinguish: And this may be done, observing the Species of Mr. Sutton's intent,
though varying in individuo; for it appears that he had in notion, a triple
good, an Hospital, a School, and maintaining of a Preacher; which individuals
refer to these three General Heads, Relief of the Poor, Advancement of
Learning, and Propagation of Religion. Now then, if I set before your Majesty,
in every of these three kinds, what it is that is most wanting in your Kingdom,
and what is like to be the most fruitful and effectual use of such a
Beneficence, and least like to be perverted; that, I think, shall be no ill
scope of my labor, how meanly soever performed; for out of Variety
represented, Election may be best grounded.

Concerning the Relief of the Poor; I hold, some number of Hospitals, with
competent Endowments, will do far more good than one Hospital of an Exorbitant
Greatness: for though the one Course will be more seen, yet the other will be
more felt: For if your Majesty erect many, besides the observing of the
ordinary Maxim, Bonum, quo communius, eo melius, choice may be made of those
Towns and places, where there is most need: and so the Remedy may be
distributed as the Disease is dispersed. Again, greatness of Relief accumulated
in one place, does rather invite a swarm and surcharge of poor, than relieve
those that are naturally bred in that place; like to ill tempered Medicines,
that draw more humor to the part, than they evacuate from it: but chiefly I
rely upon the Reason I touched in the beginning, That in these great Hospitals,
the Revenues will draw the Use, and not the Use the Revenues; and so through
the Mass of Wealth, they will swiftly tumble down in a mis-employment. And if
any man say, That in the two Hospitals in London, there is a Precedent of
Greatness concurring with good Employment; let him consider, that those
Hospitals have Annual Governors; that they are under the Superior care and
policy of such a State, as the City of London; and chiefly, that their Revenues
consist not in Certainties, but in Casualties and free Gifts: which Gifts would
be withheld, if they appeared once to be perverted; so as it keeps them in a
continual good behavior and awe, to employ them aright: None of which points
do match with the present Case.

The next Consideration may be, Whether this intended Hospital, as it has a
more ample Endowment, than other Hospitals have, should not likewise work upon
a better Subject than other poor: as that it should be converted to the relief
of maimed Soldiers, decayed Merchants, Householders, aged and destitute
Churchmen, and the like; whose Condition being of a better sort than loose
People and Beggars, deserves both a more liberal stipend and allowance, and
some proper place of Relief not intermingled, or coupled with the basest sort
of poor; which Project, though specious, yet in my judgment will not answer the
design in the event, in these our times: For certainly, few men in any
Vocation, who have been Somebody, and bear a mind somewhat according to
conscience, and remembrance of that they have been, will ever condescend to
that Condition, as to profess to live upon Alms, and to become a Corporation of
declared Beggars; but rather will choose to live obscurely, and, as it were, to
hide themselves with some private Friends: So that the end of such an
Institution will be, That it will make the place a receptacle of the worst,
idlest, and most dissolute Persons of every Profession, and to become a Cell of
Loyterers, cast Serving men, and Drunkards, with scandal, rather than fruit, to
the Commonwealth: And of this kind, I can find but one Example with us, which
is the Alms Knights of Windsor, which Particular would give a man small
encouragement to follow that Precedent.

Therefore the best effect of Hospitals, is, to make the Kingdom, if it were
possible, capable of that Law, That there be no Beggar in Israel: for it is
that kind of People that is a Burden, an Eye sore, a Scandal, and a Seed of
peril and tumult in the State. But chiefly it were to be wished, that such a
Beneficence toward the relief of the Poor, were so bestowed, as not only the
mere and naked Poor should be sustained; but also that the honest Person, which
makes hard means to live, upon whom the Poor are now charged, should be in
some sort relieved: for that were a work generally acceptable to the Kingdom,
if the public Hand of Alms might spare the private hand of Tax: and
therefore, of all other Employments of that kind, I commend most, Houses of
Relief and Correction; which are mixed Hospitals, where the Impotent Person is
relieved, and the sturdy Beggar buckled to work; and the unable Person also not
maintained to be idle (which is ever joined with Drunkenness and Impurity) but
is sorted with such work as he can manage and perform: and when the uses are
not distinguished, as in other Hospitals, whereof some are for Aged and
Impotent, some for Children, and some for Correction and Vagabonds, but are
general and promiscuous; so that they may take off Poor of every sort from the
Country, as the Country breeds them: And thus the Poor themselves shall find
the Provision, and other People the Sweetness of the abatement of the Tax.

Now if it be objected, That Houses of Correction in all places have not done
the good expected: as it cannot be denied, but in most places they have done
much good; so it must be remembered that there is a great difference, between
that which is done by the distracted government of Justices of Peace, and that
which may be done by a settled Ordinance, subject to a regular Visitation, as
this may be: and besides the want has been commonly in Houses of Correction,
of a competent and certain Stock for the Materials of Labor, which in this
Case may be likewise supplied.

Concerning the Advancement of Learning, I do subscribe to the Opinion of one
of the wisest and greatest Men of your Kingdom, That for Grammar Schools, there
are already too many, and therefore no Providence to add, where there is
excess. For the great number of Schools, which are in your Highnesses Realm,
does cause a want, and likewise an overthrow; both of them inconvenient, and
one of them dangerous: for by means thereof they find want in the Country and
Towns, both of Servants for Husbandry, and Apprentices for Trade; and on the
other side, their being more Scholars bred than the State can prefer and
employ, and the active part of that life, not bearing a proportion to the
preparative, it must needs fall out, that many persons will be bred, unfit for
other Vocations, and unprofitable for that in which they were bred up, which
fills the Realm full of indigent, idle, and wanton people, which are but
Materia reram novarum.

Therefore, in this point, I wish Mr. Sutton's intention were exalted a degree,
that, that which he meant for Teachers of Children, your Majesty should make
for Teachers of Men: wherein it has been my ancient Opinion and Observation,
That in the Universities of this Realm (which I take to be the best endowed in
Europe) there is nothing more wanting toward the flourishing state of
Learning, than the honorable and plentiful Salaries of Readers in Arts and
Professions; in which point, as your Majesty's Bounty already has made a
beginning, so this occasion is offered of God to make a proceeding; surely,
Readers in the Chair, are as Parents in Sciences, and deserve to enjoy a
Condition not inferior to their Children, who embrace the practical part, else
no man will sit longer in the Chair, than till he can walk to a better
preferment: And it will come to pass, as Virgil says, Et Patrum invalidi
referent jejunia Nati. For if the principal Readers, through the meanness of
their entertainment, be but men of superficial Learning, and that they shall
take their places but in passage, it will make the Mass of Sciences want the
chief and solid dimension, which is depth, and to become but pretty and
compendious habits of Practice. Therefore I could wish that in both the
Universities, the Lectures, as well of the three Professions, Divinity, Law,
and Physic, as of the three Heads of Science, Philosophy, Arts of Speech, and
the Mathematics, were raised to 100 l. per Annum a piece; which though it be
not near so great, as they are in some other places, where the greatness of the
reward does whistle for the ablest men out of all Foreign parts to supply the
Chair; yet it may be a Portion to content a worthy and able man, if he be
likewise contemplative in nature, as those Spirits are that are fittest for
Lectures: Thus may Learning in your Kingdom be advanced to a further height;
Learning (I say) which under your Majesty, the most learned of Kings, may claim
some degree of Elevation.

Concerning propagation of Religion, I shall in few words set before your
Majesty three Propositions; none of them devices of my own, otherwise than that
I ever approved them: Two of which have been in agitation of speech, and the
third acted.

The first is a College for Controversies, whereby we shall not still proceed
single, but shall, as it were, double our Files; which certainly will be found
in the Encounter.

The second is a Receipt (I like not the word Seminary, in respect of the vain
Vows, and implicit Obedience, and other things tending to the perturbation of
States involved in that term) for Converts to the Reformed Religion, either of
Youth, or otherwise: For I doubt not, but there are in Spain, Italy, and other
Countries of the Papists, many whose hearts are touched with a sense of those
corruptions, and an acknowledgment of a better way; which grace is many times
smothered and choked, through a worldly consideration of necessity and want;
men not knowing where to have Succor and Refuge: This likewise I hold a work
of great Piety, and of great Consequence; that we also may be wise in our
Generation, and that the watchful and silent night may be used as well for
sowing good Seed, as of Tares.

The third is, the Imitation of a Memorable and Religious Act of Queen
Elizabeth, who finding a part of Lancashire to be extremely backward in
Religion; and the Benefices swallowed up in Impropriations, did by Decree in
the Duchy, erect four Stipends of 100 l. per Annum a piece for Preachers, well
chosen to help the Harvest, who have done a great deal of good in the parts
they have labored: Neither do there want other Corners in the Realm, that
would require for a time the like extraordinary help.

Thus have I briefly delivered unto your Majesty my Opinion touching the
Employment of this Charity, whereby that Mass of Wealth, which was in the Owner
little better than a stack or heap of Muck, may be spread over your Kingdom, to
many fruitful Purposes, your Majesty planting and watering, and God giving the
increase.


Those, who ever understood the temper of this Learned Man, may easily perceive
that at this time there were Baits enough laid for his partiality, that such a
mind as his, could not but be biased, nay, now he was to contest for
opposition's sake: This made him busy and importunate, eager at the Bar, and
earnest in his Addresses to the King.

The Motives that encouraged him to espouse the Plaintiff's Quarrel, in short
were these.

1. The comfortable expectation of a great share of the Revenues.

2. Because he was not named by Sutton, as one of the Trustees for the
Foundation: which very reflection, Mr. Laws the Executor used to him much about
the Trial.

3. He and Sir Edward Coke could never agree, and therefore no wonder if they
differed in this Affair: an Instance whereof I find in a Letter of his of
Expostulation to Sir Edward, wherein, he says, He took a Liberty to disgrace
his Law, Experience and Discretion, etc.

I shall not undertake to answer the particular Arguments in the Letter, but
only briefly take thus much notice of it.

First, The Simile of Salt and Sacrifice amounts to no more than this; That we
can do nothing perfectly, but yet we must do as well as we can, and in acts of
Mercy every man is the proper Judge of his own Discretion.

Secondly, He urges, the Honorable Trustees cannot live for ever: but yet, at
their decease, their Equals are chosen in their Room.

What else is urged, is rather a large and studied Essay of the end of Charity,
than a thing proper to this Affair.

But the greatest Vindication of Mr. Sutton, and his Magnificent Charity, is
the Foundation it self, which notwithstanding the Envy and Opposition against
it, and the difficulty, after Six thousand pounds expense in sitting, the
healthful, pleasant, and large Mansion, for those that were to dwell in it, on
Monday next after Michaelmas-day, October. 3. 1614. three years after the death
of the Founder, was opened by his vigilant and faithful Executors, at which
time the Captains and Gentlemen, Scholars and Officers entered this new and
stately Hospital, to the Glory of God, the Honor of his Majesty, and Mr.
Sutton the effectual Founder thereof, the Credit of the Protestant Religion,
for the good Example of the Rich, the comfort of the Poor, the Reputation of
the Executors and Governors, and the Joy of all good Minds to behold it: so
that it might well be said, in the Settlement thereof, as it was in the
Solemnity of the Roman Jubilees, Come, and see a work, the like to which, none
alive ever saw, and no man alive is ever like to see again.

Some years after I find an Establishment made, with many Excellent Orders, at
an Assembly June 21. 1627. and signed with King CHARLES the First's own Hand.

Charter House.
THE Hospital of King JAMES founded in Charter House in the County of
Middlesex, at the humble Petition and only Costs and Charges of Thomas Sutton
Esquire; this Style shall be inviolably observed and expressed in the same
formal words upon all Evidences, Conveyances, Leases, and Writings of Records.

There shall be an Anniversary Commemoration of the Founder kept every 12th day
of December, with Solemn Service, a Sermon, and such increase of Commons as we
allow upon other Festival days by our Establishment hereafter ensuing.

The Governors jointly taken make the Head of this Body Corporate: The poor
Brothers and Scholars, and such Officers as are mentioned only in the Kings
Letters Patents, shall be styled Members of the Foundation, and shall be chosen
within two months after the Vacancy, according to the express words of the
Letters Patents.

All other Officers of the Revenue or Household, not particularly mentioned in
the Letters Patents aforesaid, shall be accepted, reputed and taken as Members
of Arbitrary Election, and it shall be in the Governors Power to make their
number more or less, and to choose them sooner or later, as to their Wisdoms
shall seem best for the good of the Hospital.

No Member of the Foundation, or of Arbitrary Election, that is lodged in the
House, shall be a married man, either at the time of his admission, or after;
and if he be, he shall be deprived of his place, and of all Fees and Profits
thereto belonging (except Dr. Wright the present Physician, and John Clarke the
present Receiver, and John Wotton the present Auditor.

The disproportioned and improper Titles for an Hospital, of an Attorney
General, Surveyor General, Receiver General, and Steward of the House and
Household, shall quite be abolished, and those Officers shall upon all Writings
and Accounts be styled as hereafter follows in these our Ordinances.

All possible care shall be taken, and diligence used to obtain an Act at the
next Parliament, for the Confirmation of the Foundation of King James's
Hospital, founded in Charter House in the County of Middlesex, at the humble
Petition and only Costs and Charges of Thomas Sutton Esquire And this care and
diligence is imposed upon the Master and Solicitor, as they will answer the
contrary at their peril.

The Common Seal shall be kept in the Evidence-house, and under four Keys, to
remain in their Custody that now have them, till the Governors dispose thereof
otherwise: And then the same to be kept as shall be directed; provided always
that the Master of the Hospital for the time being shall have the keeping of
one Key.

The Statutes and Ordinances for the good Government of the Hospital, concluded
upon by the Governors, and ratified by the Common Seal, shall be fairly and
twice engrossed in Parchment, whereof the Original, with the Common Seal
affixed, shall be safely kept in the Evidence-house, and the other being a true
Copy, shall be fairly bound up in a Book, to remain in the Masters custody, and
to be brought to the Table at every Assembly.

The Keys of the Evidence-house shall be in their custody who now keep them,
till the Governors dispose otherwise thereof, and then shall remain according
to such disposition; Provided always that the Master for the time being shall
keep one: And no Writings shall be delivered out to the Solicitor, but with a
Note of the particulars registered in a Book under the Masters hand, and a Note
taken under his hand that receives them for the Re-delivery.

There shall be a Ledger Book, fairly written in Parchment, wherein shall be
entered the true Copy of all the Deeds, Evidences, Surveys old and new,
Counterparts of Leases old and new, Bonds, Orders, Decrees, and all other
Writings touching the Hospital Lands, and the same shall be ranged in their
proper Classes of every several Manor, Township, or other place.

There shall be two Iron Chests, one in the Receivers custody for keeping the
Hospital Revenues, whereof he shall give account quarterly to the Master:
another with three several Locks and Keys, two in the custody of the Master and
Receiver, and the third in the custody of whom the Governors shall please; to
abide always in the Evidence-house, for keeping the Surplus remaining at the
years end, whereof the Receiver shall be accomptant by a fair Declaration,
examined and engrossed in Parchment by the Auditor, and signed with their three
hands, and then safely laid up in the Evidence-house.

There shall be two other Copies of the said Declaration fairly written and
signed by the Master, Receiver, and Auditor, whereof the Auditor shall keep one
to justify the Account, and the Receiver another for his full Discharge, which
shall be as good, lawful, and sufficient Acquittance and Discharge, as if the
same were sealed with our Common Seal.

In time of a General Visitation or dangerous Mortality by the Plague, the
Master, with the consent of four of the Governors, or more, shall dissolve the
House in this manner: The Officers, Servants, and poor Brothers that are able
to travel, he shall dismiss for such sitting time, not exceeding half a year,
as he shall think convenient, with their full allowance of Diet and Wages paid
in hand; and if the danger continue, the advance of allowance shall be
continued. The impotent and unable, by sickness or age, he shall leave under
the care and charge of the Manciple, or his sufficient Deputy, with two elder
Grooms to make Provisions, and three old women lodged in the House, during the
time, to attend them. Such Scholars as have Parents or near Friends able to
receive and maintain them, shall be carefully sent home at the charge of the
House to be kept, and sent back at their Friends charge, when the danger is
past, the times free, and the House open: As for those that are destitute of
Friends or Means they shall be sent out and maintained by the Hospital: For all
which Disbursments the Receiver shall impress money to the Manciple by Warrant
from the Master under his Hand.

The Hospital shall be sufficiently furnished with Buckets, Fire-hooks,
Ladders, Ropes, and other necessary Implements against any casualty by Fire,
either in Charter House or Precincts thereof.

What other Orders soever the Governors, or the Major part of them, shall make
at an Assembly for the good of the Hospital, and sign them with their own Hands
in the Assembly Book, shall stand in as full force and power as if they had
been inserted with these, and ratified with the Common Seal.

All other things ordered and enacted by the Kings Letters Patents for the
confirmation of the Foundation of the Hospital of K. James, founded in
Charter House, in the County of Middlesex, at the humble Petition and only
Costs and Charges of Thomas Sutton Esquire as also all other Orders and Decrees of
this Instrument, ratified by our Common Seal, shall be inevitably kept and
observed.

The Assemblies and Committees.
THere shall be two set and certain Assemblies, one in December, to take the
years Account, view the state of the Hospital, and determine and order any
business occurring: The other in June or July, to dispose of the Scholars to
the Universities or Trades, to make Election both of poor men and poor Scholars
into places vacant, as also to determine and order any other business.

If the Major part of the Governors meet at an Assembly, and the greater part
of them present determine and give order for any thing propounded, then that
Assembly shall stand good, and those Orders shall be in force, otherwise not:
And also all Elections and Expulsions made at such a full Assembly shall stand
good, otherwise they shall be held unlawful, and it shall be the Masters duty
to disavow them till the Governors pleasure be further known the next Assembly.

All Grants, Leases, and Presentations, and all Elections of all Officers
mentioned in the Charter, and likewise of the Register, Receiver, Auditor,
Chapel Clerk, Organist and Manciple, as also of all poor men and poor
Scholars, shall be in the power of the Governors only, and they shall not
elect above Eighteen poor Men, or Eighteen poor Scholars at any one Assembly.

No Patent or Fee shall be granted for life to any Officer whatsoever, but
durante beneplacito.

No poor Man or poor Scholar shall be admitted but into the next place after
him that is or shall be pre-elected, and they shall not come one over the
others head, any powerful means or importunity to the contrary notwithstanding.

The Orders and Constitutions of every Assembly shall be engrossed in the
Assembly Book by the Register, and signed by the Governors present at that
Assembly within forty days: All which Orders and Constitutions the Master,
Register, and other Members, Officers, Ministers and Servants of the House whom
it may concern, shall observe and obey, as they will answer the contrary at
their peril.

Other Assemblies shall be accidentary upon the occasion of the Death or
Resignation of a Governor, Officer of the Foundation, or Incumbent upon any
Spiritual Living, being of the Patronage of the Hospital, to elect or present
another in his place, wherein it is provided that the Spiritual Livings be
conferred upon persons capable, and such as do, or have done actual Service to
the House, or have been Members thereof, before any others.

A Committee of five at the least shall be chosen for the whole year at the
Assembly in December, whereof any three, the Master being one, may proceed in
any business left to the Committees: And they shall yearly, between Easter and
Midsummer, assisted with some learned Men, make a Visitation of the School, and
certify the Table at the Assembly following of the state thereof, and which
Scholars between the Age of Sixteen and Eighteen, are fit to be preferred to
the Universities, and there maintained by the Hospital; which not.

Those Scholars sent to the Universities, if they continue there, and follow
their Studies, shall be allowed each of them Sixteen pounds yearly Pension, at
the four usual Feasts, by even and equal portions, for Eight years: But in case
they discontinue sooner, their Pension shall cease; Provided always they shall
not exceed the number of Four and twenty such Pensioners at any one time.

Such as are to be bound Apprentices, shall have Sixteen pounds a piece in gift
toward their setting out, whereof four Marks shall be to apparel the
Apprentice, and twenty Marks to his Master, which money, both for Maintenance
at the Universities, and putting out to Trades, shall be disbursed by the
surviving Executor of the Founder, during his life, and after by such as the
Governors shall appoint in that behalf; Provided that the Tradesman shall
first enter into Thirty pounds Bond to the Governors for good usage of the
Apprentice, and teaching him his Trade.

Such Scholars as the Governors at an Assembly shall appoint to Universities
or Trades, with the allowance before specified, their Parents or nearest
Friends that are able shall be sent unto to provide them of Places accordingly,
before Michaelmas-day then next following, and if they shall fail therein, upon
lawful warning given them, then those Scholars shall be dismissed, and made
incapable of any allowance in or from the Hospital: Concerning such Scholars
whose Parents or Friends are unable, the House shall provide places for them.

Lastly, the said Committees shall take in their Consideration all business of
importance referred unto them by the Governors at an Assembly; As also all
such things as the Master of the Hospital shall communicate unto them for their
advice and assistance, to digest and prepare them, that they may be presented
in writing to the Solicitor, and propounded at the next meeting of the
Governors.

The Master.
ELection shall be made of a Master that is a learned, discreet, and meet man,
according to the express words of the Foundation, unmarried, and aged above
Forty years.

He shall neither have, nor accept of any place of Preferment or Benefit,
either in Church or Commonwealth, whereby he may be drawn from his Residence,
Care, and Charge of the Hospital; and if he do, in such case, he shall leave
that place, or be displaced if he refuse to leave it.

He shall have the Oeconomical Government of the House and Household, during the
Governors pleasure, and to put upon any Officer a Mulct, not exceeding the
value of a week or fortnights Commons, which shall be continued, unless the
Governors, at the next Assembly, shall see cause, and give order to the
contrary: And also to fine any poor Brother at four shillings four pence, or
eight shillings eight pence, upon any misdemeanour, in his discretion deserving
the same, any further punishment he shall not inflict; but upon continuance of
their transgression and incorrigibility, he shall inform the Governors at the
next Assembly, by them to be more severely and condignly chastised by way of
Mulct, Expulsion, or otherwise, as to their Wisdoms shall seem best and most
just for the Offenders Correction, and terror of others.

All other inferior Servants of the Household shall be put in or out at the
discretion of the Master, but he shall have this power in subordination to the
Governors, and his actions shall be alterable by their Censure and Revocation
upon just Cause of Complaint.

He shall not increase or decrease any Diets, Stipends, Fees, or Wages in the
House or School, under, or above the Rates set down in our Establishment
hereafter ensuing, as he will answer the contrary upon pain of paying the
Surcharge himself, and incurring the Gevernours displeasure in case any
allowance be shortened.

Masters of the House since the Foundation.
1. John Hutton Clerk. 2. Mr. Andrew Pern. 3. Peter Hooker Clerk. 4. Francis
Beaumont Esquire. 5. Sir Robert Dallington. 6. George Gerard Esquire. 7. Edward
Gresset Esquire. 8. Sir Ralph Sidenham. 9. Martyn Clifford Esquire.
The Preacher,
HE shall be qualified, both for his Learning and good Conversation of Life, to
be capable and fit for the place, aged about Thirty years, a Master of Arts of
Seven years standing at the least, and one that has been a preaching Minister
the space of four years or more.

The first and chiefest care and charge that we impose upon the Master and Him,
is, for the Service of God, that they, and all the Officers, poor Brothers,
Scholars, and Servants of the Household, frequent the Chapel daily at the
accustomed time of Divine Service: The like shall be observed by the
Schoolmaster, Usher, and poor Scholars of the Foundation, upon every Sunday,
Holy Day, and Vigil in the Afternoon: And that there be a Sermon every Sunday
at Morning Prayer, either by him the said Preacher, or some other deputed by
him.

The Master and Preacher shall have in care and charge, to see that the whole
Household, and those of the School of the Age of Sixteen years and upwards,
shall receive the Blessed Sacrament yearly, at the three Solemn Feasts of
Christmas, Easter, and Whitsontide, unless they be satisfied by some lawful
excuse and just cause of their failing, otherwise the party denying or delaying
shall be liable to the Masters Chastisement, and the Governors further Censure.

The Master and Preacher shall have Superintendancy over the Chapel Clerk,
Organist, and Sexton, to see if each of them carefully perform the Duties of
his place; the one in Reading of Divine Service at the hours accustomed,
assisting the Preacher at the Communion and burying the Dead: The second, in
teaching the poor Scholars to Sing, and playing on the Organs at set times of
Divine Service; The third in keeping the Chapel in a cleanly, comely, and
decent manner, and carefully performing all other Services belonging to such a
place, otherwise they and every of them, shall be subject to the Masters
Punishment.

Preachers since the Foundation.
1. Mr. Harsnet. 2. Mr. Parker. 3. Mr. Ford. 4. Mr. Percivall Burrell. 5. Mr.
William Middleton. 6. Mr. Daniel Toughtevil. 7. Mr. Foxely. 8. Mr. Clark. 9.
Mr. William Adderly. 10. Mr. George Griffith. 11. Dr. Timothy Thirscross. 12.
Mr. Patrick.
The Physician,
HE shall be qualified with the Degree of a Doctor in that Profession, and
shall have his yearly Fee of twenty pounds confirmed unto him; he shall make
choice of his Apothecary, and not exceed the Sum of Twenty pounds a year for
Physic Bills, according to the Rate set down in our Establishment; otherwise
the Governors reserve the power to themselves to make choice of another that
will accept of these Conditions, or to determine whether they will have any
Physician in Ordinary Fee, or not.

Physicians ever since the Foundation.
1. Mr. Thomas Barker. 2. Dr. Barker, his Son. 3. Dr. Laurence Wright. 4. Dr.
Bates. 5. Dr. Gabriel Beavoir. 6. Dr. Castle. 7. Dr. Walter Needham.
The Register and Solicitor.
HE shall be lodged and dieted in the Hospital, a Man of good Conversation,
well practiced in following Law Causes, a good Penman, ready, diligent, and
faithful in all such Employments as the Governors or Master shall put him upon.

His Employment shall be to Summon all Assemblies, to Register their Orders and
Decrees in the Assembly Book, to draw all Patents and Leases, make them ready
for the Common Seal, and enroll them in the Book of Entries, to draw all Leases
for the Gvernours, and wait upon them for the signing and dispatch; to attend
the Hospital Council, and take their Direction upon any occasion of Law
business, and having the Masters Warrant to follow the same withal dexterity
and diligence; to call in Arrearages of Rents, and make seizure or re-entry for
default of payment by Warrant of the Governors; to take all Petitions and
present them to the Table; to take Bond for the teaching, well using and
maintenance of poor Scholars made Apprentices; and by the Masters order and
direction to put in suit the Bonds forfeited, either for Non-payment of Debts,
not performance of Covenants, or for any other cause whatsoever; and to
prosecute and answer all Suits in Law whatsoever, for, and concerning the said
House and Hospital.

He shall not directly nor indirectly contract for the preferring of poor men,
or Boys into the Hospital, nor with any of the Tenants for renewing their
Leases; such business shall immediately be preferred by Petition to the
Governors only, and then presented by him to the Table, and if he be a
Transgressor herein, he shall forfeit his place.

He shall not cancel or deface any Orders concluded at an Assembly, and signed
by the Governors there present, upon peril of loosing his place.

He shall not presume to receive or meddle with any moneys accrewing due to the
Hospital by way of Fine, Rent, or Debt however.

Registers ever since the Foundation.
1. Mr. Thomas Heyward. 2. Mr. Samuel Martyn. 3. Mr. John Yeomans. 4. Mr.
Brent. 5. Mr. Cresset, afterward Master. 6. Mr. John Holland. 7. Mr. William
Taylour. 8. Mr. William Massey. 9. Mr. Spelman. 10. Mr. Lightfoot.
The Receiver.
HE shall not enter into the Execution of his Office before he give good
Security by ten several Bonds of two hundred pounds a piece, wherein himself,
with two sufficient Sureties in every Bond, shall stand bound to the Governors
for the faithful executing his Place, and discharging his Account; he shall
deliver out no moneys but only to the Manciple for Diet, unless he have order
and warrant from the Master.

He shall, according to such Letters of Attorney as are or shall be made in
that behalf, make public demand of Rents due by the Hospital Tenants, upon
the days expressed in the Conditions of their Leases, and shall take witness
thereof, that such further course may be taken for satisfaction, as shall seem
good to the Governors.

At Michaelmas every year, when his Account shall be given up, he shall have
two hundred pounds imprested to him by the Master out of the Surplus remaining
that year, or out of the House Stock, which impressed shall be for expense for
Diet and other Charges till Michaelmas Rent come in, repaying the said money
into the Iron Chest of the Hospital Stock, at, or before the end of November
then next coming.

Receivers ever since the Foundation.
1. Mr. Smith. 2. Mr. David Lewis. 3. Mr. John Clark. 4. Mr. Andrew Hill. 5.
Mr. Alexander Lawson. 6. Sir John Pain. 7. Mr. Pain.
The Manciple,
HE shall put in Bond of One hundred pounds, with one sufficient Surety, for
discharging himself by a just and allowed Account of all such Sums of money as
the Receiver shall from time to time impressed unto him, upon the Masters
warrant, for the Affairs of the Hospital.

He shall attend his Service in the Kitchen till all the Tables be served, and
taken away, and then he shall take his Meals with the inferior Officers and
Grooms at their accustomed Table, and Rate established in these our Ordinances
following.

He shall keep a Book of the weekly expense in Diet, carry it to the Auditors
to be examined; he shall within four days after the week is expired, bring it
to the Master to be perused and signed by him, and whom else he will call.

He shall not disburse or lay out any Sum or Sums of money for any Provisions
for the Hospital (save only the Provision of Diet) without the Masters warrant,
wherein also he shall not exceed the Rates set down in our Establishment
ensuing; nor shall he buy any such Provisions in the Market, or elsewhere, but
with ready money; And if he shall disburse any thing contrary to these Orders,
it shall not be allowed him upon his Account: Besides, he shall be answerable
for his Disobedience.

He shall take a true and perfect Inventory twice in every year of all the
Goods, Movables, and Utensils, of, and throughout the Hospital, and give
Account thereof to the Master, that he may lay the imbezelling or loss to every
Officer, Groom, or poor Brother, to whom it was entrusted, satisfying the House
out of their Wages at his discretion, and giving order for repairing and
renewing such Stuff as shall be so lost, or by long wearing become no more
useful.

The poor Brothers.
THey shall not exceed the Number of Fourscore.

They shall not be holden qualified and capable of the place, unless they be
such as are within the Intention of the Kings Letters Patents of the
Foundation, namely Gentlemen by Descent, and in Poverty, Soldiers that have
born Arms by Sea or Land, Merchants decayed by Pyracy or Shipwreck, or Servants
in Household to the King and Queens Majesty, and none of these to be under the
Age of Fifty years at the time of their Admission; and it shall be the Masters
Charge to certify the Table when they are propounded at an Assembly, if he
know any thing of any man standing in Election to the contrary.

He that has been maimed in the Wars, either at Sea or Land, and not in any
fray or private quarrel, being also a Subject of the Kings Dominions, shall be
capable of the place at Forty years Age or upwards; But if he be not maimed,
though otherwise well deserving, he shall not be capable of the place unless he
be Fifty years old at the least: Nor shall any be admitted whose Body is
tainted with any Leprous, Unclean, or Infectious Disease.

None shall be admitted or elected that has competent Means to sustain him;
and if at or after his admittance he shall be found to have an Estate in value
worth two hundred pounds or coming in, viis and modiis, to the value of Four
and twenty pounds per Annum during his Life, his place shall be void.

No poor Brother shall be admitted till the next Quarter day after his place is
void, and till he bring two pair of new Sheets with him, or that the House
provide them for him, in Discharge whereof the Receiver shall deduct the price
out of his Wages, due the first two Quarters, by even and equal portions, and
upon his account clear the House of that charge.

No poor Brother shall have leave to pass the Seas upon what pretense soever,
but by petition to the Governors, and signed with six of their hands, in which
case and time of absence, he shall only be allowed his Wages, and have his
place reserved for him, other allowances for Commons he shall not have.

They shall not go into the Country to visit Friends, or upon any other
business, without the Masters leave, and that but for two Months at the
farthest, in which case and time of absence, they shall be allowed two third
parts of their Commons in money, but no part of their Wages shall be abated, but
if they go abroad either with leave or without, and fall under Arrest, or any
other danger whereby their return is slayed, in such case they shall have no
means or allowance from the Hospital, either for Commons or Wages, only their
place shall be reserved for them till the Governors pleasure be further known:
And moreover, no Brother shall presume to pass the Out-gates of the Hospital in
their Livery Gowns, upon pain of paying a months Commons out of their Quarters
wages.

They shall not undertake the following of other men's Causes and Suits, nor
procure the molestation, trouble, or expense of other the Kings Subjects, by
their suggestions or informations, upon pain of paying what Mulct the Master,
by these our Ordinances, can impose upon them, and abiding the Governors
further pleasure.

All other Duties to be performed after their Admission, as daily frequenting
the Chapel, Reverent behavior at Prayers, civil fashion of feeding, cleanly
and decent Clothing, neat and wholesome Lodging, friendly and brotherly
conversing and living together, shall be referred to the Masters discretion to
direct, and to the power we have given him to Correct.

The School.
THE Scholars of the Foundation shall not exceed the Number of Forty; nor shall
any be admitted but such as the Schoolmaster shall find and approve to be well
entered in Learning, answerable to his Age at the time of his admittance.

The Schoolmaster shall be of Twenty seven years Age at the least, a Master of
Arts, of good Reputation, both for his Life and Learning in the Latin and Greek
Tongues. The Usher shall likewise be well qualified for his place, having taken
degree of Bachelor of Arts two years at least before his Election, Aged twenty
four years: And if there be such in either University (no discontinuers) and
that have formerly been Members of this Hospital, they shall ( coeteris
paribus) be chosen before any others.

The Schoolmaster shall have charge to admit no poor Scholar without one new
Suit of Apparel, besides that he wears, two new Shirts, three new pair of
Stockings, three new pair of Shoos, and Books for the Form he is to be in, or
money to buy them; and if he fail therein, the charge of repairing the wants
shall be discounted out of his own Wages.

He shall have Certificate by good proof from the place whence they come of the
just Age of every Boy to be admitted, and he shall admit none under the Age of
Ten years, and above Fourteen, as he will answer the contrary.

He shall keep a Book of all such admissions, as also of all Scholars sent to
the University, or Trade, with a particular and punctual setting down the day
and year of their coming in, going out.

They shall keep the accustomed hours of six in Summer, and Seven in Winter,
for their coming to School, and Eight and Three in the Forenoon and Afternoon
for their Collations, and of Six in Summer and Winter, if the time of Meals
will permit, for their leaving off; not failing both Morning and Evening to
begin and end their Studies with the Latin Prayers and Collects now used.

He shall read none but approved Authors, Greek and Latin, as are read in the
best esteemed Free-Schools, and to see those of the Upper Form furnished with
Greek Testaments for their use in the Chapel.

Besides the Scholars weekly exercise, they of the highest Form shall every
Sunday set up in the great Hall four Greek and four Latin Verses a piece, upon
any part of the Second Lesson appointed for that day, for the Master of the
Hospital, or any Stranger, to view and examine: As also two shall be weekly
appointed for reading the Chapters, and saying Grace at every Meal in both the
Halls.

It shall be his care, and the Ushers charge, to teach the Scholars to Cipher
and cast an Account, especially those that are less capable of Learning, and
sit to be put to Trades.

He and the Usher shall be diligent in the daily attendance on their Charge,
and shall not Journey into the Country without the Masters leave: Nor shall
they take into their Tuition above Sixty other Scholars, unless they entertain
another under Usher out of their own Means, and to be dyeted and lodged out of
the Hospital: Nor shall they receive for teaching those of the Foundation any
Fee or Wages from their Friends.

They shall be careful and discreet to observe the Nature and Ingeny of their
Scholars, and accordingly instruct and correct them: In Correction they shall
be moderate; in Instruction diligent: Correcting according to the quality of
the Fault in matter of Manners, and according to the capacity of the Fault in
matter of Learning.

All other Duties of their place they shall faithfully perform; namely, to see
that the Scholars be of modest and mannerly behavior, well and decently
clothed, orderly and seasonably dyeted, cleanly and wholesomly lodged: And that
the Matron, Butler, Tailor, and Groom perform their duties to these purposes,
otherwise their Tutors to be censured by Us the Governors, and their Servants
to be punished by the Master of the Hospital.

Schoolmasters.
1. Mr. Nicholas Gray. 2. Mr. Robert Gray, his Brother. 3. Mr. William
Middleton. 4. Mr. Robert Brooks. 5. Mr. Samuel Wilson. 6. Mr. John Bonchee. 7.
Mr. Norris Wood. 8. Mr. Thomas Watson.
Vshers.
1. Mr. Bagley. 2. Mr. Robert Gray. 3. Mr. Middleton. 4. Mr, Brooks. 5. Mr.
Anthony Andrews. 6. Mr. John Byrch. 7. Mr. Samuel Wilson. 8. Mr. John Martyn.
9. Mr. Norris Wood. 10. Mr. John Stephens. 11. Mr. Edmund Sly. 12. Mr. Thomas
Watson. 13. Mr. Rowland Buckeridge. 14. Mr. Thomas Walker.
Officers of the Revenues.
Steward of Courts.
NO Steward of Courts shall take any greater Fee than Five shillings for his
Copy and entering it into the Roll, unless it express uses made over by Will, in
which Case his Fee shall be Ten Shillings.

All Stewards of Courts shall bring or send into the Charter House, within
three months after the Court holden, the Roll thereof, fairly written in
Parchment, with the Fine set down in the Margent, and signed with his own hand:
They shall also deliver the Tenant his Copy within forty days after the Court
holden, if the Tenant demand it, and pay for it according to the Rate aforesaid.

Stewards.
1. Mr. John Mocket. 2. Mr. Joseph Ward. 3. Mr. Abell Allen.
This Office is now turned into the Manciple's.

Auditor.
HE Shall quarterly examine the Receivers Book of Receipts of the Revenues and
Disbursments for the Hospital, to see if the one agree with the Rental, and the
other be disbursed by the Masters warrant; and upon proof by Examination under
his hand of every particular, the Book shall be signed by the Master.

He shall weekly examine the Manciple's Book of Disbursments for Dyets, and
what else he lays out, to see if the one agree with the Establishment, and the
other be done by warrant, and upon due Examination to approve them under his
hand, before they be signed by the Master.

Upon Balancing all Accounts of Receipts and Disbursment at the years end, he
shall draw the Declaration by us formerly enjoyed in these our Orders, that at
the Assembly in December. a perfect and yearly view may be taken of the state of
the Hospital.

Auditors.
1. Mr. John Wotton. 2. Mr. Henry Wotton. 3. Mr. Henry Playford. 4. Mr. Spour.
Bailiffs.
NO Bailiff shall be chosen of any Manor or Manors, unless he dwell there, or
within five miles distance at the farthest.

All Bailiffs shall put in Bond of Two hundred pounds apiece, with two Sureties
for paying in the moneys by them levied either for free Rents or Profits of
Courts; and they shall not meddle with the Receipt of any Farm-rents, upon pain
of forfeiting their Bond.

All Bailiffs shall bring in all free and customary Rents within forty days
after the Quarter day; also all Profits and Perquisits of Courts within the
said time of forty days after the day assigned by the Steward for payment
thereof.

Leases.
UPon a Lease hereafter to be granted, no Tenant shall have respit for payment
of his Rent above Forty days after the Quarter-day, wherein he ought to pay it
by his Lease.

All Lease Rents shall be paid by Tenants at the Charter House, so shall all
free and customary Rents, with Profits and Perquisits of Courts, be there
likewise paid by the Bailiffs.

All Lessees shall be tied by Covenant to dwell upon their Farms, and not to
put them over but to Wife and Children, without License procured by Petition at
the Table, and signed by the Major part of the Governors there present; and no
License shall be granted them but for the remainder of years limited by the
former Lease, and at the same Rent, and enjoining the under Tenants to dwell
thereupon.

In every Lease hereafter to be granted of any of the Hospital Lands or
Tenements in any Manor where a Court Baron is used to be kept, there shall be
comprised in every such Lease a Covenant on the Lessees part, To do suit of
Court there, and to be obedient to the Orders therein to be made, touching, or
by reason of the Lands and Tenements.

No Lease shall be made till within Three years before the expiration of the
old Lease, unless it be upon surrender of the old Lease: Nor shall it be
granted for Lives, or longer time than One and twenty years.

No Fine shall be taken upon letting or renewing any Lease; but such an
Improvement of Rent as shall seem best to the Governors, and for the good of
the Hospital.

Surveys.
THere shall be two Surveys made of all such Lands belonging to the Hospital,
as are not already surveyed, and the same shall be faithfully transcribed into
a Book expressing the yearly Rent now paid, and the yearly value by Survey,
which Book shall be brought to the Table at every Asssembly, that upon the
expiring or renewing of Leases, the Governors may increase or abate the Rents,
as to their Wisdoms shall seem best for the good of the Hospital.

An Establishment for the Dyets, Liveries, Stipends, Wages, and other Charges
and Expenses of the Hospital of King JAMES, founded in Charter House, in the
County of Middlesex, at the humble Petition, and only costs and charges of
Thomas Sutton Esquire, to be strictly observed, and not any way exceeded, viz.
For weekly Diet.
l. s. d. EIght at the Master's Table allowed for Bread, Beer, Diet, and
Detriments iiii. Fourscore at the Brothers Table allowed for Bread, Beer, Diet,
and Detriments vii. xiii. iiii. Forty two at the Scholars Table allowed for
Bread, Beer, Diet, and Detriments. vi. xviii. iii. ob. Ten at the Manciples
Table allowed for Bread, Beer, Diet, and Detrements xliiii. ii. Two of the
Kitchen, and one Porter xiii. Five Attendants for the Masters Table, for Bread
and Beer v. x. For weakly Beavors.
l. s. d. Eight at the Master's Table allowed it in kind at the rate of xiiii
d. a man ix. iiii. Five Attendants allowed it in kind at the same rate v. x.
Forty Scholars, one Butler, and one Groom, allowed it in kind at six to a Mess,
with iiii d. allowance xvi. iiii. Fourscore Brothers are allowed it in money by
the Establishment vii. Ten at the Manciples Table, two of the Kitchen, and one
Porter, allowed it in money iii. In all Dyets and Beavors, viz. weekly xxxiii l.
vi s. i d. ob. In all Dyets and Beavors, viz. yearly M. viic. xxxi l. xviii s.
vi d. ob.

For exceeding days.
l. s. d. Twenty three Exceeding days, namely, Christmas Day, St. Stephen, St.
John, Innocents, New years, Epiphany, Candlemas, Shrove-sunday, and Tuesday,
Kings-day, Queens-day, Lady Day, Easter Day, Monday and Tuesday, Ascension,
Whitsunday, Monday and Tuesday, Midsummer, Michaelmas, All Saints, Fifth of
November, and Twelfth of December. xliiii. ix. iiii. In all Dyets, Beavors, and
exceeding days yearly Mt. viic. lxxvil. viis. xd. ob. For Liveries.
l. s. d. Fourscore poor men for Gowns at xls. a piece yearly Clx. Forty
Scholars for Gowns finished and made up, at xxxvi s. ii d. a piece, which makes
yearly lxxii. vi. viii. Summer Suits for forty Scholars at xxix s. vi d. a
piece ix. Winter Suits like number, at xvii s. x d. a piece xxxv. xiii. iiii.
For every Scholar yearly six pair of Shoos, at xxd. the pair, four pair of
Stockings at xx d. the pair, Hatt and Band iiii s. Garters, Points, and Gloves
at xvi d. in all yearly xliiii. For every Scholar two Shirts, at iii s. apiece,
and six Bands at x. d. apiece, in all yearly xxii. For Books, Paper, Ink,
Quills, and teaching them to Write and Cipher yearly xiiii. Four Gowns for the
Chappel-Clerk, Organist, Manciple and Matron, at xl s. apiece yearly viii.
Sixteen Gowns for Sixteen Grooms and other inferior Officers at xx s. a man
xvi. In all Liveries and other Necessaries yearly iiiic. xxxil. For Wages.
l. s. d. For the Master of the Hospital yearly l. The Council of the Hospital
xv. The Steward of Courts for Cambridge and Essex x. The Steward of Elcombe xl.
The Preacher xl. The Register and Solicitor xxx. The Receiver xxx. The Auditor
without Diet xl. The Schoolmaster xxx. The Chapel Clerk viii. The Usher xv.
The Organist xiii. vi. viii. The Manciple viii. The Pantler with xxvi s. viii
d. for Beavors viii. The Physician and Physic xl. The Butler for the House,
with xxvi s. viii d. for Beavors viii. The Butler for the Scholars vi. xiii.
iiii. The Bailiff of Elcombe xl. Other Bailiffs x. Fourscore poor men at C s.
for wages, and xxvi s. viii d. a piece for Beavors vc. vi.xiii. iiii. The
Sexton attending in the Hall and Chapel, with xxvi s. viii d. for Beavors vii.
vi. viii. The Scholars Groom iiii. Other five Grooms at iiii l. wages, and xxvi
s. viii d. for Beavors xxvi. xiii. iiii. The Gardner xx. The two Scullions
viii. vi. viii. The Porter for Wages and Beavors viii. The Matron xvi. The
Landress xxx. The Cook, besides his accustomed Kitchen Fees xvi. The Plummer
for his time xx. The Barber for the Scholars xl. The two Out-porters iiii. The
Clock keeper xl. The Surveyor of the Hall lii. The Keeper of the great Chamber
xl. The Scholars, Butler, and Groom, to make their Diet equal to others ciiii.
The Scavenger vi. The Scrape Trencher xl. Portage of Meat from Market vi. x.

In all Fees and Wages yearly Mt. lxvil. vi.

Other Ordinary Allowances.
l. s. d. The Masters Fuel x. The Preachers c. The Register and Solicitor c.
The Receiver c. The Schoolmaster iiii. Chapel Clerk xl. The Usher iiii. The
Organist xl. The Manciple xl. Law Charges xl. Fuel for the Hospital, and
allowance for weak and sick clii. Reparations lx. Renewing of Housholdstuff l.
Washing and Starching Scholars Linen vi. Candles xlv. Burials x. Communions
xl. Quit Rents ix. xvi. Surplus allowed for the Master and Strangers in the
Hall viii. Loss in cutting out Beef xi. C. l. s. In all the other ordinary
allowances yearly iiii. xxxii. xvi. l. l. l. C. l. s. d. Sum total of the
yearly Expense of the Hospital for Dyets, Liveries, Wages, and other ordinary
allowances M. M. M. vii. vi. ix. x. ob. Besides Extraordinaries for Pary x l.
Palmer ciiii s.

This Establishment was made Nine and forty years ago, since which time there
have been considerable alterations, chiefly upon the account of the increase of
the Revenue: which I shall set down in a fit place hereafter.

The next thing to be considered, is the consummation of the Settlement, to put
it beyond all question; which cannot be effected without a new Act of
Parliament particularly designed to confirm this new Foundation, in distinction
from that at Hallingbury: Therefore you find it propounded in the beginning of
the Establishment, which was in the first year of King Charles his Reign: and
in the third, this following Act of Parliament was obtained, which, I have been
told, was never before printed; and therefore proper for this place.

The Exemplification under the Great Seal of England, of the Act of Parliament
for confirmation of the Hospital of King James, founded in Charter House in the
County of Middlesex, at the humble Petition and only Costs and Charges of
Thomas Sutton Esquire, and of the Possessions thereof.
CAROLUS Dei gratia Anglie, Scotie, Francie, and Hibernie Rex, Fidei Defensor',
etc. Omnibus ad quos praesentes Litere pervenerint, Salutem: Inspeximus quoddam
breve nostrum de Cerciorand' e Curia Cancellarie nostre nuper emanand. unacum
quoddam retorn. in dorso ejusdem brevis fact. in Filaciis dicte Cancellarie
nostre de recordo residend. in haec verba, carolus Dei gratia Anglie, The Writ
of Certiorari.
Scotie, Francie, and Hibernie Rex, Fidei Defensor, etc, dilecto nobis Henrico
Elsyinge Armiger', Clerico Parliamentorum nostrorum, Salutem, Volentes certis
de causis Certiorari super tenore cujusdam Actus Parliamenti nostri apud
Civitatem nostram Westm', Decimo septimo die Martii, ultimo praeterito
inchoat', and ibidem usque vicesimum Sextum diem instan. Mensis Junii tent', ac
deinde usque ad and in vicesimum diem Octobris, proxime sequen, praerogat.
intitulat', An Act for the establishing and confirming of the Foundation of the
Hospital of King James, founded in Charter House in the County of Middlesex, at
the humble Petition and only Costs and Charges of Thomas Sutton Esquire, and of
the Possessions thereof. The Return thereof.
Tibi precipimus quod tenorem Actus predict. cum omnibus illum tangerd. nobi.
in cancellariam' nostram sub Sigillo tuo distinct and aperte, sine dilatione
mittas and hoc breve T. meipso apud Westm' xxviiio. die Junii, Anno Regni
nostri quarto Caesar. Ra. Executio istius brevis patet in Scedula hinc annexat'
H. Elsyinge Cler' The time of the beginning and continuance of the Parliament,
viz. from the 17. day of March, in the third of King Charles the First, until
the 26. of June next following.
Scedulam eidem brevi annexat' in Filaciis dict. Cancellarie nostre de Recordo
similiter residen. in in haec verba, In Parliamento inchoat' and tent' apud
Westm' Decimo septimo die Martii, Anno Regni Serenissimi and Excellentissimi
Domini nostri Caroli, Dei gratia, Anglie, Scotie, Francie, and Hibernie Regis,
Fidei Defensor', etc. tertio and ibidem continuat' usque in Vicesimum sextum
diem Mensis Junii, tunc propter sequen. communi omnium Dominorum tam
spiritualium quam temporalium, and Communium consensu, and Regie Majestatis
assensu (inter alia) fancitum, inactitatum, and stabilitum fuit hoc sequens
Statutum, The Title of the Act.
An Act for the Establishing and Confirming of the Hospital of King James,
founded in Charter House in the County of Middlesex, at the humble Petition and
only Costs and Charges of Thomas Sutton Esquire, and of the Possessions
thereof: Cujus quidem Statuti tenor sequitur in haec verba, viz.

The Act.
Whereas our late Sovereign Lord King James of blessed memory, at the humble
suit of Thomas Sutton late of Balsham in the County of Cambridge Esquire deceased,
Recital of the Letters Patents.
by his Highness Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, hearing date
the Two and twentieth day of June, in the Ninth year of his Majesty's Reign of
England, did give and grant unto the said Thomas Sutton full power, license,
and lawful authority to erect and establish at or in the late dissolved
Charter House besides Smithfield, in the County of Middlesex, an Hospital and
Free School in such sort as in, and by the said Letters Patents is expressed.
And did further by the same Letters Patents, nominate, ordain, assign,
constitute, limit, and appoint certain persons in the same Letters Patents
named to be Governors of the Lands, Possessions, Revenues and Goods of the
said Hospital; And did by the same Letters Patents Incorporate the said
Governors and their Successors to be a Body Politic and Corporate, to have
continuance for ever by the Name of the Governors of the Lands, Possessions,
Revenues, and Goods of the Hospital of King James, founded in Charter House
within the County of Middlesex, at the humble Petition and only Costs and
Charges of Thomas Sutton Esquire: And did further by the same Letters Patents
give license to the said Thomas Sutton, to give, grant, and assure to the said
Governors the Mansion House, commonly called Charter House, besides
Smithfield, in the said County of Middlesex, and diverse and sundry other
Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments mentioned in the said
Letters Patents, as in the said Letters Patents more at large appears. Thomas
Sutton, Recital of the Founders Deed of Bargain and Sale.
minding the performance of the said Charitable Work by his Indenture of
Bargain and Sale, bearing date the First day of November in the Ninth year
aforesaid, and enrolled in his said late Majesty's High Court of Chancery, did,
according to the said license to him in that behalf given for the consideration
in the same Indenture mentioned, give, bargain, sell, grant, confirm, and
convey to the said Governors of the Lands, Possessions, Revenues, and Goods of
the Hospital of King James, founded in Charter House within the County of
Middlesex, at the humble Petition and only Costs and Charges of Thomas Sutton
Esquire, and to their Successors for ever, the said Mansion House, commonly
called Charter House besides Smithfield, in the said County of Middlesex, and
diverse and sundry other Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments
in the same Indenture mentioned and expressed upon especial trust and
confidence, that all and singular the Rents, Issues, Revenues, Commodities, and
Profits of all and singular the said Manors, Houses, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, should be for ever truly, faithfully, and wholly distributed,
converted, and employed to and for the maintenance and continuance of the said
Hospital and Free School, and other the Charitable uses in the said Deed
indented, mentioned, as by the said Deed indented more at large appears.
Recital of the Heirs Suit in Law against the Foundation.
And whereas since the death of the said Thomas Sutton one Simon Baxter, the
Heir of the said Thomas Sutton, has attempted and endeavored to impeach and
overthrow the Incorporation and Foundation of the said Hospital, and the
endowments thereof, and so to obtain and get to himself the Manors, Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments that were the said Thomas Suttons, and by him
conveyed to the Governors of the said Hospital for maintenance of the poor
there; Howbeit the said Heir drawing the same in question in his said Majesty's
Courts of Kings Bench and Chancery, and the Case being adjorned by the then
Justices of the Kings Bench into the Exchequer Chamber, after solemn argument
and deliberate advice of all the then Justices of both Benches, and Barons of
the Exchequer, it was clearly resolved, That the said Foundation,
Incorporation, and Endowment of the said Hospital, was sufficient good and
effectual in the Law. Kings Bench, and also a Decree agreeing with the said
Judgment was had in the said Court of Chancery, upon consideration whereof, and
for that the said Foundation and Endowment does daily maintain Fourscore poor
men, some maimed in the Wars, some undone by Shipwreck and Misfortune on the
Seas, and Forty poor Scholars, with a Master, Preacher, Teachers, and
Attendants, and other Officers in very ample manner, with good and sufficient
allowance in all things: It is most humbly desired in the behalf of the
Governors and poor People of the said Hospital, That it may be enacted by the
Kings most Excellent Majesty, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons
in this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, The
body of the Act.
And be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the said House, called the
late dissolved Charter House besides Smithfield, The place of the Hospital.
and all the said Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Orchards, Gardens, Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments within the Site, Circuit, and Precinct of the
same, was, is, and shall be for ever hereafter an Hospital in deed and in name,
and is and shall be called by the name of the Hospital of King James, The name
of the Hospital.
founded in Charter House within the County of Middlesex, at the humble
Petition and only Costs and Charges of Thomas Sutton Esquire, and that such of
the said Governors, named or mentioned in the said Letters Patents as are yet
living, The Governors incorporated, and by what Name.
together with such others now living as have sithence been named or elected,
or mentioned to be elected into the room or place of such of them as are since
dead, or are removed, or have relinquished their places, and are now esteemed
Governors, now are, and they and their Successors for ever hereafter shall be
and continue, And shall be adjudged, deemed, and taken to be a Body Corporate
and Politic, by the name of the Governors of the Lands, Possessions,
Revenues, and Goods of the Hospital of King James, founded in Charter house
within the County of Middlesex, at the humble Petition and only Costs and
Charges of Thomas Sutton Esquire, and by that name shall have, The Governors
capacity.
and may have and enjoy all and singular such and the like capacity, power, and
ability to all intents, constructions, and purposes, as any other Corporation
lawfully Incorporated, may, or ought to have, And be it further Enacted by
Power given to the Governors to make laws and orders under their Common Seal.
and their Successors for the time being, or the most part of them, from time
to time, and at all times hereafter, as to their or the most part of them shall
seem fit and convenient, shall and may have full power and authority by writing
under their Common Seal, to make, ordain, set down and prescribe as occasion
shall require, such Rules, Statutes, and Ordinances, as they shall from time to
time, and at all times think fit, as well for and concerning the naming and
electing of such person and persons as shall succeed into the place and room of
any the said Governors, when, and as often as any of them shall dye or be
removed from such place or places of Governor or Governors, or voluntarily
shall relinquish their places; As also for and concerning the Election, Order,
Rule and Government of the Master, Preacher, Schoolmaster, Usher, poor Men,
poor Children, and all other Members, Officers, or Servants of the said
Hospital in their several places, offices and rooms, and for their and every of
their Stipends and Allowances, And that the same Rules, Orders, Statutes and
Ordinances so from time to time to be made, set down and prescribed as
aforesaid, shall be and stand in full force and strength in Law, and be
executed in all things according to the true intent and meaning thereof, under
the several pains, forfeitures, and penalties as shall be expressed and
contained in the same Ordinances, Statutes, and Rules respectively: Provided
always, that the said Rules, Ordinances, and Statutes, or any of them, be not
repugnant or contrary to the Laws or Statutes of this Realm of England, nor
against the purport or true intent of the recited Letters Patents, The
Governors henceforth to take the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance.
And be it enacted and established by the Authority aforesaid, That every
person that shall from henceforth be Elected a Governor of the said Hospital,
shall before he exercise the place of a Governor, take the several Oaths of
Supremacy and Allegiance, which any two others of the said Governors for the
time being, The Master to take the same Oaths henceforth.
shall have power and authority by this Act to administer unto them: And that
the Master from henceforth to be elected shall, before he exercise or take any
benefit of the said place, take the said several Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance; The Masters other oath.
And shall also take an Oath that neither he, nor any other for him, with his
privity, allowance, or consent, has given, or shall give, directly or
indirectly, any money, or other gratuity The oaths of the Preacher,
Schoolmaster, Usher, Officers, and poor men.
Officers, and poor men, and every of them from henceforth to be elected and
admitted, shall before he exercise or take benefit of any such place, take the
said several Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance; And shall also take an Oath
that neither he nor any other for him, with his privity, allowance or consent,
has given, or shall give directly or indirectly, any money, or other gratuity
or reward, for, or in respect of the having or enjoying of the said place, All
which said Oaths by the said Preacher, Minister, Schoolmaster, Usher, Officers,
and poor Men to be taken, any one of the said Governors, and the said Master
for the time being, shall have power and authority by virtue of this Act to
administer. The Governors to hold for ever the Hospital against the King and
others.
And be it further enacted and established by the Authority aforesaid, That the
said Governors and their Successors shall and may for ever hereafter, have,
hold, and enjoy, according to the purport, true intent and meaning of the said
Indenture of Bargain and Sale, the said Hospital, House, and all Buildings,
Gardens, Courts, Orchards, and Backsides thereto belonging, and all and
singular the Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Liberties, Franchises, and
Hereditaments by the aforesaid Letters Patents by the said Indenture of Bargain
and Sale, given, granted, conveyed and assured, or meant, mentioned or
intended, in or by the said Letters Patents or Indenture, to be given, granted,
conveyed or assured to the said Governors against our Sovereign Lord the
King's Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and against all other Person and
Persons, of whom the said Hospital, House, Manors, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, or any of them, were holden at the time of the said Indenture
made, and against their Heirs and Issues, notwithstanding any Title accrewing
for or by any Alienation in Mortmain; And also against all and every other
person and persons of whom the said Thomas Sutton did purchase the said
Hospital, House, Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, or any of them
respectively, and against their Heirs, Issues and Assigns; And also against all
and every other person and persons claiming, or that shall claim any Estate,
Right, Title, or Interest of, in, out, Thomas Sutton did purchase the same,
unless such other person and persons do pursue their Title, Claim, or Interest
by way of Action or lawful Entry within ten years after the end of this present
Session of Parliament, Saving to the King's Majesty, Exceptions and Savings.
his Heirs and Successors, all such Estate, Right, Title and Interest as his
Majesty had, or might have had unto any the said Manors. Lands* Tenements, and
Hereditaments before the said Indenture made, other than for or by reason of
any Alienation in Mortmain; And saving to all and every other person or
persons, Bodies Politic and Corporate, and their Heirs and Successors (other
than the Heirs of the said Thomas Sutton, and other than such person and
persons from whom the said Thomas Sutton purchased the said Hospital, House,
Manors, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, or any of them, their Heirs,
Issues, and Assigns, and Persons claiming by, from, or under them respectively,
and other than such Person and Persons as shall claim the title of Alienation
in Mortmain of any the said Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments) all
such Estate, Right, Title, Claim, Custom, Interest and Demand whatsoever, as
they or any of them have, or shall have, in as large and ample manner and form
to all intents and purposes, as if this Act had never been had nor made. The
Governors disabled to convey the Hospital, House, or Lands to the King.
And be it further enacted and established by the Authority aforesaid, That the
said Governors and their Successors, shall be from and after the end of this
present Session of Parliament, for ever wholly and utterly disabled in Law to
make, do, levy, or suffer any Act or Acts, Thing or Things, whereby, or by
means whereof the said Hospital, House, Manors, Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments, or any part of them, or any of them, shall or may be aliened,
assured, given, granted, demised, charged, or in any sort conveyed, or come to
the possession of our said Sovereign Lord the King, All conveyances to the King
of any the Hos^ital L^^ us to be v^^d.
his Heirs or Successors; And that all Alienations, Assurances, Gifts, Grants,
Leases, Charges, and Conveyances whatsoever, from and after the end of this
present The Governors disabled to make any Estates but for 21 years, or under,
or for one, two, or three lives, or for any years determinab^e upon one, two,
or three lives by Indenture in possession, and not in Reversion, at the usual
Rent or more, or the true yearly value thereof
And be it further enacted and established by the Authority aforesaid, that the
said Governors and their Succesors, and every of them, be also from henceforth
for ever wholly and utterly disabled in Law to make, do, levy, or suffer any
act or acts, thing or things, whereby, or by means whereof the said
Hospital-house, Manors, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, or any of them, or
any part of them, or any of them shall or may be aliened, assured, given,
granted, demised, charged, or in any sort conveyed to any Person or Persons,
Bodies Politic or Corporate, other than Leases and Demises by Indenture of
the said Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and every or any of them
(other than the said Hospital-house, Orchards, Gardens, Backsides, or any of
them, or any part of them, or any of them now used for the habitation or use
of, or for, the Master, Preacher, Schoolmaster, Usher, poor Scholars, and poor
People of the said Hospital, or any of them) for the term of One and twenty
years or under in possession, and not in reversion, or for one, two, or three
lives, or for any number of years determinable upon one, two, or three lives in
possession, and not in reversion, and whereupon such yearly rent or more shall
be reserved to the Governors of the said Hospital and their Successors, during
the continuance of every such Lease as is now reserved upon any demise thereof,
or otherwise the true yearly value thereof, and other than Grants by Copy of
Court Roll, according to the Customs of the several Manors respectively: An
Exception by granting by Copy of Court Roll.
Provided nevertheless, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said
Governors and their Successors, to grant reasonable and convenient Annuities,
Rents, or Fees to such person or persons as shall be Officers, Ministers, or
needful Attendants concerning the affairs of the said Hospital, only for life
or at will, So as the number of the Officers, Ministers, or needful Attendants
be not increased above the Number which now is, as fully and amply as they
should or might have done, as if this Act had never been had or made; A Proviso
for the Lord North.
Provided always, and be it enacted that this Act, or any thing herein before
contained, shall no way extend to give any title to the said Hospital, in or
unto the Mansion House now in possession of the Right Honorable Dudley Lord
North, or of his Assigns at or near the East end of the said Hospital, nor unto
any the Buildings, Edifices, Courts, Gardens, Orchards, or Grounds thereunto
belonging, or therewith used or enjoyed, nor unto any other the Messuages,
Tenements, or Hereditaments of the said Lord North, being within or near the
Site or Precinct of the said Hospital; But that it shall and may be lawful to
and for the said Lord North, his Heirs, Tenants, and Assigns for ever hereafter
to hold and enjoy against the Governors, Master, and other the Owners or
Possessors of the said Hospital in the Charter House, now, and for the time
being, the said Mansion House and Premises, and all ways and passages by Cart
or otherwise, Easements, Waters, Watercourse, Channels, Pipes, Conduits,
Cocks, Liberties, Profits, and Hereditaments to the same, or any of them
belonging, or therewith, or with any of them now used or enjoyed, or the which
by the true meaning of any Grant, Covenant, Clause, or Agreement contained in
one Deed of Feoffment made by Edward Lord North unto Sir William Peter Knight
and others, bearing date the Sixth day of November in the Fifth year of the
Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth, and in one other Deed made by Roger late
Lord North and others to the Right Noble Prince Thomas late Duke of Norfolk,
bearing date the last day of May in the Seventh year of the Reign of the said
late Queen Elizabeth, were meant and intended to belong unto, or to be enjoyed
with the said Mansion House, or any other the said Messuages, Tenements, or
Hereditaments of the said now Lord North, according to the true meaning of the
said several Deeds; And that it shall and may be lawful at all times hereafter
to and for the said Dudley Lord North, his Heirs, Tenants, and Assigns, and all
others inhabiting and possessing the said Mansion House, or any other the said
Messuages, Tenements, or Hereditaments of the said Lord North, for themselves,
their servants, and workmen to have free ingress and regress into and from the
Orchards, Gardens, or other places of the said Hospital, where it shall be
needful to survey, repair, cleanse, amend, and new make the said Pipes,
Conduits, Cocks, Channels, and Watercourse, and all other Pipes, Conduits,
Cocks, Channels, and Watercourse that hereafter shall be erected or placed
within the precinct of the said Hospital for the conveying of Water unto the
said Mansion House, or other the Messuages, Tenements, or Hereditaments of the
said now Lord North, or any of them, and to that purpose to subvert and digg up
the Soil of the said Orchards, Gardens, or other places of the said Hospital
where it shall be needful: Provided also, A Proviso for the Viscountess
Maidstone.
and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that this Act or any thing
therein contained, shall not in any wise extend unto the Mansion House of the
Right honorable Elizabeth Viscountess of Maidstone, situate and being in
Charter House Churchyard, near unto the said Hospital, nor to any the
Buildings, Outhouses, Gardens, or Grounds therewith used, or thereto
pertaining, nor to any Mansion-houses, Buildings, or Grounds therewith used of
any other person or persons within or near the precinct of the said Churchyard
or Hospital, and not conveyed, or mentioned to be conveyed by the said Thomas
Sutton to the said Governors by the said Indenture of Bargain and Sale; But
that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Viscountess of Maidstone,
and all and every other person and persons whatsoever, to hold and enjoy the
said several Mansion houses and Premises, therewith used, or thereto
pertaining, together with all ways and passages with Carts or otherwise, and
all Liberties, Profits, Easements, Water and Watercourse, Pipes, Cocks, and
Passages for Water, and liberty to digg, cleanse, amend, and new make such
Pipes, Cocks, and Watercourse as fully and as amply as if this Act had never
been had nor made. Ego Henricus Elsyinge Armiger', Clericus Parliamentorum,
virtute brevis dicti Domini nostri Regis de Certiorando mihi direct', and his
annexat', certifico superius hoc scriptum verum esse tenorem Actus Parliamenti
supradicti in eo brevi mencionat'. In cujus rei testimonium Sigillum nomenque
meum apposui atque subscripsi, Dat' secundo Die Julii, Anno regni dict' Domini
nostri Regis Caroli quarto, H. Elsyinge Cler' Parl. Nos autem separales tenores
brevis and scedulae predict. ad requisition' Gubernatorum terrarum
possessionum, revencionum, and bonorum Hospitalis predict. duximus
Exemplificand' per presents. In cujus rei testimonium has literas nostras
fieri fecimus Patentes, Test meipso apud Westmonasterium Decimo octavo die
Julii Anno Regni nostri quarto.

Caesar Car.
Examinat' per nos Rob. Rich and Edw. Clarke
Clericos.
Irrotulat' and Rotul' Patent' Cur' Cancellar' Domini Regis Caroli, infra
script' de Anno Regni ejusdem Regis Angliae, etc. Quarto.

Now all things are fixed and settled, according to the admirable Ends they
were designed for, every one enjoying the benefit and refreshments of our Noble
Founder's Charity: Ezra 6.9.
Day by day we have our Portions without fail, that we may offer Sacrifices of
sweet Savor unto the God of Heaven, and pray for the Life and Prosperity of
our most gracious King, and the Happiness of our Noble Governors.

The Names of the present Governors.
1. The most Reverend Father in God, Gilbert, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury 2.
The Lord Chancellor of England. 3. The Duke of Buckingham. 4. The Duke of
Monmouth. 5. The Duke of Ormond. 6. Lord Chamberlain. 7. Lord Treasurer. 8.
Earl of Bridgewater. 9. Earl of Craven. 10. Earl of Shaftsbury. 11. Lord Bishop
of Winchester. 12. Lord Bishop of Rochester. 13. Lord Robarts. 14. Mr.
Secretary Coventry. 15. Sir William Wild. 16. Martyn Clifford Esquire.
Thus the Government of this Foundation is fixed upon the most Honorable
Grandees of our State, and the most Reverend Prelates of our Church; they who
sit at the Helm of our Kingdom, and are graciously pleased to steer and guide
this goodly Ship of Renowned Sutton's Charity. And here we may note the great
Wisdom of our Founder, who made choice of men of Honor and Power, who were
able to maintain his Foundation by their Interest, and to grace it with their
Honor.

When any of these Noble Lord, happen to decease, another is chosen within two
months by the voices of the Major part.

The Patent runs thus.
TO all whom these Presents shall come, the Governors of the Lands,
Possessions, Revenues and Goods of the Hospital of King James, founded in the
Charter House, within the County of Middlesex, at the humble Petition and only
Costs and Charges of Thomas Sutton Esquire, send greeting in our Lord GOD
everlasting. Whereas (...) one of the Governors of the Lands, Possessions,
Revenues, and Goods of the Hospital of King James aforesaid, lately died, and
departed this life, by means whereof his room and place of a Governor did
become, and yet is and continues void: Know ye therefore, that the said
Governors according to the true intent and meaning of the Letters Patent of
our late Sovereign Lord King James, for the Foundation of the said Hospital,
bearing date the Two and twentieth day of June, in the Ninth year of his Reign,
do elect, nominate, and appoint (...) to be henceforth one of the Governors of
the Lands, Possessions, Revenues and Goods of the said Hospital of King James,
founded in the Charter House, within the County of Middlesex, at the humble
Petition and only Costs and Charges of Thomas Sutton Esquire, in the room and
place of a Governor so being void, as aforesaid, by the death of the said
(...) (...) to be, and continue in the room and place, and to have, exercise,
and enjoy the said room and place of one of the Governors of the Lands,
Possessions, Revenues, and Goods of the Hospital aforesaid, according to the
true intent and meaning of the said Letters Patent.

In witness whereof the said Governors have hereunto set their Common Seal,
and every one of them his particular Seal, etc.
The Members that are kept and maintained in the Hospital, chiefly consist of
old Gentlemen and Children.
1. FOurscore ancient Men, who have been formerly in the Wars, and been
serviceable to their King and Country: or else decayed Merchants, whose Estates
have been swallowed up in the Deep, or aged and poor Householders, who have
formerly lived in a fair esteem in the World; who have a long while born the
labor of the day, and now are joyful to find such a Noble Sanctuary and place
of refreshment.

It was primarily intended for old Gentlemen Soldiers, when Age seemed to
sound a Retreat, and therefore such qualified Persons, by the Orders of the
Governors, may be admitted into the House, ten years sooner, or younger, than
other men. I suppose, because the hardships and severe Discipline of War, the
Wounds and Distempers contracted in the Camp, might soon shatter their Bodies,
and render them more early objects of Charity.

These Persons are chosen by particular Governors, every one in their Order:
only the King puts in two in his course, the Queen and Duke of York one a
piece, then the Governors in their respective turns, as places happen to be
vacant: This they do by a Warrant sent to the Master and Register of the House.

The Form of a Warrant for a Pensioner.
To my loving Friends, the Master and Register of Sutton 's Hospital.
I Do hereby nominate and appoint A. B. of N. in the County of M. to be a poor
Brother and Pensioner in Sutton's Hospital; and do desire that this my Warrant
may be presented to the next Assembly of Governors for the Election of
Pensioners, to the intent he may be elected and admitted into the next place
which shall fall to my disposal (next after N. N. of S. in the County of P.
whom I last nominated).

Given under my Hand.

A great Number of Religious and Aged Persons have here received Comfort both
of Soul and Body: Much about 554 have here peaceably spent the Evening of their
days, and then ascended up into Heaven to return thanks to their Great Founder
and Deliverer in their former time of Distress. Here I cannot but take notice
of the health, and sweetness of life in this place: For if out of 80 aged men,
there dye but 9 in a year, which from October the third, 1614. to 1676. makes
up the Sum of 554, or thereabouts, they seem to outlive the common rate of men,
the purchase of whose lives is usually reckoned seven or eight years.

But if at any time it please God to visit the City with the Pestilence, or
some such grievous Distemper (which God for ever avert from them) the House is
dissolved, and every Pensioner has a Certificate in this Form.

To all whom these may appertain, Greeting, etc.
THe Bearer hereof, A. B. a Brother of this Society of the Charter House, has
occasions to go into the Country, and there to make his abode for a time. And
forasmuch as in these Contagious times all Officers and others have just cause
to be fearful whom they lodge or entertain into their Company; These are
therefore to certify faithfully, that neither this Bearer, nor any of our
Society, has been yet visited with the Contagion, or any danger thereof, God
be praised, but are in as perfect health and soundness, as in former times.
These are therefore to will and desire all men, whom it may concern, to suffer
the said A. B. quietly to pass, and freely to stay at the place of his intended
abode, or elsewhere, behaving himself civilly and orderly, whereof we give good
Testimony, as also of the undoubted truth of the Premises.

In witness whereof we have hereunto set our Hands. From Charterhouse, by the
Order of the Lords the Governors.

2. There are also 44 Boys at School, chosen by the same Honorable Persons,
after the same manner with the Pensioners: They are only capable of Admission
between the years of 10 and 15; and are to continue in the House but 8 years at
the most. The place, where now the Scholars are taught, was formerly a
Tennis-Court, upon which an Historian has this Remark, It was a Change, a Ludo
Pilario, Slow by Hows,
ad Ludum Literarium.

Out of this Nursery of Learning some are by Election transplanted to the
Universities, either to Cambridge or Oxford, to any College, according to
their own Friends choice and determination; where they likewise are capacitated
to receive any favor or benefit from the said College; as several worthy
Persons do this day in the Universities, and are no small Reputation to this
Noble Foundation. Their allowance is 20 l. per Annum, duly paid Quarterly,
without any charge or trouble in the place of their Residence, in either of the
Universities: And this is done upon their sending up a Certificate to the
Receiver of the Charter House, with this or the like signification: These are
to certify whom it may concern, That T. B. Student of has been resident all
the last Quarter; and is of a good life and conversation.

This is to be signed by the Head of the College and two of the chief
Officers. They have liberty from the House to discontinue two months in a year;
so that their time of discontinuance is usually excepted in the Certificate.

Nine and twenty of these Scholars are maintained at the Universities, and the
Allowance of 20 l. per Annum continues for 8 years. Others who are
superannuated, being unwilling, or incapable of Learning, are designed for
Apprentices, put out to Write and Cipher, and disposed of to a Trade, with the
Sum of 40 l. (which was agreed on the last Assembly).

Here I cannot but take notice of a mighty Inconvenience which attends the
School, and were it once remedied, it would certainly redound much to the
Improvement of the Lads, and the Honor of the Foundation: I humbly desire that
the Right Honorable the Governors, would take it into their consideration;
For how is it possible for ripe and well-grounded Lads to be sent away to the
Universities, when Elections usually come sooner than the Scholars are prepared
for them: And this truly arises from no other cause but this, when Boys are
admitted into the House, little or no regard is had to their Learning and
Proficiency; but the thing mainly considered is, Whether they are between the
years of Ten and Fifteen; and though they are scarce able to read, then they
must be admitted.

The way to obtain a place for a young Lad or an old Gentleman, is much the
same: viz. to make an address to any single Governor the Person has most
Interest in, by way of Friends, Petition, or any other method of Application:
for no old Gentleman or Boy is chosen by a common Vote, but each Governor
nominates in his turn: Then a Warrant is to be procured, if for a Lad, after
this manner.

To his loving Friends, the Master and Register of Sutton's Hospital.
I Do nominate, choose, and appoint A. B. the Son of C. D. to be a poor Scholar
of Sutton's Hospital; and do desire that this my Warrant may be presented to
the next Assembly of Governors, for the Election of Scholars: to the intent he
may be accordingly Elected, and admitted when any such place shall fall in my
Disposal.

Given under my Hand, etc.

And here it is to be noted, that their Majesty's, his Royal Highness, and the
Governors, being usually pre-engaged, it is the best way to be early in making
application, especially for the place of a young Lad; Three or four years is
but a reasonable time before hand; for else ordinarily they will hardly have
the benefit of their Warrant, which some impute to the unkindness of the
Officers. For the Governors at an Assembly make a List, and nominate their
Lad, each of them, who, being approved of, is certain to come in, though the
place should fall after his Governors Death: and till the former Nomination
and Warrant be served, no other can have any claim or virtue.

The Number now in the House maintained and kept, is above 188 Persons, besides
the 29 Scholars at the Universities; and the standing Council to the House
(which at present are Sir William Jones his Majesty's Attorney General, and Mr.
Dolben of the Temple) have a retaining Fee from the House; and several other
persons who are mentioned in the first Establishment.

At the Admission of every Member, it is required that they be sober in mind,
and healthful in body; which later information is to be given by the
Chriurgion, with the Approbation of the Physician, by an Order December. 10. 1613.

What a mighty benefit this Donation has proved to many hundreds, in the space
of Threescore and six years, is almost incredible; for no Estate of the like
Revenue has done near so much good, in all Europe: For some Persons who have
been Members of great and considerable Families, have been glad to take Relief
in this, when their own wealthy Relations esteemed them as a burden.

I have already given you an Account of the Ancient concerns of the House, and
now I intend to conclude, with a fresh account of the Alterations of Salaries,
and increase of Revenues by the great wisdom and care of the Right Honorable
the Governors. As for the particular Orders by which the Ancient Men are to be
regulated, they are conveniently placed before their Devotions.

I find an Account of the Lands, Manors, and Revenues of the Charter House,
set down Alphabetically by Master Fuller, but so confusedly, by reason of
mistakes of Farms for Manors, that I chose rather to set them exactly down as
I found them in the Rental at the Charter House, made Anno Dom. 1673.

1. THe Estate about the Charterhouse, viz. in the Lane, and the Yard before
the House, and the Backside of the Wilderness, called now Sutton's Street:
These are let out to several Tenants, but the Annual Rent of them all amounts
to l. s. d. 202 00 00 2. Some Lands at Hackney, in the County of Middlesex,
which bring in per Annum 025 00 00 3. At Southminster in Essex, the Lease-hold
Rents of the same Manor per Annum 921 03 04 The Free and Customary Rents of
the said Manor per Annum 038 08 3 ob. 4. Cold Norton in Essex, Lease-hold
Rents 160 00 00 Free and Customary 017 06 09 5. Great Stanbridge in Essex,
Lease-hold Rents 113 06 08 Free and Customary 012 04 02 6. Little Hallingbury
in Essex, Lease-hold Rents 267 13 04 Free and Customary 010 16 2 ob. 7.
Castle-Camps in Cambridge, Lease hold 652 14 08 Free and Customary 032 09 3. q.
8. Balsham Manor in Cambridge, Lease-hold 200 00 00 Free and Customary 041 19
5 ob. q. 9. Buslingthorpe in Lincolnshire, Lease-hold 305 10 00 10. Dunsby in
Lincolnshire, Farm Rents 408 18 08 11. Elcomb Manor and Park in Wiltshire,
containing all these Farms (which Mr. Fuller sets down for Manors) 1. Chilton,
2. Blackgrove, 3. Missunden, 4. Salthorpe, 5. Wescott, 6. Uffcott, etc. The
Lease-holds whereof amount to 1063 13 04 Free and Customary 020 15 8 ob.

These are all the Manors, Lands, and Revenues which were settled by the
Founder himself upon his Hospital. But the Purchases since have been
Considerable.

1. Thurston, and the Marsh, in Cold Norton in Essex, which brings in per Annum
l. s. d. 018 00 00 2. Elmestead Park in Essex, Lease-hold 060 00 00 3. Fryans
and Jackletts in Essex 60 00 00 4. Little Wigborow in Essex, Farm Rents 200 00
00 Free and Customary 005 05 04 5. Higney Grange and Isle in Hungtingtonshire
220 00 00 6. Fulstow-Marsh-Chappel and Tetney in Linc. 50 00 00 7. Hartland in
Devonshire 36 00 00 Small Tithes 25 00 00 8. West-black loft, Saddlethorpe,
Yokfleet, and Bellasis in Yorkshire 070 00 00 Freehold 011 03 0 ob. 9.
Bockleton in Shropshire 060 00 00 10. Thickwood in Wiltshire 078 06 04 Another
Rent 003 69 01 The Ancient Revenue comes to 4493 19 10 ob. The new Purchased
Lands to 0897 13 9 ob. Both together amount to 5391 13 08

Although the House lost near 8000 l. in Beaumont's and Heyward's time, in the
years 1623 and 1624: and was robbed of 1600 l. in the year 1649. and was set
behind hand in Mr. Gerard's time, when he was Master; yet during these Wars, as
well as formerly, there have been considerable Additions since the year 1614.

First of all, 24 Boys were allowed at the University 20 pounds per Annum a
piece, out of Lands purchased by the good Providence of Sir Richard Sutton, one
of the Founders faithful Executors.

Secondly, Five Scholars added since to the number of the University Youths,
who are now 29, by the good care and providence of Mr. Gresset.

And Four Scholars more added to the first Foundation of 40, maintained in the
House.

The Masters Salary has been raised from 50 l. per Annum, to a 100 l. and
lately increased to 200 l.

The Preachers from 40 l. per Annum to a 100 l.

The Schoolmasters from 30 l. to a 100 marks.

The Readers from 20 l. to 30 l. per Annum.

The Gardiners place is also considerably encreast.

And the Apprentices have their 20 l. doubled.

For now the Lands amount to as before mentioned in the Rental. l. s. d. 5391
13 08

A very fair Estate for a private man to get, and to bestow to such Excellent
Purposes, whose praise ought to be celebrated in all Ages.

Thus we may observe how just and regular Affairs stand in this House, that the
Revenues are no way embezel'd: It Is true, not many years since a lamentable
sire happened, which occasioned the taking out the famous 1000 l. so long kept
prisoner in the Chest; but yet in time it is to be hoped it may be gathered up,
and return to its old habitation: and in truth it lay there to be a reserve for
extraordinary Emergencies.

So neither is the Estate diverted to any other use than what the Founder
designed, viz. decayed Soldiers, and English Gentlemen, and others who
formerly have been well educated: These have every one a handsome and
convenient Apartment. Likewise it is laid out on the maintenance of decayed
Gentlemen's Children, who have a Chamber to two of them, wholesome diet, admirable
conveniences, and all accommodations imaginable; so that they are no burden at
all to their Parents, after their first years admission into the House.

I have nothing now to say, but to recommend this Great Example to the
Christian World.

The Poets feign that at the end of the thread or web of every man's life, there
is a little Medal containing the person's name; and that Time waiting upon the
Shears, as soon as the thread was cut, caught the Medals, and carried them to
the River Lethe: about whose Banks there were many Birds flying up and down,
that would get the Medals, and carry them in their Beaks a little while, and
then let them fall into the River, only there were a few Swans, which if they
got a Name, would carry it to a Temple, where it was Consecrated.

May the memory of this great Man long endure, and in this Temple dwell for
ever. The last WILL AND TESTAMENT OF Thomas Sutton Esquire.
IN the Name of God, Amen. The Second day of November, in the year of our Lord
God One thousand six hundred and eleven, I Thomas Sutton of Camp; Castle in the
County of Cambridge Esquire, being weak in body, and of good and perfect mind
and memory, thanks be given to Almighty God for the same; Do make and declare
this my last Will and Testament in manner and form following; that is to say,
First, and principally, I commend my Soul into the hands of Almighty God,
trusting through his mercy, and by the precious death and passion of my Savior
and Redeemer Jesus Christ, to be saved, and to inherit the Kingdom of Heaven
for ever. And my Body I will to be buried where and in what sort it shall seem
meet and convenient to mine Executor or Executors, and Supervisor or
Supervisors of this my last Will and Testament, with the least pomp and charge
that may be.

Item, I give to every one of the Children of Richard Coxe, late Bishop of Ely,
who shall be living at the time of my death, Ten pounds apiece, of lawful money
of England.

Item, I give to the Children of Eleanor Ask, late wife of Robert Ask, of
Aughton in the County of York, Esquire, the Sum of One hundred pounds of good
and lawful money of England, to be equally distributed amongst them.

Item, I give to the poor Town of Berwick upon Tweed, One hundred Marks of
lawful money of England, to be distributed amongst the Poor there by the
discretion of the chief Governor and Preacher there for the time being, to be
paid within one year after my decease.

Also I give to Andrew Westwood's wife, of Newcastle upon Tyne, or to her
Children, or to so many of them as shall be living at my death, Ten pounds, to
be bestowed equally amongst them.

And I give to the poor people of Stoke-Newinton in the County of Middlesex,
Ten pounds to be distributed by the Constables, Churchwardens, and Parson of
the same Town, for the time being, to the most needy people there.

Also I give to Mr. Gray, dwelling in Yorkshire, sometimes servant to Ambrose
Earl of Warwick, or to his Children, if any of them be living at my decease,
Forty pounds of good and lawful money of England, to be distributed equally
amongst them within six months after my decease.

Also I give to the Children of my Aunt White, or to so many of them as shall
be living at my decease, One hundred Marks to be equally distributed amongst
them, within six months next after my decease.

Also I give to William Cocket, Son to William Cocket late Alderman of the City
of Lincoln, One hundred pounds of lawful money of England.

Also I give to the Children of John Copeland, late of Skillingthorp in the
County of Lincoln, or to so many of them as shall be living at the time of my
decease, One hundred pounds of lawful money of England, to be equally
distributed amongst them, saving unto Elizabeth Copeland, for my meaning is
that she shall not have any part of the said Legacy of One hundred pounds.

And unto the said Elizabeth Copeland I give the Sum of One hundred pounds of
lawful money of England, to be paid unto her at the day of her marriage, or
within one year after my decease.

Item, I give unto Jane Upton, one of the Daughters of Elizabeth Upton, late
wife of Hamond Upton of Wamfleet in the County of Lincoln Esquire, the Sum of
fifty pounds of lawful money of England.

And to every other of the Children of the said Elizabeth who shall be living
at the time of my decease, Twenty pounds apiece of lawful money of England, to
be paid within six months next after my decease.

Also I give to the Children of one Skeleton, late of Lowth in the County of
Lincoln, and sometimes toward the Henneages of Heniton in the said County, Ten
pounds to be equally divided amongst them.

Item, I give to the Children of Thomas Pynner, late of Micham in the County of
Surrey Esquire, or to so many of them as shall be living at my decease, Twenty
pounds to be equally distributed amongst them.

Item, I give to the Children of Henry Tutty, late Gunner in Barwick, or to so
many of them as shall be living at my decease, Ten pounds of lawful money of
England, to be equally distributed amongst them.

Also I give to my Niece Elizabeth Allen, Two hundred pounds of lawful money of
England.

And to every of her Children which shall be living at my decease, One hundred
Marks apiece.

Item, I give to Simon Baxter, if he be living at my decease, Three hundred
pounds of lawful money of England, if not, then I give the same Sum to his Child
or Children, to be equally divided amongst them.

Item, I give unto Francis Baxter, if he be living at my death, Five hundred
Marks of lawful money of England, if not, I give the same Sum to his Child or
Children, to be equally divided amongst them.

Item, I give unto each of my Serving-men to whom I give wages, with my Cook,
that shall be alive at my decease, Thirteen pounds six shillings and eight
pence over and above their wages then due.

Item, I give to so many of my Maidservants as I have in my house, at the time
of my decease, five Marks apiece over and above their wages.

Item, I give unto the Children of Reynold Tomps, my late Servant, if any of
them be alive at my death, Ten pounds to be distributed amongst them.

Item, I give to the Fishermen of the Town of Ostend in the Low Countries, One
hundred pounds of lawful English money, to be given and distributed amongst the
poorest Fishermen of that Town, or for want of a competent number of them, to
call in some other of that Town to have a share of the said one hundred pounds,
by the discretion of the Governors of that Town and his Assistants, and the
Parson and Minister there for the time being, the same to be paid within one
year after my decease.

Item, I give toward the mending of the Highways between Islington and
Newington in the County of Middlesex, Twenty six pounds thirteen shillings and
four pence of lawful money of England, to be employed and bestowed by the good
oversight of mine Executor or Executors, the Constable of Newington and the
Churchwardens there for the time being, the same Highways to be amended, made,
and helped within one year after my decease.

Item, I give toward the amending of the Highways between Ashden and Walden in
the County of Essex, called Walden-lane, One hundred pounds of lawful money of
England: And toward the amending of the Highways between Great Lynton in the
County of Cambridge, and the said Town of Walden, Threescore and six pounds
thirteen shillings and four pence of lawful money of England: And I also give
toward the amending of Horsheath-lane, Threescore pounds of lawful money of
England.

All these works next before recited, I will shall be overseen and guided by
the two head-Constables thereunto next adjoining, the Treasurer of Walden, and
the Parsons of Ashden, Hadstock, and Horsheath, and the Constables of the same
Parishes for the time being: And the same several Sums to be employed, and the
said Highways so to be amended, so far as the same Sums will extend within One
year after my decease.

Also I give toward the amending of the Bridges and the ordinary Highways
between Southminster and Maldon in the said County of Essex, the Sum of One
hundred pounds of lawful money of England, and the same Work to be overseen and
guided by the two head-Constables thereunto next adjoining, and the Parsons or
Vicars of Southminster and Maldon for the time being, and the same money to be
so employed, and the Highways so amended, within one year after my decease.

Item, I give to Mr. Robert Dudley, Alderman of Newcastle upon Tine, or to his
Children, or to so many of his Children as shall be living at the time of my
decease, Thirty pounds of lawful money of England which he owes me.

And I will and do earnestly charge mine Executor or Executors, to deliver into
the Treasury or Chamber of the City of London One thousand pounds in current
money of England, with such care and foresight to be had, that such Bonds or
Assurances be taken of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the same City that for
the time shall be, by learned Counsel in the Law, as the same may be safe, and
for ever go and be converted to these uses following* That is to say, That the
said thousand pounds be yearly lent and put forth to Ten young Merchant men,
not having any great Stocks of their own, being young men, and of honest life
and conversation, and towardly in their Trades; that is, to every one of them
One hundred pounds for a year, without paying any thing for the same: And these
Ten young Merchants to be chosen and appointed by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen
of the said City that for the time shall be, and the Dean of the Cathedral
Church of St. Paul in London for the time being. Provided as before, that none
have or continue the said hundred pounds so appointed above one year.

Item, I will and give to the Children of Justinian Crome Draper, sometimes
dwelling in the City of Lincoln, or to his Childrens children, if any of them
shall be living at my decease, Twenty pounds of lawful money of England, to be
equally divided amongst them.

I give also to the Wife and Children or Child of Martin Wathersine Dutchman,
sometime dwelling at the Sign of the White-Bear in Buttolph-lane, London, if
any of them be living at the time of my death, Ten pounds to be equally divided
amongst them.

Item, I give to the next Kinsman or Kinswoman of Henry Vavering Dutchman,
Smith, sometimes dwelling in Barwick, three pounds six shillings eight pence.

Item, I give and bequeath unto Sir Francis Popham Knight, as well in respect
and good will which I bear unto his Wife, being the Daughter of my late
deceased dear Wife, the Sum of Two thousand Marks of lawful money of England,
upon condition nevertheless, and so that, the said Sir Francis Popham, and the
said Lady Anne his Wife, give a sufficient discharge and a general release to
mine Executor or Executors, as well for that sum, as also for the receipt of
all the rest of her part of portion of the plate, money and household stuff
already paid, and delivered to them or to their use, as appears by several
bills or notes subscribed with my own hand, which I do think to be the very
true half, and better half of the said plate, money, and household stuff, part
whereof was delivered by one John Fishborne, my late Servant, to Sir John
Popham Knight, late Lord Chief Justice of England, at his late House in
Chancery Lane: The rest of the Household Stuff, as Chairs, Stools, Bedsteeds,
Kitchen stuff, Tables, and such like, was delivered by the said Fishborne to
the said Sir John Popham's Servants at Newington, One thousand pounds in money
paid in this sort, (viz.) To Sir John Popham by his Servant Straker upon the
said Sir John's Bill before marriage Three hundred pounds, which Bill after the
marriage I returned to the said Sir John Popham; seven hundred pounds were paid
to the said Sir John Popham upon the marriage by one Mr. Anthony Law, late
dwelling in Paternoster Row, London, the better moiety of the plate due to Sir
Francis Popham, was by the appointment of the said Sir John Popham, received by
one Mr. Clark, sometimes toward the said Sir John, and now a Counselor at the
Law of the Middle Temple as I ghess.

Item, I give to my well-beloved friend Amy Popham, Two hundred pounds to be
paid to her at the day of her marriage, or when she shall accomplish the age of
Eighteen years.

Item, I give to Francis Popham, Mary Popham, Elizabeth Popham, Jane Popham,
and Anne Popham, all Daughters of the said Lady Anne Popham, One hundred pounds
apiece, which several Sums I will shall be paid them at the days of their
marriage, or when they shall accomplish the age of eighteen years: And my will
and meaning is that unless the said Sir Francis Popham, and the said Lady Anne
his wife, do or shall give to mine Executor or Executors a general Acquittance
or Release to the effect abovementioned, that then, as well the said Legacy of
Two thousand Marks so willed to be given to the said Sir Francis Popham, and
the Lady Anne his wife, as also the other several Legacies given and bequeathed
to every of the said Children of the said Sir Francis Popham, and the Lady his
wife, shall remain and be to the use of mine Executor or Executors, to be
wholly disposed and given by them within one year after my decease, partly to
the amending of Highways, and partly to poor Maidens marriages, and partly to
the releasing of poor men that lie in Prison for Debt, and partly to the poor
people of mine intended Hospital, when it shall please God that it shall be
established and erected. And where perhaps it is or may be supposed that the
said Sir John Popham has paid Three hundred pounds to Sir Rowland Hayward of
the City of London, Alderman, as a Debt due unto him upon the Bonds of John
Dudley and Thomas Dudley, I protest before God that I paid the whole three
hundred pounds to the said Sir John Popham, in this sort to be paid over to the
said Sir Rowland Heyward, viz. Two hundred pounds by my Servant John Fishborne,
and One hundred pounds by one Henry Best Scrivener, near Temple bar. There was
a demand made by Alderman Ducats Executors, for Four hundred pounds owing to
the said Alderman upon the Bonds of John Dudley and Thomas Dudley for Copper,
for the use of the Earl of Leicester, which the said Earl transported into
Spain, which Debt was paid to the said Alderman. For I my self was a Messenger
from the said Earl to the said Alderman, to let him understand that Mr.
Bainham, my Lords special Officer and Receiver, should discharge them
presently, and after it was discharged, the said Alderman demanded interest for
the forbearing of the 400 l. which, as I remember, Thomas Dudley discharged:
Mr. Justice Owen, as I remember, who had the doing in the Testament of Ald.
Ducket, promised to deliver in the said Bond to Sir John Popham, then being
Attorney, which I do believe he did: And whereas Mr. John Gardener, brother to
my late wife, by his last Will and Testament, did give unto Anne Dudley, now
wife to Sir Francis Popham, one hundred pounds to be paid to her at the day of
her marriage, the same hundred pounds was and is paid by me, at or before the
day of her marriage, viz. In a Chain of Gold, being fourscore and seventeen
pounds ten shillings in Gold, and for the fashion paid to Master Padmore
Goldsmith in London, fifty shillings, which compleats the hundred pounds, for
the which, amongst other things which I delivered in trust I have no
acquittance.

Item, I give to Mr. Jeffery Nightingale Esquire, the Sum of Forty pounds of
lawful money of England.

Also I give to my Cosen William Stapleton, Son of Sir Richard Stapleton
Knight, One hundred Marks.

Item, I give unto the Children of Sir Francis Willoughby Knight, One hundred
pounds of lawful money of England, to be equally distributed amongst them.

Item, I give unto John Law, one of the Procurators of the Arches, London, Two
hundred pounds.

And to Mr. Tbomas Brown, Ten pounds to make him a Ring.

Item, I give to the Wife and Children of John Gardener, my late Wifes Nephew,
if they be living after my decease, being the Mother and two Sons, Two hundred
Marks to be equally divided amongst them.

Item, I give to the poor people of Hadstock, to be distributed amongst them by
the Churchwardens and Constables there for the time being, Twenty pounds

Item, I give to the poor people of Littlebury, and to the poor people of
Balsham to be distributed as before, to either Town, Twenty pounds.

Item, I give to the Parson and Churchwardens of Balsham aforesaid, for the
time being, to buy a Bell withal, to be hanged up in the Steeple, to amend the
Ring there, Twenty pounds.

Item, To the poor of Southminster Twenty pounds.

Item, To the poor of Little Hallingbury Twenty pounds.

Item, To the poor of Dunsby, in the County of Lincoln, Twenty pounds.

Item, I give to Robert Wright Poulterer of Little Hallingbury, Five pounds.

Item, I give to Widow Ask, late Wife of Robert Ask of London, Goldsmith,
Twenty pounds which she owes me.

Item, My will and meaning is, that there shall no Interest or Increase for
money be taken after my decease, so as he or they by whom any Sums of money are
or shall be owing, do pay the principal Debt within one half year next after my
decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to the poor Prisoners within the Prisons of Ludgate,
Newgate, the two Compters in London, the Kings Bench and the Marshalsea, the
Sum of two hundred pounds, to be paid and divided among the same Prisoners by
even and equal portions.

Item, I give to Susan Price, at the day of her marriage, Forty pounds.

Item, I give to one Collins of the Town of Cursal in Essex, Five pounds.

Item, I give to my good friends, Mrs. Heyward and Mrs. Low, either of them Ten
pounds.

Item, I give to Margaret Woodhal my God-daughter, the Sum of Twenty pounds.

Item, I give to all other my God-children Five pounds a piece.

Item, I give and bequeath to the Master and Fellows, as the Corporation of
Jesus College in Cambridge, the Sum of Five hundred Marks of lawful money of
England, to be employed, used, and bestowed for or in some perpetuity, for and
to the use, benefit, and behalf of the said College, Master, Fellows, and
Scholars in such sort, manner, and form as by the discretion of the Bishop of
Ely for the time being, the Vice Chancellor of Cambridge for the time being,
the Master and Fellows of the said College for the time being, and my
Executors hereafter named, or the Survivor or Survivors of them, if they be
living when the bestowing of the said Sum shall come in question, shall be
thought best and most convenient.

Item, I give and bequeath the Master and Fellows, as the ^^oration of Magdalen
College in Cambridge, the Sum of Five hundred pounds to be employed, used, or
bestowed for or in some perpetuity, for and to the use, benefit, and behalf of
the said College, Master and Fellows, and Scholars there, in such sort,
manner, and form as by the discretion, privity, and consent of the
Vicechancellor in Cambridge for the time being, the Master of Trinity College
in Cambridge for the time being, and the Master and Fellows of the said
Magdalen College for the time being, shall be thought best and most convenient.

And I will that my great Chain of Gold, and all my Jewels of what kind soever
they be, shall be sold by mine Executors and Supervisors hereafter named,
toward the better and speedier payment of my Legacies and performance of this
my last Will and Testament.

And my will and meaning is, that all the Legacies by me, in this my Testament
and last Will, given and bequeathed, and for the payment of much whereof there
is no certain time set down, shall be paid within Two years next after my
decease at the furthest.

Also I give for and toward the building of mine intended Hospital, Chapel,
and School-house, the Sum of Five thousand pounds, if I do not live to see it
performed in my life time.

And I desire in the Name of God my Feoffees, and my Executor or Executors,
within two years after my decease, or sooner if they may conveniently (if it
please not God I live to see and cause the same my determination to be
performed and accomplished) to see and cause the same to be performed and
accomplished.

Also I give the residue of the years which I shall have at the time of my
decease in one Close called the Withies, lying within the Town and Fields of
Cottingham, in the County of York, to the Mayor and Aldermen of Beverly, or to
the Governor of the same Town and his Assistants for the time being, to this
end and purpose, That they shall distribute, or cause to be distributed, the
yearly profit arising of the same over and above the yearly Rent payable to the
Kings most Excellent Majesty, amongst the poorest people dwelling within the
said Town of Beverly.

Also I give to the Mayor and Aldermen of the City of Lincoln for the time
being, all such Profits and Revenues as shall arise and grow of the Parsonage
of Glentham within the County of Lincoln, and all the residue of the years that
shall remain after my decease, to this intent, that they shall distribute and
bestow, or cause to be distributed and bestowed the same, amongst twenty of the
poorest people that shall then be dwelling in the said City with the consent
and privity of the Dean of the Cathedral Church of Lincoln, or the Recorder of
the same for the time being (they the said Mayor, Aldermen, Dean, and Recorder,
foreseeing that the Parsonage be letten for their most benefit).

Item, I give into the Treasury or Storehouse of mine intended Hospital, to
begin their Stock with, and to defend the Rights of the House, One thousand
pounds of lawful English money.

And I give to every one of my Feoffees whom I have put in trust about my
intended Hospital (to whom I have not given any thing in this my last Will) the
Sum of Twenty six pounds thirty shillings and four pence of lawful money of
England.

Item, I give to Amy Popham, if it please God she live to keep House, three
Feather-beds, and so many pair of Holland Sheets, with the Boulsters to them,
and so many Hangings of Tapestry, as furnish her a Bedchamber. The rest of my
Housholdstuff I will shall be sold by mine Executors for the speedier payment
of my Legacies, and performance of this my last Will.

Item, I give to the Widow Tassel of Balsham, the Sum of Five pounds of lawful
money of England, and to Thomas Lawrence the elder, of the same Town, Five
pounds of lawful money of England.

Item, I give and bequeath unto the Brother of Percival Graung, my late
Servant, deceased, the Sum of Twenty pounds of like lawful money of England.

And of this my last Will and Testament I make and ordain Richard Sutton of
London Esquire, and John Law one of the Procurators of the Arches, London, my
Executors, charging them, as they will answer at the last Day of Judgment, that
they, or one of them in the absence of the other, endeavor themselves, with all
earnestness and diligence, to see this my Will performed according to my true
meaning and charitable intent.

And I make Overseers of this my last Will and Testament, the Reverend Father
in God George Abbot, Arch bishop of Canterbury, unto whom I give and bequeath
the Sum of Forty Marks of lawful money of England, or a piece of Plate of that
value, at his election and choice.

And also Lancelot Andrews Almonizer to the Kings Majesty, my other Supervisor
and Overseer of this my last Will and Testament, unto whom I give and bequeath
the Sum of Twenty pounds of lawful money of England, or a piece of Plate of that
value, at his election and choice.

Item, My will and full intent and meaning is, That if any person or persons
whosoever, to whom I have in and by this my last Will and Testament given and
bequeathed any Legacy, or Sum or Sums of money, shall any ways gainsay, impugn,
contradict, or impeach this my last Will and Testament, that then all and every
one so impugning, contradicting, impeaching; or gainsaying this my last Will
and Testament, and every of their Children and Kinsfolks to whom I have in and
by this my last Will and Testament given and bequeathed any Legacy or Sum or
Sums of money, shall have no part nor portion of any such Gift, Legacy, or
Bequest, but shall utterly lose the same, and be utterly barred thereof, as if
no such Legacy, Gift, or Bequest, had been given unto him, her, or them, by
this my last Will and Testament (any thing before in these presents mentioned
or contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding).

Item, I give and bequeath to Richard Sutton, one of my Executors before named,
the Sum of One hundred pounds; and to Mrs. Law over and besides the Legacy
before to her given, I give the Sum of Forty pounds to make her a Gown withal.

Item, I give to Master Hutton, the Vicar of Littlebury, Twenty pounds. To the
Town of Camps Castle where I dwell, to be distributed amongst the poor of the
same Parish, Ten pounds.

Also to the poor of the Town of Elcomb, to be equally distributed amongst
them, the Sum of Ten pounds.

Item, I give and bequeath those my Manors of Littlebury and Hadstock in the
County of Essex, to the Right Honorable the Lord Thomas Howard Earl of
Suffolk, and to his Heirs for ever, upon Condition that he do well and truly
pay, or cause to be paid to my Executors before named, or to the Survivor of
them, the Sum of Ten thousand pounds of lawful money of England, within One year
next after my decease. And if he shall refuse to pay the said Sum of Ten
thousand pounds for the said Manors, then I give and bequeath the said Manors
of Littlebury and Hadstock to my said Executors, and to their Heirs for ever.
And then I will and devise that the said Manors of Littlebury and Hadstock
shall be sold by my said Executors, or the Survivor of them, to the uttermost
price and value that they may be sold for, and the money coming of the sale
thereof, together with as much more as shall make up the same Sum the full Sum
of Twenty thousand pounds, I will shall be employed and bestowed by my said
Executors, or the Survivor of them, with the advice of my Supervisors
aforenamed, in some good works and charitable uses for mine intended Hospital,
and for poor people, or otherwise as they in their wisdoms and discretions
shall think fit.

Item, I give to Mr. Flud, Parson of Newington, the Sum of Thirteen pounds six
shillings eight pence. And to the wife of Benjamin King of Southminster, Six
pounds thirteen shillings four pence.

Item, I give to Thomas Averell, if it shall be found that he has dealt
faithfully and plainly with me in my business, the Sum of Ten pounds which he
owes me.

Item, I give unto the wife of Mr. Ingry of Littlebury, Three pounds six
shillings eight pence.

Item, I give to Sir Henry Hubberd Knight, the King's Majesty's Attorney
General, a piece of Plate of the value of Ten pounds: And to Mr Locksmith his
Clerk, the Sum of Ten pounds.

Item, I give to the poor of the Parish of Hackney, Ten pounds.

Item, I give to Bridget Law the Sum of Ten pounds: And to the Lady Altham,
daughter to Mr. Auditor Sutton, the Sum of Twenty pounds.

Item, I give to Sir Edward Philips, Master of the Rolls, a piece of Plate of
the value of Twenty pounds: And to Sir James Altham, one of the Barons of the
Exchequer, One piece of Plate of the value of Twenty pounds.

Item, I give to my late wives kinsman, Guy Godolphin, the sum of Ten pounds.

Item, I give to the Right Honorable, my very good Lord, the Earl of Suffolk,
the sum of Four hundred pounds. All the rest of my Goods, Chattels, and Debts,
not before given and disposed, I give and bequeath to my intended Hospital, to
be employed and bestowed on and about the same, according to the discretion of
the Feoffees of my said Hospital, or the greater part of them. In witness
hereof I have hereunto set my Hand and Seal, the Twenty eighth day of the Month
of November above written.

Thomas Sutton.
Memorandum, That the same Testator did acknowledge this his Will, written and
contained in these Three and twenty leaves, to be his last Will and Testament,
and that his Hand and Seal set thereunto is his own Hand and Seal, and that he
had heard it read, and was acquainted with the Contents of it the said Twenty
Eighth of November above written, In presence of us, John Law, Leonard
Houghton, Alexander Longworth, Thomas Hall, The Mark of Richard Pearce, The
Mark of Thomas Johnson, Primo Decembris 1611. idem recognitum per Testatorem
coram Jo. Crook Quarto Decembris 1611. recognit. to be the Testators last
Will. Before me Henry Thoresby.



A Codicil to be annexed to the last Will and Testament of Thomas Sutton
Esquire, made and declared the Day whereon he died, being the Twelfth of
December, One thousand six hundred and eleven.
ITem, he gave and bequeathed to Mr. Judge Crook, one of the Judges of the
King's Bench at Westminster, the Sum of Ten pounds. And to Mr. Henry Thoresby,
one of the Masters of the Court of Chancery, the like Sum of Ten pounds: And to
Mrs. Sutton of London, Widow, the Sum of Three pounds six shillings eight pence
to make her a Ring.

Also he gave to Mr. Hutton, Clerk and Vicar of Littlebury, the Advowson or
next Presentation to the Parsonage of Dunsby in the County of Lincoln.

Also he did then publish and declare before Mr. Flud, Parson of
Stoke-Newington in the County of Middlesex, Robert Petit, Alexander Longworth,
John Parsons, and Thomas Johnson his Cook, that he had made his Will, and
thereof had made and ordained Richard Sutton of London, Esquire, and John Law,
his Executors.

I thought good to make a Conclusion of all, with some proper Devotions,
relating to those particular Occasions which concern the Fourscore pious and
aged Gentlemen, etc.

Not that I intend, by any means, to detract from the excellency and usefulness
of the Prayers of the Church: for these are only designed for private Offices
at home, and possibly, by Gods assistance, may be instrumental to the
Improvement of their Thankfulness to God, and their Preparation for their
latter end.

Here likewise I thought it might be convenient to place several Orders (which
hang up in the lesser Hall of the Pensioners) by which they are to square and
regulate their Manners; so that they might have in a narrow compass contained,
the several Instances of their public and private Duty.

Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in peace, according to thy word.

For mine eyes have seen thy Salvation, which thou have prepared before the
face of all People.

To be a Light to lighten the Gentiles, and to be the glory of thy people
Israel.

Eccles. 12. The years draw nigh when thou shall say, I have no pleasure in
them: while the Sun, or the Light, or the Moon, or the Stars be not darkened,
nor the Clouds return after the rain.

In the day when the The ribs.
keepers of the house shall tremble, and the The Legs.
strong men shall bow themselves; and the Teeth.
grinders cease because they are few, and those that look out of the Eyes.
windows be darkened.

Or ever the Circulation of the Blood.
silver cord be loosed, or the Liver.
golden bowl be broken, or the pitcher be broken at the fountain, or the wheel
at the cistern: then shall the dust return to the earth as it was, and the
Spirit shall return to God who gave it.

Job 5.26. Thou shall come to thy grave in a full age, like as a shock of corn
comes in his season.

ORDERS made by the Governors of the Hospital of King JAMES, founded in
Charter House by Thomas Sutton Esquire, at several times since the beginning of
the said Hospital, and yet continuing in force, and to be observed or known by
the poor Men, Pensioners, and Brothers of the said Hospital for the time being;
as follow.
NO poor Man shall be admitted into the Hospital, unless he shall appear to be
clean, and sound of body from any foul and infectious Disease. ( Per Ordinem
fact. 10 December. 1613). And to prevent that none be admitted that is infected
with any infectious Disease, It is Ordered that the Surgeon of the Hospital
for the time being, shall view and search the Body of such a person, if there
be any cause of suspicion, before he be admitted. Per Ordinem 24 Februarii,
1622.

No poor Man that shall be a Member of the Hospital, shall wear any long Hair,
or any Weapons within the said House, or have any Weapons within their several
Lodgings. Per Ordinem 10 December. 1613.

Every poor Man of this Hospital, that shall happen to fall so sick, that he
cannot come into the Hall to take his repast, then he shall have his part in
Diet in his Chamber, or his weekly allowance in money for it, as the Master and
the Steward in their discretions shall hold meet. Per Ordinem 22 December. 1615.

The Master of the Hospital for the time being, and every Officer, poor Man,
and every Member of the same, shall take their Diet in the Dining Halls
appointed for that purpose, and not in their Chambers, unless it be in time of
Sickness, or upon some urgent occasion, such as the Master shall allow of.
Provided that they do not then exceed the proportion of Diet that is set down
and established. Per Ordinem 21 Januarii, 1618.

No Officer, Pensioner, or Member of this Hospital shall send, or carry away
any Bread, Beer, or Meat from their Tables, when they shall be at Dinner and
Supper in the said Dining-Halls; but if any Bread, Beer, or Meat shall happen
to be left, it shall be bestowed on such poor men and women that shall from
time to time be appointed and allowed to do service in the said Hospital, or
otherwise as the Master in his discretion shall hold fitting, but not any of it
to be sold for money. Per Ordinem 21 Januarii, 1618.

One of the poor Men of the Hospital, in their several turns, and the Master
Cook of the said Hospital shall go weekly to the Market with the Steward or his
Man, to buy the Provision of Fish and Flesh for the Diet of the Hospital, that
choice may be made by them of that which shall be good and sweet, and to see
ready money paid for the same; And if any poor Man shall refuse to serve in his
turn, he shall be kept without his Diet in the Hospital until he perform it.
Per Ordinem fact. 25 Junii, 1621.

The Master of the Hospital, and all and every Officer, and the poor Brethren
and Members thereof, shall take their Diet of Dinner and Supper in the Common
Hall in the Hospital, and not in any of their Chambers; And they shall carry no
part thereof from thence into private Chambers. And not any of the poor
Brethren shall presume to sit down at the Table before Grace be said, and the
Master and chief Officers sit; nor any of them to arise from the Table before
Grace be said, without license of the Master, or in his absence of Senior at
the Master's Table. Provided notwithstanding, that if any of them happen to be
sick, upon signification of his sickness to the Master, it shall be lawful for
him, with the Master's allowance, for to take and have his Commons out of the
Kitchen, in his private lodging, during the time of his sickness. Per Ordinem
24 Februarii, 1622.

All the poor Brethren, and other the Inferior Officers and Members of the said
Hospital now being, and their Successors that shall hereafter at any time be
chosen into their rooms, shall give dutiful Reverence to the Master of the
Hospital for the time being, wheresoever they shall happen to be in his
presence, or when either he shall speak to any of them, or any of them shall
repair or speak to him, they shall stand before him with their Heads uncovered,
not presuming, whilst they are in his presence, to put on their Hats (except it
be at the Table whilst they are at Dinner and Supper.) And that none of them
give or use any evil, reviling or railing speeches of him before his face or
behind his back, upon pain of the loss of one months Commons at least for every
such Offense done. And also it is commanded that they be obedient unto him in
all his lawful Commands and Injunctions to them for the observing the Orders
and Constitutions now made, or hereafter to be made by the Governors of this
Hospital and their Successors. Per Ordinem 24 Februarii 1622.

They, and every of them, and all others that shall succeed them in their
places, shall be diligent in frequenting the Chapel in the Hospital twice
every day at times of Divine Service, and there behave themselves Reverently,
as becomes them to do in so Sacred a Place, and at so holy a Work. And though
they may ask and obtain leave of the Master on some Work-day of the Week to be
absent, upon some good and urgent occasion, yet that in no case none of them be
absent from Service and Sermon on the Sunday, if he be in health, and able to
come forth of his Lodging. And that every one of them do receive the holy
Communion of the Lords Supper thrice every year, to wit, at Christmas, Easter,
and Whitsuntide, if he be at that time in health, able to go forth of his
Lodging. Per Ordinem 24 Februarii, 1622. And unless the Master and Preacher be
satisfied by some lawful excuse and just cause of their failing, otherwise the
party so wilfully neglecting, shall be liable to the Masters Chastisement, and
to the Governors further displeasure. Per Ordinem 22 Junii, 1627.

If any of the poor Brethren and Inferior Officers and Members of the said
Hospital, after his admittance, shall draw any Weapons in the said Hospital, to
the intent to hurt any Member of the said Hospital, or shall strike in anger
any of the said House, within the precinct thereof, or be convict of any
notorious crime punishable by the Laws of this Realm. That then his place in
the Hospital shall be void, and be quite removed from the same. Per Ordinem
fact. 24 Februarii, 1622.

None of the poor Brethren shall intermeddle with any business touching the
affairs of the Hospital, but attend only the Service of God, and take
thankfully what is provided for them, without muttering, murmuring, or
grudging. Per Ordinem 26 February, 1622.

None of the said poor Brethren, or other the said Inferior Officers and
Members of the said Hospital, shall wear any weapons, long hair, colored
boots, spurs, or any colored shoos, feathers in their hats, or any
Russian-like or unseemly Apparel, but such as becomes Hospital-men to wear. Per
Ordinem fact. ut supra.

None of them shall lodge abroad out of his ordinary Lodging by night, or
permit, or suffer any Stranger to lodge in any of their Lodgings within the
Hospital. Neither shall any of them haunt Houses suspected of Incontinency,
Gaming-houses, common Bowling-Allys, Taverns, or Alehouses by Day or Night,
neither use swearing and taking of God's holy Name in vain, nor railing on any
of his Fellow Brethren, nor given to any Drunkenness, or other notorious Vice,
upon pain of such punishment as shall be thought meet of such an Offender, by
the Master, in the presence of two of the chief Officers of the said House,
whom he shall please to call unto him. And if the party so punished by him shall
prove incorrigible, after he has been twice punished, then the Master shall put
such an Offender out of Commons until the next General Assembly, and then he
shall make the same Offender, together with his Offense, known to the
Governors, that they may inflict such further punishment upon him, either by
expulsion or otherwise, as they in their wisdom shall hold sitting. Per Ordinem
fact. ut supra.

No poor Brother of the Hospital shall hereafter presume to go into any Taverns
or Alehouses with his Livery Gown on his back, upon pain of such punishment as
the Master in his discretion shall hold sitting to be inflicted upon him. Per
Ordinem fact. 22 Februarii, 1624.

No poor Brother shall have leave to pass the Seas upon what pretense soever,
but by Petition to the Governors, and signed with six of their Hands. In which
case and time of absence, he shall only be allowed his wages, and have his
place reserved for him. Other allowance for Commons he shall not have. Per
Ordinem 21 Junii, 1627.

They shall not go into the Country to visit Friends, or upon any other
business, without the Master's leave, and that but for two months at the
furthest; In which case and time of absence no part of his wages shall be
abated. But if they go abroad, either with leave or without leave, and fall
under Arrest or any other danger whereby their return is staid, in such case
they shall have no monys or allowance from the Hospital, only their places
shall be reserved for them till the Governors pleasure be further known. And
moreover, no Brother shall presume to pass the Out-gates of the Hospital in
their Livery Gowns, upon pain of paying a months Commons out of his Quarters
wages. 21 Junii 1627.

They shall not undertake the following of others men's Causes and Suits, nor
procure the molestation of trouble or expense of other the Kings Subjects, by
their suggestions or informations, upon pain of paying what Mulct the Master,
by the Ordinances can impose upon them, and abiding the Governors further
Censure. 21 Junii 1627.

All other Duties to be performed after their Admission, as daily frequenting
the Chapel, Reverent behavior at Prayers, Civil fashion of Feeding, Cleanly
and decent Clothing, Neat and wholesome Lodging, Friendly and Brotherly
Conversing and Living together, shall be referred to the Masters discretion to
direct, and to the power given him to correct. 21 Junii 1627.

At an Assembly of the Governors, 27 February 1656. It is Ordered, That
whenever any Pensioner or poor Man of this Hospital, shall, with leave or
without leave, go into the Country, and be absent from the Hospital, or shall
live in or about the City of London, Westminster, or elsewhere, and shall not
be Abiding, Lodging, and Resident at and in the Hospital, he shall have no
allowance at all in money, or otherwise, for his Commons or Diet, during any
such time as he shall be absent from the Hospital. And those that are now
absent are at their perils to take notice of this Order, and to return home to
the Hospital by the Feast of the Annunciation of the Virgin Mary now next
ensuing. Neither shall any Pensioner or poor Man that lodges in the Hospital,
and goes abroad into the Town, be suffered to be out of Commons, nor be paid
any money, for, or in lieu of his Commons, but shall take and eat his Commons in
kind in the common Dining-Hall of the Hospital, according to the Orders of the
House, and shall carry none of it away uneaten; and what he cannot eat there,
shall be there left, and given to the poor women that are appointed to do
service in the Hospital. And We the Governors do charge the Receiver not to
pay any of them any money, or allowance contrary to the intent of this our
Order, upon pain not to be allowed the same upon his Account, besides incurring
our further Censure. Provided always, that if any of the said Pensioners shall
be sent, or go away out of the Hospital upon the Dismission of the House in the
Sickness time, in respect of the danger of the Plague, then, in such case,
during such time of Dismission and Absence, he shall have his full Allowance in
money for Commons and Diet, as has been formerly given in such case.

There are diverse other Orders made by the Governors concerning the poor Men
and Brothers of this Hospital, which are not so proper to be comprehended in
this Table; but are (with these herein mentioned) transcribed into a Book
remaining in the Vestry, whereunto any Pensioner or poor Man of this Hospital
may, at convenient times, repair, to see and read, for his better knowledge and
observation.

My House shall be called THE HOUSE OF PRAYER. Mark. 11.^ Spare the People (...)


Let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord, Weep between ye (...) and the
Altar, and let them say. Spare thy People O LORD Joel. 1.17. London Printed for
Henry Brom^^. 1677.



PRAYERS UPON Several Occasions, Fitted for the PRIVATE DEVOTIONS OF THE
Ancient Gentlemen IN THE CHARTER-HOVSE, etc:

Upon their Admission into the House.
O Thou Lord of Hosts, and God of Battles! The great Preserver of Men! I adore,
reverence, and magnify thy holy Name, that after the skirmishes of a tedious
and uneasy life, I have the blessed Opportunity of retiring and making my
peace with thee, O God; my Life has been a real warfare, I have been exposed to
the dangers of Night, and the discoveries of Day, to the fury of unkind
Weather, and the rage of Enemies; but yet thou wast my defense and shield, the
support of my Soul, and my great Deliverer: Therefore, blessed be the God of
Heaven, I will take the Cup of Salvation, and praise thy glorious Name: I will
never cease to cry out, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts; Blessed be thy
Name for ever and ever.

O Father, who have looked upon me in the times of hazard and sear, moved and
frame my mind into acknowledgment and thankfulness: Thou, who art absolute in
thy Providence, have wonderfully raised means to succor and relieve thy
Servant in danger; may thy grace and goodness never forsake me, but continue to
be my loving God, Helper, and Savior unto the worlds end: How many are in
^onds and Distress, when I am Free and provided for? How many are in wars and
necessity, when I am in peace, and encompas't with plenty? Though I have justly
deserved many years ago to have been cut off from the Land of the Living, and
by reason of my sins to have been sent early to the House of Mourning, yet thou
have drawn out my life to a great length, thy mercy has saved and protected me
all the time of my Pilgrimage, and now I remain as a signal Monument of thy
loving kindness.

O grant, that the remainder of my time may be spent in Thanksgiving and
Repentance, that all the days of my appointed time I may patiently wait until
my change come.

Let my Admission into this Religious house be an Emblem of my Entrance into
Heaven above; that my Life may be a continual walking with Thee, that the main
tendency of my thoughts may be heaven-wards, and my conversation there also.

Grant, O Lord, that my entering into this Society of Grey-hairs below, may be
an Earnest of my joining with the Elders that are before thy Throne above: That
when I first put on these Garments of Charity, I may resolve to endeavor that
my Soul may be clothed with humility and gratitude, and the robes of
Righteousness. I am sensible, O Lord, of the weakness of my Body, and the
decays of Nature; but our Souls are of another frame and complexion: Therefore
be pleased to quicken and revive my thoughts, to awaken the powers and
faculties of my Soul, that the feebleness of my Body may be recompensed with
the strength of my mind, that the declination of my outward man may be in order
to the Ascension of my Soul into the Heaven of Heavens.

Not long since the sorrows of my heart were enlarged, but now thou have
graciously brought me out of all my trouble: I have nothing now to do in this
place of Retirement but to live well, and love thee, from whom I receive my
daily bread, who art the Fountain of all I drink: Therefore, O my Soul, praise
that God who is so great a lover of the sons of men: Thou have not dealt so
with every man, neither have the wicked a desire to praise thee. Thou have
plentifully prepared all things for me thy aged and infirm Servant, so that I
must confess I want nothing but thankfulness to Thee. What Reward shall I give
unto thee, or what Sacrifice shall I pay for all thy benefits?

Now I am settled in this Religious place, O Lord, grant that by my life I may
answer the ends of my admission, and the purposes of our Noble Founder's
Charity: Sanctify my memory to treasure up good things; purify my conscience
to have peace in thee; and reform my will to do thy pleasure. Teach me to be
humble and meek, to be patient, full of content and thankfulness for the riches
of thy mercy: For how poor must that man be, who is not content with a God so
rich as thou art? Let the remainder of my time be spent in the thoughts of
eternity, and the ravishing joys of another life; that while I carry about with
me this decayed and withered body, which will soon moulder into dust and ashes;
while I have time and opportunity, I may endeavor to live in thy fear, that I
may dye in thy favor, O thou Strength, and Redeemer of Israel. Amen.

On the Founder's Day.
BLessed be thy Name, O God, and this happy Morn, wherein the Foundation of my
present Comfort of this Life was laid, wherein this Noble Benefaction was given
by Thomas Sutton, a great Lover of Souls and Bodies, who has so plentifully
provided for the repair and support of my aged Body, and the heavenly
entertainment of my Soul: O my Soul, give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good,
and his mercy endures for ever! This Day let us worship him, in the beauty of
holiness, let us come before his Presence with Thanksgiving, and make a joyful
noise unto him with Psalms; Blow the Trumpet at the time appointed, at our
Solemn Feast Day.

Be pleased, O Lord, to send the Influence of thy Grace upon me, that I may
answer the intent and purposes of our Noble Founder in my Life and
Conversation; that my years and department may be exemplary for Piety and
Devotion, that I may sanctify this Earth with a blameless and angelick Life;
and that at my last hour I may be reconciled unto Thee, or else all these
Benefits will rather become a Curse than a Blessing unto me.

Teach me, O dearest Savior, to live a life worthy of the name I bear, as a
Member of thy Church, worthy of the Blessings I have received, of the Food I
eat, and the Ease I take; of the Love my gracious God has showed to me, and
the Glory he has reserved for me; I live in the abundance of thy Favors, and
within the influence of thy Goodness. I thank thee, O Lord, for the fixedness
and condition of my Life, for many corporal and earthly comforts which I now
enjoy; nay, thy blessings exceed far the number of my sins, which are more than
the hairs upon my head. In this House is God known, and his Name is great in
our Israel; for his mercy reaches unto the Heavens, and his truth unto the
Clouds. O Lord, thou have brought up my Soul from the grave, thou have kept me
alive, that I should not go down unto the Pit: Thou art my Shepherd, and I
shall never want; yea, though I walk through the Valley of the shadow of Death,
I will fear no evil, for thou art with me, thy Rod and thy Staff, they comfort
me: This day thou preparedst a full Table for me, surely goodness and mercy
will follow me all the days of my life; and afterward I hope to dwell in the
House of the Lord for ever.

When I looked round about, and saw no hand to help me, thy Providence relieved
my fears, and all my wants; and led me to this Habitation of Comfort: When I
was weak and stooped for Age, thou wast my strength, and the lifter up of my
head: when my eyes waxed dim, and I was almost banished from the sense of the
pleasures of this life, thou did recompense that loss, with the joyful
prospect of those Blessings which are in the Kingdom above: Though my hands,
and the Pillars of my House tremble, yet I rejoice, because my hope is founded
upon the Rock of Ages, which cannot be removed, but abides steadfast for ever:
My Passions decay, and all things prove insipid unto me, I have but a small
relish of mortal Joys, because the sense of them is swallowed up in the
unexpressible thoughts of Heaven and Happiness: what I am capable of partaking
of in this life, I heartily thank the Great Preserver of Men, that he has
plenteously afforded it me, I had perished long ago, if I had not been sustained
by his protecting Hand: Therefore will I pour forth his deserved Praises with a
joyful and thankful heart; hoping, in God's due time, to sing Eternal
Hallelujahs with the Blessed Saints above.

O thou first born of the Dead, put me always in mind of the Resurrection: now
I am full of years, let me be full of Grace, and full of Faith. I am heartily
sensible of all the Miscarriages of a long and sinful Life, yet thy mercy is
over all thy Works; though my Sins are as Scarlet, yet thou can make me all
over as white as Snow: As I have tasted of thy benefits here, so let me partake
of thy Salvation hereafter. I consult not with Flesh and Blood, but rely upon
thy Providence; desiring thee to bestow upon me Wisdom, and Patience, and
Thanksgiving, to know thy Will, to suffer what I deserved, and to extol and
praise my Guide to everlasting Glory.

This is the glorious Day of Relief and Consolation; therefore from the rising
up of the Sun, to the going down of the same, the Lord's Name be praised: The
Dead praise not the Lord, nor any that go down into the Pit, but we that are
alive, and in health, who live in the Enjoyment of his peculiar Blessings, will
bless the Lord from this time forth for evermore.

Glory be to God on high, on Earth peace, and good will toward men. Amen.
Upon the Decease of a Pensioner.
O Thou who art the Spring and Original of all Comfort, the Hope of them that
live, and the Resurrection of the Dead; Sanctify this mournful occasion to me
thy Servant, that I may seasonably prepare for my latter end, and wisely
provide for the journey to my long Home: Spare me a little, before I go hence
and be no more seen. I am daily sensible of the near approaches of death, every
moment I receive some warnings of mortality, and I know, within a few days I
must depart, and render an account of all my life: Therefore teach me rightly
to state the Accounts of my Soul, and to improve the precious minutes of my
stay in this life, for on the least of them depends Eternity. My Soul longs
and waits for the living God: I desire, in thy due time, to appear before thy
glorious Presence, that I may see the good things thou have laid up in Heaven
for them that are thine: Confirm my hope, and make it perfect, until I enjoy
the lively Fruits of thy assured Salvation: Bear me upon thy saving wings,
through the miseries of this life, and let not the mire and clay, wherein I
stick fast, detain me for ever: For thy Names sake, O Lord, have mercy upon me,
for my sin is great. If every moment we offend thee, and can do nothing as we
ought, then how long must my Accusation be, who have so many years repeated so
many transgressions? How dreadful must the thoughts of the Process of the Day
of Judgment be unto me who have been so long an experienced sinner? I faint at
my own unworthiness, and yet otherwise I cannot appear before thee: O Lord, I
have no other qualification for thy mercy, but my extreme misery, I am now
brought very low, to a vale of misery and tears, surrounded with all the
Chambers and Instruments of Death. This dear Brother, just deceased, only shows
the way that I must soon follow, e're long I must repair to the House of
mourning; I must bid my last farewell to the world: but woe and eternal sorrow
will be my Portion if I dye in my sins, and depart in thy displeasure:
Therefore, out of the abundance of thy love, pardon, cleanse, and reform my
poor and sinful Soul, send me thy sanctifying, thy guiding, and supporting
Spirit, that I may pass safely through the valley of Death, in the lively sense
of thy mercies, and the refreshments of thy love, in the hopes of pardon, and
the expectation of glory.

O thou ancient of days, at whose voice the pillars of Heaven shake, and the
whole Creation trembles, thou art my strength and defense, in whom is my sole
trust; deliver my Soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from
falling; cleanse me from all my iniquities, and purge me from my secret sins,
for Heaven is so holy a place, that no impure thing can inhabit there: teach me
so to number the rest of my days, that I may apply my heart unto Wisdom: Here
length of days is in her right hand, and her ways lead to those rivers of joy
which are at Gods right hand for evermore. O Lord, who art touched with a sense
of my Infirmities, let me not be afraid of the thoughts of Death, that King of
Terrors, but soften its severity, by a mild Commission, sweeten its bitterness
with the most pleasant relishes of joy and immortality: My life I had of thee,
and all the blessings I have enjoyed ever since I came into the World; O Lord,
make me willing to render them back again into thy hands. Whom have I in Heaven
but thee? and I desire no other Savior but thee. Teach me often to meditate on
Heaven, that I may wish for it: of Hell, that I may abhor it: of Death, that I
may expect it; and of the Day of Judgment, that I may be prepared for it.

To thy mercy I appeal, I fly unto thee for succor; my sole dependence is on
thy love: I fear, love, reverence, and adore thy goodness, which is thy glory:
Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, for though he seems to decay and
perish, to be a companion of death, though the body wax feeble and impotent,
yet he lives the life of Faith; he lives in the secure Courts of thy
protection, and the Guardian Angels pitch their Tents round about him.

Let not this be a short heat and sudden fit of Devotion, raised by this late
instance of mortality, and the amazing thoughts of Death; but may these
exercises of piety continue, and endure to my lives end: For I know that my
Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the Earth; and
though after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God.
Amen.

In the Morning before he stirs abroad.
O Lord God Almighty, who make the outgoings of the Morning and Evening to
praise Thee; I cannot but reverence and adore thy Divine Majesty for the
Blessings of the last Night, for my Preservation from all evils, both of Body
and Soul. I laid me down, and slept, and rose up again, for the Lord has
sustained me: For I am a weak and aged Creature, surrounded with Infirmities of
Nature, and seldom free from the assault of Temptations night and day: Though
my Limbs wax stiff and cold, yet let my Soul be vigorous and fervent, that like
Jacob, I may seem to wrestle with thee; for thou delightest in the earnest and
importunate Solicitations of thy people. Now I am risen from my place of
slumber, teach me to look upwards; to found my hopes on Thee, to fix my eye
upon that holy place, from whence the day does break. Bless me in all my
endeavors and duties of this day, that in every action I may have a regard to
thy glory, and the salvation of my own Soul.

Unto thee, O Lord, have I cried, and early in the morning shall my Prayer come
before thee: As long as I live will I magnify thee on this manner, and lift up
my hands in thy Name: O let me hear of thy loving kindness in the morning
betimes, for in thee is my trust: Show me the way I should walk in, for I lift
up my Soul unto thee. I desire to dedicate the powers of my Soul, the
Affections of my heart, and the Faculties of my Body, to be thy Faithful,
Loyal, and Obedient Servants.

Extend, O merciful Father, thy loving kindness over all the World, especially
this sinful Land of my Nativity. Herein bless his most Excellent Majesty, his
Royal Consort, and the Illustrious Prince; let the Sons of Violence do them no
harm: Let Mercy and Truth preserve him, and his Throne be established for ever
before thee, O thou who art the wonderful Counselor, and Prince of Peace. Be
gracious to thine Inheritance, for the glory of thy Name, let not thine Enemies
devour the Church, and lay waste her dwelling places: Defend it with the
Custody of Angels, and the Patronage of Kings and Princes, that She may
flourish under the Beams of thy Favor and Providence, take root and spread,
and fill all Lands, that the whole Nation may be blessed with thy health and
salvation.

Bless our Noble Governors, under whose care and protection we live and are
sustained: Let thy Truth and Mercy be ever with them, and when they have
happily finished their Course in this Life, crown their Wisdom and Fidelity
with Immortality and Glory.

Hear me for all those whom I am obliged to, by the bonds of Duty, Charity, or
Affection. Pity all those who sit in darkness and the shadow of death, preserve
them in the midst of an untoward and sinful Generation; Avert thy Judgments
from us, and soften the hearts of all our Enemies.

O Lord, whom my Soul does desire, and my Spirit seeks early in the morning:
How excellent is thy Name in all the World? Grant me a pure intention of mind,
and a steadfast regard of thy glory in all my Actions: Create in me sorrow for
my sins, thankfulness for thy benefits, fear of thy Judgments, and love of thy
mercies, that I may have a continual reverence for thy Name, and be mindful of
thy presence for evermore.

Every morning I draw nearer the last Stage of my Life, therefore, Lord, assist
me with thy Grace, that I may be the more prepared every minute for my
dissolution, that when I hear news of thy Messenger, Death, I may not be
amazed, and wax faint, but hope in thy Salvation.

Let this Day be a day of Reformation and Repentance; that though I am weak and
aged, yet I may become a new Creature, and serve thee in true holiness and
righteousness all the days of my life. Rule and govern my heart, that it may
every day be intent and studious upon good things, that I may not live as an
useless Creature, and so become a burden to the Earth. Support me in this my
long Pilgrimage, in the Journey of this day, and the performances thereof, hold
me by thy right hand, that my feet slip not aside, that I may fall into no
danger.

I brought nothing into this World, and it is certain I can carry nothing out,
therefore, O Lord, be thou my portion and my hope, in whom I will ever trust.
My abode here is of no long continuance, which often puts me in mind of
Eternity: My present weakness and poverty reminds me of thy strength, and the
riches of thy glory. Remember thy Promises, O merciful Father, and suffer me
never to forget thy Praises: O fail me not this day following, and all the days
of my life, my God, and my Redeemer, through Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

An Evening Prayer.
OMnipotent and Everlasting God, thou who neither slumberest nor sleep, the
great Shepherd of Israel, I dare not commit my body to rest, before I have
commended my soul to thee: I dare not suffer my eyes to sleep, nor mine
eyelids to slumber, nor the temples of my head to take any rest, before I have
poured out my soul before Thee in Praises and Thanksgiving, for the blessings
of this day past, and the succors of thy Favors, for the length of my life,
and the continuance of thy Providence, for the comforts of my soul, and the
refreshment of my body, which I have largely received: The Day is thine, and
the Night is thine, therefore let me experience thy goodness in both: Let my
Prayers be set forth in thy sight as Incense, and the lifting up of my hands,
be as the Evening Sacrifice.

I humbly thank thee for all the late Instances of thy love and goodness, for
the improvement of my time, and the blessed opportunities of Divine worship;
for the occasions of doing good, and the benefit of holy conference, for the
gracious issues of thy love, and the manifestation of thy glory: make me to
remember, that the more Blessings I receive, the greater will my account be at
the last day: Take away all the mutinous thoughts of repining nature, that when
I consider the happiness of my birth, and the quality of my education, I may
not quarrel with my present condition, but study to repay as much thankfulness,
as I receive charity: Praised be thy Name, that I am thus provided for, that I
have a place whereon to lay my head, and that I am not tempted to put forth my
hand to wickedness, for some strange course of supply. Whenever I consider of
the mean circumstances of my condition, let me then remember the smalness of my
deserts, who might well be satisfied with the bread and water of Affliction, or
with the crumbs that fall from other men's Tables: Possess me with this
seasonable persuasion, that this my present state is fittest for me, and make
me sensible that thy Providence does visit the lowest condition of men, and
that the beams of thy Favor do reach unto the most withdrawn and solitary
places of the world: O thou, who art pleased to call thy self the Hearer of
Prayers, give me a tender sense of Conscience, that out of the abundance of my
sorrow I may pour out a most plentiful and hearty confession of my sins before
thee: Make me to consider seriously, that all pain and grief is but the fruit
of sin, and that as all sickness naturally makes way for death, so death (in it
self) is the forerunner of Condemnation: Why should I cover and hide my sins
from thee, when the discovery of them is the way to receive thy pardon and
release? For thou have bound thy self by a promise, to hear and assist all
those that seek thee with an unfeigned heart: I have a thousand ways done evil
in thy sight: My Prayers have been interrupted, my Meditations perplexed and
robbed of their wonted sweetness, and my careless hearing and reading of thy
Word has proved unprofitable: My faith has been encountered with grievous
doubtings, because I cannot feel that strength and power of thy Spirit which I
desire. I am compassed about with many weaknesses, as I have found by the
experience of this day: Satan is full of his old subtilty, to work upon all
advantages; therefore give me thy holy wisdom, to discover his snares, and thy
grace to withstand his siercest assaults: O Lord, forgive my Ignorance, and
forget my Presumption, pardon my iniquities committed both in youth and age;
give me prudence and sobriety to carry my self among men out of the reach of
just exception, and arm me with resolution, that I may sacrifice my credit and
estimation, nay, life it self, if need be, for the testimony of thy Faith.

Let me not be haunted with troops of unquiet thoughts, because I feed on
Charity when my Relations live plenteously upon their own; for all the World is
thine, and thou art an equal Lord and Disposer of that and this too: Enrich my
Soul with Spiritual Blessings in heavenly things, raise and ennoble my Soul,
that it may not dwell too long upon the Earth, but often be entertained with
the thoughts of that City above, which has Foundations, whose Builder and
Maker is God. Make me to see the depth of my sins, that I do not flatter and
deceive my Soul: pardon the vanities of my youth, and the offenses of my riper
years: When I look upon my days that are past, and consider how much time has
been consumed in sin and folly, and how little in the exercises of Piety and
offices of Religion, when I behold all my sins marshalled in rank and order
before my eyes, I am even ashamed and confounded within my self, and have no
other sanctuary to repair unto but thy mercy and goodness. Let not thy Graces
in me wither with my age, nor my zeal for thy glory cool with the decay of
bodily heat: Suffer me not to put the evil day far from me, to delude my Soul
with the idle hopes of living a little and a little longer, but teach me with
St. Paul to dye daily. Now therefore do I bow my Soul to thee, O God, and
humbly lay my self low before thy Throne, pity these feeble and trembling
knees; have mercy upon thy poor Suppliant, though now sleep be ready to seize
upon the eyes of my body, yet let not vain security oppress my Soul: I am now
thinking of thy everlasting Rest, which I hope at length to obtain, when time
shall be swallowed up in Eternity, when Faith shall be turned into Vision, and
bare hopes into actual Enjoyment: O Lord hear, and graciously accept of these
my Prayers, through Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

A Preparatory Prayer before the Sacrament.
O Thou Searcher of hearts, who know the secrets and most silent passages of
the mind, assist me in the survey and examination of my Soul, that I may draw
up a true Inventory of all the furniture of sin which is lodged in my breast: I
dare not approach thy Table, before I have entered into my self, and laid open
all my sins and iniquities before thee, which I have been contracting so long,
that I am become an aged sinner; I have no other Sanctuary to repair to but thy
mercy; therefore, O Lord, pardon the sins of my whole life, and pity the
Infirmities of age; and though I am of small esteem, and no reputation among
men, though this trembling and withered Body of mine, is become unwelcome to
the eye of the World; yet grant that thy holy Spirit would vouchsafe to dwell
in this Ancient Temple, that I may daily magnify thy holy Name.

I dare not presume to draw near thy Table, without making my addresses to the
Throne of Grace; for he that confesses his sins shall obtain a covering for
them. O Lord, cleanse my hands, and purify my heart, and make me conformable
to thy Will and thy Image, that I may not pollute thy heavenly food, nor
profane the most blessed body and blood of my dearest Savior: To this end
sanctify my body and soul, that no unclean thing may come out of my mouth;
that I may detest and abhor covetousness, lying, and injurious dealing; all
cursing, blasphemy, and unreasonable anger; that I may be chaste, virtuous,
meek, and religious; that I never offer to put that heavenly Food into a mouth
used to gluttony and drunkenness, to falsifying the truth, and speaking evil of
my Brethren, for this will be to make no difference, yea, to profane the
Lord's Body.

Teach me to put off the Old man, and repair the breaches of my decayed Nature;
prosper and direct my present purposes of communicating at thy Table; that I
may prove a true Disciple, and know my Lord in breaking of bread: This is the
commemoration of my Saviors death, may it prove instrumental to my eternal
life; strike an aw and reverence in my heart, because of thy Presence, and in
consideration that it is thy holy Ordinance: My soul mourns, when I consider at
what a great distance my sins have set me from thee; but yet now I begin to
revive and wax glad, because of thy faithful promise of reunion. O how I
hunger and thirst for thy saving health! to be united to that sacred Body,
whose Head is Christ.

Give me Faith to believe in him, who by Faith and new Obedience is made mine:
Make me a welcome Guest at thy holy Table, that all the days of my life I may
bear a good Conscience both toward God and toward Man, which will be a
continual Feast: O Lord, this is a Feast of Love, therefore expel out of my
mind all disorderly and uncharitable thoughts, that I may lovingly embrace all
my aged Brethren, who are fed within the walls of this Religious House, that I
may extend it to all men, even my enemies, and forgive the whole world; for
thou did the same thing to us, who were at variance with thy holiness and
purity: For he that comes to thy Table with the barbarous thoughts of Revenge,
does certainly crucify his Savior afresh. If my Lord and Savior descended
from his glorious Palace in Heaven, was so humble as to take our Nature upon
him, endured the contradiction of sinners, and at last laid down his life for
my sake; truly I am ashamed to think that I should scruple acts of kindness and
civility, Instances of love and charity to those who are bone of my bone, and
flesh of my flesh; for so thy Prophet tells me, by advising me not to turn away
my face from my own flesh.

Seeing my God was made a Sacrifice for me, what can I do less than make my
solemn vows in the House of the Lord, to serve him faithfully all the days of
my life, than to thank him for the pledges of his love, and the seals of his
Favor: that while I carry about with me this frail and shattered body, I may
fit my self for the glorious Mansions above, where there will be an Eternal
Communion of Saints.

Who can tell how often he offends? therefore, O Lord, cleanse me from my
secret faults: Cast me not away in the time of my old age, and forsake me not
when my strength fails me; enable me to get the mastery of sin, that I may
perform holy duties with more ease and satisfaction, and that I may have
sweeter fellowship with thy Spirit.

I am eternally bound to thank thee for thy gracious instances of Providence in
my own behalf, that when I was a slave to sin and punishment, thou gave thy
Son for a Ransom, did send thy holy Spirit for a pledge and comforter, thy
Word for a Guide, and have prepared a Kingdom for my inheritance: I am now
going about to renew thy Covenant, to beg pardon for my failure in any of the
conditions, that I may not forfeit my right to Eternal Happiness.

Accept of my Prayers and Vows, my imperfect offers of Duty and Obedience, for
the sake of the Son of thy Love, the Holy Jesus, my Mediator and Redeemer, the
Savior of Mankind: Grant that I may be a worthy Receiver, that this holy
action prescribed us by the great Atonement, may prove efficacious, and add to
the life and refreshment of my Soul, through Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

A Prayer after the Receiving the holy Communion.
O Dearest Jesu, the Head of the Church, the Beginning and Firstborn from the
Dead; thou who gave thy self a Sacrifice and Propitiation for my sins, accept
of my hearty Prayers, and receive my Thanksgiving; thou who upholdest all
things by the word of thy Power, sustain my weak and aged body; thou who art
the brightness of thy Fathers glory, purify and refine my Soul, that it be not
sullied with the filthiness of sin.

I humbly thank thee for the greatness of thy love, in humbling thy self to the
death of the Cross, for thy institution of this Blessed Sacrament, for thy
gracious invitation to this holy Table; and lastly, for the unspeakable comfort
and refreshment of my Soul. Possess my Soul with a mighty sense of thy great
goodness, that I may declare to the sons of men the wonderful works that the
Lord has done unto me: Let me clearly perceive the manifestation of thy wisdom
and love, who to inform and instruct my weakness, are pleased by these Elements
of Bread and Wine, to figure out unto me the Body and Blood of my dearest
Savior; may the Shadow lead me to the Substance, and this Seal of thy gracious
Covenant be an instrument of my eternal Happiness, that from this temporal
Commemoration I may rise to the blessed Vision of my sweet Redeemer. I am now
almost in the Suburbs of Death, grant that it may be in order to my entrance
into the heavenly Jerusalem; it is not long before I shall try the Grand
Experiment, for now my Pulse beats (about) threescore, and much further the
strength of man cannot go: Therefore I desire to settle the affairs of my Soul,
before I go hence and be no more seen; I cannot tell whither I shall have
another opportunity to partake of thy holy Table: Therefore let this present
participation of the holy Sacrament be a Seal and Testimony for the Remission
of my Sins. Though I have not long to live, yet I will enter into covenant with
my Soul to serve and obey thee, to love the Lord my God, with all my heart, and
with all my strength; for the Righteousness of thy Testimonies is everlasting,
give me understanding, and I shall live: O thou who art the appointed Heir of
all things, the express Image of thy Fathers Person, let thy Grace comfort and
refresh me who hunger and thirst after eternal life, let my Soul never faint in
the Courts of the Lord, as long as my heart and my flesh cries out for the
living God: Let Satan never find an opportunity to tempt and ensnare my Soul;
may I ever be diligent, to prevent a surprise, and abstain from transgressions,
lest my portion be among sad and accursed Souls. As for me, I will call upon
God, and the Lord shall save me: Evening and Morning, and at noon day, will I
pray and cry aloud, and he shall hear my voice; he has delivered my Soul in
peace from the Battle that was against me, therefore I will put my trust in him
for ever.

I confess I have omitted much good, and am guilty of many Offenses of
Ignorance, Infirmity, and Knowledge; therefore thy pardon I still beg, and
assistance of thy Grace, that I may bring forth fruits worthy of Repentance.

Make thy Church happy in a Moses and Aaron; in Nursing Fathers to go in and
out before thy people, and holy Ministers to stand before thee our God:
Preserve them from the malice of their Enemies, and the strivings of the
people; let their lips preserve knowledge, that we may seek the Law at their
mouth: Spare thy people; bless them in their Souls, Bodies, and Estates, that
this Nation may be at length as great an instance of thy mercy, as it has been
of thy wrath and fury: Every one of us more or less has contributed to the vast
heap of crying sins, yet seeing thou have graciously afforded us a space for
repentance, and suspended the dreadful execution, let our sorrow procure the
continuance of thy Favors, that Peace and Plenty may be within our Borders,
and no Invasion in the Land.

I thank thee, O merciful Father, for the freedom of thy Gospel, the food of
the Word, the sweet refreshings of thy Sacraments, public Communions in thy
Church, and for all the benefits which are enjoyed by the society of Saints and
good men. Pity all those who sit in darkness, and in the shadow of Death, who
are not acquainted with thy Name, or knowing it are nevertheless carried away
by strong delusions into the ways of error and mischief. Bless all the sons
and daughters of affliction, strengthen them in the hour of trial, that neither
the love of this world, nor the loss of light, neither the fear of death, nor
the terrors of Hell, may make them unwilling to depart this life.

And now at length I humbly desire thee to give me wisdom to order my life
aright from henceforth, that I may be wary and circumspect in all my actions, a
careful and an understanding Hearer of thy Word, a constant frequenter of thy
Courts, sober and temperate, exercising my self unto all godliness, that my
whole Spirit, Soul, and Body, may be kept blameless unto the end: Plant in my
Soul a deep detestation of all evil, that when I see my sins, I may also behold
my Redeemer.

Bless this Religious Society, the pious and aged Brethren; that Peace and Love
may endear and unite us all together; that we may faithfully communicate
heavenly things one to another: temper our minds with submission and reverence,
that we may honor our Governors, and pay our just duty to all our Superiors,
and no way carry our selves insolently to our Inferiors.

O Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the Blessed Three in One, the All in All,
accept of these, and all my hearty Prayers, through Jesus Christ my God and
Savior. Amen.

In the time of Sickness.
O Thou determiner of my days, in whose hands are the Issues of Life and Death,
behold and pity thy aged and sinful Servant, diseased in body, and distressed
in mind; turn thy face unto me, send down thine aid to comfort me, for I am in
pain, desolate and poor: Speak peace unto my Soul, and say thou art my
Salvation.

O dearest Jesus, the brightness of thy Fathers Glory, dispel these Clouds of
Darkness and Despair; thou, who art the Souls Physician, arise with healing
under thy wings, and show thy skill in my weakness.

If it be thy Will and uncontrollable Decree by this thy Chastisement to finish
my days, draw near to my humble and afflicted Soul, support it by thy strength
in this day of Trial, as I have always endeavored to live, so let me now dye
the death of the Righteous; diminish the fears of death by the hopes of a
blessed life; hide not thy face from me in the time of my trouble; hold not thy
peace at my tears, now my Soul cleaves unto the dust, but let the last Minute
be the best of all my life.

Many days have I enjoyed the Comforts of Life, in this quiet and Religious
Sanctuary, and all I ascribe to thy particular mercy and gracious instances of
Providence: But now my spirits faint, my eyes wax dim, my hands shake, and the
pillars of my house tremble; now I find the time of my dissolution approaches
by the regular Course of Nature: therefore what is my Hope, O Lord? truly my
hope and affiance is even in Thee: O Lord, my heart is smitten down, and
withered like Grass, so that I forget to eat bread; there is no health in my
flesh, because of thy displeasure, and no rest in my bones by reason of my sin:
Therefore, dear Savior, pardon me, forgive me all my sins, comfort me in this
day of sorrow, ease my pains, and satisfy my doubts, strengthen my hopes, and
relieve my Soul: Thou, who are the Firstborn from the dead, the appointed Heir
of all things, uphold my faint and trembling Soul in the conflict and agony of
death, that I may utter nothing displeasing to thee, O God, and give me
assurance that my portion shall never be among hopeless and accursed Souls in
the Regions of Torment and Despair. Welcome blessed Hour, the period of my
Pilgrimage, the term of my Bondage, the end of my Care, and the Haven of my
Hopes; now I am to take my flight to the place from whence I shall never more
return; now I am to enter into the loving Embraces of my Lord and Savior.

O thou Father of Comforts! how do I love to hear of thy mercy, and the joys of
Heaven? O how dear unto me are the promises of the Living God? Suffer me not to
be impatient in this day of Visitation, but meekly to resign my spirit up into
thy Hands, and peaceably to pass by the Gates of Death, to the Kingdom of Glory.

Separate my Transgressions, O Lord, from my Soul, or else they will separate
me from Heaven: Now the Enemy is busy, and Satan watches for an advantage,
secure my apprehension, add strength to my faith, and pity my Infirmities; make
all my Friends, who stand around my Deathbed, sensible of Human frailty, by
beholding me an object of Mortality, just setting out for Eternity: O Lord, let
thy pardon refresh my Soul, let thy Spirit guide me safely in the way to the
blessed Mansions above: (If they are at the point of death.)
I have fought a long fight, in much weakness, I have near finished my Course,
though in great faintness, and the Crown of my Life is, that through the
strength of thy Grace I have kept the true faith, and now dye in it: I thank
God for all his blessings, the company of my Friends, the means of Physic,
holy Prayers, and living and dying in the best established Church in the
Christian World. I willingly resign my Earthly body to the Dust from whence it
came, and I earnestly desire to be with God: I profess to all the World, I know
no other Name by which any man can be saved, but by the Name of Jesus: I
renounce all presumption and confidence in my own merits: I thankfully
acknowledge Gods repeated Blessings, and heartily bewail my own sins: I repose
all my trust in the mercy and promises of God, and I forgive all my Enemies, as
now I beg of God to forgive me. Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my Soul. Amen.

A Prayer to be said at any time by a young Scholar of the House.
O Merciful Father, the Redeemer and Sanctifier of all thy Children, I praise
and magnify thy holy Name, because I have received many special and peculiar
Blessings at thy hands: I thank thee, O God, that I was born of Christian
Parents, that I was baptized into the true Faith, that my Lot is fallen in this
excellent place of Piety and Education, and that I have the knowledge and
opportunity of making my early approaches to the Throne of Grace: Teach me, O
Lord, to remember my Creator in the days of my Youth, to dedicate the Spring
and Innocence of my Age to the God of Purity and Perfection; I am now soft and
tender, apt to receive the first Impressions that are laid upon me, suffer me
therefore not to be led aside by the whispers of sin, or the pernicious
Examples of a wanton and profane Age: Season the beginnings of my years with
thy Grace and Goodness, let wisdom teach me the fear of the Lord, that I may
cheerfully run the way of thy Commandments: I am now entering upon the Stage of
the World, and humbly desire to be led by good Example; therefore, O blessed
Father, lead me not into Temptation, but deliver me from Evil: Curb and
restrain the unruliness of my passion, rebuke and subdue the rashness and heat
of youth, train me up in that way wherein thou desire I should walk: Frame in
me an humble and submissive mind, that I may be willing to be taught and obey,
to entertain all godly and profitable Instructions: Give me understanding to
discern my duty, grace and wisdom (...) all corrupt Example and Conve^^^ and to
fix my heart upon Obe^^^ Thanksgiving. Here thy won^ (...) mercy has placed me,
to be brought up in thy Fear, and praise thy Name; therefore I heartily desire
to fulfill thy Will, that these my fresh and greener years, may be consecrated
to thy Service, before they receive any taint of Corruption from a lewd and
infectious Age; I bow my Soul before thee, earnestly desiring that I may
betimes become a Servant of the Living God. Teach me to shun the occasions and
appearances of sin, that I may never be defiled with its Embraces: Teach me to
avoid the first steps and entrances of Impiety, that I may never be so bold as
to violate thy Commands. Let the apprehensions of a small sin so terrify and
affright my tender Soul, that I may always abhor the malignity of gross and
filthy sins, that I may keep these Evils at a distance, and not be entangled in
their Snares.

As I grow up in years, let me increase in Goodness and Learning, that I may
fully Answer the ends of my Noble Benefactour, and be instrumental to the
publishing of thy Honor and Glory: Now may I justly sing Hosanna, seeing thou
have made so many shiftless Babes and Sucklings to rejoice.

Plant in me a just and forward Obedience to all my Governors that are set in
Authority over me: In an especial manner bless my Sovereign Lord King Charles,
let him be as the Firstborn, and glorious among the Kings of the Earth, let
thine Hand hold him fast, and thine Arm strengthen him. Bless him likewise in
all his Royal Relations. Be gracious to thine Inheritance, bless them who watch
diligently for our Souls, that at the last day they may give a joyful account
of them to the Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls. Arise O God, maintain thine
own Cause, remember how the foolish man blasphemeth thee daily: continue unto
us the Light of thy Gospel, that the Name of the Man of thy Right Hand, Christ
Jesus, may be glorified, thy Church enlarged and defended, and we all brought
up in the true Faith of thy only Son.

Bless our Noble and Wise Governors, our Instructors both in Sacred and Human
Learning; and sanctify my heart with humility, that I may show all due
Reverence, to the several Members of this Religious House, whether in Age or
Authority placed above me.

Purge and cleanse my Soul from all the seeds and beginnings of evil; root out
of my mind all folly and vanity, idleness and self-conceit; expel all loose and
wanton desires, all stubborn and contumacious Humors, which are apt to breed
in younger years; that every day I may wax wiser and more holy, sensible of thy
gracious assistance, and the comforts of a chaste and virtuous life. O thou
Father of Lights, it is by thy Providence I am placed here in the School of
Instruction, and from thy Goodness I crave a blessing upon my endeavors,
otherwise all my labor and study will be vain and fruitless: To thee therefore
do I lift up my Soul, who art the Fountain of all Knowledge, the Original of
all Tongues and Languages, I humbly desire thee to endue my mind with knowledge
and discretion, quickness of perception, and a tenacious memory, that I may be
sit for that station which thou art pleased to design me for. As I now make my
Addresses betimes to thy holy Majesty, so grant that the sincerity and fervor
of my Soul may continue and increase, that I may be accustomed to Prayer, and
lifting up holy hands unto thee.

Pardon all the sins of my youth, the errors and miscarriages of my few and
imprudent years: Bless me with health of body, and soundness of mind; increase
of friends, and profitable acquaintance; sanctify the ministry of thy Word
unto me, that my Soul may rejoice in thy Salvation.

Make me able and ready every day to extol thy loving kindness, and frequently
to meditate upon thy mercy, O thou Pittier of all that stand in need of help,
my Guide and Castle of Defense, the great Preserver of Youth as well as Men,
through Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

FINIS.
Errata sic corrigat Lector Benevolus.
Page 10. line 14. read now. p. 21. l. 11. r. dolenter. p. 21. l. 18. r.
propagentur. p. 38. l. penult. r. 500 marks to Jesus College. p. 55. l. 6. r.
cholick. p. 87. l. 14. r. Horse-heath. p. 114. l. 16. r. fitting. p. 127. l.
12. r. all. p. 135. l. 20. r. of age. p. 187. l. 10. in the marg. r. by Hows.
p. 191. l. penult. r. latter. p. 195. l. 9. r. Fryans. p. 234. l. 18. r. the
Senior. p. 237. l. 16. r. shoes. p. 238. l. 4. r. for such.


