Tempora cinxisset Foliorum densior umbra:
Debetur Genio laurea Sylva tuo.
Tempora et Hla sibi mollis redimisset Oliva;
Scilicet excludis Versibus Arma tuis.
Admisces Antigua Novis, Iucunda Severis:
Hinc Iuvenis discat, Foemina, Virgo, Senex
Ut solo minor es Phoebo, sic major es Unus
Omnibus, Ingenio, Mente, Lepore, Stylo
W. Marshall Fecit.

scripsit I. H. C. W. M.



HESPERIDES: OR, THE WORKS BOTH HUMANE and DIVINE OF ROBERT HERRICK Esquire.

OVID.

Effugient avidos Carmina nostra Rogos.

LONDON, Printed for John Williams, and Francis Eglesfield, and are to be sold
by Tho: Hunt, Bookseller in Exon. 1648.

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS, AND Most Hopeful PRINCE, CHARLES, Prince of Wales.
WEll may my Book come forth like Public Day,
When such a Light as You are leads the way:
Who are my Works Creator, and alone
The Flame of it, and the Expansion.
And look how all those heavenly Lamps acquire
Light from the Sun, that inexhausted Fire:
So all my Morn, and Evening Stars from You
Have their Existence, and their Influence too.
Full is my Book of Glories; but all These
By You become Immortal Substances.
FOr these Transgressions which thou here do see,
Condemn the Printer, Reader, and not me;
Who gave him forth good Grain, though he mistook
The Seed; so sowed these Tares throughout my Book.
ERRATA.
PAge 33. line 10. read Rods. p. 41. l. 19. r. Gotiere. p. 65. l. 12. r. only
one. p. 83. l. 28. r. soft. p. 88. l. 26. r. the flowrie. p. 91. l. 29. r. such
fears. p. 136. l. 9. r. to thee the. p. 155. l. 10. r. washed or's to tell. p.
166. l. 10. r. his Lachrimae. p. 181. l. 10. r. Ah woe is me, woe, woe is me.
p. 183. l. 9. r. and thy breast. p. 201. l. 22. r. let chaste. p. 230. l. 21. r.
and having drunk. p. 260. l. 26. r. to rise. p. 335. l. 17. r. a wife as.

In the Divine.

Page 22. line 14. read where so ere he sees.

HESPERIDES.
The Argument of his Book.
I Sing of Brooks, of Blossoms, Birds, and Bowers:
Of April, May, of June, and July-Flowers.
I sing of May-poles, Hock-carts, Wassails, Wakes,
Of Bride-grooms, Brides, and of their Bridall-cakes.
I write of Youth, of Love, and have Access
By these, to sing of cleanly- Wantonness.
I sing of Dewes, of Raines, and piece by piece
Of Balm, of Oil, of Spice, and Ambergris.
I sing of Times trans-shifting; and I write
How Roses first came Red, and Lillies White.
I write of Groves, of Twilights, and I sing
The Court of Mab, and of the Fairie-King.
I write of Hell; I sing (and ever shall)
Of Heaven, and hope to have it after all.
To his Muse.
WHither Mad maiden will thou roame?
Far safer 'twere to stay at home:
Where thou may sit, and piping please
The poor and private Cottages.
Since Coats, and Hamlets, best agree
With this thy meaner Minstralsie.
There with the Reed, thou may express
The Shepherds Fleecie happiness:
And with thy Eclogues intermixe
Some smooth, and harmless Beucol'cks.
There on a Hillock thou may sing
Unto a handsome Shephardling;
Or to a Girl (that keeps the Neat)
With breath more sweet then Violet.
There, there, (perhaps) such Lines as These
May take the simple Villages.
But for the Court, the Country wit
Is despicable unto it.
Stay then at home, and do not go
Or fly abroad to seek for woe.
Contempts in Courts and Cities dwell;
No Critic haunts the Poor man's Cell:
Where thou may hear thine own Lines read
By no one tongue, there, censured.
That man's unwise will search for Ill,
And may prevent it, sitting still.
To his Book.
WHile thou did keep thy Cander undefiled,
Dearly I loved thee; as my firstborn child:
But when I saw thee want only to roame
From house to house, and never stay at home;
I brake my bonds of Love, and bad thee go,
Regardlesse whether well thou sped'st, or no.
On with thy fortunes then, what e're they be;
If good I Will smile, if bad I Will sigh for Thee.
Another.
TO read my Book the Virgin shie
May blush, (while Brutus stands by:)
But when He Is gone, read through what is writ,
And never stain a cheek for it.
Another.
WHo with thy leaves shall wipe (at need)
The place, where swelling Piles do breed:
May every Ill, that bites, or smarts,
Perplexe him in his hinder-parts.
To the sour Reader.
IF thou dislik'st the Piece thou light'st on first;
Think that of All, that I have writ, the worst:
But if thou read'st my Book unto the end,
And still do this, and that verse, reprehend:
O Perverse man! If All disgustfull be,
The Extreme Scabbe take thee, and thine, for me.
To his Book.
COme thou not near those men, who are like Bread
O're-leven'd; or like Cheese o're-renetted.
When he would have his verses read.
IN sober mornings, do not thou rehearse
The holy incantation of a verse;
But when that men have both well drunk, and fed,
Let my Enchantments then be sung, or read.
When Laurel spirts 'ith fire, and when the Hearth
Smiles to it self, and guilds the roof with mirth;
When up the A Javelin twind with Ivy. Songs to Bacchus.
Thyrse is raised, and when the sound
Of sacred A Javelin twind with Ivy. Songs to Bacchus.
Orgies flies, A round, A round.
When the Rose reigns, and locks with ointments shine,
Let rigid Cato read these Lines of mine.
Upon Julias Recovery.
DRoop, droop no more, or hang the head
Ye Roses almost withered;
Now strength, and newer Purple get,
Each here declining Violet.
O Primroses! let this day be
A Resurrection unto ye;
And to all flowers allied in blood,
Or sworn to that sweet Sister-hood:
For Health on Julia's cheek has shed
Clarret, and Cream coming led.
And those her lips do now appear
As beams of Corrall, but more clear.
To Silvia to wed.
LEt us (though late) at last (my Silvia) wed;
And loving lie in one devoted bed.
Thy Watch may stand, my minutes fly post haste;
No sound calls back the year that once is past.
Then sweetest Silvia, let us no longer stay;
True love, we know, precipitates delay.
Away with doubts, all scruples hence remove;
No man at one time, can be wise, and love.
The Parliament of Roses to Julia.
I Dreamt the Roses one time went
To meet and sit in Parliament:
The place for these, and for the rest
Of flowers, was thy spotless breast:
Over the which a State was drawn
Of Tiffanie, or Cob-web Lawne;
Then in that Parley, all those powers
Voted the Rose; the Queen of flowers.
But so, as that her self should be
The maid of Honor unto thee.
No bashfulnesse in begging.
TO get thine ends, lay bashfulnesse aside;
Who fears to ask, does teach to be denied.
The Frozen Heart.
I Freeze, I freeze, and nothing dwells
In me but Snow, and ysicles.
For pitties sake give y our advice,
To melt this snow, and thaw this ice;
I Will drink down Flames, but if so be
Nothing but love can supple me;
I Will rather keep this frost, and snow,
Then to be thawed, or heated so.
To Perilla.
AH my Perilla! do thou grieve to see
Me, day by day, to steal away from thee?
Age calls me hence, and my gray hairs bid come,
And haste away to mine eternal home;
Twill not be long ( Perilla) after this,
That I must give thee the supremest kiss:
Dead when I am, first cast in salt, and bring
Part of the cream from that Religious Spring;
With which ( Perilla) wash my hands and feet;
That done, then wind me in that very sheet
Which wrapped thy smooth limbs (when thou did implore
The Gods protection, but the night before)
Follow me weeping to my Turfe, and there
Let fall a Primrose, and with it a tear:
Then lastly, let some weekly-strewings be
Devoted to the memory of me:
Then shall my Ghost not walk about, but keep
Still in the cool, and silent shades of sleep.
A Song to the Maskers.
1.
COme down, and dance ye in the toil
Of pleasures, to a Heat;
But if to moisture, Let the oil
Of Roses be your sweat.
2.
Not only to your selves assume
These sweets, but let them fly;
From this, to that, and so Perfume
E'ne all the standers by.
3.
As Goddess Isis (when she went,
Or glided through the street)
Made all that touched her with her scent,
And whom she touched, turn sweet.
To Perenna.
WHen I thy Parts run over, I cannot epsy
In any one, the least indecencie:
But every Line, and Limb diffused thence,
A fair, and unfamiliar excellence:
So, that the more I look, the more I prove,
There Is still more cause, why I the more should love.
Treason.
THe seeds of Treason choke up as they spring,
He Acts the Crime, that gives it Cherisking.
Two Things Odious.
TWo of a thousand things, are disallowed,
A lying Rich man, and a Poor man proud.
To his Mistresses.
Help me! help me! now I call
To my pretty Witchcrafts all:
Old I am, and cannot do
That, I was accustomed to.
Bring your Magicks, Spells, and Charms,
To enflesh my thighs, and arms:
Is there no way to beget
In my limbs their former heat?
AEson had (as Poets feign)
Baths that made him young again:
Find that Medicine (if you can)
For your dric-decrepid man:
Who would feign his strength renew,
Were it but to pleasure you.
The Wounded Heart.
COme bring your sampler, and with Art,
Draw in it a wounded Heart:
And dropping here, and there:
Not that I think, that any Dart,
Can make yours bleed a tear:
Or pierce it any where;
Yet do it to this end: that I,
May by
This secret see,
Though you can make
That Heart to bleed, yours never will ache
For me.
No Loathsomeness in love.
WHat I fancy, I approve,
No Dislike there is in love:
Be my Mistress short or tall,
And distorted there-withall:
Be she likewise one of those,
That an Acre has of Nose:
Be her forehead, and her eyes
Full of incongruities:
Be her cheeks so shallow too,
As to show her Tongue wag through:
Be her lips ill hung, or set,
And her grinders black as jet;
Has she thin hair, has she none,
She Is to me a 'Paragon.
To Anthea.
IF dear Anthea, my hard fate it be
To live some few-sad-howers after thee:
Thy sacred Corse with Odours I will burn;
And with my Laurel crown thy Golden Urne.
Then holding up (there) such religious Things,
As were (time past) thy holy Filitings:
Nere to thy Reverend Pitcher I will fall
Down dead for grief, and end my woes withal:
So three in one small plat of ground shall ly,
Anthea, Herrick, and his Poetry.
The Weeping Cherry.
I Saw a Cherry weep, and why?
Why wept it? but for shame,
Because my Julia's lip was by,
And did out-red the same.
But pretty Fondling, let not fall
A tear at all for that:
Which Rubies, Corralls, Scarlets, all
For tincture, wonder at.
Soft Music.
THe mellow touch of music most does wound
The soul, when it does rather sigh, then sound.
The Difference Betwixt Kings and Subjects.
TWixt Kings and Subjects there is this mighty odds,
Subjects are taught by Men; Kings by the Gods.
His Answer to a Question.
SOme would know
Why I so
Long still do tarry,
And ask why
Here that I
Live, and not marry?
Thus I those
Do oppose;
What man would be here,
Slave to Thrall,
If at all
He could live free here?
Upon Julia's Fall.
IVLIA was careless, and withal,
She rather took, then got a fall:
The wanton Ambler chanced to see
Part of her legs sincerity:
And ravished thus, It came to pass,
The Nagge (like to the Prophets Ass)
Began to speak, and would have been
A telling what rare sights h'ad seen:
And had told all; but did refrain,
Because his Tongue was tied again.
Expenses Exhaust.
LIve with a thrifty, not a needy Fate;
Small shots paid often, waste a vast estate.
Love what it is.
LOve is a circle that does restless move
In the same sweet eternity of love.
Presence and Absence.
WHen what is loved, is Present, love does spring;
But being absent, Love lies languishing.
No Spouse but a Sister.
A Bachelour I will
Live as I have lived still,
And never take a wife
To crucify my life:
But this I Will tell ye too,
What now I mean to do;
A Sister (in the stead
Of Wife) about I Will lead;
Which I will keep embraced,
And kiss, but yet be chaste.
The Pomander Bracelet.
TO me my Julia lately sent
A Bracelet richly Redolent:
The Beads I kissed, but most loved her
That did perfume the Pomander.
The shoe tying.
ANthea bade me tie her shoe;
I did; and kissed the Instep too:
And would have kissed unto her knee,
Had not her Blush rebuked me.
The Carkanet.
INstead of Orient Pearls of Jet,
I sent my Love a Karkanet:
About her spotless neck she knit
The lace, to honor me, or it:
Then think how wrapped was I to see
My Jet t'enthrall such Ivorie.
His sailing from Julia.
WHen that day comes, whose evening says I Am gone
Unto that watrie Desolation:
Devoutly to thy Closet-gods then pray,
That my winged Ship may meet no Remora.
Those Deities which circum-walk the Seas,
And look upon our dreadful passages,
Will from all dangers, re-deliver me,
For one drink offering, poured out by thee.
Mercy and Truth live with thee! and forbear
(In my short absence) to unfluce a tear:
But yet for Loves-sake, let thy lips do this,
Give my dead picture one engendring kiss:
Work that to life, and let me ever dwell
In thy remembrance ( julia.) So farewell.
How the Wall-flower came first, and why so called.
WHy this Flower is now called so,
List' sweet maids, and you shall know.
Understand, this First-ling was
Once a brisk and bonny Less,
Kept as close as Danae was:
Who a sprightly Spring all loved,
And to have it fully proved,
Up she got upon a wall,
Tempting down to slide withal:
But the silken twist untied,
So she fell, and bruised, she died.
Love, in pity of the deed,
And her loving-lucklesse speed,
Turned her to this Plant, we call
Now, The Flower of the Wall.
Why Flowers change color.
THose fresh beauties (we can prove)
Once were Virgins sick of love,
Turned to Flowers. Still in some
Colors go, and colors come.
To his Mistress objecting to him neither Toying or Talking.
YOu say I love not, cause I do not play
Still with your curles, and kiss the time away.
You blame me too, because I cannot devise
Some sport, to please those Babies in your eyes:
By Loves Religion, I must here confess it,
The most I love, when I the least express it.
Small griefs find tongues: Full Casques are ever found
To give (if any, yet) but little sound.
Deep waters noyse-lesse are; And this we know,
That chiding streams betray small depth below.
So when Love speechless is, she does express
A depth in love, and that depth, bottomless.
Now since my love is tongue-lesse, know me such,
Who speak but little, cause I love so much.
Upon the loss of his Mistresses.
IHave lost, and lately, these
Many dainty Mistresses:
Stately julia, prime of all;
Sapho next, a principal:
Smooth Anthea, for a skin
White, and Heaven-like Chrystalline:
Sweet Electra, and the choice
Myrha, for the Lute, and Voice.
Next, Corinna, for her wit,
And the graceful use of it:
With Perilla: All are gone;
Only Herrick's left alone,
For to number sorrow by
Their departures hence, and die.
The Dream.
ME thought, (last night) love in an anger came,
And brought a rod, so whipped me with the same:
Myrtle the twigs were, merely to imply;
Love strikes, but'tis with gentle cruelty.
Patient I was: Love pitiful grew then,
And stroak'd the stripes, and I was whole again.
Thus like a Be, Love-gentle still does bring
Honey to salve, where he before did sting.
The Vine.
IDream'd this mortal part of mine
Was Metamorphoz'd to a Vine;
Which crawling one and every way,
Enthralled my dainty Lucia.
Me thought, her long small legs and thighs
I with my Tendrils did surprise;
Her Belly, Buttocks, and her Waste
By my soft Nerv'lits were embraced:
About her head I writhing hung,
And with rich clusters (hid among
The leaves) her temples I behung:
So that my Lucia seemed to me
Young Bacchus ravished by his tree.
My curles about her neck did craule,
And arms and hands they did enthrall:
So that she could not freely stir,
(All parts there made one prisoner.)
But when I crept with leaves to hide
Those parts, which maids keep unespy'd.
Such fleeting pleasures there I took,
That with the fancy I awook;
And found (Ah me!) this flesh of mine
More like a Stock, then like a Vine.
To Love.
I AM free from thee; and thou no more shall hear
My puling Pipe to beat against thine ear:
Farewell my shackles, (though of pearl they be)
Such precious thraldom never shall fetter me.
He loves his bonds, who when the first are broke,
Submits his neck unto a second yoke.
On himself.
YOung I was, but now am old,
But I am not yet grown cold;
I can play, and I can twine
Bout a Virgin like a Vine:
In her lap too I can lie
Melting, and in fancy die:
And return to life, if she
Claps my cheek, or kisseth me;
Thus, and thus it now appears
That our love out-lasts our years.
Love's play at Push-pin.
LOve and my self (believe me) on a day
At childish Push-pin (for our sport) did play:
I put, he pusht, and heedless of my skin,
Love pricked my finger with a golden pin:
Since which, it felters so, that I can prove
'Twas but a trick to poison me with love:
Little the wound was; greater was the smart;
The finger bled, but burnt was all my heart.
The Rosarie.
ONe asked me where the Roses grew?
I bade him not go seek;
But forthwith bade my Julia show
A bud in either cheek.
Upon Cupid.
OLd wives have often told, how they
Saw Cupid bitten by a flea:
And thereupon, in tears half drowned,
He cried aloud, Help, help the wound:
He wept, he sobb'd, he called to some
To bring him Lint, and Balsamum,
To make a Tent, and put it in,
Where the Steletto pierced the skin:
Which being done, the fretfull pain
Asswag'd, and he was well again.
The Parcae, or, Three dainty Destinies. The Armilet.
THree lovely Sifters working were
(As they were closely set)
Of soft and dainty Maiden-haire,
A curious Armelet.
I smiling, asked them what they did?
(Fair Destinies all three)
Who told me, they had drawn a thread of Life, and 'twas for me.
They showed me then, how fine 'twas spun;
And I replied thereto,
I care not now how soon it is done,
Or cut, if cut by you.
Sorrows succeed.
WHen one is past, another care we have,
Thus Woe succeeds a Woe; as wave a Wave.
Cherry-pit.
IVLIA and I did lately sit
Playing for sport, at Cherry-pit:
She threw; I cast; and having thrown,
I got the Pit, and she the Stone.
To Robin Red-brest.
LAid out for dead, let thy last kindness be
With leaves and mosse-work for to cover me:
And while the Wood-nimphs my cold corpse inter,
Sing thou my Dirge, sweet-warbling Chorister!
For Epitaph, in Foliage, next write this,
Here, here the Tomb of Robin Herrick is.
Discontents in Devon.
MOre discontents I never had
Since I was born, then here;
Where I have been, and still am sad,
In this dull Devon-shire:
Yet justly too I must confess;
I never invented such
Ennobled numbers for the Press,
Then where I loathed so much.
To his Paternall Country.
OEarth! Earth! Earth hear thou my voice, and be
Loving, and gentle for to cover me:
Banished from thee I live; never to return,
Unless thou giv'st my small Remains an Urne.
Cherrie-ripe.
CHerrie-Ripe, Ripe, Ripe, I cry,
Full and fair ones; come and buy:
If so be, you ask me where
They do grow? I answer, There,
Where my Julia's lips do smile;
There Is the Land, or Cherry-Ile:
Whose Plantations fully show
All the year, where Cherries grow.
To his Mistresses.
PUt on your silks; and piece by piece
Give them the scent of Ambergris:
And for your breaths too, let them smell
Ambrosia-like, or Nectarell:
While other Gums their sweets perspire,
By your own jewels set on sire.
To Anthea.
NOw is the time, when all the lights wax dim;
And thou ( Anthea) must withdraw from him
Who was thy servant. Dearest, bury me
Under that Holy-oke, or Gospel-tree:
Where (though thou see not) thou may think upon
Me, when thou yearly go Procession:
Or for mine honor, lay me in that Tomb
In which thy sacred Relics shall have room:
For my Embalming (Sweetest) there will be
No Spices wanting, when I Am laid by thee.
The Vision to Electra.
IDream'd we both were in a bed
Of Roses, almost smothered:
The warmth and sweetness had me there
Made lovingly familiar:
But that I heard thy sweet breath say,
Faults done by night, will blush by day:
I kissed thee (panting,) and I call
Night to the Record! that was all.
But ah! if empty dreams so please,
Love give me more such nights as these.
Dreams.
HEre we are all, by day; By night we are hurled
By dreams, each one, into a several world.
Ambition.
IN Man, Ambition is the common'st thing;
Each one, by nature, loves to be a King.
His request to Julia.
IVlia, if I chance to die
Ere I print my Poetry;
I most humbly thee desire
To commit it to the fire:
Better 'twere my Book were dead,
Then to live not perfected.
Money gets the masterie.
FIght thou with shafts of silver, and o'rcome,
When no force else can get the masterdome.
The Scar-fire.
WAter, water I desire,
Here Is a house of flesh on fire:
Ope' the fountains and the springs,
And come all to Buckittings:
What ye cannot quench, pull down;
Spoil a house, to save a town:
Better it is that one should fall,
Then by one, to hazard all.
Upon Silvia, a Mistress.
WHen some shall say, Fair once my Silvia was;
Thou will complain, False now is thy Looking-
Which renders that quite tarnisht, which was green; (glass:
And Priceless now, what Peerless once had been:
Upon thy Form more wrinkles yet will fall,
And coming down, shall make no noise at all.
Cheerfulness in Charity: or, The sweet Sacrifice.
It Is not a thousand Bullocks thies
Can please those Heavenly Deities,
If the Vower don't express
In his Offering, Cheerfulness.
Once poor, still penurious.
GOes the world now, it will with thee go hard:
The fattest Hogs we grease the more with Lard.
To him that has, there shall be added more;
Who is penurious, he shall still be poor.
Sweetness in Sacrifice.
It Is not greatness they require,
To be offered up by fire:
But it is sweetness that does please
Those Eternal Essences.
Steame in Sacrifice.
IF meat the Gods give, I the steame
High-towring will devote to them:
Whose easy natures like it well,
If we the roste have, they the smell.
Upon Julia's Voice.
SO smooth, so sweet, so silv'ry is thy voice,
As, could they hear, the Damned would make no noise,
But listen to thee, (walking in thy chamber)
Melting melodious word, to Lutes of Amber.
Again.
When I thy singing next shall hear,
I Will wish I might turn all to ear,
To drink in Notes, and Numbers; such
As blessed souls cannot hear too much:
Then melted down, there let me lie
Entranced, and lost confusedly:
And by thy Music stricken mute,
Die, and be turned into a Lute.
All things decay and die.
ALL things decay with Time: The Forest sees
The growth, and downfall of her aged trees:
That Timber tall, which threescore lusters stood
The proud Dictator of the State-like wood:
I mean (the Sovereign of all Plants) the Oak
Droops, dies, and falls without the cleavers stroke.
The succession of the four sweet months.
FIrst, April, she with mellow showrs
Opens the way for early flowers;
Then after her comes smiling May,
In a more rich and sweet array:
Next enters June, and brings us more
Jems, then those two, that went before:
Then (lastly) July comes, and she
More wealth brings in, then all those three.
No Shipwreck of Virtue. To a friend.
THou sail'st with others, in this Argus here;
Nor wrack, or Bulging thou have cause to fear:
But trust to this, my noble passenger;
Who swims with Virtue, he shall still be sure
(Vlysses-like) all tempests to endure;
And 'midst a thousand gulfs to be secure.
Upon his Sister-in-Law, Mistress Elizab: Herrick.
FIrst, for Effusions due unto the dead,
My solemn Vows have here accomplished:
Next, how I love thee, that my grief must tell,
Wherein thou liv'st for ever. Dear farewell.
Of Love. A Sonet.
HOw Love came in, I do not know,
Whether by the eye, or ear, or no:
Or whether with the soul it came
(At first) infused with the same:
Whether in part it is here or there,
Or, like the soul, whole every where:
This troubles me: but I as well
As any other, this can tell;
That when from hence she does depart,
The outlet then is from the heart.
To Anthea.
AH my Anthea! Must my heart still break?
(Love makes me write, what shame forbids to speak.)
Give me a kiss, and to that kiss a score;
Then to that twenty, add an hundred more:
A thousand to that hundred: so kiss on,
To make that thousand up a million.
Treble that million, and when that is done,
Let Us kiss afresh, as when we first begun.
But yet, though Love likes well such Scenes as these,
There is an Act that will more fully please:
Kissing and glancing, soothing, all make way
But to the acting of this private Play:
Name it I would; but being blushing red,
The rest I Will speak, when we meet both in bed.
The Rock of Rubies: and The quarrie of Pearls.
SOme asked me where the Rubies grew?
And nothing I did say:
But with my finger pointed to
The lips of Julia.
Some asked how Pearls did grow, and where?
Then spoke I to my Girl,
To part her lips, and showed them there
The Quarelets of Pearl.
Conformity.
COnformity was ever known
A foe to Dissolution:
Nor can we that a ruin call,
Whose crack gives crushing unto all.
TO THE KING, Upon his coming with his Army into the West.
WElcome, most welcome to our Vows and us,
Most great, and universal Genius!
The Drooping West, which hitherto has stood
As one, in long-lamented-widow-hood;
Looks like a Bride now, or a bed of flowers,
Newly refresh't, both by the Sun, and showers.
War, which before was horrid, now appears
Lovely in you, brave Prince of Cavaliers!
A deal of courage in each bosom springs
By your access; ( O you the best of Kings!)
Ride on with all white Omens; so, that where
Your Standard's up, we fix a Conquest there.
Upon Roses.
Under a Lawne, then skies more clear,
Some ruffled Roses nestling were:
And snugging there, they seemed to lie
As in a flowrie Nunnery:
They blushed, and looked more fresh then flowers
Quickened of late by Pearly showers;
And all, because they were possessed
But of the heat of Julia's breast:
Which as a warm, and moistened spring,
Gave them their ever flourishing.
To the King and Queen, upon their unhappy distances.
WOe, woe to them, who (by a ball of strife)
Do, and have parted here a Man and Wife:
CHARLES the best Husband, while MARIA strives
To be, and is, the very best of Wives:
Like Streams, you are divorced; but't will come, when
These eyes of mine shall see you mix again.
Thus speaks the Oak, here; C. and M. shall meet,
Treading on Amber, with their silver-feet:
Nor will it be long, ere this accomplished be;
The words found true, C. M. remember me.
Dangers wait on Kings.
AS often as Night is banished by the Morn,
So often, we'll think, we see a King new born.
The Cheat of Cupid: Or, The ungentle guest.
ONe silent night of late,
When every creature rested,
Came one unto my gate,
And knocking, me molested.
Who Is that (said I) beats there,
And troubles thus the Sleepie?
Cast off (said he) all fear,
And let not Locks thus keep ye.
For I a Boy am, who
By Moonlesse nights have swerved;
And all with showrs wet through,
And even with cold half starved.
I pitiful arose,
And soon a Taper lighted;
And did my self disclose
Unto the lad benighted.
I saw he had a Bow,
And Wings too, which did shiver;
And looking down below,
I spied he had a Quiver.
I to my Chimney's shine
Brought him, (as Love professes)
And chafed his hands with mine,
And dried his dropping Tresses:
But when he felt him warmed,
Let Us try this bow of ours,
And string if they be harmed,
Said he, with these late showrs.
Forthwith his bow he bent,
And wedded string and arrow,
And struck me that it went
Quite through my heart and marrow.
Then laughing loud, he flew
Away, and thus said flying,
Adieu, mine Host, Adieu,
I Will leave thy heart a dying.
To the reverend shade of his religious Father.
THat for seven Lusters I did never come
To do the Rites to thy Religious Tomb:
That neither hair was cut, or true tears shed
By me, o'r thee, ( as justments to the dead)
Forgive, forgive me; since I did not know
Whether thy bones had here their Rest, or no.
But now it is known, Behold; behold, I bring
Unto thy Ghost, th'Effused Offering:
And look, what Smallage, Nightshade, Cypress, Yew,
Unto the shades have been, or now are due,
Here I devote; And something more then so;
I come to pay a Debt of Birth I owe.
Thou gav'st me life, (but Mortal;) For that one
Favor, I Will make full satisfaction;
For my life mortal, Rise from out thy Hearse,
And take a life immortal from my Verse.
Delight in Disorder.
A Sweet disorder in the dress
Kindles in clothes a wantonness:
A Lawne about the shoulders thrown
Into a fine distraction:
An erring Lace, which here and there
Enthralls the Crimson Stomacher:
A Cuffe neglectfull, and thereby
Ribbands to flow confusedly:
A winning wave (deserving Note)
In the tempestuous petticote:
A careless shooe-string, in whose tie
I see a wild civility:
Do more bewitch me, then when Art
Is too precise in every part.
To his Muse.
WEre I to give thee Baptime, I would choose
To Christen thee, the Bride, the Bashful Muse,
Or Muse of Roses: since that name does fit
Best with those Virgin-Verses thou have writ:
Which are so clean, so chaste, as none may fear
Cato the Censor, should he scan each here.
Upon Love.
LOve scorched my finger, but did spare
The burning of my heart:
To signify, in Love my share
Should be a little part.
Little I love; but if that he
Would but that heat recall:
That joint to ashes should he burnt,
Ere I would love at all.
Dean-bourn, a rude River in Devon. by which sometimes he lived.
DEan-bourn, farewell; I never look to see
Deane, or thy warty incivility.
Thy rockie bottom, that does tear thy streams,
And makes them frantic, even to all extremes;
To my content, I never should behold,
Were thy streams silver, or thy rocks all gold.
Rockie thou art; and rockie we discover
Thy men; and rockie are thy ways all over.
O men, O manners; Now, and ever known
To be A Rockie Generation
A people currish; churlish as the seas;
And rude (almost) as rudest Salvages.
With whom I did, and may re-sojourne when
Rocks turn to Rivers, Rivers turn to Men.
Kissing Usury.
BIancha, Let
Me pay the debt
I owe thee for a kiss
Thou lend'st to me;
And I to thee
Will render ten for this:
If thou will say,
Ten will not pay
For that so rich a one;
I Will clear the sum,
If it will come
Unto a Million.
By this I guess,
Of happiness
Who has a little measure:
He must of right,
To the utmost mite,
Make payment for his pleasure.
To Julia:
HOw rich and pleasing thou my Julia art
In each thy dainty, and peculiar part!
First, for thy Queen-ship on thy head is set
Of flowers a sweet commingled Coronet:
About thy neck a Carkanet is bound,
Made of the Rubie, Pearl and Diamond:
A golden ring, that shines upon thy thumb:
About thy wrist, the rich A Bracelet, from Dardanus so called
Dardanium.
Between thy Breast (then Down of Swans more white)
There plays the Sapphire with the Chrysolite.
No part besides must of thy self be known,
But by the Topaz, Opa!, Calcedon.
To Laurels.
AFunerall stone,
Or Verse I covet none;
But only crave
Of you, that I may have
Asacred Laurel springing from my grave:
Which being seen,
Blessed with perpetual green,
May grow to be
Not so much called a tree,
As the eternal monument of me.
His Cavalier.
GIve me that man, that dares bestride
The active Seahorse, and with pride,
Through that huge field of waters ride:
Who, with his looks too, can appease
The ruffling winds and raging Seas,
In midst of all their outrages.
This, this a virtuous man can do,
Sail against Rocks, and split them too;
I! and a world of Pikes pasle through.
Zeal required in Love.
I Will do my best to win, when'ere I woo:
That man loves not, who is not zealous too.
The Bag of the Be.
ABout the sweet bag of a Be,
Two Cupids fell at ddos;
And whose the pretty prize should be,
They vowed to ask the Gods.
Which Venus hearing; thither came,
And for their boldness stripped them:
And taking thence from each his flame;
With rods of Myrtle whipped them.
Which done, to still their wanton cries,
When quiet grown sh'ad seen them,
She kissed, and wiped their dove-like eyes;
And gave the Bag between them.
Love killed by Lack.
LEt me be warm; let me be fully fed:
Luxurious Love by Wealth is nourished.
Let me be lean, and cold, and once grown poor,
I shall dislike, what once I loved before.
To his Mistress.
CHoose me your Valentine;
Next, let us marry:
Love to the death will pine,
If we long tarry.
Promise, and keep your vows,
Or vow ye never:
Loves doctrine disallowes
Troth-breakers ever.
You have broke promise twice
(Dear) to undo me;
If you prove faithless thrice,
None then will woo you.
To the generous Reader.
SEE, and not see; and if thou chance t'espie
Some Aberrations in my Poetry;
Wink at small faults, the greater, ne'rthelesse
Hide, and with them, their Fathers nakedness.
Let Us do our best, our Watch and Ward to keep:
Homer himself, in a long work, may sleep.
To Critics.
I Will write, because I Will give
You Critics means to live:
For should I not supply
The Cause, the effect would die.
Duty to Tyrants.
GOod Princes must be prayed for: for the bad
They must be borne with, and in reverence had.
Do they first pill thee, next, pluck off thy skin?
Good children kiss the rods, that punish sin.
Touch not the Tyrant; Let the Gods alone
To strike him dead, that but usurps a Throne.
Being once blind, his request to Biancha.
WHen Age or Chance has made me blind,
So that the path I cannot find:
And when my falls and stumblings are
More then the stones i'th'street by far:
Go thou before; and I shall well
Follow thy Perfumes by the smell:
Or be my guide; and I shall be
Led by some light that flows from thee.
Thus held, or led by thee, I shall
In ways confused, nor slip or fall.
Upon Blanch.
BLanch swears her Husband's lovely; when a scald
Has blear'd his eyes: Besides, his head is bald.
Next, his wild ears, like Lethern wings full spread,
Flutter to fly, and bear away his head.
No want where there is little.
TO Bread and Water none is poor;
And having these, what need of more?
Though much from out the Cess be spent,
Nature with little is content.
Barly-Break: or, Last in Hell.
WE two are last in Hell: what may we fear
To be tormented, or kept Prisoners here?
Alas! If kissing be of plagues the worst,
We'll wish, in Hell we had been Last and First.
The Definition of Beauty.
BEauty, no other thing is, then a Beam
Flasht out between the Middle and Extreme.
To Dianeme.
Dear, though to part it be a Hell,
Yet Dianeme now farewell:
Thy frown (last night) did bid me go;
But whither, only Grief does know.
I do beseech thee, ere we part,
(If merciful, as fair thou art;
Or else defir'st that Maids should tell
Thy pity by Loves-Chronicle)
O Dianeme, rather kill
Me, then to make me languish still!
It Is cruelty in thee to'th'height,
Thus, thus to wound, not kill outright:
Yet there is a way found (if thou please)
By sudden death to give me ease:
And thus devised, do thou but this,
Bequeath to me one parting kiss:
So sup'rabundant joy shall be
The Executioner of me.
To Anthea lying in bed.
SO looks Anthea, when in bed she lies,
Overcome, or half betrayed by Tiffanies:
Like to a Twilight, or that simpring Dawn,
That Roses show, when misted over with Lawn.
Twilight is yet, till that her Lawnes give way;
Which done, that Dawne, turns then to perfect day.
To Electra.
MOre white then whitest Lillies far,
Or Snow, or whitest Swans you are:
More white then are the whitest Creames,
Or Moone-light tinselling the streams:
More white then Pearls, or Juno's thighs
Or Pelops Arm of Yvorie.
True, I confess; such Whites as these
May me delight, not fully please:
Till, like Ixion's Cloud you be
White, warm, and soft to lie with me.
A Country life: To his Brother, M. Tho: Herrick.
THrice, and above, blessed (my souls half) art thou,
In thy both Last, and Better Vow:
Could leave the City, for exchange, to see
The Countries sweet simplicity:
And it to know, and practice; with intent
To grow the sooner innocent:
By studying to know virtue; and to aim
More at her nature, then her name:
The last is but the least; the first does tell
Ways less to live, then to live well:
And both are known to thee, who now can live
Led by thy conscience; to give
Justice to soone-pleas'd nature; and to show,
Wisdom and she together go,
And keep one Center: This with that conspires,
To teach Man to confine desires:
And know, that Riches have their proper stint,
In the contented mind, not mint.
And can instruct, that those who have the itch
Of craving more, are never rich.
These things thou know to'th'height, and do prevent
That plague; because thou art content
With that Heaven gave thee with a wary hand,
(More blessed in thy Brass, then Land)
To keep cheap Nature even, and upright;
To cool, not cocker Appetite.
Thus thou can tearcely live to satisfy
The belly chiefiy; not the eye:
Keeping the barking stomach wisely quiet,
Less with a neat, then needful diet.
But that which most makes sweet thy country life,
Is, the fruition of a wife:
Whom (Stars consenting with thy Fate) thou have
Got, not so beautiful, as chaste:
By whose warm side thou do securely sleep
(While Love the Centinell does keep)
With those deeds done by day, which never affright
Thy silken slumbers in the night.
Nor has the darkness power to usher in
Fear to those sheets, that know no sin.
But still thy wife, by chaste intentions led,
Gives thee each night a Maidenhead.
The Damaskt meadows, and the peebly streams
Sweeten, and make soft your dreams:
The Purling springs, groves, birds, and well-weav'd Bowrs,
With fields enameled with flowers,
Present their shapes; while fantasy discloses
Millions of Lillies mixed with Roses.
Then dream, ye hear the Lamb by many a bleat
Wooed to come suck the milkie Teat:
While Faunus in the Vision comes to keep,
From rav'ning wolves, the fleecie sheep.
With thousand such enchanting dreams, that meet
To make sleep not so sound, as sweet:
Nor can these figures so thy rest endeare,
As not to rise when Chanticlere
Warnes the last Watch; but with the Dawne do rise
To work, but first to sacrifice;
Making thy peace with heaven, for some late fault,
With Holy-meale, and spirting-salt.
Which done, thy painful Thumb this sentence tells us,
Jove for our labor all things sells us.
Nor are thy daily and devout affairs
Attended with those desperate cares,
The Industrious Merchant has; who for to find
Gold, runs to the Western Inde,
And back again, (tortured with fears) does sly,
Untaught, to suffer Poverty.
But thou at home, blessed with securest ease,
Sitt'st, and beleev'st that there be seas,
And watrie dangers; while thy whiter hap,
But sees these things within thy Map.
And viewing them with a more safe survey,
Make easy Fear unto thee say,
A heart thrice walled with Oak, and Brass, that man
Had, first, durst plow the Ocean.
But thou at home without or tide or gale,
Can in thy Map securely sail:
Seeing those painted Countries; and so guess
By those fine Shades, their Substances:
And from thy Compass taking small advice,
Buy'st Travel at the lowest price.
Nor are thine ears so deaf, but thou can hear
(Far more with wonder, then with fear)
Fame tell of States, of Countries, Courts, and Kings;
And believe there be such things:
When of these truths, thy happyer knowledge lies,
More in thine ears, then in thine eyes.
And when thou hear'st by that too-true-Report,
Vice rules the Most, or All at Court:
Thy pious wishes are, (though thou not there)
Virtue had, and moved her Sphere.
But thou liv'st fearlesse; and thy face never shows
Fortune when she comes, or goes.
But with thy equal thoughts, prepared do stand,
To take her by the either hand:
Nor car'st which comes the first, the foul or fair;
A wise man every way lies square.
And like a surly Oak with storms perplexed;
Grows still the stronger, strongly vexed.
Be so, bold spirit; Stand Center-like, unmoved;
And be not only thought, but proved
To be what I report thee; and inure
Thy self, if want comes to endure:
And so thou do: for thy desires are
Confined to live with private Larr:
Not curious whether Appetite be fed,
Or with the first, or second bread.
Who keep'st no proud mouth for delicious cates:
Hunger makes coorse meats, delicates.
Can, and unurg'd, forsake that Larded fare,
Which Art, not Nature, makes so rare;
To taste boiled Nettles, Colworts, Beets, and eat
These, and sour herbs, as dainty meat?
While soft Opinion makes thy Genius say,
Content makes all Ambrosia.
Nor is it, that thou keep'st this stricter size
So much for want, as exercise:
To numb the sense of Dearth, which should sin haste it,
Thou might but only see it, not taste it.
Yet can thy humble roof maintain a Quire
Of singing Crickits by thy fire:
And the brisk Mouse may feast her self with crumbs,
Till that the green-ey'd Kitling comes.
Then to her Cabin, blessed she can escape
The sudden danger of a Rape.
And thus thy little-well-kept-stock does prove,
Wealth cannot make a life, but Love.
Nor art thou so close-handed, but can spend
(Counsel concurring with the end)
As well as spare: still conning o'r this Theme,
To shun the first, and last extreme.
Ordaining that thy small stock find no breach,
Or to exceed thy Tether's reach:
But to live round, and close, and wisely true
To thine own self; and known to few.
Thus let thy Rural Sanctuary be
Elysium to thy wife and thee;
There to disport your selves with golden measure:
For seldom use commends the pleasure.
Live, and live blessed; thrice happy Pair; Let Breath,
But lost to one, be the others death.
And as there is one Love, one Faith, one Troth,
Be so one Death, one Grave to both.
Till when, in such assurance live, ye may
Nor fear, or wish your dying day.
Divination by a Daffadill.
WHen a Daffadill I see,
Hanging down his head toward me;
Guess I may, what I must be:
First, I shall decline my head;
Secondly, I shall be dead;
Lastly, safely buried.
To the Painter, to draw him a Picture.
COme, skillful Lupo, now, and take
Thy Bice, thy Umber, Pink, and Lake;
And let it be thy Pensils strife,
To paint a Bridgeman to the life:
Draw him as like too, as you can,
An old, poor, lying, flattering man:
His cheeks be-pimpled, red and blue;
His nose and lips of mulbrie hiew.
Then for an easy fancy; place
A Burling iron for his face:
Next, make his cheeks with breath to swell,
And for to speak, if possible:
But do not so; for fear, lest he
Should by his breathing, poison thee.
Upon Cuffe. Epig.
CUffe comes to Church much; but he keeps his bed
Those Sundays only, when as Briefs are read.
This makes Cuffe dull; and troubles him the most,
Because he cannot sleep i'th'Church, free-cost.
Upon Fone a Schoolmaster. Epig.
FOne says, those mighty whiskers he does wear,
Are twigs of Birch, and willow, growing there:
If so, we'll think too, (when he does condemn
Boys to the lash) that he does whip with them.
A Lyrick to Mirth.
WHile the milder Fates consent,
Let Us enjoy our merryment:
Drink, and dance, and pipe, and play;
Kiss our Dollies night and day:
Crowned with clusters of the Vine;
Let us sit, and quaffe our wine.
Call on Bacchus; chaunt his praise;
Shake the Thyrse, and bite the Bays:
Rouse Anacreon from the dead;
And return him drunk to bed:
Sing over Horace; for ere long
Death will come and mar the song:
Then shall Wilson and Cotitre
Never sing, or play more here.
To the Earl of Westmerland.
WHen my date's done, and my gray age must die;
Nurse up, great Lord, this my posterity:
Weak though it be; long may it grow, and stand,
Shor'd up by you, ( Brave Earl of Westmerland.)
Against Love.
WHen ere my heart, Love's warmth, but entertaines,
O Frost! O Snow! O Hail forbid the Banes.
One drop now deads a spark; but if the same
Once gets a force, Floods cannot quench the flame.
Rather then love, let me be ever lost;
Or let me 'gender with eternal frost.
Upon Julia's Riband.
AS shows the Air, when with a Rainbow graced;
So smiles that Riband 'oout my Julia's waste:
Or like -- Nay'tis that Zonulet of love,
Wherein all pleasures of the world are wove.
The frozen Zone: or, Julia disdainful.
WHither? Say, whither shall I fly,
To slack these flames wherein I fry?
To the Treasures, shall I go,
Of the Rain, Frost, Hail, and Snow?
Shall I search the underground,
Where all Damps, and Mists are found?
Shall I seek (for speedy ease)
All the floods, and frozen seas?
Or descend into the deep,
Where eternal cold does keep?
These may cool; but there is a Zone
Colder yet then any one:
That Is my Julia's breast; where dwells
Such destructive Ysicles;
As that the Congelation will
Me sooner starve, then those can kill.
An Epitaph upon a sober Matron.
With blameless carriage, I lived here,
To' the (almost) sev'n and fortieth year.
Stout sons I had, and those twice three;
One only daughter lent to me:
The which was made a happy Bride,
But thrice three Moons before she died.
My modest wedlock, that was known
Contented with the bed of one.
To the Patron of Poets, M. End: Porter.
LEt there be Patrons; Patrons like to thee,
Brave Porter! Poets never will wanting be:
Fabim, and Cotta, Lentulus, all live
In thee, thou Man of Men I who here do give
Not only subject matter for our wit,
But likewise Oil of Maintenance to it:
For which, before thy Threshold, we'll lay down
Our Thyrse, for Scepter; and our Baies for Crown.
For to say truth, all Garlands are thy due;
The Laurel, Myrtle, Oak, and Ivy too.
The sadness of things for Sapho's sickness.
LIllies will languish; Violets look ill;
Sickly the Prim-rose: Pale the Daffadill:
That gallant Tulip will hang down his head,
Like to a Virgin newly ravished.
Pansies will weep; and Marygolds will wither;
And keep a Fast, and Funeral together,
If Sapho droop; Daisies will open never,
But bid Goodnight, and close their lids for ever.
Leanders Obsequies.
WHen as Leander young was drowned,
No heart by love received a wound;
But on a Rock himself sat by,
There weeping sup'rabundantly.
Sighs numberless he cast about,
And all his Tapers thus put out:
His head upon his hand he laid;
And sobbing deeply, thus he said,
Ah cruel Sea! and looking on it,
Wept as he would drown the Hellespont.
And sure his tongue had more expressed,
But that his tears forbad the rest.
Hope heartens.
NOne goes to warfare, but with this intent;
The gains must dead the fear of detriment.
Four things make us happy here.
HEalth is the first good lent to men;
A gentle disposition then:
Next, to be rich by no by-ways;
Lastly, with friends to enjoy our days.
His parting from Mrs Dorothy Keneday.
WHen I did go from thee, I felt that smart,
Which Bodies do, when Souls from them depart.
Thou did not mind it; though thou then might see
Me turned to tears; yet did not weep for me.
It Is true, I kissed thee; but I co'd not hear
Thee spend a sigh, t'accompany my tear.
Leanders Obsequies.
WHen as Leander young was drowned,
No heart by love received a wound;
But on a Rock himself sat by,
There weeping sup'rabundantly.
Sighs numberless he cast about,
And all his Tapers thus put out:
His head upon his hand he laid;
And sobbing deeply, thus he said,
Ah cruel Sea! and looking on it,
Wept as he would drown the Hellespont.
And sure his tongue had more expressed,
But that his tears forbad the rest.
Hope heartens.
NOne goes to warfare, but with this intent;
The gains must dead the fear of detriment.
Four things make us happy here.
HEalth is the first good lent to men;
A gentle disposition then:
Next, to be rich by no by-ways;
Lastly, with friends to enjoy our days.
His parting from Mrs Dorothy Keneday.
WHen I did go from thee, I felt that smart,
Which Bodies do, when Souls from them depart.
Thou did not mind it; though thou then might see
Me turned to tears; yet did not weep for me.
It Is true, I kissed thee; but I co'd not hear
Thee spend a sigh, t'accompany my tear.
5.
Yet say; should she condemn
Me to surrender them;
Then say; my part
Must be to weep
Out them, to keep
A poor, yet loving heart.
6.
Say too, She would have this;
She shall: Then my hope is,
That when I Am poor,
And nothing have
To send, or save;
I Am sure she will ask no more.
Upon one Lilly, who married with a maid called Rose.
What times of sweetness this fair day fore-shows,
When as the Lilly marries with the Rose!
What next is looked for? but we all should see
To spring from these a sweet Posterity.
An Epitaph upon a child.
VIrgins promised when I died,
That they would each Primrose-tide,
Duly, Morn and Evening, come,
And with flowers dress my Tomb.
Having promised, pay your debts,
Maids, and here strew Violets.
Upon Scobble. Epig.
SCobble for Whoredom whips his wife; and cries,
He Will slit her nose; But blubb'ring, she replies,
Good Sir, make no more cuts i'th'outward skin,
One slit's enough to let Adultry in.
The Houre-glasse.
THat Houre-glasse, which there ye see
With Water filled, (Sirs, credit me)
The humor was, (as I have read)
But Lovers tears inchristalled.
Which, as they drop by drop do pass
From the upper to the under-glasse,
Do in a trickling mannner tell,
(By many a watrie syllable)
That Lovers tears in lifetime shed,
Do restless run when they are dead.
His farewell to Sack.
FArewell thou Thing, time-past so known, so dear
To me, as blood to life and spirit: Near,
Nay, thou more near then kindred, friend, man, wife,
Male to the female, soul to body: Life
To quick action, or the warm soft side
Of the resigning, yet resisting Bride.
The kiss of Virgins; First Fruits of the bed;
Soft speech, smooth touch, the lips, the Maidenhead:
These, and a thousand sweets, co'd never be
So near, or dear, as thou wast once to me.
O thou the drink of Gods, and Angels! Wine
That scatter'st Spirit and Lust; whose purest shine,
More radiant then the Summers Sunbeams shows;
Each way illustrious, brave; and like to those
Comets we see by night; whose shagg'd portents
Foretell the coming of some dire events:
Or some full flame, which with a pride aspires,
Throwing about his wild, and active fires.
It Is thou, above Nectar, O Divinest soul!
(Eternal in thy self) that can control
That, which subverts whole nature, grief and care;
Vexation of the mind, and damned Despair.
It Is thou, alone, who with thy Mistick Fan,
Work'st more then Wisdom, Art, or Nature can,
To rouse the sacred madness; and awake
The frost-bound-blood, and spirits; and to make
Them frantic with thy raptures, flashing through
The soul, like lightning, and as active too.
It Is not Apollo can, or those thrice three
Castalian Sisters, sing, if wanting thee.
Horace, Anacreon both had lost their fame,
Had thou not filled them with thy fire and flame.
Phaebean splendor! and thou Thespian spring!
Of which, sweet Swans must drink, before they sing
Their true-pac'd-Numbers, and their Holy-Layes,
Which makes them worthy Cedar, and the Bays.
But why? why longer do I gaze upon
Thee with the eye of admiration?
Since I must leave thee; and enforced, must say
To all thy witching beauties, Go, Away.
But if thy whimpring looks do ask me why?
Then know, that Nature bids thee go, not I.
It Is her erroneous self has made a brain
Incapable of such a Sovereign,
As is thy powerful self. Prithee not smile;
Or smile more inly; lest thy looks beguile
My vows denounced in zeal, which thus much show thee,
That I have sworn, but by thy looks to know thee.
Let others drink thee freely; and desire
Thee and their lips espoused; while I admire,
And love thee; but not taste thee. Let my Muse
Fail of thy former helps; and only use
Her inadult'rate strength: what is done by me
Hereafter, shall smell of the Lamp, not thee.
Upon Glasco. Epig.
GLasco had none, but now some teeth has got;
Which though they furre, will neither ache, or rot.
Six teeth he has, whereof twice two are known
Made of a Haft, that was a Mutton-bone.
Which not for use, but merely for the sight,
He wears all day, and draws those teeth at night.
Upon Mrs. Eliz: Wheeler, under the name of Amarillis.
SWeet Amarillis, by a Spring's
Soft and soule-melting murmurings,
Slept; and thus sleeping, thither flew
A Robin-Red breast; who at view,
Not seeing her at all to stir,
Brought leaves and moss to cover her:
But while he, perking, there did pry
About the Arch of either eye;
The lid began to let out day;
At which poor Robin flew amay:
And seeing her not dead, but all disleav'd;
He chirpt for joy, to see himself disceav'd.
The Custard.
FOr second course, last night, a Custard came
To th'board, so hot, as none co'd touch the same
Furze, three or four times with his cheeks did blow
Upon the Custard, and thus cooled so:
It seemed by this time to admit the touch;
But none co'd eat it, 'cause it stunk so much.
To Myrrha hard-hearted.
FOld now thine arms; and hang the head,
Like to a Lilly withered:
Next, look thou like a sickly Moon;
Or like Jocasta in a swoone.
Then weep, and sigh, and softly go,
Like to a widow drowned in woe:
Or like a Virgin full of ruth,
For the lost sweetheart of her youth:
And all because, Fair Maid, thou art
Insensible of all my smart;
And of those evil days that be
Now posting on to punish thee.
The Gods are easy, and condemn
All such as are not soft like them.
The Eye.
MAke me a heaven; and make me there
Many a less and greater sphere.
Make me the straight, and oblique lines;
The Motions, Lations, and the Signs.
Make me a Chariot, and a Sun;
And let them through a Zodiac run:
Next, place me Zones, and Tropicks there;
With all the Seasons of the Year.
Make me a Sunset; and a Night:
And then present the Mornings-light
Clothed in her Chamlets of Delight.
To these, make Clouds to pour down rain;
With weather foul, then fair again.
And when, wise Artist, that thou have,
With all that can be, this heaven graced;
Ah! what is then this curious sky,
But only my Corinna's eye?
Upon the much lamented, Mr. J. War.
WHat Wisdom, Learning, Wit, or Worth,
Youth, or sweet Nature, co'd bring forth,
Rests here with him; who was the Fame,
The Volumne of himself, and Name.
If, Reader, then thou will draw near,
And do an honor to thy tear;
Weep then for him, for whom laments
Not one, but many Monuments.
Upon Gryll.
GRyll eats, but never says Grace; To speak the troth,
Gryll either keeps his breath to cool his broth;
Or else because Grill's roste does burn his Spit,
Gryll will not therefore say a Grace for it.
The suspicion upon his overmuch familiarity with a Gentlewoman.
ANd must we part, because some say,
Loud is our love, and loose our play,
And more then well becomes the day?
Alas for pity! and for us
Most innocent, and injured thus.
Had we kept close, or played within,
Suspicion now had been the sin,
And shame had followed long ere this,
T'ave plagued, what now unpunisht is,
But we as fearlesse of the Sun,
As faultlesse; will not wish undone,
What now is done: since where no sin
Unbolts the door, no shame comes in.
Then comely and most fragrant Maid,
Be you more wary, then afraid
Of these Reports; because you see
The fairest most suspected be.
The common forms have no one eye,
Or ear of burning jealousy
To follow them: but chiefly, where
Love makes the cheek, and chin a sphere
To dance and play in: (Trust me) there
Suspicion questions every hair.
Come, you are fair; and should be seen
While you are in your sprightfull green:
And what though you had been embraced
By me, were you for that unchaste?
No, no, no more then is yond' Moon,
Which shining in her perfect Noone;
In all that great and glorious light,
Continues cold, as is the night.
Then, beauteous Maid, you may retire;
And as for me, my chaste desire
Shall move toward you; although I see
Your face no more: So live you free
From Fames black lips, as you from me.
Single life most secure.
SUspicion, Discontent, and Strife,
Come in for Dowry with a Wife.
The Curse. A Song.
Go perjured man; and if thou ere return
To see the small remainders in mine Urne:
When thou shall laugh at my Religious dust;
And ask, Where Is now the color, form and trust
Of Woman's beauty? and with hand more rude
Rifle the Flowers which the Virgins strewn:
Know, I have prayed to Fury, that some wind
May blow my ashes up, and strike thee blind.
The wounded Cupid. Song.
CUpid as he lay among
Roses, by a Be was stung.
Whereupon in anger flying
To his Mother, said thus crying;
Help! O help! your Boy's a dying.
And why, my pretty Lad, said she?
Then blubbering, replied he,
A winged Snake has bitten me,
Which Country people call a Be.
At which she smiled; then with her hairs
And kisses drying up his tears:
Alas! said she, my Wag! if this
Such a pernicious torment is:
Come tell me then, how great's the smart
Of those, thou woundest with thy Dart!
To Dewes. A Song.
I Burn, I burn; and beg of you
To quench, or cool me with your Dew.
I fry in fire, and so consume,
Although the Pile be all perfume.
Alas! the heat and death's the same;
Whether by choice, or common flame:
To be in Oil of Roses drowned,
Or water; where is the comfort found?
Both bring one death; and I die here,
Unless you cool me with a Tear:
Alas! I call; but ah! I see
Ye cool, and comfort all, but me.
Some comfort in calamity.
TO conquered men, some comfort it is to fall
By the hand of him who is the General.
The Vision.
SItting alone (as one forsook)
Close by a Silver-shedding Brook;
With hands held up to Love, I wept;
And after sorrows spent, I slept:
Then in a Vision I did see
A glorious form appear to me:
A Virgins face she had; her dress
Was like a sprightly Spartanesse.
A silver bow with green silk strung,
Down from her comely shoulders hung:
And as she stood, the wanton Air
Dandled the ringlets of her hair.
Her legs were such Diana shows,
When tuckt up she a hunting goes;
With Buskins shortened to descrie
The happy dawning of her thigh:
Which when I saw, I made access
To kiss that tempting nakedness:
But she forbad me, with a wand
Of Myrtle she had in her hand:
And chiding me, said, Hence, Remove,
Herrick, thou art too coorse to love.
Love me little, love me long.
YOu say, to me-wards your affection's strong;
Pray love me little, so you love me long.
Slowly goes far: The mean is best: Desire
Grown violent, does either die, or tire.
Upon a Virgin kissing a Rose.
It Was but a single Rose,
Till you on it did breathe;
But since (me thinks) it shows
Not so much Rose, as Wreathe.
Upon a Wife that dyed mad with Jealousy.
IN this little Vault she lies,
Here, with all her jealousies:
Quiet yet; but if ye make
Any noise, they both will wake,
And such spirits raise, 'twill then
Trouble Death to lay again.
Upon the Bishop of Lincolne's Imprisonment.
NEver was Day so over-sick with showers,
But that it had some intermitting hours.
Never was Night so tedious, but it knew
The Last Watch out, and saw the Dawning too.
Never was Dungeon so obscurely deep,
Wherein or Light, or Day, did never peep.
Never did Moon so ebb, or seas so wane,
But they left Hope-seed to fill up again.
So you, my Lord, though you have now your stay,
Your Night, your Prison, and your Ebb; you may
Spring up afresh; when all these mists are spent,
And Star-like, once more, guild our Firmament.
Let but That Mighty Caesar speak, and then,
All bolts, all bars, all gates shall cleave; as when
That Earthquake shook the house, and gave the stout
Apostles, way (unshackled) to go out.
This, as I wish for, so I hope to see;
Though you (my Lord) have been unkind to me:
To wound my heart, and never to apply
(When you had power) the meanest remedy:
Well; though my grief by you was galled, the more;
Yet I bring Balm and Oil to heal your sore.
Disswasions from Idleness.
CYnthius pluck ye by the ear,
That ye may good doctrine hear.
Play not with the maiden-haire;
For each Ringlet there is a share.
Cheek, and eye, and lip, and chin;
These are traps to take fools in.
Arms, and hands, and all parts else,
Are but Toiles, or Manicles
Set on purpose to enthrall
Men, but Slothfulls most of all.
Live employed, and so live free
From these fetters; like to me
Who have found, and still can prove,
The lazy man the most does love,
Upon Strut.
STrut, once a Foreman of a Shop we knew;
But turned a Ladies Usher now, ('it is true:)
Tell me, has Strut got ere a title more?
No; he is but Foreman, as he was before.
An Epithalamie to Sir Thomas Southwell and his Lady.
I.
NOw, now is the time; so often by truth
Promised should come to crown your youth.
Then Fair ones, do not wrong
Your joys, by staying long:
Or let Love's fire go out,
By lingering thus in doubt:
But learn, that Time once lost,
Is never redeemed by cost.
Then away; come, Hymen guide
To the bed, the bashful Bride.
II.
Is it (sweet maid) your fault these holy
Bridall-Rites go on so slowly?
Dear, is it this you dread,
The loss of Maidenhead?
Believe me; you will most
Esteem it when it is lost:
Then it no longer keep,
Lest Issue lie asleep.
Then away; come, Hymen guide
To the bed, the bashful Bride.
III.
These Precious-Pearly-Purling tears,
But spring from ceremonious fears.
And it is but Native shame,
That hides the loving flame:
And may a while control
The soft and amorous soul;
But yet, Loves fire will wast
Such bashfulnesse at last.
Then away; come, Hymen guide
To the bed, the bashful Bride.
IV.
Night now has watched her self half blind;
Yet not a Maidenhead resigned!
It Is strange, ye will not fly
To Love's sweet mystery.
Might you Full-Moon the sweets
Have, promised to your sheets;
She soon would leave her sphere,
To be admitted there.
Then away; come, Hymen guide
To the bed, the bashful Bride.
V.
On, on devoutly, make no stay;
While Domiduca leads the way:
And Genius who attends
The bed for luckie ends:
With Juno goes the hours,
And Graces strewing flowers.
And the boys with sweet tunes sing,
Hymen, O Hymen bring
(...) the ^^rtles; Hymen guide
To the bed, the bashful Bride.
VI.
Behold! how Hymen's Taper-light
Shows you how much is spent of night.
See, see the Bride-grooms Torch
Half wasted in the porch.
And now those Tapers five,
That show the womb shall thrive:
Their silv'rie flames advance,
To tell all prosperous chance
Still shall crown the happy life
Of the good man and the wife.
VII.
Move forward then your Rosy feet,
And make, what ere they touch, turn sweet.
May all, like flowrie Meads
Smell, where your soft foot treads;
And every thing assume
To it, the like perfume:
As Zephirus when he 'spires
Through Woodbine, and Sweet-bryers.
Then away; come Hymen, guide
To the bed the bashful Bride.
VIII.
And now the yellow Veil, at last,
Over her fragrant cheek is cast.
Now seems she to express
A bashful willingness:
Showing a heart consenting;
As with a will repenting.
Then gently lead her on
With wise suspicion:
For that, Matrons say, a measure
Of that Passion sweetens Pleasure.
IX.
You, you that be of her nearest kin,
Now over the threshold force her in.
But to avert the worst;
Let her, her fillets first
Knit to the posts: this point
Remembering, to anoint
The sides: for it is a charm
Strong against future harm:
And the evil deads, the which
There was hidden by the Witch.
X.
O Venus! thou, to whom is known
The best way how to loose the Zone
Of Virgins! Tell the Maid,
She need not be afraid:
And bid the Youth apply
Close kisses, if she cry:
And charge, he not forbears
Her, though she woo with tears.
Tell them, now they must adventer,
Since that Love and Night bid enter.
XI.
No Fatal Owl the Bedsted keeps,
With direful notes to fright your sleeps:
No Furies, here about,
To put the Tapers out,
Watch, or did make the bed:
It Is Omen full of dread:
But all fair signs appear
Within the Chamber here.
Juno here, far off, does stand
Cooling sleep with charming wand.
XII.
Virgins, weep not; 'twill come, when,
As she, so you will be ripe for men.
Then grieve her not, with saying
She must no more a Maying:
Or by Rose-buds devine,
Who Will be her Valentine.
Nor name those wanton reaks
You Have had at Barly-breaks.
But now kiss her, and thus say,
Take time Lady while ye may.
XIII.
Now bar the doors, the Bridegroom puts
The eager Boys to gather Nuts.
And now, both Love and Time
To their full height do clime:
O! give them active heat
And moisture, both complete:
Fit Organs for increase,
To keep, and to release
That, which may the honored Stem
Circle with a Diadem.
XIV.
And now, Behold! the Bed or Couch
That never knew Brides, or Bride-grooms
Feels in it self a fire; (touch,
And tickled with Desire,
Pants with a Downie breast,
As with a heart possessed:
Shrugging as it did move,
Even with the soul of love.
And (oh!) had it but a tongue,
Doves, 'two'd say, ye bill too long.
XV.
O enter then! but see ye shun
A sleep, until the act be done.
Let kisses, in their close,
Breathe as the Damask Rose:
Or sweet, as is that gum
Does from Panchaia come.
Teach Nature now to know,
Lips can make Cherries grow
Sooner, then she, ever yet,
In her wisdom co'd beget.
XVI.
On your minutes, hours, days, months, years,
Drop the fat blessing of the spears.
That good, which Heaven can give
To make you bravely live;
Fall, like a spangling dew,
By day, and night on you.
May Fortunes Lilly-hand
Open at your command;
With all luckie Birds to side
With the Bridegroom, and the Bride.
XVII.
Let bounteous Fate your spindles full
Fill, and wind up with whitest wool.
Let them not cut the thread
Of life, until ye bid.
May Death yet come at last;
And not with desperate have:
But when ye both can say,
Come, Let us now away.
Be ye to the Barn then born,
Two, like two ripe shocks of corn.
Tears are Tongues.
WHen Julia chid, I stood as mute the while,
As is the fish, or tonguelesse Crocodile.
Air coined to words, my Julia co'd not hear;
But she co'd see each eye to stamp a tear:
By which, mine angry Mistress might descry,
Tears are the noble language of the eye.
And when true love of words is destitute,
The Eyes by tears speak, while the Tongue is mute.
Upon a young mother of many children.
LEt all chaste Matrons, when they chance to see
My numerous issue: Praise, and pity me.
Praise me, for having such a fruitful womb;
Pity me too, who found so soon a Tomb.
To Electra.
I Will come to thee in all those shapes
As Jove did, when he made his rapes:
Only, I Will not appear to thee,
As he did once to Semele.
Thunder and Lightning I Will lay by,
To talk with thee familiarly.
Which done, then quickly we'll undresse
To one and the others nakedness.
And ravished, plunge into the bed,
(Bodies and souls commingled)
And kissing, so as none may hear,
We'll weary all the Fables there.
His wish.
IT is sufficient if we pray
To Jove, who gives, and takes away:
Let him the Land and Living find;
Let me alone to fit the mind.
His Protestation to Perilla.
Noonday and Midnight shall at once be seen:
Trees, at one time, shall be both sere and green:
Fire and water shall together lie
In one-self-sweet-conspiring sympathy:
Summer and Winter shall at one time show
Ripe ears of corn, and up to the ears in snow:
Seas shall be sandlesse; Fields devoid of grass;
Shapelesse the world, (as when all Chaos was)
Before, my dear Perilla, I will be
False to my vow, or fall away from thee.
Love perfumes all parts.
IF I kiss Anthea's breast,
There I smell the Phoenix nest:
If her lip, the most sincere
Altar of Incense, I smell there.
Hands, and thighs, and legs, are all
Richly Aromaticall.
Goddess Isis cannot transfer
Musks and Ambers more from her:
Nor can Juno sweeter be,
When she lies with Jove, then she.
To Julia.
PErmit me, Julia, now to go away;
Or by thy love, decree me here to stay.
If thou will say, that I shall live with thee;
Here shall my endless Tabernacle be:
If not, (as banished) I will live alone
There, where no language ever yet was known.
On himself.
Lovesick I am, and must endure
A desperate grief, that finds no cure.
Ah me! I try; and trying, prove,
No Herbs have power to cure Love.
Only our Sovereign salve, I know,
And that is Death, the end of Woe.
Virtue is sensible of suffering.
THough a wise man all pressures can sustain;
His virtue still is sensible of pain:
Large shoulders though he has, and well can bear,
He feels when Packs do pinch him; and the where.
The cruel Maid.
ANd Cruel Maid, because I see
You scornful of my love, and me:
I Will trouble you no more; but go
My way, where you shall never know
What is become of me: there I
Will find me our a path to die;
Or learn some way how to forget
You, and your name, for ever: yet
Ere I go hence; know this from me,
What will, in time, your Fortune be:
This to your coynefse I will tell;
And having spoke it once, Farewell.
The Lilly will not long endure;
Nor the Snow continue pure:
The Rose, the Violet, one day
See, both these Lady-flowers decay:
And you must fade, as well as they.
And it may chance that Love may turn,
And (like to mine) make your heart burn
And weep to see it; yet this thing do,
That my last Vow commends to you:
When you shall see that I am dead,
For pity let a tear be shed;
And (with your Mantle over me cast)
Give my cold lips a kiss at last:
If twice you kiss, you need not fear,
That I shall stir, or live more here.
Next, hollow out a Tomb to cover
Me; me, the most despised Lover:
And write thereon, This, Reader, know,
Love killed this mun. No more but so.
To Dianeme.
SWeet, be not proud of those two eyes,
Which Star-like sparkle in their skies:
Nor be you proud, that you can see
All hearts your captives; yours, yet free:
Be you not proud of that rich hair,
Which wantons with the Lovesick air:
When as that Rubie, which you wear,
Sunk from the tip of your soft ear,
Will last to be a precious Stone,
When all your world of Beautie's gone.
TO THE KING, To cure the Evil.
TO find that Tree of Life, whose Fruits did feed,
And Leaves did heal, all sick of humane seed:
To find Bethesda, and an Angel there,
Stirring the waters, I am come; and here,
At last, I find, (after my much to do)
The Tree, Bethesda, and the Angel too:
And all in Your Blessed Hand, which has the powers
Of all those suppling-healing herbs and flowers.
To that soft Charm, that Spell, that Magic Bough,
That high Enchantment I betake me now:
And to that Hand, (the Branch of Heavens fair Tree)
I kneel for help; O! lay that hand on me,
Adored Caesar! and my Faith is such,
I shall be healed, if that my KING but touch,
The Evil is not Yours: my sorrow sings,
Mine is the Evil, but the Cure, the KINGS.
His misery in a Mistress.
WAter, Water I epsy:
Come, and cool ye; all who fry
In your loves; but none as I.
Though a thousand showers be
Still a falling, yet I see
Not one drop to light on me.
Happy you, who can have seas
For to quench ye, or some ease
From your kinder Mistresses.
I have one, and she alone,
Of a thousand thousand known,
Dead to all compassion.
Such an one, as will repeat
Both the cause, and make the heat
More by Provocation great.
Gentle friends, though I despair
Of my cure, do you beware
Of those Girls, which cruel are.
Upon Jollies wife.
FIrst, Jollies wife is lame; then next, loose-hipt:
Squint-eyed, hook-nos'd; and lastly, Kidney-lipt.
To a Gentlewoman, objecting to him his gray hairs.
AM I despised, because you say,
And I dare swear, that I am gray?
Know, Lady, you have but your day:
And time will come when you shall wear
Such frost and snow upon your hair:
And when (though long it comes to pass)
You question with your Looking-glass;
And in that sincere Crystal seek,
But find no Rose-bud in your cheek:
Nor any bed to give the show
Where such a rare Carnation grew.
Ah! then too late, close in your chamber keeping,
It will be told
That you are old;
By those true tears you are weeping.
To Cedars.
IF amongst my many Poems, I can see
One, only, worthy to be washed by thee:
I live for ever; let the rest all lie
In dens of Darkness, or condemned to die.
Upon Cupid.
LOve, like a Gypsy, lately came;
And did me much importunc
To see my hand; that by the same
He might foretell my Fortune.
He saw my Palm; and then, said he,
I tell thee, by this score here;
That thou, within few months, shall be
The youthful Prince D'Amour here.
I smiled; and bade him once more prove,
And by some crosse-line show it;
That I co'd never be Prince of Love,
Though here the Princely Poet.
How Primroses came green.
VIrgins, time-past, known were these,
Troubled with Green-sicknesses,
Turned to flowers: Still the hieu,
Sickly Girls, they bear of you.
To Jos: Lo: Bishop of Exeter.
WHom should I fear to write to, if I can
Stand before you, my learned Diocesan?
And never show blood-guiltinesse, or fear
To see my Lines Excathedrated here.
Since none so good are, but you may condemn;
Or here so bad, but you may pardon them.
If then, (my Lord) to sanctify my Muse
One only Poem out of all you will choose;
And mark it for a Rapture nobly writ,
It Is Good Confirmed; for you have Bishop't it.
Upon a black Twist, rounding the Arm of the Countess of Carlisle.
I Saw about her spotless wrist,
Of blackest silk, a curious twist;
Which, circumvolving gently, there
Enthralled her Arm, as Prisoner.
Dark was the Jayle; but as if light
Had met t'engender with the night;
Or so, as Darkness made a stay
To show at once, both night and day.
I fancy more! but if there be
Such Freedom in Captivity;
I beg of Love, that ever I
May in like Chains of Darkness lie.
On himself.
I Fear no Earthly Powers;
But care for crowns of flowers:
And love to have my Beard
With Wine and Oil besmeared.
This day I Will drown all sorrow;
Who knows to live to morrow?
Upon Pagget.
PAgget, a Schoolboy, got a Sword, and then
He vowed Destruction both to Birch, and Men:
Who would not think this Yonker sierce to fight?
Yet coming home, but somewhat late, (last night)
Untrusse, his Master bade him; and that word
Made him take up his shirt, lay down his sword.
A Ring presented to Julia.
IVlia, I bring
To thee this Ring.
Made for thy finger fit;
To show by this,
That our love is
(Or should be) like to it.
Close though it be,
The joint is free:
So when Love's yoke is on,
It must not gall,
Or fret at all
With hard oppression.
But it must play
Still either way;
And be, too, such a yoke,
As not too wide,
To over-slide;
Or be so strait to choke.
So we, who bear,
This beam, must rear
Our selves to such a height:
As that the stay
Of either may
Create the burden light.
And as this round
Is no where found
To flaw, or else to sever:
So let our love
As endless prove;
And pure as Gold for ever.
To the Detracter.
WHere others love, and praise my Verses; still
Thy long-black-Thumb-nail marks 'em out for ill
A fellon take it, or some Whit-flaw come
For to unslate, or to untile that thumb!
But cry thee Mercy: Exercise thy nails
To scratch or claw, so that thy tongue not railes:
Some numbers prurient are, and some of these
Are wanton with their itch; scratch, and 'twill please.
Upon the same.
I Ask't thee often, what Poets thou have read,
And like the best? Still thou reply'st, The dead.
I shall, ere long, with green turfs covered be;
Then sure thou't like, or thou will envy me.
Julia's Petticoat.
THy Azure Robe, I did behold,
As ayrie as the leaves of gold;
Which erring here, and wandering there,
Pleased with transgression every where:
Sometimes 'two'd pant, and sigh, and heave,
As if to stir it scarce had leave:
But having got it; thereupon,
'Two'd make a brave expansion.
And pounc't with Stars, it showed to me
Like a Celestial Canopie.
Sometimes 'two'd blaze, and then abate,
Like to a flame grown moderate:
Sometimes away 'two'd wildly fling;
Then to thy thighs so closely cling,
That some conceit did melt me down,
As Lovers fall into a swoone:
And all confused, I there did lie
Drowned in Delights; but co'd not die.
That Leading Cloud, I followed still,
Hoping t'ave seen of it my fill;
But ah! I co'd not: should it move
To Life Eternal, I co'd love.
To Music.
BEgin to charm, and as thou stroak'st mine ears
With thy enchantment, melt me into tears.
Then let thy active hand scu'd over thy Lyre:
And make my spirits frantic with the fire.
That done, sink down into a silv'rie strain;
And make me smooth as Balm, and Oiie again.
Distrust.
TO safeguard Man from wrongs, there nothing must
Be truer to him, then a wise Distrust.
And to thy self be best this sentence known,
Hear all men speak; but credit few or none.
Corinna's going a Maying.
GEt up, get up for shame, the Blooming Morn
Upon her wings presents the god unshorne.
See how Aurora throws her fair
Fresh-quilted colors through the air:
Get up, sweet-Slug-a-bed, and see
The Dew-bespangling Herb and Tree.
Each Flower has wept, and bowed toward the East,
Above an hour since; yet you not dressed,
Nay! not so much as out of bed?
When all the Birds have Mattens said,
And sung their thankful Hymns: it is sin,
Nay, profanation to keep in,
When as a thousand Virgins on this day,
Spring, sooner then the Lark, to fetch in May.
Rise; and put on your Foliage, and be seen
To come forth, like the Springtime, fresh and green;
And sweet as Flora. Take no care
For Jewels for your Gown, or Hair:
Fear not; the leaves will strew
Gemms in abundance upon you:
Besides, the childhood of the Day has kept,
Against you come, some Orient Pearls unwept:
Come, and receive them while the light
Hangs on the Dew-locks of the night:
And Titan on the Eastern hill
Retires himself, or else stands still
Till you come forth. Wash, dress, be brief in praying:
Few Beads are best, when once we go a Maying.
Come, my Corinna, come; and coming, mark
How each field turns a street; each street a Park
Made green, and trimmed with trees: see how
Devotion gives each House a Bough,
Or Branch: Each Porch, each door, ere this,
An Arc a Tabernacle is
Made up of white-thorn neatly enterwove;
As if here were those cooler shades of love.
Can such delights be in the street,
And open fields, and we not see it?
Come, we'll abroad; and let us obey
The Proclamation made for May:
And sin no more, as we have done, by staying;
But my Corinna, come, let us go a Maying.
There Is not a budding Boy, or Girl, this day,
But is got up, and gone to bring in May.
A deal of Youth, ere this, is come
Back, and with White-thorn laden home.
Some have dispatched their Cakes and Cream,
Before that we have left to dream:
And some have wept, and wooed, and plighted Troth,
And chose their Ptiest, ere we can cast off sloth:
Many a green-gown has been given;
Many a kiss, both odd and even:
Many a glance too has been sent
From out the eye, Loves Firmament:
Many a jest told of the Keys betraying
This night, and Locks picked, yet we are not a Maying.
Come, let us go, while we are in our prime;
And take the harmless folly of the time.
We shall grow old a pace, and die
Before we know our liberty.
Our life is short; and our days run
As fast away as does the Sun:
And as a vapor, or a drop of rain
Once lost, can never be found again:
So when or you or I are made
A fable, song, or fleeting shade;
All love, all liking, all delight
Lies drowned with us in endless night.
Then while time serves, and we are but decaying;
Come, my Corinna, come, let us go a Maying.
On Julia's breath.
BReathe, Julia, breathe, and I Will protest,
Nay more, I Will deeply swear,
That all the Spices of the East
Are cit cumfused there.
Upon a Child. An Epitaph.
BUt borne, and like a short Delight,
I glided by my Parents sight.
That done, the harder Fates denied
My longer stay, and so I died.
If pitying my sad Parents Tears,
You Will spil a tear, or two with theirs:
And with some flowrs my grave bestrew,
Love and they will thank you for it. Adieu.
A Dialogue betwixt Horace and Lydia, Translated Anno 1627. and set by Mr. To:
Ramsey.
Hor. WHile, Lydia, I was loved of thee,
Nor any was preferred before me
To hug thy whitest neck: Then I,
The Persian King lived not more happily.

Lyd. While thou no other did affect,
Nor Cloe was of more respect;
Then Lydia, far-fam'd Lydia,
I flourish't more then Roman Ilia.

Hor. Now Thracian Cloe governs me,
Skillful i'th'Harpe, and Melody:
For whose affection, Lydia, I
(So Fate spares her) am well content to die.

Lyd. My heart now set on fire is
By Ornithes son, young Calais;
For whose commutuall flames here I
(To save his life) twice am content to die.

Hor. Say our first loves we should revoke,
And severed, join in brazen yoke:
Admit I Cloe put away,
And love again love-cast-off Lydia?

Lyd. Though mine be brighter then the Star;
Thou lighter then the Cork by far:
Rough as the Adratick sea, yet I
Will live with thee, or else for thee will die.

The captived Be: or, The little Filcher.
AS Julia once a slumbering lay,
It chanced a Be did fly that way,
(After a dew, or dew-like shower)
To tipple freely in a flower.
For some rich flower, he took the lip
Of Julia, and began to sip;
But when he felt he sucked from thence
Honey, and in the quintessence:
He drank so much he scarce co'd stir;
So Julia took the Pilferer.
And thus surpised (as Filchers use)
He thus began himself t'excuse:
Sweet Lady-Flower, I never brought
Hither the least one theeving thought:
But taking those rare lips of yours
For some fresh, fragrant, luscious flowers:
I thought I might there take a taste,
Where so much sirrop ran at waste.
Besides, know this, I never sting
The flower that gives me nourishing:
But with a kiss, or thanks, doc pay
For Honey, that I bear away.
This said, he laid his little scrip
Of honey, before her Ladyship:
And told her, (as some tears did fall)
That, that he took, and that was all.
At which she smiled; and bade him go
And take his bag; but thus much know,
When next he came a pilfring so,
He should from her full lips derive,
Honey enough to fill his hive.
Upon Prig.
PRig now drinks Water, who before drank Beer:
What Is now the cause? we know the case is clear:
Look in Prigs's purse, the chev'rell there tell syou
Prig money wants, either to buy, or brew.
Upon Batt.
BAtt he gets children, not for love to rear 'em;
But out of hope his wife might die to bear 'em.
An Ode to Master Endymion Porter, upon his Brothers death.
NOt all thy flushing Suns are set,
Herrick, as yet:
Nor does this far-drawn Hemisphere
Frown, and look sullen every where.
Days may conclude in nights; and Suns may rest,
As dead, within the West;
Yet the next Morn, re-guild the fragrant East.
Alas for me! that I have lost
Even all almost:
Sunk is my sight; set is my Sun;
And all the loome of life undone:
The staff, the Elm, the prop, the sheltering wall
Whereon my Vine did crawle,
Now, now, blown down; needs must the old stock fall.
Yet, Porter, while thou keep'st alive,
In death I thrive:
And like a Phoenix re-aspire
From out my Narde, and Fun'rall fire:
And as I prune my feathered youth, so I
Do mar'l how I co'd die,
When I had Thee, my chief Preserver, by.
I Am up, I Am up, and bless that hand,
Which makes me stand
Now as I do; and but for thee,
I must confess, I co'd not be.
The debt is paid: for he who does resign
Thanks to the generous Vine;
Invites fresh Grapes to fill his Press with Wine.
To his dying Brother, Master William Herrick.
LIfe of my life, take not so soon thy flight,
But stay the time till we have bade Good night.
Thou have both Wind and Tide with thee; Thy way
As soon dispatched is by the Night, as Day.
Let us not then so rudely henceforth go
Till we have wept, kissed, sigh't, shook hands, or so.
There Is pain in parting; and a kind of hell,
When once true-lovers take their last Farewell.
What? shall we two our endless leaves take here
Without a sad look, or a solemn tear?
He knows not Love, that has not this truth proved,
Love is most loath to leave the thing beloved.
Pay we our Vows, and go; yet when we part,
Then, even then, I will bequeath my heart
Into thy loving hands: For I Will keep none
To warm my Breast, when thou my Pulse art gone.
No, here I Will last, and walk (a harmless shade)
About this Urne, wherein thy Dust is laid,
To guard it so, as nothing here shall be
Heavy, to hurt those sacred seeds of thee.
The Olive Branch.
SAdly I walked within the field,
To see what comfort it would yield:
And as I went my private way,
An Olive Branch before me lay:
And seeing it, I made a stay.
And took it up, and viewed it; then
Kissing the Omen, said Amen:
Be, be it so, and let this be
A Divination unto me:
That in short time my woes shall cease;
And Love shall crown my End with Peace.
Upon Much-more. Epig.
MUch-more, provides, and hoords up like an Ant;
Yet Much-more still complains he is in want.
Let Much-more justly pay his tithes; then try
How both his Meal and Oil will multiply.
To Cherry-blossomes.
YE may simper, blush, and smile,
And perfume the air a while:
But (sweet things) ye must be gone;
Fruit, ye know, is coming on:
Then, Ah! Then, where is your grace,
When as Cherries come in place?
How Lillies came white.
WHite though ye be; yet, Lillies, know,
From the first ye were not so:
But I Will tell ye
What befell ye;
Cupid and his Mother lay
In a Cloud; while both did play,
He with his pretty finger pressed
The rubie niplet of her breast;
Out of the which, the cream of light,
Like to a Dew,
Fell down on you.
And made ye white.
To Pansies.
AH, cruel Love! must I endure
Thy many scorns, and find no cure?
Say, are thy medicines made to be
Helps to all others, but to me?
I Will leave thee, and to Pansies come;
Comforts you will afford me some:
You can ease my heart, and do
What Love co'd never be brought unto.
On Gelli-flowers begotten.
WHat was it that fell but now
From that warm kiss of ours?
Look, look, by Love I vow
They were two Gelli-flowers.
Let Us kiss, and kiss again;
For if so be our closes
Make Gelli-flowers, then
I Am sure they will fashion Roses.
The Lilly in a Crystal.
YOu have beheld a smiling Rose
When Virgins hands have drawn
O'r it a Cobweb-Lawne:
And here, you see, this Lilly shows,
Tomb'd in a Crystal stone,
More fair in this transparent case,
Then when it grew alone;
And had but single grace.
You see how Cream but naked is;
Nor daunces in the eye
Without a Strawberrie:
Or some fine tincture, like to this,
Which draws the sight thereto,
More by that wantoning with it;
Then when the paler hieu
No mixture did admit.
You see how Amber through the streams
More gently strokes the sight,
With some concealed delight;
Then when he darts his radiant beams
Into the boundless air:
Where either too much light his worth
Does all at once impair,
Or set it little forth.
Put Purple Grapes, or Cherries in-
To Glass, and they will send
More beauty to commend
Them, from that clean and subtle skin,
Then if they naked stood,
And had no other pride at all,
But their own flesh and blood,
And tinctures natural.
Thus Lilly, Rose, Grape, Cherry, Cream,
And Straw-berry do stir
More love, when they transfer
A weak, a soft, a broken beam;
Then if they should discover
At full their proper excellence;
Without some Scean cast over,
To juggle with the sense.
Thus let this Christal'd Lilly be
A Rule, how far to teach,
Your nakedness must reach:
And that, no further, then we see
Those glaring colors laid
By Arts wise hand, but to this end
They should obey a shade;
Lest they too far extend.
So though you are white as Swan, or Snow,
And have the power to move
A world of men to love:
Yet, when your Lawns and Silks shall flow;
And that white cloud divide
Into a doubtful Twilight; then,
Then will your hidden Pride
Raise greater fires in men.
To his Book.
LIke to a Bride, come forth my Book, at last,
With all thy richest jewels over-cast:
Say, if there be amongst many jems here; one
Deservelesse of the name of Paragon:
Blush not at all for that; since we have set
Some Pearls on Queens, that have been counterfeit.
Upon some women.
THou who wilt not love, do this;
Learn of me what Woman is.
Something made of thredand thrumme;
A mere Botch of all and some.
Pieces, patches, ropes of hair;
In-laid Garbage every where.
Outside silk, and outside Lawne;
Scenes to cheat us neatly drawn.
False in legs, and false in thighs;
False in breast, teeth, hair, and eyes:
False in head, and false enough;
Only true in shreds and stuff.
Supreme fortune falls soonest.
WHile leanest Beasts in Pastures feed,
The fattest Ox the first must bleed.
The Welcome to Sack.
SO soft streams meet, so springs with gladder smiles
Meet after long divorcement by the Isles:
When Love (the child of likeness) urges on
Their Crystal natures to an union.
So meet stolen kisses, when the Moonie nights
Call forth fierce Lovers to their wished Delights:
So Kings and Queens meet, when Desire convinces
All thoughts, but such as aim at getting Princes,
A I meet thee. Soul of my life, and fame!
Eternal Lamp of Love! whose radiant flame
Out-glares the Heavens The Sun.
Osiris; and thy gleams
Outshine the splendor of his midday beams.
Welcome, O welcome my illustrious Spouse;
Welcome as are the ends unto my Vows:
I! far more welcome then the happy soil,
The Sea-scourg'd Merchant, after all his toil,
Salutes with tears of joy; when fires betray
The smoakie chimneys of his Ithaca.
Where have thou been so long from my embraces,
Poor pittyed Exile? Tell me, did thy Graces
Fly discontented hence, and for a time
Did rather choose to bless another clime?
Or wentst'st thou to this end, the more to move me,
By thy short absence, to desire and love thee?
Why frowns my Sweet? Why will not my Saint confer
Favors on me, her fierce Idolater?
Why are Those Looks, Those Looks the which have been
Time-past so fragrant, sickly now drawn in
Like a dull Twilight? Tell me; and the fault
I Will expiate with Sulphur, Hair, and Salt:
And with the Crystal humor of the spring,
Purge hence the guilt, and kill this quarrelling.
Wo't thou not smile, or tell me what is amiss?
Have I been cold to hug thee, too remiss,
Too temperate in embracing? Tell me, has desire
To thee-ward died i'th'embers, and no fire
Left in this rak't-up Ash-heap, as a mark
To testify the glowing of a spark?
Have I divorc't thee only to combine
In hot Adult'ry with another Wine?
True, I confess I left thee, and appeal
'Twas done by me, more to confirm my zeal,
And double my affection on thee; as do those,
Whose love grows more enflamed, by being Foes.
But to forsake thee ever, co'd there be
A thought of such like possibility?
When thou thy self dare say, thy Isles shall lack
Grapes, before Herrick leaves Canarie Sack.
Thou make me ayrie, active to be born,
Like Iphyclus, upon the tops of Corn.
Thou make me nimble, as the winged hours,
To dance and caper on the heads of flowers,
And ride the Sunbeams. Can there be a thing
Under the heavenly The Moon,
Isis, that can bring
More love unto my life, or can present
My Genius with a fuller blandishment?
Illustrious Idol! co'd the Egyptians seek
Help from the Garlic, Onyon, and the Leek,
And pay no vows to thee? who wast their best
God, and far more transcendent then the rest?
Had Cassius, that weak Water-drinker, known
Thee in thy Vine, or had but tasted one
Small Chalice of thy frantic liquor; He
As the wise Cato had approved of thee.
Had not Hercules.
Joves son, that brave Tyrinthian Swain,
(Invited to the Thesbian banquet) taken
Full goblets of thy generous blood; his spright
Never had kept heat for fifty Maids that night.
Come, come and kiss me; Love and lust commends
Thee, and thy beauties; kiss, we will be friends
Too strong for Fate to break us: Look upon
Me, with that full pride of complexion,
As Queens, meet Queens; or come thou unto me,
As Cleopatra came to Anthony;
When her high carriage did at once present
To the Triumvir, Love and Wonderment.
Swell up my nerves with spirit; let my blood
Run through my veins, like to a hasty flood.
Fill each part full of fire, active to do
What thy commanding soul shall put it to.
And till I turn Apostate to thy love,
Which here I vow to serve, do not remove
Thy Fires from me; but Apollo's curse
Blast these-like actions, or a thing that is worse;
When these Circumstants shall but live to see
The time that I prevaricate from thee.
Call me The son of Beer, and then confine
Me to the Tap, the Tossed, the Turfe; Let Wine
Never shine upon me; May my Numbers all
Run to a sudden Death, and Funeral.
And last, when thee (dear Spouse) I disavow,
Never may Prophetique Daphne crown my Brow.
Impossibilities to his friend.
MY faithful friend, if you can see
The Fruit to grow up, or the Tree:
If you can see the color come
Into the blushing Pear, or Plum:
If you can see the water grow
To cakes of Ice, or flakes of Snow:
If you can see, that drop of rain
Lost in the wild sea, once again:
If you can see, how Dreams do creep
Into the Brain by easy sleep:
Then there is hope that you may see
Her love me once, who now hates me.
Upon Luggs. Epig.
LUggs, by the Condemnation of the Bench,
Was lately whipped for lying with a Wench.
Thus Pains and Pleasures turn by turn succeed:
He smarts at last, who does not first take heed.
Upon Gubbs. Epig.
GUbbs call's his children Kitlings: and would bound
(Some say) for joy, to see those Kitlings drowned.
To live merrily, and to trust to Good Verses.
NOw is the time for mirth,
Nor cheek, or tongue be dumb:
For with flowrie earth,
The golden pomp is come.
The golden Pomp is come;
For now each tree does wear
(Made of her Pap and Gum)
Rich beads of Amber here.
Now reigns the Rose, and now
The Arabian Dew besmears
My uncontrolled brow,
And my retorted hairs.
Homer, this Health to thee,
In Sack of such a kind,
That it would make thee see,
Though thou were never so blind.
Next, Virgil, I Will call forth,
To pledge this second Health
In Wine, whose each cup's worth
An Indian Commonwealth.
A Goblet next I Will drink
To Ovid; and suppose,
Made he the pledge, he would think
The world had all one Nose.
Then this immensive cup
Of Aromatike wine,
Catullus, I quaffe up
To that Terce Muse of thine.
Wild I am now with heat;
O Bacchus! cool thy Rays!
Or frantic I shall eat
Thy Thyrse, and bite the Bays.
Round, round, the roof does run;
And being ravished thus,
Come, I will drink a Tun
To my Propertius.
Now, to Tibullus, next,
This flood I drink to thee:
But stay; I see a Text,
That this presents to me.
Behold, Tibullus lies
Here burnt, whose small return
Of ashes, scarce suffice
To fill a little Urne.
Trust to good Verses then;
They only will aspire,
When Pyramids, as men,
Are lost, i'th'funerall fire.
And when all Bodies meet
In Lethe to be drowned;
Then only Numbers sweet,
With endless life are crowned.
Fair days: or, Dawnes deceitful.
Fair was the Dawne; and but e'ne now the Skies
Showed like to Cream, enspir'd with Strawberries:
But on a sudden, all was changed and gone
That smiled in that first-sweet complexion.
Then Thunderclaps and Lightning did conspire
To tear the world, or set it all on fire.
What trust to things, below when as we see,
As Men, the Heavens have their Hypocrisy?
Lips Tonguelesse.
FOr my part, I never care
For those lips, that tongue-ty'd are:
Tell-tales I would have them be
Of my Mistress, and of me.
Let them prattle how that I,
Sometimes freeze, and sometimes fry:
Let them tell how she does move
Fore-or backward in her love:
Let them speak by gentle tones,
One and the others passions:
How we watch, and seldom sleep:
How by Willowes we do weep:
How by stealth we meet, and then
Kiss, and sigh, so part again.
This the lips we will permit
For to tell, not publish it.
To the Fever, not to trouble Julia.
Thou Have dared too far; but Fury now forbear
To give the least disturbance to her hair:
But less presume to lay a Plait upon
Her skins most smooth, and clear expansion.
It Is like a Lawnie-Firmament as yet
Quite dispossessed of either fray, or fret.
Come thou not near that Filmne so finely spread,
Where no one piece is yet unlevelled.
This if thou do, woe to thee Fury, woe,
I Will send such Frost, such Hail, such Sleet, and Snow,
Such Flesh-quakes, Palsies, and such Heates as shall
Dead thee to the most, if not destroy thee all.
And thou a thousand thousand times shall be
More shook thy self, then she is scorch't by thee.
To Violets.
1.
WElcome Maids of Honor,
You do bring
In the Spring;
And wait upon her.
2.
She has Virgins many,
Fresh and fair;
Yet you are
More sweet then any.
3.
You Are the Maiden Posies,
And so graced,
To be placed,
Before Damask Roses.
4.
Yet though thus respected,
By and by
Ye do lie,
Poor Girls, neglected.
Upon Bunce. Epig.
Money thou ow'st me; Prithee fix a day
For payment promised, though thou never pay:
Let it be Doomes-day; nay, take longer scope;
Pay when thou art honest; let me have some hope.
To Carnations. A Song.
1.
STay while ye will, or go;
And leave no scent behind ye:
Yet trust me, I shall know
The place, where I may find ye.
2.
Within my Lucia's cheek,
(Whose Livery ye wear)
Play ye at Hide or Seek,
I Am sure to find ye there.
To the Virgins, to make much of Time.
1.
GAther ye Rose-buds while ye may,
Old Time is still a flying:
And this same flower that smiles to day,
To morrow will be dying.
2.
The glorious Lamp of Heaven, the Sun,
The higher he is a getting;
The sooner will his Race be run,
And nearer he is to Setting.
3.
That Age is best, which is the first,
When Youth and Blood are warmer;
But being spent, the worse, and worst
Times, still succeed the former.
4.
Then be not coy, but use your time;
And while ye may, go marry:
For having lost but once your prime,
You may for ever tarry.
Safety to look to ones self.
FOr my neighbor I Will not know,
Whether high he builds or no:
Only this I Will look upon,
Firm be my foundation.
Sound, or unsound, let it be;
It Is the lot ordained for me.
He who to the ground does fall,
Has not whence to sink at all.
To his Friend, on the untuneable Times.
PLay I co'd once; but (gentle friend) you see
My Harp hung up; here on the Willow tree.
Sing I co'd once; and bravely too enspire
(With luscious Numbers) my melodious Lyre.
Draw I co'd once (although not stocks or stones,
Amphion-like) men made of flesh and bones,
Whether I would; but (ah!) I know not how,
I feel in me, this transmutation now.
Grief, (my dear friend) has first my Harp unstrung;
Withered my hand, and palsie-struck my tongue.
His Poetry his Pillar.
1.
Only a little more
I have to write,
Then I Will give over,
And bid the world Goodnight.
2.
It Is but a flying minute,
That I must stay,
Or linger in it;
And then I must away.
3.
O time that cut'st down all!
And scarce leave here
Memorial
Of any men that were.
4.
How many lie forgot
In Vaults beneath?
And piece-meale rot
Without a fame in death?
5.
Behold this living stone,
I rear for me,
Ne'n to be thrown
Down, envious Time by thee.
6.
Pillars let some set up,
(If so they please)
Here is my hope,
And my Pyramides.
Safety on the Shore.
WHat though the sea be calm? Trust to the shore:
Ships have been drowned, where late they danced
(before.
A Pastoral upon the birth of Prince Charles, Presented to the King, and Set
by Mr. Nic: Laniere.
The Speakers, Mirtillo, Amyntas, and Amarillis.

Amin. GOod day, Mirtillo. Mirt. And to you no less:
And all fair Signs lead on our Shepardesse.

Amar. With all white luck to you. Mirt. But say,
(What news
Stirs in our Sheep-walk? Amin. None, save that my Ewes,
My Weathers, Lambs, and wanton Kids are well,
Smooth, fair, and fat, none better I can tell:
Or that this day Menalchas keeps a feast
For his Sheep-shearers. Mir. True, these are the least.
But dear Amyntas, and sweet Amarillis,
Rest but a while here, by this bank of Lillies.
And lend a gentle ear to one report
The Country has. Amint. From whence? Amar. From
(whence? Mir. The Court.
Three days before the shutting in of May,
(With whitest Wool be ever crowned that day!)
To all our joy, a sweet-fac't child was borne,
More tender then the childhood of the Morn.

Chor. Pan pipe to him, and bleats of lambs and sheep,
Let Lullaby the pretty Prince asleep!

Mirt. And that his birth should be more singular,
At Noone of Day, was seen a silver Star,
Bright as the Wise-mens Torch, which guided them
To Gods sweet Babe, when borne at Bethlehem;
While Golden Angels (some have told to me)
Sung out his Birth with Heavenly Minstralsie.

Amint. O rare! But is it a trespass if we three
Should wend along his Baby-ship to see?

Mir. Not so, not so. Chor. But if it chance to prove
At most a fault, it is but a fault of love.

Amar. But dear Mirtillo, I have heard it told,
Those learned men brought Incense, Myrrh, and Gold,
From Countries far, with store of Spices, (sweet)
And laid them down for Offerings at his feet.

Mirt. It Is true indeed; and each of us will bring
Unto our smiling, and our blooming King,
A neat, though not so great an Offering.

Amar. A Garland for my Gift shall be
Of flowers, never sucked by th'theeving Be:
And all most sweet; yet all less sweet then he.

Amint. And I will bear along with you
Leaves dropping down the honyed dew,
With oaten pipes, as sweet, as new.

Mirt. And I a Sheep-hook will bestow,
To have his little King-ship know,
As he is Prince, he is Shepherd too.

Chor. Come let us away, and quickly let us be dressed,
And quickly give, The swiftest Grace is best.
And when before him we have laid our treasures,
We'll bless the Babe, Then back to Country pleasures.

To the Lark.
GOod speed, for I this day
Betimes my Mattens say:
Because I do
Begin to woo:
Sweet singing Lark,
Be thou the Clark,
And know thy when
To say, Amen.
And if I prove
Blessed in my love;
Then thou shall be
High Priest to me,
At my return,
To Incense burn;
And so to solemnize
Love's, and my Sacrifice.
The Bubble. A Song.
TO my revenge, and to her desperate fears,
Fly thou made Bubble of my sighs, and tears.
In the wild air, when thou have rolled about,
And (like a blasting Planet) found her out;
Stoop, mount, pass by to take her eye, then glare
Like to a dreadful Comet in the Air:
Next, when thou do perceive her fixed sight,
For thy revenge to be most opposite;
Then like a Globe, or Ball of Wildfire, fly,
And break thy self in shivers on her eye.
A Meditation for his Mistress.
1.
YOu are a Tulip seen to day,
But (Dearest) of so short a stay;
That where you grew, scarce man can say.
2.
You are a lovely July-flower,
Yet one rude wind, or ruffling shower,
Will force you hence, (and in an hour.)
3.
You are a sparkling Rose i'th'bud,
Yet lost, ere that chaste flesh and blood
Can show where you or grew, or stood.
4.
You are a full-spread faire-set Vine,
And can with Tendrills love intwine,
Yet dried, ere you distill your Wine.
5.
You are like Balm enclosed (well)
In Amber, or some Crystal shell,
Yet lost ere you transfuse your smell.
6.
You are a dainty Violet,
Yet withered, ere you can be set
Within the Virgins Coronet.
7.
You are the Queen all flowers among,
But die you must (fair Maid) ere long,
As He, the maker of this Song.
The bleeding hand: or, The sprig of Eglantine given to a maid.
FRom this bleeding hand of mine,
Take this sprig of Eglantine.
Which (though sweet unto your smell)
Yet the fretfull bryar will tell,
He who plucks the sweets shall prove
Many thorns to be in Love.
Lyrick for Legacies.
GOld I Have none, for use or show,
Neither Silver to bestow
At my death; but thus much know,
That each Lyrick here shall be
Of my love a Legacy,
Left to all posterity.
Gentle friends, then do but please,
To accept such coins as these;
As my last Remembrances.
A Dirge upon the Death of the Right Valiant Lord, Bernard Stuart.
1.
HEnce, hence, profane; soft silence let us have;
While we this Trentall sing about thy Grave.
2.
Had Wolves or Tigers seen but thee,
They would have showed civility;
And in compassion of thy years,
Washed those thy purple wounds with tears.
But since thou art slain; and in thy fall,
The drooping Kingdom suffers all.
Chor. This we will do; we'll daily come
And offer Tears upon thy Tomb:
And if that they will not suffice,
Thou shall have souls for sacrifice.
Sleep in thy peace, while we with spice perfume thee,
And Cedar wash thee, that no times consume thee.
3.
Live, live thou do, and shall; for why?
Souls do not with their bodies die:
Ignoble offsprings, they may fall
Into the flames of Funeral:
When as the chosen seed shall spring
Fresh, and for ever flourishing.

Cho. And times to come shall, weeping, read thy glory,
Less in these Marble stones, then in thy story.

To Perenna, a Mistress.
Dear Perenna, prithee come,
And with Smallage dress my Tomb:
Add a Cypresse-sprig thereto,
With a tear; and so Adieu.
Great boast, small roast.
OF Flanks and Chines of Beef does Gorrell boast
He has at home; but who tastes boiled or roast?
Look in his Brine-tub, and you shall find there
Two stiffe-blew-Pigs-feet, and a sow's cleft ear.
Upon a Bleare-ey'd woman.
Withered with years, and bedridden Mumma lies;
Dry-rosted all, but raw yet in her eyes.
The Fairie Temple: or, Oberons Chapel. Dedicated to Mr. John Merrifield,
Counselor at Law.
RAre Temples thou have seen, I know,
And rich for in and outward show:
Survey this Chapel, built, alone,
Without or Lime, or Wood, or Stone:
Then say, if one thou have seen more fine
Then this, the Fairies once, now Thine.
The Temple.
AWay enchac't with glass and beads
There is, that to the Chapel leads:
Whose structure (for his holy rest)
Is here the Halcion's curious nest:
Into the which who looks shall see
His Temple of Idolatry:
Where he of God-heads has such store,
As Rome's Pantheon had not more.
His house of Rimmon, this he calls,
Girt with small bones, instead of walls.
First, in a Neech, more black then jet,
His Idol-Cricket there is set:
Then in a Polisht Ovall by
There stands his Idol-Beeile-flie:
Next in an Arch, akin to this,
His Idol-Canker seated is:
Then in a Round, is placed by these,
His golden god, Cantharides.
So that where ere ye look, ye see,
No Capitol, no Cornish free,
Or Freeze, from this fine Fripperie.
Now this the Fairies would have known,
Theirs is a mixed Religion.
And some have heard the Elves it call
Part Pagan, part Papisticall.
If unto me all Tongues were granted,
I co'd not speak the Saints here painted.
Saint Tit, Saint Nit, Saint Is, Saint Itis,
Who against Mabs-state placed here right is.
Saint Will o'th'Wispe (of no great bigness)
But alias called here Fatuus ignis.
Saint Frip, Saint Trip, Saint Fill, S. Fillie,
Neither those other-Saint-ships will I
Here go about for to recite
Their number (almost) infinite,
Which one by one here set down are
In this most curious Calendar.
First, at the entrance of the gate,
A little-Puppet-Priest does wait,
Who squeaks to all the comers there,
Favor your tongues, who enter here.
Pure hands bring hither, without stain.
A second pules, Hence, hence, profane.
Hard by, i'th'shell of half a nut,
The Holy Water there is put:
A little brush of Squirrils hairs,
(Composed of odd, not even paires)
Stands in the Platter, or close by,
To purge the Fairie Family.
Near to the Altar stands the Priest,
There offering up the Holy-Grist:
Ducking in Mood, and perfect Tense,
With (much-good-do't him) reverence.
The Altar is not here foure-square,
Nor in a form Triangular;
Nor made of glass, or wood, or stone,
But of a little Transverce bone;
Which boys, and Bruckel'd children call
(Playing for Points and Pins) Cockall.
Whose Linnen-Drapery is a thin
Subtle and ductile Codlin's skin;
Which over the board is smoothly spread,
With little Seale-work Damasked.
The Fringe that circumbinds it too,
Is Spangle-work of trembling dew,
Which, gently gleaming, makes a show,
Like Frost-work glittering on the Snow.
Upon this fetuous board does stand
Something for Shewbread, and at hand
(Just in the middle of the Altar)
Upon an end, the Fairie-Psalter,
Graced with the Trout-flies curious wings,
Which serve for watched Ribbanings.
Now, we must know, the Elves are led
Right by the Rubric, which they read.
And if Report of them be true,
They have their Text for what they do;
I, and their Book of Canons too.
And, as Sir Thomas Parson tells,
They have their Book of Articles:
And if that Fairie Knight not lies,
They have their Book of Homilies:
And other Scriptures, that design
A short, but righteous discipline.
The Basin stands the board upon
To take the Free-Oblation:
A little Pin-dust; which they hold
More precious, then we prize our gold:
Which charity they give to many
Poor of the Parish, (if there is any)
Upon the ends of these neat Railes
(Hatched, with the Silver-light of snails)
The Elves, in formal manner, fix
Two pure, and holy Candlesticks:
In either which a small tall bent
Burns for the Altars ornament.
For sanctity, they have, to these,
Their curious Copes and Surplices
Of cleanest Cobweb, hanging by
In their Religious Vesterie.
They have their Ash-pans, and their Brooms
To purge the Chapel and the rooms:
Their many mumbling Mass Priests here,
And many a dapper Chorister.
Their ush'ring Vergers, here likewise,
Their Canons, and their Chaunteries:
Of Cloyster-Monks they have enough,
J, and their Abby-Lubbers too:
And if their Legend do not lie,
They much affect the Papacy:
And since the last is dead, there is hope,
Elve Boniface shall next be Pope.
They have their Cups and Chalices;
Their Pardons and Indulgences:
Their Beads of Nits, Bells, Books, and Wax
Candles (forsooth) and other knacks:
Their Holy Oil, their Fasting-Spittle;
Their sacred Salt here, (not a little.)
Dry chips, old shoes, rags, grease, and bones;
Beside their Fumigations,
To drive the Devil from the Cod-piece
Of the Friar, (of work an odde-piece.)
Many a trifle too, and trinket,
And for what use, scarce man would think
Next, then, upon the Chanters side (it.
An Apples-core is hung up dried,
With rattling Kirnils, which is rung
To call to Morn, and Even-Song.
The Saint, to which the most he prays
And offers Incense Nights and days,
The Lady of the Lobster is,
Whose foot-pace he does stroke and kiss;
And, humbly, chives of Saffron brings,
For his most cheerful offerings.
When, after these, h'as paid his vows,
He lowly to the Altar bows:
And then he dons the Silkworms shed,
(Like a Turks Turbant on his head)
And reverently departs thence,
Hid in a cloud of Frankincense:
And by the glowworms light well guided,
Goes to the Feast that is now provided.
To Mistress Katherine Bradshaw, the lovely, that crowned him with Laurel.
MY Muse in Meads has spent her many hours,
Sitting, and sorting several sorts of flowers,
To make for others garlands; and to set
On many a head here, many a Coronet:
But, amongst All encircled here, not one
Gave her a day of Coronation;
Till you (sweet Mistress) came and enterwove
A Laurel for her, (ever young as love)
You first of all crowned her; she must of due,
Render for that, a crown of life to you.
The Plaudite, or end of life.
IF after rude and boystrous seas,
My wearyed Pinnace here finds ease:
If so it be I Have gained the shore
With safety of a faithful Ore:
If having run my Barque on ground,
Ye see the aged Vessel crowned:
What Is to be done? but on the Sands
Ye dance, and sing, and now clap hands.
The first Act's doubtful, (but we say)
It is the last commends the Play.
To the most virtuous Mistress Pot, who many times entertained him.
WHen I through all my many Poems look,
And see your self to beautify my Book;
Me thinks that only luster does appear
A Light ful-filling all the Region here.
Guild still with flames this Firmament, and be
A Lamp Eternal to my Poetry.
Which if it now, or shall hereafter shine,
'Twas by your splendor (Lady) not by mine.
The Oil was yours; and that I owe for yet:
He pays the half, who does confess the Debt.
To Music, to becalme his Fever.
1.
CHarm me asleep, and melt me so
With thy Delicious Numbers;
That being ravished, hence I go
Away in easy slumbers.
Ease my sick head,
And make my bed,
Thou Power that can sever
From me this ill:
And quickly still:
Though thou not kill
My Fever.
2.
Thou sweetly can convert the same
From a consuming fire,
Into a gentle-licking flame,
And make it thus expire.
Then make me weep
My pains asleep;
And give me such reposes,
That I, poor I,
May think, thereby,
I live and die
Amongst Roses,
2.
Fall on me like a silent dew,
Or like those Maiden showrs,
Which, by the peep of day, do strew
A Baptime over the flowers.
Melt, melt my pains,
With thy soft strains;
That having ease me given,
With full delight,
I leave this light;
And take my flight
For Heaven.
Upon a Gentlewoman with a sweet Voice.
SO long you did not sing, or touch your Lute,
We knew 'twas Flesh and Blood, that there sat mute.
But when your Playing, and your Voice came in,
'Twas no more you then, but a Cherubin.
Upon Cupid.
AS lately I a Garland bound,
Amongst Roses, I there Cupid found:
I took him, put him in my cup,
And drunk with Wine, I drank him up.
Hence then it is, that my poor breast
Co'd never since find any rest.
Upon Julia's breasts.
DIsplay thy breasts, my Julia, there let me
Behold that circummortall purity:
Between whose glories, there my lips I Will lay,
Ravished, in that fair Via Lactea.
Best to be merry.
Fools are they, who never know
How the times away do go:
But for us, who wisely see
Where the bounds of black Death be:
Let Us live merrily, and thus
Gratify the Genius.
The Changes to Corinna.
BE not proud, but now incline
Your soft ear to Discipline.
You have changes in your life,
Sometimes peace, and sometimes strife:
You have ebbes of face and flows,
As your health or comes, or goes;
You have hopes, and doubts, andfeares
Numberless, as are your hairs.
You have Pulses that do beat
High, and passions less of heat.
You are young, but must be old,
And, to these, ye must be told,
Time, ere long, will come and plow
Loathed Furrows in your brow:
And the dimnesse of your eye
Will no other thing imply,
But you must die
As well as I.
No Lock against Letcherie.
Bar close as you can, and bolt fast too your door,
To keep out the Letcher, and keep in the whore:
Yet, quickly you will see by the turn of a pin,
The Whore to come out, or the Letcher come in.
Neglect.
ARt quickens Nature; Care will make a face:
Neglected beauty perishes apace.
Upon himself.
MOp-ey'd I am, as some have said,
Because I Have lived so long a maid:
But grant that I should wedded be,
Should I a jot the better see?
No, I should think, that Marriage might,
Rather then mend, put out the light.
Upon a Physician.
THou came to cure me (Doctor) of my cold,
And caught'st thy self the more by twenty fold:
Prithee go home; and for thy credit be
First cured thy self; then come and cure me.
Upon Sudds a Laundresse.
SUdds Launders Bands in piss; and starches them
Both with her Husband's, and her own tough fleame,
To the Rose. Song.
1.
Go happy Rose, and enterwove
With other Flowers, bind my Love.
Tell her too, she must not be,
Longer flowing, longer free,
That so often has fettered me.
2.
Say (if she is fretfull) I have bands
Of Pearl, and Gold, to bind her hands:
Tell her, if she struggle still,
I have Myrtle rods, (at will)
For to tame, though not to kill.
3.
Take thou my blessing, thus, and go,
And tell her this, but do not so,
Left a handsome anger fly,
Like a Lightning, from her eye,
And burn thee'up, as well as I.
Upon Guess. Epig.
Guess cuts his shoes, and limping, goes about
To have men think he is troubled with the Gout:
But it is no Gout (believe it) but hard Beer,
Whose acrimonious humor bites him here.
To his Book.
THou art a plant sprung up to wither never,
But like a Laurel, to grow green for ever.
Upon a painted Gentlewoman.
MEn say you are fair; and fair ye are, it is true;
But (Hark!) we praise the Painter now, not you.
Upon a crooked Maid.
CRooked you are, but that dislikes not me;
So you be straight, where Virgins straight should be:
Draw Gloves.
AT Draw-Gloves we will play,
And prithee, let us lay
A wager, and let it be this;
Who first to the Sum
Of twenty shall come,
Shall have for his winning a kiss.
To Music, to becalme a sweet-sick-youth.
CHarms, that call down the moon from out her sphere,
On this sick youth work your enchantments here:
Bind up his senses with your numbers, so,
As to entrance his pain, or cure his woe.
Fall gently, gently, and a while him keep
Lost in the civil Wilderness of sleep:
That done, then let him, dispossessed of painc,
Like to a slumbring Bride, awake again.
To the High and Noble Prince, GEORGE, Duke, Marquess, and Earl of Buckingham.
NEver my Book's perfection did appear,
Til I had got the name of VILLARS here.
Now it is so full, that when therein I look,
I see a Cloud of Glory fills my Book.
Here stand it still to dignifie our Muse,
Your sober Handmaid; who does wisely choose,
Your Name to be a Laureat Wreathe to Her,
Who does both love and fear you Honored Sir.
His Recantation.
LOve, I recant,
And pardon crave,
That lately I offended,
But 'twas,
Alas,
To make a brave,
But no disdain intended.
No more I Will vaunt,
For now I see,
Thou only have the power,
To find,
And bind
A heart that is free,
And slave it in an hour.
The coming of good luck.
SO Good-luck came, and on my roof did light,
Like noyse-lesse Snow; or as the dew of night:
Not all at once, but gently, as the trees
Are, by the Sunbeams, tickel'd by degrees.
The Present: or, The Bag of the Be.
FLy to my Mistress, pretty pilfring Be,
And say, thou bring'st this Hony-bag from me:
When on her lip, thou have thy sweet dew placed,
Mark, if her tongue, but slily, steal a taste.
If so, we live; if not, with mournful humme,
Tole forth my death; next, to my buryall come.
On Love.
LOve bade me ask a gift,
And I no more did move,
But this, that I might shift
Still with my clothes, my Love:
That favor granted was;
Since which, though I love many,
Yet so it comes to pass,
That long I love not any.
The Hock-cart, or Harvest home: To the Right Honorable, Mildmay, Earl of
Westmorland.
COme Sons of Summer, by whose toil,
We are the Lords of Wine and Oil:
By whose tough labors, and rough hands,
We rip up first, then reap our lands.
Crowned with the ears of corn, now come,
And, to the Pipe, sing Harvest home.
Come forth, my Lord, and see the Cart
Dressed up with all the Country Art.
See, here a Maukin, there a sheet,
As spotless pure, as it is sweet:
The Horses, Mares, and frisking Fillies,
(Clad, all, in Linen, white as Lillies.)
The Harvest Swains, and Wenches bound
For joy, to see the Hock-cart crowned.
About the Cart, hear, how the Rout
Of Rural Younglings raise the shout;
Pressing before, some coming after,
Those with a shout, and these with laughter.
Some bless the Cart; some kiss the sheaves;
Some prank them up with Oaken leaves:
Some cross the Fill-horse; some with great
Devotion, stroke the home-borne wheat:
While other Rusticks, less attent
To Prayers, then to Merryment,
Run after with their breeches rent.
Well, on, brave boys, to your Lords Hearth,
Glittering with fire; where, for your mirth,
Ye shall see first the large and chief
Foundation of your Feast, Fat Beef:
With Upper Stories, Mutton, Veale
And Bacon, (which makes full the meal)
With several dishes standing by,
As here a Custard, there a Pie,
And here all tempting Frumentie.
And for to make the merry cheer,
If smirking Wine be wanting here,
There Is that, which drowns all care, stout Beer;
Which freely drink to your Lords health,
Then to the Plough, (the Commonwealth)
Next to your Flailes, your Fanes, your Fatts;
Then to the Maids with Wheaten Hats:
To the rough Sickle, and crookt Sithe,
Drink frollick boys, till all be blythe.
Feed, and grow fat; and as ye eat,
Be mindful, that the laboring Neat
(As you) may have their fill of meat.
And know, besides, ye must revoke
The patient Ox unto the Yoke,
And all go back unto the Plough
And Harrow, (though they are hanged up now.)
And, you must know, your Lords word's true,
Feed him ye must, whose food fills you.
And that this pleasure is like rain,
Not sent ye for to drown your pain,
But for to make it spring again.
The Perfume.
TOmorrow, Julia, I betimes must rise,
For some small fault, to offer sacrifice:
The Altar's ready; Fire to consume
The fat; breathe thou, and there is the rich perfume.
Upon her Voice.
LEt but thy voice engender with the string,
And Angels will be borne, while thou do sing.
Not to love.
HE that will not love, must be
My Scholar, and learn this of me:
There be in Love as many fears,
As the Summers Corn has ears:
Sighs, and sobs, and sorrows more
Then the sand, that makes the shore:
Freezing cold, and fiery heats,
Fainting swoones, and deadly sweats;
Now an Ague, then a Fever,
Both tormenting Lovers ever.
Wod'st thou know, besides all these,
How hard a woman it is to please?
How cross, how sullen, and how soon
She shifts and changes like the Moon.
How false, how hollow she is in heart;
And how she is her own least part:
How high she is prized, and worth but small;
Little thou't love, or not at all.
To Music. A Song.
Music, thou Queen of Heaven, Care-charming-spel,
That strik'st a stillness into hell:
Thou that tam'st Tigers, and fierce storms (that rise)
With thy soule-melting Lullabies:
Fall down, down, down, from those thy chiming spheres,
To charm our souls, as thou enchant'st our ears.
To the Western wind.
1.
SWeet Western Wind, whose luck it is,
(Made rival with the air)
To give Perenn'as lip a kiss,
And fan her wanton hair.
2.
Bring me but one, I Will promise thee,
Instead of common showers,
Thy wings shall be embalmed by me,
And all beset with flowers.
Upon the death of his Sparrow. An Elegy.
WHy do not all fresh maids appear
To work Love's Sampler only here,
Where springtime smiles throughout the year?
Are not here Rose-buds, Pinks, all flowers,
Nature begets by th'Sun and showers,
Met in one Hearce-cloth, to ore-spred
The body of the under-dead?
Phill, the late dead, the late dead Dear,
O! may no eye distill a Tear
For you once lost, who weep not here!
Had Lesbia (too-too-kind) but known
This Sparrow, she had scorned her own:
And for this dead which under-lies,
Wept out her heart, as well as eyes.
But endless Peace, sit here, and keep
My Phill, the time he has to sleep,
And thousand Virgins come and weep,
To make these flowrie Carpets show
Fresh, as their blood; and ever grow,
Till passengers shall spend their doom,
Not Virgil's Gnat had such a Tomb.
To Primroses filled with morning-dew.
1.
WHy do ye weep, sweet Babes? can Tears
Speak grief in you,
Who were but borne
Just as the modest Morn
Teemed her refreshing dew?
Alas you have not known that shower,
That marres a flower;
Nor felt th'unkind
Breath of a blasting wind;
Nor are ye worn with years;
Or warpt, as we,
Who think it strange to see,
Such pretty flowers, (like to Orphans young)
To speak by Tears, before ye have a Tongue.
^^
Speak, whimp'ring Younglings, and make known
The reason, why
Ye droop, and weep;
Is it for want of sleep?
Or childish Lullabie?
Or that ye have not seen as yet
The Violet?
Or brought a kiss
From that Sweetheart, to this?
No, no, this sorrow shown
By your tears shed,
Would have this Lecture read,
That things of greatest, so of meanest worth,
Conceived with grief are, and with tears brought forth.
How Roses came red.
1.
ROses at first were white,
Till they co'd not agree,
Whether my Sapho's breast,
Or they more white should be.
2.
But being vanquished quite,
A blush their cheeks bespred;
Since which (believe the rest)
The Roses first came red.
Comfort to a Lady upon the Death of her Husband.
(rain;
DRy your sweet cheek, long drowned with sorrows
Since Clouds dispersed, Suns guild the Air again.
Seas chafe and fret, and beat, and over-boile;
But turn soon after calm, as Balm, or Oil.
Winds have their time to rage; but when they cease,
The leavie-trees nod in a still-born peace.
Your storm is over; Lady, now appear
Like to the peeping-spring-time of the year.
Off then with grave clothes; put fresh colors on;
And flow, and flame, in your Vermillion.
Upon your cheek sat Ysicles awhile;
Now let the Rose reign like a Queen, and smile.
How Violets came blew.
LOve on a day (wise Poets tell)
Some time in wrangling spent,
Whether the Violets should excel,
Or she, in sweetest scent.
But Venus having lost the day,
Poor Girls, she fell on you;
And beat ye so, (as some dare say)
Her blows did make ye blew.
Upon Groynes. Epig.
GRoynes, for his fleshly Burglary of late.
Stood in the Holy-Forum Candidate:
The word is Roman; but in English known:
Penance, and standing so, are both but one.
To the Willow-tree.
1.
THou art to all lost love the best,
The only true plant found,
Wherewith young men and maids distressed,
And left of love, are crowned.
2.
When once the Lovers Rose is dead,
Or laid aside forlorn;
Then Willow-garlands, 'bout the head,
Bedewed with tears, are worn.
3.
When with Neglect, (the Lovers bane)
Poor Maids rewarded be,
For their love lost; their only gain
Is but a Wreathe from thee.
4.
And underneath thy cooling shade,
(When weary of the light)
The love-spent Youth, and lovesick Maid,
Come to weep out the night.
Mrs. Eliz. Wheeler, under the name of the lost Shepardesse.
AMong the Mirtles, as I walked,
Love and my sighs thus intertalkt:
Tell me, said I, in deep distreffe,
Where I may find my Shepardesse.
Thou fool, said Love, know thou not this?
In every thing that is sweet, she is.
In yond' Carnation go and seek,
There thou shall find her lip and cheek:
In that ennamel'd Pansie by,
There thou shall have her curious eye:
In bloome of Peach, and Roses bud,
There waves the Streamer of her blood.
It Is true, said I, and thereupon
I went to pluck them one by one,
To make of parts an union;
But on a sudden all were gone.
At which I stopped; Said Love, these be
The true resemblances of thee;
For as these flowers, thy joys must die,
And in the turning of an eye;
And all thy hopes of her must wither,
Like those short sweets ere knit together.
TO THE KING.
IF when these Lyricks (CAESAR) You shall hear.
And that Apollo shall so touch Your care,
As for to make this, that, or any one
Number, Your own, by free Adoption;
That Verse, of all the Verses here, shall be
The Heir to This great Realm of Poetry.
TO THE QUEEN.
Goddess of Youth, and Lady of the Spring,
(Most fit to be the Consort to a King)
Be pleased to rest you in This Sacred Grove,
Beset with Mirtles; whose each leaf drops Love.
Many a sweet-fac't Wood-Nymph here is seen,
Of which chaste Order You are now the Queen:
Witness their Homage, when they come and strew
Your Walks with Flowers, and give their Crowns to you.
Your Leavie-Throne (with Lilly-work) possess;
And be both Princess here, and Poetresse.
The Poets good wishes for the most hopeful and handsome Prince, the Duke of
York.
MAy his pretty Duke-ship grow
Like t'a Rose of Jericho:
Sweeter far, then ever yet
Showrs or Sun-shines co'd beget.
May the Graces, and the Hours
Strew his hopes, and Him with flowers:
And so dress him up with Love,
As to be the Chick of Jove.
May the thrice-three-Sisters sing
Him the Sovereign of their Spring:
And entitle none to be
Prince of Hellicon, but He.
May his soft foot, where it treads,
Gardens thence produce and Meads:
And those Meddowes full be set
With the Rose, and Violet.
May his ample Name be known
To the last succession:
And his actions high be told
Through the world, but writ in gold.
To Anthea, who may command him any thing.
BId me to live, and I will live
Thy Protestant to be:
Or bid me love, and I will give
A loving heart to thee.
2.
A heart as soft, a heart as kind,
A heart as sound and free,
As in the whole world thou can find,
That heart I Will give to thee.
3.
Bid that heart stay, and it will stay,
To honor thy Decree:
Or bid it languish quite away,
And't shall do so for thee.
4.
Bid me to weep, and I will weep,
While I have eyes to see:
And having none, yet I will keep
A heart to weep for thee.
5.
Bid me despair, and I Will despair,
Under that Cypress tree:
Or bid me die, and I will dare
Even Death, to die for thee.
6.
Thou art my life, my love, my heart,
The very eyes of me:
And have command of every part,
To live and die for thee.
Prevision, or Provision.
THat Prince takes soon enough the Victors room,
Who first provides, not to be overoome.
Obedience in Subjects.
THe Gods to Kings the Judgment give to sway:
The Subjects only glory to obey.
More potent, less peccant.
HE that may sin, sins least; Leave to transgress
Enfeebles much the seeds of wickedness.
Upon a maid that dyed the day she was married.
THat Morn which saw me made a Bride,
The Evening witnest that I died.
Those holy lights, wherewith they guide
Unto the bed the bashful Bride;
Served, but as Tapers, for to burn,
And light my Relics to their Urne.
This Epitaph, which here you see,
Supplied the Epithalamie.
Upon Pink an ill-fac'd Painter. Epig.
TO paint the Fiend, Pink would the Devil see;
And so he may, if he will be ruled by me:
Let but Pink's face in the Looking-glass be shown,
And Pink may paint the Devill's by his own.
Upon Brock. Epig.
TO cleanse his eyes, Tom Brock makes much ado,
But not his mouth (the fouler of the two.)
A clammie Reume makes loathsome both his eyes:
His mouth worse furred with oaths and blasphemies.
To Meddowes.
1.
YE have been fresh and green,
Ye have been filled with flowers:
And ye the Walks have been
Where Maids have spent their hours.
2.
You have beheld, how they
With Wicker Arks did come
To kiss, and bear away
The richer Couslips home.
3.
You Have heard them sweetly sing,
And seen them in a Round:
Each Virgin, like a Spring,
With Hony-succles crowned.
4.
But now, we see, none here,
Whose silv'rie feet did tread,
And with dishevelled Hair,
Adorned this smoother Mead.
5.
Like Unthrifts, having spent,
Your stock, and needy grown,
You Are left here to lament
Your poor estates, alone.
Crosses.
THough good things answer many good intents;
Crosses do still bring forth the best events.
Miseries.
THough hourly comforts from the Gods we see,
No life is yet life-proofe from misery.
Laugh and lie down.
You Have laughed enough (sweet) vary now your Text;
And laugh no more; or laugh, and lie down next.
To his Household gods.
RIse, Houshold-gods, and let us go;
But whither, I my self not know.
First, let us dwell on rudest seas;
Next, with severest Salvages;
Last, let us make our best abode,
Where humane foot, as yet, never trod:
Search worlds of Ice; and rather there
Dwell, then in lothed Devonshire.
To the Nightingale, and Robin-Red-brest.
WHen I departed am, ring thou my knell,
Thou pitiful, and pretty Philomel:
And when I Am laid out for a Corse; then be
Thou Sexton (Red-brest) for to cover me.
To the Yew and Cypress to grace his Funeral.
1.
BOth you two have
Relation to the grave:
And where
The Fun'rall-Trump sounds, you are there.
2.
I shall be made
Ere long a fleeting shade:
Pray come,
And do some honor to my Tomb.
3.
Do not deny
My last request; for I
Will be
Thankful to you, or friends, for me.
I call and I call.
I Call, I call, who do ye call?
The Maids to catch this Cowslip-ball:
But since these Cowslips fading be,
Troth, leave the flowers, and Maids, take me.
Yet, if that neither you will do,
Speak but the word, and I Will take you.
On a perfumed Lady.
YOu say you are sweet; how should we know
Whether that you be sweet or no?
From Powders and Perfumes keep free;
Then we shall smell how sweet you be.
A Nuptial Song, or Epithalamie, on Sir Clipseby Crew and his Lady.
1.
What Is that we see from far? the spring of Day
Bloomed from the East, or fair Injewel'd May
Blown out of April; or some New-
Star filled with glory to our view,
Reaching at heaven,
To add a nobler Planet to the seven?
Say, or do we not descrie
Some Goddess, in a cloud of Tiffanie
To move, or rather the
Emergent Venus from the Sea?
2.
It Is she! it is she! or else some more Divine
Enlightened substance; mark how from the Shrine
Of holy Saints she paces on,
Treading upon Vermilion
And Amber; Spiceing the Chafte Air with fumes of Paradise.
Then come on, come on, and yield
A savor like unto a blessed field,
When the bedabled Morn
Washes the golden ears of corn.
3.
See where she comes; and smell how all the street
Breathes Vine-yards and Pomgranats: O how sweet!
As a fired Altar, is each stone,
Perspiring pounded Cynamon.
The Phoenix nest,
Built up of odours, burns in her breast.
Who therein would not consume
His soul to Ash-heaps in that rich perfume?
Bestroaking Fate the while
He burns to Embers on the Pile.
4.
Himen, O Himen! Tread the sacred ground;
Show thy white feet, and head with Marjoram crowned
Mount up thy flames, and let thy Torch
Display the Bridegroom in the porch,
In his desires
More towering, more disparkling then thy fires:
Show her how his eyes do turn
And roll about, and in their motions burn
Their balls to Cindars: haste,
Or else to ashes he will waste.
5.
Glide by the banks of Virgins then, and pass
The Shewers of Roses, lucky-foure-leav'd grass:
The while the cloud of younglings sing,
And drown ye with a flowrie Spring:
While some repeat
Your praise, and bless you, sprinkling you with Wheat:
While that others do divine;
Blessed is the Bride, on whom the Sun does shine;
And thousands gladly wish
You multiply, as does a Fish.
6.
And beauteous Bride we do confess you are wise,
In dealing forth these bashful jealousies:
In Lov's name do so; and a price
Set on your self, by being nice:
But yet take heed;
What now you seem, be not the same indeed,
And turn Apostate: Love will
Part of the way be met; or sit stone-still.
On then, and though you slowly go, yet, howsoever, go.
7.
And now you are entered; see the Codled Cook
Runs from his Torrid Zone, to pry, and look,
And bless his dainty Mistress: see,
The Aged point out, This is she,
Who now must sway
The House (Love shield her) with her Yea and Nay:
And the smirk Butler thinks it
Sin, in's Nap'rie, not to express his wit;
Each striving to devise
Some gin, wherewith to catch your eyes.
8.
To bed, to bed, kind Turtles, now, and write
This the short'st day, and this the longest night;
But yet too short for you: it is we,
Who count this night as long as three,
Lying alone,
Telling the Clock strike Ten, Eleven, Twelve, One.
Quickly, quickly then prepare;
And let the Young Men and the Bride-maids share
Your Garters; and their joints
Encircle with the Bride-grooms Points.
9.
By the Brides eyes, and by the teeming life
Of her green hopes, we charge ye, that no strife
(Farther then Gentleness tends) gets place
Among ye, striving for her lace:
O do not fall
Foul in these noble pastimes, lest ye call
Discord in, and so divide
The youthful Bridegroom, and the fragrant Bride:
Which Love fore-fend; but spoken,
Be It to your praise, no peace was broken.
10.
Strip her of Springtime, tender-whimpring-maids,
Now Autumne's come, when all those flowrie aids
Of her Delays must end; Dispose
That Lady-smock, that Pansie, and that Rose
Neatly apart;
But for Prick-madam, and for Gentle-heart;
And soft- Maidens-blush, the Bride
Makes holy these, all others lay aside:
Then strip her, or unto her
Let him come, who dares undo her.
11.
And to enchant ye more, see every where
About the Roof a Siren in a Sphere;
(As we think) singing to the dinne
Of many a warbling Cherubim:
O mark ye how
The soul of Nature melts in numbers: now
See, a thousand Cupids fly,
To light their Tapers at the Brides bright eye.
To Bed; or her they will tire,
Were she an Element of fire.
12.
And to your more bewitching, see, the proud
Plumpe Bed bear up, and swelling like a cloud,
Tempting the two too modest; can
Ye see it brusle like a Swan,
And you be cold
To meet it, when it woo's and seems to fold
The Arms to hug it? throw, throw
Your selves into the mighty overflow
Of that white Pride, and Drown
The night, with you, in floods of Down.
13.
The bed is ready, and the maze of Love
Looks for the treaders; every where is wove
Wit and new mystery; read, and
Put in practice, to understand
And know each wile,
Each hieroglyphick of a kiss or smile;
And do it to the full; reach
High in your own conceit, and some way teach
Nature and Art, one more
Play, then they ever knew before.
14.
If needs we must for Ceremonies-sake,
Bless a Sack-posset; Luck go with it; take
The Night-Charme quickly; you have spells,
And magicks for to end, and hells,
To pass; but such
And of such Torture as no one would grutch
To live therein for ever: Fry
And consume, and grow again to die,
And live, and in that case,
Love the confusion of the place.
15.
But since It must be done, dispatch, and sow
Up in a sheet your Bride, and what if so
It be with Rock, or walls of Brass,
Ye Tower her up, as Danae was;
Think you that this,
Or hell it self a powerful Bulwark is?
I tell ye no; but like a
Bold bolt of thunder he will make his way,
And rend the cloud, and throw
The sheet about, like flakes of snow.
16.
All now is hushed in silence; Midwife-moone,
With all her Owle-ey'd issue begs a boon
Which you must grant; that is entrance; with
Which extract, all we can call pith
And quintiscence
Of Planetary bodies; so commence
All fair Constellations
Looking upon ye, that, That Nations
Springing from two such Fires,
May blaze the virtue of their Sires.
The silken Snake.
FOr sport my Julia threw a Lace
Of silk and silver at my face:
Watchet the silk was; and did make
A show, as if't'ad been a snake:
The suddenness did me affright;
But though it scared, it did not bite.
Upon himself.
IAm Sive-like, and can hold
Nothing hot, or nothing cold.
Put in Love, and put in too
Jealousy, and both will through:
Put in Fear, and hope, and doubt;
What comes in, runs quickly out:
Put in secrecies withal,
What ere enters, out it shall:
But if you can stop the Sive,
For mine own part I Would as lieve,
Maids should say, or Virgins sing,
Herrick keeps, as holds nothing.
Upon Love.
LOve's a thing, (as I do hear)
Ever full of pensive fear;
Rather then to which I Will fall,
Trust me, I Will not like at all:
If to love I should entend,
Let my hair then stand an end:
And that terror likewise prove,
Fatal to me in my love.
But if horror cannot slake
Flames, which would an entrance make;
Then the next thing I desire,
Is to love, and live in the fire.
Reverence to Riches.
LIke to the Income must be our expense;
Man's Fortune must be had in reverence.
Devotion makes the Deity.
WHo forms a Godhead out of Gold or Stone,
Makes not a God; but he that prays to one.
To all young men that love.
I Could wish you all, who love,
That ye could your thoughts remove
From your Mistresses, and be,
Wisely wanton (like to me.)
I could wish you dispossessed
Of that Fiend that marres your rest;
And with Tapers comes to fright
Your weak senses in the night.
I co'd wish, ye all, who fry
Cold as Ice, or cool as I.
But if flames best like ye, then
Much good do it ye Gentlemen.
I a merry heart will keep,
While you wring your hands and weep.
The Eyes.
It Is a known principle in War,
The eyes be first, that conquered are.
No fault in women.
NO fault in women to refuse
The offer, which they most would choose.
No fault in women, to confess
How tedious they are in their dress.
No fault in women, to lay on
The tincture of Vermillion:
And there to give the cheek a die
Of white, where nature does deny.
No fault in women, to make show
Of largeness, when they are nothing so:
(When true it is, the outside swells
With inward Buckram, little else.)
No fault in women, though they be
But seldom from suspicion free:
No fault in womankind, at all,
If they but slip, and never fall.
Upon Shark. Epig.
SHark when he goes to any public feast,
Eats to ones thinking, of all there, the least.
What saves the master of the House thereby?
When if the servants search, they may descry
In his wide Codpeece, (dinner being done)
Two Napkins crammed up, and a silver Spoone.
Oberons Feast.
SHapcot! To thee tha Fairy State
I with discretion, dedicate.
Because thou prizest things that are
Curious, and un-familiar.
Take first the feast; these dishes gone;
We Will see the Fairy-Court anon.
ALittle mushroome table spread,
After short prayers, they set on bread;
A Moon-parcht grain of purest wheat,
With some small glit'ring gritt, to eat
His choice bitts with; then in a trice
They make a feast less great then nice.
But all this while his eye is served,
We must not think his ear was sterv'd:
But that there was in place to stir
His Spleen, the chirring Grasshopper;
The merry Cricket, puling Fly,
The piping Gnat for minstralcy.
And now, we must imagine first,
The Elves present to quench his thirst
A pure seed-Pearle of Infant dew,
Brought and besweetned in a blew
And pregnant violet; which done,
His kitling eyes begin to run
Quite through the table, where he spies
The horns of paperie Butterflies,
Of which he eats, and tastes a little
Of that we call the Cuckoes spittle.
A little Fuz-ball-pudding stands
By, yet not blessed by his hands,
That was too coorse; but then forthwith
He ventures boldly on the pith
Of sugared Rush, and eats the sagge
And well bestrutted Bees sweet bag:
Gladding his pallat with some store
Of Emits eggs; what would he more?
But Beards of Mice, a Newt's stew'dthigh,
A bloated Earewig, and a Fly;
With the Red-capt worm, that is shut
Within the concave of a Nut,
Brown as his Tooth. A little Moth,
Late fatned in a piece of cloth:
With withered cherries; Mandrakes ears;
Moles eyes; to these, the slain-Stags tears:
The unctuous dewlaps of a Snaile;
The broke-heart of a Nightingale
Ore-come in music; with a wine,
Never ravished from the flattering Vine,
But gently pressed from the soft side
Of the most sweet and dainty Bride,
Brought in a dainty daizie, which
He fully quaffs up to bewitch
His blood to height; this done, commended
Grace by his Priest; The feast is ended.
Event of things not in our power.
BY Time, and Counsel, do the best we can,
The Event is never in the power of man.
Upon her blush.
WHen Julia blushes, she does show
Cheeks like to Roses, when they blow.
Merits make the man.
OUr Honors, and our Commendations be
Due to the Merits, not Authority.
To Virgins.
Hear ye Virgins, and I Will teach,
What the times of old did preach.
Rosamond was in a Bower
Kept, as Danae in a Tower:
But yet Love (who subtle is)
Crept to that, and came to this.
Be ye locked up like to these,
Or the rich Hesperides;
Or those Babies in your eyes,
In their Crystal Nunneries;
Notwithstanding Love will win,
Or else force a passage in:
And as coy be, as you can,
Gifts will get ye, or the man.
Virtue.
EAch must, in virtue, strive for to excel;
That man lives twice, that lives the first life well.
The Bell-man.
FRom noise of Scare-fires rest ye free,
From Murders Benedicitie.
From all mischances, that may fright
Your pleasing slumbers in the night:
Mercy secure ye all, and keep
The Goblin from ye, while ye sleep.
Past one aclock, and almost two,
My Masters all, Good day to you.
Bashfulnesse.
OF all our parts, the eyes express
The sweetest kind of bashfulnesse.
To the most accomplished Gentleman, Master Edward Norgate, Clark of the Signet
to His Majesty. Epig.
FOr one so rarely tuned to fit all parts;
For one to whom espoused are all the Arts;
Long have I sought for: but co'd never see
Them all concentered in one man, but Thee.
Thus, thou, that man art, whom the Fates conspired
To make but One (and that is thy self) admired.
Upon Brudence Baldwin her sickness.
PRue, my dearest Maid, is sick,
Almost to be Lunatic:
AEsculapius! come and bring
Means for her recovering;
And a gallant Cock shall be
Offered up by Her, to Thee.
To Apollo. A short Hymn.
PHoebus! when that I a Verse,
Or some numbers more rehearse;
Tune my words, that they may fall,
Each way smoothly Musical:
For which favor, there shall be
Swans devoted unto thee.
A Hymn to Bacchus.
BAcchus, let me drink no more;
Wild are Seas, that want a shore.
When our drinking has no stint,
There is no one pleasure in it.
I have drank up for to please
Thee, that great cup Hercules:
Urge no more; and there shall be
Daffadills g'en up to Thee.
Upon Bungie.
BUngie does fast; looks pale; puts Sackcloth on;
Not out of Conscience, or Religion:
Or that this Yonker keeps so strict a Lent,
Fearing to break the Kings Commandment:
But being poor, and knowing Flesh is dear,
He keeps not one, but many Lents i'th'yeare.
On himself.
HEre down my wearyed limbs I Will lay;
My Pilgrims staff; my weed of gray:
My Palmers hat; my Scallops shell;
My Cross; my Cord; and all farewell,
For having now my journey done,
(Just at the setting of the Sun)
Here I have found a Chamber fit,
(God and good friends be thankt for it)
Where if I can a lodger be
A little while from Tramplers free;
At my up-rising next, I shall,
If not requite, yet thank ye all.
Mean while, the Holy-Rood hence fright
The fouler Fiend, and evil Spright,
From scaring you or yours this night.
Casualties.
GOod things, that come of course, far less do please,
Then those, which come by sweet contingences.
Bribes and Gifts get all.
DEad falls the Cause, if once the Hand be mute;
But let that speak, the Client gets the suit.
The end.
IF well thou have begun, go on fore-right;
It is the End that crowns us, not the Fight.
Upon a child that dyed.
HEre she lies, a pretty bud,
Lately made of flesh and blood:
Who, as soon, fell fast asleep,
As her lirtle eyes did peep.
Give her strewings; but not stir
The earth, that lightly covers her.
Upon Sneape. Epig.
SNeape has a face so brittle, that it breaks
Forth into blushes, whensoere he speaks.
Content, not cates.
It Is not the food, but the content
That makes the Tables merriment.
Where Trouble serves the board, we eat
The Platters there, as soon as meat.
A little Pipkin with a bit
Of Mutton, or of Veale in it,
Set on my Table, (Trouble-free)
More then a Feast contenteth me.
The Entertainment: or, Porch-verse, at the Marriage of Mr. Hen. Northly, and
the most witty Mrs. Lettice Yard.
WEelcome! but yet no entrance, till we bless
First you, then you, and both for white success.
Profane no Porch young man and maid, for fear
Ye wrong the Threshold-god, that keeps peace here:
Please him, and then all good-luck will betide
You, the brisk Bridegroom, you the dainty Bride.
Do all things sweetly, and in comely wise;
Put on your Garlands first, then Sacrifice:
That done; when both of you have seemly fed,
We'll call on Night, to bring ye both to Bed:
Where being laid, all Fair signs looking on,
Fish-like, increase then to a million:
And millions of spring-times may ye have,
Which spent, on death, bring to ye both one Grave.
The goodnight or Blessing.
BLessings, in abundance come,
To the Bride, and to her Groom;
May the Bed, and this short night,
Know the fullness of delight!
Pleasures, many here attend ye,
And ere long, a Boy Love send ye
Curld and comely, and so trim,
Maids (in time) may ravish him.
Thus a dew of Graces fall
On ye both; Goodnight to all.
Upon Leech.
LEech boasts, he has a Pill, that can alone,
With speed give sick men their salvation:
It Is strange, his Father long time has been ill,
And credits Physic, yet not trusts his Pill:
And why? he knows he must of Cure despair,
Who makes the sly Physician his Heir.
To Daffadills.
Fair Daffadills, we weep to see
You haste away so soon:
As yet the early-rising Sun
Has not attained his Noone.
Stay, stay,
Until the hasting day
Has run
But to the Even-song;
And, having prayed together, we
Will go with you along.
2.
We have short time to stay, as you,
We have as short a Spring;
As quick a growth to meet Decay,
As you, or any thing.
We die,
As your hours do, and dry
Away,
Like to the Summers rain;
Or as the pearls of Mornings dew
Never to be found again.
To a Maid.
YOu say, you love me; that I thus must prove;
If that you lie, then I will swear you love.
Upon a Lady that dyed in childbed, and left a daughter behind her.
AS Gilly flowers do but stay
To blow, and seed, and so away;
So you sweetLady (sweet as May)
The gardens-glory lived a while,
To lend the world your scent and smile.
But when your own fair print was set
Once in a Virgin Flosculet,
(Sweet as your self, and newly blown)
To give that life, resigned your own:
But so, as still the mothers power
Lives in the pretty Lady-flower.
A New-yeares gift sent to Sir Simeon Steward.
NO news of Navies burnt at Seas;
No noise of late spawned Tittyries:
No closset plot, or open vent,
That frights men with a Parliament:
No new devise, or late found trick,
To read by th'Starres, the Kingdoms sick:
No ginne to catch the State, or wring
The freeborn Nosthrill of the King,
We send to you; but here a jolly
Verse crowned with Yvie, and with Holly:
That tells of Winters Tales and Mirth,
That Milk-maids make about the hearth,
Of Christmas sports, the Wassell-boule,
That tossed up, after Fox-i'th'hole:
Of Blind-man-buffe, and of the care
That young men have to shoe the Mare:
Of Twelf-tide Cakes, of Pease, and Beans
Wherewith ye make those merry Scenes,
When as ye choose your King and Queen,
And cry out, Hey, for our town green.
Of Ash-heapes, in the which ye use
Husbands and Wives by streakes to choose:
Of crackling Laurel, which fore-sounds,
A Plentious harvest to your grounds:
Of these, and such like things, for shift,
We send in stead of New-yeares gift.
Read then, and when your faces shine
With bucksome meat and capring Wine:
Remember us in Cups full crowned,
And let our Citie-health go round,
Quite through the young maids and the men,
To the ninth number, if not ten;
Until the fired Chestnuts leap
For joy, to see the fruits ye reap,
From the plumpe Challice, and the Cup,
That tempts till it be tossed up:
Then as ye sit about your embers,
Call not to mind those fled Decembers;
But think on these, that are t'appeare,
As Daughters to the instant year:
Sit crowned with Rose-buds, and carouse,
Till Liber Pater twirles the house
About your ears; and lay upon
The year (your cares) that is fled and gone.
And let the russet Swains the Plough
And Harrow hang up resting now;
And to the Bag-pipe all address;
Till sleep takes place of weariness.
And thus, throughout, with Christmas plays
Frolic the full twelve Holy Days.
Mattens, or morning Prayer.
WHen with the Virgin morning thou do rise,
Crossing thy self; come thus to sacrifice:
First wash thy heart in innocence, then bring
Pure hands, pure habits, pure, pure every thing.
Next to the Altar humbly kneel, and thence,
Give up thy soul in clouds of frankincense.
Thy golden Censors filled with odours sweet,
Shall make thy actions with their ends to meet.
Evensong.
Begin with Jove; then is the work half done;
And runs most smoothly, when it is well begun.
Jove's is the first and last: The Morn's his due,
The midst is thine; But Joves the Evening too;
As sure a Mattins does to him belong,
So sure he lays claim to the Evensong.
The Braclet to Julia.
WHy I tie about thy wrist,
Julia, this my silken twist;
For what other reason is it,
But to show thee how in part,
Thou my pretty Captive art?
But thy Bondslave is my heart:
It Is but silk that binds thee,
Knap the thread, and thou are free:
But it is otherwise with me;
I am bound, and fast bound so,
That from thee I cannot go;
If I co'd, I would not so.
The Christian Militant.
A Man prepared against all ills to come,
That dares to dead the fire of martyrdom:
That sleeps at home; and sailing there at ease,
Fears not the fierce sedition of the Seas:
That Is counter-proofe against the Farms mis-haps,
Undreadfull too of courtly thunderclaps:
That wears one face (like heaven) and never shows
A change, when Fortune either comes, or goes:
That keeps his own strong guard, in the despite
Of what can hurt by day, or harm by night:
That takes and re-delivers every stroke
Of Chance, (as made up all of rock, and oak:)
That sighs at others death; smiles at his own
Most dire and horrid crucifixion.
Who for true glory suffers thus; we grant
Him to be here our Christian militant.
A short Hymn to Larr.
THough I cannot give thee fires
Glit'ring to my free desires:
These accept, and I Will be free,
Offering Poppy unto thee.
Another to Neptune.
MIghty Neptune, may it please
Thee, the Rector of the Seas,
That my Barque may safely run
Through thy watrie-region;
And a Tunnie-fish shall be
Offered up, with thanks to thee.
Upon Greedy. Epig.
AN old, old widow Greedy needs would wed,
Not for affection to her, or her Bed;
But in regard, 'twas often said, this old
Woman would bring him more then co'd be told,
He took her; now the jestn ithis appears,
So old she was, that none co'd tell her years.
His embalming to Julia.
FOr my embalming, Julia, do but this,
Give thou my lips but their supreamest kiss:
Or else trans-fuse thy breath into the chest,
Where my small relics must for ever rest:
That breath the Balm, the myrrh, the Nard shall be,
To give an incorruption unto me.
Gold, before Goodness.
HOw rich a man is, all desire to know;
But none enquires if good he be, or no.
The Kiss. A Dialogue.
1.
AMong thy Fancies, tell me this,
What is the thing we call a kiss?
2.
I shall resolve ye, what it is.
It is a creature born and bred
Between the lips, (all cherrie-red,)
By love and warm desires fed,
Chor. And makes more soft the Bridal Bed.
2.
It is an active flame, that flies,
First to the Babies of the eyes;
And charms them there with lullabies;

Chor. And stils the Bride too, when she cries.
2.
Then to the chin, the cheek, the ear,
It frisks, and flies, now here, now there,
It Is now far off, and then it is nere;

Chor. And here, and there, and every where.
1.
Has it a speaking virtue? 2. Yes;
1. How speaks it, say? 2. Do you but this,
Part your joined lips, then speaks your kiss;

Chor. And this loves sweetest language is.
1.
Has it a body? 2. I, and wings
With thousand rare encolourings:
And as it flies, it gently sings,

Chor. Love, honey yields; but never stings.

The admonition.
See thou those Diamonds which she wears
In that rich Carkanet;
Or those on her disheveled hairs,
Fair Pearls in order set?
Believe young man all those were tears
By wretched Wooers sent,
In mournful Hyacinths and Rue,
That figure discontent;
Which when not warmed by her view,
By cold neglect, each one,
Congealed to Pearl and stone;
Which precious spoils upon her,
She wears as trophies of her honor.
Ah then consider! What all this implies;
She that will wear thy tears, would wear thine eyes.
To his honored kinsman Sir William Soame. Epig.
I Can but name thee, and methinks I call
All that have been, or are canonical
For love and bounty, to come near, and see,
Their many virtues volum'd up in thee;
In thee Brave Man! Whose incorrupted fame,
Casts forth a light like to a Virgin flame:
And as it shines, it throws a scent about,
As when a Rainbow in perfumes goes out.
So vanish shence, but leave a name, as sweet,
As Benjamin, and Storax, when they meet.
On himself.
Ask me, why I do not sing
To the tension of the string,
As I did, not long ago,
When my numbers full did flow?
Grief (ay me!) has struck my Lute,
And my tongue at one time mute.
To Larr.
NO more shall I, since I am driven hence,
Devote to thee my grains of Frankincense:
No more shall I from mantle-trees hang down,
To honor thee, my little Parsley crown:
No more shall I (I fear me) to thee bring
My chives of Garlic for an offering:
No more shall I, from henceforth, hear a quire
Of merry Crickets by my Country fire.
Go where I will, thou luckie Larr stay here,
Warm by a glit'ring chimnie all the year.
The departure of the good Demon.
WHat can I do in Poetry,
Now the good Spirit's gone from me?
Why nothing now, but lonely fit,
And over-read what I have writ.
Clemency.
FOr punishment in war, it will suffice,
If the chief author of the faction dies;
Let but few smart, but strike a fear through all:
Where the fault springs, there let the judgment fall.
His age, dedicated to his peculiar friend, M. John Wickes, under the name of
Posthumus.
1.
AH Posthumus! Our years hence fly,
And leave no sound; nor piety,
Or prayers, or vow
Can keep the wrinkle from the brow:
But we must on,
As Fate does lead or draw us; none,
None, Posthumus, co'd ere decline
The doom of cruel Proserpine.
2.
The pleasing wife, the house, the ground
Must all be left, no one plant found
To follow thee,
Save only the Curst-Cipresse tree:
A merry mind
Looks forward, scorns what is left behind:
Let Us live, my Wickes, then, while we may,
And here enjoy our Holiday.
W'ave seen the past-best Times, and these
Will nere return, we see the Seas,
And Moons to wain;
But they fill up their Ebbs again:
But vanished man,
Like to a Lilly-lost, nere can,
Nere can repullulate, or bring
His days to see a second Spring.
4.
But on we must, and thither tend,
Where Anchus and rich Tullus blend
Their sacred seed:
Thus has Infernal jove decreed;
We must be made,
Ere long, a song, ere long, a shade.
Why then, since life to us is short,
Lets make it full up, by our sport.
5.
Crown we our Heads with Roses then,
And 'noint with Tirian Balm; for when
We two are dead,
The world with us is buried.
Then live we free,
As is the Air, and let us be
Our own fair wind, and mark each one
Day with the white and Luckie stone.
6.
We are not poor; although we have
No roofs of Cedar, nor our brave
Baiae, nor keep
Account of such a flock of sheep;
Nor Bullocks fed
To lard the shambles: Barbels bred
To kiss our hands, nor do we wish
For Pollio's Lampries in our dish.
7.
If we can meet, and so confer,
Both by a shining Salt-seller;
And have our Roof,
Although not archt, yet weather proof,
And seeling free,
From that cheap Candle baudery:
We Will eat our Bean with that full mirth
As we were Lords of all the earth.
8.
Well then, on what Seas we are tossed,
Our comfort is, we cannot be lost.
Let the winds drive
Our Bark; yet she will keep alive
Amidst the deepes;
It Is constancy (my Wickes) which keeps
The Pinnace up; which though she erres
In The Seas, she saves her passengers.
9.
Say, we must part (sweet mercy bless
Us both in the Sea, Camp, Wilderness)
Can we so far
Stray, to become less circular,
Then we are now?
No, no, that self same heart, that vow,
Which made us one, shall never undo;
Or ravell so, to make us two.
10.
Live in thy peace; as for my self,
When I am bruised on the Shelfe
Of Time, and show
My locks behung with frost and snow:
When with the reume,
The cough, the ptisick, I consume
Unto an almost nothing; then,
The Ages fled, I Will call again:
11.
And with a tear compare these last
Lame, and bad times, with those are past,
While Baucis by,
My old lean wife, shall kiss it dry:
And so we will sit
By 'th 'fire, foretelling snow and slit,
And weather by our aches, grown
Now old enough to be our own
12.
True Calenders, as Pusses ear
Washed o'rs, to tell what change is near
Then to assuage
The gripings of the chine by age;
I Will call my young
Iulus to sing such a song
I made upon my Julia's breast;
And of her blush at such a feast.
13.
Then shall he read that flower of mine
Enclosed within a crystal shrine:
A Primrose next;
A piece, then of a higher text:
For to beget
In me a more transcendant heat,
Then that insinuating fire,
Which crept into each aged Sire.
14.
When the fair Hellen, from her eyes,
Shot forth her loving Sorceries:
At which I Will rear
Mine aged limbs above my chair:
And hearing it,
Flutter and crow, as in a fit
Of fresh concupiscence, and cry,
No lust there is like to Poetry.
15.
Thus frantic crazie man (God wot)
I Will call to mind things half forgot:
And often between,
Repeat the Times that I have seen!
Thus ripe with tears,
And twisting my Iulus hairs;
Doting, I Will weep and say (In Truth)
Baucis, these were my sins of youth.
16.
Then next I Will cause my hopeful Lad
(If a wild Apple can be had)
To crown the Hearth,
( Larr thus conspiring with our mirth)
Then to infuse
Our browner Ale into the cruse:
Which sweetly spic't, we will first carouse
Unto the Genius of the house.
17.
Then the next health to friends of mine
(Loving the brave Burgundian wine)
High sons of Pith,
Whose fortunes I have frolickt with:
Such as co'd well
Bear up the Magic bough, and spel:
And dancing 'bout the Mystic Thyrse,
Give up the just applause to verse:
18.
To those, and then again to thee
We Will drink, my Wickes, until we be
Plump as the cherry,
Though not so fresh, yet full as merry
As the crickit;
The untamed Heifer, or the Pricket,
Until our tongues shall tell our ears,
We Are younger by a score of years.
19.
Thus, till we see the fire less shine
From the embers, then the kitlings eyne,
We Will still sit up,
Sphering about the wassail cup,
To all those times,
Which gave me honor for my Rhimes,
The cole once spent, we will then to bed,
Far more then night bewearied.
A short hymn to Venus.
Goddess, I do love a Girl
Rubie-lipt, and toothed with Pearl:
If so be, I may but prove
Luckie in this Maid I love:
I will promise there shall be
Mirtles offered up to Thee.
To a Gentlewoman on just dealing.
TRue to your self, and sheets, you will have me swear,
You shall; if righteous dealing I find there.
Do not you fall through frailty; I Will be sure
To keep my Bond still free from forfeiture.
The hand and tongue.
TWo parts of us successively command;
The tongue in peace; but then in war the hand.
Upon a delaying Lady.
COme come away,
Or let me go;
Must I here stay,
Because you are slow;
And will continue so?
Troth Lady, no.
2.
I scorn to be
A slave to state:
And since I Am free,
I will not wait,
Henceforth at such a rate,
For needy Fate.
3.
If you desire
My spark should glow,
The peeping fire
You must blow;
Or I shall quickly grow,
To Frost or Snow.
To the Lady Mary Villars, Governesse to the Princess Henretta.
WHen I of Villars do but hear the name,
It calls to mind, that mighty Buckingham,
Who was your brave exalted Uncle here,
(Binding the wheel of Fortune to his Sphere)
Who spurned at Envy; and co'd bring, with ease,
An end to all his stately purposes.
For his love then, whose sacred Relics show
Their Resurrection, and their growth in you:
And for my sake, whoever did prefer
You, above all Those Sweets of Westminster:
Permit my Book to have a free access
To kiss your hand, most Dainty Governesse.
Upon his Julia.
WIll ye hear, what I can say
Briefly of my Julia?
Black and rolling is her eye,
Double chinn'd, and forehead high:
Lips she has, all Rubie red,
Cheeks like Cream Enclarited:
And a nose that is the grace
And Proscenium of her face.
So that we may guess by these,
The other parts will richly please.
To Flowers.
IN time of life, I graced ye with my Verse;
Do now your flowrie honors to my Hearse.
You shall not languish, trust me: Virgins here
Weeping, shall make ye flourish all the year.
To my ill Reader.
THou say my lines are hard;
And I the truth will tell;
They are both hard, and marred,
If thou not read'st them well.
The power in the people.
LEt Kings Command, and do the best they may,
The saucie Subjects still will bear the sway.
A Hymn to Venus, and Cupid.
SEa-born Goddess, let me be,
By thy son thus graced, and thee;
That when ere I woo, I find
Virgins coy, but not unkind.
Let me when I kiss a maid,
Taste her lips, so over-laid
With Loves-sirrop; that I may,
In your Temple, when I pray,
Kiss the Altar, and confess
There Is in love, no bitterness.
On Julia's Picture.
HOw am I ravished! When I do but see,
The Painters art in thy Sciography?
If so, how much more shall I dote thereon,
When once he gives it incarnation?
Her Bed.
See, thou that Cloud as silver clear,
Plump, soft, and swelling every where?
It Is Julia's Bed, and she sleeps there.
Her Legs.
FAin would I kiss my Julia's dainty Leg,
Which is as white and hair-less as an egg.
Upon her Alms.
SEe how the poor do waiting stand,
For the expansion of thy hand.
A wafer Dol'd by thee, will swell
Thousands to feed by miracle.
Rewards.
STill to our gains our chief respect is had;
Reward it is, that makes us good or bad.
Nothing new.
NOthing is New: we walk where others went.
There Is no vice now, but has his president.
The Rainbow.
LOok, how the Rainbow does appear
But in one only Hemisphere:
So likewise after our disseace,
No more is seen the Arch of Peace.
That Cov'nant's here; The under-bow,
That nothing shoots, but war and woe.
The meddow verse or Aniversary to Mistress Bridget Lowman.
COme with the Springtime, forth Fair Maid, and he
This year again, the medows Deity.
Yet ere ye enter, give us leave to set
Upon your Head this flowery Coronet:
To make this neat distinction from the rest;
You are the Prime, and Princess of the Feast:
To which, with silver feet lead you the way,
While sweet-breath Nimphs, attend on you this Day.
This is your hour; and best you may command,
Since you are Lady of this Fairie land.
Full mirth wait on you; and such mirth as shall
Cherrish the cheek, but make none blush at all.
The parting verse, the feast there ended.
Loath to depart, but yet at last, each one
Back must now go to's habitation:
Not knowing thus much, when we once do sever,
Whether or no, that we shall meet here ever.
As for my self, since time a thousand cares
And griefs has fil'de upon my silver hairs;
It Is to be doubted whether I next year,
Or no, shall give ye a re-meeting here.
If die I must, then my last vow shall be,
You Will with a tear or two, remember me,
Your sometime Poet; but if fates do give
Me longer date, and more fresh springs to live:
Often as your field, shall her old age renew,
Herrick shall make the meddow-verse for you.
Upon Judith. Epig.
Judith has cast her old-skin, and got new;
And walks fresh varnisht to the public view.
Foul Judith was; and foul she will be known,
For all this fair Transfiguration.
Long and lazy.
THat was the Proverb. Let my mistress be
Lasie to others, but be long to me.
Upon Ralph. Epig.
CUrse not the mice, no grist of thine they eat:
But curse thy children, they consume thy wheat.
To the right honorable, Philip, Earl of Pembroke, and Montgomerie.
HOw dull and dead are books, that cannot show
A Prince or Pembroke, and that Pembroke, you!
You, who are High born, and a Lord no less
Free by your fate, then Fortunes mightiness,
Who hug our Poems (Honored Sir) and then
The paper gild, and Laureat the pen.
Nor suffer you the Poets to sit cold,
But warm their wits, and turn their lines to gold.
Others there be, who righteously will swear
Those smooth-pac't Numbers, amble every where;
And these brave Measures go a stately trot;
Love those, like these; regard, reward them not.
But you my Lord, are One, whose hand along
Goes with your mouth, or does outrun your tongue;
Paying before you praise; and cockring wit,
Give both the Gold and Garland unto it.
An hymn to Juno.
STately Goddess, do thou please,
Who art chief at marriages,
But to dress the Bridall-Bed,
When my Love and I shall wed:
And a Peacock proud shall be
Offered up by us, to thee.
Upon Mease. Epig.
MEase brags of Pullets which he eats: but Mease
Never yet set tooth in stump, or rump of these.
Upon Sapho, sweetly playing, and sweetly singing.
WHen thou do play, and sweetly sing,
Whether it be the voice or string,
Or both of them, that do agree
Thus to en-trance and ravish me:
This, this I know, I Am often struck mute;
And dye away upon thy Lute.
Upon Paske a Draper.
PAske, though his debt be due upon the day
Demands no money by a craving way;
For why says he, all debts and their arreares,
Have reference to the shoulders, not the ears.
Chop-Cherry.
THou gav'st me leave to kiss;
Thou gav'st me leave to woo;
Thou made me think by this,
And that, thou lov'dst me too.
2.
But I shall never forget,
How for to make thee merry;
Thou made me chop, but yet,
Another snapt the Cherry.
To the most learned, wise, and Arch-Antiquary, M. John Seldom.
I Who have favored many, come to be
Graced (now at last) or glorified by thee.
Lo, I, the Lyrick Prophet, who have set
On many a head the Delphick Coroner,
Come unto thee for Laurel, having spent,
My wreaths on those, who little gave or lent.
Give me the Daphne, that the world may know it,
Whom they neglected, thou have crowned a Poet.
A City here of Heroes I have made,
Upon the rock, whose firm foundation laid,
Shall never shrink, where making thine abode,
Live thou a Seldom, that is a Demi-god.
Upon himself.
THou shall not All die; for while Love's fire shines
Upon his Altar, men shall read thy lines;
And learned Musicians shall to honor Herricks
Fame, and his Name, both set, and sing his Lyricks,
Upon wrinkles.
WRinkles no more are, or no less,
Then beauty turned to sowernesse.
Upon Prigg.
PRigg, when he comes to houses, often does use
(Rather then fail) to steal from thence old shoes:
Sound or unsound, be they rent or whole,
Prigg bears away the body and the sole.
Upon Moon.
MOon is an Usurer, whose gain,
Seldom or never, knows a wain,
Only Moons conscience, we confess,
That ebs from pity less and less.
Pray and prosper.
FIrst offer Incense, then thy field and meads
Shall smile and smell the better by thy beads.
The spangling Dew dreg'd over the grass shall be
Turned all to Mell, and Manna there for thee.
Butter of Amber, Cream, and Wine, and Oil
Shall run, as rivers all throughout thy soil.
Wod'st thou to sincere-silver turn thy mold?
Pray once, twice pray; and turn thy ground to gold.
His Lacrimee or Mirth, turned to mourning.
1.
CAll me no more,
As heretofore,
The music of a Feast;
Since now (alas)
The mirth, that was
In me, is dead or ceast.
2.
Before I went
To banishment
Into the loathed West;
I co'd rehearse
A Lyrick verse,
And speak it with the best.
3.
But Time (Ai me)
Has laid, I see
My Organ fast asleep;
And turned my voice
Into the noise
Of those that sit and weep.
Upon Shift.
SHift now has cast his clothes: got all things new;
Save but his hat, and that he cannot mew.
Upon Cuts.
IF wounds in clothes, Cuts calls his rags, it is clear,
His linings are the matter running there.
Gain and Gettings.
WHen others gain much by the present cast,
The cobblers getting time, is at the Last.
To the most fair and lovely Mistress, Anne Soame, now Lady Abdie.
SO smell those odours that do rise
From out the wealthy spiceries:
So smells the flower of blooming Clove;
Or Roses smothered in the stove:
So smells the Air of spiced wine;
Or Essences of Jessimine:
So smells the Breath about the hives,
When well the work of honey thrives;
And all the busy Factours come
Laden with wax and honey home:
So smell those neat and woven Bowers,
All over-archt with Oringe flowers,
And Almond blossoms, that do mix
To make rich these Aromatikes:
So smell those bracelets, and those bands
Of Amber chaf't between the hands,
When thus enkindled they transpire
A noble perfume from the fire.
The wine of cherries, and to these,
The cooling breath of Respasses;
The smell of mornings milk, and cream;
Butter of Cowslips mixed with them;
Of roasted warden, or baked pear,
These are not to be reckoned here;
When as the meanest part of her,
Smells like the maiden-Pomander.
Thus sweet she smells, or what can be
More liked by her, or loved by me.
Upon his kinswoman Mistress Elizabeth Herrick.
SWeet virgin, that I do not set
The pillars up of weeping Jet,
Or mournful Marble; let thy shade
Not wrathful seem, or fright the Maid,
Who hither at her wonted hours
Shall come to strew thy earth with flowers.
No, know (Blessed Maid) when there is not one
Remainder left of Brass or stone,
Thy living Epitaph shall be,
Though lost in them, yet found in me.
Dear, in thy bed of Roses, then,
Till this world shall dissolve as men,
Sleep, while we hide thee from the light,
Drawing thy curtains round: Good night.
A Panegerick to Sir Lewis Pemberton.
TIll I shall come again, let this suffice,
I send my salt, my sacrifice
To Thee, thy Lady, younglings, and as far
As to thy Gonius and thy Larre;
To the worn Threshold, Porch, Hall, Parlour, Kitchen,
The fat-fed smoking Temple, which in
The wholesome savor of thy mighty Chines
Invites to supper him who dines,
Where laden spits, warp't with large Ribbs of Beef,
Not represent, but give relief
To the lanke-Stranger, and the sour Swain;
Where both may feed, and come again:
For no black-bearded Vigil from thy door
Beats with a button'd-staffe the poor:
But from thy warm-love-hatching gates each may
Take friendly morsels, and there stay
To Sun his thin-clad members, if he likes,
For thou no Porter keep'st who strikes.
No commer to thy Roof his Guest-rite wants;
Or staying there, is scourged with taunts
Of some rough Groom, who (yirkt with Corns) says, Sir
You Have dipped too long in the Vinegar;
And with our Broth and bread, and bits; Sir, friend,
You Have farced well, pray make an end;
Two days you have larded here; a third, ye know,
Makes guests and fish smell strong; pray go
You to some other chimney, and there take
Essay of other giblets; make
Merry at another hearth; you are here
Welcome as thunder to our beer:
Manners knows distance, and a man unrude
Would soon recoile, and not intrude
His Stomach to a second Meal. No, no,
Thy house, well fed and taught, can show
No such crab'd vizard: Thou have learnt thy Train,
With heart and hand to entertain:
And by the Armes-full (with a Breast unhid)
As the old Race of mankind did,
When eithers heart, and eithers hand did strive
To be the nearer Relative:
Thou do redeem those times; and what was lost
Of ancient honesty, may boast
It keeps a growth in thee; and so will run
A course i(...)y Fames-pledge, thy Son.
Thus, like a Roma(...)oune, thou thy gate
Earl(...)tts open to feast, and late:
Keeping no currish Waiter to affright,
With blasting eye, the appetite,
Which fain would waste upon thy Cates, but that
The Trencher-creature marketh what
Best and more (...)iece he cuts, and by
So(...)e pinch tells danger's nie
A hand too desperate, or a knife that bites
Skin deep into the Porke, or lights
Upon some part of Kid, as if mistook,
When checked by the Butlers look.
No, no, thy bread, thy wine, thy jocund Beer
Is not reserved for Trebius here,
But all, who at thy table seated are,
Find equal freedom, equal fare;
And Thou, like to that Hospitable God,
Jove, joy'st when guests make their abode
To eat thy Bullocks thighs, thy Veales, thy fat
Weathers, and never grudged at.
The Phesant, Partridge, Gotwit, Reeve, Ruff, Rail,
The Cock, the Curlew, and the quail;
These, and thy choicest viands do extend
Their taste unto the lower end
Of thy glad table: not a dish more known
To thee, then unto any one:
But as thy meat, so thy immortal wine
Makes the smirk face of each to shine,
And spring fresh Rose-buds, while the salt, the wit
Flows from the Wine, and graces it:
While Reverence, waiting at the bashful board,
Honors my Lady and my Lord.
No scurrile jest; no open Scene is laid
Here, for to make the face afraid;
But temperate mirth dealt forth, and so discreetly that it makes the meat
more sweet;
And adds perfumes unto the Wine, which thou
Do rather pour forth, then allow
By cruse and measure; thus devoting Wine,
As the Canary Isles were thine:
But with that wisdom, and that method, as
No One that is there his guilty glass
Drinks of distemper, or has cause to cry
Repentance to his liberty.
No, thou know order, Ethics, and has read
All Oeconomicks, know to lead
A House-dance neatly, and can truly show,
How far a Figure ought to go,
Forward, or backward, side-ward, and what pace
Can give, and what retract a grace;
What Gesture, Courtship; Comeliness agrees,
With those thy primitive decrees,
To give subsistence to thy house, and proof,
What Genii support thy roof,
Goodness and Greatness; not the oaken Piles;
For these, and marbles have their whiles
To last, but not their ever: Virtues Hand
It is, which builds, against Fate to stand.
Such is thy house, whose firm foundations trust
Is more in thee, then in her dust,
Or depth, these last may yield, and yearly shrink,
When what is strongly built, no chinke
Or yawning rupture can the same devour,
But fixed it stands, by her own power,
And well-laid bottom, on the iron and rock,
Which tryes, and counter-stands the shock,
And Ram of time and by vexation grows
The stronger: Virtue dies when foes
Are wanting to her exercise, but great
And large she spreads by dust, and sweat
Safe stand thy Walls, and Thee, and so both will,
Since neithers height was raised by the will
Of others; since no Stud, no Stone, no Piece,
Was reared up by the Poore-mans fleece:
No Widows Tenement was rackt to guild
Or fret thy Seeling, or to build
A Sweating-Closset, to anoint the silkesoft-skin, or bath in Asses milk:
No Orphans pittance, left him, served to set
The Pillars up of lasting jet,
For which their cries might beat against thine ears,
Or in the dampe Jet read their Tears.
No Planke from Hallowed Altar, does appeal
To yond' Star Chamber, or does seal
A curse to Thee, or Thine; but all things even
Make for thy peace, and pace to heaven.
Go on directly so, as just men may
A thousand times, more swear, then say,
This is that Princely Pemberton, who can
Teach man to keep a God in man:
And when wise Poets shall search out to see
Good men, They find them all in Thee.
To his Valentine, on S. Valentines day.
Often have I heard both Youths and Virgins say,
Birds choose their Mates, and couple too, this day:
But by their flight I never can divine,
When I shall couple with my Valentine.
Upon Doll. Epig.
DOll she so soon began the wanton trade;
She never remembers that she was a maid.
SKrew lives by shifts; yet swears by no small oaths;
For all his shifts, he cannot shift his clothes.
Upon Linnit. Epig.
LInnit plays rarely on the Lute, we know;
And sweetly sings, but yet his breath says no.
Upon M. Ben. Johnson. Epig.
AFter the rare Arch-Poet JOHNSON died,
The Sock grew loathsome, and the Buskins pride,
Together with the Stages glory stood
Each like a poor and pitied widowhood.
The Cirque profaned was; and all postures rackt:
For men did strut, and stride, and stare, not act.
Then temper flew from words; and men did squeake,
Look red, and blow, and bluster, but not speak:
No Holy-Rage, or frantick-fires did stir,
Or flash about the spacious Theater.
No clap of hands, or shout, or praises-proofe
Did crack the Playhouse sides, or cleave her roof.
Artlesse the Scene was; and that monstrous sin
Of deep and arrant ignorance came in;
Such ignorance as theirs was, who once hist
At thy unequaled Play, the Alchymist:
Oh fie upon 'em! Lastly too, all wit
In utter darkness did, and still will sit
Sleeping the lucklesse Age out, till that she
Her Resurrection has again with Thee.
Another.
THou had the wreath before, now take the Tree;
That henceforth none be Laurel crowned but Thee.
To his Nephew, to be prosperous in his art of Painting.
ON, as thou have begun, brave youth, and get
The Palm from Urbin, Titian, Tintarret,
Brugel and Coxu, and the works out-doe,
Of Holben, and That mighty Ruben too.
So draw, and paint, as none may do the like,
No, not the glory of the World, Vandike.
Upon Glass. Epig.
Glass, out of deep, and out of desperate want,
Turned, from a Papist here, a Predicant.
A Vicarige at last Tom Glass got here,
Just upon five and thirty pounds a year.
Add to that thirty five, but five pounds more,
He Will turn a Papist, rancker then before.
A Vow to Mars.
STore of courage to me grant,
Now I Am turned a combatant:
Help me so, that I my shield,
(Fighting) lose not in the field.
That Is the grearest shame of all,
That in warfare can befall.
Do but this; and there shall be
Offered up a Wolf to thee.
To his Maid Prew.
THese Summer-Birds did with thy master stay
The times of warmth; but then they flew away;
Leaving their Poet (being now grown old)
Exposed to all the coming Winters cold.
But thou kind Prew did with my fates abide,
As well the Winters, as the Summers Tide:
For which thy love, live with thy master here,
Not one, but all the seasons of the year.
A Canticle to Apollo.
PLay Poehbus on thy Lute;
And we will sit all mute:
By listening to thy Lire,
That sets all ears on fire.
2.
Hark, hark, the God does play!
And as he leads the way
Through heaven, the very Speres,
As men, turn all to ears.
A just man.
A Just man's like a Rock that turns the wroth
Of all the raging Waves, into a froth.
Upon a hoarse Singer.
SIng me to death; for till thy voice be clear,
Twill never please the palate of mine care.
How Pansies or Hart-case came first.
FRollick Virgins once these were,
Overloving, (living here:)
Being here their ends denied
Ran for Sweet-hearts mad, and di'd.
Love in pity of their tears,
And their loss in blooming years;
For their restless here-spent-houres.
Gave them Hearts-ease turned to Flowers.
To his peculiar friend Sir Edward Fish, Knight Baronet.
SInce for thy full deserts (with all the rest
Of these chaste spirits, that are here possessed
Of Life eternal) Time has made thee one,
For growth in this my rich Plantation:
Live here: But know 'twas virtue, and not chance,
That gave thee this so high inheritance.
Keep it forever; grounded with the good,
Who hold fast here an endless lively food.
Larr's portion, and the Poets part.
AT my homely Country-seat,
I have there a little wheat;
Which I work to Meal, and make
Therewithal a Holy-cake:
Part of which I give to Larr,
Part is my peculiar.
Upon man.
MAn is composed here of a twofold part;
The first of Nature and the next of Art:
Art presupposes Nature; Nature she
Preparos the way for man's docility.
Liberty.
THose ills that mortal men endure,
So long are capable of cure,
As they of freedom may be sure:
But that denied; a grief, though small,
Shakes the whole Roof, or ruins all.
Lots to be liked.
LEarn this of me, where ever thy Lot does fall;
Short lot, or not, to be content with all
Griefs.
Jove may afford us thousands of reliefs;
Since man exposed is to a world of griefs.
Upon Eeles. Epig.
EEles winds and turns, and cheats and steals; yet Eeles
Driving these sharking trades, is out at heels,
The Dream.
BY Dream I saw, one of the three
Sisters of Fate appear to me.
Close to my Beds side she did stand
Showing me there a fire brand;
She told me too, as that did spend,
So drew my life unto an end.
Three quarters were consumed of it;
Only remaind a little bit,
Which will be burnt up by and by;
Then Juha weep, for I must die:
Upon Raspe Epig.
RAspe plays at Nine-holes; and it is known he gets
Many a Teaster by his game, and bets:
But of his gettings there is but little sign;
When one hole wastes more then he gets by Nine.
Upon Center a Spectacle-maker with a flat nose.
CEnter is known weak sighted, and he sells
To others store of helpful spectacles.
Why were she none? Because we may suppose,
Where Leaven wants, there Levill lies the nose.
Clothes do but cheat and cosen us.
AWay with silks, away with Lawn,
I Will have no Sceans, or Curtains drawn:
Give me my Mistress, as she is,
Dressed in her nak't simplicities:
For as my Heart, ene so mine Eye
Is wone with flesh, not Drapery.
To Dianeme.
Show me thy feet; show me thy legs, thy thighs;
Show me Those Fleshie Principalities;
Show me that Hill (where smiling Love does sit)
Having a living Fountain under it.
Show me thy waste; Then let me there withal,
By the Assention of thy Lawn, see All.
Upon Electra.
WHen out of bed my Love does spring,
It Is but as day a kindling:
But when She Is up and fully dressed,
It Is then broad Day throughout the East.
To his Book.
HAve I not blessed Thee? Then go forth; nor fear
Or spice, or fish, or fire, or close-stools here.
But with thy fair Fates leading thee, Go on
With thy most white Predestination.
Nor think these Ages that do hoarcely sing
The farting Tanner, and familiar King;
The dancing Friar, tattered in the bush;
Those monstrous lies of little Robin Rush:
Tom Chipperfeild, and pretty- lisping Ned,
That doted on a Maid of Gingerbred:
The flying Pilcher, and the frisking Dace;
With all the rabble of Tim-Trundells race,
(Bred from the dung-hils, and adulterous rhimes,)
Shall live, and thou not superlast all times?
No, no, thy Stars have destined Thee to see
The whole world die, and turn to dust with thee.
He Is greedy of his life, who will not fall,
When as a public ruin bears down All.
Of Love.
I Do not love, nor can it be
Love will in vain spend shafts on me:
I did this Godhead once defy;
Since which I freeze, but cannot fry.
Yet out alas! the deaths the same,
Killed by a frost or by a flame.
Upon himself.
I Dislikt but even now;
Now I love I know not how.
Was I idle, and that while
Was I fier'd with a smile?
I Will too work, or pray; and then
I shall quite dislike again.
Another.
LOve he that will; it best likes me,
To have my neck from Loves yoke-free.
Upon Skinns. Epig.
SKinns he dined well to day; how do you think?
His Nails they were his meat, his Reume the drink.
Upon Pievish. Epig.
PIevish does boast, that he is the very first
Of English Poets, and it is thought the Worst.
Upon Jolly and Jilly, Epig.
Jolly and Jillie, bite and scratch all day,
But yet get children (as the neighbors say.)
The reason is, though all the day they fight,
They cling and close, some minutes of the night.
The mad Maids song.
1.
GOod morrow to the Day so fair;
Good morning Sir to you:
Good morrow to mine own torn hair
Bedabled with the dew.
2.
Good morning to this Prim-rose too;
Good morrow to each maid;
That will with flowers the Tomb bestrew,
Wherein my Love is laid.
3.
Ah! woe woe woe woe woe is me,
Alack and welladay!
For pity, Sir, find out that Be,
Which bore my Love away.
4.
I Will seek him in your Bonnet brave;
I Will seek him in your eyes;
Nay, now I think they have made his grave
I'th'bed of strawburies.
5.
I Will seek him there; I know, ere this,
The cold, cold Earth does shake him;
But I will go, or send a kiss
By you, Sir, to awake him.
6.
Pray hurt him not; though he be dead,
He knows well who do love him,
And who with green-turfes rear his head,
And who do rudely move him.
7.
He Is soft and tender (Pray take heed)
With bands of Cow-slips bind him;
And bring him home, but it is decreed,
That I shall never find him.
To Springs and Fountains.
I Heard ye co'd cool heat; and came
With hope you would allay the same:
Thrice I have washed, but feel no cold,
Nor find that true, which was foretold.
Me thinks like mine, your pulses beat;
And labor with unequal heat:
Cure, cure your selves, for I discrie,
Ye boil with Love, as well as I.
Upon Julia's unlacing her self.
TEll, if thou can, (and truly) whence does come
This Camphire, Storax, Spiknard, Galbanum:
These Musks, these Ambers, and those other smells
(Sweet as the Vestrie of the Oracles.)
I Will tell thee; while my Julia did unlace
Her silken bodies, but a breathing space:
The passive Air such odor then assumed,
As when to Jove Great Juno goes perfumed.
Whose pure-Immortall body does transmit
A scent, that fills both Heaven and Earth with it.
To Bacchus, a Canticle.
WHither do thou whorry me,
Bacchus, being full of thee?
This way, that way, that way, this,
Here, and there a fresh Love is,
That does like me, this does please;
Thus a thousand Mistresses,
I have now; yet I alone,
Having All, enjoy not One.
The Lawne.
Would I see Lawn, clear as the Heaven, and thin?
It should be only in my Julia's skin:
Which so betrays her blood, as we discover
The blush of cherries, when a Lawn's cast over.
The Frankincense.
WHen my offering next I make,
Be thy hand the hallowed Cake:
And thy bed the Altar, whence
Love may smell the Frankincense.
Upon Patrick a footman, Epig.
NOw Patrick with his footmanship has done,
His eyes and ears strive which should fastest run.
Upon Bridget. Epig.
OF four teeth only Bridget was possessed;
Two she spat out, a cough forced out the rest.
To Sycamores.
I AM siek of Love; O let me lie
Under your shades, to sleep or die!
Either is welcome; so I have
Or here my Bed, or here my Grave.
Why do you sigh, and sob, and keep
Time with the tears, that I do weep?
Say, have ye sense, or do you prove
What Crucifixions are in Love?
I know ye do; and that is the why,
You sigh for Love, as well as I.
A Pastoral sung to the King: Montano, Silvio, and Mirtillo, Shepherds.
Mon. BAd are the times. Sil. And wors thenthey are we.

Mon. Troth, bad are both; worse fruit, and ill the tree:
The feast of Shepherds fail. Sil. None crowns the cup
Of Wassaile now, or sets the quintell up:
And He, who used to lead the Country-round,
Youthful Mirtillo, Here he comes, Grief drowned.
Ambo Lets cheer him up. Sil. Behold him weeping ripe.

Mirt. Ah! Amarillis, farewell mirth and pipe;
Since thou art gone, no more I mean to play,
To these smooth Lawns, my mirthfull Roundelay. (sweet
Dear Amarillis! Mon. Hark! Sil. mark: Mir. this earth grew
Where, Amarillis, Thou did set thy feet.

Ambo. Poor pitied youth! Mir. And here the breath of kine
And sheep, grew more sweet, by that breath of Thine.
This flock of wool, and this rich lock of hair,
This ball of Cow-slips, these she gave me here.

Sil. Words sweet as Love it self. Montano, Hark.

Mirt. This way she came, and this way too she went;
How each thing smells divinely redolent!
Like to a field of beans, when newly blown;
Or like a meadow being lately mown.

Mon. A sweet-sad passion. --

Mirt. In dewie-mornings when she came this way,
Sweet Bents wode bow, to give my Love the day:
And when at night, she folded had her sheep,
Daysies would shut, and closing, sigh and weep.
Besides (Aim!) since she went hence to dwell,
The voices Daughter nea'r spoke syllable.
But she is gone. Sil. Mirtillo, tell us whether,

Mirt. Where she and I shall never meet together.

Mont. Fore-fend it Pan, and Pales do thou please
Togive an end: Mir. To what? Scil. such griefs as these.

Mirt. Never, O never! Still I may endure
The wound I suffer, never find a cure.

Mont. Love for thy sake will bring her to these hills
And dales again: Mir. No I will languish still;
And all the while my part shall be to weep;
And with my sighs, call home my bleating sheep:
And in the Rind of every comely tree
I Will carve thy name, and in that name kiss thee: (old:

Mont. Set with the Sun, thy woes: Scil. The day grows
And time it is our full-fed flocks to fold.

Chor. (row,
The shades grow great; but greater grows our sor-
But lets go steep
Our eyes in sleep;
And meet to weep
To morrow.

The Poet loves a Mistress, but not to marry.
1.
I Do not love to wed,
Though I do like to woo;
And for a maidenhead
I Will beg, and buy it too.
2.
I Will praise, and I Will approve
Those maids that never vary;
And fervently I Will love;
But yet I would not marry.
3.
I Will hug, I Will kiss, I Will play,
And Cock-like Hens I Will tread:
And sport it any way;
But in the Bridal Bed:
4.
For why? that man is poor,
Who has but one of many;
But crowned he is with store,
That single may have any.
5.
Why then, say, what is he
(To freedom so unknown)
Who having two or three,
Will be content with one?
Upon Flimsey. Epig.
WHy walks Nick Flimsey like a Malcontent?
Is it because his money all is spent?
No, but because the Ding-thrift now is poor,
And knows not where in the world to borrow more.
Upon Shewbread. Epig.
LAst night thou did invite me home to eat;
And show me there much Plate, but little meat
Prithee, when next thou do invite, bar State,
And give me meat, or give me else thy Plate.
The Willow Garland.
A Willow Garland thou did scnd
Perfumed (last day) to me:
Which did but only this portend,
I was forsook by thee.
Since so it is; I Will tell thee what,
To morrow thou shall see
Me wear the Willow; after that,
To dye upon the Tree.
As Beasts unto the Altars go
With Garlands dressed, so I
Will, with my Willow-wreath also,
Come forth and sweetly dye.
A Hymn to Sir Clipseby Crew.
'TWas not Lov's Dart;
Or any blow
Of want, or foe,
Did wound my heart
With an eternal smart:
But only you,
My sometimes known
Companion,
(My dearest Crew,)
That me unkindly flew.
May your fault dye,
And have no name
In Books of fame;
Or let it lie
Forgotten now, as I.
We parted are,
And now no more,
As heretofore,
By jocund Larr,
Shall be familiar.
But though we Sever
My Crew shall see,
That I will be
Here faithless never;
But love my Clipseby ever.
Upon Roots. Epig.
ROots had no money; yet he went o'th score
For a wrought Purse; can any tell wherefore?
Say, What should Roots do with a Purse in print,
That h'ad nor Gold or Silver to put in it?
Upon Craw.
CRaw cracks in sirrop; and does stinking say,
Who can hold that (my friends) that will away?
Observation.
WHo to the North, or South, does set
His Bed, Male children shall beget.
Empires.
EMpires of Kings, are now, and ever were,
(As Salnst says) co-incident to fear.
Felicity, quick of flight.
EVery time seems short to be,
That Is measured by felicity:
But one half hour, that is made up here
With grief; seems longer then a year.
Putrefaction.
PUtrefaction is the end
Of all that Nature does entend.
Passion.
WEre there not a Matter known,
There would be no Passion.
Jack and Jill.
SInce Jack and Jill both wicked be;
It seems a wonder unto me,
That they no better do agree.
Upon Parson Beans.
OLd Parson Beans hunts six days of the week,
And on the seventh, he has his Notes to seek.
Six days he hollows so much breath away,
That on the seventh, he can nor preach, or pray.
The crowd and company.
IN holy meetings, there a man may be
One of the crowd, not of the company.
Short and long both likes.
THis Lady's short, that Mistress she is tall;
But long or short, I Am well content with all.
Policy in Princes.
THat Princes may possess a surer seat,
It Is fit they make no One with them too great.
Upon Rook, Epig.
ROok he sells feathers, yet he still does cry
Fie on this pride, this Female vanity.
Thus, though the Rooke does rail against the sin,
He loves the gain that vanity brings in.
Upon the Nipples of Julia's Breast.
HAve ye beheld (with much delight)
A red-Rose peeping through a white?
Or else a Cherrie (double graced)
Within a Lilly? Center placed?
Or ever marked the pretty beam,
A Strawberry shows half drowned in Cream?
Or seen rich Rubies blushing through
A pure smooth Pearl, and Orient too?
So like to this, nay all the rest,
Is each neat Niplet of her breast.
To Daisies, not to shut so soon.
1.
SHut not so soon; the dull-ey'd night
Has not as yet begun
To make a seizure on the light,
Or to seal up the Sun.
2.
No Marigolds yet closed are;
No shadows great appear;
Nor does the early Shepherds Star
Shine like a spangle here.
3.
Stay but till my Julia close
Her life-begetting eye;
And let the whole world then dispose
It self to live or dye.
To the little Spinners.
YE pretty Huswives, would ye know
The work that I would putye to?
This, this it should be, for to spin,
A Lawn for me, so fine and thin,
As it might serve me for my skin.
For cruel Love has me so whipped,
That of my skin, I all am stripped;
And shall despair, that any art
Can ease the rawnesse, or the smart;
Unless you skin again each part.
Which mercy if you will but do,
I call all Maids to witness too
What here I promise, that no Broom
Shall now, or ever after come
To wrong a Spinner or her Loome.
Oberons Palace.
AFter the Feast (my Shapcot) see,
The Fairie Court I give to thee:
Where we will present our Oberon led
Half tipsie to the Fairie Bed,
Where Mab he finds; who there does lie
Not without mickle majesty.
Which, done; and thence removed the light,
We Will wish both Them and Thee, good night.
Full as a Be with Thyme, and Red,
As Cherry harvest, now high fed
For Lust and action; on he will go,
To lie with Mab, though all say no.
Lust has no ears; He Is sharp as thorn;
And fretfull, carries Hay in's horn,
And lightning in his eyes; and flings
Among the Elves, (if moved) the stings
Of peltish wasps; we will know his Guard
Kings though they are hated, will be feared.
Wine lead him on. Thus to a Grove
(Sometimes devoted unto Love)
Tinseld with Twilight, He, and They
Lead by the shine of Snails; a way
Beat with their numerous feet, which by
Many a neat perplexity,
Many a turn, and man' a cross-
Track they redeem a bank of moss
Spungie and swelling, and far more
Soft then the finest Lemster Ore.
Mildly disparkling, like those fires,
Which break from the Injeweld tyres
Of curious Brides; or like those mites
Of Candi'd dew in Moony nights.
Upon this Unequal, all the flowers,
(Nature begets by th'Sun, and showers,)
Are to a wild digestion brought,
As if Loves Sampler here was wrought:
Or Citherea's Ceston, which
All with temptation does bewitch.
Sweet Aires move here; and more divine
Made by the breath of great ey'd-kine,
Who as they low empearl with milk
The four-leav'd grass, or mosse-like silk.
The breath of Munkies met to mix
With Musk-flies, are the Aromaticks,
Which cense this Arch; and here and there,
And farther off, and every where,
Throughout that Brave Mosaic yard
Those Picks or Diamonds in the Card:
With peeps of Hearts, of Club and Spade
Are here most neatly inter-laid.
Many a Counter, many a Die,
Half rotten, and without an eye,
Lies here abouts; and for to pave
The excellency of this Cave,
Squirrils and childrens teeth late shed,
Are neatly here enchequered.
With brownest Toadstones, and the Gum
That shines upon the blewer Plum.
The nails fallen off by Whit-flawes: Art's
Wise hand enchasing here those warts.
Which we to others (from our selves)
Sell, and brought hither by the Elves.
The tempting Mole, stolen from the neck
Of the shie Virgin, seems to deck
The holy Entrance; where within
The room is hung with the blew skin
Of shifted Snake: enfreez'd throughout
With eyes of Peacocks Trains, and Troutflies curious wings; and these among
Those silver-pence, that cut the tongue
Of the red infant, neatly hung.
The glow-wormes eyes; the shining scales
Of silv'rie fish; wheat-strawes, the snailes
Soft Candlelight; the Kitling's eyne;
Corrupted wood; serve here for shine.
No glaring light of bold-fac't Day,
Or other over radiant Ray
Ransacks this room; but what weak beams
Can make reflected from these jems,
And multiply; Such is the light,
But ever doubtful Day, or night.
By this quaint Taper-light he winds
His Errors up; and now he finds
His Moon-tann'd Mab, as somewhat sick,
And (Love knows) tender as a chick.
Upon six plump Dandillions, high-
Reared, lies her Elvish-majestie:
Whose woollie-bubbles seemed to drown
Her Mab-ship in obedient Down.
For either sheet, was spread the Caul
That does the Infants face enthrall,
When it is born: (by some enstyl'd
The luckie Omen of the child)
And next to these two blankets ore-
Cast of the finest Gossamore.
And then a Rug of carded wool,
Which, Spunge-like drinking in the dull-
Light of the Moon, seemed to comply,
Cloud-like, the dainty Deity.
Thus soft she lies: and over-head
A Spinners circle is bespread,
With Cob-web-curtains: from the roof
So neatly sunck, as that no proof
Of any tackling can declare
What gives it hanging in the Air.
The Fringe about this, are those Threads
Broke at the Loss of Maiden-heads:
And all behung with these pure Pearls,
Dropped from the eyes of ravished Girls
Or writhing Brides; when, (panting) they
Give unto Love the straiter way.
For Music now; He has the cries
Of fained-lost-Virginities;
The which the Elves make to excite
A more unconquered appetite.
The Kings undrest; and now upon
The Gnats-watch-word the Elves are gone.
And now the bed, and Mab possessed
Of this great-little-kingly-Guest.
We'll nobly think, what is to be done,
He Will do no doubt; This flax is spun.
To his peculiar friend Master Thomas Shapcott, Lawyer.
I Have paid Thee, what I promised; that is not All;
Besides I give Thee here a Verse that shall
(When hence thy Circum-mortall-part is gone)
Arch-like, hold up, Thy Name's Inscription.
Brave men cannot die; whose Candid Actions are
Writ in the Poets Endlesse-Kalendar:
Whose velome, and whose volumne is the Sky,
And the pure Stars the praising Poetry.
Farewell.
To Julia in the Temple.
BEsides us two, in the Temple here is not one
To make up now a Congregation.
Let Us to the Altar of perfumes then go,
And say short Prayers; and when we have done so,
Then we shall see, how in a little space,
Saints will come in to fill each Pew and Place.
To Oenone.
1.
WHat Conscience, say, is it in thee
When I a Heart had one,
To Take away that Heart from me,
And to retain thy own?
2.
For shame or pity now incline
To play a loving part;
Either to send me kindly thine,
Or give me back my heart.
3.
Covet not both; but if thou do
Resolve to part with neither;
Why! yet to show that thou art just,
Take me and mine together.
His weakness in woes.
I Cannot suffer; And in this, my part
Of Patience wants. Grief breaks the stoutest Heart.
Fame makes us forward.
TO Print our Poems, the propulsive cause
Is Fame, (the breath of popular applause.)
To Groves.
Ye silent shades, whose each tree here
Some Relic of a Saint does wear:
Who for some sweet-hearts sake, did prove
The fire, and martyrdom of love.
Here is the Legend of those Saints
That did for love; and their complaints:
Their wounded hearts; and names we find
Encarv'd upon the Leaves and Rind.
Give way, give way to me, who come
Scorch't with the selfsame martyrdom:
And have deserved as much (Love knows)
As to be canonized amongst those,
Whose deeds, and deaths here written are
Within your Greenie-Kalendar:
By all those Virgins Fillets hung
Upon your Boughs, and Requiems sung
For Saints and Souls departed hence,
(Here honored still with Frankincense)
By all those tears that have been shed,
As a Drink Offering, to the dead:
By all those True-love-knots, that be
With Motto's carved on every tree,
By sweet S. Phillis; pity me:
By dear S. Iphis; and the rest,
Of all those other Saints now blessed;
Me, me, forsaken, here admit
Among your Mirtles to be writ:
That my poor name may have the glory
To live remembered in your story.
An Epitaph upon a Virgin.
HEre a solemn Fast we keep,
While all beauty lies asleep
Hushed be all things; (no noise here)
But the toning of a tear:
Or a sigh of such as bring
Cowslips for her covering.
To the right gracious Prince, Lodwick, Duke of Richmond and Lenox.
OF all those three-brave-brothers, fallen i'th'Warre,
(Not without glory) Noble Sir, you are,
Despite of all concussions left the Stem
To shoot forth Generations like to them.
Which may be done, if (Sir) you can beget
Men in their substance, not in counterfeit.
Such Essences as those Three Brothers; known
Eternal by their own production.
Of whom, from Fam's white Trumpet, This I Will Tell,
Worthy their everlasting Chronicle,
Never since first Bellona used a Shield,
Such Three brave Brothers fell in Mars his Field.
These were those Three Horatii Rome did boast,
Rom's where these Three Horatii we have lost.
One Cordelion had that Age long since;
This, Three; which Three, you make up Four Brave Prince.
To Jealousy.
O Jealousy, that art
The Canker of the heart:
And make all hell
Where thou do dwell;
For pity be
No Fury, or no Firebrand to me.
2.
Far from me I Will remove
All thoughts of irksome Love:
And turn to snow,
Or Crystal grow;
To keep still free
(O! Soul-tormenting Jealousy,) from Thee.
To live Freely.
Let Us live in have; use pleasures while we may:
Co'd life return, 'twod never lose a day.
Upon Sponge. Epig.
Sponge makes his boasts that he is the only man
Can hold of Beer and Ale an Ocean;
Is this his Glory? then his Triumph's Poor;
I know the Tun of Hidleberge holds more.
His Alms.
HEre, here I live,
And somewhat give,
Of what I have,
To those, who crave.
Little or much,
My Almnes is such:
But if my deal
Of Oil and Meal
Shall fuller grow,
More I Will bestow:
Mean time be it
Even but a bit,
Or else a crum,
The scrip has some.
Upon himself.
COme, leave this loathed Country-life, and then
Grow up to be a Roman Citizen.
Those mites of Time, which yet remain unspent,
Waste thou in that most Civil Government.
Get their comportment, and the gliding tongue
Of those mild Men, thou art to live among:
Then being seated in that smoother Sphere,
Decree thy everlasting Topic there.
And to the Farm-house nere return at all,
Though Granges do not love thee, Cities shall.
To enjoy the Time.
WHile Fates permits us, let us be merry;
Pass all we must the fatal Ferry:
And this our life too whirles away,
With the Rotation of the Day.
Upon Love.
1.
LOve, I have broke
Thy yoke;
The neck is free:
But when I Am next
Love vexed,
Then shackell me.
2.
It Is better yet
To fret
The feet or hands;
Then to enthrall,
Or gall
The neck with bands.
To the right Honorable Mildmay, Earl of Westmorland..
YOu are a Lord, an Earl, nay more, a Man,
Who writes sweet Numbers well as any can:
If so, why then are not These Verses hurld,
Like Sybels Leaves, throughout the ample world?
What is a Jewel if it be not set
Forth by a Ring, or some rich Carkanet?
But being so; then the beholders cry,
See, see a Jemme (as rare as Baelus eye.)
Then public praise does run upon the Stone,
For a most rich, a rare, a precious One.
Expose your jewels then unto the view,
That we may praise Them, or themselves prize You.
Virtue concealed (with Horace you will confess)
Differs not much from drowzie slothfullnesse.
The Plunder.
I Am of all berefe;
Save but some few Beans left,
Whereof (at last) to make
For me, and mine a Cake:
Which eaten, they and I
Will say our grace, and die.
Littleness no cause of Leanness.
ONe feeds on Lard, and yet is lean;
And I but feasting with a Bean,
Grow fat and smooth; The reason is,
Jove prospers my meat, more then his.
Upon one who said she was always young.
YOu say you are young; but when your Teeth are told
To be but three, Black-ey'd, we will think you are old.
Upon Huncks. Epig.
HUncks has no money (he does swear, or say)
About him, when the Taverns shot's to pay.
If he has none in's pockets, trust me, Huncks
Has none at home, in Coffers, Desks, or Trunks.
The Jimmall Ring, or True-love-knot.
THou sent'st to me a True-love-knot; but I
Returned a Ring of Jimmals, to imply
Thy Love had one knot, mine a triple tie.
The parting Verse, or charge to his supposed Wife when he traveled.
GO hence, and with this parting kiss,
Which joins two souls, remember this;
Though thou be young, kind, soft, and fair,
And may draw thousands with a hair:
Yet let these glib temptations be
Furies to others, Friends to me.
Look upon all; and though on fire
Thou set'st their hearts, yet chaste desire
Steer Thee to me; and think (me gone)
In having all, that thou have none.
Nor so immured would I have
Thee live, as dead and in thy grave;
But walk abroad, yet wisely well
Stand for my coming, Sentinel.
And think (as thou do walk the street)
Me, or my shadow thou do meet.
I know a thousand greedy eyes
Will on thy Feature tirannize,
In my short absence; yet behold
Them like some Picture, or some Mould
Fashioned like Thee; which though' tave ears
And eyes, it neither sees or hears.
Gifts will be sent, and Letters, which
Are the expressions of that itch,
And salt, which frets thy Suitors; fly
Both, lest thou lose thy liberty:
For that once lost, thou't fall to one,
Then prostrate to a million.
But if they woo thee, do thou say,
(As that chaste Queen of Ithaca
Did to her suitors) this web done
(Undone as often as done) I Am won;
I will not urge Thee, for I know,
Though thou art young, thou can say no,
And no again, and so deny,
Those thy Lust-burning Incubi.
Let them enstile Thee Fairest fair,
The Pearl of Princes, yet despair
That so thou art, because thou must
Believe, Love speaks it not, but Lust;
And this their Flatt'rie does commend
Thee chiefly for their pleasures end.
I am not jealous of thy Faith,
Or will be; for the Axiom says,
He that does suspect, does haste
A gentle mind to be unchaste.
No, live thee to thy self, and keep
Thy thoughts as cold, as is thy sleep:
And let thy dreams be only fed
With this, that I am in thy bed.
And thou then turning in that Sphere,
Waking shall find me sleeping there.
But yet if boundless Lust must skaile
Thy Fortress, and will needs prevail;
And wildly force a paslage in,
Banish consent, and it is no sin
Of Thine; so Lucrece fell, and the
Chaste Syracusian Cyane.
So Medullina fell, yet none
Of these had imputation
For the least trespass; 'cause the mind
Here was not with the act combined.
The body sins not, it is the Will
That makes the Action, good, or ill.
And if thy fall should this way come,
Triumph in such a Martyrdom.
I will not overlong enlarge
To thee, this my religious charge.
Take this compression, so by this
Means I shall know what other kiss
Is mixed with mine; and truly know,
Returning, if it be mine or no:
Keep it till then; and now my Spouse,
For my wished safety pay thy vows,
And prayers to Venus; if it please
The Great-blew-ruler of the Seas;
Not many full-fac't-moons shall waine,
Lean-horn'd, before I come again
As one triumphant; when I find
In thee, all faith of Womankind.
Nor would I have thee think, that Thou
Had power thy self to keep this vow;
But having escaped temptations shelfe,
Know virtue taught thee, not thy self.
To his Kinsman, Sir Tho. Soame.
SEeing Thee Soame, I see a Goodly man,
And in that Good, a great Patrician.
Next to which Two; among the City-Powers,
And Thrones, thy self one of Those Senators:
Not wearing Purple only for the show;
(As many Conscripts of the City do)
But for True Service, worthy of that Gown,
The Golden chain too, and the Civick Crown.
To Blossoms.
Fair pledges of a fruitful Tree,
Why do ye fall so fast?
Your date is not so past;
But you may stay yet here a while,
To blush and gently smile;
And go at last.
2.
What, were ye borne to be
An hour or half's delight;
And so to bid goodnight?
'Twas pity Nature brought ye forth
Merely to show your worth,
And lose you quite.
3.
But you are lovely Leaves, where we
May read how soon things have
Their end, though never so brave:
And after they have shown their pride,
Like you a while: They glide
Into the Grave.
Man's dying-place uncertain.
MAn knows where first he ships himself; but he
Never can tell, where shall his Landing be.
Nothing Free-cost.
NOthing comes Free-cost here; Jove will not let
His gifts go from him; if not bought with sweat.
Few fortunate.
MAny we are, and yet but few possess
Those Fields of everlasting happiness.
To Perenna.
HOw long, Perenna, will thou see
Me languish for the love of Thee?
Consent and play a friendly part
To save; when thou may kill a heart.
To the Ladies.
TRust me Ladies, I will do
Nothing to distemper you;
If I any fret or vex,
Men they shall be, not your sex.
The old Wives Prayer.
HOly-Rood come forth and shield
Us in the City, and the Field:
Safely guard us, now and aye,
From the blast that burns by day;
And those sounds that us affright
In the dead of dampish night.
Drive all hurtful Feinds us fro,
By the Time the Cocks first crow.
Upon a cheap Laundresse. Epig.
FEacie (some say) does wash her clothes in the Lie
That sharply trickles from her either eye.
The Laundresses, They envy her good-luck,
Who can with so small charges drive the buck.
What needs she fire and ashes to consume,
Who can scour Linnens with her own salt reeume?
Upon his departure hence.
THus I
Pass by,
And die:
As One,
Unknown,
And gone:
I Am made
A shade,
And laid
In The grave,
There have
My Cave.
Where tell
I dwell,
Farewell.
The Wassaile.
1.
GIve way, give way ye Gates, and win
An easy blessing to your Bin,
And Basket, by our entering in.
2.
May both with manchet stand repleat;
Your Larders too so hung with meat,
That though a thousand, thousand eat;
3.
Yet, ere twelve Moons shall whirl about
Their silv'rie Spheres, there is none may doubt,
But more's sent in, then was served out.
4.
Next, may your Dairies Prosper so,
As that your pans no Ebb may know;
But if they do, the more to flow.
5.
Like to a solemn sober Stream
Bankt all with Lillies, and the Cream
Of sweetest Cow-slips filling Them.
6.
Then, may your Plants be pressed with Fruit,
Nor Be, or Hive you have be mute;
But sweetly sounding like a Lute.
7.
Next may your Duck and teeming Hen
Both to the Cocks-tread say Amen;
And for their two eggs render tea.
8.
Last, may your Harrows, Shares and Ploughes,
Your Stacks, your Stocks, your sweetest Mowes,
All prosper by your Virgin-vowes.
9.
Alas! we bless, but see none here,
That brings us either Ale or Beer;
In a drie-house all things are near.
10.
Let Us leave a longer time to wait,
Where Rust and Cobwebs bind the gate;
And all live here with needy Fate.
11.
Where Chimneys do for ever weep,
For want of warmth, and Stomachs keep
With noise, the servants eyes from sleep.
12.
It is in vain to sing, or stay
Our free-feet here; but we will away:
Yet to the Lares this we will say,
13.
The time will come, when you will be sad,
And reckon this for fortune bad,
T'ave lost the good ye might have had.
Upon a Lady fair, but fruitless.
TWice has Pudica been a Bride, and led
By holy Himen to the Nuptial Bed.
Two Youths sha's known, thrice two, and twice 3. years
Yet not a Lilly from the Bed appears;
Nor will; for why, Pudica, this may know,
Trees never bear, unless they first do blow.
How Springs came first.
THese Springs were Maidens once that loved
But lost to that they most approved:
My Story tells, by Love they were
Turned to these Springs, which we see here:
The pretty whimpering that they make,
When of the Banks their leave they take;
Tells ye but this, they are the same,
In nothing changed but in their name.
To Rosemary and Baies.
MY wooing's ended: now my wedding's near;
When Gloves are giving, Gilded be you there.
Upon Skurffe.
SKurffe by his Nine-bones swears, and well he may,
All know a Fellon eat the Tenth away.
Upon a Scarre in a Virgins Face.
It Is Heresy in others: In your face
That Scarr's no Schism, but the sign of grace.
Upon his eyesight failing him.
I Begin to waine in sight;
Shortly I shall bid goodnight:
Then no gazing more about,
When the Tapers once are out.
To his worthy Friend, M. Tho. Falconbirge.
STand with thy Graces forth, Brave man, and rise
High with thine own Auspitious Destinies:
Nor leave the search, and proof, till Thou can find
These, or those ends, to which Thou wast designed.
Thy lucky Genius, and thy guiding Star,
Have made Thee prosperous in thy ways, thus far:
Nor will they leave Thee, till they both have shown
Thee to the World a Prime and Public One.
Then, when Thou see'it thine Age all turned to gold,
Remember what thy Herrick Thee foretold,
When at the holy Threshold of thine house,
He Boded good-luck to thy Self and Spouse.
Lastly, be mindful (when thou art grown great)
That Towrs high reared dread most the lightnings threat:
When as the humble Cottages not fear
The cleaving Bolt of Jove the Thunderer.
Upon Julia's hair filled with Dew.
DEw sat on Julia's hair,
And spangled too,
Like Leaves that laden are
With trembling Dew:
Or glittered to my sight,
As when the Beams
Have their reflected light,
Daunc't by the Streams.
Another on her.
HOw can I choose but love, and follow her,
Whose shadow smells like milder Pomander!
How can I choose but kiss her, whence does come
The Storax, Spiknard, Myrrh, and Ladanum.
Loss from the least.
GReat men by small means often are overthrown:
He Is Lord of thy life, who contemnes his own.
Reward and punishments.
ALL things are open to these two events,
Or to Rewards, or else to Punishments.
Shame, no Statist.
SHame is a bad attendant to a State:
He rents his Crown, That fears the Peoples hate.
To Sir Clisebie Crew.
SInce to the Country first I came,
I have lost my former flame:
And, methinks, I not inherit,
As I did, my ravished spirit.
If I write a Verse, or two,
It Is with very much ado;
In regard I want that Wine,
Which should conjure up a line.
Yet, though now of Muse bereft,
I have still the manners left
For to thank you (Noble Sir)
For those gifts you do confer
Upon him, who only can
Be in Prose a grateful man.
Upon himself.
I Co'd never love indeed;
Never see mine own heart bleed:
Never crucify my life;
Or for Widow, Maid, or Wife.
2.
I co'd never seek to please
One, or many Mistresses:
Never like their lips, to swear
Oil of Roses still smelt there.
3.
I co'd never break my sleep,
Fold mine Arms, sob, sigh, or weep:
Never beg, or humbly woo
With oaths, and lies, (as others do.)
4.
I co'd never walk alone;
Put a shirt of sackcloth on:
Never keep a fast, or pray
For good luck in love (that day.)
5.
But have hitherto lived free,
As the air that circles me:
And kept credit with my heart,
Neither broke in the whole, or part.
Fresh Cheese and Cream.
Would ye have fresh Cheese and Cream?
Iulia's Breast can give you them:
And if more; Each Nipple cries,
To your Cream, here is Straw berries.
An Eclogue, or Pastoral between Endimion Porter and Lycidas Herrick,, set and
sung.
Endym. AH! Lycidas, come tell me why
Thy whilome merry Oate
By thee does so neglected lie;
And never purls a Note?
2.
I prithee speak: Lyc. I will. End. Say on:

Lyc. It Is thou, and only thou,
That art the cause Endimion;

End. For Loves-sake, tell me how.

Lyc. 3.
In this regard, that thou do play
Upon an other Plain:
And for a Rural Roundelay,
Strik'st now a Courtly strain.
4.
Thou leave our Hills, our Dales, our Bowers,
Our finer fleeced sheep:
(Unkind to us) to spend thine hours,
Where Shepherds should not keep.
5.
I mean the Court: Let Latmos be
My loved Endymions Court;

End. But I the Courtly State would see:

Lyc. Then see it in report.
6.
What has the Court to do with Swains,
Where Phillis is not known?
Nor does it mind the Rustic strains
Of us, or Coridon.
7.
Break, if thou love us, this delay;

End. Dear Lycidas, e're long,
I vow by Pan, to come away
And Pipe unto thy Song.
8.
Then Jessimine, with Florabell;
And dainty Amarillis,
With handsome-handed Drosomell
Shall pranke thy Hook with Lillies.

Lyc. 9.
Then Tityrus, and Coridon,
And Thyrsis, they shall follow
With all the rest; while thou alone
Shall lead, like young Apollo.
10.
And till thou come, thy Lycidas,
In every Geniall Cup,
Shall write in Spice, Endimion 'twas
That kept his Piping up.
And my most luckie Swain, when I shall live to see
Endimions Moon to fill up full, remember me:
Mean time, let Lycidas have leave to Pipe to thee.

To a Bed of Tulips.
1.
BRight Tulips, we do know,
You had your coming hither;
And Fading-time does show,
That Ye must quickly wither.
2.
Your Sister-hoods may stay,
And smile here for your hour;
But dye ye must away:
Even as the meanest Flower.
3.
Come Virgins then, and see
Your frailties; and bemone ye;
For lost like these, 'twill be,
As Time had never known ye.
A Caution.
THat Love last long; let it thy first care be
To find a Wife, that is most fit for Thee.
Be She too wealthy, or too poor; be sure,
Love in extremes, can never long endure.
To the Water Nymphs, drinking at the Fountain.
1.
REach, with your whiter hands, to me,
Some Crystal of the Spring;
And I, about the Cup shall see
Fresh Lillies flourishing.
2.
Or else sweet Nimphs do you but this;
To'th' Glass your lips incline;
And I shall see by that one kiss,
The Water turned to Wine.
To his Honored Kinsman, Sir Richard Stone.
TO this white Temple of my Heroes, here
Beset with stately Figures (every where)
Of such rare Saint-ships, who did here consume
Their lives in sweets, and left in death perfume.
Come thou Brave man! And bring with Thee a Stone
Unto thine own Edification.
High are These Statues here, besides no less
Strong then the Heavens for everlastingnesse:
Where build aloft; and being fixed by These,
Set up Thine own eternal Images.
Upon a Fly.
A Golden Fly one showed to me,
Closed in a Box of Yvorie: (have
Where both seemed proud; the Fly to
His burial in an yvory grave:
The yvorie took State to hold
A Corpse as bright as burnisht gold.
One Fate had both; both equal Grace;
The Buried, and the Burying-place.
Not Virgils Gnat, to whom the Spring
All Flowers sent to'is burying.
Not Marshals Be, which in a Bead
Of Amber quick was buried.
Nor that fine Worm that does interre
Her self in the silken Sepulcher.
Nor my rare Sparrow
Phil, that lately was
With Lillies Tomb'd up in a Glass;
More honor had, then this same Fly;
Dead, and closed up in Yvorie.
Upon Jack and Jill. Epig.
WHen Jill complains to Jack for want of meat;
Jack kisses Jill, and bids her freely eat:
Jill says, of what? says Jack, on that sweet kiss,
Which full of Nectar and Ambrosia is,
The food of Poets; so I thought says Jill,
That makes them look so lanke, so Ghost-like still.
Let Poets feed on air, or what they will;
Let me feed sull, till that I fart, says Jill.
To Julia.
IUlia' when thy Herrick dies,
Close thou up thy Poets eyes:
And his last breath, let it be
Taken in by none but Thee.
To Mistress Dorothy Parsons.
IF thou ask me (Dear) wherefore
I do write of thee no more:
I must answer (Sweet) thy part
Less is here, then in my heart.
Upon Parrat.
PArrat protests it is he, and only he
Can teach a man the Art of memory:
Believe him not; for he forgot it quite,
Being drunk, who 'twas that Can'd his Ribs last night.
How he would drink his Wine.
FIll me my Wine in Crystal; thus, and thus
I see it in's puris naturalibus:
Unmixt. I love to have it smirke and shine,
It Is sin I know, it is sin to throtle Wine.
What Mad-man's he, that when it sparkles so,
Will cool his flames, or quench his fires with snow?
How Marigolds came yellow.
Jealous Girls these sometimes were,
While they lived, or lasted here:
Turned to Flowers, still they be
Yellow, marked for Jealousy.
The broken Crystal.
TO Fetch me Wine my Lucia went,
Bearing a Crystal continent:
But making haste, it came to pass,
She brake in two the purer Glass,
Then smiled, and sweetly chid her speed;
So with a blush, beshrew'd the deed.
Precepts.
GOod Precepts we must firmly hold,
By daily Learning we wax old.
To the right Honorable Edward Earl of Dorset.
IF I dare write to You, my Lord, who are,
Of your own self, a Public Theater.
And sitting, see the wiles, ways, walks of wit,
And give a righteous judgment upon it.
What need I care, though some dislike me should,
If Dorset say, what Herrick writes, is good?
We know you are learned i'th'Muses, and no less
In our State-sanctions, deep, or bottomless.
Whose smile can make a Poet; and your glance
Dash all bad Poems out of countenance.
So, that an Author needs no other Bays
For Coronation, then Your only Praise.
And no one mischief greater then your frown,
To null his Numbers, and to blast his Crown.
Few live the life immortal. He ensures
His Fame's long life, who strives to set up Yours.
Upon himself.
Thou Art hence removing, (like a Shepherds Tent)
And walk thou must the way that others went:
Fall thou must first, then rise to life with These,
Marked in thy Book for faithful Witnesses.
Hope well and Have well: or, Fair after Foul weather.
WHat though the Heaven be lowering now,
And look with a contracted brow?
We shall discover, by and by,
A Repurgation of the Sky:
And when those clouds away are driven,
Then will appear a cheerful Heaven.
Upon Love.
I Held Love's head while it did ache;
But so it chanced to be;
The cruel pain did his forsake,
And forthwith came to me.
2.
Ai me! How shall my grief be styled?
Or where else shall we find
One like to me, who must be killed
For being too-too-kind?
To his Kinswoman, Mrs. Penelope Wheeler.
NExt is your lot (Fair) to be numbered one,
Here, in my Book's Canonization:
Late you come in; but you a Saint shall be,
In Chief, in this Poetic Liturgy.
Another upon her.
FIrst, for your shape, the curious cannot show
Any one part that is dissonant in you:
And against your chaste behavior there is no Plea,
Since you are known to be Penelope.
Thus fair and clean you are, although there be
A mighty strife 'twixt Form and Chastity.
Kissing and bussing..
KIssing and bussing differ both in this;
We busse our Wantons, but our Wives we kiss.
Cross and Pile.
Fair and foul days trip Cross and Pile; The fair
Far less in number, then our foul days are.
To the Lady Crew, upon the death of her Child.
WHy, Madam, will ye longer weep,
When as your Baby's lulled asleep?
And (pretty Child) feels now no more
Those pains it lately felt before.
All now is silent; groans are fled:
Your Child lies still, yet is not dead:
But rather like a flower hid here
To spring again another year.
His Winding Sheet.
COme thou, who art the Wine, and wit
Of all I Have writ:
The Grace, the Glory, and the best
Piece of the rest.
Thou art of what I did intend
The All, and End.
And what was made, was made to meet
Thee, thee my sheet.
Come then, and be to my chaste side
Both Bed, and Bride.
We two (as Relics left) will have
One Rest, one Grave.
And, hugging close, we will not fear
Lust entering here:
Where all Desires are dead, or cold
As is the mould:
And all Affections are forgot,
Or Trouble not.
Here, here the Slaves and Prisoners be
From Shackles free:
And weeping Widows long oppressed
Do here find rest.
The wronged Client ends his Laws
Here, and his Cause.
Here those long suits of Chancery lie
Quiet, or die:
And all Star-chamber-Bils do cease,
Or hold their peace.
Here needs no Court for our Request,
Where all are best;
All wise; all equal; and all just
Alike i'th'dust.
Nor need we here to fear the frown
Of Court, or Crown.
Where Fortune bears no sway over things,
There all are Kings.
In this securer place we will keep,
As lulled asleep;
Or for a little time we will lie,
As Robes laid by;
To be another day re-worne,
Turned, but not torn:
Or like old Testaments ingrost,
Locked up, not lost:
And for a while lie here concealed,
To be revealed
Next, at that great Platonic year,
And then meet here.
To Mistress Mary Willand.
ONe more by Thee, Love, and Desert have sent,
T'enspangle this expansive Firmament.
O Flame of Beauty! come, appear, appear
A Virgin Taper, ever shining here.
Change gives content.
WHat now we like, anon we disapprove:
The new successor drives away old Love.
Upon Magot a frequenter of Ordinaries.
MAgot frequents those houses of good-cheere,
Talks most, eats most, of all the Feeders there.
He raves through lean, he rages through the fat;
(What gets the master of the Meal by that?)
He who with talking can devour so much,
How would he eat, were nor his hindrance such?
On himself.
BOrne I was to meet with Age,
And to walk Life's pilgrimage.
Much I know of Time is spent,
Tell I cannot, what is Resident.
Howsoever, cares, adue;
I Will have naught to say to you:
But I Will spend my coming hours,
Drinking wine, and crowned with flowers.
Fortune favors.
FOrtune did never favor one
Fully, without exception;
Though free she be, there is something yet
Still wanting to her Favorite.
To Phillis to love, and live with him.
LIve, live with me, and thou shall see
The pleasures I Will prepare for thee:
What sweets the Country can afford
Shall bless thy Bed, and bless thy Board.
The soft sweet Moss shall be thy bed,
With crawling Woodbine overspread:
By which the silver-shedding streams
Shall gently melt thee into dreams.
Thy clothing next, shall be a Gown
Made of the Fleeces purest Down.
The tongues of Kids shall be thy meat;
Their Milk thy drink; and thou shall eat
The Paste, of Filberts for thy bread
With Cream of Cowslips buttered:
Thy Feasting-Tables shall be Hills
With Daisies spread, and Daffadils;
Where thou shall sit, and Red-brest by,
For meat, shall give thee melody.
I Will give thee Chains and Carkanets
Of Primroses and Violets.
A Bag and Bottle thou shall have;
That richly wrought, and This as brave;
So that as either shall express
The Wearer's no mean Shepherdess.
At Sheering-times, and yearly Wakes,
When Themilis his pastime makes,
There thou shall be; and be the wit,
Nay more, the Feast, and grace of it.
On Holy Days, when Virgins meet
To dance the Heyes with nimble feet;
Thou shall come forth, and then appear
The Queen of Roses for that year.
And having danced ('bove all the best)
Carry the Garland from the rest.
In Wicker-baskets Maids shall bring
To thee, (my dearest Shepharling)
The blushing Apple, bashful Pear,
And shame-fac't Plum, (all simp'ring there)
Walk in the Groves, and thou shall find
The name of Phillis in the Rind
Of every straight, and smooth-skin tree;
Where kissing that, I Will twice kiss thee.
To thee a Sheep-hook I will send,
Be-pranckt with Ribbands, to this end,
This, this alluring Hook might be
Less for to catch a sheep, then me.
Thou shall have Possets, Wassails fine,
Not made of Ale, but spiced Wine;
To make thy Maids and self free mirth,
All sitting near the glittering Hearth.
Thou shall have Ribbands, Roses, Rings,
Gloves, Garters, Stockings, Shoes, and Strings
Of winning Colors, that shall move
Others to Lust, but me to Love.
These (nay) and more, thine own shall be,
If thou will love, and live with me.
To his Kinswoman, Mistress Susanna Herrick.
WHen I consider (Dearest) thou do stay
But here a while, to languish and decay;
Like to these Garden-glories, which here be
The Flowrie-sweet resemblances of Thee:
With grief of heart, methinks, I thus do cry,
Would thou have never been born; or might not die.
Upon Mistress Susanna Southwell her cheeks.
RAre are thy cheeks Susanna, which do show
Ripe Cherries smiling, while that others blow.
Upon her Eyes.
Clear are her eyes,
Like purest Skies.
Discovering from thence
A Babie there
That turns each Sphere,
Like an Intelligence.
Upon her feet.
HEr pretty feet
Like snailes did creep
A little out, and then,
As if they played at Bo-peep,
Did soon draw in again.
To his honored friend, Sir John Mince.
FOr civil, clean, and circumcised wit,
And for the comely carriage of it;
Thou art The Man, the only Man best known,
Marked for the True-wit of a Million:
From whom we will reckon. Wit came in, but since
The Calculation of thy Birth, Brave Mince.
Upon his gray hairs.
FLy me not, though I be gray,
Lady, this I know you will say;
Better look the Roses red,
When with white commingled.
Black your hairs are; mine are white;
This begets the more delight,
When things meet most opposite:
As in Pictures we descry,
Venus standing Vulcan by.
Accusation.
IF Accusation only can draw blood,
None shall be guiltless, be he never so good.
Pride allowable in Poets.
AS thou deserve, be proud; then gladly let
The Muse give thee the Delphick Coronet.
A Vow to Minerva.
Goddess, I begin an Art;
Come thou in, with thy best part,
For to make the Texture lie
Each way smooth and civilly:
And a broad-fac't Owl shall be
Offered up with Vows to Thee.
On Jone.
IOne would go tell her hairs; and well she might,
Having but seven in all; three black, four white.
Upon Letcher. Epig.
LEtcher was Carted first about the streets,
For false Position in his neighbors sheets:
Next, hanged for Theeving: Now the people say,
His Carting was the Prologue to this Play.
Upon Dundrige.
DVndrige his Issue has; but is not styled
For all his Issue, Father of one Child.
To Electra.
It Is Evening, my Sweet,
And dark; let us meet;
Long time w'ave here been a toying:
And never, as yet,
That season co'd get,
Wherein t'ave had an enjoying.
2.
For pity or shame,
Then let not Love's flame,
Be ever and ever a spending;
Since now to the Port
The path is but short;
And yet our way has no ending.
3.
Time flies away fast;
Our hours do waste:
The while we never remember,
How soon our life, here,
Grows old with the year,
That dies with the next December.
Discord not disadvantageous.
FOrtune no higher Project can devise,
Then to sow Discord amongst the Enemies.
Ill Government.
PReposterous is that Government, (and rude)
When Kings obey the wilder Multitude.
To Marygolds.
GIve way, and be ye ravished by the Sun,
(And hang the head when as the Act is done)
Spread as He spreads; wax less as He does wane;
And as He shuts, close up to Maids again.
To Dianeme.
GIve me one kiss,
And no more;
If so be, this
Makes you poor;
To enrich you,
I Will restore
For that one, two
Thousand score.
To Julia, the Flaminica Dialis, or Queen-Priest.
THou know, my Julia, that it is thy turn
This Mornings Incense to prepare, and burrie.
The Chaplet, and A twig of a Pomgranat, which the queen-priest did use to
wear on her head at sacrificing.
Inarculum here be,
With the white Vestures, all attending Thee.
This day, the Queen-Priest, thou art made to appease
Love for our very-many Trespasses.
One chief transgression is among the rest,
Because with Flowers her Temple was not dressed:
The next, because her Altars did not shine
With daily Fyers: The last, neglect of Wine:
For which, her wrath is gone forth to consume
Us all, unless preserved by thy Perfume.
Take then thy Censer; Put in Fire, and thus,
O Pious-Priestresse! make a Peace for us.
For our neglect, Love did our Death decree,
That we escape. Redemption comes by Thee.
Anacreontike.
BOrn I was to be old,
And for to die here:
After that, in the mould
Long for to lie here.
But before that day comes,
Still I be Bousing;
For I know, in the Tombs
There Is no Carousing.
Meat without mirth.
EAten I have; and though I had good cheer,
I did not sup, because no friends were there.
Where Mirth and Friends are absent when we Dine
Or Sup, there wants the Incense and the Wine.
Large Bounds do but bury us.
ALL things o'r-rul'd are here by Chance;
The greatest man's Inheritance.
Where ere the luckie Lot does fall,
Serves but for place of Burial.
Upon Ursley.
VRsley, she thinks those Velvet Patches grace
The Candid Temples of her comely face:
But he will say, who ever those Circlets sees,
They be but signs of Ursleys hollow teeth.
An Ode to Sir Clipsebie Crew.
1.
HEre we securely live, and eat
The Cream of meat;
And keep eternal fires,
By which we sit, and do Divine
As Wine
And Rage inspires.
2.
If full we charm; then call upon
Anacreon
To grace the frantic Thyrse:
And having drunk, we raise a shout
Throughout
To praise his Verse.
3.
Then cause we Horace to be read,
Which sung, or said,
A Goblet, to the brim,
Of Lyrick Wine, both swelled and crowned,
A Round
We quaffe to him.
4.
Thus, thus, we live, and spend the hours
In Wine and Flowers:
And make the frollick year,
The Month, the Week, the instant Day
To stay
The longer here.
5.
Come then, brave Knight, and see the Cell
Wherein I dwell;
And my Enchantments too;
Which Love and noble freedom is;
And this
Shall fetter you.
6.
Take Horse, and come; or be so kind,
To send your mind
(Though but in Numbers few)
And I shall think I have the heart,
Or part
Of Clipseby Crew.
To his worthy Kinsman, Mr. Stephen Soame.
NOr is my Number full, till I inscribe
Thee sprightly Soame, one of my righteous Tribe:
A Tribe of one Lip; Leven, and of One
Civil Behavior, and Religion.
A Stock of Saints; where every one does wear
A stole of white, (and Canonized here)
Among which Holies, be Thou ever known,
Brave Kinsman, marked out with the whiter stone:
Which seals Thy Glory; since I do prefer
Thee here in my eternal Calender.
To his Tomb-maker.
GO I must; when I am gone,
Write but this upon my Stone;
Chaste I lived, without a wife,
That Is the Story of my life.
Strewings need none, every flower
Is in this word, Batchelour.
Great Spirits supervive.
OUr mortal parts may wrapped in Seare-cloths lie:
Great Spirits never with their bodies dye.
None free from fault.
OUt of the world he must, who once comes in:
No man exempted is from Death, or sin.
Upon himself being buried.
LEt me sleep this night away,
Till the Dawning of the day:
Then at th'opening of mine eyes,
I, and all the world shall rise.
Pity to the prostrate.
It Is worse then barbarous cruelty to show
No part of pity on a conquered foe.
Way in a crowd.
ONce on a Lord-Mayors day, in Cheapside, when
Skulls co'd not well pass through that scum of men.
For quick dispatch, Sculls made no longer stay,
Then but to breath, and every one gave way:
For as he breathed, the People swore from thence
A Fart flew out, or a Sir-reverence.
His content in the Country.
HEre, here I live with what my Board,
Can with the smallest cost afford.
Though never so mean the Viands be,
They well content my Prew and me.
Or Pea, or Bean, or Wort, or Beet,
What ever comes, content makes sweet:
Here we rejoice, because no Rent
We pay for our poor Tenement:
Wherein we rest, and never fear
The Landlord, or the Usurer.
The Quarter-day does never affright
Our Peaceful slumbers in the night.
We eat our own, and batten more,
Because we feed on no man's score:
But pity those, whose flanks grow great,
Swelled with the Lard of others meat.
We bless our Fortunes, when we see
Our own beloved privacie:
And like our living, where we are known
To very few, or else to none.
The credit of the Conqueror.
HE who commends the vanquished, speaks the Power,
And glorifies the worthy Conqueror.
On himself.
SOme parts may perish; dye thou can not all:
The most of Thee shall escape the funeral.
Upon one-ey'd Broomsted. Epig.
BRoomsted a lamenesse got by cold and Beer;
And to the Bath went, to be cured there:
His feet were helped, and left his Crutch behind:
But home returned, as he went forth, half blind.
The Fairies.
IF ye will with Mab find grace,
Set each Platter in his place:
Rake the Fire up, and get
Water in, ere Sun be set.
Wash your Pailes, and cleanse your Dairies;
Sluts are loathsome to the Fairies:
Sweep your house: Who does not so,
Mab will pinch her by the toe.
To his honored friend, M. John Wear, Counselor.
DId I or love, or could I others draw
To the indulgence of the rugged Law:
The first foundation of that zeal should be
By Reading all her Paragraphs in Thee.
Who do so fitly with the Laws unite,
As if You Two, were one Hermophrodite:
Nor courts thou Her because she is well attended
With wealth, but for those ends she was intended:
Which were, (and still her offices are known)
Law is to give to every one his own.
To shore the Feeble up, against the strong;
To shield the Stranger, and the Poor from wrong:
This was the Founders grave and good intent,
To keep the outcast in his Tenement:
To free the Orphan from that Wolfe-like-man,
Who is his Butcher more then Guardian.
To dry the Widows tears; and stop her Swoones,
By pouring Balm and Oil into her wounds.
This was the old way; and it is yet thy course,
To keep those pious Principles in force,
Modest I will be; but one word I Will say
(Like to a sound that is vanishing away)
Sooner the inside of thy hand shall grow
Hisped, and hairie, ere thy Palm shall know
A Postern-bribe took, or a Forked-Fee
To fetter Justice, when She might be free.
Eggs I Will not shave: But yet brave man, if I
Was destined forth to golden Sovereignty:
A Prince I Would be, that I might Thee prefer
To be my Counsel both, and Chanceller.
The Watch.
MAn is a Watch, wound up at first, but never
Wound up again: Once down, He Is down for ever.
The Watch once down, all motions then do cease;
And Man's Pulse stopped, All Passions sleep in Peace.
Lines have their Linings, and Books their Buckram.
AS in our clothes, so likewise he who looks,
Shall find much farcing Buckram in our Books.
Art above Nature, to Julia.
WHen I behold a Forest spread
With silken trees upon thyhead;
And when I see that other Dress
Of flowers set in comeliness:
When I behold another grace
In the ascent of curious Lace,
Which like a Pinnacle does show
The top, and the top-gallant too.
Then, when I see thy Tresses bound
Into an Ovall, square, or round;
And knit in knots far more then I
Can tell by tongue; or true-love tie:
Next, when those Lawnie Filmes I see
Play with a wild civility:
And all those airie silks to flow,
Alluring me, and tempting so:
I must confess, mine eye and heart
Dotes less on Nature, then on Art.
Upon Sibilla.
WIth paste of Almonds, Syb her hands does scour;
Then gives it to the children to devour.
In Cream she bathes her thighs (more soft then silk)
Then to the poor she freely gives the milk.
Upon his kinswoman Mistress Bridget Herrick.
SWeet Bridget blushed, and therewithal,
Fresh blossoms from her cheeks did fall
I thought at first 'twas but a dream,
Till after I had handled them;
And smelt them, then they smelt to me,
As Blossoms of the Almond Tree.
Upon Love.
I Played with Love, as with the fire
The wanton Satyr did;
Nor did I know, or co'd descry
What under there was hid.
2.
That Satyr he but burnt his lips;
(But min's the greater smart)
For kissing Loves dissembling chips,
The fire scorctht my heart.
Upon a comely, and curious Maid.
IF Men can say that beauty dies;
Marbles will swear that here it lies.
If Reader then thou can forbear,
In public loss to shed a Tear:
The Dew of grief upon this stone
Will tell thee Pity thou have none.
Upon the loss of his Finger.
ONe of the five straight branches of my hand
Is lopt already; and the rest but stand
Expecting when to fall: which soon will be;
First dies the Leaf, the Bough next, next the Tree.
Upon Irene.
ANgry if Irene be
But a Minutes life with me:
Such a fire I epsy
Walking in and out her eye,
As at once I freeze, and fry.
Upon Electra's Tears.
Upon her cheeks she wept, and from those showers.
Sprang up a sweet Nativity of Flowers.
Upon Tooly.
THe Eggs of Pheasants wrie-nos'd Tooly sells;
But never so much as licks the speckled shells:
Only, if one prove addled, that he eats
With superstition, (as the Cream of meats.)
The Cock and Hen he feeds; but not a bone
He ever picked (as yet) of any one.
A Hymn to the Graces.
WHen I love, (as some have told,
Love I shall when I am old)
O ye Graces I Make me fit
For the welcoming of it.
Clean my Rooms, as Temples be,
T'entertain that Deity.
Give me words wherewith to wooe'
Suppling and successful too:
Winning postures; and withal,
Manners each way musical:
Sweetness to allay my sour
And unsmooth behavior.
For I know you have the skill
Vines to prune, though not to kill,
And of any wood ye see,
You can make a Mercury.
To Silvia.
NO more my Silvia, do I mean to pray
For those good days that never will come away.
I want belief; O gentle Silvia, be
The patient Saint, and send up vows for me.
Upon Blanch. Epig.
I Have seen many Maidens to have hair;
Both for their comely need, and some to spare:
But Blanch has not so much upon her head,
As to bind up her chaps when she is dead.
Upon Vmber. Epig.
VMber was painting of a Lion fierce,
And working it, by chance from Vmbers Erse
Flew out a crack, so mighty, that the Fart,
(As Vmber swears) did make his Lion start.
The Poet has lost his pipe.
I Cannot pipe as I was wont to do,
Broke is my Reed, hoarse is my singing too:
My wearied Oat I Will hang upon the Tree,
And give it to the Silvan Deity.
True Friendship.
Will thou my true Friend be?
Then love not mine, but me.
The Apparition of his Mistress calling him to Elysium.
Desunt nonnulla --
COme then, and like two Doves with silv'rie wings,
Let our souls fly to'th'shades, where ever springs
Sit smiling in the Meads; where Balm and Oil,
Roses and Cassia crown the untilled soil.
Where no disease reigns, or infection comes
To blast the Air, but Ambergris and Gums.
This, that, and every Thicket does transpire
More sweet, then Storax from the hallowed fire:
Where every tree a wealthy issue bears
Of fragrant Apples, blushing Plums, or Pears:
And all the shrubs, with sparkling spangles, show
Like Morning-Sun-shine tinsilling the dew.
Here in green Meddowes sits eternal May,
Purfling the Margents, while perpetual Day
So double gilds the Air, as that no night
Can ever rust th'Enamel of the light.
Here, naked Younglings, handsome Striplings run
Their Goales for Virgins kisses; which when done,
Then unto Dancing forth the learned Round
Commixt they meet, with endless Roses crowned.
And here we will sit on Primrose-banks, and see
Love's Chorus led by Cupid; and we will be
Two loving followers too unto the Grove,
Where Poets sing the stories of our love.
There thou shall hear Divine Musoeus sing
Of Hero, and Leander; then I Will bring
Thee to the Stand, where honored Homer reads
His Odisees, and his high Iliads.
About whose Throne the crowd of Poets throng
To hear the incantation of his tongue:
To Linus, then to Pindar; and that done,
I Will bring thee Herrick to Anacreon,
Quaffing his full-crown'd bowls of burning Wine,
And in his Raptures speaking Lines of Thine,
Like to His subject; and as his Frantic-
Looks, show him truly Bacchanalian like,
Besmeared with Grapes; welcome he shall thee thither,
Where both may rage, both drink and dance together.
Then stately Virgil, witty Ovid, by
Whom fair Corinna sits, and does comply
With Yvorie wrists, his Laureat head, and steeps
His eye in dew of kisses, wh'le he sleeps.
Then soft Catullus, sharp-fang'd Martial,
And towering Lucan, Horace, Juvenal,
And Snakie Perseus, these, and those, whom Rage
(Dropped for the jarres of heaven) filled t'engage
All times unto their frenzies; Thou shall there
Behold them in a spacious Theater.
Among which glories, (crowned with sacred Bays,
And flattering Ivy) Two recite their Plays,
Beumont and Fletcher, Swans, to whom all ears
Listen, while they (like Sirens in their Spheres)
Sing their Evadne; and still more for thee
There yet remains to know, then thou can see
By glim'ring of a fancy: Do but come,
And there I Will show thee that capacious room
In which thy Father Johnson now is placed,
As in a Globe of Radiant fire, and graced
To be in that Orb crowned (that does include
Those Prophets of the former Magnitude)
And he one chief; But hark, I hear the Cock,
(The Bell-man of the night) proclaim the clock
Of late struck one; and now I see the prime
Of Day break from the pregnant East, it is time
I vanish; more I had to say;
But Night determines here, Away.
Life is the Bodies Light.
LIfe is the Bodies light; which once declining,
Those crimson clouds i'th'cheeks and lips leave shining.
Those counter-changed Tabbies in the air,
(The Sun once set) all of one color are.
So, when Death comes, Fresh tinctures lose their place,
And dismal Darkness then does smutch the face.
Upon Urles. Epig.
VRles had the Gout so, that he co'd not stand;
Then from his Feet, it shifted to his Hand:
When 'twas in's Feet, his Charity was small;
Now it is in's Hand, he gives no Alms at all.
Upon Franck.
FRanck never wore silk she swears; but I reply,
She now wears silk to hide her blood-shot eye.
Love lightly pleased.
LEt fair or foul my Mistress be,
Or low, or tall, she pleases me:
Or let her walk, or stand, or sit,
The posture hers, I Am pleased with it.
Or let her tongue be still, or stir,
Graceful is every thing from her.
Or let her Grant, or else Deny,
My Love will fit each History.
The Primrose.
Ask me why I send you here
This sweet Infanta of the year?
Ask me why I send to you
This Primrose, thus bepearl'd with dew?
I will whisper to your ears,
The sweets of Love are mixed with tears.
2.
Ask me why this flower does show
So yellow-green, and sickly too?
Ask me why the stalk is weak
And bending, (yet it does not break?)
I will answer, These discover
What fainting hopes are in a Lover.
The Tithe. To the Bride.
IF nine times you your Bridegroom kiss;
The tenth you know the Parsons is.
Pay then your Tithe; and doing thus,
Prove in your Bride-bed numerous.
If children you have ten, Sir John
Will Not for his tenth part ask you one.
A Frolic.
BRing me my Rose-buds, Drawer come;
So, while I thus sit crowned;
I Will drink the aged Cecubum,
Until the roof turn round.
Change common to all.
ALL things subjected are to Fate;
Whom this Morn sees most fortunate,
The Evening sees in poor estate.
To Julia.
THe Saints-bell calls; and, Julia, I must read
The Proper Lessons for the Saints now dead:
To grace which Service, Julia, there shall be
One Holy Collect, said or sung for Thee.
Dead when thou art, Dear Julia, thou shall have
A Tentrall sung by Virgins over thy Grave:
Mean time we two will sing the Dirge of these;
Who dead, deserve our best remembrances.
No luck in Love.
IDoe love I know not what;
Sometimes this, and sometimes that:
All conditions I aim at.
2.
But, as lucklesse, I have yet
Many shrewd disasters met,
To gain her whom I would get.
3.
Therefore now I Will love no more,
As I Have doted heretofore:
He who must be, shall be poor.
In the dark none dainty.
NIght hides our thefts; all faults then pardoned be:
All are alike fair, when no spots we see.
Lais and Lucrece, in the night time are
Pleasing alike; alike both singular:
Jone, and my Lady have at that time one,
One and the selfsame prized complexion.
Then please alike the Pewter and the Plate;
The chosen Rubie, and the Reprobate.
A charm, or an allay for Love.
IF so be a Toad be laid
In a Sheeps-skin newly flaid,
And that tied to man'twill sever
Him and his affections ever.
Upon a free Maid, with a foul breath.
YOu say you will kiss me, and I thank you for it:
But stinking breath, I do as hell abhor it.
Upon Coone. Epig.
WHat is the reason Coone so dully smells?
His Nose is over-cool'd with Isicles.
To his Brother in Law Master John Wingfield.
FOr being comely, consonant, and free
To most of men, but most of all to me:
For so decrecing, that thy clothes expense
Keeps still within a just circumference:
Then for contriving so to load thy Board,
As that the Messes never o'r-laid the Lord:
Next for Ordaining, that thy words not swell
To any one unsober' syllable.
These I co'd praise thee for beyond another,
Were thou a Winckfield only, not a Brother.
The Head-ake.
MY head does ache,
O Sappho! take
Thy fillit,
And bind the pain;
Or bring some bane
To kill it.
2.
But less that part,
Then my poor heart,
Now is sick:
One kiss from thee
Will counsel be,
And Physic.
On himself.
LIve by thy Muse thou shall; when others die
Leaving no Fame to long Posterity:
When Monarchies trans-shifted are, and gone;
Here shall endure thy vast Dominion.
Upon a Maid.
HEnce a blessed soul is fled,
Leaving here the body dead:
Which (since here they cannot combine)
For the Saint, we will keep the Shrine.
Upon Spalt.
OF Pushes Spalt has such a knottie race,
He needs a. Tucker for to burle his face.
Of Horn a Comb-maker.
Horn sells to others teeth; but has not one
To grace his own Gums, or of Box, or bone.
Upon the trouble some times.
O! Times most bad,
Without the scope
Of hope
Of better to be had!
2.
Where shall I go,
Or whither run
To shun
This public overthrow?
3.
No places are
(This I am sure)
Secure
In this our wasting War.
4.
Some storms w'ave past;
Yet we must all
Down fall,
And perish at the last.
Cruelty base in Commanders.
NOthing can be more loathsome, then to see
Power conjoined with Natures Cruelty.
Upon a fowre-breath Lady. Epig.
FIe, (quoth my Lady) what a stink is here?
When 'twas her breath that was the Carrionere.
Upon Lucia.
IAskt my Lucia but a kiss;
And she with scorn denied me this.
Say then, how ill should I have sped,
Had I then asked her Maidenhead?
Little and loud.
LIttle you are; for Woman's sake be proud;
For my sake next, (though little) be not loud.
Shipwreck.
HE, who has suffered Shipwreck, fears to sail
Upon the Seas, though with a gentle gale.
Pains without profit.
A Long-lifes-day I Have taken pains
For very little, or no gains:
The Ev'ning's come; here now I Will stop,
And work no more; but shut up Shop.
To his Book.
BE bold my Book, nor be abasht, or fear
The cutting Thumb-naile, or the Brow severe.
But by the Muses swear, all here is good,
If but well read; or ill read, understood.
His Prayer to Ben. Johnson.
WHen I a Verse shall make,
Know I have praid thee,
For old Religions sake,
Saint Ben to aid me.
2.
Make the way smooth for me,
When I, thy Herrick,
Honoring thee, on my knee
Offer my Lyrick,
3.
Candles I Will give to thee,
And a new Altar;
And thou Saint Ben, shall be
Writ in my Psalter.
Poverty and Riches.
GIve Want her welcome if she comes; we find,
Riches to be but burdens to the mind.
Again.
WHo with a little cannot be content,
Endures an everlasting punishment.
The Covetous still Captives.
Let Us live with that small pittance that we have;
Who covets more, is evermore a slave.
Laws.
WHen Laws full power have to sway, we see
Little or no part there of Tyranny,
Of Love.
I Will get me hence,
Because no fence,
Or Fort that I can make here;
But Love by charms,
Or else by Arms
Will storm, or starving take here.
Upon Cock.
COck calls his Wife his Hen: when Cock goes to it,
Cock treads his Hen, but treads her under-foot.
To his Muse.
GO woo young Charles no more to look,
Then but to read this in my Book:
How Herrick beggs, if that he can-
Not like the Muse; to love the man,
Who by the Shepherds, sung (long since)
The Starre-led-birth of Charles the Prince.
The bad season makes the Poet sad.
DUll to my self, and almost dead to these
My many fresh and fragrant Mistresses:
Lost to all Music now; since every thing
Puts on the semblance here of sorrowing.
Sick is the Land to'th' heart; and does endure
More dangerous faintings by her desperate cure.
But if that golden Age would come again,
And Charles here Rule, as he before did Reign;
If smooth and unperplext the Seasons were,
As when the Sweet Maria lived here:
I should delight to have my Curles half drowned
In Tyrian Dewes, and Head with Roses crowned.
And once more yet (ere I am laid out dead)
Knock at a Star with my exalted Head.
To Vulcan.
THy sooty Godhead, I desire
Still to be ready with thy fire:
That should my Book despised be,
Acceptance it might find of thee.
Like Pattern, like People.
THis is the height of Justice, that to do
Thy self, which thou put'st other men unto.
As great men lead; the meaner follow on,
Or to the good, or cvill action.
Purposes.
NO wrath of Men, or rage of Seas
Can shake a just man's purposes:
No threats of Tyrants, or the Grim
Visage of them can alter him;
But what he does at first entend,
That he holds firmly to the end.
To the Maids to walk abroad.
Come sit we under yonder Tree,
Where merry as the Maids we will be.
And as on Primroses we sit,
We Will venture (if we can) at wit:
If not, at Draw-gloves we will play;
So spend some minutes of the day:
Or else spin out the thread of sands,
Playing at Questions and Commands:
Or tell what strange Tricks Love can do,
By quickly making one of two,
Thus we will sit and talk; but tell
No cruel truths of Philomell,
Or Phillis, whom hard Fate forc'ton,
To kill her self for Demophon.
But Fables we will relate; how fove.
Put on all shapes to get a Love:
As now a Satyr, then a Swan;
A Bull but then; and now a man.
Next we will act, how young men woo;
And sigh, and kiss, as Lovers do:
And talk of Brides; and who shall make
That wedding-smock, this Bridal-Cake;
That Dress, this Sprig, that Leaf, this Vine;
That smooth and silken Columbine.
This done, we will draw lots, who shall buy
And guild the Baies and Rosemary:
What Posies for our Wedding Rings;
What Gloves we will give, and Ribanings:
And smiling at our selves, decree,
Who then the joining Priest shall be.
What short sweet Prayers shall be said;
And how the Posset shall be made
With Cream of Lillies (not of Kine)
And Maiden's-blush, for spiced wine.
Thus, having talked, we will next' commend
A kiss to each; and so we will end.
His own Epitaph.
A Swearied Pilgrims, once possessed
Of longed-for lodging, go to rest:
So I, now having rid my way;
Fix here my Buttoned Staff and stay.
Youth (I confess) has me misled;
Bnt Age has brought me right to Bed.
A Nuptial Verse to Mistress Elizabeth Lee, now Lady Tracie.
Spring with the Lark, most comely Bride, and meet
Your eager Bridegroom with auspitious feet.
The Morn's far spent; and the immortal Sun
Corrols his cheek, to see those Rites not done.
Fie, Lovely maid! Indeed you are too flow,
When to the Temple Love should run, not go.
Dispatch your dressing then; and quickly wed:
Then feast, and coy't a little; then to bed.
This day is Loves day; and this busy night
Is yours, in which you challenged are to fight
With such an armed, but such an easy Foe,
As will if you yield, lie down conquered too.
The Field is pitched; but such must be your wars,
As that your kisses must outvie the Stars.
Fall down together vanquished both, and lie
Drowned in the blood of Rubies there, not die.
The Night-piece, to Julia.
HEr Eyes the Glow-worme lend thee,
The Shooting Stars attend thee;
And the Elves also,
Whose little eyes glow,
Like the sparks of fire, befriend thee.
2.
No Will-o'th'-Wispe mis-light thee;
Nor Snake, or Slow-worme bite thee:
But on, on thy way
Not making a stay,
Since Ghost there is none to affright thee.
3.
Let not the dark thee cumber;
What though the Moon does slumber?
The Stars of the night
Will lend thee their light,
Like Tapers clear without number.
4.
Then Julia let me woo thee,
Thus, thus to come unto me:
And when I shall meet
Thy silv'ry feet,
My soul I Will pour into thee.
To Sir Cilpseby Crew.
GIve me wine, and give me meat,
To create in me a heat,
That my Pulses high may beat.
2.
Cold and hunger never yet
Co'd a noble Verse beget;
But your Boules with Sack repleat.
3.
Give me these (my Knight) and try
In a Minutes space how I
Can run mad, and Prophecy.
4.
Then if any Piece proves new,
And rare, I Will say (my dearest Crew)
It was full enspir'd by you.
Good Luck not lasting.
IF well the Dice run, lets applaud the cast:
The happy fortune will not always last.
A Kiss.
WHat is a Kiss? Why this, 'as some approve;
The sure sweet-Sement, Glue, and Lime of Love.
Glory.
I Make no haste to have my Numbers read.
Seldom comes Glory till a man be dead.
Poets.
WAntons we are; and though our words be such,
Our Lives do differ from our Lines by much.
No despite to the dead.
REproach we may the living; not the dead:
It Is cowardice to bite the buried.
To his Verses.
WHat will ye (my poor Orphans) do
When I must leave the World (and you)
Who Will give ye then a sheltring shed,
Or credit ye, when I am dead?
Who Will let ye by their fire fit?
Although ye have a stock of wit,
Already coined to pay for it.
I cannot tell; unless there be
Some Race of old humanity
Left (of the large heart, and long hand)
Alive, as Noble Westmor land;
Or gallant Newark; which brave two
May fost'ring fathers be to you.
If not; expect to be no less
Ill used, then Babes left fatherless.
His charge to Julia at his death.
DEarest of thousands, now the time draws near,
That with my Lines, my Life must full-stop here.
Cut off thy hairs; and let thy Tears be shed
Over my Turfe, when I am buried.
Then for effusions, let none wanting be,
Or other Rites that do belong to me;
As Love shall help thee, when thou do go hence
Unto thy everlasting residence,
Upon Love.
IN a Dream, Love bad me go
To the Galleys there to Row;
In the Vision I asked, why?
Love as briefly did reply;
It Was better there to toil, then prove
The turmoiles they endure that love.
I awoke, and then I knew
What Love said was too too true:
Henceforth therefore I will be
As from Love, from trouble free.
None pities him that is in the snare,
And warned before, would not beware.
The Cobblers Catch.
COme sit we by the fires side;
And roundly drink we here;
Till that we see our checkes Ale-dy'd
And noses tanned with Beer.
Upon Bran. Epig.
WHat made that mirth last night? the neighbors
That Bran the Baker did his Breech bewray: (say,
I rather think (though they may speak the worst)
It Was to his Batch, but Leaven laid there first.
Upon Snare, an Usurer.
SNare, ten in the hundred calls his wife; and why?
She brings in much, by carnal usury.
He by extortion brings in three times more:
Say, who is the worst, the exactor, or the whore?
Upon Grudgings.
GRudgings turns bread to stones, when to the Poor
He gives an alms, and chides them from his door.
Connubii Flores, or the well-wishes at Weddings
Chorus Sacerdotum.
1.
FRom the Temple to your home
May a thousand blessings come!
And a sweet concurring stream
Of all joys, to join with them.
Chorus Juvenum.
2.
HAppy day
Make no long stay
Here
In thy Sphere;
But give thy place to night,
That she,
As Thee,
May be
Partaker of this sight.
And since it was thy care
To see the Younglings wed;
It Is fit that Night, the Pair,
Should see safe brought to Bed.
Chorus Senum.
3.
GO to your banquet then, but use delight,
So as to rise still with an appetite.
Love is a thing most nice; and must be fed
To such a height; but never surfeited.
What is beyond the mean is ever ill:
It Is best to feed Love; but not over-fill:
Go then discreetly to the Bed of pleasure;
And this remember, Virtue keeps the measure.
Chorus Virginum.
4.
LUckie signs we have discri'd
To encourage on the Bride;
And to these we have espied,
Not a kissing Cupid flies
Here about, but has his eyes,
To imply your Love is wise.
Chorus Pastorum.
5.
HEre we present a fleece
To make a piece
Of cloth;
Nor Fair, must you be loath
Your Finger to apply
To huswiferie.
Then, then begin
To spin:
And (Sweetling) mark you, what a Web will come
Into your Chests, drawn by your painful Thumb.
Chorus Matronarum.
6.
SEt you to your Wheel, and wax
SRich, by the Ductile Wool and Flax.
Yarne is an Income; and the Huswives thread
The Larder fills with meat; the Bin with bread.
Chorus Senum.
7.
LEt wealth come in by comely thrift,
And not by any sordid shift:
It Is haste
Makes waste:
Extremes have still their fault;
The softest Fire makes the sweetest Malt.
Who gripes too hard the dry and slip'rie sand,
Holds none at all, or little in his hand.
Chorus Virginum.
8.
Goddess of Pleasure, Youth and Peace,
Give them the blessing of increase:
And thou Lucina, that do'it hear
The vows of those, that children bear:
When as her April ^^
draws near,
Be thou then propitious there.
Chorus Fuvenum.
9.
Far hence be all speech, that may anger move:
Sweet words must nourish soft and gentle Love.
Chorus omnium.
10.
LIve in the Love of Doves, and having told
The Ravens years, go hence more Ripe then old
To his lovely Mistresses.
ONe night i'th'yeare, my dearest Beauties, come
And bring those dew-d in^-offerings to my Tomb.
When thence ye see my reverend Ghost to kiss,
And there to liek th'effuied sacrifice:
Though palenes be the Livery that I wear,
Look ye not wan, or colourlesse for fear.
Trust me I will not hurt ye; or once show
The least grim look, or cast a frown on you:
Nor shall the Tapers when I Am there, burn blew.
This I may do (perhaps) as I glide by,
Cast on my Girls a glance, and loving eye:
Or fold mine arms and sigh, because I Have lost
The world so soon, and in it, you the most.
Then these, no fears more on your Fancies fall,
Though then I smile, and speak no words at all.
Upon Love.
A Crystal Violl Cupid brought,
Which had a juice in it:
Of which who drank, he said no thought
Of Love he should admit.
2.
I greedy of the prize, did drink,
And emptied soon the glass;
Which burnt me so, that I do think
The fire of hell it was.
3.
Give me my earthen Cups again,
The Crystal I contemn;
Which, though enchas'd with Pearls, contain
A deadly draught in them.
4.
And thou O Cupid! come not to
My Threshold, since I see,
For all I have, or else can do,
Thou still wilt cozen me.
Upon Gander. Epig.
SInce Gander did his pretty Youngling wed;
Gander (they say) does each night piss a Bed:
What is the cause? Why Gander will reply,
No Goose lays good eggs that is trodden dry.
Upon Lungs. Epig.
LUngs (as some, say) never sets him down to eat,
But that his breath does Fly-blow all the meat.
The Beggar to Mab, the Fairie Queen.
PLease your Grace, from out your Store,
Give an Alms to one that is poor,
That your mickle, may have more.
Black I Am grown for want of meat;
Give me then an Ant to eat;
Or the clest ear of a Mouse
Over-sowr'd in drink of Souce:
Or sweet Lady reach to me
The Abdomen of a Be;
Or commend a Crickets-hip,
Or his Huckson, to my Scrip.
Give for bread, a little bit
Of a Pease, that 'gins to chit,
And my full thanks take for it.
Flower of Fuz-balls, that is too good
For a man in needy-hood:
But the Meal of Mill-dust can
Well content a craving man.
Any Orts the Elves refuse
Well will serve the Beggars use.
But if this may seem too much
For an Alms; then give me such
Little bits, that nestle there
In the Prisoners Panier.
So a blessing light upon
You, and mighty Oberon:
That your plenty last till when,
I return your Alms again.
An end decreed.
Let Us be jocund while we may;
All things have an ending day:
And when once the Work is done;
Fates revolve no Flax they have spun.
Upon a child.
HEre a pretty Baby lies
Sung asleep with Lullabies:
Pray be silent, and not stir
Th 'easie earth that covers her.
Painting sometimes permitted.
IF Nature do deny
Colors, let Art supply.
Farewell Frost, or welcome the Spring.
FLed are the Frosts, and now the Fields appear
Re-cloth'd in fresh and verdant Diaper.
Thawed are the snowes, and now the lusty Spring
Gives to each Mead a neat enameling.
The Palms put forth their Gemmes, and every Tree
Now swaggers in her Leavy gallantry.
The while the Daulian Minstrell sweetly sings,
With warbling Notes, her Tyrrean suffe rings.
What gentle Winds perspire? As if here
Never had been the Northern Plunderer
To strip the Trees, and Fields, to their distress,
Leaving them to a pitied nakedness.
And look how when a frantic Storm does rear
A stubborn Oak, or Holme (long growing there)
But lul'd to calmnesse, then succeeds a breeze
That scarcely stirs the nodding leaves of Trees:
So when this War (which tempest-like does spoil
Our salt, our Corn, our Honey, Wine, and Oil)
Falls to a temper, and does mildly cast
His inconsiderate Frenzy off (at last)
The gentle Dove may, when these turmoils cease,
Bring in her Bill, once more, the Branch of Peace.
The Hag.
THe Hag is astride,
This night for to ride;
The Devil and she together:
Through thick, and through thin,
Now out, and then in,
Though never so foul be the weather.
2.
A Thorn or a Burr
She takes for a Spur:
With a lash of a Bramble she rides now,
Through Brakes and through Briars,
Over Ditches, and Mires,
She follows the Spirit that guides now,
3.
No Beast, for his food,
Dares now range the wood;
But hushed in his laire he lies lurking:
While mischeifs, by these,
On Land and on Seas,
At noone of Night are a working,
4.
The storm will arise,
And trouble the skies;
This night, and more for the wonder,
The ghost from the Tomb
Affrighted shall come,
Called out by the clap of the Thunder.
Upon an old man a Residenciarie.
TRead, Sirs, as lightly as ye can
Upon the grave of this old man.
Twice forty (bating but one year,
And thrice three weeks) he lived here.
Whom gentle fate translated hence
To a more happy Residence.
Yet, Reader, let me tell thee this
(Which from his ghost a promise is)
If here ye will some few tears shed,
He Will never haunt ye now he is dead.
Upon Tears.
Tears, though they are here below the sinners brine,
Above they are the Angels spiced wine.
Physicians.
Physicians fight not against men; but these
Combat for men, by conquering the disease.
The Primitiae to Parents.
OUr Houshold-gods our Parents be;
And manners good requires, that we
The first Fruits give to them, who gave
Us hands to get what here we have.
Upon Cob. Epig.
COb clouts his shoes, and as the story tells,
His thumb-nailes-par'd, afford him sperrables.
Upon Lucie. Epig.
SOund Teeth has Lucie, pure as Pearl, and small,
With mellow Lips, and luscious there withal.
Upon Skoles. Epig.
Skoles stinks so deadly, that his Breeches loath
His dampish Buttocks furthermore to cloth:
Cloyed they are up with Arse; but hope, one blast
Will whirle about, and blow them thence at last.
To Silvia.
I Am holy, while I stand
Circum-crost by thy pure hand:
But when that is gone; Again,
I, as others, am Profane.
To his Closet-Gods.
WHen I go Hence ye Closet-Gods, I fear
Never again to have ingression here:
Where I have had, what ever thing co'd be
Pleasant, and precious to my Muse and me.
Besides rare sweets, I had a Book which none
Co'd read the Intext but my self alone.
About the Cover of this Book there went
A curious-comely clean Compartlement:
And, in the midst, to grace it more, was set
A blushing-pretty-peeping Rubelet:
But now'tis closed; and being shut, and sealed,
Be it, O be it, never more revealed!
Keep here still, Closet-gods, before whom I Have set
Oblations often, of sweetest Marmelet.
A Bacchanalian Verse.
FIll me a mighty Bowl
Up to the brim:
That I may drink
Unto my Johnsons soul.
2.
Crown it again again;
And thrice repeat
That happy heat;
To drink to Thee my Ben.
3.
Well I can quaffe, I see,
To th'number five,
Or nine; but thrive
In frenzy never like thee.
Long looked for comes at last.
THough long it be, years may repay the debt;
None loses that, which he in time may get.
To Youth.
DRink Wine, and live here blithefull, while ye may:
The morrowes life too late is, Live to day.
Never too late to dye.
NO man comes late unto that place from whence
Never man yet had a regredience.
A Hymn to the Muses.
O! You the Virgins nine!
That do our souls incline
To noble Discipline!
Nod to this vow of mine:
Come then, and now enspire
My violl and my lyre
With your etetnall fire:
And make me one entire
Composer in your Quire.
Then I Will your Altars strew
With Roses sweet and new;
And ever live a true
Acknowledger of you.
On himself.
I Will sing no more, nor will I longer write
Of that sweet Lady, or that gallant Knight:
I Will sing no more of Frosts, Snowes, Dews and Showers;
No more of Groves, Meades, Springs, and wreaths of
I Will write no more, nor will I tell or sing (Flowers:
Of Cupid, and his witty coozning:
I Will sing no more of death, or shall the grave
No more my Dirges, and my Trentalls have.
Upon Jone and Jane.
I One is a wench that is painted;
June is a Girl that is tainted;
Yet Jone she goes
Like one of those
Whom purity had Sainted..
Jane is a Girl that is prittie;
Jane is a wench that is witty;
Yet, who would think,
Her breath does stink,
As so it does? that is pity.
To Momus.
WHo read'st this Book that I have writ,
And can not mend, but carpe at it:
By all the muses! thou shall be
Anathema to it, and me.
Ambition.
IN ways to greatness, think on this,
That slippery all Ambition is.
The Country life, to the honored M. End. Porter,
Groom of the Bedchamber to His Maj.
SWeet Country life, to such unknown,
Whose lives are others, not their own!
But serving Courts, and Cities, be
Less happy, less enjoying thee.
Thou never Plow'st the Oceans foame
To seek, and bring rough Pepper home:
Nor to the Eastern Ind do rove
To bringfrom thence the scorched Clove.
Nor, with the loss of thy loved rest,
Bring'st home the Ingot from the West.
No, thy Ambition's Masterpiece
Flies no thought higher then a fleece:
Or how to pay thy Hinds, and clear
All scores; and so to end the year:
But walk'st about thine own dear bounds,
Not envying others larger grounds:
For well thou know, it is not the extent
Of Land makes life, but sweet content.
When now the Cock (the Plow-mans Horn)
Calls forth the lilly-wristed Morn;
Then to thy cornfieldsd thou do go,
Which though well soyl'd, yet thou do know,
That the best compost for the Lands
Is the wise Masters Feet, and Hands.
There at the Plough thou find'st thy Teame,
With a Hind whistling there to them:
And cheer'st them up, by singing how
The Kingdoms portion is the Plow.
This done, then to th'enameld Meads
Thou go; and as thy foot there treads,
Thou see a present God-like Power
Imprinted in each Herb and Flower:
And smell'st the breath of great-ey'd Kine,
Sweet as the blossoms of the Vine.
Here thou behold'st thy large sleek Neat
Unto the Dew-laps up in meat:
And, as thou look, the wanton Steer,
The Heifer, Cow, and Ox draw near
To make a pleasing pastime there.
These seen, thou go to view thy flocks
Of sheep, (safe from the Wolf and Fox)
And find'st their bellies there as full
Of short sweet grass, as backs with wool.
And leave them (as they feed and fill)
A Shepherd piping on a hill.
For Sports, for Pagentrie, and Plays,
Thou have thy Eves, and Holidays:
On which the young men and maids meet,
To exercise their dancing feet:
Tripping the comely country round,
With Daffadils and Daisies crowned.
Thy Wakes, thy Quintels, here thou have,
Thy May-poles too with Garlands graced:
Thy Morris-dance; thy Whitsun-ale;
Thy Sheering-feast, which never fail.
Thy Harvest home; thy Wassaile bowl,
That Is tossed up after Fox i'th'Hole.
Thy Mummeries; thy Twelse tide Kings
And Queens; thy Christmas revellings:
Thy Nut-browne mirth; thy Russet wit;
And no man pays too dear for it.
To these, thou have thy times to go
And trace the Hare i'th'trecherous Snow:
Thy witty wiles to draw, and get
The Lark into the Trammell net:
Thou have thy Cockrood, and thy Glade
To take the precious Phesant made:
Thy Lime-twigs, Snares, and Pit-falls then
To catch the pilfring Birds, not Men.
O happy life! if that their good
The Husbandmen but understood!
Who all the day themselves do please,
And Younglings, with such sports as these.
And, lying down, have naught t'affright
Sweet sleep, that makes more short the night.
Caetera desunt --

To Electra.
I Dare not ask a kiss;
I dare not beg a smile;
Lest having that, or this,
I might grow proud the while.
2.
No, no, the utmost share
Of my desire, shall be
Only to kiss that Air,
That lately kissed thee.
To his worthy friend, M. Arthur Bartly.
WHen after many Lusters thou shall be
Wrapped up in Seare-cloth with thine Ancestrie:
When of thy ragg'd Escutcheons shall be seen
So little left, as if they never had been:
Thou shall thy Name have, and thy Fames best trust,
Here with the Generation of my Just.
What kind of Mistress he would have.
BE the Mistress of my choice,
Clean in manners, clear in voice:
Be she witty, more then wise;
Pure enough, though not Precise:
Be she showing in her dress,
Like a civil Wilderness;
That the curious may detect
Order in a sweet neglect:
Be she rolling in her eye,
Tempting all the pasers by:
And each Ringlet of her hair,
An Enchantment, or a Snare,
For to catch the Lookers on;
But her self held fast by none.
Let her Lucrece all day be,
Thais in the night, to me.
Be she such, as neither will
Famish me, nor over-fill.
Upon Zelot.
IS Zelot pure? he is: ye see he wears
The sign of Circumcision in his ears.
The Rosemaire branch.
GRow for two ends, it matters not at all,
Be It for my Bridal, or my Burial.
Upon Madam Ursly, Epig.
FOr ropes of pearl, first Madam Vrsly shows
A chain of Corns, picked from her ears and toes:
Then, next, to match Tradescant's curious shells,
Nails from her fingers mewed, she shows: what else?
Why then (forsooth) a Carcanet is shown
Of teeth, as deaf as nuts, and all her own.
Upon Crab, Epigr.
CRab faces gowns with sundry Furs; it is known,
He keeps the Fox-furre for to face his own.
A Paranaeticall, or Advisive Verse, to his friend, M. John Wicks.
IS this a life, to break thy sleep?
To rise as soon as day does peep?
To 'tire thy patient Ox or Ass
By noone, and let thy good days pass,
Not knowing This, that Jove decrees
Some mirth, t'adulce man's miseries?
No; it is a life, to have thine oil,
Without extortion, from thy soil:
Thy faithful fields to yield thee Grain,
Although with some, yet little pain:
To have thy mind, and nuptial bed,
With fears, and cares uncumbered:
A Pleasing Wife, that by thy side
Lies softly panting like a Bride.
This is to live, and to endeere
Those minutes, Time has lent us here.
Then, while Fates suffer, live thou free,
(As is that air that circles thee)
And crown thy temples too, and let
Thy servant, not thy own self, sweat,
To strut thy barnes with sheafs of Wheat.
Time steals away like to a stream,
And we glide hence away with them.
No sound recalls the hours once fled,
Or Roses, being withered:
Nor us (my Friend) when we are lost,
Like to a Deaw, or melted Frost.
Then live we mirthfull, while we should,
And turn the iron Age to Gold.
Let Us feast, and frolic, sing, and play,
And thus less last, then live our Day.
Whose life with care is overcast,
That man's not said to live, but last:
Nor is it a life, seven years to tell,
But for to live that half seven well:
And that we will do; as men, who know,
Some few sands spent, we hence must go,
Both to be blended in the Urn,
From whence there is never a return.
Once seen, and no more.
THousands each day pass by, which we,
Once past and gone, no more shall see.
Love.
THis Axiom I have often heard,
Kings ought to be more loved, then feared.
To M. Denham, on his Prospective Poem.
OR looked I back unto the Times hence flown,
To praise those Muses, and dislike our own?
Or did I walk those Pean-Gardens through,
To kick the Flowers, and scorn their odours too?
I might (and justly) be reputed (here)
One nicely mad; or peevithly severe.
But by Apollo! as I worship wit,
(Where I have cause to burn perfumes to it:)
So, I confess, it is somewhat to do well
In our high art, although we cannot excel,
Like thee; or dare the Buskins to unloose
Of thy brave, bold, and sweet Maronian Muse.
But since I Am called (rare Denham) to be gone,
Take from thy Herrick this conclusion:
It Is dignity in others, if they be
Crowned Poets; yet live Princes under thee:
The while their wreaths and Purple Robes do shine;
Less by their own jemms, then those beams of thine.
A Hymn, to the Lares.
IT was, and still my care is,
To worship ye, the Lares,
With crowns of greenest Parsley,
And Garlic chives not scarcely:
For favors here to warm me,
And not by fire to harm me.
For gladding so my hearth here,
With inoffenfive mirth here;
That while the Wassaile Bowl here
With North-down Ale does troule here,
No syllable does fall here,
To mar the mirth at all here.
For which, o Chimney-keepers!
(I dare not call ye Sweepers)
So long as I am able
To keep a countrey-table,
Great be my fare, or small cheer,
I Will eat and drink up all here.
Denial in women no disheartning to men.
WOmen, although they never so goodly make it,
Their fashion is, but to say no, to take it.
Adversity.
LOve is maintained by wealth; when all is spent,
Adversity then breeds the discontent.
To Fortune.
TUmble me down, and I will sit
Upon my ruins (smiling yet:)
Tear me to tatters; yet I Will be
Patient in my necessity.
Laugh at my scraps of clothes, and shun
Me, as a feared infection:
Yet scarre-crow-like I Will walk, as one,
Neglecting thy derision.
To Anthea.
COme Anthea, know thou this,
Love at no time idle is:
Let Us be doing, though we play
But at push-pin (half the day:)
Chains of sweet bents let us make,
Captive one, or both, to take:
In which bondage we will lie,
Souls transfusing thus, and die.
Cruelties.
NEro commanded; but withdrew his eyes
From the beholding Death, and cruelties.
Perseverance.
Have thou begun an act? never then give over:
No man despaires to do what is done before.
Upon his Verses.
WHat offspring other men have got,
The how, where, when, I question not.
These are the Children I have left;
Adopted some; none got by theft.
But all are touched (like lawful plate)
And no Verse illegitimate.
Distance betters Dignities.
KIngs must not often be seen by public eyes;
State at a distance adds to dignities.
Health.
HEalth is no other (as the learned hold)
But a just measure both of Heat and Cold.
To Dianeme. A Ceremony in Gloucester.
I Will to thee a Simnell bring,
Against thou go a mothering,
So that, when she blesses thee,
Half that blessing thou wilt give me.
To the King.
GIve way, give way, now, now my Charles shines here,
A Public Light (in this immensive Sphere.)
Some stars were fixed before; but these are dim,
Compared (in this my ample Orb) to Him.
Draw in your feeble fires, while that He
Appears but in His Meaner Majesty.
Where, if such glory flashes from His Name,
Which is His Shade, who can abide His Flame!
Princes, and such like Public Lights as these,
Must not be looked on, but at distances:
For, if we gaze on These brave Lamps too near,
Our eyes they will blind, or if not blind, they will bleer.
The Funeral Rites of the Rose.
THe Rose was sick, and smiling di'd;
And (being to be sanctified)
About the Bed, there sighing stood
The sweet, and flowrie Sisterhood.
Some hung the head, while some did bring
(To wash her) water from the Spring.
Some laid her forth, while other wept,
But all a solemn Fast there kept.
The holy Sisters some among
The sacred Dirge and Trent all sung.
But ah! what sweets smelt every where,
As Heaven had spent all perfumes there.
At last, when prayers for the dead,
And Rites were all accomplished;
They, weeping, spread a Lawnie Loome,
And closed her up, as in a Tomb.
The Rainbow: or curious Covenant.
MIne eyes, like clouds, were drizling rain,
And as they thus did entertain
The gentle Beams from Julia's sight
To mine eyes levelled opposite:
O Thing admired! there did appear
A curious Rainbow smiling there;
Which was the Covenant, that she
No more would drown mine eyes, or me.
The last stroke strike sure.
THough by well-warding many blows w'ave past,
That stroke most feared is, which is struck the last.
Fortune.
Fortune's a blind profuser of her own,
Too much she gives to some, enough to none.
Stool-ball.
1
AT Stool-ball, Lucia, let us play,
For Sugar-cakes and Wine;
Or for a Tansie let us pay,
The loss or thine, or mine.
2
If thou, my Dear, a winner be
At trundling of the Ball,
The wager thou shall have, and me,
And my misfortunes all.
3
But if (my Sweetest) I shall get,
Then I desire but this;
That likewise I may pay the Bet,
And have for all a kisfe.
To Sappho.
LEt us now take time, and play,
Love, and live here while we may;
Drink rich wine; and make good cheer,
While we have our being here:
For, once dead, and laid in the grave,
No return from thence we have.
On Poet Prat, Epigr.
PRat He writes Satyrs; but herein's the fault,
In no one Satyr there is a mite of salt.
Upon Tuck, Epigr.
AT Post and Pair, or Slam, Tom Tuck would play
This Christmas, but his want wherewith, says Nay.
Biting of Beggars.
WHo, railing, drives the Lazar from his door,
Instead of alms, sets dogs upon the poor.
The May Pole.
THe May Pole is up,
Now give me the cup;
I Will drink to the Garlands a-round it:
But first unto those
Whose hands did compose
The glory of flowers that crowned it.
A health to my Girls,
Whose husbands may Earls
Or Lords be, (granting my wishes)
And when that ye wed
To the Bridal Bed,
Then multiply all, like to Fishes.
Men mind no state in sickness.
THat flow of Gallants which approach
To kiss thy hand from out the coach;
That fleet of Lackeyes, which do run
Before thy swift Postilion;
Those strong-hoof'd Mules, which we behold,
Rein'd in with Purple, Pearl, and gold,
And shod with silver, prove to be
The drawers of the axeltree.
Thy Wife, thy Children, and the state
Of Persian Loomes, and antique Plate:
All these, and more, shall then afford
No joy to thee their sickly Lord.
Adversity.
ADversity hurts none, but only such
Whom whitest Fortune dandled has too much.
Want.
NEed is no vice at all; though here it be,
With men, a loathed inconveniencie.
Grief.
Sorrows divided amongst many, less
Discruciate a man in deep distress.
Love palpable.
IPrest my Julia's lips, and in the kiss
Her Soul and Love were palpable in this.
No action hard to affection.
NOthing hard, or harsh can prove
Unto those that truly love.
Mean things overcome mighty.
BY the weak'st means things mighty are overthrown,
He Is Lord of thy life, who contemnes his own.
Upon Trigg, Epig.
TRigg having turned his suit, he struts in state,
And tells the world, he is now regenerate.
Upon Smeaton.
HOw co'd Luke Smeaton wear a shoe, or boot,
Who two and thirty corns had on a foot.
The Bracelet of Pearl: to Silvia.
I Brake thy Bracelet'gainst my will;
And, wretched, I did see
Thee discomposed then, and still
Art discontent with me.
One jemme was lost; and I will get
A richer pearl for thee,
Then ever, dearest Silvia, yet
Was drunk to Antonie.
Or, for revenge, I Will tell thee what
Thou for the breach shall do;
First, crack the strings, and after that,
Cleave thou my heart in two.
How Roses came red.
It Is said, as Cupid danced among
The Gods, he down the Nectar flung;
Which, on the white Rose being shed,
Made it for ever after red.
Kings.
MEn are not born Kings, but are men renowned;
Chose first, confirmed next, and at last are crowned.
First work, and then wages.
PRepost'rous is that order, when we run
To ask our wages, e're our work be done.
Tears, and Laughter.
KNew'st thou, one month would take thy life away,
Thou Would weep; but laugh, should it not last a day.
Glory.
GLory no other thing is ( Tullie says)
Then a man's frequent Fame, spoke out with praise.
Possessions.
THose possessions short-lived are,
Into the which we come by war.
Laxare fibulam.
TO loose the button, is no less,
Then to cast off all bashfulnesse.
His return to London.
FRom the dull confines of the drooping West,
To see the day spring from the pregnant East,
Ravished in spirit, I come, nay more, I fly
To thee, blessed place of my Nativitie!
Thus, thus with hallowed foot I touch the ground,
With thousand blessings by thy Fortune crowned.
O fruitful Genius! that bestowest here
An everlasting plenty, year by year.
O Place! O People! Manners! framed to please
All Nations, Customs, Kindreds, Languages!
I am a freeborn Roman; suffer then,
That I amongst you live a Citizen.
London my home is: though by hard fate sent
Into a long and irksome banishment;
Yet since called back; henceforward let me be,
O native country, repossest by thee!
For, rather then I Will to the West return,
I Will beg of thee first here to have mine Urn.
Weak I am grown, and must in short time fall;
Give thou my sacred Relics Burial.
Not every day fit for Verse.
It Is not every day, that I
Fitted am to prophecy:
No, but when the Spirit fills
The fantastic Pannicles:
Full of fire; then I write
As the Godhead does indite.
Thus enraged, my lines are hurled,
Like the Sybells, through the world.
Look how next the holy fire
Either slakes, or does retire;
So the Fancy cooles, till when
That brave Spirit comes again.
Poverty the greatest pack.
TO mortal men great loads allotted be,
But of all packs, no pack like poverty.
A Beucolick, or discourse of Neatherds.
1
COme blithefull Neatherds, let us lay
A wager, who the best shall play,
Of thee, or I, the Roundelay,
That fits the business of the Day.
Chor. And Lallage the Judge shall be,
To give the prize to thee, or me.
2
Content, begin, and I will bet
A Heifer smooth, and black as jet,
In every part alike complete,
And wanton as a Kid as yet.

Chor. And Lallage (with cow-like eyes)
Shall be Disposeresse of the prize.
1
Against thy Heifer, I will here
Lay to thy stake a lusty Steer,
With gilded horns, and burnisht clear.

Chor. Why then begin, and let us hear
The soft, the sweet, the mellow note
That gently purles from eithers Oat.
2
The stakes are laid: let us now apply
Each one to make his melody:

Lal. The equal Umpire shall be I,
Who Will hear, and so judge righteously.

Chor. Much time is spent in prate; begin,
And sooner play, the sooner win.
[He plays.
1
That Is sweetly touched, I must confess:
Thou art a man of worthiness:
But hark how I can now express
My love unto my Neatherdesse.
[He sings.

Chor. A suger'd note! and sound as sweet
As Kine, when they at milking meet.
4
Now for to win thy Heifer fair,
I Will strike thee such a nimble Air,
That thou shall say (thy self) it is rare;
And title me without compare.

Chor. Lay by a while your Pipes, and rest,
Since both have here deserved best.
2
To get thy Steerling, once again,
I Will play thee such another strain;
That thou thalt swear, my Pipe does reign
Over thine Oat, as Sovereign.
[He sings.

Chor. And Lallage shall tell by this,
Whose now the prize and wager is.
1 Give me the prize: 2. The day is mine:
1 Not so; my Pipe has silenc't thine:
And had thou wager'd twenty Kine,
They were mine own. Lal. In love combine.

Chor. And lay we down our Pipes together,
As weary, not overcome by either.

True safety.
It Is not the Walls, or purple, that defends
A Prince from Foes; but it is his Fort of Friends.
A Prognostic.
AS many Laws and Lawyers do express
Naught but a Kingdoms ill-affectednesse:
Even so, those streets and houses do but show
Store of diseases, where Physicians flow.
Upon Julia's sweat.
Would ye oil of Blossoms get?
Take it from my Julia's sweat:
Oil of Lillies, and of Spike,
From her moisture take the like:
Let her breath, or let her blow,
All rich spices thence will flow.
Proof to no purpose.
YOu see this gentle stream, that glides,
Should on, by quick succeeding Tides:
Try if this sober stream you can
Follow to the wilder Ocean:
And see, if there it keeps unspent
In that congesting element.
Next, from that world of waters, then
By poares and cavernes back again
Induc't that inadultrate same
Stream to the Spring from whence it came.
This with a wonder when ye do,
As easy, and else easier too:
Then may ye recollect the grains
Of my particular Remains;
After a thousand Lusters hurld,
By ruffling winds, about the world.
Fame.
It Is still observed, that Fame never sings
The order, but the Sum of things.
By use comes easiness.
Often bend the Bow, and thou with ease shall do,
What others cannot with all their strength put to.
To the Genius of his house.
COmmand the Roof great Genius, and from thence
Into this house power down thy influence,
That through each room a golden pipe may run
Of living water by thy Benizon.
Fulfill the Larders, and with strengthening bread
Be evermore these Bynns replenished.
Next, like a Bishop consecrate my ground,
That luckie Fairies here may dance their Round:
And after that, lay down some silver pence,
The Masters charge and care to recompense.
Charm then the chambers; make the beds for ease,
More then for peevish pining sicknesses.
Fix the foundation fast, and let the Roof
Grow old with time, but yet keep weather-proofe.
His Grange, or private wealth.
THough Clock,
To tell how night draws hence, I're none,
A Cock,
I have, to sing how day draws on.
I have
A maid (my Prew) by good luck sent,
To save
That little, Fates me gave or lent.
A Hen
I keep, which creeking day by day,
Tells when
She goes her long white egg to lay.
A goose
I have, which, with a jealous ear,
Lets loose
Her tongue, to tell what danger's near.
A Lamb
I keep (tame) with my morsells fed,
Whose Dam
An Orphan left him (lately dead.)
A Cat
I keep, that plays about my House,
Grown fat,
With eating many a miching Mouse.
To these
A His Spaniel.
Trasy I do keep, whereby
I please
The more my rural privacie:
Which are
But toys, to give my heart some ease:
Where care
None is, slight things do lightly please.
Good precepts, or counsel.
IN all thy need, be thou possessed
Still with a well-prepared breast:
Nor let the shackles make thee sad;
Thou can but have, what others had.
And this for comfort thou must know,
Times that are ill will not still be so.
Clouds will not ever power down rain;
A sullen day will clear again.
First, peales of Thunder we must hear,
Then Lutes and Harpes shall stroke the ear.
Money makes the mirth.
WHen all Birds else do of their music fail,
Money's the still-sweet-singing Nightingale.
Up tails all.
BEgin with a kiss,
Go on too with this:
And thus, thus, thus let us smother
Our lips for a while,
But let us not beguile
Our hope of one for the other.
This play, be assured,
Long enough has endured,
Since more and more is exacted;
For love he does call
For his Uptailes all;
And that is the part to be acted.
Upon Franck.
FRanck would go scour her teeth; and setting to it,
Twice two fell out, all rotten at the root.
Upon Lucia dabled in the deaw.
MY Lucia in the deaw did go,
And prettily bedabled so,
Her clothes held up, she showed withal
Her decent legs, clean, long and small.
I followed after to descrie
Part of the nak't sincerity;
But still the envious Scene between
Denied the Mask I would have seen.
Charon and Phylomel, a Dialogue sung.
Ph. CHaron! O gentle Charon! let me woo thee,
By tears and pity now to come unto me.

Chapter What voice so sweet and charming do I hear?
Say what thou art. Ph. I prithee first draw near.

Chapter A sound I hear, but nothing yet can see,
Speak where thou art. Ph. O Charon pity me!
I am a bird, and though no name I tell,
My warbling note will say I Am Phylomel.

Chapter What Is that to me, I waft nor fish or fowls,
Nor Beasts (fond thing) but only humane souls.

Ph. Alas for me! Chapter Shame on thy witching note,
That made me thus hoist sail, and bring my Boat:
But I Will return; what mischief brought thee hither?

Ph. A deal of Love, and much, much Grief together.

Chapter What Is thy request? Ph. that since she is now beneath
Who fed my life, I Will follow her in death.

Chapter And is that all? I Am gone. Ph. By love I pray thee,

Chapter Talk not of love, all pray, but few souls pay me.

Ph. I Will give thee vows and tears Chapter can tears pay skores
For mending sails, for patching Boat and Oars?

Chapter I Will beg a penny, or I Will sing so long,
Till thou shall say, I Have paid thee with a song.

Chapter Why then begin, and all the while we make
Our slothful passage over the Stvgian Lake,
Thou and I Will sing to make these dull Shades merry,
Who else with tears would doubtless drown my ferry

Upon Paul. Epigr.
Paul's hands do give, what give they bread or meat,
Or money? no, but only deaw and sweat.
As stones and salt gloves use to give, even so
Paul's hands do give, naught else for ought we know.
Upon Sibb. Epigr.
SIbb when she saw her face how hard it was,
For anger spat on thee her Looking-glass:
But weep not Crystal; for the shame was meant
Not unto thee, but That thou did present.
A Ternarie of littles, upon a pipkin of Jellie sent to a Lady.
1
A Little Saint best fits a little Shrine,
A little prop best fits a little Vine,
As my small Cruse best fits my little Wine.
2
A little Seed best fits a little Soil,
A little Trade best fits a little Toil:
As my small Jarre best fits my little Oil.
3
A little Bin best fits a little Bread,
A little Garland fits a little Head:
As my small stuff best fits my little Shed.
4
A little Hearth best fits a little Fire,
A little Chapel fits a little Quire,
As my small Bell best fits my little Spire.
5
A little stream best fits a little Boat;
A little lead best fits a little Float;
As my small Pipe best fits my little note.
6
A little meat best fits a little belly,
As sweetly Lady, give me leave to tell ye,
This little Pipkin fits this little Jellie.
Upon the Roses in Julias bosom.
THrice happy Roses, so much graced, to have
Within the Bosom of my Love your grave.
Die when ye will, your sepulcher is known,
Your Grave her Bosom is, the Lawne the Stone.
Maids nay's are nothing.
MAids nay's are nothing, they are shie
But to desire what they deny.
The smell of the Sacrifice.
THe Gods require the thighs
Of Beeves for sacrifice;
Which roasted, we the steam
Must sacrifice to them:
Who though they do not eat,
Yet love the smell of meat.
Lovers how they come and part.
AGyges Ring they bear about them still,
To be, and not seen when and where they will.
They tread on clouds, and though they sometimes fall
They fall like dew, but make no noise at all.
So silently they one to the other come,
As colors steal into the Pear or Plum,
And Aire-like, leave no pression to be seen
Where e're they met, or parting place has been.
To women, to hide their teeth, if they be rotten or rusty.
CLose keep your lips, if that you mean
To be accounted inside clean:
For if you cleave them, we shall see
There in your teeth much Leprosy.
In praise of women.
OJupiter, should I speak ill
Of womankind, first die I will;
Since that I know, among all the rest
Of creatures, woman is the best.
The Apron of Flowers.
TTo gather Flowers Sappha went,
And homeward she did bring
Within her Lawnie Continent,
The treasure of the Spring.
She smiling blushed, and blushing smiled,
And sweetly blushing thus,
She looked as she would been got with child
By young Favonius.
Her Apron gave (as she did pass)
An Odor more divine,
More pleasing too, then ever was
The lap of Proserpine.
The Candor of Julias teeth.
WHite as Zenobias teeth, the which the Girls
Of Rome did wear for their most precious
(Pearls.
Upon her weeping.
SHe wept upon her cheeks, and weeping so,
She seemed to quench loves fires that there did glow.
Another upon her weeping.
SHe by the River sat, and sitting there,
She wept, and made it deeper by a tear.
Delay.
BReak off Delay, since we but read of one
That ever prosper'd by Cunctation.
To Sir John Berkley, Governor of Exeter.
STand sorth brave man, since Fate has made thee here
The Hector over Aged Exeter;
Who for a long sad time has weeping stood,
Like a poor Lady lost in Widdowhood:
Bat fears not now to see her safety sold
(As other Towns and Cities were) for gold,
By those ignoble Births, which shame the stem
That gave Progermination unto them:
Whose restless Ghosts shall hear their children sing,
Our Sires betrayed their Country and their King.
True, if this City seven times rounded was
With rock, and seven times circumflankt with brass,
Yet if thou were not, Berkley, loyal proof,
The Senators down tumbling with the Roof,
Would into praised (but pitied) ruins fall,
Leaving no show, where stood the Capitol.
But thou art just and itchlesse, and do please
Thy Genius with two strengthening Buttresses,
Faith, and Affection: which will never slip
To weaken this thy great Dictator-ship.
To Electra. Love looks for Love.
LOve love begets, then never be
Unsoft to him who is smooth to thee.
Tigers and Bears (I Have heard some say)
For profer'd love will love repay:
None are so harsh, but if they find
Softness in others, will be kind;
Affection will affection move,
Then you must like, because I love.
Regression spoils Resolution.
Have thou attempted greatness? then go on,
Back-turning slackens Resolution.
Contention.
DIscreet and prudent we that Discord call,
That either profits, or not hurts at all.
Consultation.
COnsult ere thou begin'st, that done, go on
With all wise speed for execution.
Love dislikes nothing.
WHatsoever thing I see,
Rich or poor although it be;
It Is a Mistress unto me.
Be my Girl, or fair or brown,
Does she smile, or does she frown:
Still I write a Sweetheart down.
Be she rough, or smooth of skin;
When I touch, I then begin
For to let Affection in.
Be she bald, or does she wear
Locks incurl'd of other hair;
I shall find enchantment there.
Be she whole, or be she rent,
So my fancy be content,
She Is to me most excellent.
Be she fat, or be she lean,
Be she sluttish, be she clean,
I Am a man for every Scene.
Our own sins unseen.
OTher men's sins we ever bear in mind;
None sees the fardell of his faults behind.
No Pains, no Gains.
IF little lalour, little are our gains:
Man's fortunes are according to his pains.
Upon Slouch.
SLouch he packs up, and goes to several Faires,
And weekly Markets for to sell his wares:
Mean time that he from place to place does rome,
His wife her own ware sells as fast at home.
Virtue best united.
BY so much, virtue is the less,
By how much, near to singleness.
The eye.
A Wanton and lascivious eye
Betrays the Hearts Adultery.
To Prince Charles upon his coming to Exeter.
WHat Fate decreed, Time now has made us see
A Renovation of the West by Thee.
That Preternaturall Fever, which did threat
Death to our Country, now has lost his heat:
And calmes succeeding, we perceive no more
The unequal Pulse to beat, as heretofore.
Something there yet remains for Thee to do;
Then reach those ends that thou wast destined to.
Go on with Sylla's Fortune; let thy Fate
Make Thee like Him, this, that way fortunate,
Apollos Image side with Thee to bless
Thy War (discreetly made) with white success.
Mean time thy Prophets Watch by Watch shall pray;
While young Charles fights, and fighting wins the day.
That done, our smooth-pac't Poems all shall be
Sung in the high Doxologie of Thee.
Then maids shall strew Thee, and thy Curles from them
Receive (with Songs) a flowrie Diadem.
A Song.
Burn, or drown me, choose ye whether,
So I may but die together:
Thus to slay me by degrees,
Is the height of Cruelties.
What needs twenty stabs, when one
Strikes me dead as any stone?
O show mercy then, and be
Kind at once to murder me.
Princes and Favorites.
PRinces and Favorites are most dear, while they
By giving and receiving hold the play:
But the Relation then of both grows poor,
When These can ask, and Kings can give no more.
Examples, or like Prince, like People.
EXamples lead us, and we likely see,
Such as the Prince is, will his People be.
Potentates.
LOve and the Graces evermore do wait
Upon the man that is a Potentate.
The Wake.
COme Anthea let us two
Go to Feast, as others do.
Tarts and Gustards, Creams and Cakes,
Are the Junketts still at Wakes:
Unto which the Tribes resort,
Where the business is the sport:
Morris-dancers thou shall see,
Marian too in Pagentrie:
And a Mimick to devise
Many grinning properties.
Players there will be, and those
Base in action as in clothes:
Yet with strutting they will please
The incurious Villages.
Near the dying of the day,
There will be a Cudgell-Play,
Where a Coxcomb will be broke,
Ere a good word can be spoke:
But the anger ends all here,
Drencht in Ale, or drowned in Beer.
Happy Rusticks, best content
With the cheapest Merriment:
And possess no other fear,
Then to want the Wake next Year.
The Peter-penny.
FResh strowings allow
To my Sepulcher now,
To make my lodging the sweeter;
A staff or a wand
Put then in my hand,
With a penny to pay S. Peter.
Who has not a Cross,
Must sit with the loss,
And no whit further must venture;
Since the Porter he
Will paid have his fee,
Or else not one there must enter.
Who at a dead lift,
Cannot send for a gift
A Pig to the Priest for a Roster,
Shall hear his Clarke say,
By yea and by nay,
No penny, no Pater Noster.
To Doctor Alablaster.
NOr art thou less esteemed, that I have placed
(Amongst mine honored) Thee (almost) the last:
In great Processions many lead the way
To him, who is the triumph of the day,
As these have done to Thee, who art the one,
One only glory of a million,
In whom the spirit of the Gods does dwell,
Firing thy soul, by which thou do foretell
When this or that vast Dinastie must fall
Down to a Fillit more Imperial.
When this or that Horn shall be broke, and when
Others shall spring up in their place again:
When times and seasons and all years must lie
Drowned in the Sea of wild Eternity:
When the Black Doomsday Books (as yet unsealed)
Shall by the mighty Angel be revealed:
And when the Trumpet which thou late have found
Shall call to Judgment; tell us when the sound
Of this or that great April day shall be,
And next the Gospel we will credit thee.
Mean time like Earth-wormes we will craule below,
And wonder at Those Things that thou do know.
Upon his Kinswoman Mrs. M. S.
HEre lies a Virgin, and as sweet
As ere was wrapped in winding sheet.
Her name if next you would have known,
The Marble speaks it Mary Stone:
Who dying in her blooming years,
This Stone, for names sake, melts to tears.
If fragrant Virgins you will but keep
A Fast, while Jets and Marbles weep,
And praying, strew some Roses on her,
You Will do my Neice abundant honor.
Felicity knows no Fence.
OF both our Fortunes good and bad we find
Prosperity more searching of the mind:
Felicity flies over the Wall and Fence,
While misery keeps in with patience.
Death ends all woe.
TIme is the Bound of things, where e're we go,
Fate gives a meeting. Death's the end of woe.
A Conjuration, to Electra.
BY those soft Tods of wool
With which the air is full:
By all those Tinctures there,
That paint the Hemisphere:
By Dewes and drisling Rain,
That swell the Golden Grain:
By all those sweets that be
In The flowrie Nunnerie:
By silent Nights, and the
Three Forms of Heccate:
By all Aspects that bless
The sober Sorceresse,
While juice she strains, and pith
To make her Philters with:
By Time, that hastens on
Things to perfection:
And by your self, the best
Conjurement of the rest:
O my Electra! be
In love with none, but me.
Courage cooled.
I Cannot love, as I have loved before:
For, I Am grown old; and, with mine age, grown poor:
Love must be fed by wealth: this blood of mine
Must needs wax cold, if wanting bread and wine.
The Spell.
HOly Water come and bring;
Cast in Salt, for seasoning:
Set the Brush for sprinkling:
Sacred Spittle bring ye hither;
Meal and it now mix together;
And a little Oil to either:
Give the Tapers here their light,
Ring the Saints-Bell, to affright
Far from hence the evil Sp'rite.
His wish to privacie.
GIve me a Cell
To dwell,
Where no foot has
A path:
There will I spend,
And end
My wearied years
In tears.
A good Husband.
A Master of a house (as I have read)
Must be the first man up, and last in bed:
With the Sun rising he must walk his grounds;
See this, View that, and all the other bounds:
Shut every gate; mend every hedge that is torn.
Either with old, or plant therein new thorn:
Tread ore his gleab, but with such care, that where
He sets his foot, he leaves rich compost there.
A Hymn to Bacchus.
I Sing thy praise Iacchus,
Who with thy Thyrse do thwack us:
And yet thou so do back us
With boldness that we fear
No Brutus entering here;
Nor Cato the severe.
What though the Lictors threat us,
We know they dare not beat us;
So long as thou do heat us.
When we thy Orgies sing,
Each Cobbler is a King;
Nor dreads he any thing:
And though he do not rave,
Yet he will the courage have
To call my Lord Mayor knave;
Besides too, in a brave,
Although he has no riches,
But walks with dangling breeches,
And skirts that want their stiches,
And shows his naked flitches;
Yet he will be thought or seen,
So good as George-a-Green;
And calls his Blouze, his Queen;
And speaks in language keen:
O Bacchus! let us be
From cares and troubles free;
And thou shall hear how we
Will chant new Hymns to thee.
Upon Pusse and her Prentice. Epig.
PUsse and her Prentice both at Draw-gloves play;
That done, they kiss, and so draw out the day:
At night they draw to Supper; then well fed,
They draw their clothes off both, so draw to bed.
Blame the reward of Princes.
AMong disasters that discention brings,
This not the least is, which belongs to Kings.
If Wars go well; each for a part lays claim:
If ill, then Kings, not Soldiers bear the blame.
Clemency in Kings.
KIngs must not only cherish up the good,
But must be niggards of the meanest blood.
Anger.
WRongs if neglected, vanish in short time;
But heard with anger, we confess the crime.
A Psalm or Hymn to the Graces.
GLory be to the Graces!
That do in public places,
Drive thence what ere encumbers,
The listening to my numbers.
Honor be to the Graces!
Who do with sweet embraces,
Show they are well contented
With what I have invented.
Worship be to the Graces!
Who do from sour faces,
And lungs that would infect me,
For evermore protect me.
An Hymn to the Muses.
Honor to you who sit!
Near to the well of wit;
And drink you fill of it.
Glory and worship be!
To you sweet Maids (thrice three)
Who still inspire me.
And teach me how to sing
Unto the Lyrick string
My measures ravishing.
Then while I sing your praise,
My Priesthood crown with bays
Green, to the end of days.
Upon Julia's Clothes.
WHen as in silks my Julia goes, (flows
There, then (me thinks) how sweetly
That liquefaction of her clothes.
Next, when I cast mine eyes and see
That brave Vibration each way free;
O how that glittering takes me!
Moderation.
IN things a moderation keep,
Kings ought to sheare, not skin their sheep.
To Anthea.
LEts call for Hymen if agreed thou art;
Delays in love but crucify the heart.
Loves thornie Tapers yet neglected lie:
Speak thou the word, they will kind le by and by.
The nimble hours woo us on to wed,
And Genius waits to have us both to bed.
Behold, for us the Naked Graces ^ay
With maunds of roses for to strew the way:
Besides, the most religious Prophet stands
Ready to join, as well our hearts as hands.
Juno yet smiles; but if she chance to chide,
Ill luck 'twill bode to the Bridegroom and the Bride.
Tell me Anthea, do thou fondly dread
The loss of that we call a Maydenhead?
Come, I Will instruct thee. Know, the vestall fire
Is not by marriage quenched, but flames the higher.
Upon Prew his Maid.
IN this little Urne is laid
Prewdence Baldwin (once my maid)
From whose happy spark here let
Spring the purple Violet.
The Invitation.
TO sup with thee thou did me home invite;
And made a promise that mine appetite
Should meet and tire, on such lautitious meat,
The like not Heliogabalus did eat:
And richer Wine wo'dst give to me (thy guest)
Then Roman Sylla powered out at his feast.
I came; (it is true) and looked for Foul of price,
The bastard Phoenix; bird of Paradise;
And for no less then Aromatic Wine
Of Maydens-blush, commixt with Jessimine.
Clean was the herth, the mantle larded jet;
Which wanting Lar, and smoke, hung weeping wet;
At last, in the noone of winter, did appear
A ragd-soust-neats-foot with sick vinegar:
And in a burnisht Flagonet stood by
Beer small as Comfort, dead as Charity.
At which amazed, and pondring on the food,
How cold it was, and how it child my blood;
I cursed the master; and I damned the souce;
And swore I Would got the ague of the house.
Well, when to eat thou do me next desire,
I Will bring a Fever; since thou keep'st no fire.
Ceremonies for Christmasse.
COme, bring with a noise,
My merry merry boys,
The Christmas Log to the firing;
While my good Dame, she
Bids ye all be free;
And drink to your hearts desiring.
With the last years brand
Light the new block, And
For good success in his spending,
On your Psaltries play,
That sweet luck may
Come while the Log is a teending.
Drink now the strong Beer,
Cut the white loaf here,
The while the meat is a shredding;
For the rare Mince-Pie
And the Plums stand by
To fill the Paste that is a kneading.
Christmasse-Eve, another Ceremony.
COme guard this night the Christmas-Pie,
That the Thief, though never so sly,
With his Flesh-hooks, don't come nie
To catch it.
From him, who all alone sits there,
Having his eyes still in his ear,
And a deal of nightly fear
To watch it.
Another to the Maids.
WAsh your hands, or else the fire
Will not teend to your desire;
Unwasht hands, ye Maidens, know,
Dead the Fire, though ye blow.
Another.
VVAssaile the Trees, that they may bear
You many a Plum, and many a Pear:
For more or less fruits they will bring,
As you do give them Wassailing.
Power and Peace.
It Is never, or but seldom known,
Power and Peace to keep one Throne.
To his dear Valentine, Mistress Margaret Falconbrige.
NOw is your turn (my Dearest) to be set
A Jem in this eternal Coronet:
'Twas rich before; but since your Name is down,
It sparkles now like Ariadne's Crown.
Blaze by this Sphere for ever: Or this do,
Let Me and It shine evermore by you.
To Oenone.
SWeet Oenone, do but say
Love thou do, though Love says Nay.
Speak me fair; for Lovers be
Gently killed by Flattery.
Verses.
Who will not honor Noble Numbers, when
Verses outlive the bravest deeds of men?
Happiness.
THat Happiness does still the longest thrive,
Where Joys and Griefs have (...) Alternative.
Things of choice, long a coming.
WE pray against War, yet we enjoy no Peace;
Desire deferred is, that it may increase.
Poetry perpetuates the Poet.
HEre I my self might likewise die,
And utterly forgotten lie,
But that eternal Poetry
Repullulation gives me here
Unto the thirtieth thousand year,
When all now dead shall re-appeare.
Upon Bice.
BIce laughs, when no man speaks; and does protest
It is his own breech there that breaks the jest.
Upon Trencherman.
TOm shifts the Trenchers; yet he never can
Endure that lukewarm name of Serving-man;
Serve or not serve, let Tom do what he can,
He is a serving, who is a Trencher-man.
Kisses.
GIve me the food that satisfies a Guest:
Kisses are but dry banquets to a Feast.
Orpheus.
ORpheus he went (as Poets tell)
To fetch Euridice from Hell;
And had her; but it was upon
This short but strict condition:
Backward he should not look while he
Led her through Hells obscurity:
But ah! it happened as he made
His passage through that dreadful shade:
Revolve he did his loving eye;
(For gentle fear, or jelousie)
And looking back, that look did sever
Him and Euridice for ever.
Upon Comely a good speaker but an ill singer, Epig.
COmely Acts well; and when he speaks his part,
He does it with the sweetest tones of Art:
But when he sings a Psalm, there is none can be
More cursed for singing out of tune then he.
Any way for wealth.
E'Ene all Religious courses to be rich
Has been reherst, by Joell Michelditch:
But now perceiving that it still does please
The sterner Fates, to cross his purposes;
He tacks about, and now he does profess
Rich he will be by all unrighteousness:
Thus if our ship fails of her Anchor hold,
We Will love the Devil, so he lands the gold.
Upon an old Woman.
OLd widow Prouse to do her neighbors evil
Would give (some say) her soul unto the Devil.
Well, when she has killed, that Pig, Goose, Cock or Hen,
What would she give to get that soul again?
Upon Perch. Epig.
THou writes in Prose, how sweet all Virgins be;
But there is not one, does praise the smell of thee.
To Sapho.
SApho, I will choose to go
Where the Northern winds do blow
Endless Ice, and endless Snow:
Rather then I once would see,
But a Winters face in thee,
To benumme my hopes and me.
To his faithful friend, Master John Crofts, Cup Bearer to the King.
FOr all thy many courtesies to me,
Nothing I have (my Crofts) to send to Thee
For the requital; save this only one
Half of my just remuneration.
For since I Have travailed all this Realm throughout
To seek, and find some few Immortals out
To circumspangle this my spacious Sphere,
(As Lamps for everlasting shining here:)
And having fixed Thee in mine Orb a Star
(Amongst the rest) both bright and singular;
The present Age will tell the world thou art
If not to the whole, yet satisfied in part.
As for the rest, being too great a sum
Here to be paid; I Will pay't i'th'world to come.
The Bride-Cake.
THis day my Julia thou must make
For Mistress Bride, the wedding Cake:
Knead but the Dow and it will be
To paste of Almonds turned by thee:
Or kiss it thou, but once, or twice,
And for the Bride-Cake ther'l be Spice.
To be merry.
LEts now take out time;
While we are in our Prime;
And old, old Age is a far off:
For the evil evil days
Will come on apace;
Before we can be aware of.
Burial.
MAn may want Land to live in; but for all,
Nature finds out some place for burial.
Lenity.
It Is the Chyrurgions praise, and height of Art,
Not to cut off, but cure the vicious part.
Penitence.
WHo after his transgression does repent,
Is half, or altogether innocent.
Grief.
COnsider sorrows, how they are aright:
Grief, if it be great, it is short; if long, it is light.
The Maiden-blush.
SO look the mornings when the Sun
Paints them with fresh Vermilion:
So Cherries blush, and Kathern Pears,
And Apricocks, in youthful years:
So Corrolls look more lovely Red,
And Rubies lately polished:
So purest Diaper does shine,
Stained by the Beams of Clarret wine:
As Julia looks when she does dress
Her either cheek with bashfullness.
The Mean.
IMparitie does ever discord bring:
The Mean the Music makes in every thing.
Haste hurtful.
HAste is unhappy: What we Rashly do
Is both unluckie; I, and foolish too.
Where War with rashness is attempted, there
The Soldiers leave the Field with equal fear.
Purgatory.
REaders we enteat ye pray
For the soul of Lucia;
That in little time she be
From her Purgatory free:
In the intrim she desires
That your tears may cool her fires.
The Cloud.
See thou that Cloud that rides in State
Part Ruby-like, part Candidate?
It is no other then the Bed
Where Venus sleeps (half smothered.)
Upon Loach.
SEeal'd up with Night-gum, Loach each morning lies,
Till his Wife licking, so unglews his eyes.
No question then, but such a lick is sweet,
When a warm tongue does with such Ambers meet.
The Amber Bead.
I Saw a Fly within a Beade
Of Amber cleanly buried:
The Urne was little, but the room
More rich then Cleopatra's Tomb.
To my dearest Sister M. Mercy Herrick.
WHen ere I go, or what so ere befalls
Me in mine Age, or foreign Funerals,
This Blessing I will leave thee, ere I go,
Prosper thy Basket, and therein thy Dow.
Feed on the paste of Filberts, or else knead
And Bake the flower of Amber for thy bread.
Balm may thy Trees drop, and thy Springs run
And everlasting Harvest crown thy Soil! (oil
These I but wish for; but they self shall see,
The Blessing fall in mellow times on Thee.
The Transfiguration.
Immortal clothing I put on,
So soon as Julia I am gone
To mine eternal Mansion.
Thou, thou art here, to humane sight
Clothed all with incorrupted light;
But yet how more admir'dly bright
Will thou appear, when thou art set
In thy refulgent Thronelet,
That shin'st thus in thy counterfeit?
Suffer that thou can not shift.
Does Fortune rend thee? Bear with thy hard Fate:
Virtuous instructions never are delicate.
Say, does she frown? still countermand her threats:
Virtue best loves those children that she beats.
To the Passenger.
IF I lie unburied Sir,
These my Relics, (pray) interre:
It Is religious part to see
Stones, or turfes to cover me.
One word more I had to say;
But it skills not; go your way;
He that wants a burial room
For a Stone, has Heaven his Tomhe,
Upon Nodes.
WHere ever Nodes does in the Summer come,
He prays his Harvest may be well brought home.
What store of Corn has careful Nodes, think you,
Whose Field his foot is, and whose Barn his shoe?
TO THE KING, Upon his taking of Leicester.
THis Day is Yours Great CHARLES! and in this War
Your Fate, and Ours, alike Victorious are.
In her white Stole; now Victory does rest
Enspher'd with Palm on Your Triumphant Crest.
Fortune is now Your Captive; other Kings
Hold but her hands; You hold both hands and wings.
To Julia, in her Dawn, or Day-breake.
BY the next kindling of the day
My Julia thou shall see,
Ere Ave-Mary thou can say
I Will come and visit thee.
Yet ere thou counsel'st with thy Glass,
Appear thou to mine eyes
As smooth, and nak't, as she that was
The prime of Paradise,
If blush thou must, then blush thou through
A Lawn, that thou may look
As purest Pearls, or Pebles do
When peeping through a Brook.
As Lillies shrin'd in Crystal, so
Do thou to me appear;
Or Damask Roses, when they grow
To sweet acquaintance there.
Counsel.
'TWas Cesars saying: Kings no less Conquerors are
By their wise Counsel, then they be by War.
Bad Princes pill their People.
LIke those infernal Deities which eat
The best of all the sacrificed meat;
And leave their servants, but the smoke and sweat:
So many Kings, and Primates too there are,
Who claim the Fat, and Fleshie for their share,
And leave their Subjects but the starved ware.
Most Words, less Works.
IN desperate cases, all, or most are known
Commanders, few for execution.
To Dianeme.
I Co'd but see thee yesterday
Stung by a fretfull Be;
And I the Javelin sucked away,
And healed the wound in thee.
A thousand thorns, and Briars and Stings,
I have in my poor Breast;
Yet never can see that salve which brings
My Passions any rest.
As Love shall help me, I admire
How thou can sit and smile,
To see me bleed, and not desire
To stench the blood the while.
If thou composed of gentle mould
Art so unkind to me;
What dismal Stories will be told
Of those that cruel be?
Upon Tap.
TAp (better known then trusted) as we hear
Sold his old Mothers Spectacles for Beer:
And not unlikely; rather too then fail,
He Will sell her Eyes, and Nose, for Beer and Ale.
His Loss.
ALL has been plundered from me, but my wit;
Fortune her self can lay no claim to it.
Draw, and Drink.
MIlk still your Fountains, and your Springs, for why?
The more they are drawn, the less they will grow dry.
Upon Punchin. Epig.
GIve me a reason why men call
Punchin a dry plant-animall.
Because as Plants by water grow,
Punchin by Beer and Ale; spreads so
To Oenone.
THou say Loves Dart
Has pricked thy heart;
And thou do languish too:
If one poor prick,
Can make thee sick,
Say, what would many do?
Upon Blinks. Epig.
TOm Blinks his Nose is full of wheales, and these
Tom calls not pimples, but Pimpleides:
Sometimes (in mirth) he says each whelk's a spark
(When drunk with Beer) to light him home, in the dark.
Upon Adam Peapes. Epig.
PEapes he does strut, and pick his Teeth, as if
His jaws had tired on some large Chine of Beef.
But nothing so; The Dinner Adam had,
Was cheese full ripe with Tears, with Bread as sad.
To Electra.
SHall I go to Love and tell,
Thou art all turned isicle?
Shall I say her Altars be
Disadorn'd, and scorned by thee?
O beware! in time submit;
Love has yet no wrathful fit:
If her patience turns to ire,
Love is then consuming fire.
To Mistress Amie Potter.
A I me! I love, give him your hand to kiss
Who both your wooer, and your Poet is.
Nature has pre-compos'd us both to Love;
Your part's to grant; my Scean must be to move.
Dear, can you like, and liking love your Poet?
If you say (I) Blush-guiltinesse will show it.
Mine eyes must woo you; (though I sigh the while)
True Love is tonguelesse as a Crocodile.
And you may find in Love these differing Parts;
Wooers have Tongues of Ice, but burning hearts.
Upon a Maid.
HEre she lies (in Bed of Spice)
Fair as Eve in Paradise:
For her beauty it was such
Poets co'd not praise too much.
Virgins Come, and in a Ring
Her supreamest Requiem sing;
Then depart, but see ye tread
Lightly, lightly ore the dead.
Upon Love.
LOve is a Circle, and an Endless Sphere;
From good to good, revolving here, and there.
Beauty.
BEauti's no other but a lovely Grace
Of lively colors, flowing from the face.
Upon Love.
SOme salve to every sore, we may apply;
Only for my wound there is no remedy.
Yet if my Julia kiss me, there will be
A sovereign balm found out to cure me.
Upon Hanch a Schoolmaster. Epig.
HAnch, since he (lately) did interre his wife,
He weeps and sighs (as weary of his life.)
Say, is it for real grief he mourns? not so;
Tears have their springs from joy, as well as woe.
Upon Peason. Epig.
LOng Locks of late our Zelot Peason wears,
Not for to hide his high and mighty ears;
No, but because he would not have it seen, (been.
That Stubble stands, where once large ears have
To his Book.
MAke haste away, and let one be
A friendly Patron unto thee:
Lest rapt from hence, I see thee lie
Torn for the use of Pasterie:
Or see thy injured Leaves serve well,
To make loose Gowns for Mackarell:
Or see the Grocers in a trice,
Make hoods of thee to serve out Spice.
Readiness.
THe readiness of doing, does express
No other, but the doers willingness.
Writing.
WHen words we want, Love teaches to endite;
And what we blush to speak, she bids us write.
Society.
TWo things do make society to stand;
The first Commerce is, and the next Command.
Upon a Maid.
GOne she is a long, long way,
But she has decreed a day
Back to come, (and make no stay.)
So we keep till her return
Here, her ashes, or her Urne.
Satisfaction for sufferings.
FOr all our works, a recompense is sure:
It Is sweet to think on what was hard to endure.
The delaying Bride.
WHy so slowly do you move
To the center of your love?
On your niceness though we wait,
Yet the hours say it is late:
Coyness takes us to a measure;
But o'racted deads the pleasure.
Go to Bed, and care not when
Cheerful day shall spring again.
One Brave Captain did command
(By his word) the Sun to stand:
One short charm if you but say
Will enforce the Moon to stay,
Till you warn her hence (away)
T'ave your blushes seen by day.
To M. Henry Laws, the excellent Composer of his Lyricks.
TOuch but thy Lire (my Harrie) and I hear
From thee some raptures of the rare Gotire.
Then if thy voice commingle with the String
I hear in thee the rare Laniere to sing;
Or curious Wilson: Tell me, can thou be
Less then Apollo, that usurp'st such Three?
Three, unto whom the whole world give applause;
Yet their Three praises, praise but One; that is Laws.
Age unfit for Love.
MAidens tell me I am old;
Let me in my Glass behold
Whether smooth or not I be,
Or if hair remains to me.
Well, or be it or be it not so,
This for certainty I know;
Ill it fits old men to play,
When that Death bids come away.
The Bed-man, or Grave-maker.
THou have made many Houses for the Dead;
When my Lot calls me to be buried,
For Love or Pity, prithee let there be
I'th'Church-yard, made, one Tenement for me.
To Anthea.
ANthea I am going hence
With some small stock of innocence:
But yet those blessed gates I see
Withstanding entrance unto me.
To pray for me do thou begin,
The Porter then will let me in.
Need.
WHo begs to die for fear of humane need,
Wishes his body, not his soul, good speed.
To Julia.
I Am zeallesse, prithee pray
For my welfare ( Julia)
For I think the gods require
Male perfumes, but Female fire.
On Julias lips.
SWeet are my Julia's lips and clean,
As if over washed in Hippocrene.
Twilight.
TWilight, no other thing is, Poets say,
Then the last part of night, and first of day.
To his Friend, Master J. Jincks.
LOve, love me now, because I place
Thee here among myrighteous race:
The bastard Slips may droop and die
Wanting both Root, and Earth; but thy
Immortal self, shall boldly trust
To live for ever, with my Just.
On himself.
IF that my Fate has now fulfilled my year,
And so soon stopped my longer living here;
What was it (ye Gods!) a dying man to save,
But while he met with his Paternall grave;
Though while we living 'bout the world do roame,
We love to rest in peaceful Urnes at home,
Where we may snug, and close together lie
By the dead bones of our dear Ancestrie.
Kings and Tyrants.
TWixt Kings and Tyrants there is this difference known;
Kings seek their Subjects good: Tyrants their own.
Crosses.
OUr Crosses are no other then the rods,'
And our Diseases, Vultures of the Gods:
Each grief we feel, that likewise is a Kite
Sent forth by them, our flesh to eat, or bite.
Upon Love.
LOve brought me to a silent Grove,
And showed me there a Tree,
Where some had hanged themselves for love,
And gave a Twist to me.
The Halter was of silk, and gold,
That he reached forth unto me:
No otherwise, then if he would
By dainty things undo me.
He bade me then that Neck-lace use;
And told me too, he makes
A glorious end by such a Noose,
His Death for Love that takes.
'Twas but a dream; but had I been
There really alone;
My desperate fears, in love, had seen
Mine Execution.
No difference i'th'dark.
NIght makes no difference 'twixt the Priest and Clark;
Jone as my Lady is as good i'th'dark.
The Body.
THe Body is the Souls poor house, or home,
Whose Ribs the Laths are, and whose Flesh the Loame.
To Sapho.
THou say thou love me Sapho; I say no;
But would to Love I could believe 'twas so!
Pardon my fears (sweet Sapho,) I desire
That thou be righteous found; and I the Liar.
Out of Time, out of Tune.
WE blame, nay we despise her pains
That wets her Garden when it raines:
But when the drought has dried the knot;
Then let her use the watring pot.
We pray for showers (at our need)
To drench, but not to drown our seed.
To his Book.
TAke mine advise, and go not near
Those faces (sower as Vinegar.)
For these, and Nobler numbers can
Never please the supercillious man.
To his Honored friend, Sir Thomas Heal.
STand by the Magic of my powerful Rhymes
Against all the indignation of the Times.
Age shall not wrong thee; or one jot abate
Of thy both Great, and everlasting fate.
While others perish, her'es thy life decreed
Because begot of my Immort all seed.
The Sacrifice, by way of Discourse betwixt himself and Julia.
Herr. COme and let us in solemn wise
Both address to sacrifice:
Old Religion first commands
That we wash our hearts, and hands.
Is the beast exempt from stain,
Altar clean, no fire profane?
Are the Garlands, Is the Nard

Jul. Ready here? All well prepared,
With the Wine that must be shed
(Twixt the horns) upon the head
Of the holy Beast we bring
For our Trespasse-offering.

Herr. All is well; now next to these
Put we on pure Surplices;
And with Chaplets crowned, we will roast
With perfumes the Holocaust:
And (while we the gods invoke)
Read acceptance by the smoke.

To Apollo.
THou mighty Lord and master of the Lyre,
Unshorn Apollo, come, and re-inspire
My fingers so, the Lyrick-strings to move,
That I may play, and sing a Hymn to Love.
On Love.
Love is a kind of war; Hence those who fear,
No cowards must his royal Ensigns bear.
Another.
WHere love begins, there dead thy first desire:
A spark neglected makes a mighty fire.
An Hymn to Cupid.
THou, thou that bear the sway
With whom the Sea-Nimphs play;
And Venus, every way:
When I embrace thy knee;
And make short prayers to thee:
In love, then prosper me.
This day I go to woo;
Instruct me how to do
This work thou put'st me too.
From shame my face keep free,
From scorn I beg of thee,
Love to deliver me:
So shall I sing thy praise;
And to thee Altars raise,
Unto the end of days.
To Electra.
LEt not thy Tombstone er'e be laid by me:
Nor let my Hearse, be wept upon by thee:
But let that instant when thou dy'st be known,
The minute of mine expiration.
One knell be rung for both; and let one grave
To hold us two, an endless honor have.
How his soul came ensnared.
MY soul would one day go and seek
For Roses, and in Julia's cheek,
A richess of those sweets she found,
(As in an other Rosamond.)
But gathering Roses as she was;
(Not knowing what would come to pass)
It chanst a ringlet of her hair,
Caught my poor soul, as in a snare:
Which ever since has been in thrall,
Yet freedom, she enjoyes withal.
Factions.
THe factions of the great ones call,
To side with them, the Commons all.
Kisses Loathsome.
I Abhor the slimie kiss,
(Which to me most loathsome is.)
Those lips please me which are placed
Close, but not too strictly lac't:
Yiedling I would have them; yet
Not a wimbling Tongue admit:
What should poking-sticks make there,
When the rufse is set elsewhere?
Upon Reap.
REapes eyes so raw are, that (it seems) the flies
Mistake the flesh, and flye-blow both his eyes;
So that an Angler, for a days expense,
May bait his hook, with maggots taken thence.
Upon Teage.
TEage has told lies so long, that when Teage tells
Truth, yet Teages truths are untruths, (nothing else.)
Upon Julia's hair, bundled up in a golden net.
TEll me, what needs those rich deceits,
These golden Toils, and Trammel-nets,
To take thine hairs when they are known
Already tame, and all thine own?
It Is I am wild, and more then hairs
Deserve these Mashes and those snares.
Set free thy Tresses, let them flow
As aires do breathe, or winds do blow:
And let such curious Net-works be
Less set for them, then spread for me.
Upon Truggin.
TRuggin a Footman was; but now, grown lame,
Truggin now lives but to belie his name.
The shower of Blossoms.
LOve in a shower of Blossoms came
Down, and half drowned me with the same:
The Blooms that fell were white and red;
But with such sweets commingled;
As whether (this) I cannot tell
My sight was pleased more, or my smell:
But true it was, as I rolled there,
Without a thought of hurt, or fear;
Love turned himself into a Be,
And with his Javelin wounded me:
From which mishap this use I make,
Where most sweets are, there lies a Snake.
Kisses and Favors are sweet things;
But Those have thorns, and These have stings.
Upon Spenke.
SPenke has a strong breath, yet short Prayers says:
Not out of want of breath, but want of faith.
A defense for Women.
NAught are all Women: I say no,
Since for one Bad, one Good I know:
For Clytemnestra most unkind,
Loving Alcestis there we find:
For one Medea that was bad,
A good Penelope was had:
For wanton Lais, then we have
Chaste Lucrece, or a wife as grave:
And thus through Womankind we see
A Good and Bad. Sirs credit me.
Upon Lulls.
LUlls swears he is all heart; but you will suppose
By his Probossis that he is all nose.
Slavery.
It Is liberty to serve one Lord; but he
Who many serves, serves base servility.
Charms.
BRing the holy crust of Bread,
Lay it underneath the head;
It Is a certain Charm to keep
Hags away, while Children sleep.
Another.
LEt the superstitious wife
Near the child's heart lay a knife:
Point be up, and Haft be down;
(While she gossips in the town)
This amongst other mystic charms
Keeps the sleeping child from harms.
Another to bring in the Witch.
TO house the Hag, you must do this;
Commix with Meal a little Piss
Of him bewitched: then forthwith make
A little Wafer or a Cake;
And this rawly baked will bring
The old Hag in. No surer thing.
Another Charm for Stables.
HAng up Hooks, and Sheers to scare
Hence the Hag, that rides the Mare,
Till they be all over wet,
With the mire, and the sweat:
This observed, the Manes shall be
Of your horses, all knot free.
Ceremonies for Candlemasse Eve.
DOwn with the Rosemary and Bays,
Down with the Misleto;
In stead of Holly, now up-raise
The greener Box (for show.)
The Holly hitherto did sway;
Let Box now domineere;
Until the dancing Easter Day,
Or Easters Eve appear.
Then youthful Box which now has grace,
Your houses to renew;
Grown old, surrender must his place,
Unto the crisped Yew.
When Yew is out, then Birch comes in,
And many Flowers beside;
Both of a fresh, and fragrant kin
To honor Whitsontide.
Green Rushes then, and sweetest Bents,
With cooler Oken boughs;
Come in for comely ornaments,
To re-adorn the house.
Thus times do shift; each thing his turn does hold;
New things succeed, as former things grow old.
The Ceremonies for Candlemasse day.
KIndle the Christmas Brand and then
Till Sunne-set, let it burn;
Which quenched, then lay it up again,
Tiil Christmas next return.
Part must be kept wherewith to teend
The Christmas Log next year;
And where it is safely 'kept, the Fiend,
Can do no mischief (there.)
Upon Candlemasse day.
ENd now the White-loafe, and the Pie,
And let all sports with Christmas dye.
Surfeits.
BAd are all surfeits: but Physicians call
That surfeit took by bread, the worst of all.
Upon Nis.
NIs, he makes Verses; but the Lines he writes,
Serve but for matter to make Paper-kites.
To Biancha, to bless him.
Would I woo, and would I win,
Would I well my work begin?
Would I evermore be crowned
With the end that I propound?
Would I frustrate, or prevent
All Aspects malevolent?
Thwart all Wizzards, and with these
Dead all black contingencies:
Place my words, and all works else
In most happy Parallels?
All will prosper, if so be
I be kissed, or blessed by thee.
Julia's Churching, or Purification.
PUt on thy Holy Fillitings, and so
To the Temple with the sober Midwife go.
Attended thus (in a most solemn wise)
By those who serve the Childbed mysteries.
Burn first thine incense; next, when as thou see
The candid Stole thrown ore the Pious Priest;
With reverend Curtsies come, and to him bring
Thy free (and not decurted) offering.
All Rites well ended, with fair Auspice come
(As to the breaking of a Bride-Cake) home:
Where ceremonious Hymen shall for thee
Provide a second Epithalamie.
She who keeps chastely to her husbands side
Is not for one, but every night his Bride:
And stealing still with love, and fear to Bed,
Brings him not one, but many a Maidenhead.
To his Book.
BEfore the Press scarce one co'd see
A little-peeping-part of thee:
But since thou art Printed, thou do call
To show thy nakedness to all.
My care for thee is now the less;
(Having resigned thy shamefac'tness:)
Go with thy Faults and Fates; yet stay
And take this sentence, then away;
Whom one beloved will not suffice,
She Will run to all adulteries.
Tears.
Tears most prevail; with tears too thou may move
Rocks to relent, and coyest maids to love.
To his friend to avoid contention of words.
WOrds beget Anger; Anger brings forth blows:
Blows make of dearest friends immortal Foes.
For which prevention (Sociate) let there be
Betwixt us two no more Logomachie.
Far better 'twere for either to be mute,
Then for to murder friendship, by dispute.
Truth.
TRuth is best found out by the time, and eyes;
Falsehood winnes credit by uncertainties.
Upon Prickles. Epig.
PRickles is waspish, and puts forth his sting,
For Bread, Drink, Butter, Cheese; for every thing
That Prickles buys, puts Prickles out of frame;
How well his nature's fitted to hisname!
The Eyes before the Ears.
WE credit most our sight; one eye does please
Our trust far more ten then eare-witnesses.
Want.
WAnt is a softer Wax, that takes thereon,
This, that, and every base impression.
To a Friend.
Look in my Book, and herein see,
Life endless signed to thee and me.
We over the tombs, and Fates shall fly;
While other generations dye.
Upon M. William Laws, the rare Musician.
Should I not put on Blacks, when each one here
Comes with his Cypress, and devotes a tear?
Should I not grieve (my Laws) when every Lute,
Violl, and Voice, is (by thy loss) struck mute?
Thy loss brave man! whose Numbers have been hurled,
And no less praised, then spread throughout the world.
Some have Thee called Amphion; some of us,
Named thee Terpander, or sweet Orpheus:
Some this, some that, but all in this agree,
Music had both her birth, and death with Thee.
A song upon Silvia.
FRom me my Silvia ran away,
And running therewithal;
A Primrose Bank did cross her way,
And gave my Love a fall.
But trust me now I dare not say,
What I by chance did see;
But such the Drap'ry did betray
That fully ravished me.
The Hony-combe.
IF thou have found an honie-combe,
Eat thou not all, but taste on some:
For if thou eat'st it to excess;
That sweetness turns to Loathsomness.
Taste it to Temper; then 'twill be
Marrow, and Manna unto thee
Upon Ben. Johnson.
HEre lies Johnson with the rest
Of the Poets; but the Best.
Reader, wo'dst thou more have known?
Ask his Story, not this Stone.
That will speak what this cannot tell
Of his glory. So farewell.
An Ode for him.
AH Ben!
Say how, or when
Shall we thy Guests
Meet at those Lyrick Feasts,
Made at the Sun,
The Dog, the triple Tun?
Where we such clusters had,
As made us nobly wild, not mad;
And yet each Verse of thine
Out-did the meat, out-did the frolic wine.
My Ben
Or come again:
Or send to us,
Thy wits great overplus;
But teach us yet
Wisely to husband it;
Lest we that Tallent spend:
And having once brought to an end
That precious stock; the store
Of such a wit the world should have no more.
Upon a Virgin.
SPend Harmless shade thy nightly Hours,
Selecting here, both Herbs, and Flowers;
Of which make Garlands here, and there,
To dress thy silent sepulcher.
Nor do thou fear the want of these,
In everlasting Properties.
Since we fresh strewings will bring hither,
Far faster then the first can wither.
Blame.
IN Battles what disasters fall,
The King he bears the blame of all.
A request to the Graces.
POnder my words, if so that any be
Known guilty here of incivility:
Let what is graceless, discomposed, and rude,
With sweetness, smoothness, softness, be endu'd.
Teach it to blush, to curtsie, lisp, and show
Demure, but yet, full of temptation too.
Numbers never tickle. or but lightly please,
Unless they have some wanton carriages.
This if ye do, each Piece will here be good,
And graceful made, by your neat Sisterhood.
Upon himself.
I Lately fri'd, but now behold
I freeze as fast, and shake for cold.
And in good faith I Would thought it strange
T'ave found in me this sudden change;
But that I understood by dreams,
These only were but Loves extremes;
Who fires with hope the Lovers heart,
And starves with cold the self-same part.
Multitude.
WE Trust not to the multitude in War,
But to the stout; and those that skillful are.
Fear.
MAn must do well out of a good intent;
Not for the servile fear of punishment.
To M. Kellam.
WHat can my Kellam drink his Sack
In Goblets to the brim,
And see his Robin Herrick lack,
Yet send no Boules to him?
For love or pity to his Muse,
(That she may flow in Verse)
Contemn to recommend a Cruse,
But send to her a Tearce.
Happiness to hospitality, or a hearty wish to good housekeeping.
FIrst, may the hand of bounty bring
Into the daily offering
Of full provision; such a store,
Till that the Cook cries, Bring no more.
Upon your hogsheads never fall
A drought of wine, ale, beer (at all)
But, like full clouds, may they from thence
Diffuse their mighty influence.
Next, let the Lord, and Lady here
Enjoy a Christning year by year;
And this good blessing back them still,
T'ave Boys, and Gyrles too, as they will.
Then from the porch may many a Bride
Unto the Holy Temple ride:
And thence return, (short prayers said)
A wife most richly married.
Last, may the Bride and Bridegroom be
Untoucht by cold sterility;
But in their springing blood so play,
As that in Lusters few they may,
By laughing too, and lying down,
People a City or a Town.
Cunctation in Correction.
THe Lictors bundl'd up their rods: beside,
Knit them with knots (with much ado untied)
That if (unknitting) men would yet repent,
They might escape the lash of punishment.
Present Government grievous.
MEn are suspicious; prone to discontent:
Subjects still loath the present Government.
Rest Refreshes.
LAy by the good a while; a resting field
Will, after ease, a richer harvest yield:
Trees this year bear; next, they their wealth withold:
Continual reaping makes a land wax old.
Revenge.
Man's disposition is for to requite
An injury, before a benefit:
Thanks giving is a burden, and a pain;
Revenge is pleasing to us, as our gain.
The first marrs or makes.
IN all our high designments, 'twill appear,
The first event breeds confidence or fear.
Beginning, difficult.
HArd are the two first stairs unto a Crown;
Which got, the third, bids him a King come down.
Faith apiece.
FAith is a thing that is apiece; let it fall
This way or that, it not declines at all.
The present time best pleases.
PRaise they that will Times past, I joy to see
My self now live: this age best pleases me.
Clothes, are conspirators.
THough from without no foes at all we fear;
We shall be wounded by the clothes we wear.
Cruelty.
It Is but a dog-like madness in bad Kings,
For to delight in wounds and murderings.
As some plants prosper best by cuts and blows;
So Kings by killing do increase their foes.
Fair after foul.
Tears quickly dry: griefs will in time decay:
A clear will come after a cloudy day.
Hunger.
Ask me what hunger is, and I Will reply,
It Is but a fierce desire of hot and dry.
Bad wages for good service.
IN this misfortune Kings do most excel,
To hear the worst from men, when they do well.
The End.
COnquer we shall, but we must first contend;
It Is not the Fight that crowns us, but the end.
The Bondsman.
BInd me but to thee with thine hair.
And quickly I shall be
Made by that fetter or that snare
A bondsman unto thee.
Or if thou take that bond away,
Then bore me through the ear;
And by the Law I ought to stay
For ever with thee here.
Choose for the best.
GIve house-roome to the best; It Is never known
Virtue and pleasure, both to dwell in one.
To Silvia.
PArdon my trespass ( Silvia) I confess,
My kiss out-went the bounds of shamfastnesse:
None is discreet at all times; no, not Jove
Himself, at one time, can be wise, and Love.
Fair shows deceive.
SMooth was the Sea, and seemed to call
To pretty girls to play withal:
Who padling there, the Sea soon frowned,
And on a sudden both were drowned.
What credit can we give to seas,
Who, kissing, kill such Saints as these?
His wish.
FAt be my Hind; unlearned be my wife;
Peaceful by night; my day devoid of strife:
To these a comely offspring I desire,
Singing about my everlasting fire.
Upon Julia's washing her self in the river.
HOw fierce was I, when I did see
My Julia wash her self in thee!
So Lillies thorough Crystal look:
So purest pebbles in the brook:
As in the River Julia did,
Half with a Lawne of water hid,
Into thy streams my self I threw,
And struggling there, I kissed thee too;
And more had done (it is confessed)
Had not thy waves forbad the rest.
A Mean in our Means.
THough Frankinsense the Deities require,
We must not give all to the hallowed fire.
Such be our gifts, and such be our expense,
As for our selves to leave some frankincense.
Upon Clunn.
A Roll of Parchment Clunn about him bears,
Charged with the Arms of all his Ancestors:
And seems half ravished, when he looks upon
That Bar, this Bend; that Fess, this Cheveron;
This Manch, that Moon; this Martlet, and that Mound;
This counterchange of Perle and Diamond.
What joy can Clun have in that Coat, or this,
When as his own still out at elboes is?
Upon Cupid.
LOve, like a Beggar, came to me
With Hose and Doublet torn:
His Shirt bedangling from his knee,
With Hat and Shoes out-worne.
He asked an alms; I gave him bread,
And meat too, for his need:
Of which, when he had fully fed,
He wished me all Good speed.
Away he went, but as he turned
(In faith I know not how)
He touched me so, as that I burn,
And am tormented now.
Love's silent flames, and fires obscure
Then crept into my heart;
And though I saw no Bow, I Am sure,
His finger was the dart.
Upon Bliss.
Bliss (last night drunk) did kiss his mothers knee:
Where he will kiss (next drunk) conjecture ye.
Upon Burr.
BUrr is a smell-feast, and a man alone,
That (where meat is) will be a hanger on.
Upon Megg.
MEgg yesterday was troubled with a Pose,
Which, this night hardened, sodders up her nose.
An Hymn to Love.
I Will confess
With Cheerfulness,
Love is a thing so likes me,
That let her lay
On me all day,
I Will kiss the hand that strikes me.
2.
I will not, I,
Now blubb'ring, cry,
It (Ah!) too late repents me,
That I did fall
To love at all,
Since love so much contents me.
3.
No, no, I Will be
In fetters free;
While others they sit wringing
Their hands for pain;
I Will entertain
The wounds of love with singing.
4.
With Flowers and Wine,
And Cakes Divine,
To strike me I will tempt thee:
Which done; no more
I Will come before
Thee and thine Altars empty.
To his honored and most Ingenious friend Mr. Charles Cotton.
FOr brave comportment, wit without offense,
Words fully flowing, yet of influence:
Thou art that man of men, the man alone,
Worthy the Public Admiration:
Who with thine own eyes read'st what we do write,
And giv'st our Numbers Euphonie, and weight.
Tel'st when a Verse springs high, how understood
To be, or not borne of the Royall-blood.
What State above, what Symmetrie below,
Lines have, or should have, thou the best can show.
For which (my Charles) it is my pride to be,
Not so much known, as to be loved of thee.
Long may I live so, and my wreath of Bays,
Be less another Laurel, then thy praise.
Women useless.
WHat need we marry Women, when
Without their use we may have men?
And such as will in short time be,
For murder fit, or mutiny;
As Cadmus once a new way found,
By throwing teeth into the ground:
(From which poor seed, and rudely sown)
Sprung up a Warlike Nation.
So let us Iron, Silver, Gold,
Brass, Lead or Tin, throw into th'mould;
And we shall see in little space
Rise up of men, a fighting race.
If this can be, say then, what need
Have we of Women or their seed?
Love is a sirrup.
LOve is a sirrup; and who er'e we see
Sick and surcharged with this sacietie:
Shall by this pleasing trespass quickly prove,
There Is loathsomeness even in the sweets of love.
Leven.
LOve is a Leven, and a loving kiss
The Leven of a loving sweetheart is.
Repletion.
Physicians say Repletion springs
More from the sweet then sower things.
On Himself.
Weep for the dead, for they have lost this light:
And weep for me, lost in an endless night.
Or mourn, or make a Marble Verse for me,
Who writ for many. Benedicite.
No man without Money.
NO man such rare parts has, that he can swim,
If favor or occasion help not him.
On Himself.
LOst to the world; lost to my self; alone
Here now I rest under this Marble stone:
In depth of silence, heard, and seen of none.
To M. Leonard Willan his peculiar friend.
I Will be short, and having quickly hurled
This line about, live Thou throughout the world;
Who art a man for all Scenes; unto whom
(What Is hard to others) nothing's troublesome.
Can write the Comic, Tragic strain, and fall
From these to pen the pleasing Pastoral:
Who fli'st at all heights: Prose and Verse run'st through;
Find'st here a fault, and mend'st the tre'passe too:
For which I might extol thee, but speak less,
Because thy self art coming to the Press:
And then should I in praising thee be slow,
Posterity will pay thee what I owe.
To his worthy friend M. John Hall, Student of Grayes-Inne.
TEll me young man, or did the Muses bring
Thee less to taste, then to drink up their spring;
That none hereafter should be thought, or be
A Poet, or a Poet-like but Thee.
What was thy Birth, thy star that makes thee known.
At twice ten years, a prime and public one?
Tell us thy Nation, kindred, or the whence
Thou had, and have thy mighty influence,
That makes thee loved, and of the men desired,
And no less praised, then of the maids admired.
Put on thy Laurel then; and in that trim
Be thou Apollo, or the type of him:
Or let the Unshorne God lend thee his Lyre,
And next to him, be Master of the Quire.
To Julia.
OFfer thy gift; but first the Law commands
Thee Julia, first, to sanctify thy hands:
Do that my Julia which the rites require,
Then boldly give thine incense to the fire.
To the most comely and proper M. Elizabeth Finch.
HAnsome you are, and Proper you will be
Despite of all your infortunitie:
Live long and lovely, but yet grow no less
In that your own prefixed comeliness:
Spend on that stock: and when your life must fall,
Leave others Beauty, to set up withal.
Upon Ralph.
RAlph pares his nails, his warts, his corns, and Raph
In several tills, and boxes keeps 'em safe;
Instead of Harts-horne (if he speaks the troth)
To make a lustie-gellie for his broth.
To his Book.
IF hap it must, that I must see thee lie
Absyrtus-like all torn confusedly:
With solemn tears, and with much grief of heart,
I Will recollect thee (weeping) part by part;
And having washed thee, close thee in a chest
With spice; that done, I Will leave thee to thy rest.
TO THE KING, Upon his welcome to Hampton Court. Set and Sung.
VVElcome, Great Caesar, welcome now you are,
As dearest Peace, after destructive War:
Welcome as slumbers; or as beds of ease
After our long, and peevish sicknesses.
O Pomp of Glory! Welcome now, and come
To re-possess once more your longed-for home.
A thousand Altars smoke; a thousand thighs
Of Beeves here ready stand for Sacrifice.
Enter and prosper; while our eyes do wait
For an Ascendent thoroughly Auspicate:
Under which sign we may the former stone
Lay of our safeties new foundation:
That done; O Caesar, live, and be to us,
Our Fate, our Fortune, and our Genius;
To whose free knees we may our temples tie
As to a still protecting Deity.
That should you stir, we and our Altars too
May (Great Augustus) go along with You.
Chor. Long live the King; and to accomplish this,
We Will from our own, add far more years to his.
Ultimus Heroum: OR, To the most learned, and to the right Honorable, Henry,
Marquess of Dorchester.
ANd as time past when Cato the Severe
Entered the circumspacious Theater;
In reverence of his person, every one
Stood as he had been turned from flesh to stone:
E'ne so my numbers will astonished be
If but looked on; struck dead, if scanned by Thee.
To his Muse, another to the same.
TEll that Brave Man, fain thou wo'dst have access
To kiss his hands, but that for fearfullness;
Or else because thou art like a modest Bride,
Ready to blush to death, should he but chide.
Upon Vinegar.
Vinegar is no other I define,
Then the dead Corpse, or carkase of the Wine.
Upon Mudge.
MUdge every morning to the Postern comes,
(His teeth all out) to rince and wash his gummes.
To his learned friend M. Jo. Harmar, Physician to the College of Westminster.
WHen first I find those Numbers thou do write;
To be most soft, terce, sweet, and perpolite:
Next, when I see Thee towering in the sky,
In an expansion no less large, then high;
Then, in that compass, sailing here and there,
And with Circumgyration every where;
Following with love and active heat thy game,
And then at last to truss the Epigram;
I must confess, distinction none I see
Between Domitians Martial then, and Thee.
But this I know, should Jupiter again
Descend from heaven, to re-converse with men;
The Roman Language full, and superfine,
If Jove would speak, he would accept of thine.
Upon his Spaniell Tracie.
NOw thou art dead, no eye shall ever see,
For shape and service, Spaniell like to thee.
This shall my love do, give thy sad death one
Tear, that deserves of me a million.
The deluge.
DRowning, drowning, I epsy
Coming from my Julia's eye:
It Is some solace in our smart,
To have friends to bear a part:
I have none; but must be sure
Th'inundation to endure.
Shall not times hereafter tell
This for no mean miracle;
When the waters by their fall
Threatened ruin unto all?
Yet the deluge here was known,
Of a world to drown but One.
Upon Lupes.
LUpes for the outside of his suite has paid;
But for his heart, he cannot have it made:
The reason is, his credit cannot get
The inward carbage for his clothes as yet.
Rags.
What are our patches, tatters, rags, and rents,
But the base dregs and lees of vestiments?
Strength to support Sovereignty.
LEt Kings and Rulers, learn this line from me;
Where power is weak, unsafe is Majesty.
Upon Tubbs.
FOr thirty years, Tubbs has been proud and poor,
It Is now his habit, which he cannot give ore.
Crutches.
THou see me Lucia this year droope,
Three Zodiaks filled more I shall stoop;
Let Crutches then provided be
To shore up my debilitie.
Then while thou laugh'st; I Will, sighing, cry,
A Ruin underpropt am I:
Do'n will I then my Beadsmans gown,
And when so feeble I am grown,
As my weak shoulders cannot bear
The burden of a Grasshopper:
Yet with the bench of aged sires,
When I and they keep tearmly fires;
With my weak voice I Will sing, or say
Some Odes I made of Lucia:
Then will I heave my withered hand
To Jove the Mighty for to stand
Thy faithful friend, and to pour down
Upon thee many a Benizon.
To Julia.
HOly waters hither bring
For the sacred sprinkling:
Raptize me and thee, and so
Let us to the Altar go.
And (ere we our rites commence)
Wash our hands in innocence.
Then I Will be the Rex Saerorum,
Thou the Queen of Peace and Quorum.
Upon Case.
CAse is a Lawyer, that near pleads alone,
But when he hears the like confusion,
As when the disagreeing Commons throw
About their House, their clamorous I, or No:
Then Case, as loud as any Serjant there,
Cries out (my Lord, my Lord) the Case is clear:
But when all is hushed, Case then a fish more mute,
Bestirs his Hand, but starves in hand the Suite.
To Perenna.
I A Dirge will pen for thee;
Thou a Trentall make for me:
That the Monks and Friars together,
Here may fing the rest of either:
Next, I Am sure, the Nuns will have
Candlemas to grace the Grave.
To his Sister in Law, M. Susanna Herrick.
THe Person crowns the Place; your lot does fall
Last, yet to be with These a Principal.
How ere it fortuned; know for Truth, I meant
You a fore-leader in this Testament.
Upon the Lady Crew.
THis Stone can tell the story of my life,
What was my Birth, to whom I was a Wife:
In teeming years, how soon my Sun was set,
Where now I rest, these may be known by Jet.
For other things, my many Children be
The best and truest Chronicles of me.
On Tomasin Parsons.
GRow up in Beauty, as thou do begin,
And be of all admired, Tomasin.
Ceremony upon Candlemas Eve.
DOwn with the Rosemary, and so
Down with the Baies, and misletoe:
Down with the Holly, Ivy, all,
Wherewith ye dressed the Christmas Hall:
That so the superstious find
No one least Branch there left behind:
For look how many leaves there be
Neglected there (maids trust to me)
So many Goblins you shall see.
Suspicion makes secure.
HE that will live of all cares dispossessed,
Must shun the bad, I, and suspect the best.
Upon Spokes.
SPokes when he sees a roasted Pig, he swears
Nothing he loves on it but the chaps and ears:
But carve to him the fat flanks; and he shall
Rid these, and those, and part by part eat all.
To his kinsman M. Tho: Herrick, who desired to be in his Book.
WElcome to this my College, and though late
Tha'st got a place here (standing candidate)
It matters not, since thou art chosen one
Here of my great and good foundation.
A Bucolick betwixt Two: Lacon and Thyrsis.
Lacon. FOr a kiss or two, confess,
What does cause this pensiveness?
Thou most lovely Neat-heardesse:
Why so lonely on the hill?
Why thy pipe by thee so still,
That ere while was heard so shrill?
Tell me, do thy kine now fail
To fulfill the milkin-paile?
Say, what is it that thou do aile?

Thyr. None of these; but out, alas!
A mischance is come to pass,
And I Will tell thee what it was:
See mine eyes are weeping ripe,

Lacon. Tell, and I Will lay down my Pipe.

Thyr. I have lost my lovely steer,
That to me was far more deer
Then these kine, which I milk here.
Broad of forehead, large of eye,
Party colored like a Pie;
Smooth in each limb as a die;
Clear of hoof, and clear of horn;
Sharply pointed as a thorn:
With a neck by yoke unworn.
From the which hung down by strings,
Balls of Cowslips, Daisie rings,
Enterplac't with ribbanings.
Faultless every way for shape;
Not a straw co'd him escape;
Ever gamesome as an ape:
But yet harmless as a sheep.
(Pardon, Lacon if I weep)
Tears will spring, where woes are deep.
Now (ai me) (ai me.) Last night
Came a mad dog, and did bite,
I, and killed my dear delight.

Lacon. Alack for grief!

Thyr. But I Will be brief,
Hence I must, for time does call
Me, and my sad Play-mates all,
To his Evening Funeral.
Live long, Lacon, so adieu.

Lacon. Mournful maid farewell to you;
Earth afford ye flowers to strew.

Upon Sapho.
LOok upon Sapho's lip, and you will swear,
There is a love-like-leven rising there.
Upon Faunus.
WE read how Faunus, he the shepherds God,
His wife to death whipped with a Myrtle Rod.
The Rod (perhaps) was bettered by the name;
But had it been of Birch, the death's the same.
The Quintell.
UP with the Quintill, that the Rout,
May fart for joy, as well as shout:
Either's welcome, Stink or Civit,
If we take it, as they give it.
A Bachanalian Verse.
Drink up
Your Cup,
But not spill Wine;
For if you
Do,
It Is an ill sign;
2.
That we
Foresee,
You are cloyed here,
If so, no
Hoe,
But avoid here.
Care a good keeper.
CAre keeps the Conquest; it is no less renown,
To keep a City, then to win a Town.
Rules for our reach.
MEn must have Bounds how far to walk; for we
Are made far worse, by lawless liberty.
To Biancha.
AH Biancha! now I see,
It is Noone and past with me:
In a while it will strike one;
Then Biancha, I am gone.
Some effusions let me have,
Offered on my holy Grave;
Then, Biancha, let me rest
With my face toward the East.
To the handsome Mistress Grace Potter.
AS is your name, so is your comely face,
Touched every where with such diffused grace,
As that in all that admirable round,
There is not one least solecisme found;
And as that part, so every portion else,
Keeps line for line with Beauties Parallels.
Anacreontike.
I Must
Not trust
Here to any;
Bereaved,
Deceived
By so many:
As one
Undone
By my losses;
Comply
Will I
With my crosses.
Yet still
I will
Not be grieving;
Since thence
And hence
Comes relieving.
But this
Sweet is
In our mourning;
Times bad
And sad
Are a turning:
And he
Whom we
See dejected;
Next day
We may
See erected.
More modest, more manly.
It Is still observed, those men most valiant are,
That are most modest ere they come to war.
Not to covet much where tittle is the charge.
WHy should we covet much, when as we know,
W'ave more to bear our charge, then way to go?
Anacrontick Verse.
BRisk methinks I am, and fine,
When I drink my capring wine:
Then to love I do incline;
When I drink my wanton wine:
And I wish all maidens mine,
When I drink my sprightly wine:
Well I sup, and well I dine,
When I drink my frolic wine:
But I languish, lowre, and Pine,
When I want my fragrant wine.
Upon Penny.
BRown bread Tom Penny eats, and must of right,
Because his stock will not hold out for white.
Patience in Princes.
KIngs must not use the Axe for each offense:
Princes cure some faults by their patience.
Fear gets force.
Despair takes heart, when there is no hope to speed:
The Coward then takes Arms, and does the deed.
Parcell-gil't-Poetry.
Let Us strive to be the best; the Gods, we know it,
Pillars and men, hate an indifferent Poet.
Upon Love, by way of question and answer.
I Bring ye love, Quest. What will love do?
Ans. Like, and dislike ye:
I bring ye love: Quest. What will love do?
Ans. Stroke ye to strike ye.
I bring ye love: Quest. What will Love do?
Ans. Love will be-foole ye:
I bring ye love: Quest. What will love do?
Ans. Heat ye to cool ye:
I bring ye love: Quest. What will love do?
Ans. Love gifts will send ye:
I bring ye love: Quest. What will love do?
Ans. Stock ye to spend ye:
I bring ye love: Quest. What will love do?
Ans. Love will fulfill ye:
I bring ye love: Quest. What will love do?
Ans. Kiss ye, to kill ye.
To the Lord Hopton, on his fight in Cornwall.
GO on brave Hopton, to effectuate that
Which we, and times to come, shall wonder at.
Lift up thy Sword; next, suffer it to fall,
And by that One blow set an end to all.
His Grange.
HOw well contented in this private Grange
Spend I my life (that is subject unto change:)
Under whose Roof with Mosse-worke wrought, there I
Kiss my Brown wife, and black Posterity.
Leprosy in houses.
WHen to a House I come, and see
The Genius wastefull, more then free:
The servants thumblesse, yet to eat,
With lawless tooth the flower of wheat:
The Sons to suck the milk of Kine,
More then the teats of Discipline:
The Daughters wild and loose in dress;
Their cheeks unstained with shamefac'tnesse:
The Husband drunk, the Wife to be
A Band to incivility:
I must confess, I there descrie,
A House spread through with Leprosy.
Good manners at meat.
THis rule of manners I will teach my guests,
To come with their own bellies unto feasts:
Not to eat equal portions; but to rise
Farc't with the food, that may themselves suffice.
Anthea's Retractation.
ANthea laughed, and fearing lest excess
Might stretch the cords of civil comeliness:
She with a dainty blush rebuk't her face;
And called each line back to his rule and space.
Comforts in Crosses.
BE not dismaide, though crosses cast thee down;
Thy fall is but the rising to a Crown.
Seek and find.
ATtempt the end, and never stand to doubt;
Nothing's so hard, but search will find it out.
Rest.
ON with thy work, though thou be hardly pressed;
Labor is held up, by the hope of rest.
Leprosy in Clothes.
WHen slowing garments I behold
Enspir'd with Purple, Pearl, and Gold;
I think no other but I see
In them a glorious leprosy
That does infect, and make the rent
More mortal in the vestiment.
As flowrie vestures do descrie
The wearers rich immodestie;
So plain and simple clothes doeshow
Where virtue walks, not those that flow.
Upon Buggins.
BUggins is Drunk all night, all day he sleeps;
This is the Levell-coyle that Buggins keeps.
Great Maladies, long Medicines.
TO an old soar a long cure must go on;
Great faults require great satisfaction.
His Answer to a friend.
YOu ask me what I do, and how I live?
And (Noble friend) this answer I must give:
Drooping, I draw on to the vaults of death,
Over which you will walk, when I am laid beneath.
The Beggar.
SHall I a daily Beggar be,
For loves sake asking alms of thee?
Still shall I crave, and never get
A hope of my desired bit?
Ah cruel maids! I Will go my way,
Whereas (perchance) my fortunes may
Find out a Threshold or a door,
That may far sooner speed the poor:
Where thrice we knock, and none will hear,
Cold comfort still I Am sure lives there.
Bastards.
OUr Bastard-children are but like to Plate,
Made by the Coyners illegitimate.
His change.
MY many cares and much distress,
Has made me like a wilderness:
Or (discompo'sd) I Am like a rude,
And all confused multitude:
Out of my comely manners worn;
And as in means, in mind all torn.
The Vision.
ME thought I saw (as I did dream in bed)
A crawling Vine about Anacreon's head,
Flusht was his face; his hairs with oil did shine;
And as he spoke, his mouth ran ore with wine.
Tipled he was; and tippling lispt withal;
And lisping reeld, and reeling like to fall.
A young Enchantresse close by him did stand
Tapping his plump thighs with a myrtle wand:
She smiled; he kissed; and kissing, culled her too;
And being cup-shot, more he co'd not do.
For which (me thought) in prittie anger she
Snatched off his Crown, and gave the wreath to me:
Since when (me thinks) my brains about do swim,
And I am wild and wanton like to him.
A vow to Venus.
HAppily I had a sight
Of my dearest dear last night;
Make her this day smile on me,
And I Will Roses give to thee.
On his Book.
THe bound (almost) now of my book I see,
But yet no end of those therein or me:
Here we begin new life; while thousands quite
Are lost, and theirs, in everlasting night.
A sonnet of Perilla.
THen did I live when I did see
Perilla smile on none but me.
But (ah!) by stars malignant crossed,
The life I got I quickly lost:
But yet a way there does remain,
For me embalmed to live again;
And that is to love me; in which state
I Will live as one Regenerate.
Bad may be better.
MAn may at first transgress, but next do well:
Vice does in some but lodge a while, not dwell.
Posting to Printing.
LEt others to the Printing Press run fast,
Since after death comes glory, I Will not haste.
Rapine brings Ruin.
What Is got by Justice is established sure;
No Kingdoms got by Rapine long endure.
Comfort to a youth that had lost his Love.
WHat needs complaints,
When she a place
Has with the race
Of Saints?
In endless mirth,
She thinks not on
What Is said or done
In earth:
She sees no tears,
Or any tone
Of thy deep groan
She hears:
Nor does she mind,
Or think on it now,
That ever thou
Wast kind.
But changed above,
She likes not there,
As she did here,
Thy Love.
Forbear therefore,
And Lull asleep
Thy woes and weep
No more.
Upon Boreman. Epig.
BOreman takes tole, cheats, flatters, lies, yet Boreman,
For all the Devil helps, will be a poor man.
Saint Distaffs day, or the morrow after Twelth day.
PArtly work and partly play
Ye must on S. Distaffs day:
From the Plough soon free your teame;
Then come home and fother them.
If the Maids a spinning go,
Burn the flax, and fire the tow:
Scorch their plackets, but beware
That ye singe no maiden-haire.
Bring in pailes of water then,
Let the Maids bewash the men.
Give S. Distaffe all the right,
Then bid Christmas sport goodnight.
And next morrow, every one
To his own vocation.
Sufferance.
IN the hope of ease to come,
Let Us endure one Martyrdom.
His tears to Thamasis.
I Send, I send here my supremest kiss
To thee my silver-footed Thamasis.
No more shall I reiterate thy Strand,
Whereon so many Stately Structures stand:
Nor in the summers sweeter evenings go,
To bath in thee (as thousand others do.)
No more shall I a long thy crystal glide,
In Barge (with boughs and rushes beautified)
With soft-smooth Virgins (for our chaste disport)
To Richmond, Kingstone, and to Hampton Court:
Never again shall I with Finnie-Ore
Put from, or draw unto the faithful shore:
And Landing here, or safely Landing there,
Make way to my Beloved Westminster:
Or to the Golden-cheap-side, where the earth
Of Julia Herrick gave to me my Birth.
May all clean Nimphs and curious water Dames,
With Swan-like-state, flote up and down thy streams:
No drought upon thy wanton waters fall
To make them Lean, and languishing at all.
No ruffling winds come hither to discease
Thy pure, and Silver-wristed Naides.
Keep up your state ye streams; and as ye spring,
Never make sick your Banks by surfeiting.
Grow young with Tides, and though I see ye never,
Receive this vow, so fare-ye-well for ever.
Pardons.
THose ends in War the best contentment bring,
Whose Peace is made up with a Pardoning.
Peace not Permanent.
GReat Cities seldom rest: If there be none
T'invade from far: They Will find worse foes at home.
Truth and Error.
Twixt Truth and Error, there is this difference known,
Error is fruitful, Truth is only one.
Things mortal still mutable.
THings are uncertain, and the more we get,
The more on ycie pavements we are set.
Studies to be supported.
STudies themselves will languish and decay,
When either price, or praise is taken away.
Wit punished, prospers most.
DRead not the shackles: on with thine intent;
Good wits get more fame by their punishment.
Twelfe night, or King and Queen.
NOw, now the mirth comes
With the cake full of plums,
Where Beane's the King of the sport here;
Beside we must know,
The Pea also
Must revell, as Queen, in the Court here.
Begin then to choose,
(This night as ye use)
Who shall for the present delight here,
Be a King by the lot,
And who shall not
Be Twelfe-day Queen for the night here.
Which known, let us make
Joy-sops with the cake;
And let not a man then be seen here,
Who unurg'd will not drink
To the base from the brink
A health to the King and the Queen here.
Next crown the bowl full
With gentle lambs-wooll;
Add sugar, nutmeg and ginger,
With store of ale too;
And thus ye must do
To make the wassaile a swinger.
Give then to the King
And Queen wassailing;
And though with ale ye be whet here;
Yet part ye from hence,
As free from offense,
As when ye innocent met here.
His desire.
GIve me a man that is not dull,
When all the world with rifts is full,
But unamaz'd dares clearly sing,
When as the roof's a tottering:
And, though it falls, continues still
Tickling the Citterne with his quill.
Caution in Council.
KNow when to speak; for many times it brings
Danger to give the best advice to Kings.
Moderation.
LEt moderation on thy passions wait
Who loves too much, too much the loved will hate.
Advice the best actor.
STill take advice; though counsels when they fly
At random, sometimes hit most happily.
Conformity is comely.
COnformity gives comeliness to things.
And equal shares exclude all murmerings.
Laws.
WHo violates the Customs, hurts the Health,
Not of one man, but all the Commonwealth.
The mean.
It Is much among the filthy to be clean;
Our heat of youth can hardly keep the mean.
Like loves his like.
LIke will to like, each Creature loves his kind;
Chaste words proceed still from a bashful mind.
His hope or sheat-Anchor.
AMong these Tempests great and manifold
My Ship has here one only Anchor-hold;
That is my hope; which if that slip, I Am one
Wildred in this vast watery Region.
Comfort in Calamity.
It Is no discomfort in the world to fall,
When the great Crack not Crushes one, but all.
Twilight.
THe Twilight is no other thing (we say)
Then Night now gone, and yet not sprung the Day.
False Mourning.
HE who wears Blacks, and mournes not for the Dead,
Does but deride the Party buried.
The will makes the work, or consent makes the Cure.
NO grief is grown so desperate, but the ill
Is half way cured, if the party will.
Diet.
IF wholesome Diet can re-cure a man,
What need of Physic, or Physician?
Smart.
STripes justly given yerk us (with their fall)
But causeless whipping smarts the most of all.
The Tinkers Song.
ALong, come along,
Let Us meet in a throng
Here of Tinkers;
And quaffe up a Bowl
As big as a Cowle
To Beer Drinkers.
The pole of the Hop
Place in the Ale-shop to Bethwack us;
If ever we think
So much as to drink
Unto Bacchus.
Who frolic will be,
For little cost he
Must not vary,
From Beer-broth at all,
So much as to call
For Canary.
His Comfort.
THe only comfort of my life
Is, that I never yet had wife;
Nor will hereafter; since I know
Who Weds, ore-buyes his weal with woe
Sincerity.
WAsh clean the Vessel, lest ye sour
What ever Liquor in ye power.
To Anthea.
SIck is Anthea, sickly is the spring,
The Primrose sick, and sickly every thing:
The while my deer Anthea does but droop,
The Tulips, Lillies, Daffadills do stoop;
But when again she has got her healthful hour,
Each bending then, will rise a proper flower.
Nor buying or selling.
NOw, if you love me, tell me,
For as I will not sell ye,
So not one cross to buy thee
I Will give, if thou deny me.
To his peculiar friend M. Jo: Wicks.
SInce shed or Cottage I have none,
I sing the more, that thou have one;
To whose glad threshold, and free door
I may a Poet come, though poor;
And eat with thee a savory bit,
Paying but common thanks for it.
Yet should I chance, (my Wicks) to see
An over-leven-looks in thee,
To sour the Bread, and turn the Beer
To an exalted vinegar;
Or sho'dst thou prize me as a Dish
Of thrice-boyl'd-worts, or third days fish;
I Would rather hungry go and come,
Then to thy house be Burdensome;
Yet, in my depth of grief, I Would be
One that should drop his Beads for thee.
The more mighty, the more merciful.
WHo may do most, does least: The bravest will
Show mercy there, where they have power to kill.
After Autumn, Winter.
DIe ere long I Am sure, I shall;
After leaves, the tree must fall.
A good death.
FOr truth I may this sentence tell,
No man dies ill, that lives well.
Recompense.
Who plants an Olive, but to eat the Oil?
Reward, we know, is the chief end of toil.
On Fortune.
THis is my comfort, when she is most unkind,
She can but spoil me of my Means, not Mind.
To Sir George Parrie, Doctor of the Civil Law.
I Have my Laurel Chaplet on my head,
If'mongst these many Numbers to be read,
But one by you be hugged and cherished.
Peruse my Measures thoroughly, and where
Your judgment finds a guilty Poem, there
Be you a Judge; but not a Judge severe.
The mean pass by, or over, none contemn;
The good applaud: the peccant less condemn,
Since Absolution you can give to them.
Stand forth BraveMan, here to the public sight;
And in my Book now claim a two-folrd right:
The first as Doctor, and the last as Knight.
Charms.
THis I Will tell ye by the way,
Maidens when ye Leavens lay,
Cross your Dow, and your dispatch,
Will be better for your Batch.
Another.
IN the morning when ye rise (eyes.
Wash your hands, and cleanse your
Next be sure ye have a care,
To disperse the water far.
For as far as that does light,
So far keeps the evil Spright.
Another.
IF ye fear to be affrighted
When ye are (by chance) benighted:
In your Pocket for a trust,
Carry nothing but a Crust:
For that holy piece of Bread,
Charms the danger, and the dread.
Upon Gorgonius.
Unto Pastillus rank Gorgonius came,
To have a tooth twitcht out of's native frame.
Drawn was his tooth; but stanke so, that some say,
The Barber stopped his Nose, and ran away.
Gentleness.
THat Prince must govern with a gentle hand,
Who will have love comply with his command.
A Dialogue betwixt himself and Mistress Eliza: Wheeler, under the name of
Amarillis.
MY dearest Love, since thou will go,
And leave me here behind thee;
For love or pity let me know
The place where I may find thee.
Amaril. In country Meadows pearl'd with Dew,
And set about with Lillies;
There filling Maunds with Cowslips, you
May find your Amarillis.

Her. What have the Meades to do with thee,
Or with thy youthful hours?
Live thou at Court, where thou may be
The Queen of men, not flowers.
Let Country wenches make'em fine
With Poesies, since it is fitter
For thee with richest Jemmes to shine,
And like the Stars to glitter.

Amaril. You set too high a rate upon
A Shepheardess so homely;

Her. Believe it (dearest) there is not one
In The Court that is half so comely.
I prithee stay. ( Am.) I must away,
Lets kiss first, then we will sever.

Ambo. And though we bid adieu to day,
We shall not part for ever.

To Julia.
HElp me, Julia, for to pray,
Mattens sing, or Mattens say:
This I know, the Fiend will fly
Far away, if thou be by.
Bring the Holy Water hither;
Let us wash, and pray together:
When our Beads are thus united,
Then the Foe will fly affrighted.
To Roses in Julia's Bosom.
ROses, you can never die,
Since the place wherein ye lie,
Heat and moisture mixed are so,
As to make ye ever grow.
To the Honored, Master Endimion Porter.
WHen to thy Porch I come, and (ravished) see
The State of Poets there attending Thee:
Those Bardes, and I, all in a Chorus sing,
We are Thy Prophets Porter; Thou our King.
Speak in season.
WHen times are troubled, then forbear; but speak,
When a clear day, out of a Cloud does break.
Obedience.
THe Power of Princes rests in the Consent
Of only those, who are obedient:
Which if away, proud Scepters then will lie
Low, and of Thrones the Ancient Majesty.
Another on the same.
NO man so well a Kingdom Rules, as He,
Who has himself obaid the Sovereignty.
Of Love.
Instruct me now what love will do;
'Twill make a tongless man to woo.
Inform me next, what love will do;
'Twill strangely make a one of too.
Teach me besides, what love will do;
'Twill quickly mar, and make ye too.
Tell me, now last, what love will do;
'Twill hurt and heal a heart pierced through.
Upon Trap.
TRap, of a Player turned a Priest now is;
Behold a sudden Metamorphosis.
If Tythe-pigs fail, then will he shift the scean,
And, from a Priest, turn Player once again.
Upon Grubs.
GRubs loves his Wife and Children, while that they
Can live by love, or else grow fat by Play:
But when they call or cry on Grubs for meat;
Instead of Bread, Grubs gives them stones to eat.
He (...) rends, and while he thus does tear,
His Wife and Children fast to death for fear.
Upon Dol.
NO question but Dols cheecks would soon roast dry,
Were they not basted by her either eye.
Upon Hog.
HOg has a place in the Kitchen, and his share
The flimsie Livers, and blew Gizzards are.
The School or Perl of Putney, the Mistress of all singular manners, Mistress
Portman.
Whether I was my self, or else did see
Out of my self that Glorious Hierarchy!
Or whether those (in orders rare) or these
Made up One State of Sixty Venuses;
Or whether Fairies, Sirens, Nymphs they were,
Or Muses, on their mountain sitting there;
Or some enchanted Place, I do not know
(Or Sharon, where eternal Roses grow.)
This I am sure; I Ravished stood, as one
Confused in utter Admiration.
Me thought I saw them stir, and gently move,
And look as all were capable of Love:
And in their motion smelt much like to flowers
Enspir'd by the Sunbeams after dews and showers.
There did I see the Reverend Rectresse stand,
Who with her eyes-gleam, or a glance of hand,
Those spirits raised; and with like precepts then
(As with a Magic) laid them all again:
(A happy Realm! When no compulsinve Law,
Or fear of it, but Love keeps all in awe.)
Live you great Mistress of your Arts, and be
A a nursing Mother so to Majesty;
As those your Ladies may in time be seen,
Fot Grace and Carriage, every one a Queen.
One Birth their Parents gave them; but their new,
And better Being, they receive from You.
Man's former Birth is grace-lesse; but the state
Of life comes in, when he is Regenerate.
To Perenna.
THou say I Am dull; if edge-lesse so I be,
I Will whet my lips, and sharpen Love on thee.
On himself.
LEt me not live, if I not love,
Since I as yet did never prove,
Where Pleasures met; at last, do find,
All Pleasures meet in Womankind.
On Love.
THat love 'twixt men does ever longest last
Where War and Peace the Dice by turns do cast.
Another on Love.
LOve's of it self, too sweet; the best of all
Is, when loves honey has a dash of gall.
Upon Gut.
SCience puffs up, says Gut, when either Pease
Make him thus swell, or windy Cabbages,
Upon Chub.
WHen Chub brings in his harvest, still he cries,
Aha my boys! here is wheat for Christmas Pies!
Soon after, he for beer so scores his wheat,
That at the tide, he has not bread to eat.
Pleasures Pernicious.
WHere Pleasures rule a Kingdom, never there
Is sober virtue, seen to move her sphere.
On himself.
A Wearied Pilgrim, I have wandered here
Twice five and twenty (bate me but one year)
Long I have lasted in this world; (it is true)
But yet those years that I have lived, but few.
Who by his gray Hairs, does his lusters tell,
Lives not those years, but he that lives them well.
One man has reatch't his sixty years, but he
Of all those threescore, has not lived half three:
He lives, who lives to virtue: men who cast
Their ends for Pleasure, do not live, but last.
To M. Laurence Swetnaham.
REad thou my Lines, my Swetnaham, if there be
A fault, it is hid, if it be voic't by thee.
Thy mouth will make the sourest numbers please;
How will it drop pure honey, speaking these?
His Covenant or Protestation to Julia.
WHy do thou wound, and break my heart?
As if we should for ever part?
Have thou not heard an Oath from me,
After a day, or two, or three,
I would come back and live with thee?
Take, if thou do distrust, that Vow;
This second Protestation now.
Upon thy cheek that spangel'd Tear,
Which sits as Dew of Roses there:
That Tear shall scarce be dried before
I Will kiss the Threshold of thy door.
Then weep not sweet; but thus much know,
I Am half returned before I go.
On himself.
I Will no longer kiss,
I can no longer stay;
The way of all Flesh is,
That I must go this day:
Since longer I cannot live,
My frolic Youths adieu;
My Lamp to you I Will give,
And all my troubles too.
To the most accomplished Gentleman Master Michael Oulsworth.
NOr think that Thou in this my Book art worst,
Because not placed here with the midst, or first.
Since Fame that sides with these, or goes before
Those, that must live with Thee for evermore.
That Fame, and Fames reared Pillar, thou shall see
In the next sheet Brave Man to follow Thee.
Fix on That Column then, and never fall;
Held up by Fames eternal Pedestall.
To his Girls who would have him sportfull.
ALas I cannot, for tell me how
Can I be gamesome (aged now)
Besides ye see me daily grow
Here Winter-like, to Frost and Snow.
And I ere long, my Girls shall see,
Ye quake for cold to look on me.
Truth and falsehood.
TRuth by her own simplicity is known,
Falsehood by Varnish and Vermillion.
His last request to Julia.
I Have been wanton, and too bold I fear,
To chafe over much the Virgins cheek or ear:
Beg for my Pardon Julia; He does win
Grace with the Gods, who is sorry for his sin.
That done, my Julia, dearest Julia, come,
And go with me to choose my Burial room:
My Fates are ended; when thy Herrick dies,
Claspe thou his Book, then close thou up his Eyes.
On himself.
ONe Ear tingles; some there be,
That are snarling now at me:
Be they those that Homer bit,
I will give them thanks for it.
Upon Kings.
KIngs must be dauntlesse: Subjects will contemn
Those, who want Hearts, and wear a Diadem.
To his Girls.
WAnton Wenches do not bring
For my hairs black coloring:
For my Locks (Girls) let them be
Gray or white, all is one to me.
Upon Spur.
SPur jingles now, and swears by no mean oaths,
He Is double honored since h'as got gay clothes:
Most like his Suite, and all commend the Trim;
And thus they praise the Sumpter, but not him:
As to the Goddess, people did confer
Worship, and not to'th' Ass that carried her.
To his Brother Nicolas Herrick.
What others have with cheapnesse seen, and ease,
In Varnisht maps; by'th' help of Compasses:
Or read in Volumes, and those Books (with all
Their large Narrations, Incanonicall)
Thou have beheld those seas, and Countries far;
And tel'st to us what once they were, and are.
So that with bold truth, thou can now relate
This Kingdoms fortune, and that Empires fate:
Can talk to us of Sharon; where a spring
Of Roses have an endless flourishing.
Of Sion, Sinai, Nebo, and with them,
Make known to us the now Jerusalem.
The Mount of Olives; Calverie, and where
Is (and have seen) thy Saviors Sepulcher.
So that the man that will but lay his ears,
As Inapostate, to the thing he hears,
Shall be his hearing quickly come to see
The truth of Travails less in books then Thee.
The Voice and Violl.
RAre is the voice it self; but when we sing
To The Lute or Violl, then it is ravishing.
War.
IF Kings and kingdoms, once distracted be,
The sword of war must try the Sovereignty.
A King and no King.
THat Prince, who may do nothing but what is just,
Rules but by leave, ana takes his Crown on trust.
Plots not still prosperous.
ALl are not ill Plots, that do sometimes fail;
Nor those false vows, which often times don't prevail.
Flattery.
WHat is it that wafts a Prince? example shows,
It Is flattery spends a King, more then his foes.
Upon Rumpe.
RUmpe is a Turne-broach, yet he seldom can
Steal a swollen sop out of the Dripping pan.
Upon Shopter.
OLd Widow Shopter, when so ere she cries,
Lets drip a certain Gravie from her eyes.
Upon Deb.
IF felt and heard, (unseen) thou do me please;
If seen, thou like me, Deb, in none of these,
Excess.
Excess is sluttish: keep the mean; for why?
Virtue's clean Conclave is sobriety.
Upon Croot.
ONe silver spoon shines in the house of Croot;
Who cannot buie, or steal a second to it.
The soul is the salt.
THe body's salt, the soul is; which when gone,
The flesh soon sucks in putrefaction.
Upon Flood, or a thankful man.
FLood, if he has for him and his a bit,
He says his fore and after Grace for it:
If meat he wants, then Grace he says to see
His hungry belly borne by Legs Jaile-free.
Thus have, or have not, all alike is good,
To this our poor, yet ever patient Flood.
Upon Pimpe.
WHen Pimpes feet sweat (as they do often use)
There springs a sope-like-lather in his shoos.
Upon Luske.
IN Den'-shire Kerzie Lusk (when he was dead)
Would shrouded be, and therewith buried.
When his Assigns asked him the reason why?
He said, because he got his wealth thereby.
Foolishness.
IN's Tusc'lanes, Tullie does confess,
No plague there is like to foolishness.
Upon Rush.
RUsh saves his shoes, in wet and snowie wether;
And fears in summer to wear out the lether:
This is strong thrift that wary Rush does use
Summer and Winter still to save his shoes.
Abstinence.
AGainst diseases here the strongest fence
Is the defensive virtue, Abstinence.
No danger to men desperate.
When fear admits no hope of safety, then
Necessity makes dastards valiant men.
Sauce for sorrows.
ALthough our suffering meet with no relief,
An equal mind is the best sauce for grief.
To Cupid.
I Have a leaden, thou a shaft of gold;
Thou kil'st with heat, and I strike dead with cold.
Let Us try of us who shall the first expire;
Or thou be frost, or I by quenchlesse fire:
Extremes are fatal, where they once do strike,
And bring to'th' heart destruction both alike.
Distrust.
WHat ever men for Loyalty pretend,
It Is Wisdoms part to doubt a faithful friend.
The Hagg.
THe staff is now greased,
And very well pleased,
She cocks out her Arse at the parting,
To an old Ram Goat,
That rattles i'th'throat,
Half choakt with the stink of her farting.
In a dirtie Haire-lace
She leads on a brace
Of black-bore-cats to attend her;
Who scratch at the Moon,
And threaten at noone
Of night from Heaven for to rend her.
A hunting she goes;
A cracked horn she blows;
At which the hounds fall a bounding;
While th'Moone in her sphere
Peepes trembling for fear,
And night's afraid of the sounding.
The mount of the Muses.
AFter thy labor take thine ease,
Here with the sweet Pierides.
But if so be that men will not
Give thee the Laurel Crown for lot;
Be yet assured, thou shall have one
Not subject to corruption.
On Himself.
I Will write no more of Love; but now repent
Of all those times that I in it have spent.
I Will write no more of life; but wish it was ended,
And that my dust was to the earth commended.
To his Book.
Go thou forth my book, though late;
Yet be timely fortunate.
It may chance good-luck may send
Thee a kinsman, or a friend,
That may harbor thee, when I,
With my fates neglected lie.
If thou know not where to dwell,
See, the fier's by: Farewell.
The end of his work.
PArt of the work remains; one part is past:
And here my ship rides having Anchor cast.
To Crown it.
MY wearied Bark, O Let it now be Crowned!
The Haven reached to which I first was bound.
On Himself.
THe work is done: young men, and maidens set
Upon my curles the Myrtle Coronet,
Washed with sweet omtments; Thus at last I come
To suffer in the Muses Martyrdom:
But with this comfort, if my blood be shed,
The Muses will wear blackes, when I am dead.
The pillar of Fame.
FAmes pillar here, at last, we set,
Out-during Marble, Brass, or Jet,
Charmed and enchanted so,
As to withstand the blow
Of overthrow:
Nor shall the seas,
Or OUTRAGES
Of storms orebear
What we up-rear,
Tho Kingdoms fall,
This pillar never shall
Decline or waste at all;
But stand for ever by his own
Firm and well fixed foundation.
To his Book's end this last line he would have placed,
Jocond his Muse was; but his Life was chaste.
FINIS.

