LENT, 1638.

The Learned READING OF John Herne Esquire Late of the Honorable Society OF
LINCOLNS-INNE UPON The Statute of 23 H. 8. Cap. 3. CONCERNING COMMISSIONS OF
SEWERS.

Translated out of the French Manusctipt.

LONDON, Printed for Matthew Walbanke, at Grayes-Inne-Gate in Holborn, 1659.

The Right Hon.ble S. Thomas Trevor Knight Lord Chief Justice of Her Majesty's
Court of Com^on Pleas and one of Her Majesty's Most Hon.ble Privy Council 1702


TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, THE COMMISSIONERS OF SEVVERS FOR
The City os Westminster, and parts near adjacent.
I Here present you with a Reading, the Author whereof may be known to most of
you; it is not for me to write Ercomiums on his worth; for his eminency f^
other learning, besides his great knowledge that appears in this, speaks him
more to the judicious and intelligent then I dare take upon me to express, lest
I do too little, knowing my inability of doing him honor enough:

I humbly beg your pardon in obtruding so rude a Composure, (as to the
translation) upon your Patronage, the sense of my own weakness, making me
conscious of some mishaps, but reflecting upon the greatness of your judgments
and learning in this Law, together with your candor to my years, will first
rectify and then pardon: Let the world shoot their bolts, I have my end if in
this or any other act I may be esteemed

Your humble Servant,

TO THE READER
Reader,
I Can neither find nor learn that ever any but Sergeant Callis ever writ upon
this Statute, therefore this is the rarer. I have that reverence both to the
Author and his work, that I profess to my best knowledge I have not wronged
him in the translation, but what the smallest judgment may correct. You Will find
not much Rhetoric in regard the Law obliges me to singular terms.

Farewell:
LENT 1638. The Reading Of that Learned Lawyer John Herne, Esquire Late of the
honorable society of LINCOLNS INN Upon the STATUTE of the 23. H. 8. Cap. 3. A
Genrall Act concerning Commissions of SEVVERS.
OUR Sovereign Lord the King, considering the daily great damages and losses
which have happened etc. as well by reason of the outrageous overflowing
surges and course of the Sea, provided this Act in prevention of that and other
incursions.

All Statutes of Sewers are made in aid of the ancient prerogative of the
King; and how be it they are penal, as well to the Person as to the
Frank-tenement of the offender, yet because intersunt reipublicae, they shall
have a large and benign construction.

6. R. 2. Fith 46. Avow. 122. 5. Rep. Sr. H. Constables case.
This Prerogative has its original from the Law of Nations, which in truth is
the original of Monarchical Government, and the same Law gives to such
Governors Jura Regalia, as well in respect of sea as land, as to have
Sturgeons, Whale, Wreck, etc.

And as to that, the statute that gives the prerogative is but declaratory of
the Common Law, and in respect of these prerogatives the King ought always
both as well upon the sea as Land, to govern and protect, so that always the
King was bound ratione dignitatis Regiae, to provide for the safeguard of his
Kingdom etc. and so it is recited in the ancient Commission of Sewers; N. B.
113. a.
Sir John Davis's Reports case of Royal piscaryes; The principal differences
between the ancient Commissions, and the Commissions grounded upon our statute,
are three.

1. The first is Enumeratio delicti, for at the Common Law the commission did
not extend but to eight particular offenses, but there are added by this
statute damages, by banks, streams, mills, etc. and in conclusion it is penned
with these general words, [All annoyances.]

2. Admensuratio extenti, for the commission upon this statute extends (not
only) to maritine parts, but to the reforming all Nusances in any part of the
Realm of England, as well of Rivers navigable as not navigable, to streams
etc. but always with this Caution that the proceeding tends to a public good
and not to a private benefit; and for this reason there ought not to be any
impedement to navigation or to a River which by industry may be made navigable,
or for the overflowing of land so of rivers newly made for navigation, or
drayning for a Country, as in Lincolne-shire: In these cases it concerns the
general benefit of the subject, otherwise of private waters, and so is it of
the Kings highway, which is only within this statute, and not for the ways
for private use among particular persons.

3. Aggravation of the penalty, as by this statute it may be by abatement,
fine, imprisonment, etc. so that this statute may truly be said to be quasi
tiranicall, and yet just, for it is but a tyrant opposed against tyrant (ss.)
the rage of the sea.

For explanation of this statute there are to be considered the principal and
the verba operativa within the statute.

There are seven words respecting the means (ss.) ad Supervidendum. ad
Inquirendum. ad Tapandum. ad Assignandum. ad Arrestandum. ad Ordinandum. ad
Determinendum.


There are three conducing to the end, (sl.) ad Defendendum. ad Amovendum and
ad Distruendum.


Within the exercise of this day it shall be shown, who may be a good
Commissioner to make a survey,

What may be a good enquiry, and what shall be a good Tax.

The King is supreme Justice through all the Realm, and yet he cannot be a
good Commissioner within this statute, for all the fines accrue to the King,
and then he should be judge in his own case; a blind man cannot be a
Commissioner, for he cannot be a Surveyor, who ought to be in the person of a
commissioner; as in an action of waste the Sheriff ought to enquire in propria
persona, so in the case of Redisseism, it lies not in ancient demesne, 7 H. 35.
61 Fith. Red. 4. rep. 6. 5.
but only before the ^heriffe; for in this case the Sheriff is made Judge by
the statute: So here the commis^ioners ought to be Judges upon their Survey,
which is the office of the eyes; ^. ^. 197.
and so Mary (...) of Richmond, was in commission of the p^ace, cited per Mr.
Tailor.

In the Survey there ought to be ^estes Occular^s: A Feme may be a
commissioner, and this differs from the case of a Justice of peace upon the
statute of 13. R. 2. 7. for our statute is general and does not design any
person in-particular; Then I do not conceive any natural disability in a
woman, as to a temporal government, though we see the is excluded a
spiritual; Neither is it rare, that temporal Government has been given to
Women as well as men; Deborah was Judge in Israel, and Semiramis in Syria, and
it was adjudged in B. R. 5. Car. That the office of Marshall of the court well
descended to a Feme, and that she might well execute it by her Deputy etc.

Inquirors, are designed by the statute, that they shall be honest and lawful
men; so that a Feme cannot be an Inquiror, for she is not a man: probus homo
excludes one convicted of conspiracy, attainted of Perjury or other notorious
crimes Legalis homo excludes Alien, Villain or man outlawed, etc. 14. H. 4.
19. 41.

Persons to be taxed are, 26. Ass 28. 36 H. 8. 35
1. By Whose default some damage happens. 9. H. 6 53. 2. H. 6. 30. 4 E. 4. 16.
2. Who receives any profit adjoining. 3. Who have damage by the Surrounder.
A lease for years of land left by the sea to B. the remainder to C. in fee,
Livery is given and taken by attorney within view to the Ocean; a sea-bank
within the Level is broke, and B. and C. are taxed with other Levellers, to
repair it; R. and C. have good estates, but not well taxed within this Law; A
wall for defense of private ground decaying, shall not be taxed to be repaired:
He who has a ferry-over the (...), or river shall be taxed; otherwise of one
who has a private boat. A market, or fair not within in his statute, for they
are but a liberty, and not a profit of the soil; otherwise of a common. The
new river of Ware is not within this statute, because it tends neither to
navigation not to dreyning, but by the statute of the 5. Jac. there is a
special provision for it.

The Case.
A seized of an acre of Meadow in Sale by tenure from B. by 5. s. rent, and to
repair the wall between that and the sea. And C parson of the Rectory of S. and
of a Mill (which could not grind, because of the inundations by defect of the
said wall) and of the tyth corn in S. of which mill and tyth-corn the rectory
consists only, the wall is broken, per impetum maris, B. distreins for the
service, A. brings a replevin, B. avows, and A disclaimes; six Commissioners
whereof three of the Quorum, are but of the age of 20. years, survey Die
Sabbat. and there is an inquiry at Court die Sol. by 12. Jurors, whereof six
are outlawed; The Commissioners pull down the mill and tax A. B. and C. and all
having land within the level to repair the breach. Here is a good survey, a
good inquiry, and also a good levelling the mill within this law, and also
there is a good tax of A. and all the levellers, but not of B. and C. within
this Law.

The Points.
An Infant may be a good commissioner, for there is a special trust by this
statute to the Chancellor Treasurer, etc. and other great persons to assign
commissioners according to their discression; but it was objected, that these
persons cannot know men in every County, and for that reason they often
nominate upon information of others: but it may be answered, that they in
matters of so great importance, will not depend upon ordinary information, so
that in effect these persons which have the nomination, judge them sufficient;
And then, they have no time to find.

And therefore it differs from the cases of Dower, Leases, etc. which have
their prescribed time; also of Judicial offices, an infant generally is
incapable; for offices at common Law, by presumption of the same Law an infant
is incapable; otherwise is meant by office from the General words of the
statute; for under the general words of the statute an infant is enabled to
the same office; an infant may qualify a Chaplain Rep. 4. Actons case; an
infant cannot be a steward of a Manor, but that requires more skill and
experience, for the same steward ought to enter all pleas; 21. H. 4. 12. 13.
he may be Major of a town in the civil law Coecussurdus and pubes etc. are
disabled in respect of Judicial offices, and yet in the same Chapter he allows
an infant of the age of 20. years to be a competent Judge, and so admiting them
disabled, yet the survey is good defacto. See stat. in H. 4: That no enquest
shall be taken by tithes out lawed Will. Scots case who pleaded that he was
indicted by persons outlawed: and the Judges of the Bench-R would not proceed
about indictment.


2. The inquiry by men outlawed is good, the objection that he is not Legalis
Homo; and to that I answer, that he admitting six outlawed persons disabled,
yet the inquiry by the six others only, is good, because the statute designs
not any number; but I agree that as well within this statute as at Common Law,
there ought to be twelve to make an inquiry; for the inquiry upon this statute
is of the same consequence, being the ground of the commissioners decree, and
which concerns the liberty and estates of men; also I agree an outlawed man not
to be a good Juror, but Distinguend a sunt tempora, for if it appears before
oath, there he shall not be sworn, but being once admitted to his oath, there
he shall be judged Legalis Homo, for one before oath may be thought a partial
man, who after oath shall be thought indifferent, so as after solemn debate
one was admitted to his oath in Parliament, notwithstanding outlawry.

3. The Commissioners of Sewers have a Court incident, true it is that a court
by this statute is not expressly ordained. And upon this has been objected the
consequence of Dr. Bouhams case Rep. 8. 8. Rep. 11. 9.
the case of the City of London which have not a court; so the commissioners
upon the statute of Bankrupts, have not a court upon their commission out of
Chancery, ad audiendum and terminandum, yet they are enabled to hold a court;
but these cases depend upon their particular reasons, as if a commission out of
Chancery gives a power to have a court, then the same case would depend in two
courts, as well in this new court, as in Chancery, and as to the commission
upon the statute of Bankrupts, and the cases of the 8. Rep. they are but
ministerial offices, and not Judicial offices, but this statute calls the
commissioners Justices of Sewers, which implicitly also gives a court of
record; as also the statute appoints legal proceedings, process, Bayliffe, a
clerk, a register, their power to make distresses etc. And Error cannot but be
brought before these commissioners, and upon these is the authority grounded,
in the 6. Rep. Gregoryes case.

4. This court is well held die solis; the statute of W. 1. has been urged of
my part to warrant it: but I agree Sunday not to be within this law, for the
statute does not mention the particular day of Sunday, but only any continued
Feast, as in Advent, etc.

And within these holy times etc. Essoyns has been well taken; and then it
has beeen objected, that here is a Judicial act, whereas Dies Solis is not
Dies Juridicus, as a Proclamation upon that day void, and the pleas ought to be
entered, Crastinum Quind^n. Pasc. and not Quin. Pasc. because Sunday: So a scire
fac. die solis not good, but the difference does not hold only between
ministerial and judicial acts, but between judicial acts and civil cases,
and cases of necessity; for judicial acts, propter necessitat. and pro bone
publico, upon that day are good, as upon the approach of an enemy, the taking
up of arms lawful; so if fire happen, the same reason of water, which is an
enemy not to be repealed but in this court, and the danger as well in one case
as in the other, equal and iminent; Mich: 16. Iac. the Hundred of Stoke was
charged with a robbery, Die solis, and it is common experience that Coronors
(Die solis) sat upon the dead corpse, which by delay would become noisome.

5. The Mill erected during the time of inundation well prostrated; for it was
an impediment and hindrance of water, so that the land for a long time
continued surrounded, and then it is a nuisance to be prostrated: And it was
lately resolved, where the Lord Popham having a Mill which did not grind during
the inundation, he was advised to re-edifie a new one to grind for such a time,
the Mil so continued until the time of Sir Francis, and after observing the
prejudice and nuisance (as aforesaid) the pulling it down was resolved to be
good.

6. The tenant disclaimes the avowry, yet well taxed; for notwithstanding the
disclaimer he continues tenant, and there is a difference between a disclaimer
in real actions, 18. H. 6. 10.
and in avowries: for in real actions there being a demand of the tenancy upon
a disclaimer, it shall be judged to the demandant: 16. H. 7. 10
and the plea of the disclaimer in the case of the Abbot is not because
Mortmaine which implies mutation of possession, but in an avowry the Frank
tenemnt is not altered by the disclaimer, but the Lord ought to have his writ
of right of disclaimer, and by that shall recover the land.

The Lord after the disclaimer, cannot be taxed neither for the land or for the
rent, for the tenancy continues, and yet the rent by the disclaimer is
immediately lost; and as to this, there is a difference between a Cesser and a
disclaimer for after Cesser, the tenant may tender his rent to save his
tenancy, but after disclaimer, the Lord notwithstanding any tender shall
recover the Land.

That C. is not well taxed within this Law.
1. He cannot be charged in respect of the Mill, for the damage did not
happen by his default; neither has he damage by the inundation; Qu^s.
wherefore he is not taxed for the land on which the Mill stood.
for then he might only grind; neither has he profit by the repairation,
because the mill is pulled down: As to tithes, I conceive them not chargeable;
for notwithstanding the general words of status cujusque status etc. yet
without particular words of Ecclesiastical livings, they shall not be charged
onere seculari, as they are excepted from toll. Otherwise of Glebe land, for
that is not so sacred; but comes through temporal hands: And as to the cases of
contribution for finding of arms, relieveing of the poor, N. B. 228.
is in respect of particular cases concerning it; so of subsidies in respect of
their particular grants; so of ways: so that without a special statute, tithes
shall not be contributory to temporal charges; otherwise as to Ecclesiastical:
but if they shall be contributory to shipmoney, Querie, For there was
instructions taken with the writ, that the tax upon Clergy men, should not be
any prejudice as to their legal exemption from temporal charges: Also tithes
are liable to a temporal charge or tax, after that they come into temporal
hands; but here they continue spiritual, wherefore not well taxed; Also the
arable land does not appear to be surrounded, and then neither damage or profit.

8. The Levellers chargable, notwithstanding particular tenure; yet I agree the
tenure to be good, 11. H. 7. 12. 1. Rep. Porters case: But here it appears the
tenant to be unable, for he has but an acre, where all the wall is broken;
also the Diruption is per impetum maris

The Second Day. How a tax shall be assest by this Law.
A Man shall not be taxed according to his ability by no Law or Statute, but
the 27. Eliz. Cap. 13. where by the express words (upon a robbery done) those
of the Hundred shall be taxed according to their abilities, 12 Iac. B. R: the
parishoners of Tuttenham, assesse a Merchant of London a parishoner there for
the repairing the Church, and the tax was according to his abilities; and
notwithstanding they pretended custom, yet the Kings Bench awarded a
prohibition, because the customs was against law; for if so, then perchance
one or two should only be burdened, where the benefit would be in common;
against this reason, Quod omnes tangit ab omnibus supportari debet, shall be
expounded according to the quality, as in the statute of Quia reputores etc.
for the rate ought not to be Arithmeticall, but Geometrical: And note the
intention of the Statute is not magna or parva but media.

He cannot be double charged, as a Copyholder can, nor be taxed for his
Copyhold, 11. H 4: 35.
and the Lord for his Frank-tenement and if there be a distress upon the Lord
trespass lies against the Officer non obstante, the color of this Commission.

Lord and Commoners may be both charged, for they have several profits, the
tenant may be taxed for the land, and the Lord for the rent; so the Grantee of
a rent charge, or a Rent seck, but the commissioners are not bound to examine
the particular estates or incumbranees; but they may tax the land severally;
and upon complaint of the tenant he shall be received by equity, and the tax
shall be divided; for otherwise the tenant might be charged above the value of
the profits of the land by him received.

Differences of repair; They are annual and accidental, ordinary and
extraordinary: A Reversioner having a rent shall be taxed for the rent, as well
to ordinary as extraordinary repairs; and if he have no rent, yet he shall
contribute to extraordinary; but if it be a remainder or a reversion upon a
lease for years only; there shall be a contribution to ordinary repairs.

The Case.
After Survey and presentment made, that the port of A. was greivously in
decay, and not repairable but upon unusual charge; and that B. for cause of
frontage, and C. for cause of a passage, and the Village of A by custom have
used jointly to repair it, and that D. a Merchant of London tradeing there, had
promised to one of the commissioners, that if they duly executed their
commission, he would stand charged to pay 100. pounds toward the repair: The
commissioners thereupon tax B. and C. and the Village of A. and four other
Villages in the High-lands adjoining, severally to repair the part, and D. the
100. pounds and make warrants to the officers to levy the sums by distresses
and sale without allowance of replevins, where by law it might be denied. The
Officers destreyne D in London; and all the Vills pay but B. and C. Being
distreyned bring replevins, which the Officers refuse to allow, and they sell
the distress.

All these taxes good and well levied within this Law.
1. First the Upland-towns adjoining, are well taxed by this Law; for, first
the inhabitants are adjoining, and then they may suffer damage by decay of the
Port, or they may receive benefit by the repair, as well in tradeing by import,
and export in time of peace, as in time of war opporunity for exporting of
Soldiers. Then these Inhabitants have Salvationem Defensionem and Commodum;
31. As^. Pla. 10.
otherwise it is of towns remote; which (non obstante) damage or profit
received, shall not be taxed because they are not adjoining.

2. Town-ship may be taxed generally, against the case of the Isle of Ely, Rep.
10. For although the first words of the statute seem to direct a particular tax
to be assest upon every possessor of land, etc. yet the clause concludes
generally, according to the directions, etc. 35.38. As^
So that it may be convenient for the Commissioners to assess a sum in gross
upon a Village; and after sub-divide the same; Magna Charta 15. A tax levied
in the same manner, and upon the Statute of Winchester; an amerciament of a
town, good.

4. Jac: A decree from the Council Table with advice of all Judges, Dr. and
Student: 74.
that such a tax is good.
3. D. Tradeing there, and promising, etc. is well taxed; true it is that loss
in tradeing is sustained by inundation: yet I agree, that loss only does not
suffice, unless he be an inhabitant also; ^ Rep. Witemans case.
but I rely upon his promise, which as well makes a man chargeable,as a tenure
or prescription; and it is a legal consideration to support that promise. The
objection, that to the King it is no good consideration, because he is bound ex
officio, so here; for the good execution of commissioners: First the case
objected may well be doubted; but admitting it good law, yet the cases differ;
For the King is bound without election, so no consideration; otherwise of a
commissioner, who may refuse to be a Governor: But admiting no good
consideration in law, yet he is bound in conscience. And as to that difference
between nudum, and pactum simply, and promise to good uses, or pro bono
public, the commissioners may make it cumpulsitory, for they have a court of
equity, and may as well charge as receive by equity.

A distress of D. in London, or in any other town good within this law: as to
the lands or goods to be taxed, they are limited to their Jurisdiction; But
upon a refusuall of payment, a distress in any part of the Realm, is a lawful
distress; of common right it is upon the land, or where there is a charge
ratione tenurae, and upon presentment before the commissioners ratione tenure;
awarded to Officers, it is ministerial only, and shall not be taken but upon
the land; but if so judicial a distress be awarded there in any part of the
Realm (non abstante) the tenure shall be good.

B: and C: are well taxed, and the Tax well levied by sale, without allowing
the Replevin; in respect of the Frontage or Passage they might have damage or
profit, (for it is intended of a private passage) and then the tax without
question is good, and the sale without the Replevin, for the levy is not
satisfied by the distress of the Officers, because they ought to collect and
lay out; but they cannot lay out without sale. And although a Distress is not
generally saleable in so many days, yet being here in this case where a
Replevin does not lie at common Law; it shall be good: 3 H. 7. 4. A Distress
for an amerciament in a Leet may be sold. 2^ A^. 7^. 7. H. 4. 25. 21 H. ^. 40
11 H^4. 6.
And admitting a Replevin did lie, yet being a Distress made by a superior
Court, the sheriff cannot make a replevin: Otherwise of the C. C^ Dyer 67. 5
Rep. Rooks case.

The third Day. What shall be a lawful Arrest, Ordinances, Denovo, where good;
and what Cases are determinable by the Commissioners.
IN these particulars the Power of these Commissioners extend further then all
other statutes; for the Authority is not bounded by prescribed rules, but it is
left to their discretion; and yet absolute power given them to compel obedience
to their Ordinances: Wisdom is here coupled with Discretion, and also the
addition [Good] according to their good discretion and wisdom; discretion is
Generalis specialis aut legalis: Every wise man dispatches every business with
a general discretion, and yet that discretion submits to others; for Nemini
opportet esse sapientiori legibus.

The touchstone of their proceedings within this statute, ought to be Discretio
specialis and legalis, and between sense and discretion to know what is just,
34 H. 6. 24 19 H. 6. 27
and ubicessat lex, to have recourse to reason, and that also but in cases of
necessity, potest as ordinandi, gives power to erect new defenses: they have
power to arrest the body of a man; and in many cases where he may be fined, he
may be imprisoned.

Opposition to the legal Ordinances of the Court, is a rebellion, and
punishable by fine within this Law. An Officer for his neglect finable.
Otherwise of an Officer not sworn. 10 H. 6. 6. ^ Rep. Gregory's case.
One that makes payment at the time appointed, is not finable, but to be
amerced. One for non feasance amerciable only: Otherwise for misfeasance. The
case for which a Fine is imposed by Act of the court, not traversable;
Otherwise it is of a Fine upon a presentment of the Jury; but all Fines ought
to be reasonable.

Fines may be assest only in Plena curia; for out of court they are not Judges
of Record.

Fines are not leviable by the Commissioners, 11 Rep. Godfreye case.
but shall be estreated into the Exchequer.

Otherwise of Justices of the peace.

And the diffrence arises upon the several pennings of the statutes.

Commissioners have power to impose perpetual charge, (ss.) an annual charge
for keeping in repair, and to sell the land upon refusal of payment; the
Commissioners may not only decree right, but do right; as well repeal, as
expound ancient laws.

The Case.
The Village of A upon a coast of the sea (which had an ancient Bridge upon the
river, time out of mind of man, etc: utterly decayed) is incorporated by the
king that now is, and therefore has a grant of Pontage; B. erects purpresture,
and inhaunces a Mear within the river by force, which by former order was
destroyed; The Commissioners upon surv^y and presentment, upon their
discretions decree a new bank to resist the Meare, and fortify the bridge, and
the Levellers to make it; the county to re-edifie the bridge, the Village to
keep it in repair: B is arrested and imprisoned, and C to pay a hundred marks.

The POINTS.
1 All these acts are justifiable by the commissioners within this Law; Grant
of Pontage good. It has been objected, that the King may grant a thing tending
to charge people, and Davis's Reports, fol: 15. it is express, that Pontage
cannot be granted, but it lies only in prescription, Rep. 1. Al^nwoods case.
Plow. 426. Rep. 5 55. Rep. 11. 73.
as of other things lying ingrant only, and not in prescription; but clearly,
Pontage as well lies in grant, as in prescription. But true it is, that Pontage
for a bridge before built, is void; for there it is but a charge to the
subject; but Pontage for a bridge to be erected new, is warrantable; for there
it is, Quid pro quo. Also admitting the ancient bridge, then Pontage is
incident, unless prescription lie under; as the case between Heedy and Wheeler,
it is resolved, that toll is incident to an ancient fair, 38 Eliz. ^. R. Rot.
9^3.
unless prescription to the contrary: So of Pontage to a bridge etc.

2 Commissioners may erect a novo.

The objection, That an ad quod damnum ought to issue first; but here is a
great circumspection; for it is not a trust to a single person only, as
Escheator, but after survey of commissioners oaths. Another objection, That the
statute of H. 6: gives this power by Express Words: so that without express
words, power is not granted. But I conceive, although the statute of H. 6 be
temporary, yet it continues, and our statute has some coherence with the words
of the statute of H. 6 and upon the same reason was a solemn Decree grounded at
the Council table, That commissioners might erect de novo; and the difference
was there taken between a statute expired, and a statute repealed; for where a
statute is repealed, there an inconvenience appears, and a repeal is made in
disallowance; but where a statute expires only, there it has once an
allowance, and no check in disallowance.

3 The county is well charged to re-edifie the bridge, and the village well
charged to repair it: the question is grounded upon 22 H. 8. of Bridges, by
which it is enacted, that every village incorporate shall repair bridges of the
same village, and the others are left to the county charge, unless there be a
particular tenure or prescription, then there cannot be prescription, because
the decay is before time of memory, etc: neither is the village bound to repair
it, because that the corporation was made after the decay, also it was a
village in the county charged at the time of the statute; for it is corporate
in the time of the King also: although it be a village incorporate, yet not
being a county-town, it continues within the county at large; but after
erection, the charge of the village to repair it is good, for the village has
Pontage: Et qui sentit emu debet sentire commodum.

B: was well arrested and imprisoned for the purpresture; Kelw. 141 7 H. ^. 33.
19 H 6. 8; 33 E. 3. 8. Da. Rep. 6. De Roy. P^schar^s.
for purpresture may be as well in water as in the highway, and this without
force, but amerciable: but pupresture or anusance with force fineable, and then
if finable, imprisonment follows of consequence.

5 The fine of C. to an hundred marks, is reasonable: and I shall not help my
self by aggravating of the offense with contempt, being to re-edifie after
pulling down by Decree: but I hold, that here he cannot be fined to a greater
or lesser sum, and the words of the statute are express, scil. Statute 1 Hen.
4: cap. 12

The fourth Day, What cases are to be determined within this Law.
IF a tax be imposed upon A: and the goods of B. are distrained for it, B:
shall have an action of trespass in the court of Sewers.

Officers and servants, as Carpenters and Masons, etc. employed by the
commissioners, shall recover their wages of the commissioners in this court,
because the original cause arises by this court: Otherwise where it arises out
of this court, as the case of Vaux and Gibbons, which was referred to the
Council Table: but where a thing originally belongs to the court of Sewers, 1
R. 3.4.
that shall warrant all the proceedings also, for the accessory follows his
principal.

Where a township is taxed with a sum in gross, and a man distrains for it, he
shall have process out of this court for assessing of the sum after sale of the
land for non-payment, where the Officers by Decrees of this court, takes trees
upon the land of one man, and digs a trench upon the land of another man, both
shall recover damages for the land, and also for the trees, against the
levellers in this court: But if A: was chargeable by this law, and B disseises
him, yet B. shall have no remedy by this law.

A presentment in a Leet or Turn not traversable unless they concern the
frank-tenement, and then I conceive it ought to be removed into the Kings
bench; and the reason why personal torts are not traversable, is I conceive, ii
Rep. Bags case. 8 Rep Bonhaws case.
because de minimis non curat lex, and therefore no process to compel him to
answer in this court.

No traverse against a return of a sherif, or a Major and commonalty, but
presentiments before Justices of the peace are traversable: So a presentment
before Justices of Oyer and Terminer, Sta^t. 183. 83: 30 Ass. 57: 37 Ass. part:
45: E. 3: 26. Plowd. 397. Charter of Rumney Marsh, fol. 23, 24 and Godfrey was
presented for not repairing, and his traverse was admitted to be good, for
otherwise the words of the statute were in vain: All traverses framed according
to Law, shall be allowed in this court.

The Case:
Upon survey against A upon a presentment against B and C upon decree for sale
against D and against the father of E A tenders his traverse, B prescribes in
non reparando, C pleads that he and F ought to join in repairing, D pleads that
he was within age at the time of the decree, and E that he is son and heir of
the donee, against whom the decree was made:

All these traverses and pleas are disallowed by the Justices of Sewers, and
well within this law.

The survey of the Commissioners not traversable. M. Holborn


A survey is supposed to be by the court, and so it is a record. But I doubt if
the commissioners may make a record to charge the subject, they may by the
statute come and prostrate; but they are restrained by the other words for
charging: If they be Judges of the default, yet they are not Judges upon what
the default lies. for the statute says it shall be by enquiry: Also it is not
possible they should upon coming determine upon any cases, for they cannot view
if the will was made before the time of E.M. and then they ought not to
prostrate it; but if they can make a record, that is not traversable, for it is
made by them as Judges; for commissioners of Sewers are a court of Oyer and
Terminer; 14 H. 8. 7 H. 4.
and what a man does as Judge, that is not traversable, for it is presumed to
be just.

If Justices of Peace view the highways, i Mar. Dyer Vernous case. 19 Ass. 6.
1 H. 4.
and make entries of it, it is equivalent to a presentment, and there no
traverse: So of surveys of the commissioners who are made Judges: But a
presentment of a Jury without question is traversable.

The commission of Sewers is part of the general power of the general
commission of Oyer and Terminer; Rep. 2. Marquess Winchest. case.
but the question is, If the prescription of a non reperando, be good, it is
void at common Law, for it is against reason: but as before, Quod omnes tangit
ab omnibus deb^t supportari, a Clergy man may prescribe in non decimando, but a
Layman cannot, because he was not capable of taking of tithes; and of a clergy
man it was reason, because it might be that he was discharged anciently by
contract, but in our case the King has interest, and therefore it belongs to
him to discharge, and prescription is not good against him; but if it were good
at common law, yet this statute takes it away, because the words are general,
Rinney Marsh Cha. fol. 13. 39.
(Every man, rich or poor, etc.) For Wreck there may be a prescription, Non
obstante, the statute of prerogative: In London there is a custom, and they
prescribe, That he that serves an apprentiship to one trade, may set up any, 5
Eliz. 5. Noy said, That that statute being general in the negative, takes away
such customs. But the same was over all the realm.

C. pleads that he and F. ought to join in the repair: No good plea; For among
joynt-tenants, every one is charged with the repair of the whole, for there is
to be no division amongst them; for when one possesses all, it would be
inconvenient and difficult to find all the Joynt-tenants: True it is, for
avoiding of damages joynt-tenancy is a good plea, for there he cannot help
himself; but in our case the commissioners have a court of equity, and have
power to relieve and make distribution. There might have been the Writ De
reparation faciend. N.B. 234. 235
de onerand. pro rata portion; so the statute of Marleborough for suit, to have
the other tenants contribute. So upon 27 Eliz. 13. upon Hue and cry
contribution.

3 Infancy at the time of the Decree, no good plea; but the sale shall bind the
Infant in perpetuum.

Littleton says, that in such a case Latches shall not prejudice the Infant.
Now where the benefit of the Commonwealth is concerned, and the words of the
statute are general, there the infant is to be bound, for the Commonwealth is
the greater favorite of the Law, statute 4 H. 7. of Fines that shall bind
Infants; for there is no express saving for them: So the statute of
Limitations, 19 H. 8. but there is a difference where the statute charges the
possessions, of the Infant, there he shall be bound, but the person of the
Infant is more favored. But though they may not during his nonage, 7 E. 3.
age 88. Plow. 359. 459. 21 E. age 54.
yet at his full age they shall be charged for the default of his infancy; so
of the statute of waste; but the person of the infant shall be excused. As the
statute of Westminster. 2. enacted, that he that pleaded a record, and failed of it,
should be imprisoned, yet an infant shall not. Now in our case where the
statute is made pro bono publico, 4 H. 7. 1^. Fitz. ass. 443. Imprison. 17. 14
Ass. 18. 21.
and the infants person not touched by the Decree, neither is there any
prejudice to the infant because the commissioners are Judges entrusted by the
Law to do equity. Also so it is of a Feme Covert, so I conceive for the reasons
aforesaid that he is bound by this statute.

5 The heir of a gift in tale, is chargeable upon a Decree against his
ancestor; but that ought to be supposed upon a complaint to be relieved in
equity, that it cannot be a plea against the decree is determined: The question
is grounded upon the statute De donis conditionalibis, which says, that
neither Factum, nor Feoffament of the Donee shall prejudice his issue. Now
there are many statutes that do not extend to prejudice these Estates, the
statute of 16 R. 2. of forfeiture of all lands upon Praemunire, extends not to
tail, because the general words of the statute are merely penal; but statutes
that are for the public good, if they be general, extend to it, as 4 H. 7. of
Fines, 3 Rep. 8. and the Law takes it, that a demise of a tenant in tail,
should bind the issue, until the 34 H. 8. and upon the 42 Eliz. of charitable
uses, a conveyance by Donee shall bind the issue in tail, because it is
beneficial to him, but the 26 H. 8. for forfeiture for treason shall not bind
the Estate tail, because it is penal: Now our statute being (any Estate) if it
should not reach to estates tail, the words would operate nothing; and it may
be all the Lands chargeable may be in tail, at the same time, and then there
would be no lands chargeable if the statute did not extend to tails, and so be
sold; yet I conceive there be some lands that cannot be sold by this law, as of
a corporation that makes default, their lands shall be sold within this law, if
it be such a corporation which may perpetually charge their successor:
otherwise of a corporation that cannot bind themselves, as a Prebend, Parson,
Dean, and Chapter, and Bishop, etc. For the statute of 13 Eliz. says, that no
act or conveyance by them to be made or suffered, shall bind their successors:
But the general words of our statute makes the successors chargeable. And
although the statute de Donis, etc. protects the issue, yet they may be well
charged within this law.

The Reader.
If A. by survey being found faulty for non-feasance, he may traverse it by
this law; this law has two surveyors, the commissioners themselves, who may
come and survey.

2 Officers, as assistants and Jurors. If the Jury make a presentment that J.
S. ought to repair by reason of his tenure, that presentment is void, for the
jury ought not to enquire of that; but if they present that J. S. has nor
repaired as he was charged to do, that's good; and in this case to the
presentment of the Jury the party may tender his traverse, because the Jurors
are only assistants to the Court for occasion, but not Judges; but the survey
of the commissioners themselves shall not be traversable, because it is the act
of the court, and it is done as Judge, and not by special authority, as
commissioners of bankrupts. And if a Justice of peace survey the force, and
makes a record of it, that is not traversable, because it is done as Judge of it.

Prescription for non reparando, is good; for the words of the ancient
commission are Cujuscunque status condition. etc. so the words of the statute,
Every man which shall reap benefit, although a prescription pro modo is good;
and according to the special matter his prescription may be good, as if B. had
pleaded that his land had lain between the sea and the sea-bank, and prescribes
for discharge of his land, there the prescription is good. Otherwise of a
prescription generally, Joynt-tenancy, is not a good plea; for repairation
being a public work, and of necessity it shall not be pleaded; but all the
land shall be charged in gross.

9 Rep. Conyers case.
4 Infancy no good plea for the manner, because it is after the Decree, which is
the final judgment, and he is put to his bill of review before the
commissioners.

44 E. 3. 22
5 That the issue shall be bound as aforesaid. A rent granted by tenant in tail
for release of him who had the right, this shall bind the heir because it is for
his benefit. And in our statute there is the word (Heir) which would be void
unless it included the Estates tail. Also this plea is void for the manner,
Rationa predict. of Infancy.

The Fifth Day. Was upon the power of the Commissionsioners to determine, and
what Lands, and for what causes they may be sold, what persons liable to be
charged.
LAnds to be charged within the decree, ought to be within the bounds of the
Commissioners; but there is a difference between locality for a decree, and for
a distress; for the distress may be in any part of the Realm, Non compos
mentis, Infants, etc are bound by this statute; so of a Parson, Prebend, etc.
and other corporations; but as to their successors, the corporation within the
statute of 13 Eliz. is out of this statute, for they cannot by any act to be
done or suffered, prejudice their successors.

The Case.
A. seized of lands left by the sea, B. and C. tenants in common of other
lands, and D. copyholder of another acre; A. is assest 2 d. B. and C. 20 s.
for their acre, and D. to 20 s. for his acre; A. B. and D refuse payment, and
the commissioners decree the sale of the acre of A and the moiety of the acre
of C and D

The POINTS.
The Decree for none of these sales is good.

Lands left by the sea is not within this commission; for there is a difference
between lands gained from the sea, and land left by the sea; for the lands
absolutely gained, may be more beneficial, and it is within the level; but this
land left, is between the sea, and the sea-banks, so that there can be no
benefit by the repairation.

2 The sale of the copyhold land is not good, for then the copy hold estate
should be altered without the privity of the Lord: Otherwise of a tax.

3 Tenants in common being taxed, and refuse, the sale of the moiety is not
good, for the tax is joint, and shall not double, as upon a grant of a rent;
and then the tax being entire, (and no partition of the Estate) a division by
sale of the moiety, is not good and warrantable; for a tenant in common cannot
prejudice his companion as to his land; and upon every sale Commissioners ought
to take notice of Estates. Otherwise upon a tax.

The sixth day nothing was done, but repetition of the former days exercise.

FINIS.

