AN Astrological Discourse With Mathematical DEMONSTRATIONS, Proving the
Powerful and Harmonical Influence of the Planets and fixed Stars upon
Elementary Bodies, in Justification of the Validity of ASTROLOGY

Together with an Astrological Judgment UPON The great Conjunction of Saturn
and Jupiter 1603.

Written by that worthy learned Gentleman Sir CHRISTOPHER HEYDON, Knight, and
now published by NICHOLAS FISKE, Jatromathematicus.

LONDON, Printed by J: Macock for Nathaniel Brooks at the Angel in Cornhil.
1650.

THis exquisite Treatise having been near 40 years detained in private hands,
is now by the good hand of God made public; it being the One, and only Copy of
this Subject extant in the World: Penned it was by the incomparably learned Sir
Christopher Heydon Knight, whose able Pen has so strenuously vindicated
Judicial Astrology; as to this day not any Antagonist ^^^st encounter with his
unanswer able Arguments. In this Tractate that very thing which all Antagonists
cry out for, viz. Where Is the demonstration of the Art? is hear in this Book by
^^^^^^able Mathematical Demonstrations so judiciously proved, that the most
scrupulous may receive full satisfaction. I shall ouly add thus much, that we
may herein admire the divine Providence of God, who so long since elevated the
Conceptions of this learned Knight, to go on with, to perform and perfect so high
and so sublime a piece of learning, and yet deferred its. publication, until
both the times, and men's minds also were by his all-guiding hand made capable
of its reception: The Work speaks its own merits. I am thine,

WILLIAM LILLY.

To the Reader.
RICHARD FORSTER, Doctor in Physic, one of the College of Physicians in
London, in Astronomy very learned, and in Astrology no less skilful, as many
yet living do very well remember; for although he was Physician to Robert
Dudley, that great Earl of Leicester, yet did he survive him, and dyed long
after King James came into England: by this Doctors means Sir Christopher
Heydon Knight. of the County of Norfolk, became not only a Lover but an admirable
Student in Astrology; and to say truth, I do not find in all my reading that
any of the Ancients did exceed him in Knowledge herein.

Some years after K. James his coming into England this learned Knight, to
manifest his gratefulness unto Doctor Forster, from whom he acknowledged his
initiation in this Study, did present unto him in London in a well written
hand, this ingenuous and deep piece of Philosophy which I now make public.
Doctor Forster, as my self well know, received it as an inestimable Jewel, and
preserved it in his Study amongst the rarest and choicest Pieces therein; but
death depriving this learned Doctor of life in that year he was President of
the College, by great providence this ensuing Treatise came into my hands;
which I have carefully preserved with great respect, both to the Author and
matter it self.

I have many times endeavored its impression, but without success; for until of
late years such was the error or rather malice of the Clergy, who only had
privilege of licensing Books of this nature, that they wilfully refused the
publication: But of late casually showing this Manuscript to my worthy friend
Elias Ashmole Esquire he earnestly desired it might be made public, freely
offering to be at the charges of cutting the Diagrams in brass, that so the
work might appear in its greater luster.

I might here fall into a serious and just Commendation of every particular
Chapter of this Work, and the weight almost of every word in each Chapter; but
since the Work it self is short, I will not anticipate thy reading, but refer
thee to the book it self, having abundantly satisfied my self in these my aged
days to have added somewhat to the raising up of Astrology, which during all my
years, and they are more then 70. has been strangely kept under, and aspersed
by men malicious and unlearned; so that although I had my self many times
serious thoughts of expressing my own Astrological Conceptions in public, yet
was I ever either dehorted by Friends, or retarded by a servile fear of
incuring the then present Powers. However, if God shall enlarge my days, I hope
hereafter to be serviceable to the learned Society of Astrologers, unto whom I
heartily commend this at present, and in the future such other Pieces as he
shall enable me to perform, while I live, and am called, Thine,

Nicholas Fisk. Philiatros, and Astrophilus.

Courteous Reader, These Books following are printed for NATHANIEL BROOKS, and
are to be sold at his shop at the Angel in Cornhill.
1. PLanometria, or the whole Art of Survey of Land, showing the use of all
Instruments, but especially the plain Table; whereunto is added an Appendix to
measure regular Solides, as Timber, Stone, and the like, and to find the
contents of Timber tree as it grows, useful for all that intends either to
sell or purchase, by Ol. Wallingby. 8. 2. An Arithmatick, discovering the
secrets of that Art in Numbers and Species, in two Books: 1. Teaching by
precept and example the operation in Numbers, whole and broken by Decimals, a
new practice and use of the Logarithms, Napyers bones, with new Propositions,
touching the Quantities, qualities and Rules of Medicines. 2. The great Rule of
Algebra in Species, resolving all Arithmatical Questions by supposition, with a
Canon of the powers of Numbers, fitted to the meanest capacity, by Jonas Moor,
late of Durham. 8. 3. Tactometria, or the Geometry of Regulars, after a new,
most exact, and expedious manner, in Solids, not only in respect of magnitude
or demension, but also of gravity or ponderosity, according to any metal
assigned, with useful Experiments, falling in by the way of measure and weight.
And withal, the like artifical Practical Geometry of Regular-like Solids, and
of a Cylindrir body, for liquid or Vessel Measure, with sundry new Experiments
never before extant for gauging, a work very useful for all that are employed
in the Art Metrical, by John Wiberd, Doctor in Physic. 4. Records Arithmetic,
or the grounds of Art, teaching the Practices of Numbers and Fractions after an
easy manner.
Histories with curious Discourse of Humane Learning.
1. The English Gentleman, and English Gentlewoman, both couched into one
volume, with the Ladies Love-Lecture, and a Supylement, called the Turtles
Triumph, by Richard Braithwait, Esquire Folio. 2. The History of the Golden Ass. 4.
3. The Painting of the Ancients, the beginning, progress and Consummation of
that Noble Art; and how those ancient Artificers attained to their still so
much admired Excellency. 5. Isreal's Redemption, or the Prophetical History of
our Saviors Kingdom on Earth, that is, the Church Catholic and Triumphant,
with a Discourse of Gog and Magog, or the Battle of the the great Day of God
Almighty, by Robert Maton of Exon-Colledg in Oxon. 8. 6. An Introduction to the
Teutonick Philosophy, being a determination of the original of the Soul, at a
Dispute held in the public School at Cambridg at the Comencement, March 3.
1646. by Charles Hotham, Fellow of Peter-House. 12. 7. Oedipus, or A Resolver,
being a Clew that leads to the chief Secrets and true Resolution of Ammorus
Natural, Moral and Political Problems, by G. M. 12. 8. The Celestial Lamp,
enlightening every distressed Soul from the depth of everlasting Darkness to
the height of eternal Light, by Tho: Fettisplace. 12.
Choice Poems, with several excellent Tradegies and Comedies.
1. Fons Lachrymarum, or a Fountain of Tears, from whence does flow Englands
Complaint, Jeremiahs Lamentations, with an Elegy upon that Son of Valor Sir
Charles Lucas, by John Quarls. 8. 2. Nocturnal Locubrations, or Meditations
Divine and Moral, with Epigrams and Epitaphs, by Robert Chamberlin. 3. The
Unfortunate Mother, a Tragedy, by Thomas Nabbs. 4. The Rebellion of Comedy, by
Tho: Raulins. 5. The Tragedy of Messalina, by Nathaniel Richards. 8.
Excellent Pieces of Divinity of certain Orthodox Divines, with other Sermons,
viz.
1. The Remedy of Coffeehouse, or a Treatise of Contentation in whatsoever
condition, fit for these sad and troubled Times, by the right Reverend Father
in God Joseph Hall, late Bishop of Exon and Norwich. 12. 2. The Grand Sacriledg
of the Church of Rome, in taking away the sacred Cup from the Laiety at the
Lords Table, by the late Reverend Daniel Featly, Doctor in Divinity. 4. 3. The
Cause and Cure of Ignorance, Error, Enmity, Athiesm and Profaneness, or a most
hopeful way to Grace and Salvation, by R. Young. 8. 4. A Bridle for the Times,
tending to still the Murmuring, to settle the Wavering, to stay the Wandering,
to strengthen the Fainting, by John Brinsley Minister of Gods Word at Yarmouth.
5. Comforts against the Fear of Death, being short Meditations of that precious
Gentlewoman Mrs Anne Skeleton of Norwich, wherein are several Evidences of the
Works of Grace in her own Soul, which were the stay of her Heart against the
Fear of Death, by John Collings of Norwich. 6. Jacobs Seed, or the Excellency
of seeking God by Prayer, by Jeremiah Buroughs, Minister of the Gospel to the
two greatest Congregations about London, Stepney and Criple-gate. 12. 10. The
Zealous Magistrate, A Sermon by Thomas Trescot. 11. Britania Rediviva, or a
Sovereign Remedy to cure a sick Commonwealth, in a Sermon preached in the
Minster at York before the Judges at the Assize, Aug. 9. 1649. by John Shaw
Min. of Hull. 9. The Princes Royal, or a Sermon preached in the Minster in York
before the Judges, March 24. 1650. by John Shaw Minister of Hull. 10. Anatomy
of Mortality, divided into eight Heads. 1. The Certainty of Death. 2.
Meditations of Death. 3. Preparations for Death. 4. The right Behavior in
Death. 5. The Comfort in our own death. 6. The Comfort against the death of
friends. 7. The Cases wherein its lawful and unlawful. 8. The glorious Estate
of Gods children after death. By George Stronde.
ERRATA.
REad Page 4. li. 2. is above a. p. 13. li. 15. proportion. l. 24. operation.
p. 22. l. 26. this. p. 23. l. 6. with the quality. p. 24. l. 8. so far. p. 27.
l. 5. operation. l. 7. ardor. p. 48. l. 7. the general. p. 50. l. 6.
Historiarum Commentarios. l. 23. sine. p. 54. l. 8. this. p. 55. l. 9. make
like. p. 58. l. 25. also in p. 60. l. 12. of these. l. 28. to the true. p. 63.
l. 23. the same. l. 25. Cauda Cygni. p. 66. l. 17. are so. p. 67. l. 14.
Passion. p. 70. l. 26. by, r. of. p. 72. l. 26. their, r. these. p. 74. l. 22.
Ark. p. 75. l. 1. me, r. we. p. 78. l. 4. of, r. as. l. 6. constituted. p. 79.
l. 22. of the Circum: p. 80. l. 5. that either. p. 99. l. 19. your, r. their.
p. 102. l. 22. happened.

CHAP. I.
Of Winter.
NOt without great Judgment does Pliny affirm lib. 2. cap. 8
those that first understood the obliquity of the Zodiac, Rerum fores
aperuisse: For besides that, the finding out hereof prepared the way first to
find out the periodical motions of the Planets. The Philosopher himself
teaches us, that the variety, generation and corruption of all things
depends chiefly hereupon. And common experience drives us to confess the
access and recess of the Sun unto the four Cardinal Points of this Circle to be
the most general and assured cause of the years successive alteration. Upon
this ground I affirm the Winter quarter to take his true beginning at what time
the Sun making his entrance into the Tropic of, has attained his greatest
declination Southward from our Zenith or Vertical Point. From whence diverse
Impediments evident in Nature do follow, which bereave our Septentrional parts
of that heat and vigor wherewith at other times the Sun being nearer, and more
elevated, does preserve and cherish the Elements, and all things composed of
them, whether vegetable or sensative.

CHAP. II.
The first Reason of the difference between the Heat and Light in Summer and
Winter, drawn from the diversity of Stay above the Horizon.
Continuance of operation what difference it causes between the temperature of
Summer and winter.
FOr whereas first of all continuance of action does necessarily add force of
operation to all natural Agents, it comes to pass in Winter by reason of the
Suns remote Position, that his continuance above the Horizon is shortest, and
his absence under the same longest, thereby now causing the shortest days, and
longest nights. For example, the Elevation of the Pole at the honorable City of
London is observed to be 51. g: 32. and the greatest declination of the Sun in
this our Age is 23. g: 31. 30. Therefore in the Winter Solstice the Sun
finisheth his Diurnal Ark, to them of this City in 7 hours 34 minutes, and for
this consideration can heat the Air here but a little while, seeing the same is
not one third of a natural day, at which time nevertheless he remains hidden
under the Earth more then twice so long, and so cease from calefaction,
imparting no benefit of his light and heat to us at all: Whereas in Summer the
Sun persisteth 16 whole hours, and 26 minutes in operation, not ceasing above
seven hours and a half from action, by reason of his absence under the Horizon.
Wherefore look what proportion 7 hours 34 minutes have to 16 hou: 26 min: the
like difference there shall be betwixt the Suns operation in Summer and Winter,
in respect of his diverse stay above the Horizon, which (not to be too
scrupulous) is a double proportion the one to the other.

CHAP. III.
The second Reason of the foresaid Difference, drawn from the difference of
Union in the Beams.
SEcondly, In the work of the Stars Union of Beams is a thing regarded, Union
of Beams, what it causes.
as of special consequence. But it is clear to them that have any insight in
the Optics, that in Winter the Union of the Beam, incident with the Beam
reflected, is not comparable with that which the greater Altitude of the Sun
causes in Summer; and therefore the effects depending upon this Union, must
accordly be increased or diminished in proportion. That this is true,

Diagram.



Suppose A B in the first Figure, and C D in the second, to be two equal parts
of the Earths Superficies; whereupon the Beams of the Sun E A in Winter, and G
C in Summer do fall: E A in the Winter Solstice, making an Angle with the plain
of the Horizon H A B, of 14. gr: 56. 30. viz. E A H, or E B H, being the
Meridian Altitude of the Sun at London upon that day. Likewise let G C K, or G
D K, be admitted to irradiate the Earth at the highest Meridian Altitude in the
Summer Solstice at an Angle of 61 gr. 59. 30. Then forasmuch as (by the
principles of the Optics) the Angles of incidence and reflection are evermore
equal, A F in the first Figure, and C M in the second, being the reflected
Beams, E F and G M shall be reverberated from A B and C D at like Angles with
their proper incidents. Which being true, it is also evident, that because the
inward Angles at C and D are greater then the inward Angles at A and B, the
Triangle C L D shall of necessity be greater then the Triangle A I B. And
forasmuch as the Union of the Beams, incident with the reflected, happens
within the limits of these Triangles, therefore of consequence the Union C L D
in Summer is so much greater then the Union of A I B in Winter, as the area of
the one does exceed the area of the other, which is about, or rather somewhat
above, six to one; and being joined to the former difference, as is usual in
addition of proportions, proves, that this difference of Union, together with
the Suns stay in Summer, causes the heat to exceed that which we receive in
Winter above twelve times.

CHAP. IV.
The third Reason of the former Diversity, proceeding from the differing
quantity of Beams.
A Third Reason of the difference and Quantity of Beams.
diminution of heat in Winter proceeds from the small quantity of Beams which
then illustrate the Earths Superficies, in comparison of that which the Sun
sends down to us in Summer. For as the specifical qualities of the rest of
the Stars accompany their light, so it is also true, that the heat of the Sun
is conveyed unto us by his Beams. Wherefore the fewer the Beams be which fall
upon the Horizon, the less also shall be the heat. And forasmuch as in Winter
the Sun darteth them more oblique then in Summer; therefore it is evident, that
there shall not so many Beams fall upon the plain of the Horizon at the oblique
Position of the Sun in Winter, as when he approaches nigher to a
perpendicularity in Summer. To demonstrate this,

Diagram.



Suppose Q O, and Q P, to be two diverse Superficies of the Earth, upon which
the same Beams A Q do shine diversely; that is, perpendicularly upon the
Superficies Q O, but obliquely upon the Superficies Q P. Then I say, that the
Triangle Q O P, whose Angle at O is by supposition a right angle, the side Q P,
which subtendeth the said Angle must be greater then the side Q O, by the 18 of
the first of Euclide. And yet from hence we see it follows, that all the
light which is shed upon Q P, the oblique, but greater Super^cies, shall fall
notwithstanding upon Q O, the less, but directly subject to the Beams A Q. If
moreover we take a ^pace Q V in the greater Superficies, which by construction
shall be equal to Q O, and from N to V draw down a parallel to the line A O P,
it is evident that the Beam N Q; wherewith the Superficies Q V is illuminated,
is but a part of the Beams A Q. For which Reason the Superficies Q V shall
participate but part also of that heat which is communicated to the Superficies
Q O, being directly subject to the Beam Q A, which also was manifest enough
even by the precedent Figures, where the Winter Beams E A, compared with the
Summer Beams G D, are next hand in proportion but as one to four, by reason
whereof the Sun hardly imparteth of that light and heat to us at his Meridional
height in the Winter Solstice, which we feel from his highest Position in the
Summer. This Diminution, considered with the former Impediments, leaves us not
above the forty eight part of that heat in Winter, which we receive in Summer
from the Sun.

CHAP. V.
The fourth difference caused by the depth or diverse crassitude of the Air by
which the Beams pass.
NEither can we be rightly said to Crassitude of the Air.
have the full fruition of this portion of Heat in Winter, by reason that the
crassitude or thickness of the Air is then more object to the Suns oblique
Beams then in Summer, and does thereby resist and hinder them more now then in
Summer. For proof hereof, Diagram.

let D F H represent the superficies of the Earth: I G N, the unequal
superficies of the cloudy or vaporous Region: And suppose the Sun to shine upon
F, the place of our habitation, from three several points, Z, A, B. Z being the
vertical point over our heads, A the Suns Summer height, B his altitude in
Winter (as before was expressed:) So Z F, A F, and B F, shall be the Suns
Beams, part whereof, viz. G F, K F, and M F, we see are in a sort obscured,
hindered, and resisted by the vaporous Air. But now for as much as (by the 7 of
the 3 of Euclide) G F is shorter then K F, and K F then M F, therefore the Sun
shall of necessity feel less impediment in the Zenith at Z, then at A, and by
consequence at A, then at B. because still the further the Sun is removed from
the Zenith, the longer is the passage of the Sunbeams through the opposite
air. Now to attain Geometrically to the proportion of the Suns debilitated
force, through this impediment; we are first to agree how deep or thick this
cloudy Region of the air that ^efringeth the Sunbeams may be: which our late
Artists, to whom greatest credit is to be given, as they have been more
conversant and curious in the observation hereof, then their Predecessors, do
all agree not to extend three English miles in the Perpendicular G F, as is
plain unto The depth of Vaporous Air wherein we live.
them that are acquainted with the Disputations of Tycho, Rothman, Kepler, and
others. For we must here distinguish between the matter of the crepusculum, and
this vaporous air, which is so little elevated above the Earth, that hardly we
may live upon the tops of some hills (as Aristotle testified of Olympus)
without applying a Sponge to the nostrils for want of this thick air which we
use in respiration: The like does Josephus Acosta witness unto us of the Seres
in Peru, which are hardly passable by such as labor to overcome their height;
because the air, before they came to the tops of these hills, grows so subtle
and attenuated. And to add something of my own experience, my self having made
some trials of the height of the Clouds, as well in the heat of Summer, as at
other times, could never yet find them more lifted up above the superficies of
the Earth, then 236. perches. Wherefore admitting G F, which is the part of the
Perpendicular line that penetrateth the gross Air to be three miles, and F C,
the semidiamiter of the Earth, to be 3436 miles, and the Summer and Winter
heights as before; it will be manifest by supputation, that whereas K F shall
pierce but four miles, or thereabouts, M F shall pass twelve, and somewhat
more. So that the opposition and impediment which the Sunbeams do suffer in
Winter, is triple to that which they feel in their Summer passage, and does
therefore weaken the Suns force in that preparation. And being added to the
rest of the causes before specified, does demonstratively prove (all together
considered) that the heat in Summer excels that which we receive in Winter
in proportion, as 144. is to 1. In explaining whereof I have been the more
curious, because that which is here demonstrated concerning the Suns
apparition, is likewise to be applied to the rest of the Planets, which moving
under the same Circle that the Sun does, shall receive the like addition or
abatement of force, and therefore of singular moment to be observed in all
Judgments.

CHAP. VI.
Why the ending of July and beginning of August is the hottest time of Summer,
and so likewise the ending of January and beginning of February the coldest
time of Winter.
BUt we must further consider, that although these four causes are most evident
upon the very Solstitial days, yet it is not always of necessity that upon them
we always feel the greatest heat or cold. But there is yet another general
cause to be added, which in respect of it self does commonly aggravate the
bitterness of Winter about the beginning of February. The Reason whereof Kepler
does resolutely ascribe to Privation In fundam. Astrolog. These. 12 and 19.
only, with Cardan, further denying Cold to be a positive quality, and with
him Picus, that any specifical virtue does descend unto us from Heaven, besides
Light and Heat; and therefore says that the Air, Water, and Earth, being
naturally destitute of Heat, as they are material and thick Bodies, are neither
^uddenly warmed, nor suddenly cold, but conceiving Heat in June when the ^un is
at the highest, do accumulate it unto the Heat of July and August after ^he
same manner, and for the same Reason, that the heat of the day in the after^oon
is greater then at high noon, until ^he Sun, after his declining by degrees
from us, does also by little and little withdraw his heat from these Elements,
which ^hen return to their former Nature, and ^o necessarily admit Cold in the
absence ^f Heat, which still prevails more and more by the Suns long
discontinuance from us, until after February be past, ^e begin to recover some
part of his ^orce again.

CHAP. VII.
The method set down which is observed in refelling Kepler.
WHereunto, because it concerns the very Foundation of Astrology, I must
crave leave to answer, not doubting but if I can demonstrate that both Cold and
all the rest of the first qualities do proceed essentially from Heaven, and are
only to be found by accident in the Elements, that this will give the Reader,
who before stood in doubt, good satisfaction. And the better to clear this
point, I will first show, that Heat is neither essential to the Light, nor so
inseparably united unto it, but that they are and may be severed as diverse in
Nature; whereby it will likewise follow, that the rest of the qualities may
concur with Light as well as Heat. This done, I will secondly make it plain
that Cold is no privation, but a positive quality, and that neither it nor the
rest of the qualities can originally be referred to the Elements, but of
consequence to Heaven, yea, and that without any incongruity in Philosophy,
whatsoever the Peripateticks and their followers have heretofore thought. Which
thus premised, the Reader shall be the better prepared to believe both that
this common Intension in February is to be ascribed (as Astrology teaches)
partly to those parts of Heaven, which the Sun does then pass by, partly to
such Constellations as do then rise and set; and also the better to conceive
how the Intensions and Remissions of every season may grow by the particular
passions of the Planets and the rest of the Stars, and not from naked
Privation, as Kepler would have it.

CHAP. VIII.
Other qualities concomitate Light, as well as Heat.
ANd now to prosecute these things in order: First, I affirm, That although we
see Heat and Light to descend jointly with the Beams of the Sun, yet it does
not concomitate the light of all the Stars; for that heat is neither the
substance of the light, (for assertion whereof Scaliger justly reprehendeth
Exercitat. 75.
Cardane,) nor more to be confounded with light then sight, then sight is to be
confounded with touch, whereof Light and Heat are proper Objects. For as we
cannot feel the Light, nor see the Heat; so those Senses which are not always
jointly exercised together (as we see, and not feel, and feel, and not see) do
teach us, that Light and Heat are diverse qualities, and both in reason and
nature may be conceived to subsist the one without the other. This will best
appear by the diffinition of both, which evermore expresses the nature of the
thing in question. Forasmuch therefore as Heat is that quality which does
congregate Heat or Hotness defined.
homogeneal things, and separate those that are heterogeneal, which agreeeth
not to the property of the Light, which is brought unto us by the Beams of the
Stars, the same being defined (according to Alhazen and Vitellio) to be Light
defined, or rather lightsomness.
only The Species or Image of the inherent Light of the Sun or Star from whence
it is sent: There is nothing more evident then that that Heat which is conveyed
unto us with the beams of the Sun, is of a diverse nature from the light
thereof. For both Sense and Experience do prove, That Heat is no Image or
similitude, but a real and active quality, which how it should subsist in an
Image as in the subject, or how Light should subsist in Heat, being likewise an
accidental quality, are difficulties which in my judgment will not easily be
answered, except we can prove, that one accident may be the subject of another,
which is against all Philosophy. This then alone, although it does sufficiently
prove, that Light and Heat are two diverse qualities; yet to make it more
apparent, daily observation does show, That one may be and remain in the
absence of the other, as we see in Attrition, where Heat is excited without
Light, and so we may exclude the Light, when nevertheless the heat of the Sun
shall remain. And though the Earth, and the rest of the Elements, retein the
impression of the former day, yet does neither the Earth, Air, or Water, shine
after the Sun is set: Wherefore if Heat may thus exist, and be separated from
the light; and it be also true (as before has been showed) that the one cannot
subsist in the other, what may be more clear then that for these Reasons Light
and Heat are two diverse qualities, and that Light can neither be the essence
of Heat, nor Heat of Light? Truly therefore does Durandus distinguish of their
properties, teaching us, that the property of Light is only to illuminate, and
that it is not of the essence thereof either to heat or infrigidate; Sed (says
he) duntaxat merito corporis in quo inest, ut si virtute calidum sit, etc. So
then the heat, which accompanies the light of the Sun, is not to be said any
property of light, but in truth to be referred to the Suns occult and specific
Virtue: as with like reason I do affirm, and hereafter will prove, That the
rest of the first qualities, together with the special properties of every
Star, does accompany Light as well as Heat. For it is clear, that there be many
Light in many natural Bodies, which yet be actually cold.
lightsom bodies which do not heat, but are rather actually cold, as for
example, the Diamond, Carbuncle, and other precious Stones, besides the Eyes,
Heads, and Scales of Fishes, and the Sea it self, which in tempestuous weather
does represent huge mountains of light. Yet to affirm that the Sea burns, would
be reputed by the common Proverb, no better then a plain lie. So false is it,
that light is always the cause of heat, and proceeds only from such bodies as
are of a hot nature; which I could yet further amplify by experience that I
have made in Reflections, it being certain that Spherical Concaves, or
Parabolical Sections, will as sensibly reflect the actual cold of Snow or Ice,
as it will the heat of the Sun. Wherefore if Cold may accompany the reflected
Light, why not the original Cold accompanies reflected Light.
Light it self? Neither do I desire herein my bare word to go for payment, but
do further remit him that shall call this in doubt unto his own practice, and
the Testimonies of Maginus, who, in the Representations of his Glass sent to
the Emperor, does confirm the same in these words: Species esse sensu tactus
perceptibilis, ut apparet ex lumine candelae, item ex nive and glacie
infrigidante per suam imaginem remote admodum. And my self have often made the
like trial of the full Moon, which nevertheless The light of the Moon not to be
hot, found by reflection.
is reflected without any heat at all that sense can perceive, notwithstanding
that the same Glass does sensibly reverberate heat with the light of a small
candle, and reflecteth the beams of the Sun with that force, that it inflameth
all combustible matter in an instant, and causes Lead to run. Whereunto then
may it be imputed, that the Moon shining with her borrowed light, does not
sensibly warm, as well when it is projected from the Sun? Will they answer that
the Suns light is debilited by reflection from the Moon? But if they maintain
heat always to accompany light, then this is no answer. And though I should
yield that it may weaken the heat also, and cause calefaction in a lesser
degree, yet this does not satisfy how so glorious a Light as the full Moon
does yield, especially in Winter, should be deprived of all heat, when the same
is collected, reunited, and multiplied again, in which case as well all Beams
are as well strengthened by reflection, as weakened without his help. Add
hereunto, that the greatest Frosts happen in the fairest Moonshine nights,
which proves Cold to accompany her light. Wherefore I rather affirm this to
be another notable Argument, proving Light of an indifferent nature, neither
hot nor cold of it self, but to participate of the quality of the star, or
other body from whence it is reflected, seeing the same light which from the
Sun causes heat, has no such quality reflected from the Moon, but rather the
contrary, and diverse from it, the force thereof chiefly showing it self in cold
and moisture. But if Keplers opinion were true, that Cold were nothing but a
mere Privation, this could not be: and therefore leaving that which has been
already alleged to the Judgment of the learned, I hold it very material,
according to the order formerly propounded, to prove next, That Cold is a
positive quality.

CHAP. IX.
Cold a positive quality, as well as Heat.
ANd first I demand of Kepler, or any that maintains his Opinion, if Cold be
ascribed to nothing but privation of Heat by the Suns long absence, how it
comes to pass, that one VVinter does far exceed another in extremity of Cold?
Will he answer that the Sun is more remote, or longer absent from us, one year
then another? It were too ridiculous, knowing that the Sun has his limits
prescribed, which he never did transgress, neither can, without violating the
Law of Nature. The uniform course of the Sun therefore can be no cause of this
variety of one year from another: Neither (if it be well considered) Privation
can be no cause of Cold.
can Privation be any cause of Cold at all. For seeing Privation is no nature
in Being, but only an imaginary noncens, how can that which is not have any
action ascribed unto it? Such a cold therefore could not refrigerate, and so in
truth can be no cold at all. But on the contrary, we see that Cold is such a
quality, as actually constringeth Hail, Snow, Frost, and other congealed
Meteors; it condenseth the flowing Superficies of the Water into a firm glassie
Substance; it chilleth the Blood, and benumeth the Sense with the extremity
thereof: And to be short, through the real existence of this quality in any
Subject, we see it gives the same denomination of Cold, and that the Sense is
able to judge it so: But it were absurd to say we could feel that which is not,
and against all Reason and Philosophy to ascribe these effects unto such a
thing as rests only in imagination but has no Being in Nature. Wherefore
this Error in this Point is as palpable as the Cold it self. And to add
somewhat more unto that which I have already said, I see not how this can be
admit^ed, except we will further reduce Pha^etons world again. For if there be
no positive nature to moderate and resist the multiplied heat of the stars; it
cannot be but in continuance of time all the whole frame of the world must be
set on fire. For so long as the stars shine, they still affirm succeeding heat
to descend with their light, whereupon it does necessarily follow, that if
there be no positive nature to refrigerate, all must needs be inflamed. They
must therefore first remove the Sun and Stars out of Heaven, before they can
establish their vain Cold by absence and privation of Heat. Which were it
granted unto them, see further how, whilst they avoid Scylla, they fall into
Charybdis. For as on the one side Privation, being a mere Negative, has no
action, and therefore (as has been proved) cannot moderate the heat conceived
in Summer: So on the other side, suppose Cold once induced into the world by
privation of Heat, and it will be as impossible to restore Heat again by the
return of the Sun, or any other natural means, as to give life to a dead man.
For a privatione ad habitum nullus est regressus. As for their simile or
example, it will do them small service: For seeing that betwixt twelve and two
in the afternoon the Sun continues his action still without interruption,
their own reason will teach them, that this is not ad idem. For we speak of the
intended qualities of the Seasons, where, by intercourse of the nights, they
must needs confess an intermission of the Suns appearation, which alone (as we
read) serves greatly to qualify the Suns order to them that dwell under the
Aequinoctial. Wherefore to conclude this Point also: forasmuch as Cold is the
opposite quality to Heat, which of it self is by Kepler and Cardane confessed
to have a real existence in Nature: They must also be driven to acknowledge
Cold to be more then a mere Negation and Privation, because it is impossible
that that which is not habitual can be actually contrary to a particular
Nature in Being.

CHAP. X.
The first Qualities originally from Heaven, not from the Elements.
HAving therefore (as I take it) sufficiently proved Cold to be a positive
quality, the next thing which in order offers it self to be decided, is,
whereunto we shall originally refer the same with the rest of the first
qualities. And forasmuch as the whole Systeme of the world is distinguished
into two parts, Celestial or Elementary, we must of necessity primarily derive
them from the one or the other. But I will prove, That they are only by
accident, and not essentially, in the Elements; wherefore of consequence
originally to be ascribed to the heavenly Bodies. I know they are commonly
placed in the definition of the Elements, and therefore they define Air to be
hot and moist, Water cold and moist, Earth cold and dry. But if it be better
considered, we may more truly say with Roslinus, That the Elements rather
essentially differ one Wherein the Elements differ essentially.
from another in other qualities, which are as it were the offspring of these,
as in rariety, density, levity, gravity, liquidness, softness, transparancy,
opacity: For so is the Earth, an heavy, thick, dark, firm and stable Element.
The Water likewise soft, flowing, and navigable. The Air light, rare, liquid,
and permeable; and so tempered one to another in proportion, that as the Air,
in the rarity and liquidness thereof, is to the softness and flowing nature of
the Water, so is the like constitution of the Water unto the density and
firmness of the Earth; neither thin nor thick in extremity, but of a middle
temperature between both. And in a word, they are all proportioned to the
heavenly Bodies, but as the matter of things merely passive, Arist. li. 1. Met.
cap. 4. Zabar. li. 1. de qualit. Element. cap. 2. Tolet. 2. de genesis and cor. 2.
q. 1. p. 309. Scalig. exer. 18.
not having their first qualities essentially in themselves, but by accident
from Heaven. Thus teaches Aristotle himself, and thus says his Expositors,
Zabarella, Toletus, Scaliger, and others. Neither do I rest upon their
authority alone, but upon their firm and evident Reasons. For were these the
essential forms of the Elements, they Form admits not of intention and
remission. Axi. But Heat and Cold are intended and remitted in the Elements;
Ergo these qualities are not formally in the Elements.
could not be intended and remitted, because it is against the principle which
denies form to admit intension and remission. But these qualities are
sometimes more or less in the Elements; wherefore neither can they be affirmed
their essential forms, neither can the Elements themselves be said the first
subjects of Heat, Cold, Moisture, and Siccity, considering that both Experience
and Sense teaches us, that they be neither hot nor cold, but indifferently
disposed to the receiving of all the qualities, and not more capable of the one
then the other. For example, to them in a right sphere the Air is always hot,
by reason of the perpendicularity of the Sun beams. To us it is variable,
sometimes hot, sometimes cold, sometimes moist, and sometimes dry. And to them
nearer the North Pole for the most part cold. Nay, which is more absurd, were
these qualities formally in the Elements, we should of necessity be driven to
constitute two forms in every Element answerable to the two first qualities
ascribed to every one of them, and those not differing secundum magis and
minus, but in the highest degree of perfection, and that in such sort also as
they might not be reputed of the same special kind, but to vary one from
another. For if the moisture of the Air should not differ from the moisture of
the Water, confusion would follow, and so no distinction at all of the
Elements. And yet if these qualities be admitted of a diverse species instead of
four, we must constitute eight first qualities. Wherefore I take it very clear,
that seeing the Absurdi^^ following upon admitting the first qualities to be
formally or essentially in the Elements.
first four qualities cannot originally be derived from the Elements, necessity
will infer by consequence, that their first inherence is in the inward forms of
the heavenly Bodies, from whence by accident (as Aristotle teaches) and not
otherwise, they are conveyed into the Elements.

CHAP. XI.
The scruple of alteration in Heaven, (which made the Peripateticks, Picus,
Cardane, etc. to ascribe the first Qualities to the Elements,) taken away.
WHich being true, it will not be labor lost, after these grounds thus laid,
to borrow a little more patience for examination of the Reason why Picus,
Cardane, Kepler, with others, frankly confessing heat to descend with the light
of the Stars, are nevertheless so nice to subscribe to the derivation of the
rest of the qualities from Heaven: The consideration whereof will also
something explain unto us the differing manner between their inherence in the
Stars, and in the Elements. And surely I find none other Reason of their doubt
in this Point, but that they fear if contrary qualities should originally be
found in Heaven, we must withal induce action and passion between the heavenly
Bodies, and so by consequence, generation and corruption, whereof the
Peripateticks may not abide to hear. Which Objection may diversely be answered.
For first, whatsoever the Peripateticks have held, we know the world to have
had a beginning, and therefore even by their own doctrine it shall have an end.
And the Alteration in Heaven by experience exemplified, as well as by Reason
confirmed.
experience of latter times has sufficiently proved Heaven subject to
alteration: as is evident by that Spot which, in the time of Charles the Great,
continued 8. or 9. days in the Sun, being by Historiographers (though
ignorantly) reputed to be Mercury. For Copernicus after supputation Lib. 1. ca*
10.
finds it not to be Mercury, but a prodigious Meteor, which could not happen
but in the Sphaere of the Sun, considering it accompanied the Sun it self so
long time together. The like, Buntingus, Gemma Frisius, and others, report of
that strange and bloody obscurity, which Anno 1547. did so darken the Sun three
whole days together, as the stars for the most part were seen at high noon. But
what need I run to foreign Testimonies? when all London can bear me witness of
the like Blot, which in the year 1604. 11. and 12. of October. appeared first a
little above the South-East Periphery of the Sun, and seemed to move by little
and little unto the center of his Globe. And whereunto shall we refer the
illumination and extinguishing of the Comets and new Stars, which in this our
age have been observed to flame in Heaven it self? Do they not all
demonstratively prove generation and corruption in Heaven? True it is, that by
reason of our remote distance from the heavenly By reason of the immense
distance of Heaven, the alterations there not sensible.
Spheres, we cannot by sense attain to every particular alteration which
happens there. And therefore Aristotle neither being acquainted with the Worlds
Creation, nor in former ages finding any alteration in Heaven, but still
receiving by tradition, that the Planets, the fixed Stars, their motions, and
the medium in which they are, remained the same, while in the mean time the
Earth and Elements are daily subject unto diverse changes familiar to our eyes,
concludes from Experience, Heaven to be privileged from almutation, but the
Elements to be obnoxious thereunto. But could either Aristotle be informed,
that now this latte^ age (more diligent then the former) hat^ observed new
bodies in Heaven, or were it possible that our mortal eyes might from the
Heavens behold the Earth, as now from the Earth we behold them: I verily am
persuaded, that both the Philosopher would change his opinion, and that we
should from Heaven behold as little alteration in the Globe of the Earth, as
now we observe in Heaven. He that lists to read more of this matter, let him
peruse Kepler himself, cap. 23. de Nova Stella, where he does purposely treat
of this Subject, and proves by five particular Reasons, That the matter of
Heaven is alterable. Which if it be true, then is their Argument from the
consequence of alteration of no force against the first qualities in Heaven,
but rather to be retorted upon themselves in this manner. That because there is
a generation and alteration demonstratively observed, ergo the first qualities
may likewise be affirmed there as fit Instruments of these Mutations. But
nevertheless leaving this Doctrine in suspense, because it is new: Yet is not
our Cause so needy, but that I dare otherwise undertake to prove the Consequent
of the Reason to be false, for that The second Reason showing, that the
admitting of the Stars to produce the first qualities, does not necessarily
induce alteration in themselves.
the Stars may very well be justified to have diverse and contrary virtues,
without admitting any passion in the heavenly Bodies. For Astra agere quod in
seipsis non est, is no rare Maxim among the learned, some of whom use this
distinction between the differing manner of these qualities in the Stars
otherwise then in the Elements, by supposing them in the first only effective,
and in the latter subjective: Because (as they will have it) the Stars are not
actually hot or cold, but virtualiter; that is, they have a certain power to
produce Heat and Cold, and the rest of the qualities in the other bodies out of
themselves, which nevertheless are not in themselves. But for mine own part, I
freely confess not well to conceive this subtilty (though it be Scaligers) how
the Sun not being habitually hot, yet nevertheless can burn. Rather to go more
directly to the work, The third Reason granting the heavenly Bodies to be
actually hot or cold, yet without mutual action or Passion, by reason of the
Preogative of the matter.
I hold the efficacy of the Stars to proceed from that natural virtue which is
originally inherent in themselves, which notwithstanding shall never the more
subject these excellent Bodies to alteration. For as the Lodestone (more
precious then any Diamond) has in many points a singular affinity with Heaven,
so it does not fail to lend us a most lively example, how contraries may be
found in the same natural body without destruction thereof. For what can be
more contrary then attraction and repulsion Yet if the Needle be touched with
the North Pole of the Lodestone, it is certain, that as that part will attract
the same, so the contrary Pole or End will make it fly away, yet without any
danger or passion in the stone it self. Why should we not therefore believe,
that as Heaven is far more excellent then these sublunary Bodies, so it should
be endowed with all the virtues which are found here beneath in a far more
excellent manner, and without any prejudice to the purity of the matter whereof
it consists. For if the Matter be not proportioned unto the power of the
Agent, no effect can follow. But even by the Doctrine of the Peripateticks such
is the matter of Heaven, consisting of a simple and fifth essence free from all
passion, ergo although we do admit contrary qualities to flow from the Stars,
yet shall this work no alteration, because the matter of Heaven is not an apt
subject for this purpose. And for this Reason we may not consider these
qualities, as they are found in the Elements, or mixed Bodies, whose matter is
passive, but rather as they are inherent in a simple and pure essence,
privileged from corruption, being for this cause called by Aristotle, agentes,
(...), thereby to distinguish them from those inferior things which are
mutually subject to action and passion, because they consist of elementary
matter. I doubt not therefore but by this which has been said it does
sufficiently appear, That in this Controversy between the Stars and the
Elements, these celestial and pure Lights have obtained priority, as first
endued by God with natural power by their motion, Light and secret influence to
excite and stir up Heat, Cold, Moisture and Siccity in these sublunary Bodies
subordinate unto them, according to their several virtues.

CHAP. XII.
The Cause why the Cold in Winter is greatest in February proved to proceed
from the different Points of Heaven, whose diversity is showed.
WHerefore now to return from whence I digressed: Having thus prepared the way,
I may the more boldly proceed, and with better assurance, according to the
Rules of Astrology, ascribe this increase of Cold, which commonly happens
about February, partly unto the complexion of that Sign which the Sun then
passes, partly to the apparent rising and setting of those Constellations
which ordinarily agree to this month. And first concerning that part of Heaven
which the Sun then holds, we are to know that it is the Dominion of Saturn,
whose influence excels in exciting Cold, (as in that which follows I hope
infallibly to demonstrate,) the same being diametrically opposite unto the
Royal Palace of the Sun, which alone, to those that repose in the principles
delivered by Astrologers, is sufficient Reason in this case. But if any there
be that does doubt thereof, and whether the matter of Heaven may admit variety
as well as the Stars, I doubt not but to satisfy him also, partly by Reason,
partly by undoubted Exper^ence.

For first, whereas we see the forms of diverse The first Reason drawn from the
sympathy of these inferior things with the Parts of Heaven.
things in this sublunary world apparently to consent both with certain Stars,
and with the particular Regions of Heaven, Reason teaches us, that this can
proceed from no other probable cause in Nature, then from the sympathy or
agreeable temperature of their Substances. And that one or two examples may
stand for many, we see the North part of Heaven particularly to affect Iron,
that has either layn long North and South in some old building, or that
otherwise has bin forged at such a position, as precisely respects the same.
But above all, who is so ignorant of the like impression in the Lodestone, as
that he knows not the Mariner thereby to shape his Course, and to be further
able (by the ingenious diligence of our Countryman Mr D Gilbert) to give the
elevation of the Pole wheresoever he be come? Considering therefore that this
distinction of Regions is not to be ascribed to any Star, but to the whole
Systeme or Body of Heaven, therefore here we see directly a respective quality
impressed in these Subjects, which cannot be ascribed to any thing but the
matter of Heaven.

Again, whereas even Picus himself, The second Reason borrowed from Valesius de
sacra Philosophia.
and the Enemies of Astrology, do grant thus much to Aristotle, That if Heaven
were quiet, and stood still, nothing could have motion; which granted, it also
follows, according to the proportion of the first motions which are proper to
Heaven, That all the natural motions of inferior things are both excited and
ordinated: Valesius demands whether Heaven simply performs the same by the
motion thereof, or by accident. By simply he means, as if Heaven did
communicate this motion only because it is moved. By accident, as if by moving
is communicates an accidental faculty of motion unto other things: as when the
hand moves the candle to flax; the hand by his own motion moves the candle,
and so burns the flax or straw; the one by it self, because it does not
otherwise move the candle, then by the motion of the hand: but it does the
other by accident, because by moving of the hand and the candle, it also
conveyeth the flame, which burns of it self. If therefore Heaven, by the
motion thereof, does immit any motive faculty unto things, by help whereof they
are moved, then has it of necessity another virtue of moving besides the own
Motion. But if Picus, to avoid this, deny Heaven to impart any such virtue, and
persist in this opinion, that Heaven moves because it is moved: Then says
Valesius, it shall not skill of what matter Heaven consists; seeing this
effect would as well follow, if Heaven were of wood, metal, or stone, and were
withal carried about. But this could not be: For if a wooden Sphere were
turned about circularly over our heads, why should a stone and smoke (for
example) move, in a straight line, the one upward, the other downward? For
whatsoever moves another, it does it either by impulsion, attraction,
volutation, or vection. But a stone falling, is neither drawn, thrust forward,
carried, or turned about by Heaven; seeing the same falls in a straight line:
Wherefore Valesius strongly concludes, That the matter of Heaven concurreth
with those things that are moved by immitting some virtue which moves every
thing in the kind, which yet is diverse from the circular motion it self.

Besides, if that be true which Aristotle, The third Reason from the definition
of a Star according to Aristotle.
and with him hitherto Schools of Philosophy, do teach in the definition of a
Star, That there is no difference between the same, and the Orb wherein it is
fixed, but that the Star is Densior pars ejusdem; Then I say, it does
unanswerably follow, That as the Stars differ one from another in Motion,
Magnitude, Color, and Virtue; so likewise those parts of Heaven wherein they
are fixed must needs admit the like variety of nature and qualities. If any
following the late opinion of Tycho, and others, shall here deny the Stars to
be fixed, and inherent in the matter of Heaven, and affirm the substance
thereof to be liquid, giving way as the Stars move through the same: I answer,
That besides it will be incomprehensible in a man's understanding, how all Stars
should finish the diurnal motion from East to West, and yet in the same moment
strive with a contrary Endeavor in that which we call the proper motions from
the West to the East; and that which is more, at once both ascend and descend
from or nearer to the Earth. They shall hardly in the end be able to make this
their conceit stand with the motion of (...), which (as it is evident to Sense)
is the very substance and matter of the Heaven it self, differing only from the
rest of Heaven in whiteness of color. And yet we see both the same Stars now
contained within the latitude thereof, and others to describe and limit the
tract of this Circle, as it crosses the Zodiac from one Tropic to the other,
which Ptolomy did comprehend, and define the same by, in his Li. Almagesti.
time; which to my poor understanding does infallibly prove, That the fixed
Stars at the least are inherent and fastened in the matter of Heaven, for that
otherwise the Substance of this Circle could not now be found equally moved
from the Aequinoctial Points with the Stars that were then in and about the
same. I might yet confirm this further by that Sympathy which is found betwixt
the Points of Heaven in the time of Conception and Nativities, and betwixt the
figure of the Fathers Nativity and the Sons: but for brevity sake I remit him
that will be better informed to Kepler. Li. de Nova Stell^ ca. 10.


And now to confirm these Reasons by Experience; I know not what better course
to take, then to appeal to their Testimony who have traveled into America, in
whose stories we read, That the same parts of Heaven, both to them and us,
retain the same qualities. For thus Johannes Lerius, in the History of Lerius,
ca. 4
his Navigation into Brasile, affirms, That their Ship passed the
Aequinoctial the day before the Nones of February, which was about the fourth
of that month, at what time nevertheless the Sun being in Aquarius he
complains of great Tempests, extreme and corrupt rain, with inconstant and
tempestuous storms of wind. And no less (if not more) notable is that which I
find in Josephus Acosta, whose words, for the Readers better satisfaction, as
they lie in the English Translation, I will set Lib. 2. de Not. Novi orbis. ca.
3. page 85.. in editione Collon. Agrip. p. 68.
down, as follows.

Truly (says Acosta) it is an admirable thing, and worthy of observation, That
the Air is most clear, and without rain under the burning Zone, when as the Sun
is furthest off: and contrariwise, there is most Rain, Snow, and Mists, when as
the Sun is nearest. Such as have not traveled in this new World, will happily
think this incredible: and it will seem strange unto such as have been there,
if they have not well observed it. But the one and the other will willingly
yield, in noting the certain experience of that which has been said of this
part of Peru, which looks to the Southern or Antartick Pole: the Sun is then
furthest off when it is nearest unto Europe; that is, May, June, July, and
August, when he makes his Course in the Tropic of Cancer. During which months
the Air at Peru is very calm and clear, neither does there fall any Snow or
Rain; all their Rivers fall much, and some are dried up quite. But as the year
increases, and the Sun approaches near the Tropic of Capricorn, then begins
it to Rain and to Snow, and their Rivers swell from October to December. Then
after that, the Sun retyring from Capricorn, when as his Beams reflect directly
upon the heads of them at Peru, then is the violence of their Waters great,
then is the time of Rain, Snow, and great over-flowings of their Rivers, when
as their heat is greatest; that is, from January to mid March: this is so true
and certain, as no man may contradict it. Hitherto Acosta. By which it
appears, that the Sun in the same Signs causes like effects to them beyond
the Aequinoctial, that at the same time he produces here to us, the fairest or
foulest weather happening to both at the same instant: which may satisfy the
most obstinate in this point, seeing throughout the whole world the same parts
of Heaven keep still the same quality. Thus much therefore shall suffice
concerning the general constitutions of the Seasons, as the same chiefly depend
upon the Sun, and the parts of Heaven which he passes.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the particular Intensions or Remissions which happen by Position of the
Planets.
BUt as for the Intension happening by the fixed Stars, it shall hereafter be
handled by it self, as I come to the same in order, forasmuch as the greatest
disposition of weather may and does admit Intension and Remission in the
particular parts thereof for diverse other causes; we must likewise have respect
unto them: Amongst which the first that offers it self unto our
Consideration, is the place or Position of the Planets, who moving Our sharp^st
Winters by Saturns Position, when he is in Perigaeo Excentrici and Epicycli,
viz. in the end of II, confirmed by demonstration and experience.
under the Zodiac, shall for the same Reasons receive the same increase and
abatement of force in their Operations, which before I have proved the Sun to
receive. For considering the power of Saturn consists chiefly in cold and
congealed Meteors, it follows for an infallible Maxim, That we are then
pinched with the sharpest and longest Winters, when Saturn having surmounted
the Aequinoctial, shines in the Septentrional Signs nearest our heads; by
means whereof, as the Suns force begins to grow weak, during his situation
in those Signs, his cold influence shall prevail still more and more, as well
because of his slow motion, and long continuance in one place, as also by
reason of the more direct projection of his Beams, and great described Ark
above the Horizon. In all which respects his impression must then be more
forcible, and the rather, that he then consists above the Perigaeon of his
Orbs, and so becomes the nearest the Earth that he can approach, which still
adds much to his efficacy. And that experience does confirm thus much, I
refer the Reader to Pontanus, and Valentinus Nabod, in his Comentary upon
Alcabitius, and also to Reisuerus Li. 1. Prop. 17.
his Optics, where illustrating this Proposition, That All light the nearer it
is, the more strongly it does illuminate the Object, he has these words.

Hac ratione (says he) Anno 1441. sub Imperatore Friderico Proavo Imp: Caroli
V. paulo aute cladem Varnensem Saturnus Ann. 1441. a sharp Winter.
currens per postremos parts Geminorum, Soli oppositas, factusque terrae quam
propinquissimus, tam ratione eccentrici quam epicycli, luminis sui
propinquitate in usitatum illud frigus effecit, quod adeo saevum fuit diuturum,
ut in Historium Commentarias referri meruerit. Here therefore they that will be
satisfied, may behold Demonstration as well as Experience, for which cause I
hold it needless to commemorate any further examples hereof, especially seeing
it is not so long since the year 1591, at what time being likewise Ann. 1591.
the like.
placed in II, as well as the years immediately before and after, the effects
of his cold influence were so lasting and hurtful, specially to sheep that
perished in the deep of Snows, as I know they cannot be yet forgotten.
Notwithstanding it shall not be immaterial to add this out of Functius his
Chronology, that in Anno 1427. he notes the Winter to pass away without cold;
For (says he) it was Hyems sive frigore. Whereupon calculating Saturns place
for that time, I find it in the midst of, the sign of his greatest distance
from the Earth, where he suffers all the debilities which before I have
showed the Sun to do in Winter, and therefore material to be considered for our
purpose. For though he be not in, yet seeing both those Signs have equal
declination, I hold it all one. The like observation therefore I desire them
that impugn this Art most, and are not obstinate, to make for their own
satisfaction, and I know that when they find Saturn to have been and to
continue still in his greatest remotion and weakness, they cannot but subscribe
unto his virtue in cold effects, seeing it is so manifestly confirmed, that
generally our Winters are the coldest when he is strongest in operation, and so
mild and temperate when his Beams are not able to express their qualities.

CHAP. XIV.
Intension and Remission by the Motion of the Planets.
NExt the situation and place of the Planets, that Intension and Remission
which happens by these Passions that result from their motion through the
Anamaly of their Eccentricks and Epicycles, are not unfit to be considered. Not
that the diversity of Motions alters the nature of the Planets, which is ever
the same, but because in regard hereof they work not after one manner in every
place, nor yet alike in the same place at the same position, but diversely in
all places, as the force of their operation is increased or diminished through
this diversity of their particular motions, and then diversely applied by the
diurnal Revolution of the Heavens unto the matter of sublunary things. For as
is well known to those that are acquainted with the Theoricks, the Center of
their Orbs differing from the Center of the World, causes them in respect of
us to move irregularly, as sometimes Directly, according to the succession of
the Signs; sometimes Retrograde, and against their order: their Motion also for
the same Reason being sometimes swift, sometimes slow, and sometimes nothing at
all but stationary. Which great diversity must of necessity cause variety in
the manner of their operation. For as the motion of a Planet that is direct,
does greatly avail to his A direct Planet longer above the Horizon then a
retrograde, which is the reason why Retrogradation is reputed a Debility in
respect of it self.
long stay and continuance above the Horizon, in that it comprehends more
then one entire period of the Aequinoctial in his diurnal Revolution: So that
Planet which is Retrograde, seems not only to forsake his own natural course,
(because the proper motion of every Planet is performed toward the East,) but
besides, he is also esteemed purposely to refuse that opportunity of
strengthening his operation by long continuance above the Horizon, which, by
holding on a direct course, he does obtain. Yet notwithstanding my opinion is,
and both Reason and Experience do confirm it, That God has not vainly ordained
this Law in their Motions, but that it does rather evidently admonish us, that
this Planet does (as I may say) by this Retrograde Motion assuredly purpose
some particular effect, considering he seems rather to violate the constant
Decree of Nature, then it should be unperformed. In which respect Astrologers
use to call Application by Retrogradation violent.
such an Application as happens by Regression to a Planet that is direct
Violent, or the doubling of the effects. And moreover it is to be observed,
that a Retrograde Planet does, by means of this In what respect a Planet shall
double and treble his efficacy beyond that which a direct Planet c^n.
passion, pass, return, and re-pass the same small Ark of the Zodiac thrice in
few days, whereby the former loss, which he suffers through interruption of
his diurnal Ark, is as it were treble recompensed by his threefold reiteration
of the same course.

CHAP. XV.
Intension and Remission by Parallelism.
I Have before spoken of the place and motion of the Planets; now I intend to
show, That the Parallel which the Planets describe by reason of their place and
Motion, is likewise of great force to cause Intension and Remission, when any
two, or more of them, happen to describe the same Circle aequidistant from any
of the Tropicks. For then having equal Declination The Reason why Parallolism
is so effectual.
toward the same side of the Aequinoctial, they rise and set exactly in the
same points of the Horizon: they come to the Meridian at the same height; the
Ark also which they describe above the Horizon as well as under the same; by
reason whereof their Beams succeeding one another, shall not only impress the
very same line upon the Earth, but besides in their like situation and
distance of each side of the Meridian their Beams shall make right Angles of
Incidence, whereby at that time they are also united by reflextion; as in this
Figure.

Diagram.



Where let N H M F be supposed the Horizon, M N the Meridian, H F the
Aequinoctial, D E the Tropicks, or some other Parallel; A B the two Stars which
are turned in the same: and without further demonstration it is evident to the
eye, That if A rise at the point D in the Horizon, pass the Meridian at O, and
set at E: the Star B moving in another part of the same Parallel shall do the
like, and coming-to an aequidistant situation with A from the Meridian, the
Angle B O C shall be equal to the Angle A C O, being the Angles of Incidence to
both Stars; by means whereof B shall of necessity reflect unto A, and A to B,
which is of great moment in their operation, especially to them to whom the
same happens to be perpendicular. And here by the way we are to note, That by
Paralelism why most effectual nearest the Tropicks.
how much nearer the Tropicks this Parallelism does happen unto the Planets,
either amongst themselves, or with the fixed Stars, so much more effectual the
same shall be, because of the slow variation of their declination which will
cause them to continue Parallel the longer together: whereas nearer unto the
Aequinoctial it is of less moment, because their declination varying swiftly,
will also as suddenly vary their Parallelism. And thus much concerning the
natural Reason of Intension and Remission, which happens while the Planets and
fixed Stars do thus follow and wait one upon another, and by means thereof
embrace and infold every thing whereon they shine, as if equal care were
committed to both their charges, as they are carried about by the wrapped Motion
of Heaven.

CHAP. XVI.
Intension and Remission by the rising and setting of the fixed Stars and
Planets.
NOw forasmuch as the common Axiom testifies, that Nature has made nothing
in vain, we may not think, that the rest of the Stars which are fixed do stand
for Ciphers, although it be true, that the action of every particular fixed
Star be not so evidently discerned as the Planets. Neither (so far forth as we
are able to attain by experience) do they The fixed stars cause no new
alteration, and why.
cause any sudden and unwonted alteration by themselves, but rather by reason
of their uniform Motion, and the same perpetual distance which they retain one
to another, they work still after one manner, saving when their virtues are
accidentally In what cases the fixed Stars do cause alterations.
stirred up by their 1. risings and settings with the Sun, and the rest of the
Planets; or 2. when their Beams are united, either by Configuration and
Parallel, or by 3. reflection in the same vertical Circle with them, at what
time the quality of their impression depends upon their Nature, which partly
is measured by Experience, and partly confirmed by How the nature and virtue of
the fixed Stars is found.
their Color, as they resemble the Planets therein. But the quantity of this
Intension and Remission is guided by their apparent Diameters or Magnitude.

And first, how much the Ancients The Ancients in their predictions much guided
by the rising and setting of the Stars.
have ascribed to the rising and setting of the fixed Stars, not only for
distinction of Times, but also matters of Physic, Weather, Navigation,
Husbandry, and the like, is familiar to every man, though meanly conversant in
Philosophy, Physic, History, or Poetry, as well as in Astronomy. For such was
their skill herein (as Theon testifies) that the Astrologers Com. in Arat.
of those times did hereby both limit and assign the beginning of the Seasons,
and the particular state of the Weather for every day, foretelling which should
be fair, which rain and tempestuous; and again, upon what days every particular
Wind did usually blow. And thus reducing all Metons Circle of Years into
Tables, they communicated the same to all the Cities of Greece for the common
good. The truth whereof is not a little confirmed by Ptolomy himself in his
Which is the True Ptolomy de syderum inerra^t. significationibus.
Book de inerrantium Syderum significationibus, (not that supposed on, set
forth by Leonicus, but that which Fredericus Bonaventura of Vrbin, not long
since, translated out of Greek into Latin) wherein, besides experience of the
Egyptians, he also records the Observations of the most famous Astronomers
before his time; as of Dosith^us, Philippus, Calippus, Euctemon, Meton, Conon,
Metrodorus, Eudoxus, Caesar, Democritus and Hypparchus, for the place of their
particular dwellings, even to the fifth Parallel, passing by the midst of
Pontus, where the longest day is fifteen hours and a half. Not without Reason
then does Ptolomy both here, as also in his Quadrupertite, remit him that will
Li. 2. ca. 12
judge of the particular Intensions and Remissions of every day unto the risings
and settings of the fixed Stars; whereof, although he sets down eight kinds,
yet does he reduce them all into two Species, viz. the True, and the Apparent;
And if these, I see not that any of The apparent risings and settings of the
fixed Stars necessary to the particular Intensions and Remissions of the
Weather. The ancient Astronomers only regarded the apparent risings and
settings. The Error of our Prognosticators.
the Astronomers, before named, have had a regard to the first kind, but only
those which are apparent: The first whereof Ptolomy reckons the Emersion, or
Matutine oriental apparition; the second is (as he places them) the Vespertine
oriental Apparition, which he calls the last rising. In like manner there be
two apparent Settings, whereof he calls the first Matutine and Occidental,
and the last Verspertine and Ocidental, which is also their Orcultation. How
far therefore those Prognosticators do err, who quite otherwise then the
Ancients, did refer their yearly Judgments the true rising and setting of the
Stars, omitting the apparent, I leave to their own censure, if they know not
their Error before. But forasmuch as those that are supputated to one
particular The Reason why the same day is not alike in several Horizons.
place will not agree the same day to every Horizon, let none from hence take
occasion to calumniate Astrology, if the effects do likewise differ in diverse
Horizons; but rather let them learn for this Cause the more to admire the Art,
for that from hence chiefly the true Reason does grow, why in several
Elevations the Weather is often times differing upon the same day, seeing that in
a small difference of latitude both the Emersions and Occultations may vary
diverse days; Wherefore the Effect must accordingly follow the Cause. The Reason
why the apparent Risings and Settings are prefered by Antiquity before the
true, is not expressed by them, but leaning simply upon observation and
experience, they commend the same in their Monuments to Posterity, neither in
truth was it necessary, The Reason why the apparent risings and settings are
most regarded.
seeing the Reason was evident in it self. For who doubts that the
substraction or addition of Light may beget such a new degree of temperature in
the Air, as is sufficient to Mutation? As we see it often to happen in
Distillations, where the alteration, though of a very small heat, does either
perfect, or give impediment to the work. But Borrowed light, the reason why the
effects of Emersions and Occultations are for the most part moist.
whereas for the most part this Mutation turns unto moisture, this is
purposely to be imputed to the great quantity of borrowed light wherewith they
shine. For (as it is held in the Perspectives) there is no doubt but that the
Stars do as well reflect unto us the light of the Sun, as shine with their own
proper light: Wherefore the Suns light being debilitated by reflection, does
heat imperfectly, being for that cause fitter to resolve and cause moisture to
flow, then to consume the same, being stirred. And here is further to be noted,
That Ptolomy does not require the apparent rising and setting of all the fixed
Stars; for it is clear in that Tractate of their significations, that he
neglected all, but those of the first and The reason why Ptolomy regardath not
the apparent risings and settings of all the Stars.
second Magnitude, whereof he gives two Reasons; one, because the exact
Emersion and Occultation of the lesser Stars cannot be observed, by reason that
their weak light is not able to overcome the twilight; whereby the Arks of
their Apparition being uncertain, the Apparition it self cannot be calculated.
The other Reason is, because these more notable Stars are for the most part so
conveniently situated, as the Appearances of the lesser, happening much about
the same time, are not so to be regarded, as these that are more illustrious.
And thus (for example) he thinks it enough to observe the apparent Risings
and Settings of Arcturus and Spica, though we pass Vindimiatricks in silence;
neither cares he much for the Haedi, or the Vergiliae, or Hyades, so he
observe Hircus, and the brightest of the Hyades. Wherefore Ptolomy has not
supputated these Apparitions How many fixed Stars Ptolomy regarded, and why I
fall short of Ptolomy.
for above 30. my self coming short of him by 6. For more of the first and
second Magnitude do not rise and set to us, because the declinations of diverse
do exceed the complement of our Pole; and therefore if the Sun be septen^rional
they never set, as Lyra, Lucida Persei, Dexter humerus Aurigae, Con^a, Cygni,
and the like. Or if this excess be Austral, then they do never ^ise of which
kind Canobus and Pes Dexter Centauri be, which are never seen above our Horizon.

CHAP. XVII.
Intensions and Remissions by Configuration of the Stars.
THe Causes hitherto mentioned, although they be very divine, and contain much
excellency in them, yet they come all nearer the nature of Matter then this
which follows. For the manner of their operation did consist chiefly in a
certain flux and emission of light continued down to these sublunary bodies,
which although it be commonly thought without matter or time, yet it is not
without the demensions of Quantity. In what respects the precedent rules of
intension and romission come nearer the nature of Matter, then this now to be
handled.
For it is made by a right line; it is attenuated by the distance thereof from
the Star; it increases or decreaseth with the face of the Planet it self; it
is hindered by opposition of a shady body; and lastly, the visible presence of
the Star admitted, it is necessarily presupposed also. Neither is this found in
one and the same single star, considered by it self, but in comparison also
with others. As because the Sun and Moon excel all other Stars in their visible
magnitude; therefore their action is most evident: but in the rest, whose
visible Diameters are not comparable to the Suns or Moons, their efficacy is
hardly sensible, and not to be attained without long experience.

This cause therefore which follows and belongs equally to the Planets and
fixed Stars, is more noble, and to be admired then the other. For this savoreth
nothing of Matter, but has only consideration The Configurations of the Stars
savor nothing of Matter, but only of Form, and therefore to be preferred
before all other Causes.
of Form, not so much respecting the straight beams of light which flow from
every Star, as valuing and esteeming how their Beams meet at the Earth between
us and their Light; but both when they are hidden under the Horizon, and seem
above the same, it makes the efficacy of the Stars more notable over all the
World, then at other times. Which kind of operation, if the Stars be swift in
Motion, is in a manner but momentany; for that the Geometrical Angle being
changed into another Angle that is improportionable and improper, immediately,
or not long after, this efficacy also cease, though the light of the Star at
that time chance to increase. For which Cause I give not so much regard to the
Aspects of the Moon with other Planets in the alteration of the Weather, as
unto the Configurations of the Planets among themselves, or with the fixed
Stars, whose motion being but slow in respect of the Moons, does not so
suddenly vary the Angle of their Configuration at the Earth.

From hence it is therefore that those Arks or Portions of the Heaven allotted
unto the Aspects are not so much esteemed above all other Causes in
Astrological Judgments. For although it be true, that in all Scituations the
Stars send forth their Beams unto all the parts of Heaven and Earth which they
behold, as may be argued out of Vitellio his Demonstration, Li. 5. Pro. 22.
by means whereof the Beams and Lines of true motion in every two Stars do
retain a mutual respect one to another, and so do evermore intercept some Ark
of Heaven, and concur at some Angle of the Earth, which may seem to make an
Aspect among themselves: Yet nevertheless all the ancient and modern
Astronomers following Nature for their Guide, have heretofore regarded these
few Configurations only, being but five in all, namely the,,,, and: amongst
which, although the first do not commonly go for an Aspect, because every
Aspect is reputed a proportioned distance between two or more Stars; yet
nevertheless seeing a certain Position of the Stars in the Zodiac is rather
considered in this Position, then any diversity of place, and that the
enumeration of the Aspects ever begins from the Conjunction; Therefore as
well in respect of this Analogy, as of the received use, it may not be
secluded out of the Number of Aspects, specially knowing that the Beams of the
Stars are as well extended upward and downward, as obliquely and collaterally.

But if any man desire further to be satisfied of the Reason which first moved
the ancient Astronomers to observe those distances and Arks assigned unto the
Aspects as of more virtue then any other: Surely the Answer is easy, seeing
Nature it self every where, both in the motions and effects of the heavenly
Bodies, as also in other Arithmetical and Geometrical respects, chiefly
celebrateth these very proportions with a singular Prerogative. Picus speaking
hereof, thinks Nature has as it were first alured us to observe the Aspects
by special tokens, or secret marks in the Motions.
they were first induced hereunto by observing the several illuminations or
ages of the Moon, for that when she is new, horned, in her quarters,
gibbossity, and fullness, her forms are still changed at these proportioned
spaces from the Sun. Besides which, it is not to be passed in silence, which
others have more particularly noted, that in her annual Revolution she is still
found about the of her own place in the beginning of the former year. Neither
have other Astronomers failed to note, how Nature points (as it were with a
finger) particularly unto every Configuration, while we consider the motions of
the other Planets. For thus Abohazer wittily affirms the two inferior
Planets in their Stations to observe the Ark proper to a aspect. Pliny likewise
with him as skilfully commends Li. 2. ca. 17.
unto us the observation of the by the stations of the three superior Planets.
But above all it cannot be considered without deep admiration, how Nature has
singularly nobilitated all the Aspects in the Motions of Saturn and Jupiter.
For as their Conjunctions are rare, and but once in 20 years, so has Nature
evermore disposed these Conjunctions in the most memorable places of the
Zodiac, That is only in such Signs as behold one another in an aequilater
triangle inscribed. For between any two great Conjunctions of Saturn and
Jupiter, there are 19 Egyptian years, 318 days, and 13 hours, in which time
those Planets are moved from the place of their former Conjunctions 8 signs,
and almost 3 degrees, which excess of 3 degrees is the cause why after 10
Conjunctions they pass from one Triplicity to another, and one Triplicity
continues 198 equal years, 2^5 days (the intercalary day of every fourth year
omitted) and 10 hours. But the Revolution of all the Triplicities is finished
but only once in 794 equal years, 331 days, and 16 hours. Or otherwise, in 794
Julian years, 133 days, 16 hours; the double whereof comes to 1588, which
number of years they are thought to have respected, that The Reason why the
year 1588. was reputed so fatal.
imagined the year 1588. from the birth of Christ would have been so fatal.
From hence therefore it is, that not without cause they are called great
Conjunctions, both happening rarely, and abiding thus in one Triplicity almost
200 years together, and not finishing all the Triplicities of the Zodiac in
much lesser then 800 years, not having therefore reiterated all the
Triplicities 8 times since the beginning of the World. Neither are the other
Positions of these Planets to be neglected; for if any man will take the pains
to observe when Saturn and Jupiter do behold one another with a or aspect, they
shall evidently perceive that they still carry such a regard unto the signs or
places of their precedent and next Conjunctions, as evermore they irradiate the
one and the other with a,,, or aspects. And so this shall suffice (if it be not
more then enough) to show how Nature has alured us to the Consideration of
these Arks by these Aspects in the particular Motion of the Planets.

And now in a word to confirm the The aspects confirmed by their effects.
same by their virtue and effects: First, The Physicians are taught by
experience, That the Crisis of all sharp diseases have a notorious and most
memorable Sympathy with all these five Configurations of the to the place of
her Being in the beginning of the sickness. Thus also we see the Seas
themselves in their Tides to dance as it were after the motion of the, while
their Spring and highest Floods always concur with her and to the Sun, as their
Neaps and lowest Tides do likewise respect her Quarters. And as memorable a
thing it is, that the Seas in their daily flowing and ebbing upon every Coast,
have still a constant respect only to such Azimuthal Circles as are in a
quartile positure when the passes by them. To conclude, it is more manifest
then that I need to insist upon it, that the Sun it self seems greatly to
respect the, in that he moderateth the vicissitudes or four quarters of the
year by his ingress into the four Aequinoctial and Tropical Points.

But now to descend to other Speculations of the learned more mystical then
these, it is not amiss to begin with the The Signs whereof the Aspects consist
the only aliquate parts of a Circle.
Arithmetical Observation which Julius Firmicus makes of the number of Signs
agreeable to the Aspects; 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, answering in order to the,,,, and: for
these numbers only, and none other, will divide the Zodiac, consisting of
twelve Signs, for which reason he makes them the only aliquate parts of a
Circle. Thus also the famous Ptolomy adds not a little to the dignity of The
Subtenses of the Aspect proportionable to the diameter of the World. Li. 1. ca.
12. lege Cardane Comentar. The Subtenses of those Arks which are proper to the
aspects joined together only take upcircumference of the Zodiac.
these Irradiations, when he first observed the Geometrical proportion, which
the Subtenses of every of these Arks do retain in power to the Diameter of a
Circle, as every man may read in the Quadripartite. Others again, with no less
subtilty, have observed, that amongst all regular or ordinate figures that may
be inscribed in a Circle, though the same be infinite, there are none whose
sides and angles carry away the Prerogative both at the Circumference and
Center, but those whose sides and angles are answerable to the Subtenses and
Arks of their Aspects. For thus amongst all ordinate plains that may be
inscribed, there are no two whose sides joined together have pre-eminence to
take up a semicircle, but only the Hexagon, Quadrate, and equilateral triangle,
answering to the,, and, irradiated. The subtence therefore of a aspect
consists of two Signs, joined to the subtence of a, composed of four, being
regular and aequilater, take up six Signs, which is a complete semicircle. In
like manner, the sides of a Quadrate inscribed, subtending three Signs, twice
reckoned, do ocupy likewise the mediety of a Circle. And what those Figures are
before said to perform, either doubled or joined together, may also be truly
ascribed unto the opposite aspect by it self, for that the Diametral Line,
which passes from the place of Conjunction to the opposite Point, divides a
Circle into two equal parts, the like whereof cannot be found in any other
inscripts. For example, the side of a regular Pentagon subtendeth 72. degr. of
an Octagon but 45. the remainders of which Arks, viz. 108. and 135. gr. are not
subtended by the sides of any ordinate figure.

And thus, as it is before showed, That the Subtenses of these Aspects be the
same with the sides of the fore-remembered The Angles of the Aspects, viz.
the,,, the same wherewith the aforesaid ordinate plains ocupy place about a
Point, and therefore do proportionably also take up the Center of the World.
Inscripts, and do only therefore take up the Circumference of a Circle: So it
is evident, that the Angles at which they concur be the same wherewith the
ordinate plains take up the whole space about the Center. For if we consider
the Angle of a at the Earth, it is all one with that of an aequilater Triangle
consisting of 60. gr. and contains of a right Angle, but six times of a right
Angle makes four right Angles; wherefore six Sextiles equal to six aequilater
Triangles fill the whole space about a point, which is equal to four right
Angles. Secondly, Every Angle of a quartile is a right Angle, and all one with
the Angle of rectangle Quadrilater figure, wherefore four of them fill a whole
space. Thirdly, The Angle which two Stars in a make at the Center of the World,
is measured by an Angle of 120. gr. and so equal to the Angle of a regular
Hexagon, consisting of a right Angle, and 1/^ of a right Angle, and therefore
taken three times makes four right Angles: Wherefore three aequilater
Hexagons, or three Aspects, do also fill the whole space about the Center: To
which me may not improperly add the opposite Aspect, consisting of two right
Angles, and therefore doubled, shall perform the like office with the rest, any
other figure of many Angles, however joined together at the Angles, shall
either want of four right Angles, or exceed them. For example, the Angle of a
Pentagon contains a right Angle, and ^ more; wherefore three such Angles
placed about a point, shall fall short of four right Angles by of a right
Angle; as on the other side, four such Angles shall exceed four right Angles.

These Speculations therefore considered, it were senseless to imagine, that
Nature has so many ways honored these Irradiations of the Stars in vain, and
admonished us to a special regard of them by so many rare and secret
Observations, both in the motions of the Planets, and also in their effects and
proportions, if they were not endued with more virtue then others. Wherefore it
has no less exercised the learned to find out the Reason why these few
Configurations, selected out of an infinite number, should be endued with such
eminent efficacy. Neither as yet has any reason been invented, The first
Reason why these few Configurations are more effectual then others which be
infinite, being drawn from the harmonical proportion.
with more applause for the probability thereof, then that these proportions,
whereof the Aspects are before showed to consist, be the same which are found
in harmonical Concords; for which cause it is also thought no less probable,
that the light of the Stars in these proportioned distances should powerfully
affect the matter of sublunary things, then that the like Geometrical Symmetry
in sounds and voices should passionately stir up the sense of the hearer. For
to confess the truth, so has the admired providence of Nature ordained
throughout all her works, that where due proportion is not wanting, there she
never fails to endue all her effects with such height of perfection, that the
same becomes evident to the eye of every man. And from hence it is even in
artificial Compositions also as in Medicines, we know those only to be most
kind and sovereign which observe a competent Symmetry or temperature of the
Active and Passive qualities; with good likelihood therefore, and appearance of
truth, do most of the learned, with Ptolomy in Ptolomy in Catoptricis
his Optics, resolve the only cause of this efficacy to proceed from
harmonical proportion.

And more clearly to express this similitude How the Proportions which the
aforesaid Irradiations retain in respect of themselves, answer the Concords in
Music.
or affinity between the proportions of the Aspects, and the like distances
observed in the Musical Concords, we must understand, that all Harmony
whatsoever springs originally from three such terms of numbers as respect
each other in such sort, that still their differences retain the same
proportion that is found between the extremes. For example, in these three
Numbers, 6, 4, 3, (answerable to the Signs of the,, and Configurations) here it
is evident, if we compare the extremes with the mean, that 2. shall be the
difference between 6. the first, and 4. the second Number; and 1. is in like
manner between the middle or second, and 3. the third Number: but 2. is double
in proportion to 1. therefore 6. the first number respects 3. the third
number with the like proportion. The Analogy of which Proportions, as is
before remembered, is found to be the fountain of all Music, rising originally
from these three simple concording distances, which by the Musicians are called
Diapente, Diatessaron and Diapason, the 3 perfect Concords,
Diapente, consisting of a Sesquialter Proportion, as 6. to 4. or which is all
one of 3. to 2. Diatessaron of a Sesquitertia, as 4. to 3. And lastly, Diapason
consisted of a double proportion, as 6. to 3. or 2. to 1. and is as much in
value, as both the 2. first distances and proportions put together: For a
Sesquialter added to a Diapente and Diatessaron are parts of a Diapason.
Diapason severally compared with each of his parts makes up the 2 other
compounded or imperfect Concords, viz. Diapason cum Diapente a Triple, and
Diapason cum Diatessaron a Quadruple, or Bis Diapason.
Sesquitertia, according to the art of Proportions, do produce a Diapason, or
double proportion, such as is found between the former extremes compared
together, viz. 6. and 3. And in like manner, by comparing the Diapason with
both these his parts, that is, with the Sesquialter and Sesquitertia, according
to the usual manner of supputating Proportions, we are brought to the two other
compounded or imperfect Concords, so constituting the 5. first and natural
Distances in harmonical Sounds, which afterward, as they be diversely mixed
between themselves, produce infinite variety of all kind of Melody.

After the same manner fares it with the light and influence of Heaven. For
although anciently there be but 5 Irradi^tions observed as most apt to action,
namely the,,,, and; yet nevertheless there is nothing more sure, then that by
the harmonical mixture of these proportioned Beams, the generation and
corruption of this mortal world is infinitely varied. Wherefore as the force of
^ll Harmony, so likewise the effectual ^eason of all action in the influence of
the Stars, is properly deduced from the foresaid Symmetry of these distances.
And therefore more fully to illustrate, that the The Angles which the Aspects
do make at the Earth, are proved proportionable to the Concords in Music*
Angles of the Aspects, compared between themselves, concur with these
Harmonies ^n Music, it will be no hard matter, if that which before has been
often rexated be called to mind: As that first, ^he Stars in an opposite or
diametral ^spect are disjoined by the space of two ^ight angles, which are
measured with ^he Ark of 6. signs, or 180. degrees of Circumference, and that
the, consisting of 4. signs, or 120. degrees, is in value one ^ight angle, and
of a right angle: Also that the takes up one entire right an^le, and is
subtended with the Ark of 3. ^gns, or 90. degrees. And lastly, that the is
constituted but of 2. signs, or 60. gr. which is of a right angle; which being
thus, if we now so compare the two right angles of the taken together with the
angles of the rest of the aspects, either the be placed between the and the, or
the between the and the, we shall find either way three numbers, which admit
all the Laws of harmoniacal Proportions, as in these Figures following is
evident. The first Figure proves the 3 Concords to have 3 perfect Aspects. The
second shows the to be an imperfect Aspect, agreeable to Diapente cum
Diapason, that is a triple proportion, as 60. is to 80.


Diagram.



Where, to let the rest pass as plain enough of it self by that which is before
spoken, we are further to note, That the, compared in the last figure of those
two with the, has a triple proportion to the same, compounded of a double and
sesquialter proportion, as Diapente with Diapason in Music is, and so is found
no simple or perfect Aspect, but exactly B flat, why after a sort a perfect
Concord, and so by the same Reason why a may be admitted a perfect Aspect.
answerable to B flat, the first imperfect or compounded Concord in Music
being a sixth from G Sol re ut, which nevertheless in some respects is after a
sort esteemed perfect, because it uses the same division compared to D sol re
that the perfect Concords do, for it is half a Fifth, and situate in the
middle between G ut and D sol re. As also the compared with the is a just half
thereof, which before has been showed to be in a sesquialter proportion to
the, as D sol re is to G ut, and therefore exactly agreeable to a Diapente in
Music, which the rather I here note, because we shall have some use thereof
afterward in speaking New Aspects after handled.
of the new Aspects. And thus much shall shortly serve for the Theory or
Philosophical speculation of them that ascribe the efficacy of these
Irradiations to the harmonical proportion which is sound between them.
Wherefore seeing they carry the same mutual respect one toward another, which
the foresaid Harmonical Concords do retain between themselves, what wonder is
it if Nature in her operations, as well by lights as by sounds, admitted no
other Symmetry, but that which is derived from these proportions, rejecting all
other as irrational and discordant?

Yet all this hitherto does rather illustrate Keplers Reason; why the foresaid
harmonical proportions are so effectual drawnfrom the Symmetry of the World,
being the same that is found between the 5 Regular Bodies inscribed one within
another.
a Simili, and does more and more express unto us, that Nature indeed has
adorned these proportions with singular privileges above any other, then
satisfy us with the true Reason, why in the infinite variety of Sounds and
Lights these only should consent most sweetly in Music, and be effectual in
the operations of Nature. Neither has any man herein endeavored with more
probability to give satisfaction unto the learned then Kepler, who having
wittily labored to demonstrate, That God in the Creation of the World has
observed the same proportion in the Magnitude and distance of the heavenly
Spheres which is found in the regular Solides, which (as Geomitry teaches)
have their Original from the Ordinate Playns: In the end concludes with good
probability, That the heavenly Motions shall then consent sweetly, and
cooperate strongly together, when the nature of these sublunary things, endued
(as he supposes) with a sensitive or knowing faculty, apprehends the Beams
of the Stars to observe that respect in their concurrence at the Center of the
Earth, which answers unto the Ordinate Playns, from whence the Regularity of
these proportions is derived, as the impressed Characters of that Symmetry
which God is said to have used in the Creation of the World it self. So
imagining, that as often as the nature of any thing meets with these
proportions, it exercises it self as it were by this Idea, which it retains
still, and that in such sort, as what it does but ordinarily and slackly at
other times, it performs now much more effectually, and as it were with
extraordinary diligence; Not (says he) that these proportions work any thing
of their own virtue; for in Music it is neither the Sounds, neither the
proportion of the Concords, that work any thing of themselves, or beget any
delightful humor in a man, but the Soul approaching to the Instruments of
Sense, first there entertaineth the sounds inwardly, then valueth their
proportions, and (finding the same good and Geometrical) lastly exhilarateth it
self, and moves the body wherein it is, as with an Object wherein it takes
delight. And surely were these proportions set Why Keplers opinion fully
leaves me unsatisfied.
down by Kepler exactly found in the Symmetry of the World, then I could the
better give ear unto him, and believe this Mystery to rest in that which he
has said. But he himself having inscribed the several Spheres of the Planets
within the Regulare bodies, in the end finds their distances from the Center
of the World to differ very much, both in Jupiter, the Earth (which he
supposes to occupy the Suns place,) and Mercury, from that which Copernicus
and other Astronomers do set down by observation. I love not (after the
expectancy of Geometrical demonstration, though he come near in some) to feed
my self with Fancies in the rest: neither can I well conceive, in that poor
understanding which I have in Philosophy, how Configurations, consisting only
of intelligible Angles, should be objects to any sensitive power; or how the
sensitive power, which he does imagine in the Elements, and all elementary
things, should apprehend without organical Instruments. Yet nevertheless A
second Reason why these Aspects are so effectual, and first of the and whose
virtue proceeds chiefly from Union of Beams.
(leaving this Conceit of Keplers, without prejudice of his Conceit or
Judgment, unto others of riper Judgment then my self) I will as perspicuously
as I can deliver that which my self have further considered as the Reason why
these Beams should be more effectual then others. And first concerning the and,
I held my self abundantly satisfied with the union of Beams, which therefore
are the most potent and powerful Configurations of all others, as is evident in
this Figure, where we see the Beams, as well incident as reflected, to be
united.

Diagram.



For let A be in here with B, it is first manifest, that all the Beams flowing
from G and E, the points of touch in the Circumference of A shall unite
themselves with the Beams that art sent from B to C the Earth or Center of the
World. Secondly, We are also to observe, That in this Case only the Beam A C,
or B C, coming from the Center of the Stars reflecteth into it self, as being
only perpendicular, whereas those Beams which are sent from the points E and G
make an acute Angle at C, and do therefore reflect the one into the other at
equal Angles, as G C reflecteth from C to E, and E C from C to G; last of all
the union that happens in is manifest without more circumstance, where the
Beams sent from the opposite Points make but one straight line, as G F, and E H
in this Figure, except in Cases where the Earth In what case the Union of two
Stars in and is hindered.
is bigger then the Star in opposition, for there without latitude the union of
their Beams must needs be hindered by interposition of the Earth. For which
cause it is specially here to be remembered The of Venus and Mercury not so
effectual in Apogaeo Epicycli, as in Perigaeo.
in the of the two inferior Planets with the Sun, that if this happen in the
Apogaeon of their Epicycles, their shall not be of that efficacy or force, as
when they are in Perigaeo: because (according to the Hypothesis of Tycho and
Copernicus) they being above the Sun, and the Sun much bigger then they, the
Sun shall return all their Beams to themselves from the Earth, so that their
union by this means shall be interrupted and frustrate.

In like manner, in my contemplation for help in the Configuration of the and,
I found that which did reasonably give me contentment, because in the
concurrence of their Beams at the Earth I found a mutual Reflection of the one
into the other, and so an Union by Reflection.

Diagram.



For admit A B C to be three Stars, A and B in a Configuration, A C in a: Then
for so much as B F, the Beam incident of the, falls obliquely in respect of A
F, and makes an acute Angle therewith, it is evident to those that have any
mean understanding in the Optics, that B F shall reflect to C, and so be
united to C F, the incident of the Star Union by Reflection between the and
demonstrated, and the familiarity of these points of Heaven mentioned by
Prolomy declared.
C, which is in a Configuration with A: as also C F shall for the same Reason
reflect to the Star in B, and be likewise united with B F, the incident of the
Star at B. Behold here by the way the grounds of that familiarity which Ptolomy
notes in these Arks of Heaven, when he considers the Position apt for the
Aphaeta of life, or the Houses of the Figure. And thus far me thought I pursued
the Reason of that virtue which is found in the Aspects with good
encouragement, that I should have found their force to depend upon Union or
Reflection. But when I come to consider of the Quartile, whose Beams only cut
each other ad angulos rectos, and so reflect into themselves, after much
deliberation with my self, finding all aid of the Optics to fail me, I was
forced to say with Offusius; Ingenue fatebimur causam talis The Reason of the
efficacy of the not depending upon Reflection or Union.
effectus nos demonstrare non posse: id tamen verissimum esse tam diuturna
observatione compertum habemus, ut ea de re dubitare puderet. Wherefore
recounting with my self some of those Speculations before remembered, and
specially that Theoreme which prove the Angles of the, and to be only
proportionable in taking up the Center of the World; the more I considered
thereof, the more I find my self confirmed, that the mystery or secret of these
Configurations rests chiefly in this, that these only Irradiations, and those
that are derived from these, are proportional unto all patille matter, and
therefore more effectual.

For that these Irradiations only are every way proportionable is before
abundantly The third Reason why these aforesaid trradiations are of such virtue
proved to depend upon their proportionable taking up of the Center of the World
by their Angles, whereby they must needs shine upon all Elementary matter with
a due and even mixture of light and influence.
proved, whether we respect the taking up of the Circumference, the power and
proportion oftheir Subtenses unto the Diameter, or lastly and principally, the
occupying of place at the Center of the World. Which Prerogatives seeing no
other Arks, Subtenses, or Angles do enjoy: therefore I conclude these above all
others to be proportional unto the whole Systeme of the World. For that is
truly said proportionable, which is neither defective, interrupted, nor
redundant: but such are the Arks, Subtenses and Angles of those Irradiations,
and none other; Ergo, these and none other are proportionable. Now as that
which is defective, and wants proportion, leaves the action frustrate, and
without effect: so that which on the other side offends in excess, must needs
incur the contrary fault, and overcharge that which either Nature or Art
intends, whereby of necessity it will follow, that there being no defect, nor
excess, but an equal and just mixture of the influence of the Stars in these
Irradiations, these only shall be apt and convenient to produce agreeable
effects in the matter of all sublunary things. For it fares in these effects,
which are produced by the mixture of Light and Influence, as with Chemical
Operations, where the defect of heat produces nothing; as on the other side
excess does either by Sublimation, Eruption, Vitrification, breaking the
Vessel, and the like, destroy the work. And to make it yet clearer, how the
Beams of any such Stars do proportionally take up the Center of the World,
whereas, in that which went before, I have only showed how the Points of those
Ordinate Playns, whereunto these Configurations have been compared, often
reiterated, do take up place. The Reason why any 2 Stars in Configuration shall
take up all elementary matter at the Center with proportionable Angles made by
their Beams, incident, reflected, or opposite.


Now will I set forth how the Beams of any two Stars in any one of the former
Configurations shall take up more space, then that which is comprehended
between their Incidents or Beams of true motion, and how by their Beams, either
incident, reflected, or opposite, they do possess, and take up the whole Center
of the World at one instant with proportionable Angles. For evident
demonstration whereof concerning and, (whose force rather depends upon union
then proportion) I need no further labor, then to refer the Reader to the view
of the last figure but one, where he sees the united Beams of such Stars as
are in and to surround the Center, and all elementary matter whatsoever subject
unto the actions of Heaven. And so for the, whose Beams incident and opposite,
traverse the Center of the World at four right Angles, viz. AFG, GFI, AFH, and
HFI; seeing four Points of a rectangle quadrilater figure has been before
proved to occupy place, I likewise need no other proof, then that the Reader
will in the last figure consider how these four right Angles made by one
Quartile take up the Center of the World. But concerning the and, although the
like be evident enough to any of mean skill, yet nevertheless there are some
other speculations which require a word or two more. For in the last figure
suppose two Stars A and Birradiate the earth with their Beams, although it be
true, that by the protracting of the opposite Beam from F to D, the Center of
the whole World seems occupied with proportionable Angles, BFA being
subtended by the Ark of 60. which is before declared to be the Angle of an
ordinate aequilater triangle, and so leaves the outward Angle BFI equal to the
Angle of an ordinate Hexagon, subtended hereby the Ark 120, which is the Ark of
a; the like being also to be understood of the Angles made by the opposite
Beams ad verticem. Yet nevertheless we are here further to consider, how the
incident Beam of B, viz. BF, reflecteth unto C, and so takes up the whole
Semicircle ABCI, with three, viz. AFB, BFC, and CFI. In like manner, if we
consider C to be in a triangular Configuration with A, we see that as the
opposite Beam of A, viz. FI, makes a with the incident Beam of a Star at C,
viz. CF; so CF being the Beam incident of the Star C reflecteth also to the
Point B, and so makes the same three, wherewith the aforesaid whole Semicircle
is taken up, as is before demonstrated. Wherefore this may satisfy the
indifferent, how any two Stars in any of these Configurations do proportionably
ocupy the whole Center of the World in the same moment, without reiterating the
same Angle.

And because hitherto we have spoken only of the old Configurations, known to
the ancient Astronomers, I may not forget to signify, that in these our days
our late Artists (whereof Kepler is the chief) have added unto these former
Three new Aspects, viz. the Quintile, Biquintile and Sesquiquadrate added by
Kepler, and the Reason which drew him to this Observation, so making 8 Aspects
in all answerable to so many divisions of a Monochord.
Aspects three others, viz. the Quintile, consisting of 72 degr. the Biquintile
of 144 degr. and the Sesquiquadrate of 135 degr. so making 8 Configurations
answerable to the 8 Consonant Stops in a Monochord. Neither dare I for my part
contradict these new additions: For having made trial as well in the
speculations of the Weather and Meteors, as in the accidents of Nativities, I
dare boldly affirm, That there have diverse events and effects concurred with
these new Configurations, for which, without these Considerations, we can find
as yet no Reason at all in Astrology: Neither wanted they true grounds of
Reason for this their Observation. For as in Music there be but 3 perfect
Concords, viz. the Diapason, Diapente, and Diatessaron; so in Astrology there
are but 3 perfect Aspects answerable to the foresaid Harmonies, namely the,
the, and the, the being accounted, and so proved before to be but an imperfect
Aspect, answering exactly to B flat, the first among the imperfect or
compounded Concords. Wherefore considering that the first 3 perfect Concords
are found to have their perfect Aspects answerable unto them, and that B flat
being an imperfect Concord is also found to agree exactly in proportion with
the, being an imperfect Aspect: This gave Kepler first cause to suspect that
the other Harmonical Proportions contained in the same Monochord might also
have their Aspects, viz. the Quintile, Biquintile, and Sesquiquadrate
answerable unto them; wherefore although as yet I have not entered into any
other Geometrical Speculation, why these distances are also effectual in
operation as well as the former, thus much for this time may suffice, both for
the occasion of their first invention, as also for their probability to be
observed in practice.

And now having thus discoursed at large of the Dignity, and diverse Reasons of
these Aspects or Configurations, which are so powerful in operation, I shall
conclude with this desire, that two things more may be further noted.

First, That we are not only to regard these proportioned Distances among the
Planets, but also of the Planets with the fixed Stars. Which Speculation as it
has been heretofore omitted by others, either through loathness to calculate
the Aspects of the fixed Stars, or through neglecting them altogether; so
undoubtedly it has been no small cause, why our Prognosticators have failed in
their Judgments by omitting a principal part of their Direction.

And secondly, That where we find plenty of Aspects, especially coming
together, it is a manifest Argument, that plenty of matter stirred up will
follow, which will cause great alteration of the Air apt for the Season.

AN Astrological Judgment UPON The great Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter
1603. being its first Entrance into the Fiery Trigon.
Sent by way of Letter from Sir Christopher Heydon Knight, to Doctor Foster.
SIR,
UPon the 3 of December. An. 1603. being desirous (as the Weather would give
leave) to observe the places of Saturn and Jupiter, that thereby I might attain
unto the true time of their at hand, I fitted my self as well as I could in the
morning about 7 of the Clock to take their Distances: but at that time the Air
being cloudy, and the Heaven only favorable about the Horizon, I could perceive
Jupiter only in his Matutine Emersion, newly appearing out of the Sunbeams,
but Saturn at that time was not to be discerned by the youngest eye there.
Wherefore I only at that time observed Jupiter his distance a lance
Meridionali, 27. gr. 33. m. 30. sec.

The place of Lanx Merid: according to Tycho, was then 9. gr. 33. m. 30. sec.

Wherefore seeing Jupiter his latitude by the Ephem: was 54. m. Sept. and the
latitude of Lanx Merid: 26. m. Sept. agreeing thus in the denomination of your
latitude, and so near the Ecliptic, it is evident that Jupiter his place was
quoad longitudinem, without more Calculation, 7. gr. 7. m..

The three day following, viz. 4, 5, and 6. were very foul and stormy, but the
seventh being frosty in the morning, gave me reasonable opportunity to attend
this business again, at what time we beheld both Saturn, Jupiter, and Mercury
in an Isoceles triangle almost, pleasantly representing the beginning of the
fiery Trigon: But the day being broken, and the Sun approaching apace, we were
fain to take such Observations as we could of Saturn and Jupiter, and let
Mercury alone.

Wherefore, hor. 7. m. 25. I observed Saturn to be distant from Lan: Meridional
28. gr. 24. m. 30. sec. bis.

And Jupiter from the same fixed Star twice also, hor. 7. m. 40. -- 28. 24 30.
at what time Saturn his light, contending with the breaking of the day, was
very weak; therefore we began with him, and ended with Jupiter: and by this
Observation I then concluded, That I thought it the Will of God I should have
opportunity to observe the true moment of the great Conjunction, which, as
appears by these distances, happened in the 7 gr. 58 m. of, for otherwise
they could not both have had equal distance from the same fixed Star, lying
parallel in effect with them to the Ecliptic.

I also observed both Saturn, Jupiter and Mercury upon the sixteenth day,

Hor. 7. m. 15. Saturn from the said Star 29. g. 28. m. paulo plus, 9. g. 1. m..

Hor. 7. m. 15. Jupiter from the same Star 30. g. 22. m. 30. sec. -- 9. g. 55.
m..

Hor. 7. m. 27. Mercury from the same Star 32. g. 18. m. 0. sec. -- 11. g. 51.
m..

All which Observations I set down, to the end you may compare them, hopeing
you shall find they will rather confirm then derogate from the place and time
of this great Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter: yet, to speak ingenuously, not
trusting my Observation more then I should, partly because the daylight would
not suffer us to observe other fixed Stars with the Planets, and partly by
reason of the slow motion of Saturn and Jupiter, I laid them aside till after
perusing Kepler de Stella Nova, I was the more encouraged to make account of my
Observation: for I found in page 48. that he, by such Observation as he could
make, constituteth the time at Prage to be the 7 day, 8 hor. and 20 min.
although afterward he show as little confidence in the hour as my self did
before, I was confirmed by his Observation. Wherefore if the Meridians be
compared, the difference of time between his Observation and mine is not above
13 m. which is not worth the speaking of, and may happen as well by the Error
of Longitude, as of the Observation. For the Longitude of Prage, as Ty^ho
notes in his Progymnasmat^, page 131. is 38. gr. 0. m. And the Longitude of
London in Mr Cambdens Britannia is 23. gr. 25. m. the difference is 14. gr. 35.
m. which wants but 2. m. of the whole hour. Wherefore if 58. m. being the
common difference between the Meridians of Prage and London, be subducted from
8 hor. 28 m. the remainder shows the moment of the great Conjunction at
London to be 7 ho. 22 m. by Kepler. But whereas my Observation of Jupiter was
at 7 ho. 40 m. with me, whose dwelling is removed about 5 m. of time from the
Meridian of London to the East, by my Observation the same happen 7 ho. 35 m.
at London, which is but 13 m. later then Kepler assigns it, whose
Observation, being only by the Quadrate and Azimuth with many operations and
corrections, as you may read, I hold not so certain as my own.

Thus then having both observed the time my self, and confirmed my Observation
by Keplers, and by Observations of my own, both preceding and subsequent, (for
that the observation of Jupiter the 3 of December. and those of the 16. being
examined by the diurnal Motion, will vary little or nothing from the day and
time before limited,) I will now erect the Figure of the Heavens for the
Horizon of London at that instant, that so you may have a foundation of further
Speculations then have hitherto been thought on.



The first things therefore in this Figure, whereupon I pray you curiously cast
your eye, are the Ascendent, and the M: C: the degree ascending, being the very
place of the new Star, which appeared the year following 1604. in Serpen: the
M: C: the degree of the Sun at the time of the great Eclipse the year after,
1605. The Conjunction it self you see happened in duodecimo loco.

So as the places of the new Star and the Eclipses are thus celebrated with
special Prerogative in respect of us. But for so much as by the doctrine of
Leovitius, and other Astrologers, the of Mars, with these two superior
Planets, is also requisite for the just complement of a great, you shall also
see how the end and accomplishment thereof does answer the beginning. I was not
at leisure to observe the Planets my self the year following: but Kepler
supplieth my want, who page 55. observed Mars to be joined with Saturn the 16
of Sept. 1604. after out style, about 8. in the Evening at Prage, in the 10 gr.
1 m. of: and again, upon the 29 day of the same month an hour before Noon, he
affirms Mars to have passed by Jupiter, and ^o fully to absolve this great
meeting and of the three superior Planets in the 19 gr. 12 m. of. The degree of
the Eclipsed Sun, at what time the new Star was not seen, as he proves by the
Testimony of many famous Astronomers, as of Fabritius, R^slinus, and others:
But behold the 30 of Sept. (which was the very day following) in the Evening,
this rare and wonderful Phenomenon appeared just almost in the place where the
great was accomplished, viz. in the 17 gr. 40 m. of, the degree ascending at
London in the beginning of the great, and now 1. gr. before the ending thereof:
at what time also, if you please to consider the place of the Sun by Tyeho's
account, you shall find him an hour after Sunset the 30 of Sept. at London,
being 36 m. past 6 of the Clock at Even (when the Star certainly was first
seen) to hold 17 gr. 30 m. of, the place almost exactly of his Eclipse the year
following, and in a perfect to the new Star now first appearing, and the
Ascendant in the great Conjunction.

Certainly when I consider first how exactly all these dependances follow
another, I cannot think that God has observed this straight familiarity
between the, the new Star, and the Eclipse in vain, or that they should thu^
concur with the Asc: and M: C: of London at the time of the great; but tha^ as
the signification is general, so questionless, in the participation of the
effects, London, and with it England, is like to taste more fully thereof then
other places.

Now a little to consider these Appearances by the precepts of Astrology, we
see all these Conjunctions celebrated in, which, as it is Signum Bicorporeum,
by Ptolomy, signifies of Kings, and as it is the house of Jupiter, it may both
be applied to matter and persons of State and Religion. Wherefore, as we may
rightly call the sign of at this time the Court or Temple of Heaven, where al^
the Planets have made their Assembly So is it not unworthy the noting in what
order they hold the same, which for certain was all one with that which the
Planets themselves hold in Heaven; as Saturn is highest, so was his Northern
Latitude greatest, viz. 1 gr. 40. m. Jupiter next 36 m. Sept. also, and Mars
lowest of all, having Meridional Latitude 1 gr. 36 m. at his Conjunction with
Saturn and Jupiter. But the new Star shined above them all, both in respect of
the Ecliptic, and the Diameter of the World; which nevertheless is not out of
order, if we respect the situation of the Orbs: But herein to be admired, that
as the same had no Motion, nor any prodigious Tail, or Hair, (as Comets are
wont,) but both in place, and form, and fixedness represented a fixed Star; so
it may be proportionably collected, That what was decreed in this notable Synod
of the Planets, was also ratified by the fixed Stars, and by all the Spheres of
Heaven. Neither is it to be neglected, that this new Star excelled all the rest
of the Planets in Magnitude and Light: and whereas before perverse old Saturn
(the President of Antiquity) both in respect of his situation in his own Orb,
being in Apogaeo Eccentrici et Epicycli, and also in regard of his Latitude,
was elevated above Jupiter in his own house: Now this new Star having Latitude,
1 gr. 53 m. 54 sec. Sept. by our Observation is elevated above Saturn, and
therefore when Satur^ hardly enduring to be thus over-topped, prepared against
him, and toward the ending of Novem. that year thought to have encountered him;
behold he was also fain to come under the Lee (as the Seamen term it) of the
new Star, and so glad to pass away, and leave the new Star still keeping
possession, and as it were master of the field, where it still continued, till
at last the Sun returning the year following to the place which he held in the
conclusion of the great Conjunction, and the beginning of this new Star, as
before is showed, he there finished the Catastrophe of all this solemn Art,
with a great Eclipse of his Light exactly in the Mid-heaven of the beginning of
the great Conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn, and in a to the Ascendant thereof,
and the place of this new Star. This is the true Historical Narration.

What the meaning hereof is, I leave to those that are endued with a more
divine and Prophetical Instinct then my self: Yet thus much we see, that he who
overlooked proud Jupiter, and challenged Antiquity to himself, is here put down
by the brightness of this new Light. And further, as the Sun Metaphorically
represents Kings and Magistrates, and Nobility in Astrology are resembled to
the Planets about the Sun: So the fixed Stars are compared to the People, and
Commons, amongst whom some excel others, and therefore whether there be a new
Democraty or Aristocraty of the Church and Commonwealth founded while the Sun
suffers his light to be obscured by the, or whether the Gospel (often by the
Scriptures resembled to the Sun) shall suffer an Eclipse, I take not upon me to
decide. But this I verily believe, as far as I can look into it with any
probable guess, that since the beginning of this great Conjunction there has
been many Treaties of Peace over all the parts of the World, both between us
and the French, the Lowcountry-men and the Spaniard, and also between the
Emperor, Turks and Hungarians; all which are concluded, saving the Peace
between the Low Countries and Spain: So you shall see (if I be not deceived)
that Treaty will break off, and by that means the Wars be renewed, and the King
of Spain utterly beaten out of his Indies, and the Gospel propagated unto the
Southern parts. For to what other end is this new Star Perpendicular to the
Indian Seas, and to the best part of America? To what end also (though Mars
seems in the Eclipse in respect of his Position, as also in the great
Conjunction in respect of his Latitude directed) is he notwithstanding both in
the figure of the great Conjunction elevated above all the Planets, while
Saturn and Jupiter are in pessimo loco, and in the figure of the Eclipse, as
your self materially noted, in imperante gradu and signo, over the place
Eclipsed? Besides, you aptly note the dissembling and treacherous of Saturn in
12. loco to the place Eclipsed, together with the hostile and exact Irradiation
of Jupiter to the same: I speak not these things as if I pronounced them Ab
Apollinis Tripode, but as I compare the likelihood of future accidents by the
state of things present, as they have any allusion to the apparition of the
heavenly bodies: All which I submit to your grave Censure.

And so craving pardon for my tediousness, and not doubting your good
acceptance of my good will, I commend my love unfeignedly, and rest,

Yours most assured, Christopher Heydon.
April 2. 1608.
FINIS.

