AN ELEGY.

Sacred to the Memory OF THE Highborn Prince Henry D. of Grafton, WHO Dyed of
his WOUNDS at Cork, October 9th. 1690.

In Pindarick Verse.

By Franc. Hext.

Hom. Iliad. (...).
(...).
LONDON, Printed by T. M. and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor near
Stationers' Hall, 1690.

AN ELEGY. Sacred to the Memory OF THE Highborn Prince Henry D. of Grafton,
etc.
Stanza I.
BEgone, ye numerous Sons of Ptolomy,
Who would the Effects of Planets know,
And all the Secrets, which do flow
From the Dark Source of deep Astrology:
We now do find by woeful Consequence,
You Are but Pretenders to that mighty Art;
Since none to us could our Great Loss impart,
By some Malignant Stars cursed Influence
Blush to Confusion, since ye never could foresee
That our Great Duke before Corks Fatal Walls,
By eagre Honor, and Fates Envy drawn,
Should to the Eternal Irish Jubilee
A Sacrifice too precious Fall:
This had ye shown,
We' had kept him though unwilling far,
From Watery Irelands Ruthful Shore,
And so had baffled Fate, and his Tyrannick Destiny.
II.
Then our Mean Praise can no Addition bring
To thy true Bullion worth,
But rather Cloud, than Blazon forth
Those Wonders, which thy Royal Hand has done:
Yet it is our Duty, now to Moan,
And with Respectful Awe to come
With our officious, though unnecessary Epicedium.
Early thy budding Parts were shown
When thou to Portugal was sent
TO Adorn the Nuptials of that King;
A Select Cohort with Thee went
Your Entrance to Renown, and make your Grandeur known,
At the First View confounded stood
The Royal Portugueze to see
A Mor^^l so much imitate a GOD.
In have retired, himself to free
From the bright Rays of Your too dazzling Majesty.
III.
To Malta next his Course he bent,
And whilst the Grafton cut the Azure Waves,
All the Crowd of Pyrate Slaves
Scudded in have to avoid their certain Fate.
Those Christian-Knights of the Order went
For to Congratulate
His safe Arrival on their Shore.
He to Oblidge them, Exercised his Men
With such a Warlike, Haughty Mein,
That they astonished stood to see our Discipline,
They had before
In their Italian Authors read
What our Great Forefathers did.
But they supposed when they did dye,
Our Conquests with them hence did fly.
But this Great Action did retrieve
Our ruined Credit from the Grave,
And made us seem Superior to the Mighty Dead.
IV.
When Poteus Politicians joined with Rome,
Contrived the Downfall of our Church and Laws;
Then fired with Zeal for such a Cause,
Did he his Warlike Garb assume
As the Hercules that Hydra to destroy,
Who with her Phangs our Faith endeavored to Annoy.
This they foresaw, and sent an Irish Slave,
First Born of Hell, to Assassinate our Prince,
But Heavens kind Influence
Did him from that Contingent Danger save,
And sent that Villain headlong to the Grave.
When the French Fleet did swagger in our Sea,
He boldly ventured amongst the Enemy,
Whilst others Fought too nigh the Shore
He grappled with them close, and was himself the War.
V.
As Marcus Brutus musing sat
In his Pavillion, on the War,
A dreadful Figure did appear,
Which was the Nuntius of his coming Fate,
He told him on Philippi's Plain
He should behold his Form again,
But he did Dare the Malice of the Fiend
Out of the Tent did the Pale Shadow send
By his Contracted Brow, and his Imperial Mein.
But too well to the Destined Place he came,
And led by Arbitrary Power the Roman to Elysium.
So when our Duke, a Royal Volunteer,
Before Corks Walls resolved to be,
The King of Terrors did appear,
And with him brought all his Artillery,
Bombs, Hand-Granadoes, Culverins, Canons, all
The Murdering Ministers of Horrid War.
Then pointed to the Place, where he should Fall,
And where to him a Visit he would pay,
He with a Look Elate, did fright Grim Death away,
Whilst others on their supple Knees
Fired their Charged Muskets from afar.
He stood erect, defying Death, and his Weak Enemies.
Death took the Hint, secured him as his Prize,
But he long strove, before he proved the Conqueror.
VI.
It is the Practice of too Partial Fate,
Immoderate Virtue for to hate,
By long Experience she does find,
To Lop a Hero, is to Massacre Mankind.
The Mobile-Souls, whom Nature framed in vain,
Or only to fill up her Train,
Live till Decrepit Age does come,
And carry them to their long Home.
But the Wise and truly Good,
And those, that spring from Royal Blood
Like early Flowers, are nip't in the Bud.
We could of Vulgar Men great Numbers spare,
Who Slaves are to that Servile Passion, Fear.
With these we'had gorged your Ravenous Maw
As Numberless, as Curls upon the Sea,
Or as when over the Lake impending lay
The scattered Seraphim, who dared to disobey
Their Great Creator, and their Confusion downward draw.
VII.
For Britains Glorious Sons of War make Room,
Who Pikes and shivered Lances bring,
Who shattered Colors, Types of Victory
Dear-bought from no Inglorious Enemy,
And as a pleasing Offering
To their Great Hector's Name, do fix them to his Tomb.
You of the Female Sex, that are
Most Noble, Virtuous, and most Fair,
(For he was Beauteous, as a Fancyed God)
With flowing Eyes draw near,
TO assist the Pious Duchess, whose great Load
Of Grief ineffable, Her Beauties Cloud.
Could Weeping Eyes, or falling Tears,
Or a Continual Form of Prayers,
From the Dark Grave our Hero free,
And once more Cloth Him with Mortality;
Her Grace so well does Heaven move
For Her Dearest, Royal Love,
With Her moist Tears, and never-ceasing Cries,
That (if 'twere possible) He would forsake his Native Skys.
FINIS.

