Hermes Mercurius Trismegistus, HIS Divine Pymander, IN Seventeen Books.
Together with his Second Book, Called Asclepius; Containing fifteen Chapters,
with a Commentary. Transl^ted formerly out of the Arabic into Greek, and
thence into Latin, and Dutch, and now out of the Original into ENGLISH; By
that learned Divine Dr. Everard.

LONDON, Printed by I. S. for Thomas Brewster, at the three Bibles in Paul's
Churchyard near the West End. 1657.

TO The Reader.
Judicious Reader,
THis Book may justly challenge the first place for antiquity, from all the
Books in the World, being written some hundreds of years before Moses his time,
as I shall endeavor to make good. The Original (as far as is known to us) is
Arabic, and several Translations thereof have been published, as Greek,
Latin, French, Dutch, etc. but never English before. It is pity the Doct.
Everard.
Learned Translatour had not lived, and received himself, the honor, and
thanks due to him from Englishmen; for his good will to, and pains for them, in
translating a Book of such infinite worth, out of the Original, into their
Mothertongue.

Concerning the Author of the Book it self, Four things are considerable, viz.
His Name, Learning, Country, and Time. 1. The name by which he was commonly
styled, is, Hermes Trismegistus, i. e. Mercurius ter Maximus, or, The thrice
greatest Intelligencer. And well might he be called Herm^s, for he was the
first Intelligencer in the World (as we read of) that communicated Knowledge to
the sons of Men, by Writing, or Engraving. He was called Ter Maxi^s, for some
Reasons, which I shall afterward mention. 2. His Learning will appear; as by
his Works, so by the right understanding the Reason of his Name. 3. For his
Country, he was King of Egypt. 4. For his Time, it is not without much
Controversy, betwixt those that write of this Divine, ancient Author, what
time he lived in. Some say he lived after Moses his time, giving this slender
Reason for it, viz. Because he was named Ter Maximus; for being preferred
Franciscus Flussas
(according to the Egyptian Customs) being chief Philosopher, to be chief of
the Priesthood; and from thence, to be chief in Government, or King. But if
this be all their ground, you must excuse my dissent from them, and that for
this reason, Because according to the most learned of his G^ber Paracel.
Henricus Nollius in theoria Philosophia Her^ticae tractatu primo.
followers, he was called Ter Maximus; for having perfect, and exact Knowledge
of all things contained in the World; which things he divided into Three
Kingdoms (as he calls them,) viz. Mineral, Vegetable Animal; which Three, he did
excel in the right understanding of; also, because he attained to, and
transmitted to Posterity (although in an Aenigmaticall, and obscure style) the
Knowledge of the Quintestence of the whole Universe (which Universe, as I said
before, he divided into Three Parts) otherwise called, The great Elixir of the
Philosophers; which is the Receptacle of all Celestial and Terrestiall
Virtues; which Secret, many ignorantly deny, many have chargeably sought after,
yet few, but some, yea, and Englishmen Ripley, Bacon, Norton, etc.
, have happily found. The Description of this great Treasure, is said to be
found ingraved upon a Smaragdine Table, in the Valley of Ebron, after the
Flood. So that the Reason before alleged to prove this Author to live after
Moses, seems invalid; neither does it any way appear, that he lived in Moses
his time, although it be the opinion of some, as of Iohu Functius, who says in
his Chronology, That he lived twenty one years before the Law was given by
Moses in the Wilderness: But the Reasons that he, and others give, are far
weaker than those that I shall give, for his living before Moses his time. My
reasons for that, are these; First, Because it is received amongst the
Ancients, that he was the first that invented the Art of communicating
Knowledge to the World, by Writing or Engraving. Now if so, then in all
probability he was before Moses; for it is said of Moses, that he was from Acts
7. 22
his childhood, skilled in all the Egyptian Learning which could not well have
been without the help of Literature, which we never read of any, before that
invented by Hermes. Secondly, He is said by Chap. 10.
himself, to be the Son of Saturn, and by Sanch^niaton.
others to be the scribe of Saturn. Now Saturn, according to Historians, ^ived
in the time of Sa^g Abra^ams great Grandfather. I shall but take in Suidas his
judgment, and so rest satisfied, that he did live not only before, but long
before, Moses: His words are these, Suidas.
Credo Mercurium Trismegistum sapientem Egyptium flornisse ante Pharaonem.

In this Book, though so very old, is contained more true knowledge of God and
Nature, than in all the Books in the World besides, I except only Sacred Writ:
And they that shall judiciously read it, and rightly understand it, may well be
excused from reading many Books; the Authors of which, pretend so much to the
knowledge of the Creator, and Creation. If God ever appeared in any man, he
appeared in him, as it appears by this Book. That a man who had not the benefit
of his Ancestors knowledge, being, as I said before, The first Inventer of the
Art of Communicating Knowledge to Posterity by writing, should be so high a
Divine, and so deep a Philosopher, seems to be a thing more of God, than of
Man; and therefore it was the opinion of some Gorop^s. Becanus.
; That he came from Heaven, not born upon Earth. There is contained in this
Book, that true Philosophy, without which, it is impossible ever to attain to
the height, and exactness of Piety, and Religion. According to this
Philosophy, I call him a Philosopher, that shall learn and study the things
that are, and how they are ordered, and governed, and by whom, and for what
cause, or to what end; and he that does so, will acknowledge thanks to, and
admire the Omni potent Creator. Preserver, and Director of all these things.
And he that shall be thus truly thankful, may truly be called Pious, and
Religious; and he that is Religious, shall more and more, know where, and what
the Truth is: And learning that, he shall yet be more and more Religious.

The glory and splendor of Philosophy, is an endeavoring to understand the
chief Good, as the Fountain of all Good: Now how can we come near to, or find
out the Fountain, but by making use of the Streams as a conduct to it? The
operations of Nature, are Streams running from the Fountain of Good, which is
God. I am not of the ignorant, and foolish opinion of those that say, The
greatest Philosophers, are the greatest Atheists; as if to know the Works of
God, and to understand his goings forth in the Way of Nature, must necessitate
a man to deny God. The Job 38.
Scripture disapproves of this as a sottish Tenent, and experience contradicts
it: For behold! Here is the greatest Philosopher, and therefore the greatest
Divine.

Read understandingly this ensuing Book (and for thy help, thou may make use
of that voluminous Hannibal Rosseli Calabar.
Commentary written upon it) then it will speak more for its Author, than can
be spoken by any man, at least by me.

Thine in the love of the Truth, I. F.

THE Titles of every Book OF Hermes Trismegistus
Lib. Fol. 1. HIs first Book. 1 2. Poemander. 15 3. The holy Sermon. 42 4. The
Key. 47 5. That God is not manifest, and yet most manifest. 72 6. That in God
alone is good. 84 7. The secret Sermon in the Mount, of Regeneration, and the
Profession of Silence. 93 8. That the greatest evil in Man, is the not knowing
of God. 115 9. A Universal Sermon to Asclepius. 123 10. The Mind to Hermes.
135 11. Of the common mind to Tat. 159 12. Hermes Trismegistus his Crater or
Monas. 183 13, Of Sense and Understanding. 194 14. Of Operation and Sense. 206
15. Of truth to his son Ta^* 220 16. That none of the things that are, can
perish. 232 17. To Asclepius, to be truly wise. 237
Hermes Trismegistus HIS First Book.
I O my Son, write this first Book, both for Humanity sake, and for Piety
toward God.

2. For there can be no Religion more true or just, than to know the things
that are; and to acknowledge thanks for all things, to him that made them:
which thing I shall not cease continually to do.

3. What then should a man do, O Father, to lead his life well; seeing there is
nothing here true?

4. Be Pious and Religious, O my Son; for he that does so, is the best and
highest Philosopher; and without Philosophy, it is impossible ever to attain to
the height and exactnes of Piety or Religion.

5. But he that shall learn and study the things that are; and how they are
ordered and governed; and by whom, and ^r what cause, or to what end; will
acknowledge thanks to the Work man, as to a good Father, an excellent Nurse,
and a faithful Steward, and he that gives thanks shall be Pious or Religious,
and he that is Religious shall know both where the truth is, and what it is;
and learning that, he will be yet more and more Reigious.

6. For never, O Son, shall, or can that Soul, which while it is in the Body
lightens and li^ts up it self to know and comprehend that (...) (...) is Good
and True, ^de back to the contrary: For it is infinitely enamoured thereof, and
forgets all Evils; and when it has learned and known its Father and
Progenitor, it can no more Apostatize, or depart from that Good.

7. And let this, O Son, be the end of Religion and Piety; whereunto when thou
art once arrived, thou shall both live well, and die blessedly, whilst thy Soul
is not ignorant whither it must return, and fly back again.

8. For this only, O Son, is the way to the Truth, which our Progenitors
traveled in; and by which, making their Journey, they at length attained to
the Good. It is a Venerable way, and plain, but hard and difficult for the Soul
to go in, that is in the Body.

9. For first, it must war against its own self, and after much Strife and
Dissension, it must be overcome of one part; for the Contention is of one
against two, whilst it flies away, and they strive to hold and detain it.

10. But the victory of both is not like; for the one hastes to that which is
Good, but the other is a neighbor to the things that are Evil; and that which
is Good, desires to be set at Liberty; but the things that are Evil, love
Bondage and Slavery.

11. And if the two parts be overcome, they become quiet, and are content to
accept of it as their Ruler; but if the one be overcome of the two, it is by
them led and carried to be pupunished by its being and continuance here.

12. This is, O Son, the Guide in the way that leads thither; for thou must
first forsake the Body before thy end, and get the victory in this Contention
and Strifefull life, and when thou have overcome return.

13. But now, O my Son, I will by Heads run through the things that are:
Understand thou what I say, and remember what thou hear.

14. All things that are, are moved; only that which is not, is unmovable.

15. Every Body is changeable.

16. Not every Body is dissolveable.

17. Some Bodies are dissolveable.

18. Every living thing is not mortal.

19. Not every living thing is immortal.

20. That which may be dissolved is also corruptible.

21. That which abides always is unchangeable.

22. That which is unchangeable is eternal.

23. That which is always made, is always corrupted.

24. That which is made but once, is never corrupted, neither becomes any other
thing.

25. First, God, Secondly, the World; Thirdly, Man.

26. The World for Man, Man for God.

27. Of the Soul; that part which is Sensible is mortal, but that which is
Reasonable is immortal.

28. Every Essence is immortal.

29. Every Essence is unchangeable.

30. Every thing that is, is double.

31. None of the things that are, stand still.

32, Not all things are moved by a Soul, but every thing that is, is moved by a
Soul.

33. Every thing that suffers is Sensible; every thing that is Sensible
suffers.

34. Every thing that is sad rejoices also, and is a mortal living Creature.

35. Not every thing that joyeth is also sad, but is an eternal living thing.

36. Not every Body is sick; every Body that is sick, is dissolveable.

37. The Mind in God.

38. Reasoning (or disputing, of discoursing) in Man.

39. Reason in the Mind.

40. The Mind is void of suffering.

41. No thing in a Body true.

42. All that is incorporeall, is void of Lying.

43. Every thing that is made, is corruptible.

44. Nothing good upon Earth, nothing evil in Heaven.

45. God is good, Man is evil

46. Good is voluntary, or of its own accord.

47. Evil is unvoluntary, or against its will.

48. The Gods choose good things, as good things.

49. Time is a Divine thing.

50. Law is Humane.

51. Malice is the nourishment of the World.

52. Time is the Corruption of Man.

53. Whatsoever is in Heaven is unalterable.

54. All upon Earth is alterable.

55. Nothing in Heaven is servanted, nothing upon Earth free.

56. Nothing unknown in Heaven, nothing known upon Earth.

57. The things upon Earth, communicate not with those in Heaven.

58. All things in Heaven are unblameable, all things upon Earth are subject to
Reprehension.

59. That which is immortal, is not mortal; that which is mortal, is not
immortal.

60. That which is sown, is not always begotten; but that which is begotten
always is sown.

61. Of a dissolveable Body, there are two Times, one from sowing to
generation, one from generation to death.

62. Of an everlasting Body, the time is only from the Generation.

63. Dissolveable Bodies are increased and diminished.

64. Dissolveable matter is altered into contraries; to wit, Corruption and
Generation, but Eternal matter into its self, and its like.

65. The Generation of Man is Corruption, the Corruption of Man is the
beginning of Generation.

66. That which offsprings or begets another, is it self an offspring or
begotten by another.

67. Of things that are; some are in Bodies, some in their Ideas.

68. Whatsoever things belong to operation or working, are in a Body.

69. That which is immortal, partakes not of that which is mortal.

70. That which is mortal, comes not into a Body immortal; but that which is
immortal, comes into that which is mortal.

71. Operations or Workings are not carried upwards, but descend downwards.

72. Things upon Earth, do nothing advantage those in Heaven; but all things in
Heaven do profit and advantage the things upon Earth.

73. Heaven is capable, and a fit receptacle of everlasting Bodies, the Earth
of corruptible Bodies.

74. The Earth is brutish, the Heaven is reasonable or rational.

75. Those things that are in Heaven, are subjected or placed under it; but the
things on Earth are placed upon it.

76. Heaven is the first Element.

77. Providence is Divine Order.

78. Necessity is the Minister or Servant of Providence.

79. Forrune is the carriage or effect of that which is without Order; the Idol
of operation, a lying fantasy or opinion.

80. What is God? The immutable or unalterable Good.

81. What is man? An unchangeable Evil.

82. If thou perfectly remember these Heads, thou can not forget those things
which in more words I have largely expounded unto thee; for these are the
Contents or Abridgment of them.

83. Avoid all Conversation with the multitude or common People; for I would
not have thee subject to envy, much less to be ridiculous unto the Many.

84. For the like always takes to it self that which is like, but the unlike
never argrees with the unlike: Such Discourses as these have very few Anditors,
and peradventure very few will have; but they have something peculiar unto
themselves.

85. They do rather sharpen and whet evil men to their maliciousness;
therefore it behooves to avoid the multitude, and take heed of them, as not
understanding the virtue and power of the things that are said.

86. How do thou mean, O Father?

87. Thus, O Son, the whole Nature and Composition of those living things
called Men, is very prone to Malieiousnesse, and is very familiar, and as it
were nourished with it, and therefore is delighted with it. Now this Wight, if
it shall come to Learn or know that the world was once made, and all things
are done according to Providence, and Necessity, Destiny, or Fate, bearing Rule
over all: Will he not be much worse then himself? despising the whole because
it was made. And if he may lay the cause of Evil upon Fate or Destiny, he
will never abstain from any evillwork.

88. Wherefore we must look warily to such kind of people, that being in
ignorance, they may be less evil for fear of that which is hidden and kept
secret.

The end of the first Book.
THE Second Book CALLED Poemander.
MY Thoughts being once seriously busied about the things that are, and my
Understanding lifted up, all my bodily Senses being exceedingly holden back, as
it is with them that are very heavy of sleep, by reason either of fullness of
meat or of bodily labor. Me thought I savv one of an exceeding great stature,
and an infinite greatness call me by my name, and say unto me, What would
then hear and see? or what would thou understand, to learn, and know?

2. Then said I, Who art thou? I am, quoth he, Poemander, the mind of the
great Lord, the most Mighty and absolute Emperor: I know what thou would
have, and I am alvvayes present with thee.

3. Then said I, I would learn the things that are, and understand the nature
of them, and know God. How? said he. I answered, That I would gladly hear. Then
he, Have me again in thy mind, and whatsoever thou would learn, I will
teach thee.

4. When he had thus said, he was changed in his Idea or Form, and straightway
in the twinkling of an eye, all things were opened unto me: And I saw an
infinite sight, all things were become light, both sweet and exceedingly
pleasant; and I was wonderfully delighted in the beholding it.

5. But after a little while, there was a darkness made in part, coming down
obliquely, fearful and hideous, which seemed unto me to be changed into a
certain moist nature, unspeakably troubled, which yielded a smoke as from fire;
and from whence proceeded a voice unutterable, and very mournful, but
inarticulate; insomuch that it seemed to have come from the Light.

6. Then from that Light, a certain holy Word joined it self unto Nature, and
out-flew the pure and unmixed Fire from the moist Nature upward on high: it was
exceeding light, and sharp, and operative withal. And the Air which was also
light, followed the Spirit and mounted up to Fire, (from the Earth and the
Water) insomuch that it seemed to hang and depend upon it.

7. And the Earth, and the Water, stayed by themselves so mingled together,
that the Earth could not be seen for the Water; but they were moved, because of
the Spiritual Word that was carried upon them.

8. Then said Poemander unto me, Do thou understand this Upon, and what it
means? I shall know, said I: Then said he, I am that Light the Mind, thy
God, who am before that moist Nature that appeared out of darkness, and that
bright and lightfull Word from the Mind, is the Son of God.

9. How is that, quoth I? Thus, replied he, Understand it: That which in thee
sees, and hears the Word of the Lord, and the Mind, the Father, God, differ
not one from the other; and the union of these, is Life.

Trismeg. I thank thee, Pimand. But first conceive well the Light in thy mind,
and know it.

10. When he had thus said, for a long time we looked steadfastly one upon the
other; insomuch, that I trembled at his Idea or Form.

11. But when he nodded to me, I beheld in my mind the Light that is in
innumerable, and the truly indefinite ornament or world; and that the fire is
comprehended or contained in or by a most great Power and constrained to keep
its station.

12. These things, I understood, seeing the word of Pimander; and when I was
mightily amazed, he said again unto me, Have thou seen in thy mind that
Archetypall Form, which was before the interminated and infinite Beginning?
Thus Pimander to me: But whence, quoth I, or whereof are the Elements of Nature
made? Pimander. Of the Will and Counsel of God; which taking the Word, and
beholding the beautiful World (in the Archetype thereof) imitated it, and so
made this World, by the Principles and vital Seeds or Soul-like productions of
it self.

13. For the Mind Being God, Male and Female, Life and Light, brought forth by
his word; another Mind, the Workman: Which being God of the Fire, and the
Spirit, fashioned and formed seven other Governors, which in their Circles
contain the Sensible World, whose Government or Disposition is called Fate or
Destiny.

14. Straight way leaped out, or exalted it self from the downward-born
Elements of God, the Word of God, into the clean and pure Workmanship of
Nature, and was united to the Workman, Mind; for it was Consubstantia^; and so
the downward-born Elements of Nature were left without Reason, that they might
be the only Matter.

15. But the Workman, Mind, together with the Word, containing the Circles and
Whirling them about, turned round as a Wheel his own Workmanships; and suffered
them to be turned from an indefinite Beginning, to an undeterminable End; for
they always begin where they end.

16. And the Circulation, or running round of these, as the Mind wills, out
of the lower, or downward-born Elements brought forth unreasonable or brutish
Creatures, for they had no reason, the Air flying things, and the Water such as
swim.

17. And the Earth and the Water were separated, either from other, as the Mind
would; and the Earth brought forth from her self; such Living Creatures as she
had, four-foo^ed and creeping Beasts, wild and tame.

18. But the Father of all things, the Mind being Life and Light* b^ought
forth Man, like unto himself, whom he loved as his proper Birth; for he was all
beauteous, having the Image of his Father.

19. For indeed God was exceedingly enamoured of his own Form or Shape, and
delivered unto it all his own Workmanships: But he seeing and understanding the
Creation of the Workman in the whole; would needs also himself fall to work,
and so was separated from the Father, being in the sphere of Generation or
Operation.

20. Having all Power, he considered the Operations or Workmanships of the
Seven; but they loved him, and every one made him partaker of his own Order.

21. And he learning diligently, and understanding their Essence, and partaking
their Nature, resolved to pierce* and break through the Circumference of the
Circles, and to understand the Power of him that sits upon the Fire.

22. And having already all power of mortal things, or the ^iving, and of the
unreasonable Creatures of the World, stooped down and peeped through the
Harmony, and breaking through the strength of the Circles, so showed and made
manifest the downward-born Nature, the fair and beautiful Shape or Form of God.

23. Which when he saw, having in it self the unsatiable Beauty, and all the
Operation of the Seven Governors, and the Form or Shape of God, he smiled for
love, as if he had seen the Shape or Likeness in the Water, or the shadow upon
the Earth of the fairest Humane form.

24. And seeing in the Water a shape, a shape like unto himself, in himself he
loved it; and would cohabit with it; and immediately upon the resolution,
ensued the Operation, and brought forth the unreasonable Image or Shape.

25. Nature presently laying hold of what it so much loved, did wholly ^ap her
self about it, and they were mingled, for they loved one another.

26. And for this cause* Man, above all things that live upon Earth, is double:
mortal, because of his Body, and immortal, because of the substantial Man:
For being immortal, and having power of all things, he yet suffers mortal
things, and such as are subject to Fate or Destiny.

27. And therefore being above all Harmony. he is made and become a servant to
Harmony. And being Hermaphrodite, or Male and Female, and watchful, he is
governed by, and subjected to a Father, that is both Male and Female, and
watchful.

28. After these things, I said, Thou art my Mind, and I am in love with
Reason.

29. Then said Pimander, This is the Mystery that to this day is hidden, and
kept secret; for Nature being mingled with Man, brought forth a Wonder most
wonderful; for he having the Nature of the Harmony of the Seven, from him whom
I told thee, the Fire and the Spirit; Nature continued not, but forthwith
brought forth seven Men all Males and Females; and sublime, or on high,
according to the Natures of the Seven Governors.

30. And after these things, O Pomander, quoth I, I am now come into a great
desire, and longing to hear: Do not digress, or run out.

31. But he said Keep silence, for I have not yet finished the first speech.

32. Trism. Behold, I am silent.

33. Piman. The Generation therefore of these Seven, was after this manner. The
Air being Feminine, and the Water desirous of Copulation, took from the Fire
its ripeness, and from the ether Spirit; and so Nature produced bodies after
the Species and Shape of men.

34. And Man was made of Life and Light, into Soul and Mind: of Life, the
Soul; of Light, the Mind.

35. And so all the Members of the Sensible World, continued unto the period of
the end, bearing rule, and generating.

36. Hear now the rest of that speech, thou so much desire to hear.

37, When that period was fulfilled, the bond of all things was loosed and
untied by the Will of God; for all living Creatures being Hermaphroditicall, or
Male and Female, were loosed and untied, together with Man; and so the Males
were apart by themselves, and the Females likewise.

38. And straightwayes God said to the Holy Word, Increase in increasing and
multiply in multitude all you my Creatures and Workmanships. And let him that
is endued with Mind, know himself to be immortal; and that the cause of death
is the love of the body, and let him learn all things that are.

39. When he had thus said, Providence by Fate and Harmony, made the mixtures,
and established the Generations, and all things were multiplied according to
their kind; and he that knew himself, came at length to the Superstantiall of
every way substantial good.

40. But he, that through the Error of Love, loved the Body, abides wandering
in darkness, sensible, suffering the things of death.

41. Trism. But why do they that are ignorant, sin so much, that they should
therefore be deprived of immortality.

42. Pimand. Thou seem not to have understood what thou have heard.

43. Trism. Peradventure I seem so to thee; but I both understand and remember
them.

44. Pimand. I am glad, for thy sake, if thou understoodest them.

45. Trism. Tell me, Why are they worthy of death, that are in death?

46. Pimand. Because there goes a ^ad and dismal darkness before its body; of
which darkness is the moist Nature; of which moist Nature, the Body consists
in the sensible World, from whence death is derived: Have thou understood this
^right?

47. Trism. But why, or how, does he that understands himself, go or pass into
God?

48. Pim. That which the Word of God said, say I: because the Father of all
things consists of Life and light, whereof Man is made.

49. Trism. Thou say very well.

50. Pim. God and the Father is Light and Life, of which Man is made. If
therefore thou learn and believe thyself to be of the Life and Light, thou
shall again pass into Life.

51. Trism. But yet tell me more, O my Mind, how I shall go into Life.

52. Pim. God says, Let the Man endued with a Mind, mark, consider, and know
himself well.

53. Trism. Have not all men a mind?

54. Pim. Take heed what thou say, for I the Mind come unto men that are
holy and good, pure and merciful, and that live piously and religiously; and
my presence is a help unto them. And forthwith they know all things, and
lovingly they supplicate and propitiate the Father; and blessing him, they give
him thanks, and sing hymns unto him, being ordered and directed by filial
Affection, and natural Love: And before they give up their Bodies to the death
of them, they hate their Senses, knowing their Works and Operations.

55. Rather I that am the Mind it self, will not suffer the Operations or
Works, which happen or belong to the body, to be finished and brought to
perfection in them; but being the Porter and Doorkeeper, I will shut up the
entrances of Evil, and cut off the thoughtfull desires of filthy works.

56. But to the foolish, and evil, and wicked, and envious, and covetous, and
murderous, and profane, I am far off; giving place to the revenging Demon,
which applying unto him the sharpness of fire, tormenteth such a man sensible,
and armeth him the more to all wickedness, that he may obtain the greater
punishment.

57. And such a one never cease, having unfulfillable desires, and unsatiable
concupiscences, and always fighting in darkness; for the Demon afflicts and
tormenteth him continually, and increases the fire upon him more and more.

58. Trism. Thou have, O Mind, most excellently taught me all things, as I
desired; but tell me moreover, after the return is made, what then?

59. Pimand. First of all, in the resolution of the material Body, the Body it
self is given up to alteration, and the form which it had, becomes invisible;
and the idle manners are permitted, and left to the Demon, and the Senses of
the Body return into their Fountains being parts, and again made up into
Operations.

60. And Anger and Concupiscence go into the brutish, or unreasonable Nature;
and the rest striveth upward by Harmony.

61. And to the first Zone it gives the power it had of increasing and
diminishing.

62. To the second, the machination or plotting of evils, and one effectual
deceit or craft.

63. To the third, the idle deceit of Concupiscence.

64. To the fourth, the desire of Rule, and unsatiable Ambition.

65. To the fifth, profane Boldness, and the^ headlong rashness of
Confidence.

66. To the sixth, Evil and ineffectuall occasions of Riches.

67. And to the seventh Zone, subtle Falsehood, always lying in wait.

68. And then being made naked of all the Operations of Harmony, it comes to
the eighth Nature, having its proper power, and sings praises to the Father
with the things that are, and all they that are present rejoice, and
congratulate the coming of it; and being made like to them with whom it
converseth, it hears also the Powers that are above the eighth Nature,
singing praise to God in a certain voice that is peculiar to them.

69. And then in order they return unto the Father, and themselves deliver
themselves to the powers; and becoming powers, they are in God.

70. This is the Good, and to them that know to be deified.

71. Furthermore, why say thou, What rests, but that understanding all
men, thou become a guide, and way-leader to them that are worthy; that the
kind of Humanity or Mankind, may be saved by God?

72. When pimander had thus said unto me, he was mingled among the Powers.

73. But I giving thanks, and blessing the Father of all things, rose up, being
enabied by him, and taught the nature, of the Nature of the whole, and having
seen the greatest sight or spectacle.

74. And I began to Preach unto men, the beauty and fairness of Piety and
Knowledge.

75. O ye People, M^n, born and made of the Earth, which have given your selves
over to drunkenesse, and sleep, and to the ignorance of God; be sober, and
cease your surfeit, whereto you are allured, and invited by bruiti^, and
unreasonable sleep.

76. And they that heard me, came willingly, and with one accord; and then I
said further.

77. Why, O men of the Offspring of the Earth, why have you delivered your
selves over unto death, having power to partake of immortality? Repent and
change your minds you that have together walked in Error, and have been
darkened in ignorance.

78. Depart from that dark light, be partakers of immortality, and leave or
forsake corruption.

79. And some of them that heard me, mocking and scorning, went away, and
delivered themselves up to the way of death.

80. But others casting themselves down before my feet, besought me, that they
might be taught; but I causing them to rise up, became a guide of mankind,
teaching them the reasons how, and by what means they may be saved. And I
sowed in them the words of Wisdom, and nourished them with Ambrosian water of
immortality.

81. And when it was Evening, and the Brightness of the same began wholly to
go down, I commanded them to go down, I commanded them to give thanks to God;
and when they had finished their thanksgiving, every one returned to his own
lodging.

82. But I wrote in my self, the bounty and beneficence of Pimander; and being
filled with what I most desired, I was exceeding glad.

83. For the sleep of the Body was the sober watchfulness of the mind; and
the shutting of my eyes the true sight, and my silence great with child, and
full of good; and the pronouncing of my words, the blossoms and fruits of good
things.

84. And thus came to pass or happened unto me, which I received from my
mind, that is, Pimander, the Lord of the Word; whereby I became inspired by
God, with the Truth.

85. For which cause, with my Soul, and whole strength, I give praise and
blessing unto God the Father.

86. Holy is God the Father of all things.

87. Holy is God, whose will is performed, and accomplished by his own powers.

88. Holy is God, that determines to be known, and is known of his own, or
those that are his.

89. Holy art thou, that by thy Word have established all things.

90. Holy art thou, of whom all Nature is the Image.

91. Holy art thou, whom Nature has not formed.

92. Holy art thou that art stronger then all power.

93. Holy art thou that art greater then all excellency.

94. Holy art thou who art better then all praise.

95. Accept these reasonable Sacrifices from a pure soul, and a heart stretched
out unto thee.

96. O thou unspeakable, unutterable, to be praised with silence.

97. I beseech thee, that I may never err from the knowledge of thee; look
mercifully upon me, and enable me, and enlighten with this Grace, those that
are in ignorance, the brothers of my kind, but thy sons.

98. Therefore I believe thee, and bear witness, and go into the Life and
Light.

99. Blessed art thou O Father; thy man would be sanctified with thee, as thou
have given him all power.

The End of the Second Book.
THE Third Book CALLED The Holy Sermon.
THe glory of all things, God, and that which is Divine, and the Divine Nature,
the beginning of things that are.

2. God and the Mind, and Nature, and Matter, and Operation, or Working, and
Necessity, and the End, and Renovation.

3. For there were in the Chaos, an infinite darkness in the Abyss or
bottomless Depth, and Water, and a subtle Spirit intelligible in Power; and
there went out the Holy Light, and the Elements were coagulated from the Sand
out of the moist Substance.

4. And all the Gods distinguisted the Nature full of Seeds.

5, And when all things were interminated and unmade up, the light things were
divided on high. And the heavy things were founded upon the moist Sand, all
things being Terminated or Divided by Fire; and being sustained or hung up by
the Spirit, they were so carried, and the Heaven was seen in Seven Circles.

6. And the Gods were seen in their Ideas of their Stars, with all their
Signs, and the Stars were numbered with the Gods in them. And the Sphere was
all lined with Air, carried about in a circular motion by the Spirit of God.

7. And every God by his internal power did that which was commanded him; and
there were made four-footed things, and creeping things and such as live in the
Water, and such as fly, and every fruitful Seed, and Grass, and the Flowers
of all Greens, all which had sowed in themselves the Seeds of Regeneration.

8. As also the Generations of men, to the knowledge of the Divine Works, and a
lively or working Testimony of Nature, and a multitude of men, and the Dominion
of all things under Heaven, and the knowledge of good things, and to be
increased in increasing, and multiplied in multitude.

9. And every Soul in Flesh, by the wonderful working of the Gods in the
Circles, to the beholding of Heaven, the Gods, Divine Works, and the Operations
of Nature; and for Signs of good things, and the knowledge of the Divine
Power, and to find out every cunning workmanship of good things.

10. So it begins to live in them, and to be wise according to the Operation
of the course of the circular Gods and to be resolved into that which shall be
great Monuments, and Rememberances of the cunning Works done upon Earth,
leaving them to be read by the darkness of times.

11. And every Generation of living Flesh of Fruit, Seed, and all Handicrafts,
though they be lost, must of necessity be renewed by the renovation of the
Gods, and of the Nature of a Circle moving in number; for it is a Divine thing,
that every worldly temperature should be renewed by Nature; for in that which
is Divine, is Nature also established.

The End of the Fragments of the third Book very unperfect.
THE Fourth Book CALLED The Key.
YEsterdayes Speech, O Asclepins, I dedicated to thee: this days it is fit to
dedicate to Tat, because it is an Epitome of those general Speeches that were
spoken to him.

2. God therefore, and the Father, and the Good, O Tat, have the same Nature,
or rather also the same Act and Operation.

3. For there is one name or appellation of Nature and Increase, which
concerns things changeable, and another about things unchangeable, and about
things unmovable, that is to say, Things Divine and Humane; every one of which
himself will have so to be; but action or operation, is of another thing or
elsewhere, as we have taught in other things, Divine and Humane, which must
here also be understood.

4. For, his Operation or Act, is his Will, and his Essence, to will all things
to be.

5. For what is God, and the Father, and the Good, but the Being of all things
that yet are not, and the existence it self, of those things that are?

6. This is God, this is the Father, this is the Good, whereunto no other thing
is present or approaches.

7. For the World, and the Sun, which is also a Father by Participation, is not
for all that equally the cause of Good, and of Life, to living Creatures: And
if this be so, he is altogether constrained by the Will of the Good, without
which, it (...) not possible, either to be, or to be begotten or made.

8. But the Father is the cause of his Children, who has a will both to sow
and nourish that which is good by the (...).

9. For Good is always active or busy in making; and this cannot be in any
other, but in him that takes nothing, and yet wills all things to be; for I
will not say, O Tat, making them; for he that makes, is defective in much
time, in which sometimes he makes not, a^ also of quantity and quality; for
sometime, he makes those things that have quantity and quality, and sometimes
the contrary.

10. But God is the Father, and the Good, in being all things; for he both will
be this, and is it; and yet all this for himself (as is true) in him that can
see it.

11. For all things else are for this, it is the property of Good to be known:
This is the Good, O Tat.

12. Tat. Thou have filled us, O Father, with a sight, both good and fair, and
the eye of my mind is almost become more holy by the sight or spectacle.

13. Trism. I wonder not at it, for the sight of Good is not like the Beam of
the Sun, which being of a fiery shining brightness, makes the eye blind by
his excessive Light, that gazeth upon it; rather the contrary, for it
enlighteneth, and so much increases the light of the eye, as any man is able
to receive the influence of this intelligible clearness.

14. For it is more swift and sharp to pierce, and innocent or harmless
withal, and full of immortality; and they that are capable, and can draw any
store of this spectacle, and sight, do many times fall asleep from the Body,
into this most fair and beauteous Vision; which thing Celius and Saturn, our
Progenitors, obtained unto.

15. Tat. I would we also, O Father, could do so.

16. Trism. I would we could, O Son; but for the present we are less intent to
the Vision, and cannot yet open the eyes of our minds to behold the
incorruptible, and incomprehensible Beauty of that Good: But then shall we see
it, when we have nothing at all to say of it.

17. For the knowledge of it, is a Divine Silence, and the rest of all the
Senses: For neither can he that understands that, understand any thing else,
nor he that sees that, see any thing else, nor hear any other thing, nor, in
sum, move the Body.

18. For shining steadfastly upon, and round about the whole Mind, it
enlighteneth all the Soul; and loosing it from the Bodily Senses and Motions,
it draws it from the Body, and changes it wholly into the Essence of God.

19. For it is possible for the Soul O Son, to be dei^ed while yet it lo^geth
in the Body of Man if it contemplate the beauty of Good.

Tat. How do thou mean deifying, Father?

21. Trissm. There are differences, O Son, of every Soul.

22. Tat. But how do thou again divide the changes?

23. Trism. Have thou not heard in the general Speeches, that from one Soul of
the universe, are all those Souls, which in all the world are tossed up and
down, as it were, and severally divided? Of these Souls there are many changes,
some into a more fortunate estate, and some quite contrary; for they which are
of creeping things, are changed into those of watery things; and those of
things living in the water, to those of things living upon the Land; and Airy
ones are changed into men, and humane Souls, that lay hold of immortality, are
changed into Demons.

24. And so they go on into the sphere or region of the fixed Gods; for there
are two quiets or companies of Gods, one of them that wander, and another of
them that are fixed; And this is the most perfect glory of the Soul.

25. But the Soul entering into the Body of a Man, if it continue evil, shall
neither taste of immortality, nor is partaker of the good.

26. But being drawn back the same way, it returns into creeping things. And
this is the condemnation of an evil Soul.

27. And the wickedness of a Soul, is ignorance; for the Soul that knows
nothing of the things that are, neither the Nature of them, nor that which is
good, but is blinded, rusheth and dasheth against the bodily Passions; and
unhappy, as it is, not knowing it self, it serves strange Bodies, and evil
ones, carrying the Body as a burden, and not ruling, but ruled. And this is
the mischief of the Soul.

28. On the contrary, the virtue of the Soul is Knowledge; for he that knows,
is both good and religious, and already Divine.

29. Tat. But who is such an one, O Father?

30. Trism. He that neither speaks, nor hears many things; for he, O Son, that
hears two speeches or hearings, fights in the shadow.

31. For God, and the Father, and Good, is neither spoken nor heard.

32. This being so in all things that are, are the Senses, because they cannot
be without them.

33. But Knowledge differs much from Sense; for Sense is of things that
surmount it, but Knowledge is the end of Sense.

34. Knowledge is the gift of God; for all Knowledge is unbodily, but uses the
Mind as an Instrument, as the Mind uses the Body.

35. Therefore both intelligible and material things, go both of them into
bodies; for, of contraposition, that is, setting one against another, and
contrariety, all things must consist. And it is impossible it should be
otherwise.

36. Tat. Who, therefore, is this material God?

37. Trism. The fair and beautiful World, and yet it is not good; for it is
material, and easily passible, nay, it is the first of all passible things;
and the second of the things that are, and needy, or wanting somewhat else. And
it was once made, and is always, and is ever in generation, and made, and
continually makes, or generates things that have quantity and quality.

38, For it is moveable, and every material motion is generation; but the
intellectual stability moves the material motion after this manner.

39. Because the World is a Sphere, that is, a head; and above the head there
is nothing material, as beneath the feet there is nothing intellectual.

40. The whole universe is material: The Mind is the head, and it is moved
spherically, that is, like a head.

41. Whatsoever is joined or united to the Membrane or Film of this head,
wherein the Soul is, is immortal; and is in the Soul of a made Body, has its
Soul full of the Body; but the that are further from that Membrane, have the
Body full of Soul.

42. The whole is a living wight, and therefore consists of material, and
intellectual.

43. And the World is the first, and Man the second living wight after the
World, but the first of things that are mortal; and therefore has whatsoever
benefit of the Soul all the other have: And yet for all this, he is not only
not good, but flatly evil, as being mortal.

44. For the World is not good, as it is moveable; nor evil, as it is immortal.

45. But Man is evil, both as he is moveable, and as he is mortal.

46. But the Soul of Man is carried in this manner, The Mind is in Reason,
Reason in the Soul, the Soul in the Spirit, the Spirit in the Body.

47. The Spirit being diffused, and going through the veins, and arteries, and
blood, both moves the living Creature, and after a certain manner bears it.

48. Wherefore some also have thought the Soul to be blood, being deceived in
Nature, not knowing that first the Spirit must return into the Soul, and then
the blood is congealed, the veins and arteries emptied, and then the living
thing dies: And this is the death of the Body.

49. All things depend of one beginning, and the beginning depends of that
which is one and alone.

50. And the beginning is moved, that it may again be a beginning; but that
which is one, stands and abides, and is not moved.

51. There are therefore these three, God the Father and the God, the World and
Man: God has the World, and the world has Man; and the World is the Son of
God, and Man is as it were the Offspring of the World.

52. For God is not ignorant of man, but knows him perfectly, and will be known
by him. This only is healthful to man; the Knowledge of God: This is the
return of Olympus; by this only the Soul is made good, and not sometimes good,
and sometimes evil, but of necessity Good.

53. Tat. What meanest thou, O Father?

54. Trism. Consider, O Son, the Soul of a Child, when as yet it has received
no dissolution of its Body, which is not yet grown, but is very small: how
then, if it look upon it self, it fees it self beautiful, as not having been
yet sp^tted with the Passions of the Body, but as it were depending yet upon
the Soul of the World.

55. But when the Body is grown, and distracteth the Soul it ingenders
Forgetfulness, and partakes no more of the Fair, and the Good, and
Forgetfulness is Evilnesse.

56. The like also happens to them that go out of the Body: For when the Soul
runs back into it self, the Spirit is contracted into the blood, and the Soul
into the Spirit; but the Mind being made pure, and free from these cloathings;
and being Divine by Nature, taking a fiery Body, rangeth abroad in every place,
leaving the Soul to judgment, and to the punishment, it has deserved.

57. Tat. Why do thou say so, O Father, That the Mind is separated from the
Soul, and the Soul from the Spirit? When even now thou said the Soul was the
Clothing, or Apparel of the-Minde, and the Body of the Soul.

58. Trism. O Son, he that hears must co-understand, and conspire in thought
with him that speaks: yea, he must have his hearing swifter and sharper, then
the voice of the speaker.

59. The disposition of these Cloathings or Covers, is done in the Earthly
Body; for it is impossible, that the mind should establish or rest it self,
naked, and of it self, in an Earthly Body neither is the earthly Body able to
bear such immottality: And therefore, that it might suffer so great virtue, the
Mind compacted as it were, and took to it self the pasfible Body of the Soul,
as a Covering or a Clothing. And the Soul being also in some sort Divine,
uses the Spirit as her Minister and Servant; and the Spirit governs the
living thing.

60. When therefore the Mind is separated, and departs from the Earthly
Body, presently it puts on its Fiery Coat, which it could not do, having to
dwell in an Earthly Body.

61. For the Earth cannot suffer fire, for it is all burned of a small spark;
therefore is the water powered round about the Earth, as a Wall or defense, to
withstand the flame of fire.

62. But the mind being the most sharp or swift of all the Divine Cogitations,
and more swift then all the Elements, has the fire for its Body.

63. For the mind which is the Workman of all, uses the fire as his
Instrument in his workmanship; and he that is (...) ^rkman of all, uses it to
(...) ^ng of all things, as it is use^ (...) man, to the making of Earthly
things only; for the Mind that is upon Earth, void, or naked of fire, cannot
do the business of men, nor that which is otherwise the affairs of God.

64. But the Soul of Man, and yet not every one, but that which is pious and
religious, is Angelical and Divine. And such a Soul, after it is departed from
the Body, having striven the strife of Piety, becomes either Mind or God.

65. And the strife of Piety is to know God, and to injury no Man; and this way
it becomes Mind.

66. But an impious Soul abides in its own essence, punished of it self, and
seeking an earthly and humane (...) (...) enter into.

67. For no other Body is capable of an Humane Soul, neither is it Lawful for
a Man's Soul to fall into the Body of an unreasonable living thing: For it is
the Law or Decree of God, to preserve an Humane Soul from so great a contumely
and reproach.

68. Tat. How then is the Soul of Man punished, O Father; and what is i^
greatest torment^.

69. Herm. Impiety, O my S^, for what Fire has so great a flame (...) (...)?
Or what biting Beast does so tear the Body as it does the Soul?

70. Or do thou not see how many Evils the wicked Soul suffers roaring and
crying out, I am burner, I am consumed, I know not what to say, or do; I am
devoured, uuhappy wretch, of the evils that compass, and lay hold upon me,
miserable that I am, I neither see nor hear any thing.

71. These are the voices of a punished and tormented Soul, and not as many;
and thou, O Son, think, that the Soul going out of the Body, grows brutish
or enters into a Beast; which is a very great Error, for the Soul is punished
after this manner.

72. For the Mind, when it is ordered or appointed to get a fiery Body for the
services of God, coming down into the wicked soul, torments it with the whips
of Sins, wherewith the wicked Soul being scourged, turns it self to Murders
and Contumelies, and Blasphemies, and diverse Violences, and other things by
which men are in^ured.

73. But into a pious Soul, the Mind entering, leads it into the Light of
Knowledge.

74. And such a Soul is never satisfied with singing praise. To God, and
speaking well of all men; and both in words and deeds, always doing good in
imitation of her Father.

75. Therefore, O Son, we must give thanks, and pray, that we may obtain a good
mind.

76. The Soul therefore may be altered or changed into the better, but into the
worse it is impossible.

77. But there is a communion of Souls; and those of Gods, communicate with
those of men; and those of men, with those of Beasts.

78. And the better always take of the worse, Gods of Men, Men of bruit
Beasts, but God of all: For he is the best of all, and all things are less
then he.

79. Therefore is the World subject unto God, Man unto the World, and
unreasonable things to Man.

80. But God is above all, and about all; and the beams of God are operations;
and the beams of the World are Natures; and the beams of Man are Arts and
Sciences.

81. And Operations do act by the World, and upon man by the natural beams of
the World, but Natures work by the Elements, and man by Arts and Sciences.

82. And this is the Government of the whole, depending upon the Nature of the
One, and piercing or coming down by the One Mind, than which nothing is more
Divine, and more efficacious or operative; and nothing more uniting, or nothing
is more One. The Communion of Gods to Men, and of Men to Gods.

83. This is the Bonus genius, or good Demon^ Blessed Soul that is fullest of
it! and unhappy Soul that is empty of it.

84. Tat. And wherefore, Father?

85. Trism. Know, Son, that every Soul has the Good Mind; for of that it is we
now speak, and not of that Minister, of which we said before, That he was sent
from the Judgment.

86. For the Soul without the Mind, can neither do, nor say any thing; for
manytimes the Mind fl^es away from the Soul, and in that hour the Soul neither
sees nor hears, but is like an unreasonable thing; so great is the power of
the Mind.

87. But neither brooketh is an idle or lazy Soul, but leaves such a one
fastened to the Body, and by it pressed down.

88. And such a Soul, O Son, has no Mind; wherefore neither must such a one
be called a Man.

89. For Man is a Divine living thing, and is not to be compared to any bruit
Beast that lives upon Earth, but to them that are above in Heaven, that are
called Gods.

90. Rather, if we shall be bold to speak the truth, he that is a man indeed,
is above them, or at least they are equal in power, one to the other: For none
of the things in Heaven will come down upon Earth, and leave the limits of
Heaven, but a man ascends up into Heaven, and measures it.

91. And he knows what things are on high, and what below, and learneth all
other things exactly.

92. And that which is the greatest of all, he leaves not the Earth, and yet
is above: So great is the greatness of his Nature.

93. Wherefore we must be bold to say, That an earthly man, is a mortal God;
and that the heavenly God, is an immortal Man.

94. Wherefore, by these two are all things governed, the World, and Man; but
they and all things else, of that which is One.

The End of the fourth Book.
THE Fifth Book. That God is not manifest, and yet most manifest.
THis Discourse I will also make to thee, O Tat, that thou may not be
ignorant of the more excellent Name of God.

2. But do thou contemplate in thy Mind, how that which to many seems hidden
and unmanifest, may be most manifest unto thee.

3. For it were not All, if it were apparent, for whatsoever is apparent, is
generated or made; for it was made manifest, but that which is not manifest is
ever.

4. For it needs not to be manifested, for it is always.

5. And he makes all other things manifest, being unmanifest, as being
always, and making other things manifest, he is not made manifest.

6. Himself is not made, yet in fantasy he fantasieth all things, or in
appearance he makes them appear; for appearance is only of those things that
are generated or made, for appearance is nothing but generation.

7. But he that is Oue, that is not made nor generated, is also unapparent and
unmanifest.

8. But making all things appear, he appears in all, and by all; but
especially he is manifested to, or in those things wherein himself lists.

9. Thou therefore, O Tat, my Son, pray first to the Lord and Father, and to
the Alone, and to the One, from whom is one to be merciful to thee, that thou
may know and understand so great a God; and that he would shine one of his
beams upon thee in thy understanding.

10. For only the Understanding sees that which is not manifest, or apparent,
as being it self not manifest or apparent; and if thou can, O Tat, it will
appear to the eyes of thy mind.

11. For the Lord, void of envy, appears through the whole world. Thou may
see the intelligence, and take it in thy hands, and contemplate the Image of
God.

12. But if that which is in thee, be not known or apparent unto thee, how
shall he in thee be seen, and appear unto thee by the eyes?

13. But if thou will see him, consider and understand the Sun, consider the
course of the M^n, consider the order of the Stars.

14. Who is he that keeps order? for all order is circumscribed or terminated
in number and place.

15. The Sun is the greatest of the Gods in Heaven, to whom all the heavenly
Gods give place, as to a King and Potentate; and yet he being such a one,
greater than the Earth or the Sea, is content to suffer infinite lesser Stars
to walk and move above himself: whom does he fear the while, O Son?

16. Every one of these Stars that are in Heaven, do not make the like, or an
equal course; who is it that has prescribed unto every one, the manner and
the greatness of their course?

17. This Bear that turns round about it own self, and carries round the whole
World with her, who possessed and made such an Instrument?

18. Who has set the bounds to the Sea? who has established the Earth? for
there is some Body, O Tat, that is the Maker and Lord of these things.

19. For it is impossible, O Son, that either place, or number, or measure,
should be observed without a Maker.

20. For no order can be made by disorder or disproportion.

21. I would it were possible for thee, O my Son, to have wings, and to fly
into the Air, and being taken up in the midst, between Heaven and Earth, to see
the stability of the Earth the fluidnesse of the Sea, the courses of the
Rivers, the largeness of the Air, the sharpness or swiftness of the Fire,
the motion of the Stars, and the speediness of the Heaven, by which it goes
round about all these.

22. O Son, what a happy sight it were, at one instant, to see all these; that
which is unmovable moved, and that which is hidden appear and be manifest?

23. And if thou will see and behold this Workman, even by mortal things that
are upon Earth, and in the deep, consider, O Son, how Man is made and framed in
the Womb; and examine diligently the skill, and cunning of the Workman, and
learn who it was that wrought and fashioned the beautiful and Divine shape of
Man; who circumscribed and marked out his eyes? who bored his nostrils and
ears? who opened his mouth, who stretched out and tied together his sinews? who
channelled the veins? who hardened and made strong the bones? who clothed the
flesh with skin? who divided the fingers and the joints? who flatted, and made
broad the soals of the feet? who dug the pores? who stretched out the
spleen? who made the Heart like a Pyramid? who made the Liver broad? who made
the Lights spungie, and full of holes? who made the belly large and capacious?
who set to outward view, the more honorable parts, and hid the filthy ones?

24. See how many Arts in one Matter, and how many Works in one Superscription,
and all exceedingly beautiful, and all done in measure, and yet all differing.

25. Who has made all these things? what Mother? what Father? save only God
that is not manifest? that made all things by his own Will.

26. And no man says that a statue or an image is made without a Carver or a
Painter, and was this workmanship made without a Workman? O great Blindness O
great Impiety, O great Ignorance.

27. Never, O Son Tat, can thou deprive the Workmanship of the Workman,
rather it is the best Name of all the Names of God, to call him the Father of
all, for so he is alone; and this is his work to be the Father.

28. And if thou will force me to say any thing more boldly, It is his Essence
to be pregnant, or great with all things, and to make them.

29. And as without a Maker, it is impossible that any thing should be made; so
it is that he should not always be, and always be making all things in Heaven,
in the Air, in the Earth, in the Deep, in the whole World, and in every part of
the whole, that is, or that is not.

30. For there is nothing in the whole World, that is not himself; both the
things that are, and the things that are not.

31. For the things that are, he has made manifest; and the things that are
not, he has hid in himself.

32. This is God that is better then any name; this is he that is secret; this
is he that is most manifest; this is he that is to be seen by the Mind; this
is he that is visible to the eye; this is he that has no body; and this is he
that has many bodies, rather there is nothing of any body, which is not He.

33. For he alone is all things.

34. And for this cause he has all Names, because he is the One Father; and
therefore he has no Name, because he is the Father of all.

35. Who therefore can bless thee, or give thanks for thee, or to thee?

36. Which way shall I look, when I praise thee: upward? downward? outward?
inward?

37. For about thee there is no manner, nor place, nor any thing else of all
things that are.

38. But all things are in thee; all things from thee, thou give all things,
and take nothing; for thou have all things, and there is nothing, that thou
have not.

39. When shall I praise thee, O Father; for it is neither possible to
comprehend thy hour, nor thy time?

40. For what shall I praise thee? for what thou have made, or for whatthou
have not made? for those things thou have manifested, orfor those things thou
have hidden?

41. Wherefore shall I praise thee? as being of my self, or having any thing of
mine own, or rather being another?

42. For thou art what I am, thou art what Ido, thou art what I say.

43. Thou art all things, and there is nothing else thou art not.

44. Thou art thou, all that is made, and all that is not made.

45. The Mind that understands.

46. The Father that makes and frames.

47. The Good that works.

48. The Good that does all things.

49. Of the Matter, the most subtle and slender part is Air, of the Air the
Soul, of the Soul the Mind, of the Mind God.

The End of the Fifth Book.
THE Sixth Book That in God alone is good.
GOod, O Asclepius, is in nothing but in God alone; or rather God himself is
the Good always.

2. And if it be so, then must he be an Essence or Substance, void of all
motion and generation; but nothing is void or empty of him.

3. And this Essence has about or in himself a Stable, and firm Operation,
wanting nothing, most full, and giving abundantly.

4. One thing is the Beginning of all things, for it gives all things; and
when I name the Good, I mean that which is altogether and always Good.

5. This is present to none, but God alone; for he wants nothing, that he
should desire to have it, nor can any thing be taken from him; the loss
whereof may grieve him; for sorrow is a part of evilnesse.

6. Nothing is stronger then he, that he should be opposed by it; nor nothing
equal to him, that he should be in love with it; nothing unheard of to be angry
with, nothing wiser to be envious at.

7. And none of these being in his Essence, what remains, but only the Good?

8. For as in this, being such an Essence, there is none of the evils; so in
none of the other things shall the Good be found.

9. For in all other things, are all other things, as well in the small as the
great, and as well in the particulars, as in this living Creature; the greater,
and mightiest of all.

10. For all things that are made or generated, are full of Passion, Generation
it self being a Passion; and where Passion is, there is not the Good; where the
Good is, there is no Passion; where it is day, it is not night, and where it is
night, it is not day.

11. Wherefore it is impossible, that in Generation should be the Good, but
only in that which is not generated or made.

12. Yet as the Participation of all things is in the Matter bound, so also of
that which is Good. After this manner is the World good, as it makes all
things, and in the part of making or doing ((...)) it is Good, but in all other
things not Good.

13. For it is passible, and moveable, and the Maker of passible things.

14. In man also the Good is ordered (or takes denomination) in comparison of
that which is evil; for that which is not very evil, is here Good; and that
which is here called Good, is the least particle, or proportion of evil.

15. It is impossible therefore, that the Good should be here pure from Evil,
for here the Good grows Evil, and growing Evil, it does not still abide Good,
and not abiding Good, it becomes evil.

16. Therefore in God alone is the Good, or rather God is the Good.

17. Therefore, O Asclepius, there is nothing in men (or among men) but the
name of Good, the thing it self is not, for it is impossible; for a material
Body receives (or comprehends) is not, as being on every side encompassed,
and coarcted with evilnesse, and labors, and griefs, and desires, and wrath,
and deceipts, and foolish opinions.

18. And in that which is the worst of all, Asclepius, every one of the
forenamed things, is here believed to be the greatest good, especially that
supreme mischief (...) the pleasures of the Belly, and the ringleader of all
evils: Error is here the absence of the Good.

19. And I give thanks un^ God, that concerning the Knowledge of God, put this
assurance in my mind, that it is impossible it should be in the World.

20. For the World is the fullness of evilnesse; but God is the fullness of
Good, or Good of God.

21. For the eminencies of all appearing Beauty, are in the Essence more pure,
and more sincere, and peradventure they are also the Essences of it.

22. For we must be bold to say, Asclepius, That the Essence of God, if he have
an Essence, is (...) that which is fair or beautiful; but no good is
comprehended in this World.

23. For all things that are subject to the eye, are Idols, and as it were
shadows; but those things that are not subject to the eye, are ever; especially
the Essence of the Fair and the Good.

24. And as the eye cannot see God, so neither the Fair, and the Good.

25. For these are the parts of God that partake the Nature of the whole,
proper, and familiar unto him alone, inseparable, most lovely, whereof either
God is enamoured, or they are enamoured of God.

26. If thou can understand God, thou shall understand the Fair, and the God,
which is most shining, and enlightening, and most enlightened by God.

27. For that Beauty is above comparison, and that Good is inimitable, as God
himself.

28. As therefore thou understandest God, so understand the Fair, and the Good,
for these are incommunicable to any other living Creatures, because they are
inseparable from God.

29. If thou seek concerning God, thou seek or ask also of the Fair; for
there is one way that leads to the same thing, that is, Piety* with Knowledge.

30. Wherefore, they that are ignorant, and go not in the way of Piety, dare
call Man Fair and Good, never seeing so much as in a dream, what Good is; but
being infolded and wrapped upon all evil and believing that the evil is the
Good, they by that means, both use it unsatiably, and are afraid to be
deprived of it; and therefore they strive by all possible means, that they may
not only have it, but also increase it.

31. Such O Asclepius, are Good and Fair things of men, which we can neither
love nor hate; for this is the hardest thing of all, that we have need of them,
and cannot live without them.

The End of the Sixth Book.
THE Seventh Book. His secret Sermon in the Mount of Regeneration, and the
Profession of Silence.
To his Son Tat.
TAt. In the general Speeches, O Father, discoursing of the Divinity, thou
speak aenigmatically, and did not clearly reveal thy self, saying, That no
man can be saved before Regeneration.

2. And when I did humbly entreat thee, at the going up to the Mountain, after
thou had discoursed unto me, having a great desire to learn this Argument of
Regeneration; because among all the rest, I am ignorant only of this thou
toldst me thou would impart it unto me, when I would estrange my self from
the World: whereupon I made my self ready, and have vindicated the
understanding that is in me, from the deceit of the World.

3. Now then fulfill my defects, and, as thou said, instruct me of
Regeneration, either by word of mouth, or secretly; for I know not, O
Trismegistus, of what Substance, or what Womb, or what Seed a Man is thus born.

4. Herm. O Son, this Wisdom is to be understood in silence, and the Seed is
the true Good.

5. Tat. Who sows it, O Father? for I am utterly ignorant, and doubtful.

6. Herm. The Will of God, O Son.

7. And what manner of Man is he, that is thus born? for in this point, I am
clean deprived of the Essence that understands in me.

8. Herm. The Son of God will be another, God made the Universe, that in every
thing consists of all powers.

9. Tat. Thou tellest me a Riddle, Father, and do not speak as a Father to
his Son.

10. Herm. Son, things of this kind are not taught; but are by God, when he
pleases, brought to rememberance.

11. Tat. Thou speak of things strained, or far fetched, and impossible,
Father; and therefore I will directly contradict them;

12. Herm. Will thou prove a stranger, Son, to thy Fathers kind?

13. Do not envy me, Father, or pardon me, I am thy Natural Son; discourse
unto me the manner of Regeneration.

14. Herm. What shall I say, O my Son? I have nothing to say more than this,
That I see in my self an unfeigned sight or spectacle, made by the mercy of God;
and I am gone out of my self, into an immortal body, and am not now what I was
before, but was begotten in Mind.

15. This thing is not taught, nor is it to be seen in this formed Element; for
which the first compounded form was neglected by me, and that I am now
separated from it; for I have both the touch, and the measure of it, yet am I
now estranged from them.

16. Thou see, O Son, with thine eyes; but though thou look never so
stedfasly upon me, with the Body, and bodily sight, thou can not see nor
understand what I am now.

17. Tat. Thou have driven me, O Father, into no small fury and distraction of
mind, for I do not now see my self.

18. Herm. I would, O Son, that thou also were gone out of thy self, like them
that dream in their sleep.

19. Tat. Then tell me this, who is the Author and Maker of Regeneration?

20. Herm. The Child of God, one Man by the Will of God.

21. Tat. Now, O Father, thou have put me to silence for ever, and all my
former thoughts have quite left, and forsaken me; for I see the greatness, and
shape of all things here below, and nothing but falsehood in them all.

22. And sithence this mortal Form is daily changed, and turned by time into
increase, and diminution, as being falsehood: What therefore is true, O
Trismegistus?

23. Trism. That, O Son, which is not troubled, nor bounded; nor colored not
figured, not changed; that which is naked, bright, comprehensible only of it
self, unalterable, unbodily.

24. Tat. Now I am mad, indeed Father; for when I thought me to have been made
a wise man by thee, with these thoughts thou have quite dulled all my senses.

25. Herm. Yet is it so, as I say, O Son, He that looks only upon that which
is carried upward as Fire, that which is carried downward as Earth, that which
is moist as Water, and that which blows, or is subject to blast as Air; how
can he sensibly understand, that which is neither hard, nor moist, nor
tangible, nor perspicuous, seeing it is only understood in power, and
operation: But I beseech and pray to the Mind, which alone can understand the
Generation, which is in God.

26. Tat. Then am I, O Father, utterly unable to do it.

27. Herm. God forbid, Son, rather draw or pull him unto thee (or study to know
him) and he will come, be but willing, and it shall be done: quiet (or make
idle) the Senses of the Body, purging thy self from unreasonable brutish
torments of Matter.

28. Tat. Have I any revengers or tormentours in my self, Father?

29. Herm. Yea, and those, not a few, but many, and fearful ones.

30. Tat. I do not know them, Father.

31. Herm. One Torment, Son, is Ignorance; a second ^orrow; a third
Intemperance; a fourth Concupiscence; a fifth, Injustice; a sixth,
Co^etousnesse; a seventh, Deceit; an eighth, ^ndie; a ninth, Fraud, or Guile; a
tenth, Wrath; an eleventh, Ras^nesse; a twelfth, Maliciousness.

32. They are in number twelve, and under these many more; some of which through
the prison of the body, do force the inwardly placed Man to suffer sensibly.

33. And they do not suddenly, or easily depart from him that has obtained
mercy of God, and herein consists, both the manner, and the reason of
Regeneration.

34. For the rest, O Son, hold thy pe^ce, and praise God in silence, and by
that means, the mercy of God will not cease, or be wanting unto us.

35. Therefore rejoice, my Son, from hence forward, being purged by the powers
of God, to the Knowledge of the Truth.

36. For the Revelation of God is come to us; and when that came, all Ignorance
was cast out.

37. The knowledge of Joy is come unto us; and when that comes, Sorrow shall
fly away to them that are capable of it.

38. I call unto Joy, the power of Temperance, a power who^e Virtue is most
sweet: Let us take her unto our selves, O Son, most willingly; for how at her
coming has she put away Intemperance?

39. Now I call the fourth, Continence, the power which is over Concupiscence.
This, O Son, is the flable and firm foundation of Justice.

40. For see how without labor, she has chased away Injustice; and we are
justified, O Son, when Injustice is away.

41. The sixth Virtue which comes into us, I call Communion, which is against
Covetousness.

42. And when that (Covetousness) is gone, I call Truth; and when she comes,
Error and Deceit ^nisheth.

43. See, O Son, how the Good is fulfilled by the access of Truth; for by this
means, Envy is gone from us; for Truth is accompanied with the Good, together
also with Life and Light.

44. And there came no more any torment of Darkness, but being overcome, they
all fled away suddenly, and tumultu^rily.

45. Thou have understood, O Son, the manner of Regeneration; for upon the
coming of these Ten, the Intellectual Generation is perfected, and then it
drives away the Twelve; and we have seen it in the Generation it self.

46. Whosoever therefore has of Mercy obtained this Generation, which is
according to God, he leaving all bodily sense, knows himself to consist of
divine things, and rejoices, being made by God stable and immutable.

47. Tat. O Father, I conceive and understand, not by the sight of mine eyes,
but by the Intellectual Operation, which is by the Powers. I am in Heaven, in
the Earth, in the Water, in the Air; I am in living Creatures, in Plants, in
the Womb, every where.

48. Yet tell me further, this one thing, How are the torments of Darkness,
being in in number Twelve, driven away and expelled by the Ten powers? What is
the manner of it, Trismegistus?

49. Herm. This Tabernacle, O Son, consists of the Zodiacall Circle; and this
consisting of twelve numbers, the Idea of one; but all formed Nature admits of
diverse Conjugations to the deceiving of Man.

50. And though they be different in themselves, yet are they united in
practice (as for example, Rashness is inseparable from Anger) and they are
also indeterminate: Therefore with good Reason, do they make their departure,
being driven away, by the Ten powers; that is to say, By the dead.

51. For the number of Ten, O Son, is the Begetter of Souls. And there Life and
Light are united, where the number of Unity is born of the Spirit.

52. Therefore according to Reason, Unity has the number of Ten, and the
number of Ten has Unity.

53. Tat. O Father, I now see the Universe, and my self in the Mind.

54. Herm. This is Regeneration, O Son, that we should not any longer fix our
imagination upon this Body, subject to the three dimensions, according to this
Speech which we have now commented, That we may not at all calumniate the
Universe:

55. Tat. Tell me, O Father, This Body that consists of Powers, shall it ever
admit of any Dissolution?

56. Herm. Good words Son, and speak not things impossible; for so thou shall
sin, and the eye of thy mind grow wicked.

57. The sensible Body of Nature is far from the Essential Generation; for
that is subject to Dissolution, but this not; and that is mortal, but this
immortal, Do thou not know that thou art born a God, and the Son of the One,
as I am?

58. Tat. How fain would I, O Father, hear that praise given by a Hymn, which
thou said thou heardest from the Powers, when I was in the Ottonary.

59. Herm. As Pimander said by way of Oracle to the Ottonary: Thou do well, O
Son to desire the Solution of the Tabernacle, for thou art purified.

60. Pimander; the Mind of absolute Power and Authority, has delivered no
more unto me, then those that are written; knowing that of my self, I can
understand all things, and hear, and see what I will. And he commanded me to do
those things that are good; and therefore all the Powers that are in me sing.

61. Tat. I would hear thee, O Father, and understand these things.

62. Herm. Be quiet, O Son, and now hearken to that harmonious blessing and
thanksgiving; the hymn of Regeneration, which I did not determine to have
spoken of so plainly, but to thy self in the end of all.

63. Wherefore this is not taught, but hid in silence.

64. So then, O Son, do thou, standing in the open Air, worship, looking to the
North Wind, about the going down of the Sun; and to the South, when the Sun
arises: And now keep silence Son.

The Secret Song. The Holy Speech.
65. LEt all the Nature of the world entertain the hearing of this Hymn.

66. Be opened O Earth, and let all the Treasure of the Rain be opened.

67. You Trees tremble not, for I will sing, and praise the Lord of the
Creation, and the All and the One.

68. Be opened you Heavens; ye Winds stand still, and let the immortal Circle
of God, receive these words.

69. For I will sing, and praise him that created all things, that fixed the
Earth, and hung up the Heavens, and commanded the sweet Water to come out of
the Ocean, into all the World inhabited, and not-inhabited, to the use, and
nourishment of all things, or men.

70. That commanded the fire to shine for every action, both to Gods, and Men.

71. Let us altogether give him blessing, which rides upon the Heavens, the
Creator of all Nature.

72. This is he that is the Eye of the Mind, and Will accept the praise of my
Powers.

73. O all ye Powers that are in me, praise the One, and the All.

74. Sing together with my Will, all you Powers that are in me.

75. O Holy Knowledge, being enlightened by thee, I magnify the intelligible
Light, and rejoice in the Joy of the Mind.

76. All my Powers sing praise with me, and thou my Continence, sing praise my
Righteousness by me; praise that which is righteous.

77. O Communion which is in me, praise the All.

78. By me the Truth sings praise to the Truth, the Good praises the Good.

79. O Life, O Light from us, unto you, comes this praise and thankgiving.

80. I give thanks unto thee, O Father, the operation or act of my Powers.

81. I give thanks unto thee, O God, the Power of my operations.

82. By me thy Word sings praise unto thee, receive by me this reasonable, (or
verbal,) Sacrifice in words.

83. The powers that are in me, cry the'e things, they praise the All, they
fulfill thy Will; thy Will and Counsel is from thee unto thee.

84. O All, receive a reasonable Sacrifice from all things.

85. O Life, save all that is in us; O Light enlighten, O God the Spirit; for
the Mind guides (or seedeth) the Word: O Spirit bearing Workman.

86. Thou art God, thy Man cries these things unto thee through, by the Fire,
by the Air, by the Earth, by the Water, by the Spirit, by thy Creatures.

87. From eternity I have found (means to) bless and praise thee, and I have
what I seek; for I rest in thy Will.

88. Tat. O Father, I see thou have sung this Song of praise and blessing, with
thy whole Will; and therefore have I put and placed it in my World.

89. Herm. Say, in thy Intelligible World, O Son.

90. Tat. I do mean in my Intelligible World; for by the Hymn and Song of
praise, my Mind is enlightened; and gladly would I send from my Understanding,
a Thanksgiving unto God.

91. Herm. Not rashly, O Son.

92. Tat. In my Mind, O Father.

93. Herm. Those things that I see and contemplate, I infuse into thee; and
therefore say, thou Son Tat, the Author of thy succeeding Generations, I send
unto God these reasonable Sacrifices.

94. O God thou art the Father, thou art the Lord, thou art the Mind, accept
these reasonable Sacrifices which thou requirest of me.

95. For all things are done as the Mind wills.

96. Thou, O Son, send this acceptable Sacrifice to God the Father of all
things; but propound it also, O Son, by word.

97. Tat. I thank thee, Father, thou have advised and instructed me thus to
give praise and thanks.

98. Herm. I am glad, O Son, to see the Truth bring forth the Fruits of Good
things, and such immortal Branches.

99. And learn this of me* Above all other Virtues entertain Silence, and
impart unto no man, O Son, the tradition of Regeneration, lest we be reputed
Calumniators: For we both have now sufficiently meditated, I in speaking, thou
in hearing. And now thou do intellectually know thy self, and our Father.

The End of the Seventh Book.
THE Eighth Book OF Hermes Trismegistus. That the greatest Evil in Man, is, The
not knowing God.
VVHither are you carried, O men, drunkenwith drinking up the strong Wine of
Ignorance? which seeing you cannot bear: why do you not vomit it up again?

2. Stand, and be sober, and look up again with the eyes of your heart; and if
you cannot all do so, yet do as many as you can.

3. For the malice of Ignorance surroundeth all the Earth, and corrupts the
Soul, shut up in the Body, not suffering it to arrive at the Havens of
Salvation.

4. Suffer not your selves to be carried with the great stream, but stem the
tide, you that can lay hold of the Haven of Safety, and make your full course
toward it.

5. Seek one that may lead you by the hand, and conduct you to the door of
Truth, and Knowledge, where the clear Light is, that is pure from Darkness,
where there is not one drunken, but all are sober, and in their heart look up
to him, whose pleasure it is to be seen.

6. For he cannot be heard with ears; nor seen with eyes, nor expressed in
words, but only in mind and heart.

7. But first thou must tear apeeces, and break through the garment thou
wearest; the web of Ignorance, the foundation of all Mischief, the bond of
Corruption, the dark Coverture, the living Death, the sensible Carcass, the
Sepulcher, carried about with us, the domestical Thief, which in what he loves
us, hates us, envies us.

8. Such is the hurtful Apparel, wherewith thou art clothed, which draws and
pulls thee downward by its own self; lest looking up, and seeing the beauty of
Truth, and the Good that is reposed therein, thou should hate the wickedness
of this garment, and understand the traps and ambushes which it has laid for
thee.

9. Therefore does it labor to make good those things that seem, and are by
the Senses, judged and determined; and the things that are truly, it hides, and
envellopeth in much matter, filling what it presents unto thee, with hateful
pleasure, that thou can neither hear what thou should hear, nor see what
thou should see.

The End of the eighth Book.
THE Ninth Book OF Hermes Trismegistus. A Universal Sermon to Asclepius
HErm. All that is moved, O Asclepius, is it not moved in some thing, and by
some thing?

2. Asclep. Yes indeed.

3. Herm. Must not that, in which a thing is moved, of necessity be greater
than the thing that is moved?

4. Of necessity.

5. And that which moves, is it not stronger than thatwhich is moved?

6. Asclep. It is stronger.

7. Herm. That in which a thing is moved, must it not needs have a Nature
contrary to that of the thing that is moved?

8. Asclep. It must needs.

9. Herm. Is not this great World a Body, than which there is no greater?

10. Asclep. Yes, confessedly?

11. Herm. And is it not solid, as filled with many great Bodies, and indeed,
with all the Bodies that are?

12. Asclep. It is so.

13. Herm. And is not the World a Body, and a Body that is moved?

14. Asclep. It is.

15. Herm. Then what a kind of place must it be, wherein it is moved, and of
what Nature? Must it not be much bigger, that it may receive the continuity of
Motion? and lest that which is moved, should for want of room be stayed, and
hindered in the Motion?

16. Asclep. It must needs be an ^immense thing, Trismegistus; but of what
Nature?

17. Herm. Of a contrary Nature, O Asclepius; but is not the Nature of things
unbodily, contrary to a Body?

18. Asclep. Confessedly.

19. Herm. Therefore the place is unbodily; but that which is unbodily, is
either some Divine thing, or God himself. And by some thing Divine, I do not
mean that which was made or begotten.

20. If therefore it be Divine, it is an Essence or Substance; but if it be
God, it is above Essence; but he is otherwise intelligible.

21: For the first, God is intelligible, not to himself, but to us; for that
which is intelligible, is subject to that which understands by Sense.

22. Therefore God is not intelligible to himself; for not being any other
thing from that which is understood, he cannot be understood by himself.

23. But he is another thing from us; and therefore is he understood by us.

24. If therefore Place be intelligible, it is not Place, but God; but if God
be intelligible, he is intelligible not as Place, but as a capable Operation.

25. Now every thing that is moved, is moved, not in or by that which is moved,
but in that which stands or rests; and that which moves, stands or
rests: for it is impossible it should be moved with it.

26. Asclep. How then, O Trismegistus, are those things that are here, moved
with the things that are moved? for thou say, that the Spheres that wander
are moved by the Sphere that wanders not.

27. Herm. That, O Asclepius, is not a moving together, but a countermotion;
for they are not moved after a like manner, but contrary one to the other: And
contrariety has a standing resistance of motion, for the (...), or resistance,
is a staying of motion.

28. Therefore the wandering Spheres being moved contrarily to that Sphere
which wandereth not, shall have one from another contrariety standing of it
self.

29. For this Bear which thou see neither rise nor go down, but turning
always about the same; do thou think it moves or stands still?

30. Asclep. I think it moves, Trismegistus.

31. What motion, O Asclepius?

32. Asclep. A motion that is always carried about the same.

33. But the Circulation which is about the same, and the motion about the
same, are both hidden by Station; for that which is about the same, forbids
that which is above the same, if it stand to that which is about the same.

34. And so the contrary motion stands fast always, being always established
by the contrariety.

35. But I will give thee concerning this matter, an earthly example, that may
be seen with eyes.

36. Look upon any of these living Creatures upon Earth, as Man for example,
and see him swimming; for as the Water is carried one way, the reluctation or
resistance of his feet and hands is made a station to the man, that he should
not be carried with the Water, not sink underneath it.

37. Asclep. Thou have laid down a very clear example, Trismegistus.

38. Herm. Therefore every motion is in station, and is moved of station.

39. The motion then of the World, and of every material living thing,
happens not to be done by those things that are without the World; but by
those things within it, a Soul, or Spirit, or some other unbodily thing, to
those things which are without it.

40. For an inanimated Body does not now, much less a Body if it be wholly
inanimate.

41. Asclep. What meanest thou by this, O Trismegistus? Wood and Stones, and
all other inanimate things, are they not moving Bodies?

42. Herm. By no means, O Asclepius, for that within the Body which moves the
inanimate thing, is not the Body; that moves both as well the Body of that
which bears, as the Body of that which is born; for one dead or inanimate
thing, cannot move another; that which moves, must needs be alive if it move.

43: Thou see therefore how the Soul is surcharged, when it carries two
Bodies.

44. And now it is manifest, that the things that are moved, are moved in
something, and by something.

45. Asclep. The things that are moved, O Trismegistus, must needs be moved in
that which is void or empty, vacuum, (...).

46. Be advised, O Asclepius, for of all the things that are, there is nothing
empty, only that which is not, is empty and a stranger to existence or being.

47. But that which is, could not be, if it were not full of existence; for
that which is in being or existence, can never be made empty.

48. Asclep. Are there not therefore some things that are empty, O
Trismegistus, as an empty Barrel, an empty Hogshead, an empty Well, an empty
Wine Press, and many such like?

49. Herm. O the grossnesse of thy Error, O Asclepius, those things that are
most full and replenished, do thou account them void and empty?

50. Aclep. What may be thy meaning, Trismegistus?

51. Herm. Is not the Air a^ a Body?

52. Asclep. It is a Body.

53. Herm. Why then this Body, does it not pass through all things that are?
and passing through them, fill them? and that Body does it not consist of the
mixture of the four? therefore all those things which thou call empty, are
full of Air.

54. Therefore those things that thou call empty, thou ought to call them
hollow, not empty; for they exist and are full of Air and Spirit.

55. Asclep. This reason is beyond all contradiction, O Trismegistus: but what
shall we call the Place, in which the whole Universe is moved?

56. Herm. Call it incorporeall, O Asclepius.

57. Asclep. What is that incorporeall or unbodily?

58. Herm. The mind and Reason, the whole, wholly comprehending it self, free
from all Body, undeceiveable invisible, impassible from a Body it self,
standing fast in it self, capable of all things, and that savor of the things
that are.

59. Whereof the God, the Truth, the Archetypall Light, the Archetype of the
Soul, are as it were Beams.

60. Asclep. Why then, what is God?

61. Herm. That which is none of these things, yetis, and is the cause of Being
to all, and every one of the things that are; for he left nothing destitute of
Being.

62. And all things are made of things that are, and not of things that are
not; for the things that are not, have not the nature to be able to be made;
and again, the things that are, have not the nature never to be, or not to be
at all.

63. Asclep. What do thou then say at lenghth, that God is?

64. Herm. God is not a Mind, but the cause that the Mind is; not a Spirit,
but the Cause that the Spirit is; not Light, but the Cause that Light is.

65. Therefore we must worship God by these two Appellations, which are proper
to him alone, and to no other.

66. For neither of all the other, which are called Gods, nor of Men, nor
Demons, or Angels, can any one be, though never so little, good, save only God
alone.

67. And this He is, and nothing else; but all other things are separable from
the nature of Good.

68. For the Body and the Soul have no place that is capable of, or can contain
the Good.

69. For the greatness of Good, is as great as the Existence of all things,
that are both bodily and unbodily, both sensible and intelligible.

70. This is the Good, even God.

71. See therefore that thou do not at any time, call ought else Good; for so
thou shall be impious: or any else God, but only the Good; for so thou shall
again be impious.

72. In Word it is often said by all men the Good, but all men do not
understand what it is; but through Ignorance they call both the Gods, and some
men Good, that can never either be or be made so.

73. Therefore all the other Gods are honored with the title and appellation of
God, but God is the Good, not according to Heaven, but Nature.

74. For there is one Nature of God, even the Good, and one kind of them both,
from whence all are kinds.

75. For he that is good, is the giver of all things, and takes nothing; and
therefore God gives all things, and receives nothing.

76. The other title and appellation, is the Father, because of his making all
things; for it is the part of a Father to make.

77. Therefore it has been the greatest and most Religious care in this life,
to them that are wise, and well-minded, to beget children.

78. As likewise, it is the greatest misfortune and impiety, for any to be
separated from men, without children; and this man is punished after death by
the Demons, and the punishment is this, To have the Soul of this childlesse
man, adjudged and condemned, to a Body that neither has the nature of a man,
nor of a woman, which is an accursed thing under the Sun.

79. Therefore, O Asclepius, never congratulate any man that is childlesse; but
on the contrary, pity his misfortune, knowing wha t punishment abides, and is
prepared for him.

80. Let so many, and such manner of things, O Asclepius, be said as a certain
precognition of all things in Nature.

The End of the Ninth Book.
THE Tenth Book OF Hermes Trismegistus. The Mind to Hermes.
FOrbear thy Speech, O Hermes Trismegistus, and call to mind to those things
that are said: but I will not delay to speak what comes into my mind; sithence
many men have spoken many things, and those very different, concerning the
Universe, and Good; but I have not learned the Truth.

2. Therefore, the Lord make it plain to me in this point; for I will believe
thee only, for the manifestation of these things.

3. Then said the Mind how the case stands.

4. God and All.

5. God, Eternity, the World, Time, Generation.

6. God made Eternity, Eternity the World, the World Time, and Time Generation.

7. Of God, as it were the Substance, is the God, the Fair Blessedness, Wisdom.

8. Of Eternity, Identity, or Selfnesse,

9. Of the World, Order.

10. Of Time, Change.

11. Of Generation, Life and Death.

12. But the Operation of God, is Mind and Soul.

13. Of Eternity, Permanence or Long-lasting, and Immortality.

14. Of the World, Restitution, and Decay, or Destruction.

15. Of Time, Augmentation, and Diminution.

16. And of Generation qualities.

17. Therefore Eternity is in God.

18. The World in Eternity.

19. Time in the World.

20. And Generation in Time.

21. And Eternity stands about God.

22. The World is moved in Eternity.

23. Time is determined in the World.

24. Generation is done in Time.

25. Therefore the Spring and Fountain of all things, is God.

26. The Substance Eternity.

27. The Matter is the World.

28. The Power of God is Eternity.

29. And the Work of Eternity, is the World not yet made, and yet ever made by
Eternity.

30. Therefore shall nothing be at any time destroyed, for Eternity is
incorruptible.

31. Neither can any thing perish, or be destroyed in the World, the World
being contained, and embraced by eternity.

32. But what is the Wisdom of God? Even the G^d, and the Fair, and
Blessedness, and every Virtue, and Eternity.

33. Eternity therefore put into the Matter Immortality and Everlastingnesse;
for the Generation of that depends upon Eternity, even as Eternity does of God.

34. For Generation and Time, in Heaven, and in Earth, are of a double nature;
in Heaven they are unchangeable, and incorruptible; but on Earth they are
changeable, and corruptible.

35. And the Soul of Eternity, is God; and the Soul of the World, Eternity; and
of the Earth, Heaven.

36. God is in the Mind, the Mind in the Soul, the Soul in the Matter, all
things by eternity.

37. All this Universal Body, in which are all Bodies is full of Soul, the
Soul full of Mind, the Mind full of God.

38. For within he fills them, and without he contains them, quickening the
Universe.

39. Without he quickens this perfect living thing the World, and within all
living Creatures.

40. And above in Heaven he abides in Identity or Selfnesse, but below upon
Earth he changes Generation.

41. Eternity comprehends the World, either by Necessity, or Providence, or
Nature.

42. And if any man shall think any other thing, it is God that actuateth, or
operateth this All.

43. But the operation or Act of God, is Power insuperable, to which none may
compare any thing, either Humane or Divine.

44. Therefore; O Hermes; think none of these things below, or the things
above, in any wise like unto God; for if thou do, thou errest from the Truth,

45. For nothing can be like the unlike, and only, and One; nor may thou
think, that he has given of his Power to any other thing.

46. For who after him can make any thing, either of Life, or Immortality; of
Change, or of Quality? and himself, what other thing should he make?

47. For God is not idle, for then all things would be idle; for all things are
full of God.

48. But there is not any where in the World, such a thing as Idleness; for
Idleness is a name that implies a thing void or empty, both of a Doer and a
thing done.

49. But all things must necessarily be made or done both always, and
according to the nature of every place.

50. For he that makes or does, is in all things, yet not fastened or
comprehended in any thing; nor making or doing one thing, but all things.

51. For being an active or operating Power, and sufficient of himself for the
things that are made, and the things that are made, are under him.

52. Look upon, through me, the World is subject to thy sight, and understand
exactly the Beauty thereof.

53. A Body immarcescible, than the which, there is nothing more ancient, yet
always vigorous and young.

54. See also the seven Worlds set over us, adorned with an everlasting Order,
and filling Eternity, with a different course.

55. For all things are full of Light, but the Fire is no where.

56. For the friendship, and commixture of contraries and unlike, became Light
shining from the Act or Operation of God, the Father of all Good, the Prince of
all Order, and the Ruler of the Seven Worlds.

57. Look also upon the Moon, the Forerunner of them all, the Instrument of
Nature, and which changes the Matter here below.

58. Behold the Earth, the middle of the whole, the firm and stable Foundation
of the Fair World, the Feeder and Nurse of Earthly things.

59. Consider moreover, how great the multitude is of immortal living things,
and of mortal ones also; and see the Moon going about in the midst of both, to
wit, of things immortal and mortal.

60. But all things are full of Soul, and all things are properly moved by it;
some things about the Heaven, and some things about the Earth, and neither of
those on the right hand to the lest, nor those on the left hand to the right,
nor those things that are above, downward; nor those things that are below,
upwards.

61. And that all these things are made, O beloved Hermes, thou need not
learn or me.

62. For they are Bodies, and have a Soul, and are moved.

63. And that all these should come together into one it is impossible without
some thing, to gather them together.

64. Therefore there must be some such ones, and he altogether One.

65. For seeing that the motions are diverse, and many, and the Bodies not
alike, and yet one ordered swiftness among them all: It is impossible there
should be two or more Makers.

66. For one order is not kept by many.

67. But in the weaker there would be jealousy of the stronger, and thence
also Contentions.

68. And if there were one Maker of mutable and mortal living wights, he would
desire also to make immortal ones; as he that were the Maker of immortal ones,
would do to make mortal.

69. Moreover also, if there were two, the Matter being one, who should be
chief, or have the disposing of the facture?

70. Or if both of them, which of them the greater part?

71. But thinks thus that every living Body has its consistence of Matter and
Soul; and of that which is immortal, and that which is mortal, and
unreasonable.

72. For all living Bodies have a Soul; and those things that are not living,
are only matter by it self.

73. And the Soul likewise of it self drawing near her Maker, is the cause of
Life, and Being, and being the cause of Life, is after a manner, the cause of
immortal things.

74. How then are mortal wights, other from immortal?

75. Or how cannot he make living wights that causes immortal things, and
immortality?

76. That there is some Body that does these things, it is apparent, and that
he is also one, it is most manifest.

77. For there is one Soul, one Life, and one Matter.

78. Who is this? who can it be, other than the One God?

79. For whom e^e can it benefit, to make living things, save only God alone?

80. There is therefore one God.

81. For it is a ridiculous thing to confess the World to be one, one Sun, one
Moon, one Divinity; and yet to have I know not how many gods.

82. He therefore being One, does all things in many things.

83. And what great thing is it for God, to make Life, and Soul, and
Immortality, and Change, when thy self do so many things.

84. For thou both see, speak, and hear; smellest, tastest, and
touchest; walk, understandest, and breathest.

85. And it is not one that sees, and another that hears, and another that
speaks, and another that touches, and another that smells, and another
that walks, and another that understands, and another that breaths; but
One that does all these things.

86. Yet neither can these things possibly be without God.

87. For as thou, if thou should cease from doing these things, were not a
living wight; so if God should cease from those, he were not (which is not
lawful to say) any longer God.

88. For if it be already demonstrated, that nothing can be idle or empty, how
much more may be affirmed of God?

89. For if there be any thing which he does not do, then is he (if it were
lawful to say so) imperfect.

90. Whereas seeing he is not idle, but perfect; certainly he does all things.

91. Now give thy self unto me, O Hermes, for a little while, thou shall the
more easily understand, that it is the necessary work of God, that all things
should be made or done, that are done, or were once done, or shall be done.

92. And this, O best Beloloved, is life.

93. And this is the Fair.

94. And this is the Good.

95. And this is God.

96. And if thou will understand this by work also, mark what happens to thy
self, when thou will generate.

97. And yet this is not like unto him; for he is not sensible of pleasure, for
neither has he any other Fellow-workman.

98. But being himself the only Workman, he is always in the Work, himself
being that which he does or makes.

99. For all things, if they were separated from him, must needs fall and die,
as there being no life in them.

100. And again, if all things be living wights, both which are in Heaven, and
upon Earth; and that there be one Life in all things which is made by God, and
that is God, then certainly all things are made, or done by God.

101. Life is the union of the Mind, and the Soul.

102. But death is not the destruction of those things that were gathered
together, but a dissolving of the Union.

103. The Image therefore of God, is Eternity, of Eternity the World, of the
World the Sun, of the Sun Man.

104. But the people say, That changing is Death, because the Body is
dissolved, and the Life goes into that which appears not.

105. By this discourse, my dearest Hermes, I affirm as thou hear, That the
World is changed, because every day part thereof becomes invisible; but that it
is never dissolved.

106. And these are the Passions of the World, Revolutions, and Occultations;
and Revolution is a turning, but Occultation is Renovation.

107. And the world being all formed, has not the forms lying without it, but
it self changes in it self.

108. Seeing then the World is all formed, what must he be that made it? for
without form, he cannot be.

109. And if he be all formed, he will be kept like the World; but if he have
but one form; he shall be in this regard less then the World.

110. What do we then say that he is? we will not raise any doubts by our
speech; for nothing that is doubtful concerning God, is yet known.

111. He has therefore one Idea which is proper to him, which because it is
unbodily; is not subject to the sight, and yet shows all forms by the Bodies.

112. And do not wonder, if there be an incorruptible Idea.

113. For they are like the Margents of that Speech which is in writing; for
they seem to be high and swelling, but they are by nature smooth and even.

114. But understand well this that I say, more boldly, for it is more true: As
a man cannot live without life, so neither can God live, not doing good.

115. For this is, as it were, ^he Life and Motion of God, to move all things,
and quicken them.

116. But some of the things I have said, must have a particular explication:
Understand then what I say.

117. All things are in God, not as lying in a place; for Place is both a Body,
and unmovable, and those things that are there placed, have no motion.

118. For they lie otherwise in that which is unbodily, then in the fantasy,
or to appearance.

119. Consider him that contains all things, and understand, that nothing is
more capacious, then that which is incorporeall, nothing more swift; nothing
more powerful; but it is most capacious, most swift, and most strong.

120. And judge of this by thy self, command thy Soul to go into India, and
sooner then thou can bid it, it will be there.

121. Bid it likewise pass over the Ocean, and suddenly it will be there: Not
as passing from place to place, but suddenly it will be there.

122. Command it to fly into Heaven, and it will need no Wings, neither shall
any thing hinder it; not the fire of the Sun, not the Ether, nor the turning
of the Spheres, not the bodies of any of the other Stars, but cutting through
all, it will fly up to the last, and furthest Body.

123. And if thou will even break the whole, and see those things that are
without the World (if there be any thing without) thou may.

124. Behold how great power, how great swiftness thou have! Can thou do all
these things, and cannot God?

125. After this manner therefore contemplate God to have all the whole World
to himself, as it were all thoughts, or intellections.

126. If therefore thou will not equal thy self to God, thou can not
understand God.

127. For the like are intelligible by the like.

128. Increase thy self unto an immeasurable greatness, leaping beyond every
Body, and transcending all Time; become Eternity, and thou shall understand
God: If thou believe in thyself, that nothing is impossible, but accountest thy
self immortal, and that thou can understand all things, every Art every
Science, and the manner and custom of every living thing.

129. Become higher then all height, lower then all depths, comprehend in thy
self, the qualities of all the Creatures, of the Fire, the Water, the Dry, and
Moist; and conceive likewise, that thou can at once be every where in the
Sea, in the Earth.

130. Thou shall at once ununderstand thy self, not yet begotten in the Womb,
young, old, to be dead, the things after death, and all these together; as
also, times, places, deeds, qualities, quantities, or else thou can not yet
understand God.

131. But if thou shut up thy Soul in the Body, and abuse it, and say, I
understand nothing, I can do nothing, I am afraid of the Sea, I cannot climb
up into Heaven, I know not who I am, I cannot tell what I shall be; what have
thou to do with God? for thou can understand none of those Fair and Good
things; be a lover of the Body, and Evil.

132. For it is the greatest evil, not to know God.

133. But to be able to know, and to will, and to hope, is the straight way,
and divine way, proper to the Good, and it will every where meet thee, and
every where beseen of thee, plain and easy, when thou do not expect or look
for it: It will meet thee, waking, sleeping, sailing, travailing by night, by
day, when thou speak, and when tho^ keep silence.

134. For there is nothing which is not the Image of God.

135. And yet thou say, God is invisible: but be advised, for who is more
manifest, then He.

136. For therefore has he made all things, that thou by all things may see
him.

137. This is the Good of God, this is his Virtue, to appear, and to be seen in
all things.

138. There is nothing invisible, no not of those things that are incorporeal.

139. The mind is seen in Understanding, and God is seen in doing or making.

140. Let these things thus far forth, be made manifest unto thee, O
Trismegistus.

141. Understand in like manner, all other things by thy self, and thou shall
not be deceived.

The End of the Tenth Book.
THE Eleventh Book OF Hermes Trismegistus. Of the Common Mind to Tat.
THe mind, O Tat, is of the very essence of God, if yet there be any Essence
of God.

2. What kind of Essence that is, he alone knows himself exactly.

3. The mind thereof is not cut off, or divided from the essentiality of God,
but united as the light of the Sun.

4. And this Mind in men, is God, and therefore are some men Divine, and there
Humanity is near Divinity.

5. For the good Demon called the Gods, immortal men; and men, mortal Gods.

6. But in the bruit Beasts, or unreasonable living wights, the Mind is their
Nature.

7. For where there is a Soul, there is the Mind; as where there is Life,
there is also a Soul.

8. In living Creatures therefore, that are without Reason, the Soul is Life,
void of the operations of the Mind.

9. For the Mind is the Benefactor of the Souls of men, and works to the
proper Good.

10. And in unreasonable things it co-operateth with the Nature of every one of
them, but in men it works against their Natures.

11. For the Soul being in the Body, is straight way made Evil by Sorrow, and
Grief, and Pleasure or Delight.

12. For Grief and Pleasure, flow like Juices from the compound Body,
whereinto, when the Soul enters, or descends, she is moystened and tincted
with them.

13. As many Souls therefore, as the mind governs or overruleth, to them it
shows its own Light, resisting their prepossefsions or presumptions.

14. As a good Physician grieveth the Body, prepossefsed of a disease, by
burning or launcing it for healths sake.

15. After the same manner also, the Mind grieveth the Soul by drawing it out
of Pleasure, from whence every disease of the Soul proceeds.

16. But the great Disease of the Soul is Atheism, because that opinion
follows to all Evil, and no Good.

17. Therefore the Mind resisting, it procures Good to the Soul, as a
Physician health to the Body.

18. But as many Souls of men, as do not admit or entertain the Mind for their
Governor, do suffer the same thing that the Soul of unreasonable living things.

19. For the Soul being a Cooperator with them, permits or leaves them to their
concupiscences, whereunto they are carried by the torrent of their Appetite,
and so tend to brutishness.

20. And as bruit Beasts, they are angry without reason, and they desire
without reason, and never cease, nor are satisfied with evil.

21. For unreasonable Angers and Desires, are the most exceeding Evils.

22. And therefore has God set the Mind over these, as a Revenger and Reprover
of them.

23. Tat. Here, O Father, that Discourse of Fate and Destiny, which thou made
to me, is in danger to be overthrown: For if it be fatal for any man to commit
Adultery or Sacrilege or do any evil, he is punished also, though he of
necessity do the work of Fate or Destiny?

24. Herm. All things, O Son, are the work of Fate, and without it, can no
bodily thing, either Good or Evil be done.

25. For it is decreed by Fate, that he that does any evil, should also suffer
for it.

26. And therefore he does it, that he may suffer that which he suffers,
because he did it.

27. But for the present let alone that speech, concerning Evil and Fate, for
at other times we have spoken of it.

28. Now our discourse is about the Mind, and what it can do, and how it
differs, and is in men such a one, but in bruit Beasts changed.

29. And again, in bruit Beasts it is not beneficial, but in men by quenching
both their Anger and Concupiscences.

30. And of men thou must understand, some to be rational or governed by
reason, and some irrational.

31. But all men are subject to Fate, and to Generation, and Change; for these
are the beginning and end of Fate or Destiny.

32. And all men suffer those things that are decreed by Fate.

33. But rational men, over whom, as we said, the Mind bears rule, do not
suffer like unto other men; but being free from viciousness, and being not
evil, they do suffer evil.

34. T^. How say thou this again, Father? An Adulterer, is he not evil? A
Murderer, is he not evil? and so all others.

35. Herm. But the rational man, O Son, will not suffer for Adultery, but as
the Adulterer; not for Murder, but as the Murderer.

36. And it is impossible to escape the Quality of Change, as of Generation;
but the Viciousness, he that has the Mind, may escape.

37. And therefore, O Son, I have always heard the good Demon say, and if he
had delivered it in writing, he had much profited all mankind: For he alone, O
Son, as the first born, God, seeing all things, truly spoke Divine words. I
have heard him say sometimes, That all things are one thing, especially
intelligible Bodies or that all especially intelligible Bodies are one.

38. We live in Power, in Act, and in Eternity.

39. Therefore a good Mind, is that which the Soul of him is.

40. And if this be so, then no intelligible thing differs from intelligible
things.

41. As therefore it is possible, that the Mind, the Prince of all things; so
likewise that the Soul that is of God, can do whatsoever it will.

42. But understand thou well, for this Discourse I have made to the Question
which thou ask of me before, I mean concerning Fate and the Mind.

43. First, if, O Son, thou shall diligently withdraw thy self from all
contentious speeches, thou shall find that in Truth, the Mind, the Soul of God
bears rule over all things, both over Fate, and Law, and all other things.

44. And nothing is impossible to him, no not of the things that are of Fate.

45. Therefore, though the Soul of man be above it, let it not neglect the
things that happen to be under Fate.

46. And these thus far, were the excellent sayings of the good Demon.

47. Tat. Most divinely spoken, O Father, and truly and profitably, yet clear
this one thing unto me.

48. Thou say, that in bruit Beasts the Mind works or acts after the
manner of Nature, cooperating also with their ((...), impetus) inclinations.

49. Now the impetuous in clinations of bruit Beasts, as I conceive, are
Passions. If therefore the Mind do cooperate with these impetuous
Inclinations, and that they are the Passions in bruit Beasts, certainly the
Mind is also a Passion, conforming it self to Passions.

50. Herm. Well done, Son, thou ask nobly, and yet it is just that I should
answer thee.

51. All incorporeall things, O Son, that are in the Body, are passible, nay,
they are properly Passions.

52. Every thing that moves is incorporeal; every thing that is moved is a
Body; and it is moved into the Bodies by the Mind: Now Motion is Passion, and
there they both suffer; as well that which moves, as that which is moved, as
well that which rules, as that which is ruled.

53. But being freed from the Body, it is freed likewise from Passion.

54. But especially, O Son, there is nothing impassible, but all things are
passible.

55. But Passion differs from that which is passible; for that (Passion)
acts, but this suffers.

56. Beodies also of themselves do act; for either they are unmovable, or else
are moved; and which soever it be, it is a Passion.

57. But incorporeall things do always act, or work, and therefore they are
passible.

58. Let not therefore the appellation of names trouble thee, for Action and
Passion are the same thing, but that it is not grievous to use the more
honorable name.

59. Tat. O Father, thou have delivered this Discourse most plainly.

60. Herm. Consider this also, O Son, That God has freely bestowed upon man,
above all other living things, these two, to wit, Mind and Speech, or Reason,
(...), equal to immortality.

61. These, if any man use, or employ upon what he ought, he shall differ
nothing from the Immortals.

62. Yea rather going out of the Body, he shall be guided and led bythem, both
into the Quier and Society of the Gods, and blessed Ones.

63. Tat. Do not other living Creatures use Speech, O Father?

64. Herm. No, Son, but only Voice; now Speech and Voice do differ
exceedingmuch; for Speech is common to all men, but Voice is proper unto every
kind of living thing.

65. Tat. Yea, but the Speech of men is different, O Father; every man
according to his Nation.

66. Herm. It is true, O Son, they do differ: Yet as man is one, so is Speech
one also; and it is interpreted and found the same both in Egypt, Persia, and
Greece.

67. But thou seem unto me, Son, to be ignorant of the Virtue, or Power, and
Greatness of Speech.

68. For the blessed God, the good Demon said or commanded the Soul to be in
the Body, the Mind, in the Soul, ((...)) the Word, or Speech, or Reason in the
Mind, and the Mind in God, and that God is the Father of them all.

69. Therefore the Word is the Image of the Mind, and the Mind of God, and
the Body of the Idea, and the I^ea of the Soul.

70. Therefore of the Matter, the subtilest or smallest part is Air, of the Air
the Soul, of the Soul the Mind, of the Mind God.

71. And God is about all things, and through all things, but the Mind about
the Soul, the Soul about the Air, and the Air about the Matter.

72. But Necessity, and Providence, and Nature, are the Organs or Instruments
of the World, and of the Order of Matter.

73. For of those things that are intelligible every one is, but the Essence of
them is Identity.

74. But of the Bodies of the whole, or universe, every one is many things.

75. For the Bodies that are put together, and that have, and make their
changes into other, having this Identity, do always save and preserve the
uncorruption of the Identity.

76. But in every one of the compound Bodies, there is a Number.

77. For without Number it is unpossible there should be consistence, or
constitution, or composition, or dissolution.

78. But Unities do both beget and increase Numbers, and again being dissolved,
come into themselves.

79. And the Matter is One.

80. But this whole World, the great God, and the Image of the Greater, and
united unto him, and conserving the Order, and Will of the Father, is the
fullness of Life.

81. And there is nothing therein, through all the Eternity of the Revolutions,
neither of the whole, nor of the parts which does not live.

82. For there is nothing dead, that either has been, or is, or shall be in
the World.

83. For the Father would have it, as long as it lasts, to be a li^ing thing,
and therefore it must needs be God also.

84. How therefore, O Son, can there be in God, in the Image of the Universe,
in the fullness of Life, any dead things?

85. For dying is corruption, and corruption is destruction.

86. How then can any part of the incorruptible be corrupted, or of God be
destroyed?

87. Tat. Therefore, O Father, do not the living things in the World die,
though they be parts thereof.

88. Herm. Be wary in thy Speech, O Son, and not deceived in the names of
things.

89. For they do not die, O Son, but as compound Bodies they are dissolved.

90. But dissolution, is not death; and they are dissolved, not that they may
be destroyed, but that they may be made new.

91. Tat. What then is the operation of Life? Is it not Motion?

92. Herm. And what is there in the World unmovable? Nothing at all, O Son.

93. Tat. Why, does not the Earth seem unmovable to thee, O Father?

94. Herm. No, but subject to many motions, though after a manner, it alone be
stable.

95. What a ridiculous thing it were, that the Nurse of all things should be
unmovable, which bears and brings forth all things?

96. For it is impossible that any thing that brings forth, should bring
forth without Motion.

97. And a ridiculous question it is, Whether the fourth part of the whole, be
idle: For the word immovable, or without Motion, signifies nothing else, but
idleness.

98. Know generally, O Son, That whatsoever is in the World, is moved either
according to Augmentation or Diminution.

99. But that which is moved, lives also, yet it is not necessary, that a
living thing should be or continue the same.

100. For while the whole World is together, it is unchangeable, O Son, but all
the parts thereof are changeable.

101. Yet nothing is corrupted or destroyed, and quite abolished, but the names
trouble men.

102. For Generation is not Life, but Sense; neither is Change Death, but
forgetfulness, or rather Occultation, and lying hid.

Or better, thus

102. For Generation is not a Creation of Life, but a production of things to
Sense, and making them manifest. Neither is Change Death, but an occultation or
h^ing of that which was.

103. These things being so; all things are Immortal, Matter, Life, Spirit,
Soul, Mind, whereof every living thing consists.

104. Every living thing therefore is Immortal, because of the Mind, but
especially Man, who both receives God, and converseth with him.

105. For with this living wight alone is God familiar; in the night by dreams,
in the day by Symbols or Signs.

106. And by all things does he foretell him of things to come, by Birds, by
Fowls, by the Spirit, or Wind, and by an Oak.

107. Wherefore also Man professes to know things that have been, things that
are present, and things to come.

108. Consider, this also, O Son, That every other living Creature goes upon
one part of the World, Swimming things in the Water, Land wights upon the
Earth, Flying Fowls in the Air.

109. But Man uses all these, the Earth, the Water, the Air, and the Fire;
nay, he sees and touches Heaven by his Sense.

110. But God is both about all things, and through all things; for he is both
Act and Power.

111. And it is no hard thing, O Son, to understand God.

112. And if thou will also see him, look upon the Necessity of things that
appear, and the Providence of things that have been, and are done.

113. See the Matter being most full of Life, and so great a God moved with all
Good, and Fair, both Gods, and Demons, and Men.

114. Tat. But these, O Father, are wholly Acts, or operations.

115. Herm. If they be therefore wholly Acts or Operations, O Son, by whom are
they acted or operated, but by God.

116. Or art thou ignorant, that as the parts of the World, are Heaven, and
Earth, and Water, and Air; after the same manner the Members of God, are Life
and Immortality, and Eternity, and Spirit, and Necessity, and Providence, and
Nature, and Soul, and Mind, and the Continuance or perseverance of all these
which is called Good.

117. And there is not any thing of all that has been, and all that is, where
God is not.

118. Tat. What, in the Matter, O Father?

119. Herm. The Matter, Son, what is it without God, that thou should
ascribe a proper place to it?

120. Or what do thou think it to be? peradventure some heap that is not
actuated or operated.

121. But if it be actuated, by whom is it actuated? for we have said, that
Acts or Operations, are the parts of God.

122. By whom are all living things quickened, and the Immortal, by whom are
they immortalized? the things that are changeable, by whom are they changed?

123. Whether thou speak of Matter, or Body, or Essence, know that all these
are acts of God.

124. And that the Act of Matter is materiality, and of the Bodies corporality,
and of essence essentiality; and this is God the whole.

125. And in the whole, there is nothing that is not God.

126. Wherefore about God, there is neither Greatness, Place, Quality, Figure,
or Time; for he is All, and the All, through all, and about all.

127. This Word, O Son, worship and adore. And the only service of God, is not
to be evil.

The End of the Eleventh Book.
THE Twelfth Book OF Hermes Trismegistus. His Crater or Monas.
THe Workman made this Universal World, not with his Hands, but his Word.

2. Therefore thus think of him, as present every where, and being always, and
making all things; and one above, that by his Will has framed the things that
are.

3. For that is his Body, not tangible nor visible, nor measurable, nor
extensible, nor like any other body

4. For it is neither Fire, nor Water, nor Air, nor Wind, but all these things
are of him; for being Good, he has dedicated that name unto himself alone.

5. But he would also adorn the Earth, but with the Ornament of a Divine Body.

6. And he sent Man an Immortal, and a Mortal wight.

7. And Man had more then all living Creatures, and the World; because of his
Speech, and Mind.

8. For man became the spectator of the Works of God, and wondered, and
acknowledged the Maker.

9. For he divided Speech among all men, but not Mind, and yet he envied not
any; for Envy comes not thither, but is of abode here below in the Souls of
men, that have not the Mind.

10. Tat. But wherefore, Father, did not God distribute the Mind to all men?

11. Herm. Because it pleased him, O Son, to set that in the middle among all
souls, as a reward to strive for.

12. Tat. And where has he set it?

13. He^. Filling a large Cup or Bowl therewith, he ^t it down, giving also a
Crier or Proclaimer.

14. And he commanded him to proclaim these things to the souls of men.

15. Dip and wash thy self, thou that art able in this Cup or Bowl: Thou that
beleevest, that thou shall return to him that sent this Cup; thou that
acknowledgest whereunto thou were made.

16. As many therefore as understood the Proclamation, and were baptized or
dowsed into the Mind, these were made pertakers of Knowledge, and became
perfect men, receiving the Mind.

17. But as many as missed of the Proclamation, they received Speech, but not
Mind; being ignorant whereunto they were made, or by whom.

18. But their Senses are just like to bruit Beasts, and having their temper in
Anger and Wrath, they do not admire the things worthy of looking on.

19. But wholly addicted to the pleasures and desires of the Bodies, they
believe that man was made for them.

20. But as many as partaked of the gift of God; these, O Tat, in comparison of
their works, are rather immortal then mortal men.

21. Comprehending all things in their Mind, which are upon Earth, which are
in heaven, and if there be any thing above Heaven.

22. And lifting up themselves so high, they see the Good; and seeing it, they
account it a miserable calamity to make their abode here.

23. And despising all things bodily and unbodily, they make haste to the One
and Only.

24. Thus, O Tat, is the Knowledge of the Mind, the beholding of Divine
things, and the Understanding of God, the Cup it self being Divine.

25. Tat. And I, O Father, would be baptized and drenched therein.

26. Herm. Except thou first hate thy body, O Son, thou can not love thy
self, but loving thy self thou shall have the Mind, and having the Mind, thou
shall also partake the Knowledge or Science.

27. Tat. How meanest thou that, O Father?

28. Herm. Because it is impossible, O Son, to be conversant about things
Mortal and Divine.

29. For the things that are, being two Bodies, and things incorporeall,
wherein is the Mortal and the Divine, the Election or Choice of either is left
to him that will choose: For no man can choose both.

30. And of which soever the choice is made, the other being diminished or
overcome, magnifieth the act and operation of the other.

31. The choice of the better therefore, is not only best for him that chooses
it, by deifying a man; but it also shows Piety and Religion toward God.

32. But the choice of the worse destroys a man, but does nothing against God;
save that as Pomps or Pageants, when they come abroad, cannot do any thing
themselves, but hinder; after the same manner also do these make Pomps or
Pageants in the World, being seduced by the pleasures of the Body.

33. These things being so, O Tat, that things have been, and are so
plenteously ministered to us from God; let them proceed also from us, without
any scarcity or sparing.

34. For God is innocent or guiltless, but we are the causes of Evil,
preferring them before the Good.

35. Thou see, O Son, how many Bodies we must go beyond, and how many Quiers
of Demons, and what continuity and courses of Stars, that we may make haste to
the One, and only God.

36. For the Good is not to be transcended, it is unbounded and infinite; unto
it self without beginning, but unto us, seeming to have a beginning, even our
knowledge of it.

37. For our knowledge is not the beginning of it, but shows us the beginning
of its being known unto us.

38. Let us therefore lay hold of the beginning, and we shall quickly go through
all things.

39. It is indeed a difficult thing, to leave those things that are
accustomable, and present, and turn us to those things that are ancient, and
according to the Original.

40. For these things that appear, delight us, but make the things that appear
not, hard to believe, or the things that appear not, are hard to believe.

41. The things most apparent are Evil, but the Good is secret, or hid in, or
to the things that appear; for it has neither Form nor Figure.

42. For this cause it is like to it self, but unlike every thing else; for it
is impossible, that any thing incorporeall, should be made known, or appear to
a Body.

43. For this is the difference between the like and the unlike; and the unlike
wants always somewhat of the like.

44. For the Unity, Beginning, and Root of all things, as being the Root and
Beginning.

45. Nothing is without a beginning, but the Beginning is of nothing, but of it
self; for it is the Beginning of all other things.

46. Therefore it is, seeing it is not from another ^eginning.

47. Unity therefore being the Beginning, contains every number; but it self
is contained of none, and begets every number, it self being begotten of no
other number.

48. Every thing that is begotten (or made) is imperfect, and may be divided,
increased, diminished.

49. But to the perfect, there happens none of these.

50. And that which is increased, is increased by Unity* but is consumed and
vanished through weakness, being not able to receive the Unity.

51. This Image of God, have I described to thee, O Tat, as well as I could;
which if thou do diligently consider, and view by the eyes of thy mind and
heart, believe me, Son, thou shall find the way to the things above, or rather
the Image it self will lead thee.

52. But the spectacle or sight, has this peculiar and proper: Them that can
see, and behold it, it holds fast and draws unto it, as they say the Loadstone
does Iron.

The End of the twelfth Book.
THE Thirteenth Book OF Hermes Trismegistus. Of Sense and Understanding.
YEsterday, Asclepius, I delivered a perfect Discourse; but now I think it
necessary, in suit of that, to dispute also of Sense.

2. For Sense and Understanding seem to differ, because the one is material,
the other essential.

3. But unto me, they appear to be both one, or united, and not divided; in
men, I mean.

4. For in other living Creatures, Sense is united unto Nature, but in men to
Understanding.

5. But the Mind differs from Understanding, as much as God from Divinity.

6. For Divinity is ((...)) from or under God, and Understand^g from the Mind,
being the sister of the Word or Speech, and they the Instruments one of another.

7. For neither is the Word pronounced without Understanding, neither is
Understanding manifested without the Word.

8. Therefore Sense and Understanding do both flow together into a man, as if
they were infolded one within another.

9. For neither is it possible without Sense to understand, nor can we have
Sense without Understanding.

10. And yet it is possible (for the time being) that the Understanding may
understand without Sense, as they that fantasy Visions in their Dreams.

11. But it seems unto me, that both the operations are in the Visions of
Dreams, and that the Sense is stirred up out of sleep, unto awaking.

12. For Man is divided into a Body and a Soul; when both parts of the Sense
accord one with another, then is the Understanding childed, or brought forth by
the Mind pronounced.

13. For the Mind brings forth all Intellections or Understandings: Good ones,
when it receives good Seed from God; and the contrary, when it receives them
from Devi's.

14. For there is no part of the World void of the Devil, which entering in
privately, sowed the seed of his own proper operation; and the Mind did make
pregnant, or did bring forth that which was sown, Adulteries Murders Stri^ing
of Parents, Sacriledges, Impieties, Stranglings, throwing down headlong, and
all other things which are the works of evil Demons.

15. And the Seeds of God are few, but Great, and Fair, and Good; Virtue, and
Temperance, and Piety.

16. And the Piety is the Knowledge of God, whom whosoever knows being full
of all good things, has Divine Understanding, and not like the Many.

17. And therefore they that have that Knowledge, neither please the multitude,
nor the multitude them, but they seem to be mad, and to move laughter, hated
and despised, and many times also murdered.

18. For we have already said, That wickedness must dwell here, being in her
own region.

19. For her region is the Earth, and not the World, as some will sometimes
say, Blaspheming.

20. But the godly, or Godworshiping Man, laying hold on Knowledge, will
despise or tread under all these things; for though they be evil to other men,
yet to him all things are good.

21. And upon mature consideration, he refers all things to Knowledge, and that
which is most to be wondered at, he alone makes evil things good.

22. But I return again to my Discourse of Sense.

23. It is therefore a thing proper to Man, to communicate and conjoyn Sense
and Understanding.

24. But every man, as I said before, does not enjoy Understanding; for one man
is material, another essential.

25. And he that is material with wickedness, as I said received from the
Devils the seed of Understanding; but they that are with the Good essentially,
are saved with God.

26. For God is the Workman of all things; and when he works, he uses Nature.

27. He makes all things good like himself.

28. But these things that are made good, are in the use of Operation unlawful.

29. For the Motion of the World stirring up Generations, makes Qualities;
infecting some with evilnesse, and purifying some with good.

30. And the World, Asclepius, has a peculiar Sense and Understanding, not
like to Man's, nor so various or manifold, but a better and more simple.

31. For the Sense and understanding of the World is One, in that it makes all
things, and unmakes them again into it self; for it is the Organ or Instrument
of the Will of God.

32. And it is so organized or framed, and made for an Instrument by God; that
receiving all Seeds into it self from God, and keeping them in it self, it
makes all things effectually, and dissolving them, renews all things.

33. And therefore like a good Husbandman of Life, when things are dissolved
or loosened, he affords by the casting of Seed, renovation to all things that
grow.

34. There is nothing that it (the World) does not beget or bring forth alive;
and by its Motion, it makes all things alive.

35. And it is at once, both the Place and the Workman of Life.

36. But the Bodies are from the Matter, in a different manner; for some are of
the Earth, some of Water, some of Air, some of Fire, and all are compounded,
but some are more compounded, and some are more simple.

37. They that are compounded, are the heavier and they that are less, are the
higher.

38. And the swiftness of the Motion of the World, makes the vatieties of the
Qualities of Generation; for the spiration or influence, being most frequent,
extends unto the Bodies qualities with one fullness, which is of Life.

39. Therefore, God is the Father of the World, but the World is the Father of
things in the World.

40. And the World is the Son of God, but things in the World are the Sons of
the World.

41. And therefore it is well called (...), the World, that is an Ornament,
because it adorneth and beautifieth all things with the variety of Generation,
and indeficiency of Life, with the unweariednesse of Operation, and the
swiftness of Necessity, with the mingling of Elements, and the order of things
done.

42. Therefore it is necessarily, and properly called (...) the World.

43. For of all living things, both the Sense, and the Understanding, comes
into them from without, inspired by that which compasses them about, and
continues them.

44. And the World receiving it once from God as soon as it was made, has it
still, what ever it once had.

45. But God is not as it seems to some who Blaspheme through superstition,
without Sense, and without Mind, or Understanding.

46. For all things that are, O Asclepius, are in God, and made by him, and
depend of him; some, working by Bodies, some moving by a Soul-like Essence,
some quickening by a Spirit, and some receiving the things that are weary, and
all very fitly.

47. Or rather, I say, that he has them not, but I declare the Truth; he is
all things, not receiving them from without, but exhibiting them outwardly.

48. And this is the Sense and Understanding of God, to move all things always.

49. And there shall never be any time, when any of those things that are,
shall fail or be wanting.

50. When I say the things that are, I mean God; for the things that are, God
has; and neither is there any thing without him, nor he without any thing.

51. These things, O Ascleplus, will appear to be true, if thou understand
them; but if thou understand them not, incredible.

52. For to understand, is to believe; but not to believe, is not to
understand: For my speech or words reach not unto the Truth, but the Mind is
great, and being led or conducted for a while by speech, is able to attain to
the Truth.

53. And understanding all things round about, and finding them consonant, and
agreeable to those things that were delivered, and interrupted by Speech,
believes; and in that good belief, rests.

54. To them therefore that understand the things that have been said of God,
they are credible; but to them that understand them not, incredible.

55. And let these, and thus many things, be spoken concerning Understanding
and Sense.

The End of the Thirteenth Book.
THE Fourteenth Book OF Hermes Trismegistus. Of Operation and Sense.
TAt. Thou have well explained these things, Father: Teach me furthermore these
things; for thou say, that Science and Art were the Operations of the
rational, but now thou say, that Beasts are unreasonable, and fot want of
reason, both are, and are called Bruits; so that by this Reason, it must needs
follow, that unreasonable Creatures partake not of Science, or Art, because
they come short of Reason.

2. Herm. It must needs be so, Son.

3. Tat. Why then, O Father, do we see some unreasonable living Creatures use
both Science and Art? as the Pismires treasure up for themselves food against
the Winter, and Fouls of the Air likewise make them Nests, and four-footed
Beasts know their own Dens.

4. These things they do, O Son, not by Science or Art, but by Nature; for
Science or Art are things that are taught, but none of these bruit Beasts are
taught any of these things.

5. But these things being Natural unto them, are wrought by Nature, whereas
Art and Science do not happen unto all, but unto some.

6. As men are Musicians, but not all; neither are all Archers, or Huntsmen, or
the rest, but some of them have learned some things by the working of Science
or Art.

7. After the same manner also, if some Pismires did so, and some not, thou
might well say, they gather their Food according to Science and Art.

8. But being they are all led by Nature, to the same thing, even against their
wills, it is manifest they do not do it by Science or Art.

9. For Operations, O Tat, being unbodily, are in Bodies, and work by Bodies.

10. Wherefore, O Tat, in as much as they are unbodily, thou must needs say
they are immortal.

11. But as much as they cannot act without Bodies, I say, they are always in a
Body.

12. For those things that are to any thing, or for the cause of any thing made
subject to Providence or Necessity, cannot possibly remain idle of their own
proper Operation.

13. For that which is, shall ever be; for both the Body, and the Life of it,
is the same.

14. And by this reason, it follows, that the Bodies also are always; because I
affirm, That this corporiety is always by the Act and Operation, or for them.

15. For although earthly bodies be subject to dissolution; yet these bodies
must be the Places, and the Organs, and Instruments of Acts or Operations.

16. But Acts or Operations are immortal, and that which is immortal, is
always in Act, and therefore also Corpori^cation if it be always.

17. Acts or Operations do follow the Soul, yet come not suddenly or
promiscuously, but some of them come together with being made man, being about
brutish or unreasonable things.

18. But the purer Operations do insensibly. in the change of time, work with
the oblique part of the Soul.

19. And these Operations depend upon Bodies; and truly they that are
Corporifying, come from the Divine Bodies into Mortal ones.

20. But every one of them acts both about the Body and the Soul, and are
present with the Soul, even without the Body.

21. And they are always Acts or Operations, but the Soul is not always in a
Mortal Body, for it can be without a Body, but Acts or Operations cannot be
without Bodies.

22. This is a sacred speech, Son, The Body cannot consist without a Soul.

23. Tat. How meanest thou that, Father?

24. Herm. Understand it thus, O Tat; When the Soul is separated from the Body,
there remains that same Body.

25. And this same Body according to the time of its abode, is actuated or
operated in that it is dissolved, and becomes invisible.

26. And these things the Body cannot suffer without act or operation, and
consequently there remains with the Body the same act or operation.

27. This then is the difference between an Immortal Body, and a Mortal one,
that the immortal one consists of one Matter, and so does not the mortal one;
and the immortal one Does, but this Suffers.

28. And every thing that acts or operateth, is stronger, and rules, but
that which is actuated or operated, is ruled.

29. And that which rules, directs, and governs as free, but the other is
ruled as servant.

30. Acts or Operations do not only actuate or operate, living or breathing, or
insouled ((...)) Bodies, but also breathless Bodies or without Souls, Wood,
and Stones, and such like; increasing and bearing fruit, ripening, corrupting,
rotting, ^utrifying, and breaking or working suchlike things, and whatsoever
inanimate Bodies can suffer.

31. Act or Operation, O Son, is called, whatsoever is, or is made or done; and
there are always many things made, or rather all things.

32. For the World is never widowed or forsaken of any of those things that
are; but being always carried or moved in it self, it is in labor to bring
forth the things that are, which shall never be left by it to corruption.

33. Let therefore every act or operation be understood to be always immortal,
in what manner of Body soever it be.

34. But some Acts or Operations be of Divine, some of corruptible Bodies, some
universal, some peculiar, and some of the generals, and some of the parts of
every thing.

35. Divine Acts or Operations therefore there be, and such as work or operate
upon their proper Bodies, and these also are perfect, and being upon or in
perfect Bodies.

36. Particular, are they which work by any of the living Creatures.

37. Proper, be they that work upon any of the things that are.

38. By this Discourse therefore, O Son, it is gathered that all things are
full of Acts or Operations.

39. For if necessarily they be in every Body, and that there be many Bodies in
the World, I may very well affirm, that there be many other Acts or Operations.

40. For many times in one Body, there is one, and a second, and a third,
besides these universal ones that follow.

41. And universal Operations, I call them that are indeed bodily, and are
done by the Senses and Motions.

42. For without these it is impossible that the Body should consist.

43. But other Operations are proper to the Souls of Men, by Arts, Sciences,
Studies, and Actions.

44. The Senses also follow these Operations, or rather are the effects or
perfections ((...)) of them.

45. Understand therefore, O Son, the difference of Operations, it is sent from
above.

46. But Sense being in the Body, and having its essence from it, when it
receives Act or Operation, manifests it, making it as it were corporeal.

47. Therefore, I say, that the Senses are both corporeal and mortal, having
so much existence as the Body; for they are born with the Body, and die with it.

48. But mortal things themselves have not Sense, as not consisting of such an
Essence.

49. For Sense can be no other than a corporeal apprehension, either of evil or
good that comes to the Body.

50. But to Eternal Bodies there is nothing comes, nothing departs; therefore
there is no Sense in them.

51. Tat. Does the Sense therefore perceive or apprehend in every Body?

52. Herm. In every Body, O Son.

53. Tat. And do the Acts or Operations work in all things?

54. Herm. Even in things inanimate, O Son, but there are differences of Senses.

55. For the Senses of things rational, are with Reason; of things
unreasonable, Corporeal only; but the Senses of things inanimate, are passive
only, according to Augmentation and Diminution.

56. But Passion and Sense depend both upon one head, or height, and are
gathered together into the same by Acts or Operations.

57. But in living wights there be two other Operations that follow the Senses
and Passions, to wit, Grief and Pleasure.

58. And without these, it is impossible that a living wight, especially a
reasonable one should perceive or apprehend.

59. And therefore, I say, that these are the Ideas of Passions that bear rule,
especially in reasonable living wights.

60. The Operations work indeed, but the Senses do declare and manifest the
Operations, and they being bodily, are moved by the brutish parts of the Soul;
therefore, I say, they are both maleficiall, or doers of evil.

61. For that which affords the Sense to rejoice with Pleasure, is straightway
the cause of many evils happening to him that suffers it.

62. But Sorrow gives stronger Torments and Anguish, therefore doubtless are
they both maleficiall.

63. The same may be said of the Sense of the Soul.

64. Tat. Is not the Soul incorporeal, and the Sen^e a Body, Father? or is it
rather in the Body?

65. Herm. If we put it in a Body, O Son, we shall make it like the Soul or the
Operations. For these being unbodily, we say are in Bodies.

66. But Sense is neither Operation, nor Soul, nor any thing else that belongs
to the Body; but as we have said, and therefore it is not incorporeall.

67. And if it be not incorporeall, it must needs be a Body; for we always
say, that of things that are, some are Bodies, and some incorporeall.

The End of the fourteenth Book.
THE Fifteenth Book OF Hermes Trismegistus. Of Truth to his Son Tat.
Herm. Of Truth, O Tat it is not possible that man being an imperfect wight,
compounded of imperfect Members; and having his Tabernacle, consisting of
different and many Bodies, should speak with any confidence.

2. But as far as it is possible, and just, I say, That Truth is only in the
Eternal Bodies, whose very Bodies be also true.

3. The Fire is fire it self only, and nothing else; the Earth is earth it
self, and nothing else; the Air is air it self, and nothing else; the Water,
water it self, and nothing else.

4. But our Bodies consist of all these; for they have of the Fire, they have
of the Earth, they have of the Water, and Air, and yet there is neither Fire,
nor Earth, nor Water, nor Air, nor any thing true.

5. And if at the beginning, our Constitution had not Truth, how could men
either see the Truth, or speak it, or understand it only, except God would?

6. All things therefore upon Earth, O Tat, are not Truth, but imitations of
the Truth; and yet not all things neither, for they are but few that are so.

7. But the other things are Falsehood, and Deceit, O Tat and Opinions like the
Images of the fantasy, or appearance.

8. And when the fantasy has an influence from above, then it is an imitation
of Truth; but without that operation from above, it is left a lie.

9. And as an Image shows the Body described, and yet is not the Body of that
which is seen, as it seems to be; and it is seen to have eyes, but it sees
nothing, and ears, but hears nothing at all; and all other things has the
picture, but they are false, deceiving the eyes of the beholder, whilst they
think they see the Truth, and yet they are indeed but lies.

10. As many therefore as see not Falsehood, see the Truth.

11. If therefore we do so understand, and see every one of these things as it
is then we see and understand true things.

12. But if we see or understand any thing besides, or otherwise, than that
which is, we shall neither understand, nor know the Truth.

13. Tat. Is Truth therefore upon Earth, O Father?

14. Herm. Thou do not miss the mark, O Son. Truth indeed is no where at all
upon Earth, O Tat, for it cannot be generated, or made.

15. But concerning the Truth, it may be that some men, to whom God will give
the good seeing Power, may understand it.

16. So that unto the Mind and Reason, there is nothing true indeed upon Earth.

17. But unto the true Mind and Reason, all things are fantasies or
appearances, and opinions.

18. Tat. Must we not therefore call it Truth, to understand and speak the
things that are?

19. Herm. But there is nothing true upon Earth.

20. Tat. How then is this true, That we do not know any thing true? how can
that be done here?

21. Herm. O Son, Truth is the most perfect Virtue, and the highest Good it
self, not troubled by Matter, not encompassed by a Body, naked, clear,
unchangeable, venerable, unalterable Good.

22. But the things that are here, O Son, are visible, incapable of Good,
corruptible, passible, dissolveable, changeable, continually altered, and made
of another.

23. The things therefore that are not true to themselves; how can they be true?

24. For every thing that is altered, is a lie, not abiding in what it is; but
being changed it shows us always, other, and other appearances.

25. Tat. Is not man true, O Father?

26. Herm. As far forth as he is a Man, he is not true, Son; for that which is
true has of it self alone its constitution, and remains, and abides according
to it self, such as it is.

27. But man consists of many things, and does not abide of himself; but is
turned and changed, age after age, Idea after Idea, or form after form; and
this while he is yet in the Tabernacle.

28. And many have not known their own children after a little while; and many
children likewise have not known their own Parents.

29. Is it then possible, O Tat, that he who is so changed, is not to be known,
should be true? no, on the contrary, he is Falsehood, being in many Appearances
of changes.

30. But do thou understand the True to be that which abides the same, and is
Eternal, but man is not ever, therefore not True; but man is a certain
Appearance, and Appearance is the highest Lie or Falsehood.

31. Tat. But these eternal Bodies, Father, are they not true through they be
changed?

32. Herm. Everything that is begotten, or made, and changed, is not true; but
being made by our Progenitor, they might have had true Matter.

33. But these also have in themselves: something that is false, in regard of
their change.

34. For nothing that remains not in it self, is True.

35. Tat. What shall one say then, Father, that only the Sun, which besides the
Nature of other things, is not changed but abides in it self, is Truth?

36. Herm. It is Truth, and therefore he is only entrusted with the Workmanship
of the World, ruling and making all things, whom I do both honor, and adore
his Truth; and after the One, and First, I acknowledge him the Workman.

37. Tat. What therefore do thou affirm to be the first Truth, O Father?

38. Herm. The One and Only, O Tat, that is not of Matter, that is not in a
Body, that is without Color, without Figure or Shape, Immutable, Unalterable,
which always is; but Falsehood, O Son, is corrupted.

39. And corruption has laid hold upon all things on Earth, and the Providence
of the True encompasseth, and will encompasse them.

40. For without corruption, there can no Generation consist.

41. For Corruption follows every Generation, that it may again be generated.

42. For those things that are generated, must of necessity be generated of
those things that are corrupted, and the things generated must needs be
corrupted, that the Generation of things being, may not stand still or cease.

43. Acknowledge therefore the first Workman by the Generation of things.

44. Consequently the things that are generated of Corruption, are false; as
being sometimes one thing, sometimes another: For it is impossible, they should
be made the same things again; and that which is not the same, how is it true?

45. Therefore, O Son, we must call these things fantasies or appearances.

46. And if we will give a man his right name, we must call him the appearance
of Manhood; and a Child, the fantasy or appearance of a Child; an old man,
the appearance of an old man; a young man, the appearance of a young man; and a
man of ripe age, the appearance of a man of ripe age.

47. For neither is a man, a man; nor a child, a child; nor a young man, a
young man; nor an old man, an old man.

48. But the things that pre-exist, and that are, being changed, are false.

49. These things understand thus, O Son, as these false Operations, having
their dependence from above, even of the Truth it self.

50. Which being so, I do affirm, that Falsehood is the Work of Truth.

The End of the Fifteenth Book.
THE Sixteenth Book OF Hermes Trismegistus. That none of the things that are,
can perish.
HErm. We must now speak of the Soul and Body, O Son; after what manner the
Soul is Immortal; and what operation that is, which constitutes the Body, and
dissolves it.

2. But in one of these is Death, for it is a conception of a name, which is
either an empty word, or else it is wrongly called Death, ((...)) by the taking
away the first letter, instead of Immortal ((...))

3. For Death is destruction, but there is nothing in the whole World that is
destroyed.

4. For if the World be a second God, and an Immortal living Wight, it is
impossible that any part of an Immortal living Wight should die.

5. But all things that are in the World, are members of the World; especially
Man, the reasonable ^iving Wight.

6. For the first of all is God, the Eternal, and Unmade, and the Workman of
all things.

7. The second is the World, made by him, after his own Image, and by him
holden together, and nourished, and immortalized; and as from its own Father,
ever living.

8. So that as Immortal, it is ever living, and ever immortal.

9. For that which is ever living, differs from that which is eternal.

10. For the Eternal was not begotten or made, by another; and if it were
begotten or made, yet it was made by it self, not by any other, but it is
always made.

11. For the Eternal, as it is Eternal, is the Universe.

12. For the Father himself, is Eternal of himself; but the world was made by
the Father, ever living, and immortal.

13. And as much Matter as there was laid up by him, the Father made it all
into a Body, and swelling it, made it round like a Sphere; endued it with
Quality, being it self immortal, and having Eternal Materiality.

14. The Father being full of Ideas, sowed Qualities in the Sphere, and shut
them up, as in a Circle, deliberating to beautify with every Quali^y, that
which should afterward be made.

15. Then clothing the Universal Body with Immortality, lest the Matter, if
it would depart from this Composition, should be dissolved into its own
disorder.

16. For when the matter was incorporeal, O Son, it was disordered, and it has
here the same confusion daily revolved about other little things, endued with
Qualities, in point of Augmentation, and Diminution, which men call Death;
being indeed a disorder happening about earthly living wights.

17. For the Bodies of Heavenly things, have one order, which they have
received from the Father at the Beginning, and is by the instauration of each
of them, kept indissolveable.

18. But the instauration of earthly Bodies, is their consistence; and their
dissolution restores them into indissoluble, that is, Immortal.

19. And so there is made a privation of Sense, but not a destruction of Bodies.

20. Now the third living wight is Man, made after the Image of the World; and
having by the Will of the Father, a Mind above other earthly wights.

21. And he has not only a sympathy with the second God, but also an
understanding of the first.

22. For the second God, he apprehends as a Body; but the first, he understands
as Incorporeal, and the Mind of the Good.

23. Tat. And does not this living wight perish?

24. Herm. Speak advisedly, O Son, and learn what God is, what the World, what
an Immortal Wight, and what a dissolveable One is.

25. And understand that the World is of God, and in God; but Man of the World,
and in the World.

26. The Beginning, and End, and Consistence of all, is God.

The End of the sixteenth Book.
The Seventeenth Book OF Hermes Trismegistus. To Asclepius, to be truly wise.
BEcause my Son Tat, in thy absence, would needs learn the Nature of the things
that are: He would not suffer me to give over (as coming very young to the
knowledge of every Individual) till I was forced to discourse to him many
things at large, that his contemplation might from point to point, be more
easy and successful.

2. But to thee, I have thought good to write in few words, choosing out the
principal heads of the things then spoken, and to interpret them more
mystically, because thou have, both more years, and more knowledge of Nature.

3. All things that appear, were made, and are made.

4. Those things that are made, are not made by themselves, but by another.

5. And there are many things made, but especially all things that appear, and
which are different, and not like.

6. If the things that be made and done, be made and done by another, there
must be one that must make, and do them; and he unmade, and more ancient than
the things that are made.

7. For I affirm the things that are made, to be made by another; and it is
impossible, that of the things that are made, any should be more ancient than
all, but only that which is not made

8. He is stronger, and One, and only knowing all things indeed, as not having
any thing more ancient than himself.

9. For he bears rule, both over multitude and greatness, and the diversity of
the things that are made, and the continuity of the Facture, and of the
Operation.

10. Moreover, the things that are made, are visible, but he is invisible; and
for this cause, he makes them, that he may be visible; and therefore he makes
them always.

11. Thus it is fit to understand, and understanding to admire, and admiring to
think thy self happy, that know thy natural Father.

12. For what is sweeter than a natural Father?

13. Who therefore is this, or how shall we know him?

14. Or is it just to ascribe unto him alone, the Title and Appellation of God,
or of the Maker, or of the Father, or all Three? That of God, because of his
Power; the Maker, because of his Working and Operation; and the Father, because
of his Goodness?

15. For Power is different from the things that are made; but Act or
Operation, in that all things are made.

16. Wherefore, letting go all much and vain talking, we must understand these
two things, That which is made, and him which is the Maker; for there is
nothing in the middle between these Two, nor is there any third.

17. Therefore understanding All things, remember these Two; and think that
these are All things, putting nothing into doubt; neither of the things above,
nor of the things below; neither of the things changeable, nor things that are
in darkness or secret.

18. For All things, are but Two things, That which makes, and that which is
made; and the One of them cannot depart, or be divided from the other.

19. For neither is it possible, that the Maker should be without the thing
made, for either of them is the self same thing; therefore cannot the One of
them be separated from the other, no more then a thing can be separated from it
self.

20. For if he that makes be nothing else, but that which makes alone, simple
uncomponnded, it is of necessity, that he makes the same thing to himself, to
whom it is the Generation of him that makes to be also All that is made.

21. For that which is generated or made, must necessarily be generated or made
by another, but without the Maker that which is made, neither is made, not is;
for the one of them without the other, has lost his proper Nature by the
privation of the other.

22. So if these Two be confessed, That which makes, and that which is made,
then they are One in Union; this going before, and that following.

23. And that which goes before, is, God the Maker; and that which follows,
is, that which is made, be it what it will.

24. And let no man be afraid, because of the variety of things that are made
or done, lest he should cast an aspersion of baseness, or infamy upon God; for
it is the only Glory of him to do, or make All things.

25. And this making, or facture, is as it were the Body of God, and to him
that makes, or does, there is nothing evil, or filthy to be imputed, or there
is nothing thought evil, or filthy.

26. For these are Passions that follow Generation, as Rust does Copper, or as
Excrements do the Body.

27. But neither did the Coppersmith make the Rust, nor the Maker the Filth,
nor God the Evilnesse.

28. But the vicissitude of Generation does make them, as it were to blossom
out; and for this cause did make Change to be, as one should say, The Purgation
of Generation.

29. Moreover, is it Lawful for the same Painter to make both Heaven, and the
Gods, and the Earth, and the Sea, and Men, and bruit Beasts, and inanimate
Things, and Trees; and is it impossible for God to make these things? O the
great madness, and ignorance of men in things that concern God!

30. For men that think so, suffer that which is most ridiculous of all; for
professing to bless, and praise God, yet in not ascribing to him the making or
doing of All things, they know him not.

31, And, besides their not knowing him, they are extremely impious against
him, attributing unto him Passions, as Pride, or Oversight, or Weakness, or
Ignorance, or Envy.

32. For if he do not make, or do all things, he is either proud, or not able,
or ignorant, or envious, which is impious to affirm.

33. For God has only one Passion, namely, Good; and he that is good, is
neither proud, nor impotent, nor the rest; but God is Good it self.

34. For G^d is all Power, to do or make all things, and every thing that is
made, is made by God, that is, by the Good; and that can make, or do all things.

35. See then how he makes all things, and how the things are done, that are
done; and if thou will learn, thou may see an Image thereof very beautiful,
and like.

36. Look upon the Husbandman, how he casts Seeds into the Earth; here Wheat,
there Barley, and elsewhere some other Seeds.

37. Look upon the same Man, planting a Vine, or an Apple Tree, or a Fig Tree,
or some other Tree.

38. So does God in Heaven sow Immortality, in the Earth Change in the whole
Life, and Motion.

39. And these things are not many, but few, and easily numbered; for they are
all but four, God and Generation, in which are all things.

The End of the Seventeenth Book
FINIS.
Hermes his Divine Pymander, and Asclepius.

Hermes Trismegistus HIS Second Book, CALLED Asclepius. Containing fifteen
Chapters, With A Commentary.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Brewster, at the three Bibles in St. Paul's
Churchyard, near the West End. MDCLVII.

THE Second Book OF Hermes Trismegistus.
CHAP. I.
THou, Asclepius, serves in stead of a Sun unto me; for God has brought thee
to us, that thou might be present with us in thy divine Discourse, being
such which may seem worthy to carry a greater luster of Piety and Religion,
than all the works before done of us, or any gifts inspired by divine
Inspiration; which if understandingly thou shall regard, thou shall be richly
filled with all good things thorowout thy whole Soul: If notwithstanding there
be many good things, and not one general, in which all things are, for the one
is perceived to consent and agree with the other; all these things belong to
that One, and that One is All; for the one so coheres to the other, that they
cannot be separated. But in the future Discourse, by a diligent hearkening,
thou shall fully know it. But thou, O Asclepius, proceed a little, and call
forth him which should be present; who entering, Asclepius also suggesteth
Amnon to be present. Trismegistus says, No Envy hinders Amnon from us; for
to his name we remember many things to be written of us, as also to his loving
and dear Son, many things of natural Philosophy, and of many Out landish and
strange things: but this Tractate I will ascribe to your name, neither call any
other save Amnon, lest a most devout Discourse of so weighty a matter should be
violated by the intervention and presence of many comers; for it is an argument
of no honest and religious heart, to publish a Tractate replenisht with the
fullness of the divine Majesty, to the view of every man's conscience. Holy
Amnon being now entered into a private closet, fitted with the Religion of four
men, and the Divine Presence of God, in much reverence and secrecy he begins
thus to declare himself in the name of all the Hermetes to the consciences and
souls of them who are prepared to hear.

Trism. O Asclepius the soul of every man is immortal, but not all alike; for
there is a difference both in the time and manner.

Asclep. No indeed, O Trismegistus, for every Soul is of one quality.

Trism. O Asclepius, how quickly have thou learned, by the very light of
reason; for said I not this, That all things are one, and one all things? that
all things were in the Creator, before he created all things; neither
unworthily is he said to be All, whose parts are all things: therefore in this
whole Discourse have a care to remember him, who being One, is All, even the
very Creator of all things; all things descend from Heaven into the Earth,
into the Water, and into the Air. The Fire only, in that it is carried upward,
is lively subservient to that which descends; for whatsoever descends from
above is generating, and whatsoever ascends upward is nourishing; the earth
alone abiding in it self, is the receiver of all things, and the restorer of
all things she receives. In this therefore wholly (as you said) even al things,
both the Soul and the World, are naturally moved and concluded. So the various
equality of every shape being differenced, that the Species of the qualities,
by distance, may be known to be infinite, yet so united to this, that the whole
may seem one, and from that one, all to have their being; wherefore the whole
World are the four Elements of which it is compounded, Fire, Water, Earth, Air;
one World, one Soul, one God. Now be thou present with me, as much as thou art
able, both in mind, and wisdom: for the reason of the Divinity which is to be
known by the divine intention of the understanding, is most like unto a Torrent
running with a violent and swift stream from a high Rock, whereby it glides
away from the understanding of such, who are either Hearers or Dealers in it.

The COMMENTARY.
This first Chapter teaches, that all things belong to one, and that all
things are one, of one, as from which all things are, One; as all the effects
which in their cause are one, as that every man's Soul is immortal: but yet
after a different sort. All things descend from Heaven; that which descends
affords generation, that which ascends and goes upward, gives only life.
This thing to be one, of which all things are: and this which is all things to
move the world, and all the forms of which the world is compounded, to wit, the
Fire, the Air, the Water, and the Earth. And as all bodies make one body of one
world, so it will have all the forms of things to make one uniform form of one
world, which it calls the Form of the world; and these are one Body, one
Soul, one World, one God; from whom Divine Understanding and the Word passes
from above, with a swife lightening downwards, like unto a swift Torrent, which
flows into, and fills all things, and this Divine Wisdom and the Word, what is
it (I pray) but the Divinity, or Divine Wisdom it self, which is the Creator
of all things, which as the wise man sings, is the only Mover of all things,
and which being one can do all things, and which abiding in it self changes
all things.

This is the first part.
CHAP. II.
HEaven therefore is the sensible preserver of all those bodies whose increase
and decrease the Sun and Moon, have as it were power of. But God who is the
Creator of all things is the Governor of Heaven, and of its Soul, and of all
things in the world. For from all the foresaid things, of all which there is a
Governor, there is a frequent influence carried through the world by nature it
self, and by the soul of every Genus and Species in it: for the world is
prepared of God to be a receptacle of every sort of Species or form; and
fashioning out nature by the forms, has brought the world by the four Elements
even to Heaven. All the works of God which are pleasing to the eye, and which
hang over us are divided into Species, and in that manner I am now about to
relate. The Genera, or kinds, of all things follow their Species for that the
Genus is the totality, or substance of it, and the Species a part of the Genus:
wherefore there is a Genus of good Spirits, and a Genus of bad^ as also of men;
and likewise of Birds, and of all things which the world has, it begets
Species like to it self: there is another Genus of brute Beasts wanting indeed
understanding and reason, but yet not a soul or life, whereby it takes delight
in Benefits, and pines and mournes away at injuries. I say of all things which
live on the Earth by the preservation of Roots, and Plants, whose Species are
dispersed throughout the whole Earth, the very Heaven it self is full of the
Majesty of God, whose Genus inhabiteth that place where all Species are
immortal; for the Species is a part of the Genus, as the Soul a part of man
being a point of necessity to follow the quality of it Genus from whence it
proceeds, that albeit every Genus or kind be immortal, yet every Species is
not immortal; but the Genus of the godhead and the Species are immortal, yet
the kinds of other things whose eternity remains in the Genus, albeit it dies
in the Species is yet preserved by the fruitfulness of growing: therefore the
Species are mortal as man is mortal, his soul immortal; yet with every Genus
the Species of every Geuus is mixed, some which before were made, some made of
these; but all these which were made are either of God, of Angels, or of men;
being all forms most like unto their kinds: for it is impossible for Bodies
to be formed without the will of God; Species to be fashioned without the help
of Spirits, or brute Beasts to be ordered or disciplined without men.
Whatsoever therefore ill Spirits swarving from their kind are joined into the
form of any Species of a divine Genus, are by that Proximity and nearness
accounted like unto Gods, but the Species of which Spirits, persevering in the
quality of their kind, and these loving the wisdom of man are called Spirits:
there is also the like Species of men, but more large; for the Species of
mankind is of many Shapes, and full of variety, and coming from above from the
aforesaid fellowship makes a conjunction of necessity almost with all other
Species, in which respect it comes nearest to God; who with Divine worship has
joined himself unto God, even in that holiness he requires; and they come
nearest to ill Spirits, who join themselves to them: and those men who are
contented with a mediocrity in their Genus, shall be like those Species they
resemble and join themselves to.

The COMMENTARY.
The Second Chapter for the better understanding of what is and shall be said,
intimates that Mercurius does use the word Animal in a far other signification
then we have accustomed, as also the word Anima. For out of the Second Dialogue
of Pimander he defines the Soul by motion; wherefore whatsoever has a moving
faculty by the observance of his speech, has Animam a Soul, whatsoever has
Soul and Body is Animal. The Heaven therefore is an Animal, so likewise the
world, Plants, and the Elements. But it is our custom only to call that an
Animal, which is a living Creature, and has sense; Anima we define not only by
motion but by Life, Sense, Voluntary motion, and Understanding. Therefore when
we hear of the word Animal let us take it in his sense, and not in our own. But
now to the Dialogue; he compares Heaven and Heavenly bodies to other sensible
things as a man to other Creatures; but yet man with other Creatures as a
reasonable Soul, and Heaven with other sensible things as a sensible preserver.
But that God is the Ruler and Governor of all thingst which are in the world,
is nothing else, but that God provideth for all things, dispenses all things
in their kinds and Species, of all which the World is the receptacle, and God
imparteth to every one as to a fit instrument some gift or propriety; as the
Sun and Moon are the Divine Organs for the Springing and growing of things, and
for their increase, and decrease, and disposes of men by Angels, and of brutes
by men. But what he speaks of spirits, that Species cannot be formed without
their help, and that certain have cleaved to a divine Genus, and in nearness
and conversation have been accounted like unto Gods, and certain in the quality
of their Genus to have persevered Lovers of the wisdom of men. We know, out of
the sacred Scriptures, that those Angels which kept not their first State, but
left their habitation, were reserved in everlasting chains, under darkness unto
the judgment of the great day: for albeit they counterfeit themselves to be
Lovers of men, yet they love them not, but draw them to the same damnation
which they themselves have had from the Beginning. They counterfeited even to
love, when they brought death upon all men, saying, Ye shall not die, but shall
be as Gods knowing good and evil: what therefore he here speaks of Angels or
Spirits, can not seem fitly to be applied to any divine knowledge, but to
imitate the error of the Gentiles; but what he speaks of men are those which
cleave unto God and grow religious; but those which join themselves unto evil
Spirits we confess to be those which shall be received into the Company of
Devils, and shall be joined unto the evil Angels which shall be reserved, (as
has been said) in eternal chains under darkness unto the great day; for we
know it pronounced out of Gods mouth what he will say to them on the left hand
in the day of Judgment, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire,
prepared for the Devil, and his angels; and who are those, but those who are
joined unto them, and love the works of darkness in this life?

Thus much for the Second Chapter.
CHAP. III.
IN this regard, O Asclepius, Man is a great miracle, a Creature both to be
reverenced and honored being after the nature and Image of God, as though he
were a God. This the Angels know, for as much as they were created after the
same nature, but disdained part of the humane Nature, and relied only on the
Divine Nature. O therefore, the more temperate the Nature of man is, and comes
nearest to God and to the divinity, the more he despises that part of his,
whereby he becomes earthly; all other things below, with whom he must needs be,
he knows with a Heavenly disposition, and are near unto him in way of
Charity, yet his desires are in heaven: so therefore he is happily placed in
the midst, that what things are here below him he loves, and is himself
beloved of those things above. He inhabiteth the earth, and by his agility is
mixed with the Elements, yet by the sharpness of his understanding he diveth
into the depths of the Se^; all things appear manifest to him neither do the
Heavens seem to be above his reach, but as it were near by the quickness of
his Spirit; no obscurity or darkness of Air, can disturb his fantasy, no
thickness of ground can hinder his endeavor, nor depth of water hinder his
eyesight; all things are the same with him, even all creatures whether they
take root from above or below. Things without life, grow upwards from one root
into woods and bushes; some are nourished with two Elements, some with one; the
food is for two parts, the Life and the Body, of which the Animal consists.
The soul of the World is always nourished by a continual and restles
agitation. Corporeal things increase and are nourished by such things which
the water and earth affords. The Spirit, of which all things are full, is
mixed with all things, quickens and inlivens all things, adding sense unto the
understanding of man, which fifth part by Divine Inspiration is only granted to
man; and which not to be seen in any other Creatures does beautify advance and
lift up the understanding of manto the knowledge of divine mysteries; but for
that I am put in mind to speak of the understanding, I will hereafter expound
the reason of it unto you; for it is most holy, excellent, and no less than
that which belongs to the Divinity it self: but now I will dispatch what I
began; for I said in the beginning, that in the nearness and conjunction of
the Deity only, men enjoy the favor of God: for whosoever have attained to so
much felicity, that they perceive that Divine Sense of Understanding, they are
nearest unto the Divinity and Wisdom of God, which men only partake of.

Asclep. O Trismegistus, there is not a like understanding of all men.

Trism. O Asclepius, All men have not attained that true Understanding, but
apprehending some false fantasy, and that without any true reason, out of a
rash opinion, are merely deceived, which begets wickedness in the mind, and
transforms the best man into the nature and likeness of a beast. But of the
Understanding and the like, when I come to speak of the Spirit, I will give you
the full reason; for man is only of two parts: the one part simple, which the
Graecians call (...), or which we call the Image of God; but the other
fourfold, which the Graecians call (...), and we the earthly substance, or
pourtraiture, being ^he body, in which is enclosed that which we have affirmed
to be the divine part of man, which is his Soul. In which the pure Divinity of
the Soul, with the sense and feeling of a clear conscience, rests at peace
within it self, as within a Castle of Defense.

The COMMENTARY.
This third Chapter extolleth the dignity of man, in which the Author of so
great benefits is chiefly to be acknowledged, and for ever to be praised and
la^ded, who has honored man with such excellent gifts; for, as he means,
man is made, that he might be like unto Angels, acknowledging them both to be,
and that they are born with him, whom he has to be his Guaraians and
Preservers, even from the first beginni^g of his nativity, consisting of a
nature near unto Immortality, marked with the character or image of God,
compounded of a mortal and immortal, earthly and supernatural part: but who
soareth after divine things, despises and undervalues these earthly, has his
assistance in immortal and heavenly things, looks up and sighs after Heaven,
knowing that to be the place of the better part of him, and of nearest affinity
to his Soul: nevertheless, he is placed here in the midst of the world,
tying other things here below unto him, with whom (by Divine Ordinance) he
knows he must needs be in the bond of love and charity, loving so these earthly
things, that he may be loved of heavenly. He inhabiteth the earth by his
agility, is mixed with the elements, and by the sharpness of his understanding
descends into the de^ All things are manifest to hi^ Heavens seem not to be
above his reach: for that by the quickness of his Spirit he perceives them to
be (as it were) near unto him. The darkness of the air can neither confound
the intention of his mind, nor yet the thickness of the earth hinder his
endeavor, or the depth of the waters obscure his eyesight, and above all
creatures, God has beautified, advanced, and lifted up the understanding of
man, to partake of Divine Knowledge; the understanding being only the
celestial and immortal part, and challenges a Divine Essence, and some men
have attained to this Divine Knowledge, and therein are happy, bearing always
a zealous and religious mind toward God. Others content themselves only with
a shadow of Divine Knowledge, which wh^ so follows, erreth and (...) ^eived;
for this mist of a (...) of godliness, beg^tteth wickedness in their minds
which are so deceived, and transforms a man (though by nature (...) creature
good and divine) into the likeness and condition of a beast.

CHAP. IV.
ASclep. Why then, O Trismegistus, must man have his abode in the world, and
not most happily live in that part where God is?

Trism. Thou rightly inquire, Asclepius: For we also beseech God, that he
will enable us to give the reason; for seeing all things depend on his will,
then even those also which are most mysterious; the reason of which we
endeavor to unfold, by our present discourse: Hear therefore, O Asclepius: The
Lord who is the Creator of all things, whom we truly call God, made the world
first, which might be perceived and seen: but yet I affirm it to have no sense.
For of this, whether it has or no, I will declare another time; but so that it
may be seen of all. Because therefore he made this first, and that the work
seemed fair and good unto him, as most full of the variety of good things, he
loved it as a part of his Divinity and Power; and therefore, because it was of
such excellency and goodness, he would have Man made, that he might behold
the works he had thus made, and likewise imitate his Wisdom and Providence; for
the will of God is the chiefest perfection, in that he fulfilled both his will
and his deed, in one and the same moment of time. When therefore God perceived
that that image of his (the Soul) could not be studious of all things, unless
he should cloth it with an earthly covering, he builded for it this house of
clay, confounding and mixing both parts into one, as much as each body should
be capable: Wherefore he made Man of an immortal Soul, and mortal Body, that
being a Creature thus composed, he might satisfy both ends, which was, to be
in admiration of Heaven and to pray for spiritual and heavenly things, and to
inhabit, and govern these earthly things below: and I do not only avouch the
Earth and the Water to be mortal things, which two (out of the four Elements)
Nature has subjected to the use of man; but all other things whatsoever
belonging to man, as tillage, pastorage, buildings, ports, shipping,
navigation, traffic, and merchandise, which is the strongest bond of humane
Society: And there is a part of the world which is Water and Earth that which
is the Earthly part of the world is preserved for the knowledge and use of
Arts, and discipline without which God would not have the world to be perfect,
for necessity follows the pleasure of God; and the effects follow his will,
for it is not credible that God should be displeased with his own will for he
knew long bebefore what would be, and what would please him.

The COMMENTARY.
This fourth Chapter, why God did not place man in the spiritual region but in
this world; and the answer is plain, and also why he formed man of both
natures a mortal and immortal; and why the soul which he created after his
own Image and likeness, he put in a corporeal and earthy closure; and that
the will of God is the chief perfection of things, which necessity follows, and
effect the necessity; for God fulfilled both his will, and his deed in one and
the same ^ment of time. That he calls the world, the second Deity, is as much
as if you should call a second dueti^ and unity; for two is one and one two,
but one is absolutely one, but two not absolutely one but by participation and
contraction one, and the duity one. So there is one absolutely God, but the
world is not God, but God by participation, being the very stamp of all
sensible and delectable things.

Thus, for the fourth part of Ascl^pius.
CHAP. V.
BUt, O Asclepius, I observe that thou do earnestly desire to hear, how a
man may come to enjoy that musical harmony and divine Worship, which belongs
to heaven. Wherefore hear, O Asclepius, there is one frequent assembly amongst
men for this service of God; and this no other Creature can perform but man
alone. For God is only pleased and delighted that man should extol his admired
work, sing praises of thanksgiving unto him, and perform such worship and
service as belongs to his holy name. Neither do those heavenly graces
unworthily descend into the congregations of men, lest that this earthly World
should seem unbeautified in respect of the want of this heavenly and sweet
Music; but rather that his name who is the Father of all things, might be
celebrated with the well tuned voices, and comely praises of men. So that
neither in heaven nor earth this sweet Harmony of thanksgiving might cease; for
there are some men (though few in number) that are endued with so divine and
holy a spirit, that their care is only to please, reverence, and serve the
Lord: but whosoever ever through the confusion of both natures, the flesh
prevailing, have darkened their spiritual understanding, they are so much given
over to their own lusts, and are only intent upon these outward and lower
things. Therefore a man is not to be esteemed the weaker in respect that he is
in part mortal, but peradventure thereby he may seem the more fitly and
effectualley composed to increase in full knowledge and understanding, to wit,
because unless he had been made of both natures he could not have sustained
both, therefore was he framed of both that he might have both an earthly and
divine choice. I desire thee O Asclepius, not only to harken unto the reason of
this tractate; but also to entertain it with much Zeal and fervency of Spirit.
For the reason to many is incredible, but to devouter minds it seems true and
good; wherefore from hence I will begin.

The COMMENTARY.
This fifth Chapter sets forth that sweet Music granted to men, to set forth
the praises of God, which we know the prophet did well conceive, who being full
of the spirit of God, commanded to sing psalms unto the Lord with a loud
voice, and in the assemblies to praise the Lord, upon the Cymbals, upon the
L^e, Harp and Organs, for this is the chief and both of singing and Musicks.
The Letter is in it self conspicuous.

CHAP. VI.
THe Lord of eternity is first God, secondly the World, and thirdly Man. The
maker of the World is God, and all things therein governing all things with man
whom he has appointed Uicegerent or governor, whom he has made properly to
take the Charge of his whole work, that both he and the world might be an
Ornament of praise unto himself, that by this divine composition of man, the
world in Greek might be the more truly called (...), that is, an Order or
Ornament. For he knew himself, and knew the world to wit that remembering what
resemblance it had with his parts, what was for his use, and what for his
service, He might labor to give praise and great thanks unto God and to
honor his Image; being not Ignorant, that he was made also after the Image of
God, of which there are two Images, to wit the world and man; whereby it comes
to pass, that for as much as there is but one joining together on that part,
he consists of soul and sense, and Spirit and understanding he is divine, and
thereby may seem to ascend up into heaven; but on his earthly part which
consists of fire, water, and air, he remains a mortal Creature upon earth, is
altogether fixed on the things below and swallowed up of Nature; for so man is
partly divine and partly mortal abiding in one body, but he has a measure of
each.

Religion before all men (which a virtuous life follows) seems only then to be
perfect, when there is a contempt of all lustful desires and unlawful
concupiscence, assisted with all manner of virtues. For all such things are
contrary to the Soul and Spiritual understanding, which are possessed with a
corporal, and earthly desirel which are well called by the name of goods or
possessions, in that they are not born with us but afterward are possessed of
us, wherefore all things of this kind are differing from man that we may even
despise the body, and those things which we greedily cover, or any vice or
wickedness which we lustfully desire, for so far as he is led by reason; so
far he is a man; that contemplating of the divinity, he may contemn and despise
that part of his, which is mortal, but only so far as necessity compells for
preservation of the soul. For, that man may be most perfect in either part,
observe him in each to be formed of four Elements, or principal parts with two
hands and two feet, and other members of his body, with which he may do service
to this lower or earthly world, but with his other four parts, to wit, his
understanding, soul, memory, and providence, he searches and looks into all
divine causes and things, from whence it happens that man with a Restles search
enquires into the diversities, qualities, and effects of things. But being
hindered by the weight, and too much imperfection of his body, he cannot
properly foresee the true natural causes of things. This man therefore, so
framed and fashioned, and that for such a ministry and service commanded of
the great God, as in decently governing the world, piously worshipping his God,
and worthily and fitly obedient to both the wills of God, what gift do thou
think he shall be recompensed with? for seeing that this world is the work of
God, and man by his labor and industry preserves and increases the beauty of
it, joyneth his labor with the will of God, when by the help of his body, and
by daily pains and care he adorneth that Species and form, which by divine
wisdom he first created, but with that with which our parents were rewarded?
with which also that we may be rewarded if it may seem good to his wisdom, we
do most earnestly pray and desire, that he will release and free us out of this
worldly prison, deliver us from these earthly bonds; and restore us like unto
the divine nature, pure and holy.

Asclep Thou say thevery truth, O Trismegistus, for this is their reward who
live piously toward God, and faithfully to the World; but to them that live
otherwise and wickedly, both a passage is denied them into heaven, and a
fearful change into other shapes, unbeseeming a righteous soul. But to
proceed, O Trismegistus, sundry souls under the hope of future eternity are
much endangered in this world, which seems to some Incredible, to some
Fabulous and to others Ridiculous; for the fruit which is reapded by worldly
possessions in this temporal life, seems to be a very sweet thing; wherefore
it obliquely holds the soul, that it cleaves too much on that part of it
which is mortal, neither suffers it to take notice of the divine part, envy
hating immortallity: for I will, as it were by foreknowledge tell you, that
none after us shall have simple election, which is true Philosophy; being a
frequent beholding a holy worship and knowledge of the divinity, for many do
confound it after a diverse manner; how therefore do many men corrupt this
incomprehensible Philosophy, or diversely confound it.

Trism. O Asclepius, in this manner mixing it by subtle devices into diverse
disciplines not comprehensible, Arithmetic Music Geometry, but pure
Philosophy, and that only hanging upon divine religion, ought to apply it self
wholly to the rest, that it may admire the course of the Stars and Planets,
their appointed stations, and their Commutations and changes to consist of
numbers: but the dimensions, qualities, and quantities of the earth, the depth
of the Sea, the Virtue of fire, and the effects of all these, acknowledging
nature that it may admire, adore, and praise art and an excellent
understanding. But to know Music is nothing else then to know the Order of all
things, which pertakes of divine wisdom; for an order of all things
artificially pitched upon one general, will make in divine Melody a certain
sweet sounding and most true Harmony.

Asclep. What then shall become of men after us.

Trism. They shall be deceived by the Subt^ty of Sophisters, and turned away
from pure and divine Philosophy; for out of a pure mind and soul, to worship
God, to honor him in his works, and to give thanks unto him for his will,
which is only full of goodness, this is Philosophy violated or corrupted by
no foolish or unseasonable curiosity of the mind; and of these, thus far.

The COMMENTARY.
This sixth Chapter discourses that God is the first God absolutely, the World
the second, not absolutely but by participation God, as which is the first
Image of an absolutely deity; man, the third God by participation of the
divinity, and the second Image of God: but God is not an Image, but the truth
of all Images, that man may ascend up into heaven by his soul, by his
understanding, by his spirit, by his reason, as it were by the Superior
Elements. But wherein he is made of fire, of air, of water, and earth, he is
subject to death, and to dote upon all wordly things, deprived of that divine
part; That the measure after which a man ought to live, is religion which
goodness follows, and which seems to be perfect, when being armed with Virtue
it despises the coveting of other men's goods or any thing hurtful to it, as
possessions, the body it self, and all those things we lust after, even the
very sense of appetite. For so far he ought to be called a man, whiles that
this opinion is led only by reason, and that in contemplation of the divinity
he contemns and despises that part of him which is mortal; more then may
serve for the preservation of his life.

Asclepius divineth that of the succeeding Egyptians, that there shall be none
after them to attain to the pure Philosophy of the knowledge of God. Now Hermes
asks, to what end man ought to learn the dimensions of the earth, that is
Geometry, the qualities, quantities, the depth of the Sea, and the nature of
fire, and the effects of all these, that is the Universal Philosophy of
numbers, celestial globes, and natural things, certainly to admire, adore,
and praise, the Art, excellent Invention and Workman of all these for this is
pure Philosophy and only depending upon divine religion; this is Music, this
is harmony, to know the order of all things, which all divinity partaketh of,
and which artificially pitched upon one general, will make in divine melody, a
certain well tuned and most sweet harmony and that is Philosophy, which is
corrupted by no unfit curiosity of the mind, which with a pure soul and mind
does worship the diety, and honor his works, as also to give thanks for the
will of God, which is so full of goodness, and confirms the Prophecy of
Asclepius.

This is the sixth partition.
CHAP. VII.
OF a Spirit, and such like, I will now begin. There was God, and Hyle, which
in Greek signifies the world, and the Spirit was in the world; but not as with
God, neither are those things God, of which the world is, wherefore they were
not, when they were not created; but even then they were in that, from whence
they had their being. For those things are not only said to be, which are not
yet created, but those also which have not a fruitfulness in generating; so
that nothing can be produced and generated of them. Whatsoever things therefore
have in them a nature of conceiving, those are things apt to engender, which
may be created of these, albeit they engender, or are created of themselves;
wherefore God everlasting, God eternal, neither is, or could be begotten; he
both is, has been, and ever shall be. This is that therefore which in it self
is the whole nature of God.

But the nature of the world, and of the Spirit, albeit they seem to be created
from the beginning; yet they have in themselves a virtue of begetting and
procreation, as also fruitfulness; for a beginning is in the quality of the
nature, which contains in it self a quality, and nature of conception and
birth. This is therefore only generable, or easy to be ingendered without the
conception of another; but that which has in it only the virtue of
conceiving, is by the mixture of another nature. So they are to be discerned,
that this place of the world may not seem to be created with those things which
are in themselves, as which has in it self the power of whole Nature. I call
it a place in which are all things; for neither could all these things be, if a
place were wanting which might contain all things; for a place was to be
provided for all things that were; for neither the quantities, nor qualities,
nor situations, or effects, can be known of things which are not: therefore the
world, albeit it be not so created, yet it contains in it self the nature of
all things, as which gives (in all things) rich and fruitful matter to
conceive. This is therefore that whole quality and matter which may be created,
albeit it be not created: For as Nature is a fruitful matter of quality, so
the same is as fruitful in malignity. Neither have I said, O Asclepius and
Amnon, which is said of ^any, whether God could wea^ and turn away evil from
the nature of things? To which we ^nswer not at all; yet for your ^akes I will
prosecute what I began, and give a reason: For they affirm, that God ought all
manner of ways to have freed the world from wickedness; for he is so in the
world, as though he seems to be a member, or part of it; for it is so provided
and ordained by the most high God, as much as with reason he could then, when
he has vouchsafed to dignifie the minds of men with sense, discipline, and
understanding; for with those things in which we excel other creatures, we can
only shun the deceit of sin, guile, and all other corruption. For he, before
that he is ensnared in them, shall by the very sight and ugliness of them,
avoid them, that man is guarded with divine knowledge and wisdom; for it is the
foundation of discipline, consisting in the excellency of knowledge: for by
the Spirit all things are ministered, and refreshed in the world, and (as it
were) an organ, or instrument, is subject to the will of the great God.
Wherefore hitherto in our souls, let us conceive of that wise Moderatour and
sensible Governor of God, which is called the Spirit, or holy Ghost, which
comprehends in it self every place, and the substance of every thing, and the
full matter of things begotten and created; and whatsoever else in the world,
either for substance, quality, or quantity: for all the Species in the world,
and every thing according to that nature which is given it of God, is moved and
governed by the Spirit. But the world is the receptacle of all things, and the
haunt and place to move in for all creatures, of which God is the Governor,
dispensing in all worldly things, as much as is necessary to every one, who
with his Spirit fills all things, of what nature and quality so ever. For the
world is round like unto a Ball or sphere, being for the form or qualities sake
invisible to it self. For if you shall choose any high place in it only to look
down, thou can not see from thence what is below, and because it consists of
many places and parts, it is supposed to have a quality and by the alone forms
of the Species, in whose Effigies it seems to be engraven, it is supposed to be
visible, when it is showed, drawn out, or painted, but indeed it is always to
it self invisible. Whereby, the bottom or lowest part of the Sphere (if there
be any) is called in Greek (...), for (...) in the Greek tongue signifies to
see, which sight the bottom of the Sphere may want, whereupon the Species are
called (...), for that they are of an invisible form; and for that they are
deprived of light, the Grecians call (...), and for that they are in the bottom
of the Sphere, the Latins, Insert. These are therefore the ancient principles,
or are (as it were) beginnings and heads of all things contained in any part or
parts of these.

Asclep. All these things therefore, as you speak of, which are earthly, O
Trismegistus, are present as well in every Species, as in the full substance of
every thing.

Trism. Therefore the world nourishes the bodies, the Spirit the life or soul
and sense, or reason; the understanding being a gift with which man is only
enriched, neither all men but few who have a heart and judgment to be capable
of so great a benefit: for as the world is enlightened by the Sun, so man's mind
is illuminated by this light and much more. For whatsoever the Sun does
enlighten, by the Eclipses and interposition of Earth and the Moon, and by the
approach of night, it loses, and is deprived of that light: but reason when it
shall be once mixed with man's Soul it becomes, by that lively and growing
mixture, of one nature with it. So that minds thus qualified are never
entangled with misty and obscure errors. Whereby the sense or reason may well
be said tobe the soul or Spirit of God; but I say not of all, but of some
excellent, and principal ones.

The COMMENTARY.
The seventh Chapter contains a hidden Philosophy of the generation, and
matter of the World, of the Spirit accompanying it, and of the place. The world
in God he calls the Continent place, wherefore he will not have the place of
the world to be created, but that it is created and not created, created indeed
if you respect the workmanship of the Creatures, and not created if you respect
the truth of the workmanship. For the world and the spirit, to wit the world
and a certain divine power passing, and disfusing it self through all things,
were not in the world when they were not created, but he says they were in
that from whence they were to be created; but in what where they, but in that
divine word by which all things were made? But in which and what was made was
life, and from whence at length everything came that was made. The world to be
as fruitful in evil as good, being as capable of evil as good, as the Earth is
fruitful both of medicinable Herbs and hurtful Weeds; and that the earth has
by a kind of propriety, so likewise the World notwithstanding God (as much as
with reason he might) has provided for men reason, discipline, and
understanding, against this kind of material propriety, least sin should
overrunne the World, as brambles and hurtful weeds, a neglected and untilled
desert or wilderness. Moreover of the spirits disfused through all things, and
those things that be under us, of sense or reason, which is a distilling of
divine graces into men's souls, as of the Sun beams on the eyes, he discourses
somewhat in this seventh part.

CHAP. VIII.
Asclep. Whom affirm you, O Trismegistus, to be the heads and beginnings of the
first Principles.

Trism. I reveal and disclose unto thee great and divine Mysteries of which I
now begin by the desired help and assistance of God. There are diverse kinds of
Gods, and of those one part intelligible, another sensible. They are called
intelligibles, not because they may be supposed not to be subject to our
senses, (for we perceive them more then those which we call visibles) as our
discourse shall show, and thou if thou mark it may perceive: for divine
reason passing beyond the reach and capacity of men, if thou with good care,
and great attention listen not unto the speakers, will fly away and pass
through thee, and return to the Fountain of it own waters. There are therefore
chief Lords o^ Gods of all Species, the Prince of whom is U^a; these are like
one to another in their Original, who by nature e^ct all things, every one
illuminating one another work. The chief Lord of Heaven or whatsoever is
concluded under that name, is Jupiter, for from Heaven Jupiter gives life to
all. The chief Lord of the Sun, is the Light. For the benefit of light is
distributed unto us by the globe of the Sun. There are 34. Lords of the
horoscope, or which speculate into the Hours of Nativity, placed always
amongst the fixed Planets, the Prince of these they call (...), that is, which
has all snapes or which, in different Species, makes diverse Shapes. The seven
wandering Planets have also their Lords which they call, Fortune and Fate by
which all things are changed which, were firmly stablished by the law of
nature, and altered by a continual motion. But the Air is the Organ or
instrument of all things, in which all things are brought to pass; and the
chief Lord or Prince of this is second in degree conferring mortal things, and
the like, upon mortal Creatures. These things therefore being so, that these
lower things are moved by the higher; So likewise all natural things are
joined to themselves, as mortal things with mortal, and sensible things with
sensible. But the chief matter of Government, belongs to that great Lord, being
not many but only one for from that one all things de^end: rather flowing from
him when they seem to be distant, and are supposed to be a many things apart by
themselves but indeed are united: being one or rather two from whom all things
are effected, and from which they are created; that is, the matter of which
they are made, and from his will by which other things are brought to pass.

Asclep. Again, what is the reason of this, O Trismegistus?

Trism. This, O Asclepius. For God the Father, or the Lord of all things, and
whatsoever name he is more religiously and devoutly called of men, which ought
for our understanding sake to be reverenced of us, in contemplation of so great
a Majesty, we have expressly called him by none of those names, for if this
sound uttered, sets forth the whole will of man or that understanding he
shall conceive by the spirit; the substance of which name consisting of a few
syllables, is limited and circumscribed, that there might be in man a necessary
and familiar intercourse betwixt the voice, and the ears, the spirit and the
understanding, and so of all things by these: Whether then the name of God be
complete or wholly in these? for I suppose not, that the efficient cause of
all Majesty, and the Father and Lord of all things, can be expressed by one
name though compounded of many Syllables: it is necessary therefore that he
should be called not by one name but rather by all names, (seeing that he is
both one and all things) being meet that all things should be his name; or that
He should be styled by the name of All. This therefore being but one, as being
all, is full of the fruitfulness of both natures, and rich in his own will
brings forth whatsoever he has a desire to create. His will is all goodness,
and this same goodness pertaines to all things, from his divinity nature
proceeds that all things may be as they are, and have been and in all things
which shall be, nature hence forward may of it self be sufficient to beg^t. Let
this therefore be the reason given thee, O Asclepius, wherefore and how all
things, of both sexes are made.

Asclep. You mean God, Trismegistus?

Trism. Not only God, O Asclepius, but all Creatures having life, and all
Creatures without life; for it is impossible that any of those things which
are, should be unfruitful, for fruitfulness being barred from all things that
are, it will be impossible that there be a perpetuity of those things which
are: for, I say, that Nature and Reason, and the World do contein in them this
nature, and preserve in themselves all things created; for every Sex is full of
procreation, and the Conjunction or uniting of both is incomprehensible, which
you may call Venery or lust or both: this therefore being well understood and
clearly conceived, that from the God of nature the invention and office of
procreation is for ever, in whom is naturally perfect charity, joy, mirth, and
divine love; and it might be said how great the force and necessity of his
ministry is but that by the contemplation of him, it is manifest to every ones
understanding. For if you o bserve the first time wherein we are fashioned, how
both natures frames an ofpring either Male, or Female, how that the one
greedily snatcheth the seed of the other, and shuts it up close within the
womb, and lastly how by that common Conjunction at the same time they beget men
and women, which the woman for a certain time bears in her womb. The effects
therefore of so pleasing, and necessary a work, is committed in the dark, lest
that by the derisions and mockings of common ignorant fools, the divinity of
nature by the conjunction of both sexes, should be compelled to blush, if it
should be subject to the open view of irreligious and ungodly persons, for
there are very few in the world that may be counted modest and religious,
whereby it hapeneth that in many there remains malice and lewdness, through
the want of wisdom and knowledge in those things which are: for by the
understanding of divine knowledge, and re^igion, by which all things are
sweetly disposed, and ordered, there is not only a contempt of, but also
medicine for all the evils in the world: but so long as ignorance and want of
knowledge abide, there all manner of sin gets head, and wounds the soul with
incurable Vices, which being infected, and defiled with them, swells it, as it
were with Poison, which cannot be cured but by a soul furnished with divine
graces and understanding. If therefore only to a few this shall be profitable,
it is meet to prosecute and conclude this tractate, to wit, wherefore God has
vouchsafed to impart, only unto men understanding and discipline. Hear
therefore, when God the Father, and Lord of all things, had after other
inferior Gods or Angels made man of the corrupter part of the world, and of a
like measure of divinity, it happened that sin did remain mixed with those
Bodies, with a necessary desire after food and living, (which nature has given
in common to other living creatures) as also other affections and vices of the
mind incident to man's corruption. But the Angels which were made of the purest
part of nature, and wanting no helps of Reason and Knowledge, and in a
continual state of immortality yet for unity of order, and for disclipine, and
understanding he has ordained by an eternal Law, (being an order by the Law of
necessity limited) that they should not be far from them, or much different in
nature; appointing man above all creatures to be only endued with reason and
knowledge by which he might shun the corruption and vices of his body, has
assigned them for the purpose and hope of immortality, finally he has made man
that he might be immortal of a divine and mortal nature, that it might appear
that man being thus made after the will of God, is in better state then the
Angels, who are made only of an immortal nature, as also all other mortal
creatures. In which respect, man coming nearest to the nature of God he should
worship him in pure and undefiled religion with an honest heart, and that the
Angels with a pious and loving affection should pity and preserve all humane
things. But this is spoken of some few men who are endued with cha^t and pure
affections; we have nothing to do with the Vicious, lest this holy discourse be
defiled by the thought of them.

The COMMENTARY.
This eighth Chapter treats of the material Lords or Princes, which he
calls Gods: The Lord of Heaven he calls Jupiter; the Lord of the Sun, the
Light: he reckons 34 Horoscopes, or markers of the hours of childrens nativity
in the same place of the fixed Planets, and the chief of these he calls
Pantomorphos, and the Lords of the seven wandering Spheres, or Planets, he
makes Fortune, and Fate: also he appoints a Lord of the air: but these seem
to be the fictions of Devils, and certain vanities smelling of the errors of
the Gentiles, and which cause those which trust in them, rather to perish, than
to be in any safety. From hence he returns to the contemplation of the most
high and ineffable God, or which is to be named by all names, being full of
fruitfulness, whereby all things have that which makes them altogether
fruitful: From hence is that love of procreation, and that great work of
Nature, which has nothing deformed or unseemly in it, whiles that the
thoughts, speech, and actions be modest and religious; for that is given and
permitted for the imitation of divine fruitfulness. But because the greatest
part of men is ignorant of these mysteries, they profane these divine Laws, and
after the manner of bruit beasts, unreverently, unseemly, and outragiously use
these things; therefore we dare not speak of such things, even for modesties
sake, because those inordinate and irreverent thoughts and gestures are apt to
thrust themselves into the minds of men, and not that seemly, holy, and
undefiled Ordinance of God: and because few have pure and good affections, I
suppose that we should neither think, or speak much of this matter. Then he
adds, that God has bestowed only upon men reason and understanding, whereby
that immortal, and divine part of him, might shun vices, which otherwise, by
the admixture of his earthly substance, he might easily run into: for by reason
of this body and dissoluble part, men must needs fall into lusts, and other
temptations of the mind.

This, of the eighth Part.
CHAP. IX.
ANd because we are now speaking of the similitude, and mutual fellowship of
men and God, acknowledge, O Asclepius, the authority and power of man. For as
the Lord and Father, or most high God, is the Creator of the heavenly Gods or
Angels; so Man is the creator of those gods which are set in Temples,
contented to be neighbors unto men, and are not only illuminated* but do also
illuminate, doing not only good unto men, but also confirms that there is a
God. Do wonder at this, O Asclepius, or do thou doubt of it, as many do?

Asclep. I am confounded, O Trismegistus: but giving credit to what you say, I
judge man to be most happy, who has attained to so great blessedness.

Trism. Neither unworthily is he worthy of admiration, who is the greatest
amongst the gods. For the Genus of all things is manifest without confusion,
being propagated of the purest part of Nature, and the similitudes of them to
be (as it were) the heads of all; but the Species of the gods, which man
represents, is fashioned of two natures; Divine, which is the more excellent
and noble part; and Earthly, which is that which is here conversant in earth,
and which consists of the whole Fabric, or several parts of the outward Man.
So Man being mindful of his Divine Nature and Original, remains still in the
likeness of God. For as the Father and the Lord has made eternal Gods, that
might be like unto him. So man has fashioned out unto himself gods; after the
similitude of his own countenance.

Asclep. Do you mean images, O Trismegistus?

Trism. Do you not see how far you are mistaken? living images, full of sense
and spirit, doing such and so great things! Images having foreknowledge of
things to come, and foretelling by many other things, infirmities, cares, and
sorrows, which shall happen deservedly to men. Are you ignorant, O Asclepius,
that Egypt is the image of Heaven, or, which is more true, a translation of
descension of all things, which are governed and exercised in Heaven? And if we
speak rightly, Our land is the Temple of the whole World, and yet for that it
beseems wise men to foreknow all things, it behooves you not to be ignorant,
that the time will come when it may appear, that the Egyptians have by a
constant and pious practice in religion served God in vain, and all their holy
worship shall become void, and of no effect: For the Divinity shall return back
from Earth into Heaven, Egypt shall be forsaken, and the Land which was the
seat of the Divinity, shall be destitute of Religion, and deprived of the
presence of the Deity. For when strangers shall possess, and fill up this Land
and Kingdom, not only there shall be a neglect of Religion; but, which is more
miserable, there shall be Laws enacted against Religion, Piety, and Divine
Worship, with punishment inflicted upon those that seem to favor it: then this
holy seat shall be full of Iolatry, Idols Temples, and dead men's Sepulchers. O
Egypt, Egypt, there shall remain only a fained show of thy Religion, and
which will seem incredible to posterity; and only letters shall stand engraven
upon thy pillars, which may declare thy pious deeds, and in thee shall inhabit
the Scythian, Indian, or some other near barbarous Nation. For the Divinity
shall fly to Heaven, the whole Nation forsaken shall die, and so Egypt shall
be forsaken of God and man. I call upon thee, thou most holy River, and presage
unto thee things which shall come to pass; thy waters and divine streams shall
be filled with blood, which shall overflow thy banks, and make a violent
inundation, so that there shall be more dead than living, and he that remains
alive, shall only by his language be known to be an Egyptian, but by his
deeds he shall seem a Barbarian. Why weep you, O Asclepius, Egypt shall be
furnished with far greater, and worse evils than these, she being heretofore a
holy and great Favourer of the Deity, and Divine Worship and Religion, and that
worthily upon earth, separated alone from other Nations, became the Mistress
of Sanctity and Piety, shall be an example of the greatest cruelty, and then
with grief of heart, the world shall not seem to be admired and adored. This
whole good (than the which there neither is, has, or shall be any thing that
shall appear, of more excellency) shall be endangered, and seem burdenous to
men, and in this respect shall be despised: neither shall the world be
esteemed, which is the immutable work of God, a most glorious Fabric, a work
compounded with the different variety of shapes, an instrument of the will of
God, who in his work (without envy) bespake all things to become one; which,
of the beholders, might be honored, praised, and loved, being an united heap
of sundry shapes. For darkness shall be preferred before light, death shall
seem sweeter than life, no man shall look up to Heaven, a religious man shall
be accounted a mad man, an irreligious and profane person seem wise, a mad man,
valiant; and the worst of all men, good and pious: for the Soul, and all things
about it, wherein it is either mortal, or conceives that it shall attain to
immortality, accordingly as I have declared unto you, shall not only be
esteemed a thing worthy of laughter, but also a mere vanity: For believe me, it
shall be reckoned a capital offense for him that shall study to be religious,
there shall new Statutes and Laws be stablished: nothing which is religious
shall be heard worthy of Heaven, or heavenly things, or be entertained in the
hearts of men: there shall be a separation of God, which is much to be
lamented, from the Society of men, only evil angels shall remain mixed with
the humanity, which shall violently move to all manner of audacious mischiefs,
stir them up to wars, sedition, robberies, deceit, and unto all things contrary
to the disposition of the Soul, then the Earth shall not stand, the Sea shall
not be sailed in; and in Heaven, the course of the Stars and Planets shall
cease, all divine knowledge shall (of necessity) be buried in silence, the
fruits of the earth shall be corrupted, neither shall the earth be fruitful,
and the air it self shall languish with a sorrowful countenance; these and
such like times shall come; irreligion and confusion of the world, with a
senslesnes and vacancy of al good things. When these things shall happen, O
Asclepius, then that Lord and Father God Almighty, Governor only of the
world, looking into the manners, and voluntary deeds of men; after his own will
(which is his goodness) punishing vices, taking away all errors and
corruption, and drowning all manner of wickedness, either by an inundation of
waters, or else consuming them by fire, or else by plague and pestilence, he
will end this world, and restore it to its ancient beauty; so that the world it
self may seem to be admired and honored: and God, the Creator and Restorer of
so great a work, shall of all men then being, be magnified with continual
praises and thanksgivings: For this generation of the world, and the
reformation of all good things, and the most holy and religious restitution of
nature it self, in due time both is, and has been eternal from the beginning,
for the will of God wants beginning, which is the same, and continual in every
place.

Asclep. For the nature of God is the counsel of his will, and his excellent
goodness his counsel, O Trismegistus.

Trism, O Asclepius, his will proceeds from his counsel, and his will from
his will, neither wills he any thing ambitiously which is full of all things,
and those which he wills he has, but he wills all good things, and has all he
wills. For he thinks and wills all good things; but this is God, and the world
is the Image of that Good.

Asclep. Good O Trismegistus.

Trism. Good, as I shall teach thee, O Asclepius, for as God is the dispenser
and giver of all good things, to every Genus and Species in the World, that is,
both of soul and life, so likewise the world is the distributer and giver of
all things, which seem good to mortal creatures, that is, change of parts
seasonable fruits, nativity, increase and maturity, and the like, and by this
God sitting above in the highest Heaven, is every where, and beholds all
things: for there is above these Lower Heavens, a place without Stars, far
from all earthly things, this place betwixt Heaven and Earth the dispenser of
a^l things inhabiteth, whom we call Jupiter, or god, but on the earth and the
Sea, Reigns Jupiter Pluto, and he is the nourisher, and preserver of all
Living and fruitful mortal Creatures, by the power of all these, Fruits,
Trees, Plants, and the ground are refreshed, and the power and effects of other
Gods are distributed through all things that are. They are distributed that
shall bear rule on the Earth, and shall be placed in the very entrance of
Egypt, in that City which is built in the West, or where the Sun sets. To which
place all mortal Creatures both in Land and Sea shall hasten.

Asclep. But at this time where are they, O Trismegistus.

Trism. They are placed in the great City, in the Libyan Mountain, and thus far
this declaration.

The COMMENTARY.
This whole Ninth Chapter is profane. Which Augustine well reproves in his
Book of the City of God. It maintains Idolatry, extolling and setting it forth
with wonderful praises; and the decay or fall of it, it much deplores. In the
highest Heaven, he sets a certain God beholding all things; but, in that
place betwixt Heaven and Earth, he places Jupiter, the disposer, or Steward;
and Pluto Jupiter to be the God, and dispenser on Land, and Sea, as though
there were one God in Heaven, another in the Air, and another on the Land, and
Sea; all which contein an infinite impiety of errors: for out of divine Writ we
are uncorruptly, purely, and holily taught, that the Lord he is God in Heaven
above, and in Earth below, and that there is no other God: but against Idols
and Idolatry the word of God and the ^ly Prophets do warily admonish (...) that
we be not defiled, with so great a blot of impiety, nor corrupted with so great
an error, for the Idol it self is cursed, and him that made it, and again, the
worshipping of cursed Idols is the cause beginning, and end of all mischief. An
Idol maker, and this Idol are both an abomination to the Lord, for both that
which is made, with him that it shall be consumed with fire, these and many
more things of Idolatry out of the Book of wisdom, and in Leviticus God
himself out of his own mouth commands, I am the Lord your God, you shall not
make to your self any Idol, or graven Image, neither shall you erect any
monument, or Pillar in your Land to worship it. And of the Idols of Egypt, he
advertiseth in Ezekiel, Be not polluted with the Idols of Egypt, for I am the
Lord your God: and of their abolishing (...) speaks by the same Prop^ (...)
will destroy their Images and make an end of their Idol Memphis, he shall no
more lead them out of the Land of Egypt. What Mercurius calls the soul
Spirit, and sense of Idols, and Images in that they shall bring diseases, in
firmities, and fears upon men, we know without doubt to be evil Spirits, and
in assurance to be those of which the Prophet truly affirms, that all the
Gods of the gentil^s, are divils, or evil Spirits. Let this little be
sufficient against the impiety of Trismegistus in this ninth part, for we
speak to those who are seasoned with the true knowledge of God, which (as the
wiseman says) to know and understand is perfect righteousness; and to know
his righteousness and power is the root of immortality, Lazarelus draws this
place to an Analogy, as though the Idols were the Apostles; the Image of man,
Christ; the power given from above, the holy Ghost; Egypt, the darkness of
the gentiles; and the persecution of the Disciples Apostles and Martyrs, the
graven pillars declaring their pious works and that the heart of posterity did
ret^ine not their works, but their faith only: these are piously invented, but
per adventure far from the Letter, or meaning. I think with Augustine that
Hermes overshot himself both in this and the 13. Chapter, for they seem to have
the Prophets of the Gentiles, as Balaam and the Sybills, that they may suffer
both Light and darkness the lucid and obscure intermixture of Prophecies
sometimes pure, and sometimes impure:

This, for the ninth Chapter.
CHAP. X.
NOw we are to discourse of mortality and immortality: for hope and fear of
death torments many, which are ignorant of the true reason: for death is caused
by dissolution of the body, tired out with labor and the harmony being ended
whereby the members of the body are fitted into one composition for lively
uses, for the body dies when the vital parts of man fail. This is therefore
death; a dissolution of the body, and an utter decay of the bodily senses,
about which to take thought for, is to no purpose; but there is an other thing
necessary, which either ignorance, or man's incredulity seteth leight by.

Asclep. What is that, O Trismegistus, that they are either ^gnorant of, or
believe not to be?

Trism. Hear therefore, O Asclepius, when there shall be a separation of the
soul from the body, then the Judgment, and examination of his deserts shall
pass over unto the great God; and he when he shall see that it is just and
righteous shall suffer it to abide in a fit Mansion but if he shall see it to
be spotted and defiled with sin and iniquity he will cast it down, and deliver
it to Storms, Whirle-Winds, fire, Lightening, and Tempest; and it shall be
snatched up betwixt Heaven and Earth, with worldly tempests, and with
continual torments, be driven into diverse places, that in this respect the
eternity of them is prejudicious because by an immortal sentence, the Soul is
condemned to everlasting judgment; left therefore we be infolded with these
miseries, know that we must fear tremble, and beware; for the unbelievers are
after their faults and pleasure in sin compelled to believe not by words, but
by examples, not by threatenings but by the very suffering of punishment.

Asclep. Are not then, O Trismegistus, the faults of men punished only by man's
Law.

Trism. Forsooth, O Asclepius, first all earthly things which are mortal, then
those things also which live by corporal reason and which swarve from living
after that Law of reason, all these according to their deserts and faults are
liable to punishment, but after death so much the sorer punishment as their
faults have been concealed and unpunished in this life, for God foreknowing all
things renders a like punishment to evey one according to the measure and
quality of the fault.

Asclep. Who are worthy of the greatest punishment, O Trismegistus.

Trism. Those who being condemned by the Laws of men come to a violent death,
which seem not to yield unto the debt of nature, but to suffer punishment for
their deserts: Contrariwise, God is a shield and defense unto a righteous man,
who loves piety and religion; for he defends such from all manner of dangers
and evils, for the Father and Lord of all things, who alone is all, shows
himself willingly to all, not where he is in place, nor what in quality, nor
how great in quantity, but illuminating man with the alone understandof the
mind, who when the darkness of mind is removed; and the brightness of truth
perceived, participates himself by the full sense of divine knowledge, by whose
love he is freed from that natural part which is mortal, and conceives hope
of future immortality. This therefore shall be the difference betwixt good and
evil men, for every one by piety religion divine worship and reverence of God,
shines and becomes bright as the eyesight, when he has thoroughly seen the
truth of reason, and the confidence of hope and excels so far other men, as
the Sun excels other Stars in his Light: for the Sun it self not so much in
greatness of diety, as in divinity and sanctity illuminateth the other Stars.
For I suppose this, O Asclepius, to be the Second God governing all other
things, and illustrating all worldly things whether they be creatures with life
or without life, for if the creature the world has, is and shall always be
Living, nothing in the world is mortal. For there is no place of mortality, for
every living part which is in the world, as in one and the same continual
living creature, wherefore it ought to be full of life and eternity, if it must
always live. The Sun therefore as the world is eternal, and so is the
governor of life and liveliness, and the continual dispenser of them. He is
therefore the God of the living and of those things which have life in the
world, the continual governor, and eternal dispensator of life it self, for
he has once dispensed by an eternal Law; and gives life to every Living
thing. In this manner which I will speak of, for in that quickness of
eternity, the world is moved, and in that living eternity, is the place of the
world, for which hereafter it shall neither stand nor be destroyed, the world
being entrenched, and as it were wrapped in with the eternity of life. It is
therefore the dispenser or giver of life to all things which are in it, and the
place of all things which are governed under the Sun, the commotion of which
world consists of a twofold effect. For it self is outwardly enlivened from
eternity, and it quickens and inlivens those things which are within it,
differing in proportions, and appointed, and prefixed times, all things are
known and ordered by the effects of the Sun, and by the course, and influence
of the Stars, all temporal things are established by reason and divine Law,
the Earthly seasons are known by the quality of the Air, as either in the
variety of heat, or cold, the Heavenly seasons by the return of the Stars to
the same places, and by the temporal change of tides, and the world is the
receptacle of time, by whose course and motion it is refreshed, but time is
kept by order. Order and time make an innovation of all things which are in the
world by course.

The COMMENTARY.
This Tenth Chapter, speaks of death and the examination of the Soul, when
the body shall die, that they shall be most punished after death, whose life
justly is taken away by men's Laws, for the greatness of their offenses, that
God is a defense to the righteous; of the divinity of the Sun, and the world,
for he puts the World to be the first sensible God, the Sun to be the Second,
that the world shall never take rest, nor be destroyed. But we give not the
incommunicable name of God, neither to the Sun, nor to the world, and believe
that the world shall one day be dissolved. These things therefore being
understood (as the bare words of Hermes show,) they set out the error of the
Gentiles, yet we do grant by participation to these a divinity, as to excellent
works of God.

This the tenth part.
CHAP. XI.
Wherefore all things being so, neither of things created, Heavenly things or
Earthly, is any thing stable fixed or immovable, for only God, and worthily he
alone is in himself from himself, and on all sides wholly full and perfect, and
this is his firm stability which cannot be removed by the enforcement, or
occasion of any other seeing in him are all things, and in all things he is
only, unless any man will dare to say that his motion consists in eternity,
but much rather his eternity is unmovable, into which the motion of all times
returns, and from which the motion of all times takes it beginning. God has
therefore been always stable, and his eternity always a like stable with him,
containing the world not created within himself, which we rightly call
sensible. The Image of this God is the world, which is made an imitator or
resemblance of eternity: for time has the force, and nature of stability in
the very necessity of return again into it self: wherefore albeit eternity be
stable immovable and fixed, yet because by the mobility of time, motion is
always called back into eternity, and that mobility is turned by reason of
time, it comes to pass that eternity it self is certainly immovable, and may
seem only by time to be moved in which it self is, for in that time is all the
motion; so it happens that the stability of eternity is moved, and the
stability of time, becomes stable by the rule of motion, and so it is credible
that God is moved into himself, by the same immoveablenesse, for there is an in
immovable motion in the greatness of his very stability, for the condition of
his greatness is immovable. This therefore which is so, and not obvious to
our senses, is infinite, incomprehensible and inestimable, which can neither be
sustained, reported of, nor found out; whereupon it is uncertain wherein,
where, how, and in what fashion it is: for he is reported to be in the greatest
stability, and in him is his stability, whether he be God or Eternity, whether
the one be in the other, or both in either, for which cause eternity is without
definition of time: but time which may be defined, returning either by order
course or circuit of another is eternal, wherefore both seem to be infinite,
both eternal, for stability considering that it is fixed, for that by the
Benefit of strength it can sustein all things that are moveable, it worthily
obtains Dominion: for the beginning of all things which are, is God, and
eternity; but the world because it is moveable has not the principality, for
his mobility prevents his stability by the rule of continual motion, having an
immovable strength. All sense therefore of the divinity being a like and
immovable, moves it self by his stability, and is incorrupt, and eternal, or
whatsoever may more fitly be called; eternity consisting in the very truth of
the high God, full of all sensible things, and full knowledge abiding as I said
with God, but worldly sense is the receptacle of all sensible things, both for
Species and disclipine, but humane sense by the strength of memory, for that it
remembers all things that it has done: for divine reason and sense come down
continually to man, and God would not that excellent, and divine sense should
be confounded with all Creatures, lest it should blush in being mixed with
brutes. For the understanding of humane sense, of what sort, and how great it
is, is wholly in the memory of things past: for by that strength of memory it
is made governor of the earth; but the understanding of Nature, and of the
quality and sense of the world, may be perceived by all sensible things in the
world; eternity, which is the second is known to be a sense and quality given
of the sensible world, but the understanding of the quality, and quality of the
sense of the high God, is the alone truth, the shadow of which truth in the
world is not certainly known in the last line, for where is any thing known by
the dimension of time, where there seem to be leasings generations and errors?
You see therefore, O Asclepius, in what things we are agreed upon, which we
handle or which we dare to touch: but I give unto thee thanks, O great God,
which have illuminated me with the light of seeing thy divinity: and you O
Latus, Asclepius, And Amnon, conceal secretly within your breasts and keep
close these divine Mysteries. But in this differs understanding from sense,
for that our understanding comes by the intention, and diligence of the mind
to understand and know the quality of the sense of the world, but the
understanding of the world reaches to eternity, and to know God who is above
it self, and so it happens unto us men, that as in a mist we see those things
which are in Heaven, as much as it is possible through the condition of humane
sense. And this intention or reach in perceiving so great good things is very
narrow and weak, but is most large when it shall see it by knowledge, and the
testimony of a good conscience.

The COMMENTARY.
The eleventh Chapter discloseth that only God is immovable and stable, and
all other things mutable; God is infinite, incomprehensible, and is unknown
what he is: the holy, incorrupt, and eternal sense of God, treats of the
sense of the world, of the sense of man, of the difference of the understanding
from the sense.

This is the Sum of the eleventh Part.
CHAP. XII.
BUt of Vacuity, which also with many seems to be a great matter, I thus think,
that a Vacuity neither is, can, or shall be any thing; for all things of the
world are most full parts, as the world it self is full of bodies different in
quality and form, having both their form and greatness, of which one is
greater than another, and one less than another, different in strength and
weakness: for some of these easily seem to be the stronger, as the greater:
but the lesser and smaller can scarcely, or not at all be seen, which things to
be, we know only by feeling, whereby it happens, that many believe that
these are not bodies, or substances, but empty places, which is impossible; for
if any thing be named out of the world, if there be any thing (which I hardly
believe) therein so full of intelligible things, that is, things like to the
Divinity, as this place which is called the sensible world, is full of bodies
and creatures, agreeing both in nature and quality to it, all whose
representations we see not; but some exceedingly great, some exceeding little,
and short, which either through the length of distance, or that we are dull of
eyesight, they appear to be such unto us, or to be short; for their exceeding
smalnesse they are supposed of some not to be. I speak now of Angels, which, I
suppose, sojourn with us, and Spirits above us, which are betwixt the purest
part of the air, and the earth, where there is neither place ^or Clouds, nor
commotion by the motion of any Meteor, Comet, or Sign. In this respect, O
Asclepius, thou can say nothing to be subject to Vacuity, unless thou
vauntest there may be a Vacuity of what thou affirmest to be empty, as a
Vacuity from the fire, from the water, and from the like, which although it
happens to seem so (For that may be void of such things, which are great, or
little, which makes it seem empty) yet there cannot be a Vacuity of Spirit, and
Air. The like also we may speak of a place, for the word only wants
understanding; for a place appears what it is, from that of which it is: for
when the principal name is taken away, the signification, or interpretation is
imperfect. Wherefore the place of water, the place of fire, or such like, we
truly say; for as it is impossible for any thing to be void, or empty, so the
place alone what it is cannot be known. For if you put the place without that
of which it is, it shall seem to be an empty place, which I believe the world
has not: For if there be no Vacuity, neither a place appears what it is by
it self* unless you shall add unto it, either longitudes, latitudes, or
altitudes, as signs to the bodies of men. These things being so, Asclepius,
and you that are present know, that the intelligible World that is God, who is
known only by the sight of the soul, is incorporeal; neither can any thing
corporal be mixed with his Nature, that is, which may be known by quality,
quantity, and numbers, for no such thing abides in him; therefore this world,
which is called sensible, is the receptacle of all sensible Species, qualities,
or bodies; all which without God, cannot receive Vegetation, and be refreshed;
for all things are God, and from him and his will are all things: that which is
wholly good, comely and wise, sensible and intelligible, belongs to him alone,
and without this there neither is, has, or shall be any thing; for all things
are from him, in him, and by him, both qualities of many shapes, and great
quantities, and greatness exceeding measure, and varieties of Species and
Forms, which if you shall understand, O Asclepius, you will give God thanks,
and if you shall well observe the whole, you shall by true reason perfectly learn,
that the world it self is sensible, and all things that are in it, to be
covered (as with a garment) from that upper world; for every kind of creature,
O Asclepius, of what kind soever, as well mortal, immortal, or rational,
whether it be a living creature, or be not, each of them retain the image and
form of their kind, and albeit every kind of creature possesses the full form
of his kind; yet in the same form of shows, they are all unlike one to another,
as the Genus of men, although it be uniform, that a man may naturally be known,
yet all of them are in the same form unlike to themselves; for the Species,
which is divine, is in^orporeal, and whatsoever else is comprehended in the
soul, or mind: seeing therefore these two, of which the Form consists, are
corporeal, and incorporeal, it is impossible that every Form should be created,
or born like one to another, the moments of hours and climates differing, and
being distant, but are changed so often, as an hour has minutes, in which is
that God of all shapes we have spoken of; therefore the Species, or Form,
remains, begetting so often from it self, so many, and so different shapes,
as the course of the world has moments, which world is turned by conversion
and changes, but the Species is neither turned, nor changed. So the Forms of
each kind are permanent and stable, but unlike to themselves in the same Form.

Asclep. And the world changes his Species, or Form, O Trismegistus.

Trism. Do you perceive therefore, O Asclepius, that all things are spoken unto
thee, as to one in a sleep, or in a dream? For what is the world, or of what
consists it, but of all things created?

Asclep. Therefore you mean to speak of the Heaven, and of the Earth and of the
Elements, Trismegistus? For other things are more frequently changed into
Forms, the Heaven moystening, or drying up, cooling or heating, bright or
lowering. In one Form of the Heaven, these things are, which Forms are altered
by the Form, also the Earth has always many alterations of her Form; as when
it brings forth fruits, and when it nourishes her fruits, and when it gives
sundry and diverse qualities, and quantities of all fruits, and places, and
times, for the qualities, sents, relishes, and forms of all trees, flowers, and
berries. The fire also has many and divine alterations; for the Forms of the
Sun and the Moon, they are of all shapes; for they are (as it were) our
looking-glasses for representation. But of these things enough.

The COMMENTARY.
This twelfth Chapter declares, that there is no Vacuity, or Emptiness in
things; that Angels are conversant, and dwell with us, who, in regard of their
too much subtilty, are not perceived of us; that Spirits possess the purer
part of the Air; the alone name of a place to be void, that it belongs to
somewhat, which being not understood, it cannot be conceived what a place is,
and that is common to all Relatives. He affirms an intelligible World, with
which the sensible World, and all things in it, are veiled as with a garment
seeing who is contained in the intelligible World, that the Forms of all kinds
whatsoever, that are of one shape, are unlike, and that according to the
circles, moments, and minutes of hours, of which he makes Pantomorphos Lord,
whom before he affirmed to be God of the Horoscopes: but we acknowledge no such
God: but leave it to the folly and ignorance of the Gentiles: if any as yet be
so apparently blind, mad, and stupefied; but we, according to the saying of St.
Paul, have but one God, the Father, in whom are all things, and we in him; and
one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things and we by him. The Species and
Forms, that is, the Idea's of which there is so much dispute with Plato and the
Platonicks, the immutable and unchangeable Forms he places in Pantomorphos,
having this name, as though he consisted of all shapes, and of every Idea, from
which several hours and moments, every particular Form is diversely shaped; but
that the rest are mutable, as the World, the Heaven, and the Earth, but there
are who account Mercurius his Pantamorphos, and Plato his Idea to be mere
forged things and fictions.

This is the sum of the twelfth Chapter.
CHAP. XIII.
LEt us return again to man, and to reason, by which divine gift, man is called
a reasonable creature, for those things are less to be wondered at, (albeit
they deserve admiration) which are only spoken of man. But of all wonders this
is the greatest wonder, that man could find out and supply the divine nature:
because therefore, our forefathers erred much* being incredulous about the
reason and nature of the Gods, and not looking into divine worship, and
religion, they found out an art whereby they might make them gods; to which
invention they joined the work of nature, and because they could not make
souls, they called out the souls of Devils or Spirits, and put them into their
Idols, and divine Mysteries, by which alone the Idols had power to do either
good or hurt. For thy Grandfather, O Asclepius, was the first inventer of
Physic, to whom a Temple is consecrated in a mountain of Libya, or Africa,
near unto the shore of Crocodiles, in which lies his body; the rest of him,
or rather the whole of him being his better and Spiritual part, is gone back
again to Heaven, affoording all manner of help and cure to diseased and sick
persons, now by virtue of his diety, as he was wont to give before by art or
skill of Physic, and Hermes which was the name of my Ancestors, does not he
now in his Country reteining that surname, cure all persons that come from all
parts to him? Also Isis the wife of Osiris being well pleased how much good she
has done? and displeased, how much evil do we know? for it is an easy matter
for earthly gods to be displeased, seeing that they are made of the same nature
that man is, whereupon it happened that these holy creatures were called upon,
and their souls worshipped throughout every City, by the Egyptians who living
consecrated them so that they continued in their Laws, and were called by
their names: for this cause O Asclepius, those which seem to some worthy to be
worshipped and honored to others seem otherwise, therefore Egyptian Cities are
wont to fall out, and war one with another.

Asclep. And what is the quality or substance O Trismegistus of these earthly
Gods?

Trism. It consists, O Asclepius, of herbs, of Stones, of Spices which have
in them a natural power of divinity, and for this cause they are delighted
with often sacrifices, Hymns, praises, and most sweet music resembling an
Heavenly harmony, that that which is Heavenly may by a Heavenly and frequent
use be allured into the Idol, and there stay a long time, as glad and desirous
of humane society: so man is the feigner of the gods, and you should not
suppose the effects of these earthly gods to be casual, O Asclepius, the
Heavenly Gods inhabit the highest heavenly places fulfilling and preserving
that order which he has received. But these our Gods, regarding peculiarly
certain things, and foretelling some things by lot and conjecture, foreseeing
many things and after a manner helping them, become as it were by a friendly
alliance aiders unto men's affairs.

The COMMENTARY.
This Thirteenth Chapter is full of impiety like unto the ninth, wherein
Mercurius will have a man to be most divine, and most to be admired; he is
certainly most impious, and profane, to wit that he shall be the inventer of
Idolatry, that he should thrust in devilish Spirits called up into Idols, and
add Rites, and sacrifices concerning Aesculapius Mercurius, Isis, O^ris, which
were worshipped of the Egyptians; and of those plants and creatures which in
Egypt were esteemed holy, and had in reverence of herbs, and Stones, music
and hymns, with which they did appease and reconcile those Spirits which were
put into their Idols and Images, which still some Pythonists are accustomed to
do at this day (O naughty age) who think that they have Spirits closed up
either in rings or boxes: a most impious sort of men, hateful to God and man;
a very professed enemy: and against this profane error of impiety, St. Augustine
well inveigheth in his book of the City of God.

This for the 13. Chapter.
CHAP. XIV.
ASclep. What part therefore of the world do the fates abide in, O
Trismegistus? If the Heavenly Gods bear universal rule, do the earthly Gods
which we call Fortune and Fate inhabit in particular places?

Trism. O Asclepius, that is the necessity of all things that are governed,
that they are always joined and lincked together: this is therefore the
efficient cause of things, or the most high God, or next unto God, which second
effect is God, or the discipline, of all earthly and Heavenly things,
stablished by divine laws. These therefore, Fortune and Necessity, are both
tied together by an individual knot. The former of which, Fortune or Fate,
begets the beginning of all things, but Necessity enforces them to their
effects, which depends from those beginnings. Order, follows these, which is
the continuance, and disposition of time in bringing things to pass, for
nothing is without the agreement of Order. In all these this world is perfect,
for the world it self is carried by Order, or consists wholly of Order:
wherefore these 3. Fate, Necessity, and Order, are brought to pass, especially
by the will of God, who governs the world by his own Law and divine reason.
By these therefore both will and nill are by a divine hand fully crossed; for
they are neither moved by anger, nor bowed by favor, but serve the necessity
of eternal reason, which Eternity is unchangeable, immovable, and insoluble.
Fate therefore is the first; which, the seed being as it were cast in, receives
the increase of all future things. Necessity follows, by which all things are
enforced violently to their effects. The Third is Order, which preserves the
frame of those things which Fate and Necessity has disposed of. This is
therefore eternity, which neither has beginning nor ending, which by a fixed
immutable law of continual motion is preserved. It rises and falls oftentimes
by course, so that when the times vary, it rises again in those same parts in
which it fell, for so is reason a voluble rotundity that all are so firmly
joined that you cannot know what is the beginning of volubility, when all
things seem to go before, and follow themselves, for chance and fortune are
mixed in all worldly things.

The COMMENTARY.
The fourteenth Chapter speaks of the Destinies, which he calls Fate,
Necessity, and Order; others, Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos. About which the
Ethnicks were not wont less to trifle, than about other gods, which they
feigned unto themselves, coining new and wonder-working Deities: but Mercurius
treats of these more briefly and sparingly, and (as it were) doubtfully, like
as these three should be the determination, and predestination of the Divine
Will; which Necessity of things, as they be, follows; which lastly Order
preserves, even as it is stablished by Divine and Eternal Law: So that the
first Fate is Divine Predestination; the second, Consequence of things; and the
third, Preservation. And these three, or the Divine Law, or those things that
follow the course of Divine Law, contein the order both of finite causes, and
those which are according to nature, but yet Fate admits in casual things
indefinite, and indeterminate causes beyond nature: but of these let others
judge.

And this for this present part.
CHAP. XV.
WE have spoken of all things as we could, and as the divinity would suffer
and permit: It only remains that we praise God and pray unto him, and so
return to the care of the body. For treating sufficiently of divine matters, we
have satified our minds as it were with the food of the soul. But as they
passed out of the cloister, when they began to pray to God, they looked back
toward the South; for when the Sun sets, if any man will pray to God, he
ought to look that way; as also when the Sun rises, to look East: Now as they
were saying their prayers, Asclepius said, with a low voice. O Tatius let us
put the Father in mind that he command that we should dedicate our prayers unto
God, with an addition of frankincense, and incense. Trismegistus hearing of it,
and being moved, says. Guess better O Asclepius, for this is like unto theft
when you pray unto God to burn frankincense, and the like: for nothing is
wanting unto him, who himself is all things, for in him are all things; but let
us give thanks, and adore him, for these are the chief sacrifices of God, when
thanks are given of mortal men. We give thee thanks, O great and glorious
God, for by thy grace only we have attained to the Light of thy knowledge. Thou
Name, holy and worthy to be honored, one name by which God as a Father is
devoutly to be praised, because thou vouchsafest to give unto all fatherly
piety religion and love, or whatsoever thing else is of most efficacy, when
thou do reward us with sense, reason, and understanding; with sense that we
may know thee; with reason, that we may look up unto thee, and search into thy
divine nature; with understanding that knowing thee we may rejoice in thee, and
being preserved by thy Majesty, we may delight our selves in thee, that thou
wast pleased to show thy self wholly unto us: let us give thanks that thou
have vouchsafed to consecrate us, who are placed in these earthly rabernacles
to be heirs of eternity. For this is only man's congratulation and knowledge of
thy Majesty. We have known thee, thou great Light, by reason we have known thee
to be the most wise and sensible God, O true way of Life, O fruitful increase
of all natural things; we have known thee in the full conception of thy whole
nature, we have known thee in thy eternity, for in all this our prayer adoring
the bounty of thy goodness, we only beseech thee, that thou will be pleased to
continue us in the love of thy knowledge, and that by this kind of life we be
never separated from thee: desiring this we betake us to a pure Supper without
flesh.

The COMMENTARY.
This Fifteenth Chapter religiously ends the Dialogue with giving of thanks.
When thanksgiving and adoration is ended, Mercurius, Asclepius Amnon and
Tatius, the Four men which filled the holy place or cloister, according to the
religious Rites of the Egyptians, betake themselves to a pure banquet not
consisting of flesh: and thus far Hermes, of the will of God.

FINIS.
Some Books pr^d and sold by Thomas Bre^er, at the three Bibles near the
West End of Paul's.
AN Epitomy of all the Common and Statute Laws of England, in Fol.

The Faithful Councellor or Marrow of the Law in English, in quarto.

The Priveledges of the People vindicated, in quarto.

All three by W. Shephard, Esquire, in quarto.

The Retired man meditations, or the Mystory and Power of godliness, shining
forth, in the Living Word to the unmasking the mystery of iniquity etc. in
quarto. by H. Vane, Knight, Cornelius Agrippa his Occult Philosophy in three
Books, in quarto.

Mr. Baxters Aphorisms of Justification, Examined and answered, by I. Crandon,
in quart. An Exposition of the whole Book of Canticles by I. Robotham, in
quarto.

Gospel Holiness or a Saving Sight of God and the glorious Priveledge of the
Saints, by Water Craddock, Preacher of the Gospel, in quarto.

A Description of Jerusalem, with a Map, by H. Iesse, in quarto.

The Right Constitution of a Commonwealth, with some Errors of Government, and
Rules of Policy, in Octavo. A Brief History Containing most of those Notable
Occurrences and Revolutions that happened in those late contests betwixt King
and Parliament: being a short mention of things from 1637. to 1648. by T. May.
Esquire. Milk, for Babes in Christ or Meditations, Observations, and
Experiences, with diverse Cases of conscience Resolved, by Mr. Fynch.

A Warning-Piece for the Slumbring Virgins, being some Awaking Meditations upon
Christ's own Watch word, Math, 26. 41.

By Geo: Scortreth Preacher of the Gospel in Lincoln.

The Divine Pimander of Hermes Trismegistus, in the same Volume.

The Bible in Welsh with several other Welsh Books.

Lazarus and his Sisters discourse of Paradise or a conference about the
Excellent things of the other world.

A Discoverer of some Plots of Lucifer, against the Children of men.


