THE SPEECH AND DEPORTMENT OF JOHN HEWIT D.D. Late of St. GREGORY'S London, at
the place of Execution on TOWER HILL, June 8. 1658. taken by an impartial
hand. And, The Substance of his Trial before the High Court of Justice, his
letter to Dr. Wild after Sentence, his discourses and demeanor on the
Scaffold. With an Elegy on the said Dr. Published for the satisfaction of his
Friends.

Prove. 10.7. Memoria justi est benedicta, Nomen autem Improborum putridum est.

Printed at London in the year, 1658.

AN ADVERTISEMENT To The READER.
HAving been so often importuned to publish Dr. Hewit's Speech and Deportment
upon the Scaffold, I shall not excuse my self from giving the reason; the
former (though so imperfect being so earnestly received by all Persons, and
perhaps the compassion of some who had been his Auditors might wish it were not
true. But knowing my ability in caracter did advertize with me about it, being
unwilling that so great a Person as the Doctor should be ronged by false and
imperfect Relations that might come out only upon Senister account, wherefore
as a further proof of the truth, I have spoken with several Persons who were
upon the Scaffold, who seeing my Papers subscribed to them as the most exact,
wherefore that all might appear more lively, I have added the Substance of his
defense before the high Court of Justice, his letter to Doctor Wild after
sentence, and discourses and deportment upon the Scaffold, with his Elegy,
being certain his Auditors will continue to let fall a Celestial due upon the
flowers and lillies that grows upon the grave of this great Person.

THE INTRODUCTION.
GOD who rules his whole Creation by the omnipotency of his own will, wisely
appoints for every man his portion, to some riches and honor, to others
health, and to others sufferings and afflictions, that so in every thing he may
glorify himself, and be all in all, which lead us unto him, whose bitter
portion puts a period instead of a comma, to those still flowing lessons that
flowed from him, who living in the Church was beloved, and now being dead is
lamented by her, and yet lives in many hearts in Caracters of sorrow and
tears, which sends sighs to his memory, that so often remembered them to sigh,
that so they might fly from the wrath to come, and not fear what he has
cheerfully undergone, even the wages of sin which is death, but whether divine
justice inflicted that on him for the sins of his soul, he not deserving life,
or for the sins of the Age amongst whom he was too good, is a controversy shall
not find a result in me, for I shall wright impartially, and it is God who
will judge righteously.

The Substance of Dr. Hewit's Trial.
DOctor John Hewit being apprehended for a Conspirator against the present
Power and Authority, was on Tuesday the first of June, brought before the high
Court of Justice, to answer to an Indictment of high Treason, then and there
exhibited against him, his Plea being demanded, he moved the Court not to
respect his ignorance, but to excuse it, least taking advantages by the
niceties of the Laws, they might bereave him of those benefits the Law allowed
him, or overpower his Innocence; This was not denied, but his request reaching
farther to desire to hear the Commission of the Court read, which he alleged
was reasonable, and that he conceived it to be his just right to know the
validity of that Authority by which they sat, and whether according to Law they
were Compitent Judges in his Case; further urging that those being matters of
Law, he therefore desired to have the liberty to advise with Council in these
and other the like Cause which did highly concern him; this being denied, he
urged further that he conceived it to be his right, as an Englishman to be
tried by a Jury, and the Judges of his Highness Corts to whom and to the
common Law he did appeal, but being told there could be no appeal from them
to any Court, except to a Parliament, because no other Court is above them; All
those differences to the Judges of the Courts of Judicature, or to his
Highness Council against that, if they or any of them would give it under
their hand that his Trial was according to Law, he would submit, but that not
being granted, as tending to the dishonor of that Court to appeal to any
other Court or Persons, the Dr. declared how in his own opinion he stood bound
in conscience and duty not to submit to that power (meaning the Court) of whose
Authority according to Law he was not convinced, his not pleading being
recorded upon his default, he was taken from the Bar, where on June the 2d. he
received his Sentence as a Traitor, to be hanged drawn and quartered, which he
received without the least dejection of spirit.

His Carriage and Discourses in Prison.
A Friend of his a while after, telling him he were glad to hear he received
his Sentence without disturbance; he replies at that present, I had this
Meditation, my Lord and Master were made to carry his Cross, and I the meanest
of his Servants should be carried to my Cross. The time drawing near of his
death, which was Saturday June the fifth, the Sentence was altered, his head
being to be severed from his Body, on Tower Hill, on Tuesday the eighth of the
same Month. The Lords day he employed for the most part in earnest seeking God
by prayer, that so through those sorrows and tears, he might purchase the
fruition of joys and pleasures, most glorious, pure and perpetual; The rest of
the day being the afternoon, he past away in discourse with some friends, who
came to condole his condition, who deported himself with that chearfullnesse,
that they nor he need to metigate sorrow, and as the fear of death was not
tedious to him to imbrase, charity bids us conclude he did it to put on a
better Life; This afternoon too passages are observeable.

The first, whilst the Doctor was discourseing with some Friends, a Woman got
accidentally to his Chamber door, and in a seeming mallincollinesse drew near
him, and laid her hat at his Feet, saying, I can never be at quiet when the
godly are to suffer. The next, the Guard being releived, he turned to them that
were departing, and with a cheerful deportment and humble carriage, says
fair well my dear friends, and in all this time seemed so little to be moved
at his Imprisonment, that as the walls confinde his body, so meekness
imprisoned his passions. On monday morning his Lady came to visit him, but with
how little pleasure or content, I leave it to them imagined, who
contemplatively can make her sorrow their one, now she must not only take her
leave for a day, but resolve to see him no more in the flesh, and indeed to me
it seems impossible to distinguish, which was the greatest weight of sorrow to
her spirit, that he must suffer an untimely death, and be no more, or that she
must take her last farewell of him, and so she have him dead to her whilst
alive, but since providence compels them to part here, Imagen, for I cannot
express their affectionate farewels with tears, till they meet where joys are
compleater and perpetual; This being past, he makes it his only work to put of
his, and to prepare for a better life, in which D. Wild added to his endeavors
his pious assistance, the day being spent, Dr. Wild left him not without the
beams and light of a friends prayers, and the days glory together, but kept
him company all that night, thereby to make day in his soul, though it were
night in the World. (Immediately after came Dr. Reynolds, Mr. Carill, Mr.
Manton, Mr. Bates, and others, with whose discourse they were so affected, that
that evening they took Coach on Lud-gate Hill, and went down to White Hall to
beg his life of his Highness the Lord Protector, but that were not granted.)

His demeanor on the Scaffold.
ON Tuesday morning the time of execution drawing neigh, they spent that part
which gave them leisure to prepare for that great work to dye, which time being
come, Dr. Wild, Dr. Warmistry, and Deane Reves accompanied him to the place of
Execution, and on the way, they tell him he was goeing to solemnize a marriage,
wherein he must look death in the face before he could come to the fruition and
full enjoyment of his Bride, he showed such chearfullnesse to that work, that
gave satisfaction to his friends, these communications being obstructed by
arrival at the Scaffold, Dr. Wild, and Dr. Warmistry led him up the stairs,
like to wings that assist the body to assend, and being mounted, he demeaned
himself with a most meek and undejected deportment, and casting his eye toward
the block, he espied some of the blood of his fellow-sufferer, and having a
while fixed his eyes steadfastly on that object, with hands and eyes elevated, he
sends up ejaculations to heaven, and then falls down on his knees and prayed
privately a while, and then about as long audably.

Doctor HEWIT's Letter to Doctor WILD the day before he suffered.
Dearest Brother,
I Have no cause to think that you have not at any time taken me along with you
in the daily walk upon your knees to Heaven, but I beseech you and all my
Brethren to be (now especially) very mindful to call upon God for me. The more
company I go withal, the more welcome I shall be made. I should be loath either
to leave out of my Creed, or to be left out of the benefit of the Communion of
Saints, Two are better then one. Two or three have the advantage of a Promise;
but to go with a multitude to the House of God, where all comers are welcome,
is to be assured beforehand of good entertainment. Admission will hardly be
denied to any, for whom there is great importunity of many: If the Gate be
shut, much knocking will open it; or if that would not do it, united Forces
would offer an Holy violence. Many will prevail, where one alone can do but
little good. Woe unto him that is alone.

Therefore dear Brother, since it is the infirmity of our nature, that we live
not without the occasions of giving and taking of offense. And it is the
corruption of our nature that the offenses we give, we write in the dust; Those
we take, we engrave in Marble. If you know, or shall hear of any one either of
my Brethren, or other persons whom by any act of scandal I have tempted, or
provoked, or lessened or disturbed, to exclude me the benefits of their
charitable prayers or wishes; I beseech you beg of them from me, for me, their
pardon. And let not any private wildfire of passion put out the holy flames of
a diffusive charity: And as for my self, I do here protest before God that I
do heartily desire to forget the injuries of whosoever has trespassed against
me, either by word or deed. And if God should have been pleased to have granted
a longer life, I would not refuse, (yea I am steadfastly resolved to solicit
terms of Reconciliation with them that have done me the wrong) And if my own
heart do not deceive me, I would give my life to save the soul of any of my
Christian Brethren, and would be content to want some degrees of glory in
Heaven, so that my very greatest Enemies might be so happy as to have so^^e.
The God of Mercy shed forth his Bowels for them that shed my blood, and the
blood of Christ save, and the spirit of Christ sanctifi^, and support him who
desires to live no longer then to honor the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, and
both living and dying craves yours, and the prayers of the whole Church for her
unworthy Child, and

Dearest Brother Your most affectionate friend, Brother and Servant in Christ
Jesus, JOHN HEWIT.
Tower, June 7. 1658. Morning 7 a Clock.
Doctor Hewit's first Prayer.
O Most glorious God, Beeings of Beeings, unaccessable light, life of life,
Father of the spirits of the just and perfect, infinite incomprehensible God of
power, wised me, mercy, justice and truth, who dwells in that unsearchable
glory and majesty, to which none of all thy Creatures can attain; King of
kings, Lord of lords, my earnest expectation and my hope, the only confidence
and consolation of my soul; though my numberless sins have deserved thy
wrath, yet look upon me through thy Christ, in whom I have believed by thy
command, and through whom thou have promised the remission of my sins, and
eternal life, that so as I was borne with a condition to dye, so am I ready to
dye with a condition to live with him, and therefore for his sake assure me of
it, that so I may have hope and confidence in my end, what though I must drink
the bitter portion of a violent death, it is no more my God then my Redeemer
tasted before me, and though thou ha^t suffered me to be removed from my peace
and comfort of this World, and from prosperity, have cast down my dejected
spirit with weights of sorrow* yet that soul that seeks thee by mercies, are
renewed every morning, and thy compassion fails not, therefore my soul has
said, that thou art my portion, and therefore does my soul trust on thee;
truth it is indeed oh my God, that the hopes of the hills are vain, and so is
all confidence in Man in honors or prosperity, and most unhappy is that that
is not in thee, but in spite of Satan or the Worlds malice, blessed is that
soul whose hope and whose trust thou art, therefore though thou art pleased to
weane me from a trustlesse world, let thy peace and salvation Crown my end;
and oh my Lord, let my prayers come as incence up unto thee, and in my Jesus be
accepted by thee, and bow the Heavens, and come down into my soul, that in
this hour of my death, the comfort and joy of thy presence make those that
condemned me hither, know that death nor terror is not dreadful to them, whose
hope, whose strength, and whose confidence and trust is in thee, for this I am
confident, and know, oh my God, oh thou joy and salvation of my soul, that it
shall within a span of time appear that it is good and happy for me that I
have been in trouble, when after this great trial of my faith, thou shall give
me the quiet fruits of wrighteousnesse a crown of glory, this oh God is the
voice of my faith in thee, whom I believe and know to be the God of truth, of
mercy, of justice, and of wrighteousnesse; The time (oh my God) of my departure
drawing neigh, let me live those minutes I have yet to breath to thee and thy
Jesus, that he may be advantage to me in life and in death, and that in this
confidence I am willing to be dissolved and to be with Christ, who has through
death abolished death, and him that had the power of death, and though death
bring my body to the earth, yet oh my God let not my soul lie in the dust, and
let neither things present nor future separate between my soul and thee, but
oh my blessed Savior who art the death of deaths, take from my afflicted soul
the sting of death, lose its pains and the fear and sorrows, and sweeten the
bitterness of it, that so by enjoying thy presence, death may be swallowed up
in victory, and oh thou who pouredst out thy soul to death for me, receive my
wearied spirit (when the fatal blow shall be given) into thy eternal rest,
for thy passions sake hear me, and answer me. And now oh Lord to thee be
praise for ever that have breathed such a calm into my troubled spirit, that
it is at peace with thee and with the whole World, blessed be thy Majesty for
it, that thus gatherest me to my Fathers in peace, and that give me a heart
to condemn my self, that thou may justify me, and to forgive my enemies
whose own conscience cannot but condemn them, but I most humbly beseech Thee,
pardon them, and with them thy servant who is ready to come unto thee,
therefore come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Amen.

His Speech upon the Scaffold.
I Have always made it my chiefest care to submit my will to the will of God,
that with a contented mind I might imbrase, and eye him in all his motion,
that so whether he appeared in affection or affliction, my soul might say
welcome to thy own my Redeemer, I have often times tasted in the sweetness of
the first, his love by many inestimable incomes of his favors toward me, and
now am come to participate of the latter, the parentiall scurge of my holy
Father, but the experiences of the first his affections has made me more his,
then to shrink under the latter his afflictions, for to me to live is Christ,
and to dye is ga^ne, knowing that Christ is mine, that I am Christ's, and that
Christ is Gods, and he it is that for my sins has suffered me to be come a
public Spectacle this day to Men and Angels, and (I hope) God, who is
Omniscient, is now beholding me with much pity, and great mercy and compassion;
and the more, because I am now come to that end that his own Son came into the
wolrd to, To bear witness to the truth; he himself said, For this end was I
born, for this cause came I into the World, that I should bear witness to the
truth: I was brought into the world (the Christian world) for to bear witness
to the truth of the Gospel, as a common Christian; I was brought into the
world (the Church) as a Minister of his blessed Word and Sacraments; [Blessed
be his name for that great honor and dignity;] And I came into the World to
dye more immediately for the testimony of Jesus, which God has now called me
to. I came into this world (this Commonwealth) to be a member thereof, to bear
witness to the Truths of the Customs, the Laws, the Liberties, and
Privileges thereof: and for so doing I am now to suffer; And me thinks it
seems to me a strange thing, that in as much as we all plead for Liberty, and
Privileges, and I pleading for the Privileges, the Laws, the Statutes, and
the Customs of this Land, yet I should dye by those that should stand for the
Laws, the Statutes, and Privileges of the Land: And I am here beheld by those
that plead for their Liberties, and I hope I am pitied, because I here give up
my self willingly and freely to be a State-Martyr for the public good; Indeed
I had rather dye many deaths my self, than betray my fellow-free-men to so
many inconveniences that they might be like to suffer by being subject to the
wills of them that willed me to this death.

And it is worthy remembrance that Mr. Aturny Genesis having impeached me of
Treason (to the Commissioners of the Court) against his Highness, I did often
(when brought before those Commissioners) plead for the Liberties of the people
of England, though I had no knowledge of the Law, yet I had instruction from
these that were learned in the Law, and had several Law Cases and Presidents
put into my hand, though not by them, and urged several Law-Cases, and made my
Appeal, First, for the Judicature that I was to be tried by, Whether it were
according to Law? Whether it were according to the Act? And whether it were
according to the words of the said Act? I did appeal to have the said Act
argued by learned Lawyers on both sides, and then to be resolved by his
Highness own Council, which was denied me, [This by the by] I pressing the
Argument made a second Appeal that those Judges if they would give singly their
several Judgments that it was a just and lawful Court of Judicature,
according to the Laws of the Land; I would answer to my Charge. I did make
another Appeal to those that were his Highness's Council, and pleaded against
m^, That if they would deliver it to me under their hands to be according to
Law, I would then go on to plead and answer to the Charge, but all was answered
either with a denial or a disregard. What was then said further, my spirits
being faint, I shall not say much, but only this, I was taken in three defaults
upon formality of the Court. It seems it is a custom in all Courts, (which I
did not know bfore) that if they answer not the third time speaking by the
Clerk, that then they are guilty of three defaults, and proceeded against as
mute: [I had no such knowledge of the Law.] This advantage being laid hold on,
has brought my Innosence to suffer as the guilty, for they found me guilty of
those defaults; and when I would have pleaded, and resolved to begin to plead,
I was taken from the Bar. I did the next day make my Petition to the Court in
the Painted-Chamber, two Petitions were presented the same in effect; in the
former the Title was mistaken: Yet because the Title was mistaken, and no
answer was given, therefore it was that another Petition was drawn up to the
same effect, with a new Title given, (as I remember) presented by the Sergeants
at Arms, and one writ it over in such haste, lest they should be drawn out of
the Painted-Chamber into the Court, that I had not time to read it over, only I
subscribed my name, and there was in the front of the Petition a word left out,
but what the word was I know not, but must needs be sensible the trespass was
but small, and its hard that a mistake of that nature should take the blood of
the Innosent for the guilty; for it was taken so ill, as if I had put an
offront and contempt on the Court; And it was thought they would have heard me
plead; but because of that mistake, they sent word, I should have my answer
when I came into the Court, and my answer I had indeed, which was the sentence
of condemnation that adjudged me to this place. And therefore I pray with all
my soul, that God would forgive all those that occasioned the charge to be
drawn against me, to give such unjust things against me; I pray with all my
soul, that God would forgive all those that upon so slender and small grounds
adjudg'd me to dye by taking advantage of such simpl^ ignorance as I was in.
And it is the mere to be observed, because I had at the beginning of my pleading
engaged their Honors, no advantage should be taken against me to my prejudice,
that in as much as I understood nothing of the Law: And having heard that a man
in the nicity of the Law might be lost in the severity thereof, merely for
speaking a word out of simple ignorance, I made it my prayer to them that no
advantage might be taken against me to the prejudice of my person: And there
was to me a seeming consent and promise, for the President told me, there
should be no advantage taken against me: and upon these considerations I am
afraid there was two great uncha^itableness in some: But I pray God forgive
them from the very bottom of my soul, and I desire that even those that shed my
blood, may have the blood of the God of mercy shed for them.

And now having given you the occasion of my coming hi^her, it is fit I should
give you somewhat as concerning my self, as I am a Christian, and as I am a
Clergyman. First, as I am a Christian, I thank God I was baptized to the Holy
Church, so I was baptized to be a member of the holy Catholic Church, that
is, the Church of England, which I dare say for purity of Doctrine, and orderly
Discipline, till a sad reformation had spoiled the face of the Church, and made
it a querie, whether it were a Church, or no? I say, It was more purely Divine
and Apostolical, than any other Doctrine or Church in the Christian World,
whether National, or Classical, or Congregational: And I must tell you, That as
I am a member of this Church, so I am a member of the holy Catholic Church,
and shall give a most just confession of my faith, both negatively and
affirmatively. Negatively, I am so a member of the holy Catholic Church, that
I abhor all Sects, Schi^ms, Sedition, and Tyranny in Religion. Affirmatively
so, That as I hold communion with, so I love and honor all Christians in the
world, that love the same Lord JESUS in sincerity, and call on his Name,
agreeing with those truths that are absolutely necessary and clearly
demonstrated in the word of God, both in the Old and New Testament, though in
cha^i^y dissenting from some others that are not necessary. And I, as I am thus
a Christian, I hope for salvation through the merits of Christ JESUS, his blood
I rely on, his merits I trust to for the salvation of my own soul; though to
this Faith good Works are necessary, not meritorious in us, but only made
meritorious by Christ his death, by his all sufficiency, by his satisfaction,
and his righteousness; they become meri^orious, but in us they are no other
than as defiled rags. And truly, as I am a member of the Church, so I told you,
I was a member of th^s Community, and so pleaded for the Liberties and
Privileges thereof. I must now answer something I am aspersed withal in the
World.

They ta^k of something of a Plot, and a Treasonable design, and that I had a
great interest in the knowledge and practice thereof; and that, for the saving
my li^e, I would have discovered and betrayed I cannot tell what. I hope my
conversation has not been such here in this City, where I have been a long
time very well known, as to make one imagine I should intermeddle in such an
action, and go so contrary to the practice of my proiession; and I hope there
are none so uncharitable toward me, as to believe I had a knowledge of that
design which is reported, I abhor.

Here I must come to particulars for a Plot, of having a design upon the City
of London, for the firing of it. I so much tremble at the thought of the thing
that should have been done, as they say, for the carrying on of such a design,
(if my heart deceive me not) had I known it, I so much abhor the thing
unfainedly from my heart, and as a dying man I am confident I should have been
the first discoverer of it: Nor ever had I correspondency or meetings with such
persons as would have carried on such a design. It Is said likewise, I
entertained the Earl, the Marquess of Ormond: To my remembrance I never saw the
face of that honorable Person in my life. It is said, One Lords day I did
preach at Saint Gregory's, and the next Lords day I was at Brussels or Bruges,
and kissed the Kings hand, and brought I cannot tell what Orders and Instructions
from him. This I shall say, For these three years last past together, I have
not been sixty miles from this City of London, and I think it is somewhat
further to either of those places, than threescore miles. It is said that I
kept correspondence with one Mallory and Bishop: They are persons I have heard
of their names, but never in all my life to my knowledge saw their faces; and
to my knowledge I do not know they know me; nor do I know them at all, but
only as I have heard of their names. And whosoever else has suggested such
things against me, I know not, but the Lord God forgive them, who is just and
merciful.

His Highness was pleased to tell me, I was like a flaming Torch in the midst
of a sheafe of Corn: He meaning, I being a public Preacher, was able to set
the City on fire by sedition and combustions, and promoting designs H^re truly
I do say, and have it from many of those that are Judges of the High Court, by
which I was condemned, that upon examination of the business they ^av^ not
found me a medler at all in these affa^res. And truly I must needs say
therefore, That it was a very uncharitable act in them (who ever they were)
that brought such accusation against me, and irritated his Highness against
me, which first obstructed my liberty, next brought to the Bar as a Traitor,
which now commands me to satisfy them with my blood, but I will not say it was
malice, it might be zeal, but it was rash zeal which caused me to be sentenced
to this place: The God of Mercy pardon and forgive them all. And truly, as I am
a member of the Church, and as a member of the Community, where on behalf I
have been speaking, I cannot but do as our Savior himself did for his
Disciples, when he was to be taken from them, he blessed them, and ascended up
to Heaven. My trust is, in the mercy of the Most High I shall not miscarry; and
however my days are shortened by this unexpected doom, and shall be brought
untimely to the grave: I cannot go without my prayers for a blessing upon all
the people of this Land, and cannot but bless them all in the name of God, and
beseech God to bless them in all their ways, and his blessing be upon them
all; and upon me that am to suffer an ignominious violent death, but my
confidence is in the most high, and here is my hope that I am my Beloveds, and
my Beloved is mine, therefore come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Let us Pray.

O Most glorious Lord God, thou whose dwelling is so far above the highest
Heavens, that thou humblest thy self but to look upon the things that are in
Heaven, and that are in Earth, thou who do whatsoever thou will both in
Heaven, in Earth, in the Sea, and in all places. In thy hands are the Hearts of
all Men, and thou turnest them which way soever thou will. O Lord! look in
mercy and compassion, we beseech thee, on this great and numerous people of
this Land with an eye of pity, not with an eye of fury and indignation; O look
not on all those great and grievous sins that have provoked thee most justly to
wrath and displeasure against us. But gracious God! who can stand in thy sight
when thou art angry? when thou with rebuke do correct Man for sin, thou
make his beauty to consume away like as it were a Moth fretting a Garment. O
Lord! thy indignation and wrath lies heavy upon us, and thou have vexed us with
scourges, thou have made us a reproach and a byword amongst our Neighbors,
and the very Heathen laugh us to scorn. Oh that thou woulde^t turn us again,
O Lord God of Ho^ts! that thou would show us the light of thy countenance,
that we may behold it; that thou would humble us for all those sins and
grievous transgressions that are amongst us; for those Atheisms, for those
infidelities horrid Blasphemies, and Profaneness, for those Sacriledges, for
those Heresies, for those Schisms, Errors, and all those blindnesses of heart,
pride, vainglory, and hyp^crisie, that leads us from thee, it persuades us it
will bring us to thee; O humble us for that envy, hatred, and malice, and all
uncharitableness, that has set us one against another, that we are so dashed
one against another, even to destroy each other; Ephraim against Manasseh, and
Manasseh against Ephraim, and both against Judah. This thou have done to us to
make us a skurge unto each other, O Lord! because we have rebelled against
thee: O how greatly and grievously have we sinned? yet for all this thou ha^t
not reqvited us according to our ill deservings, for thou might have brought
us to des^lation and destruction: Fire might have come down from Heaven and
destroyed us; our foreign Enemies, and the Enemies of thee, and thy Christ
our Savior, might have swallowed us up. What have we not deserved? Yet O the
long-suffering, and patience, and goodness of our God! O Lord our God! we pray
thee that thy patience and long-suffering might lead to repentance, that thou
would be pleased, thou who delightest not in the death of a sinner, but
rather that he should turn from his sins and live, that thou would turn us
unto thee, O Lord! and we shall be turned: Draw us, and we shall run after
thee: Draw us with the Cords of love, and by the bands of thy loving kindness,
by the powerful working of thy holy spirit in our souls, work contrition in
our hearts, and a godly sorrow for all our sins, even a sorrow to repentance,
and a repentance to salvation never to be repented of. O Lord break these
stony hearts of ours by the hammer of thy word, molifie them by the oil of thy
Grace, smite these rockie hearts of ours by the Rod of thy most gracious power,
that we may shed forth Rivers of tears for the sins we have committed. O that
thou would make us grieve, because we cannot grieve; and to weep, because we
cannot weep enough: That thou would humble us more and more in the true
sight and sense of all our provocations against thee, and that thou would be
pleased in the blood of Jesus Christ to cleanse us from all our sins; Lord let
his blood that speaks better things than that of Abel, cry louder in thine
ears for mercy, then all those mischiefs and wickednesses that have been done
amongst us for vengeance. O besprinkle my polluted, but penitent soul, in the
blood of Jesus Christ, that I may be clean in thy sight, and that the light of
thy countenance may shine upon me. Lord! be pleased to seal unto mine, and all
our souls the free pardon and forgiveness of all our sins; Say to each of our
souls, and say that we may hear it, that thou art well-pleased with us, and
appeased toward us. Lord! do thou by thy spirit assure our spirits, that we
are thy Children, and that thou art reconciled to us in the blood of Jesus
Christ. To this end, O Lord! create in us new hearts, and renew right spirits
within us: Cast us not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit
from us; but give us the comfort of thy help, and establish us with thy free
spirit. Help us to live as thy redeemed ones, and (Lord!) let us not any longer
by our wicked lives deny that most holy faith whereof our lips have so long
time made profession, but let us that call on the name of the Lord Jesus,
depart from iniquity, and hate every evil way. Help us to cast away all our
transgressions, whereby we have transgressed, and make us new hearts. Carry us
along through the Pilgrimage of this world, supplying us with all things
needful for us; thy grace alone is sufficient for us: Lord! let thy grace be
assistant to us, to strengthen us against all the temptations of Satan,
especially against those sins whereunto we are most prone, either by custom or
constitution, or most easily provoked to. O Lord, with what affliction soever
thou shall punish, do not punish us with spiritual judgments and disertions.
Give us not over to our own hearts lusts, to our vile, lewd, and corrupt
affections. Give us not over to hardness and impenitency of heart, but make us
sensible of the least sin, and give us thy grace to think no sin little
committed against thee our God, but that we may be humbled for it, and repent
of it, and reform it in our lives and conversations: And Lord! keep us from
presumptious sins, oh let not them get the dominion over us, but keep us
innocent from the great offenses. And Lord! sanctify unto us all thy methods
and proceedings with us, fitting us for all further tribulations and trials
whatsoever thou in thy divine pleasure shall be pleased to impose upon us: Lord
give us patience, con^tancy, resolution and fortitude to undergo them, that
though we walk through the valley of the shadow of death, we may fear none
ill: knowing that thou, O Lord! art mercifully with us, and that with thy rod
as well as with thy staff thou will support and comfort us; and that nothing
shall be able to separate us from thy love which is in Jesus Christ our Lord.

And (gracious God!) we beseech thee be thou pleased to look mercifully and
compassionately on thy holy Catholic Church, and grant that all they that do
confess thy holy Name, may agree together in the truth of thy holy Word, and
live in unity and godly love. Thou have promised, O Lord! The gates of hell
shall not prevail against thy Church: Perform, we beseech thee, thy most
gracious promises both to thy whole Church, and to that part of it which thou
have planted, and now afflicted in these sinful Lands and Nations wherein we
live. Arise, O Lord! and have mercy upon our Sion, for it is time that thou
have mercy upon her; yea, the time is come, for thy servants think upon her
stones, and it pitieth them to see her in the dust. Lord! maintain thine own
cause; Rescue the light of thy truth from all those clouds of errors and
heresies which do so much obscure it, and let the light thereof in a free
profesion break forth and shine again among us, and that continually, even as
long as the Sun and Moon endures.

To this end, O Lord, bless us all, and bless Him, the po^terity -- which in
Authority ought to rule over, and be above us: Bless Him in His soul and in
His body, in His Friends and in His Servants, and all His Relations: Guide Him
by thy Council; prosper Him in all undertakings, granting Him a long,
prosperous, and honorable life here upon earth, and that He may attain to a
blessed life hereafter. And gracious God! look mercifully upon all our
Relations, and do thou bring them to the light of thy Truth that are wandering
and ready to fall, that grace here may intrest them in glory hereafter.
Confirm them in thy Truth that already stand: Show some good token for good
unto them, that they may rejoice. O let thy good hand of providence be over
them in all their ways: And to all orders and degrees of men that be amongst
us. Give religious hearts to them that now rule in Authority over us: Loyal
hearts in their Subjects toward their Supreme: And loving hearts in all men
to their Friends, and charitable hearts one toward another. And for the
continuance of thy Gospel among us, restore in thy good time to their several
Places and Callings, and give grace, O Heavenly Father! to all Bishops, Pastors
and Curates, that they may both by their Life and Doctrine set forth thy true
and lively word, and rightly and duly administer thy holy Sacraments. And Lord!
bless thy Church still with Pastors after thine own heart, with a continual
succession of faithful and able men, that they may both by Life and Doctrine
declare thy Truth, and never for fear or favor back-slide or depart from the
same. And give them the assistance of thy spirit that may enable them so to
preach thy word, that may keep thy People upright in the midst of a corrupted
and corrupt generation. And, good Lord! bless thy people every where with
hearing ears, understanding hearts, conscientious souls, and obedient lives,
especially those over whom I have had either lately or formerly a charge, that
with meek heart and due reverence they may hear and receive thy holy word,
truly serving thee in righteousness and holiness all the days of their lives.

And we beseech thee of thy goodness, O Lord! to comfort and succor all those
that in this transitory life be in trouble, sorrow, need, sickness, or any
other adversity; Lord! help the helpless, comfort the comfortless, visit the
sick, relieve the oppressed, help them to right that suffer wrong, set them at
liberty that are in Prison, restore the banished, and of thy great mercy, and
in thy good time deliver all thy people out of their necessities: Lord! do thou
of thy great mercy fit us all for our latter end, for the hour of death and the
day of Judgment; and do thou in the hour of death, and at the day of
Judgment, from thy wrath and everlasting damnation, good Lord deliver us,
through the Cross and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ.

In the mean time, O Lord! teach us so to number our days, and me my Minutes,
that we may apply our hearts to true wisdom, that we may be wise unto
salvation, that we may live soberly, godly and righteously in this present
world, denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts: Lord! teach us so to live,
that we may not be afraid to dye, and that we may so live that we may be
always prepared to dye, that when death shall seixe upon us, it may not
surprise us, but that we may lift up our heads with joy, knowing that our
redemption draws nigh, and that we shall be for ever happy, being assured that
we shall come to the Felicity of the Chosen, and rejoice with the gladness of
thy people: and give us such a fulness of thy holy Spirit that may make us
steadfast in this faith, and confirm us in this hope; indue me with patience
under thy afflicting band, and let not death be unpleasing to me, but support
me in this visitation, that I may dye with a confidence to overcome death, and
so to live for ever, and so fortify my soul with the assistance of thy spirit,
that I may to the last minute be assisted with a cheerful resolution, to give
up my self to thy divine disposing, that so passing the pilgrimage of this
world, we may come to the Land of promise, the Heavenly Canaan, that we may
reign with thee in the World to come, through Jesus Christ our Lord; in whose
blessed Name and Words we further call upon thee, saying,

Our Father, etc.

Let thy mighty hand, and outstretched arm, O Lord! be the defense of me, and
all other thy servants, thy mercy and loving kindness in Jesus Christ our
salvation, thy true and holy Word our instruction, thy Grace and holy Spirit
our comfort and consolation, to the end, and in the end, through Jesus Christ
our Lord, Amen.

Which being finished, he applies himself to the Executioner, giving him thr^e
pieces in gold out of a Purse; Stripping himself, he being in his shirt, asks
his Man for his Wastcoat, who after a dil^gent search, not finding of it, he
tell his Mast^r it were lost, upon which the Doctor makes answer, no matter if
I lose a Wastcoat, when I am to lose my life, afterward it being f^und, and
having put it on with his Cap, he put his hair under it himself, laying
himself down to fit himself to the Block, praing a pretty while; in which
time, there were brought a Warrant upon the Scaffold, which did not in the
least alter Dr. Hewit, having done Prayer, he arises, taking leave of his
friends, which occasioned the fall of many a tear, and prepares himself for
the Block, where giving a sign, the Executioner at one blow and a raze severed
his Head from his Body, which was put in a Coffin brought for that purpose, and
conveyed to Hunsdon House, near Doctors Commons, and afterward: entered with
all descency in the Chancell of Saint Gregory's, London.

FINIS.
AN ELEGY UPON The most PIOUS and EMINENT, Doctor JOHN HEWITT.
I.
NAture and reason both do plainly show,
After an Ebb we must expect a Flow:
Our late Experience makes this maxim good*
A Flood of Tears succeeds an Ebb of Blood.
HEWITT's depart are makes a Tempest rise.
His ebbing Body left us flowing Eyes.
II.
Come then, my Muse, let us labor to distill
Thorough the Limback of my mourning Quill
Such hearty Tears, that truly may invite
A Zealot to a perfect appetite
Of Love and Pity; and let those that never
Knew how to weep, now learn to weep for ever.
III.
But stay, my Genius, will these captious Times
Endure the touch of our Elorious Rimes
Without a prejudice? Be therefore wise;
This Age has reaching Ears, and searching Eyes:
If thou offend'st, my Muse, be sure to borrow
The privilege to charge it on thy sorrow.
IV.
Since he is dead, report it thou my Muse,
Unto the World as Grief, and not as News.
Hark how Religion sighs, the Pulpet groans,
And Tears run trickling down the senseless stones!
That Church which was all Ears is now turned Eyes,
The Mother weeps, and all her Children cries.
V.
Does Rachel mourn? Oh blame her not, for she
Has lost her Darling in his Infancy!
She looks upon it as a signal Cross,
But knows that he has gained by her loss.
She grieves, and hopes her griefs are understood,
Her Children that sucked Milk, may now suck Blood.
VI.
But hark! there is something whispers in my ear,
A Famine in Religion now grows near;
Her Zeal-parch'd Corn hangs down it is drooping head,
And turns to dirt, which might have proved good Bread.
How sad it is, that Children must not eat:
Religion will find Mouths, but where is the Meat.
VII.
Ah sanguine days! When such tall Cedars fall,
Dangers draws near, and threatens Shrubs and all.
The senseless Ax, that nothing understood,
Cut off his Life, and died it self in Blood.
When Troy was burnt, the neighboring Towns did stand
Expecting then their doom was near at hand.
VIII.
'Twas He, whose careful Zeal, and zealous Care
Was always laboring duly to prepare
Religious Viands, that his Flock might be
Not Pampered, but well led with Charity:
But now, Ah now, he is willingly retired
Where he will be blessed, as he was here admired!
IX.
Blast Soul! Since thy unhappy happy Fate
Has so soon made thee more than fortunate,
I will surcease my grief, and only shed
Some real drops, only because thou art dead.
It Is Nature, not Religion, makes us weep:
Manners forbids a noise whilst friends do sleep.
X.
No more, my Muse, it is enough we know
He is transplanted from this World below
Unto a glorious Mansion, in whose Quite
There is no fear of Plots, nor thoughts of Fire.
That Court of Justice periods all his strife,
And gives what here he lost; I mean, New Life.
FINIS.

