ADVICE to a DAUGHTER. In opposition to the ADVICE to a SON. OR Directions
for your better Conduct through the various and most important Encounters of
this life.

Under these general Heads, I. STUDIES, etc. II. LOVE and MARRIAGE. III.
TRAVEL. IIII. GOVERNMENT. V. RELIGION. Conclusion.


By Eugenius Theodidactus.

LONDON. Printed by J. Moxon, for Francis Cossinet, at the Golden Anchor in
Tower Street, at Mincheon lane end. 1658.

To the Excellently accomplished Gentleman, Mr. CHARLES BRVTON, Citizen, and
Merchant Adventurer of London, etc.
Much Honored SIR.
I Here trouble you with a short discourse; It is no Labored piece, and indeed
no fit Present; But I beg your acceptance. The first time I ever saw the Advice
to a Son, was the last day of Hillary Term; I read it, and found it full of
bitterness against Women; And indeed they were shamefully Wronged and Abused. I
shuff'd up this Answer in sixteen days, for your spare hours; in which you may
ma^^ your self Merry^ fur it was born this last V^cation, when I did not so
much Labor, as Play. I found him a Nameless over-worn Wittal, that five times
before I espied him, had adulterated the Press, and abused Ladies and
Gentlewomen; And no Man durst answer him: for so he reported. I will see what,
and who, this diseased Maccabee is; This (as yet) unconquered enemy of Women;
and defy him: and prove his discourse, and hard censure of Ladies and
Gentlewomen like the blasts of Rams horns before the walls of Jericho; that
throws down the Reputation of Ladies at one utterance.

I know you are Great; but yet there is a better title, you are Good. I might
have fixed this piece to a Pinnacle, made the Dedication High; But to what
purpose? Greatness is a thing I cannot admire in others; because I desire it
not in my self: It is a proud folly, a Ceremonious Fancy: There is nothing
necessary in it: for most men live without it: And I may not apply to that
which my Reason declines, as well as my Fortune. The truth is, I know no use of
Hooghen Mooghens, and Tituladoes: if they are in a humor to give, I am no
Beggar to receive: I look not for any thing, Sir, but what the Learned are
enriched withal, Judgment and Candor: you are a true friend to both, and to
my third self. And for my present boldness, you may thank your self; you taught
me this familiarity, and you may see what unprofitable affections you have
purchased. I propose nothing for your instruction; Nature has done her part;
and I would make you my Judge, not my Pupil: if therefore amongst your serious
and more dear Retirements, you can allow this trifle but some few minutes, and
think them not lost; you will perfect my ambition, you will place me (Sir) at
my full height; and though it were like that of Statius amongst Gods and Stars;
I shall quickly find the Earth again, and with the least opportunity present my
self,

SIR, Your most humble Servant. Eugenius Theodidactus:
March 26. 1658.
To the Book, and Reader.
ANd now my Book, let it not stop thy flight,
That thy just Author is not Lord or Knight.
I can define my self, and have the Art
Still to present one face, and still one heart.
But for nine years some great Ones cannot see
What they have been, nor know they what to be.
What though I have no Rattle to my name?
Do hold a Simple Honesty no Fame?
Or art thou such a stranger to the Time,
Thou can not know my Fortune from my Crime?
Go forth, and fear not: some will gladly be
Thy Learned friends, whom I did never see.
Nor should thou fear thy welcome, thy small Price
Cannot undo 'em, though they pay Excise.
Thy Bulks not great; it will not much distress
Their Empty Pockets, but their Studies dress.
Thou Art no Galeon, as books of burden be,
Which cannot ride but in a Library:
Thou Art a fine thing, and little: it may chance
Ladies will buy thee for a new Romance:
And this perhaps may sometimes move their Laughter
That thou art called Advice unto a Daughter.
Oh how I Will envy Thee! when thou art spread
In the bright Sunshine of their eyes, and read
With breath of Amber, Lips of Rose, that Lend
Perfumes unto thy leaves, shall never spend.
When from their white hands they shall let thee fall
Into their Bosom, (which I may not call
Ought of Misfortune) thou do drop to rest.
In a more pleasing place, and art more blessed
There, in some silken soft fold thou shall lie
Hid like their Love, or thy own Allegory.
Nor should thou grieve thy Language is not fine,
For sixteen days has made this Book of mine.
I could have voy^'d thee forth in such a Dress
The Spring had been a slut to thy express;
Such as might file the rude unpolished Age,
And fix the Readers Soul to every Page.
But I have used a course and homely strain,
Because it suits with Truth, which should be plain.
Last, my dear Book, if Readers Look on thee
As on three Suns, or some great Prodigy;
And swear to a full point, I do deride
All other Sects, to publish my own pride.
Tell such they lie. And since they love not thee,
Bid them go Learn some High-shoe Heresy.
Nature is not so simple but she can
Procure a sollid Reverence from Man:
Nor is my Pen so lightly plumed that I
Should serve Ambition with her Majesty.
It Is Women's Virtue I do tell abroad,
For Women-Angels are sent us from the Lord.
This Truth makes me Come forth, and having writ
This her short Scaence, I would not stifle it;
For I have called it Child, and I had rather
See 't torn by them, then strangled by the Father.
E. I.

To his Daughter.
Daughter,
I Have forborne to set your name on the fore head of these Aphorisms; not that
I am ashamed either of them, or you: but because your Enemy and his Son, have
done so before me. And such old men as these I accept against, as a generation
of decrepit and withered understandings: People whose Minds, could they be
looked into, would prove infinitely more monstrous then their Bodies; and such
as like Monkies, having either gnawed away or lost their tails, read Lectures
and Advices to young ones to cut theirs too.

First, we give to all the Virtues the habits and visages of Women: and of all
the Virtues Truth is the best; (for Truth is the mother of Justice, and Justice
(they say) comprehends them all: Yet she is naked, though she love the public,
and hate Corners: And is it not very fit that all the Sex should imitate such
an excellent Pattern and Mistress? In this light humor I am in, I think we can
do no greater right to Women, then to bring them to be Judged by one rule. And
since every Woman Judges her self the fairest; she that would be backward to
this Arbitriment, would be diffident of her self; and consequently a Rennegade
from her Sex.

Next, take care of the subtle devices of Men: and consider their designs,
which may be more Loving to your Portion, then your Person: All people having
not the same Conceptions of beauty; which is as hateful to an Ethiopian, as
Black is to us: not considering that Women uncloathed are all alike; and the
Conceptions about the harmony and measures of her Body differ not.

Yet I advise you not to follow the example of a Princess appearing in a Lawn
smock, to be veiwed by Ambassadors, as toward a Marriage^ said, she would put
off that too, if there were any necessity. But custom has made Clothes
decent. The deeds of our Ancestors, are not to be slighted; for they left them
for our example; and used in their days abundance of cheaper Artificial
Ornaments, from Shells, Feathers, and Stones. Behold the Sun and Moon, and all
the Glorious Batalia of Heaven; and they appear as the Great God and Nature
made them; to which God and Nature, I am Servant and Secretary.

This will not produce such infinite provocations and incitements to lust as
the Advice to a Son fondly conceives. But I say not. For I dare say, that what
by Painting, what by the Looseness and Change of Garments, what by these gaudy
inventions of dressings, that flexure and fracture of gate, the deformity is
hidden: unless to a very nice eye, there is much more fuel added, then if all
went with no more Mantles, Scarfes, Gowns, and Hoods, then Nature thrust them
into the World with, viz. Hair hanging loosely down, or else carelessly gathered
up in a Fillet; and perhaps some little kind of Cover, that might restrain, the
Virginal flower, from being too much gazed at, and blown upon. Follow not
(Daughter) their fashion that uncover the parts of their chiefest Beauty, as
their Face, Neck, Breasts and Hand, as the Index to the more secret object;
which without a sign may be by the guide of humane Nature sound out: So that
Women do endeavor in part to break that restraint which bides the rest of
their Glory, and to set forth their delicate Dresses, plaited and weaved with
such variety, their Ivory Necks, their Harmonious Faces, their Milkie Spherical
Breasts, and their Melting Hands: my advice is to show All, or Nothing.
Daughter though some Crazy ignorant old welsh Owens, with powder dried bones,
fit to be burnt, with diseases, has endeavored to deceive you from the same
Species, with Men; and one madder then they, deny you Souls; and so have many
others: yet when we shall oppose Holy Scripture, which makes Man the
Consummation of the Creation; and you the Consummation of Man: if I should but
instance those particular indulgencies of Nature which John Heydon reckons unto
you, and those peculiar advantages of composition and understanding he ascribes
to you; or if I should mention that of Eugenius Theodidactus, that friend to
the Fraternity of the Rosy Cross, and believed to be inspired, and so thought
a Rosy Crusian; he (I say) calls you Fountains and perfections of Goodness:
Whom (Daughter) can we imagine to be so insensible as not to be presently
touched with the delicate Composure and Symmetry of Women's Bodies? The
sweetness and killing Languors of their eyes? The mestange and harmony of their
Colors? The happiness and spirituallity of their Countenance? The Charms and
allurements of their mind? The Air and Command of their smiles? Men are merely
rough cast, bristly, and made up of tough Materials: and if they approach any
thing near Beauty, do so much degenerate from what they are.

How general is the affection of old Men to Women? some I have known of three
score to Marry Girls of sixteen. Soloman was no fool; and it is well known,
how your sex tempted him; that his power Commanded you to fulfill his desires.
And I only advise you to Wisdom and Virtue. And if any Clumsy old doting
Wittall, blinded with Ignorance, and by his own Woeful Experience shall protest
against the Sufficiency of these, or any thing else I have written, or shall
write for your better instructions, that may perhaps hereafter be made public;
He wilfully goes about to Council his Master; and adventures to make the Sun
stand still; and to run another race. For your sake I set Pen to Paper, to
teach you how to live; that to Die you need not fear.

The World is full of deceit: trust not therefore the hot love of a Stranger:
for if you will expose your self to all, you are Slighted: and a Common Wife is
hated.

Beauty affords Contentment; Riches are means to cure a weak Estate: Honor
illustrates all comes nigh it. If you Marry thus, you are happy; And then to
find Worth, Carriage Gesture and Grace, in your choice, it perfects felicity.

These things in this Book are written for your instruction; hopeing you will
excuse my faults; which through have and other infirmity are Committed. A more
Leisure time may perfect what is here Charactered in Water Colors: And you may
easily perceive, that I consulted not at all with advantaging my Name, or
wooing public esteem by what I now write. I know there was much of Naked Truth
in it; And is a Caution given to you, from

Your Loving Father. etc. (...)
March 26 1658.
ADVIGE to a DAUGHTER. In opposition to the ADVICE to a SON.
WHo is this that darkneth Council, by Words without Knowledge? Come thou
Embrio of a History, thou Cadet of a Pamphleteer; Gird up thy loins like a man,
for I will demand of thee, and answer thou me.

But now I think upon it, I will allow thee time to breath, after thy late
Bawling those fragments of a Profane Atheistical old Pamphlet, entitled Thy
Advice to a Son, and speak a few words to my Reader.

Reader, I have met with a Thing; it is not named, It speaks like a Man, and
yet abuses Women: It is the first Tincture and Rudiments of a Writer, dipped
as yet in the preparative Blew, like an Almanac well-wilier.

To call him an Historian, is to Knight a Mandrake; to say he is a Politician,
is view him throw a Perspective, and by that gross Hyperbole to give the
reputation of an Engineer to a maker of Mouse-traps. He is such an one as Queen
Mabbs Register: One, who by the same figure that a North Country Pedlar is a
Merchant man, you may style an Author: There goes his Affection, which is the
Heliotrope to the Sun of Honor; and has long since abjured his God, Religion,
Conscience, and all that shall interpose and skreen him from those Beams that
may ripen his wishes and aims into enjoyments.

And now have at his Advice to a Son. Come thou Relic of a Politician, that
five times at least (by I know not what Ignis fatuus have adulterated the
Press: And have you so much Policy in your Advice to your Son that the Readers
mistake your Name, and believe you to be the Tripple-headed Turn-key of Heaven?

Behold his Directions. For your better Conduct through the various and most
important Encounters of this Life: under the five general Heads (I will cut
off) and you will think him the Triple-headed Porter of Hell. Ladies, Fear him
not, I am your Champion; Little David will fight Goliath.

I scorn to kill him, I Will only box him, kick and cudgel him for his boldness:
and let him know, He is the better man who has besiedged and taken a Town, not
plotted to rob an Orchard, and for all his subtleties was Whipped.

But I must read first, and write afterward. Here comes the Pedee of a
Romancer, with his Advice to a Son; It Is the Indorsement to the Packet, like a
fine knot to a fine bundle: Come, Let Us open in the name of good sense: Oh! How
it smells like a diseased piece of an Apocripha taken out of Guzman's rags, or
burnt bones.

What says this Father to his Son?

1. Though I can never pay enough to your Grandfathers Memory, for his tender
Care in my Education; yet I must observe in it this mistake; that by keeping me
at Home, where I was one of my young Masters, I lost the advantage of my most
docile time. For not undergoing the same Discipline, I must needs come short of
their Experience that are bred up in Free Schools; who by plotting to rob an
Orchard etc.

1. Here he complains of the loss of those times which I could wish I had not
known. Daughter, I would have you as good as I could fancy one: and three
things I would have you know; First, Your own misery; secondly, Gods Love;
thirdly, Your thankful Obedience: your misery. How just? Gods Love, How free?
How undeserved? Your thankfulness, How due? How necessary? Consideration of
one, successively begets the apprehension of all: Your condition shows you his
Love; His Love calls for your acknowledgement: Want makes a Bounty weightier.

2. As your Education has been befriended by a foundation; so you may
endeavor a requital, if God makes you able: However let not the contrary
afflict you, since it is observed by some, that his Name who burnt the Temple
of Diana, out-lasted theirs that built it. etc.

2. Answer, Of Education I say thus much, It is seen every where: If you travel
but from White Hall to Exeter, or from a Village to an Accademy; or see but a
Horse well managed, and another resty in his own fierceness. Diet no question
alters much; even the giddy Airyness of the French, I shall rather impute to
their Diet of Wine and wild Foul, then to the difference of their Clime; it
being so near an adjoyner to ours. And* in England, I believe our much use of
Strong beer, and gross Flesh is a great occasion of dregging our Spirits, and
corrupting them till they shorten life. Age is also a changer; Man has a
Zenith, as well in Wit as in ability of Body; He grows from sense to Reason,
and then again declines to Dotage, and to imbecility: Youth is too young in
brain; and Age again, does drain away the Spirits: Passion blunts the edge of
Conceit, and where there is much sorrow the mind is dull and unperceiving; the
Soul is oppressed, and lies languishing in an unsociable loneliness, till it
proves stupid and inhumane: Nor do these more alter the Mind then the Body.

Weigh every Man's Education as his means have been: A man may look in vain for
Courtship in a Plow man, or Learning in a Mechanic. Who would expect a lame
man should run swiftly? Or that a sick man should deliver an Oration with a
Grace and cheerfullness? If you find any man failing in his Manners, you must
consider his Means, before you censure the Man: and one that is short of what
he might be, by his sloth and negligence, you must think as justly blameable,
as he that out of his Industry has adorned his behavior above his Means, is
commendable.

3. Let not an over-passionate prosecution of Learning (says he) draw you from
making an honest improvement of your Estate; as such do who are better read in
the bigness of the whole Earth, then in that little spot left them by their
friends, for their support.

3. I Answer. (You clumsie Epithet) Nothing wraps a Man in such a mist of
Errors, as his own Curiosity in twisting himself into things above him. How
happily do they live, that know nothing but what is necessary? Your knowledge
does but show your Ignorance; Your most studious scrutenies is but a discovery
of what the Spirit knew before it was imbodied: You find the effect, but not
the Cause.

Besides, If I must describe a mere Scholar, He is an intellegible Ass, or
silly fellow in Black, that speaks Sentences more familiarly then Sense, and
Latin better then his Mother Tongue; But is a stranger to no Country but his
own; He is Ambitious, and tells great stories of himself, to no purpose, for
they are commonly ridiculous, be they true or false; doubtless he is a
Graduate; but if ever he get a Fellowship, he has then no Fellow: in spite of
all Logic he dares swear and maintain it, that a Cuckold and a Towns-man are
Termini Convertibiles, though his Mothers Husband and the Father of the Advice
to a Son's Father, be Aldermen in the singular Number: He cannot but wrangle
with harmless Women: His Tongue goes always before his Wit, like the
Gentleman Usher, but abundance faster: He is long-winded, and able to speak
more with ease, than any man can endure to hear with Patience: University Jests
are his universal Discourse; and his News the Demeanor of the Proctors: His
phrase (the Apparel of his Mind) is made of diverse shreds like a Cushion, and
when it goes plainest it has a rash outside, and Fustian Linings; the
current of his Speech is closed with an Ergo: and what ever be the Question,
the Truth is on his side: it is a wrong to his Reputation to be ignorant in any
thing, and yet he knows not that he knows nothing: He gives Directions for
Husbandry from Virgils Georgicks, for Cattle from his Bucolicks: He would be
thought as great a Duellist as Heydon, and as stout a Fighter: He speaks of
Warlike Stratagems from his Eucides, or Ceasars Commentaries: He orders all
things, and thrives by none: He is led more by his Ears then his Understanding,
taking the empty sound of words for their true sense; and does therefore
confidently say, that Era Pater was the Father of Heretics; Rodolphus
Agricola a substantial Farmer; and will aver that Systimo's Logic does excel
Kickermans: His ill luck is not so much in being a Fool, as in being put to
such pains to express it to the World; for what in others is Natural, in him
(with much ado) is Artificial: His Poverty is his Happiness, for it makes men
believe he is an honest man: That Learning that he has was put in backward,
like a Clister; and is now like ware mis-laid in a Pedlars pack, he has it, but
knows not where it is. And this is the Index of a Man, and the Title page of
his Father: a new Religion in Morality; much in Profession, nothing in Practice.

4. His Father says, A mixed Education suits Employment best: Scholars and
Cittzens by a too long plodding in the same track, have their Experience seldom
dilated beyond the Circle of a narrow Profession, etc.

I Answer, There is no Syntax between a Cap of Maintenance, and a Helmet:
Although we have caution enough against these mixed multitudes in sad and
frequent experience; these latter Ages groaning under an Exorbitant Clergy. Yet
such is the easiness and Credulity of the Vulgar, such the subtilety and
dissembling sanctity of the Imposture, that he meets with as great a pronesse
in the People to be cozened, as he brings willingness to delude. For it is a
true Observation, that these Clancular Sermocinators bear as great sway in
Popular minds, and make as deep impression upon their Consciences, as the
Loyalists does when they impose upon their blind Layty.

I suspect this Clerical Statist, that makes him that cannot deceive, ignorant
how to live.

5. I have observed in Collegiate Discipline, etc:

I Answer, Here he fancies the Habit of the Jesuits, as the principal men to
perfect Patience and Obedience in Youth; when I suspect him in the dispensation
of Sacred Oracles, who (as it is said) tampers with Secular affairs of no
Concernment to his Auditors Souls: but this Discipline is the common skreen of
his private design.

6. If a more profitable Employment pull you not too soon from the University,
etc.

I Answer, Here he would have his Son make some inspection into Physic, which
will make him welcome: If he know but how to make a Suppository to please a
Lady, he will be reverenced beyond a Holy Father, or the Vicar of the Parish.

7. Do not prosecute beyond a superficial Knowledge, any Learning that moves
upon no stronger Legs, then the tottering basis of Conjecture is able to afford
it, etc.

I Answer, Learning is like a River (Sir,) whose head being far in the Land, is
at the first Rising little, and easily veiwed, but still as you go it gapeth
with a wider Bank; not without pleasure and a delightful winding, while it is
on both sides set with Trees, and the Beauties of various Flowers; but still
the further you follow it the deeper and broader it is, till at last it in
waves it self in the unfathomed Ocean. In many things you may sound Nature in
the shallows of her Revelations; we may trace her in her second Causes; but
beyond them we meet with nothing but the Mysteries of the holy company of
un-bodied Souls, which have, and some not yet have been bodied: and this
puzzels your clogged Spirit, and dazels your minds dim eyes which peeps through
the Body.

8. Huge Vollumnes, like the Ox roasted whole in Bartholmew Fair, may proclaim
plenty of Labor and Invention; but afford less of what is delicate, savory,
and well concocted, then smaller pieces, etc.

I Answer, Idle Books (like you Natural Knave, and Artificial Dissembler) are
nothing else but corrupted Tales in Ink and Paper: And indeed your vicious
Books sent abroad, makes him that reads them Conscious of a double injury; they
being in effect, like that brutish sin of Adultery; for if One reads, Two are
caught. He that Angles in these Waters, is sure to strike the Torpedo; that
instead of being his Food, confounds him. Besides the time ill spent in them, a
twofold reason shall make you refrain, both in regard to your own Soul, and
pity unto him that made them: for if you be corrupted by them, the Composer of
them is mediately a cause of your ill; and at the day of reckoning (though now
dead) must give an account for it: because you are corrupted by his bad
example, which he leaves behind him: so you become guilty by receiving; he by
thus conveying this lewdness unto you: He is the Thief, you the Receiver: and
what difference makes our Law betwixt them? If one be cut off, the other dies;
both perish. Write not like him, lest you hurt those that come after you: Read
not his Books, lest you augment his mulct. A lame Hand is better then a lewd
Pen. And his foolish Sentences dropped upon Paper, in Advice to his Son, has set
Folly on a Hill, and is a Monument to make Women Infamous eternal.

9. As the Grave hides the fault of Physic, etc.

I Answer, Here he commends modern Authors, which I should more doubt of
Knavery, who for the most part subborn Scripture to attest or incite to illegal
actions: as of kin to that which John Heydon calls very fitly Religio sum
Scelus, Religious wickedness.

10. Be conversant in the Speeches, Declarations and Transactions, occasioned
by the last Wars.

I Answer, He advises you to such Pamphlets would hardly pass Muster with a
Scotch Stationer, in a sieve full of Ballads and Godly Bewks, full of such
Reports as contradict Truth, and defame a good Title, as well as most of our
Modern Noble men: Those Went of Greatness: The Body Politics most Peccant
humors, they blistered into Lord.

11. A few Books well Studied, etc.

I Answer, Some men read Books (you crampt Compendium) as Gentlemen use
Flowers; only for delight and smell, to please their fancy, and refine their
Tongue: others like the Bees, extract only the Honey, the wholesome precepts; and
this alone they bear away, leaving the rest, as little worth: the one of these
instructs his mind, and the other tells what he has Learned; it is pity they
should be divided. He that has worth in him, and cannot express it, is as a
Chest keeping a rich Jewel, and the Key lost* Concealing Goodness is Vice. A
good style with wholesome matter, is a fair Woman, with a virtuous Soul; which
attracts the eyes of all: The good man thinks Chastely, and loves her Beauty for
her Virtue; which he still thinks more fair, for dwelling in so fair an
outside. The Vicious man has Lustful thoughts; and he would for her Beauty,
fain destroy her Virtue: but coming to solicit his purpose, finds such Divine
Lectures from her Angels Tongue, and those delivered with so sweet a pleasing
Modesty, that he thinks Virtue is dissecting her Soul to him, to ravish man
with a Beauty which he dreamed not of: so he could curse himself, for desiring
that lewdly, which he has learned since, only to admire and reverence. Thus he
goes away better, that came with an intent to be worse. Quaint phrases on a
good subject, are baits to make an ill man Virtuous. How many men seeking these
vilely, have found themselves Convertites?

12. It is an Sphorisme in Physic, etc.

I Answer, This concerns the Wits of the Town, which he advises his Son to
Converse with, to refine his Spirit, better then Books: It may be so; and I
believe they will sell him Wit dearer then Stationers their Books: And we know
what they say of Bought Wit.

13. Propose not them for Patterns, who make all Places rattle where they come,
with Greek and Latin, etc.

I Answer, (Anonimus) I should believe him a foolish jugler, that sprinkels his
words in any vulgar Mother Tongue, publicly with murmurs against the lawful
Magistrate, Ecclesiastical or civil, unless he has some better ground for his
dislike, then a thwarting his humor in things controversal and adiaphorous.

14. Follow not the tedious practice of such as seek wisdom only in learning,
etc.

I answer; He is Pedantically conceited of his invention which is so enrolled
in Policy, that it drops black and malignant influences upon Tradition.

15. Spend no time in reading, much less writing strong lines, etc.

I answer: Why so? (pray Sir) is it not worth your time to know the mysterious
truth of natural Astrology, and the strange and strong lines of the learned
Moses? but there is no superstition in Politics more odious, then to stand too
much upon niceties.

16. Books flatly writ deface your style; the like may be truly objected to
weak preachers, etc.

I answer; The late King Charles indeed had a pen more majestical then the
Crown he lost, (but not as you say from experience the Mistress of fools) for
he trusted in God, and it was he that gave him a wise and an understanding
heart, (if not) others have known as much by experience as he that are not as
he was, truly inspired; The excess which is in the defect of preaching has made
the Pulpit flighted, I mean the much bad Oratory we find it guilty of: It is a
wonder to me how men can preach so little in so long a time, as if they thought
to please by their vain Tautologies; I see no reason that so high a Princess as
Divinity is, should be presented to the people in such sordid rags of the
tongue; nor he which speaks from the father of Languages, should deliver his
Embassage in an ill one.

A man can never speak too well, where he speaks not too obscure: long and
distended clauses are both tedious to the ear, and difficult for their
retaining: a sentence well couched takes both the sense and the understanding;
I love not those cart-rope speeches, that are longer then the memory of man can
fathom; I see not but that Divinity, put into apt significants by John
Cleveland, might ravish as well as his Poetry: The weightier lines men find
upon the Stage, I am persuaded have been the Lures to draw away the Pulpit
followers: we complain of drowsiness at a Sermon, when a Play of a doubled
length leads you on still with alacrity; but the fault is not in our selves, if
we saw Divinity acted, the gesture and variety would as much invigilate. But it
is too slight to be personated by humanity, the Stage feeds both the ear and
the eye; and through this latter sense the soul drinks deeper draughts; things
acted possess us more and are more retainable then the passable tones of the
tongue: Besides, here we meet with more composed language, the Dulcia Sermonis
put into fine phrases, though it is to be lamented such wits are not set to the
right tune, and consorted to Divinity, who without doubt, well decked, will cast
a far more radiant luster, then those obscene scurrilities that the Stage
presents us with, though spangled in their gaudiest tire.

At a Sermon well dressed, what understander can have a motion to sleep? Divinity
well ordered casts forth a bait, which angles the soul into the ear; and how
can that close, when such a guest sits in it? They are Sermons like Eugenius
Philalethes Philosophy, which lead the eyes to slumber; and should we hear a
continued Oration, upon such a subject as the Stage treats on, or Clevelands
Poems in such words as we hear some Sermons, I am confident, it would not only
be far more tedious, but nauseous and contemptible. The most advantage they
have of other places is in their good lines and actions; For it is certain,
Cicero and Rossius are most complete, when they both make but one man; fit
words are better then fine ones; I like not those that are injudiciously made,
but such as be expressively significant, that lead the mind to something
besides the naked term: and he that speaks this, must not speak every day. A
kemb'd Oration will cost both sweat and the rubbing of the brain, and kemb'd I
wish it not frizeled nor curled: Divinity should not lasciviate: unwormwooded
jests I like well; but they are fitter for the Tavern, then the Majesty of a
Temple: Christ taught the people with authority, gravity becomes the Pulpit: I
became a writer, by spending more oil then wine, this is too fluid an Element
to beget substantials; wit procured by wine, is for the most part like the
sparkling in the glass, when it is filling; they brisk it for a moment, but dye
presently: I admire the valor of some men that before their studies dare
ascend the Pulpit, and do there take more pains then in their Library; but
having done this, I wonder not that they there spend sometimes two hours but to
weary the people into sleep; and this makes fugitive Divines, like cowards to
run away from their Text: words, matter, and gesture with admirable tongue
complete a Sermon. I know God has chosen by weak things to confound the wise,
yet I see not but in all times a washed language has much prevailed, and even
the Scriptures were penned in Hebrew, a tongue of deep expression, wherein
every word has almost a Metaphorical sense, which does illustrate by some
allusion. How Political is Moses in his Pentateuch, how philosophical Job, how
massy and sententious is Solomon in his Proverbs, how quaint and flamingly
amorous in his Canticles? how grave in his Ecclesiastes? How were the Jews
astonished at Christ's Doctrine? how Eloquent a pleader is Paul? He that reads the
Fathers, shall find them written as if with a crisped pen.

I grieve that any thing so excellent as Divinity should fall into such a
sluttish handling; though other interposures do eclipse her, yet this is a
principal: I never knew a good tongue wanted ears to hear it, nor a well-pend
Book want a friend to read it. Confections that are cordials are not the worse
but the better for being gilded. Paul says, Let no man be dark and full of
shadow; there is a way to be pleasingly plain, and some have found it:
Philosophy or Poetry may come in and wait to please the guests with a Trencher
at a Banquet.

17. The way to Elegancy of style, is to employ your pen upon every errand, etc.

17. This Paragraph I have answered already, and do presume, that person is
very rare, that can boast of such an absolute method of speech as Angels have,
whilst he is amongst mortals, but that there will be now and then some words
fall from him, and some phrases, which confess humanity, and require candor;
some leaves in the volume of the wisest Book, penned by the fairest life are
legenda cum venia.

18. When business or complement calls you to write letters, etc.

I answer, It happens sometimes, you may write to Princes: should you speak to
him with a Complement, that the Court makes better Scholars then the
University: For when the King vouchsafes to be a Teacher, every man blushes to
be a non-proficient.

19. Avoid words and phrases, etc.

I answer, Happy will it be if you keep base company, and learn to loath their
errors in your self. I commend to you for your immitation, the lines of the
late King, and the Proverbs of Solomon, and his grave Ecclesiastes, all very
well penned.

20. The small reckoning I have seen made, etc.

I answer; No book is so meanly penned but that there is something in it that
may teach you what you knew not before, and if you write books, let your
subject be truth, and it written plainly; for though it may prove fruitless to
many, because not understood, nor regarded, yet some few may be of that Spirit,
as to comprehend it, and embrace it, if not openly profess it, yet secretly
believe it: Amplae mentis ampla flamma.

21. Be not frequent in Poetry, how excellent soever your vein is, etc.

I answer, Poets have a name of honor, nor know I how to distinguish between
the Prophets and Poets of Israel: what is Ieremiahs Lamentation but a kind of
Saphick Elegy? David's Psalms are not only Poems, but songs; snatches and
raptures of a flaming spirit: and this indeed I observe to the honor of Poets,
I never found them covetous or scrapingly base; they find their minds so
solaced with their own flights, that they neglect the study of growing rich.

22. The Art of Music, etc.

I answer, Whose dull blood will not caper in his veins, when the very air he
breaths in frisketh in a tickled motion? who can but fix his eye and thoughts,
when he hears the sighs and dying groans, gestured from the mournful
Instrument? and I think he has not a mind well tempered, whose zeal is not
inflamed by an heavenly Anthem; so that indeed Music is good or bad, as the
end to which it tends: surely they did mean it excellent, that made Apollo,
who was God of wisdom, to be God of Music also.

23. Wear your clothes neat, etc.

I answer: This is one in whom pride is a quality that condemns every one
besides his Master, who when he wears new clothes, thinks himself wronged, if
they be not observed, imitated, and his discretion in the choice of his fashion
and stuff applauded: when he vouchsafes to bless the air with his presence, he
goes as near the wall as his Plush cloak and suit with a canvas back and Satin
sleeves will give him leave: And every passenger he views under the eyebrows,
to observe whether he vails his bonnet low enough, which he returns with an
imperious nod: He never salutes first, but his farewell is perpetual. In his
attire he is effeminate, every hair knows his own station; which if it chance
to lose, it is checked in again with his pocket comb: he had rather have the
whole Commonwealth out of order then the least member of his Muschato, and
chooses rather to lose his patrimony, then to have his band ruffled. At a feast
if he be not placed in the highest seat, he eats nothing; howsoever he drinks
to no man, talks with no man; and refuses the sports of Hunting and hawking
for fear of familiarity. As you shall hear anon, he professes to keep his
stomach for the Pheasant or the Quail, and when they come, he can eat little,
he has been so cloyed with them that year, although they be the first he saw.
In his discourse he talks high, the lowest man is a privy Counselor; and is
as prone to belie their acquaintance, as he is a Ladies favors. And this is
the Author of the Advice to a Son, that goes to Sermons only to show his gay
clothes, and if on other inferior days he chance to meet his friend, he is
sorry he sees him not in his best suit; and if he have but twelve pence in his
purse, he will give it for the best room in a Play house.

24. Never buy but with ready money, etc.

I answer, Exceed not in the humor of rags and bravery, for these will soon
were out of fashion, but money in your purse will ever be in fashion; and no
man is esteemed for gay garments but by fools and women: fix on the goodness
and commodiousness of the thing you buy; let not your judgment, friendship, or
acquaintance, persuade you to pride or wantonness, an effeminate spruceness, or
a fantastic disorder, but decency and a neglective comeliness is your best
ornament; therefore buy those.

25. Next to clothes a good horse becomes a gentleman, etc.

If you dare trust your own judgment without the assistance of a friend, in
choosing things are good and cheap, his rule is good.

A good horse, if he have majesty and stateliness, becomes a gentleman; its
commendable to see him with his Mane and Tail waving in the wind, and hear him
coursing and neighing in the pastures, and noble to see him with some gallant
Hero on his back, performing gracefully his useful postures, and practicing
his exploits of war.

26. Gallop not through a town, etc.

I answer, why so? a party may be riding post upon life and death, and then it
is but being careful and there is no danger.

27. Wrestling and vaulting have ever (says he) been looked upon by men as
more useful then Fencing, etc.

I answer, not with me (Mr. Puny) of what use is wrestling to a gentleman a
horseback going to do his King service? if you meant to quarrel in a Tavern it
may be useful, or in an Alehouse, you may trip up his heels, and vault over the
table and then run away.

28. Swimming may save a man, etc.

I answer, (That is true) I remember I saved my self, and so did all my company
at the siege of Sally in Barbary, when an Army of Turks came down to destroy
it, and all the inhabitants, and all that they found there as well strange
Merchants as natives.

29. Though Machiavil etc.

I answer, (Sir) you say Machiavil prescribes Hunting and Hawking in his Advice
to a Prince; it may be he does; I shall not take the pains to look whether he
do or not, but you it seems are afraid of acquaintance with those whom you fear
can inform your judgment in little but what signifies nothing; and who you
would think tedious to hear, yet cannot after shake off their acquaintance,
etc. I appeal to the faculties of any free Judge, whether this be not a
fruitless question; for it is a small thing to give any man the hearing of his
discourse, and not a penny Matter whether it signify any thing or not; first,
you make him your friend, and if you but a little instruct him with mild and
kind language, it is commendable both with God and Man: And be not proud and
scorneful (oh man) one God made all flesh. Now to this Sport; Is it not
pleasant to view in the open Champion a brace of swift Greyhounds coursing a
stout and well breathed Hare, or a Pack of well tuned Hounds, and Huntsmen on
their horse backs, with pleasure and alacrity pursuing their game, and to hear
them winding their horns near a wood side, so that the whole wood rings of the
echo of that Music, and cheerful yelping of the eager Dogs, and these sports
ended, retire every man, with, Gentlemen my occasions will not permit me
further? etc.

30. Such as are betrayed by their easy nature, etc.

I answer; Hear this emblem, of an Age, taking of signs by experience,
mistakes, that wherein men do ordinarily think, and believe the difference
stands between man and man in wisdom, by which he and all others commonly
understand a man's whole ability, surety-ship, trusting or power cognitive; but
this is an error: for the signs are but conjectural; and according as they
have often or seldom failed, so their assurance is more or less, but never full
and evident; for though a man have always seen the day and night to follow one
another hitherto, yet can he not thenee conclude they shall do so, or that they
have done so eternally. Experience which he cries up, concludes nothing
universally, if the signs hit twenty times for one missing; a man may lay a
wager of twenty to one of the event, but may not set it down for a truth. You
cannot from experience conclude that any thing is to be called just or unjust,
true or false; you may conclude such things to be without, that are within you.

31. He that lends upon public faith is security for his own money, etc.

I answer, Rich widows therefore were ordained for younger brothers; for they
being born to no lands, borrow upon the public, and must plow in another man's
soil.

32. Honesty treats with the world upon such vast disadvantages etc.

I answer, It is policy to borrow sometimes to prevent lending; and to be
always indebt, and able to pay upon demand is more profitable then to appear
rich.

33. In a case of importance hear the reasons of others pleaded, etc.

33. In such a case; If I mistake not, the fundamental deceit lies in a greedy
entertaining those first pretenses, and seemingly candid important propositions
are made to us before they have passed those scrutinies, and severe iniquities
they deserve) external holy reasons, invite awful regards there is no mask that
becomes Rebellion: and innovation so well as Religion; Herod would fain worship
when he means to worry, and these must be examined by the test of Gods word,
and National Laws: All the rest are but ugly consequence of that absurdity in
the Advice to a Son.

34. Beware nevertheless of thinking your self wiser or greater then you are,
etc.

I answer; Let all sober Christians, know that the shel of Religion though it
may be of external conducement, yet there is nothing that Gods pure and
undeluded eye looks on with more abhorrency, then this, and subtle pride we
may possibly disceive men, but it in vain to put Ironies upon God. A
counterfeit Religion shall find a real hell, and it is pity that such a sacred
thing should be violenced, and made subservient to Rebellious irregular
designs.

As for pride and baseness, and such who have conspired with the wrath of God,
in the stupefaction of their consciences, though they may for a time struggle,
with those inward checks, yet there will be a day (if not in this life) when
that witness, that judge, that jury, will not be bribed. God has fixed it in
the soul, as an internal Register as an impartial Diary, as the causer of the
affections and pedagogue of the passions, it does not only illustrate Divine
justice in an Autocatacrisis, but was meant by God, for a bridle and
restriction: And he that has by an inveterate wickedness conquered the
opposition which God seated on his heart to sin, may possibly consult well with
his present advantage and greatness, but not at all with his future comforts,
for besides the loss of that intimate pleasure which waits upon innocence; He
feels some times those bosom quarrels that verberate and wound the soul.

35. King James used to say of a person in a high place about him, that he ever
trembled at his approach it minded him so much of his pedagogue, etc.

I answer; If you be a Politicion and in favor with the King, the prosperity
of innovation depends in a high measure upon the right knack of kindling
supercilious Aspects, and fomenting jealousies and dislikes in the people, and
then weilding those grudges to the favor and advantage of private ends, for
the people are to the Politician like Tools to the Mechanic he can perform
nothing without them, they are his Wings, his Wheels, his implements the
properties that he acts with.

36. To whisper with another, in company of your betters is uncivil, etc.

I answer; Learn to be silent before Princes to avoid evil, repentance often
follows speaking; As the Crane flying out of Scicilly, puts little stones in
her mouth, least by her own Garrulity, she betray her self as a prey to the
Eagle, of the Mountain Taurus, by this policy she flies in safety, even so
should you curb your tongue, least you offend, and may procure your ruin, and
prove as a sword to cut the thread of your life in too, it is good always to
speak well and in season.

37. When you speak to any, etc.

To speak too much bewrayes folly: too little, an unperceiving stupidity, look
not full in the face but upon the band, with a pleasing smile for an ingenious
look is the Ensign or a virtuous mind.

38. Impudence is no virtue, yet able to beggar them all, etc.

I answer; Virtue is commanded into exile, and the Lady impudent vice, is
seated in her throne, to perform the tenor of this Paragraph, virtue went from
amongst men, and wisdom, and truth, durst not stay long after but with honesty
they traveled poor and naked, they had not gone far when standing upon a
mountain, they perceived a great train to pass by: in the midst of it was a
Chariot attended with Kings Princes and governors, and in that a stately Donna
who like some Queen regent, commanded the rest of the company; poor Virtue,
Wisdom and Truth, with Honesty they stood still, whilst this pompous Squadron
past, but when the chariot came over against them the Lady impudence who was
there seated, took notice of them, and causing her Pageants to stay, commanded
to come nearer, there they were scornfully examined, whence they came, whether
they would go? and what about, to these questions they answered, as their
custom is very truly, virtuously, wisely and honestly, whereupon the Lady vice
commands them to wait upon her, and that in the rear and tail of all her
troops, for there is their known places, etc.

39. I do not find you (says this curled lock of Antichrist) guilty of
covetousness, etc.

I answer; The rubbish of Babylon, that like the Fox supplants the Badger, to
assign such a cause of grievances, and such a course of advice for redress as
may open away to the alteration he aims at, as if he meant to alter a
Government by example of a house, or to ingross a supremacy, by artificial
buildings, etc. and by this frugal advice to reserve something may enable you
to grapple with any future contingency.

40. Keep no more servants then you have full employment for, etc.

I answer; Marriage frees a man from this care, for then his wife takes all upon
her, and has commonly more inspect into these things then a man, and often
times prevents by her discretion ensuing dangers, and is so wise that she can
know their qualities by their countenances, and finding the first fault will
endeavor to amend it.

41. Leave your bed upon the first desertion of sleep.

I answer; In sleep the present sense is not, but there the images remaining
aftet sense (when there be many) As in dreams are not obscure, but strong and
clear as in sense it self: the reason is, that which obscureth and made the
conceptions weak, namely, sense, and present operation of the object is
removed: for sleep is the privation of the act of sense (the power remaining)
and dreams are the imagenation of them that sleep.

42. It is no where wholesome to eat so long as you are able, etc.

I answer; Diet changes the body, which if good it breeds good qualities fit to
receive the Etherial first moisture, it were a rare thing by use and custom so
to order your self, that you could endure to live without food, as you see a
man when he is in the water is never thirsty, by a fine application you might
by this example kill hunger and live many years.

Hot meats and drinks destroy the body, as hot things put to the root of a
tree, although it be by that way caused to bear fruit in winter, yet it will
destroy the stock.

43. Nothing really acceptable to the guste of humanity, etc.

I answer; he that would anatomize the soul may do it best when wine has
benumbed his senses, how a man looks in his imbrications a swimming eye, a face
both roast and ^od? a temmulentive tongue clamm'd to the roof and gumms: a
drumming ear, a feavou^^d body, a boiling stomach, a mouth nasty with offensive
fumes, till it sicken the brain with gidyy verminations, a palsied hand, and
legs tottering up and down, their moistened burden, which lastly, falls into
the hands of the drowsy Constable, who happily may be so honest as to guard him
to his lodging or house.

44. He that always regulates his diet by the strickt rule of Physic, etc.

I answer; Plotter by false alarms of danger, invents horrid news, and plies
the people with such fictious perils, as makes them believe, religion and
liberty, and all is at stake; and that they are the Geese that must save the
Capital.

When he sees opportunity to reveal his own design, he does it gradually; and
by piecemeal: for that which at one view would be a Mormo to fright them, give
it them in small pieces and they will digest it well enough.

He composes his very garb with a gesture, it is a great matter to tell a lie
with a grace, as if religion be the mode, he will in his tales knock his
breast; attest God, and invoke imprecations upon himself, if he does not do
that, which he never intends.

He gives them good words and bad actions, and ravishes them with promises of
liberty, under the highest strain of oppression; for it is most certain, if you
please them with the name, they will embrace it for name and thing: he observes
that they receive probabilities, wisely propounded, more greedily, then naked
truths: and therefore he is very studious to glaze and polish his impostures,
that so they may to a loose eye dissemble truth.

And lastly, when he has by the assistance of the people, got the sword into
his own hands, he awes them with it, and frights them with future compliance,
he that courted them before withal the adulatory terms that ambition could
invent, or they receive; as if he had been vowed their Martyr, and ready to
sacrifice his dearest enjoyments upon the Alter of public liberty and
freedom, as if his veins knew no other blood, but such as he would be proud to
spend in their service, having non-served himself of them, he forgets the
bosom, that warmed him, they hear from him now in a Palinode; he curls up his
smooth complements into short Laconicks, and exchanges his courtship for
command.

45. Experience has found no less shame then danger, in being the chief at a
mercy assignation, etc.

I answer; Man's life is like a state (Sm^ctimnus) still casual in the future,
no man can leave his son rules for severals, because he knows not how the times
will be; unless he be an Astrologer of the issue of Maccabeus, begot, (as he
gains) upon the times; he that lives always by book rules, shall show himself
affected and a fool, do always that which is comely and honest.

In bad company you may see how uncomely vice appears, and correct it in your
self; who can but think, what a nasty beast he is in his drunkenness that has
seen how noisome it has made another: how like a noted sap spunged even to the
bracking of a skin; who will not abhor a chollerick passion, and a saucy pride
in himself, that sees how ridiculous and contemptible they render those that
are infested with them, do not think but that your vices are seen to others, as
theirs are to you, when committed since man's fall; observe bad company, and
abtrude it, and know good, that you may embrace it; and this knowledge you can
neither have so cheap, nor so certain, as by seeing it in others, with a
pitiful dislike.

46. Let your wit rather serve you for a buckler to defend your self, etc.

I answer; I know wisemen are not too nimble at an injury, for as with fire,
the light stuff and rubbish kindles sooner then the sollid, and more comparted,
so anger sooner inflames a fool then a man composed in wisdom and courage,
and there be many like tiled houses, that can admit a falling spark, unwarm'd,
yet some again are covered with such like dry straw, that with the least touch
they will kindle and flame about your troubled ears: and when the house is on
fire it is no disputing with how small a matter it came, it will quickly
proceed to mischief; it is not good to be too tart in your jests, for an
unhappy wit stirs up enemies against the owner, and a man may spit out his
friend from his tongue, or laugh him into an enemy, Gall in mirth is an ill
mixture, and sometimes truth is bitterness, I would wish any man to be
pleasingly merry, but let him beware he bring not truth on the Stage like a
Hector with a sword in his hand.

47. Much wisdom resides on the Proverbs of all nations, etc.

I answer; For injuries my opinion is, it is better to suffer them then to offer
them, he may be good that bares them, he must be ill that proffers them; Saul
would slay David, when himself only is vicious and ill, vice is accompanied
with injustice, patience is an attendant on virtue.

48. If an injury be of so rank a nature, etc.

I answer; insult over none, for as there is no creature so little, but may do
you mischief, so is no man so low but may occasion your smart; the Spider can
impoison, the Ant can sting, even the fly can trouble your patience; neglect an
enemy but contemn him not, disdain will bring in fury, and banish patience; he
is in the wrong way high, that scorns a man below him for his lowness, they
are but puffed winds that bubble thus above inferiors, one man cannot be so much
above another, as that his difference should legitimate his storm; contemn no
man, lest you awake the Lion of a sleeping mind, if you sit upon the higest
cog, you may with turning prove the lowest in the wheel, make your enemy
therefore your friend: the bodies and souls of all men have the like original
composure, nature at first made all equal, we are differen^ed but by accident,
be not proud of what God has given you more then him, he by time and means may
have as much or more; why should any one despise another, because he is better
furnished of that which is none of his own.

49. Prosecute not a coward too far, etc.

I answer; all the noble deeds that have beat their marches through succeeding
ages, have all proceeded from men of courage, a stern look daunts a coward, I
have studied in vain to make a coward confidently valiant, because his soul is
of a courser mixture, then the common spirits of men, in a battle I have seen
a coward by running away to avoid danger, has fallen into the several walks of
many, when a valiant man by keeping his rank, and confidently fiering in the
face of the enemy has come off safe.

50. Speak disgracefully of none at ordinaries, etc.

I answer; I think the Poet meant them for Caligula's that sprung of the teeth
of Cadmus poisoned Serpent, that enviously murder one another in their fury,
and like flies that always live upon corruption and the sores of Horses backs,
and what people are those that feed upon the corruption of another man's faults;
like those Creatures that are bred and live upon filth. Applauding another
virtues, will win you more honor, then the seeking slily to disparage him, by
suspicious evil words or silence when you cannot justly condemn with your
tongue.

57. Carray no dogs to Court, etc.

I answer; Be not so childish to justify the breeding of your dog at Court,
nor praise the behavior of your boy, who it may be Ape-like immitates his
master, yet not old enough to play the fool so handsomely without offense,
which sometimes may cause complaint, and another may observe how not long
before you did the same thing; (and for manning of Whores) I leave to those who
by woeful experience have known the danger in their bodies that have been more
plump then dough and rashy then Hogs-flesh.

52. Reveal not the pranks of another Love, etc.

I answer; Who will not condemn him as a Traitor to reputation and society,
that tells the private faults or the love pranks of his friend, to the public
and depraving world, when two friends part, they should lock up one another
secrets, and interchange their keys, the honest man will rather be a grave to
his neighbors fails, then any way uncurtain them. I care not for his humor
that loves to clip the wings of a lofty flame.

53. Be not trumpet of your own charity, etc.

Let another sound your charity to the spreading air, with your praise* Let
vice be whispered in the kissing ear, with chiding; this example of mine will
teach you even while you chide to love; if there be virtues, and you be called
to speak of him that owns them, tell them forth impartially; if there be vices
mixed with those, be content to let the world know them by some other tongue
then yours; do as you would be done unto.

54. If it be Levity and Ostentation to boast when you do well, etc.

I answer; Friend, why may he not be emblem'd by the cozening fig tree that our
Savior cursed, never to bear fruit after? So I pronounce that its worthy his
deserts to be hated of Ladies for ever after who boasts of their favors that
perhaps never enjoyed any; besides, Ladies are creatures so pure and fine by
nature that they delight not to bestow their favors upon fools.

55. To make love to married women, etc.

I answer; All Ladies are enemies to assuming men, when they would have more
then with honesty is due, or they can give; they seldom find so much as either
their persons or parts deserve.

56. Fly with Joseph the embraces of great Ladies, etc.

I answer; He is virtuous that is so for virtues sake, and chooses rather to lie
in sackclorh then in beds of down with silken delights, and Sarsnet embraces
from Taffata Mobs who within are nothing but rotton bones and loathsome diseases.

57. Usher not women to Masks, andt.

I answer; women ought to recreate themselves at their husbands discretion; and
it behooves a married man to show himself in speech and countenance both gentle
and amiable, for if a woman of modest behavior sees any gross incivility in
her husband, she does not only abhor it, but also thinks with her self, that
other men are more discreet, and better brought up, therefore it stands him
upon to be civil and modest in his doings, lest he offend the chaste thoughts of
his wife, to whose liking he ought to conform himself in all honest and
reasonable things, and to take heed of every thing that may dislike of this I
could make a volume but I must be brief.

A man should thus account of his wife as the only treasure he enjoys upon
earth, and he must also account that there is nothing more due to the wife,
then the faithful, honest, and loving company of her husband, he ought also in
sight of love to impart his secrets, and counsel unto his wife, for many have
found much comfort and profit, by taking their wives counsel; and if you
impart any ill hap to your wife, she lightneth your grief, either by comforting
you lovingly, or else in bearing a part thereof patiently, and if you epsy a
fault in your wife, you must not rebuke her angerly or reprochfully, but only
secretly betwixt you two, always remembering that you must neither chide nor
play with your wife before company; those that play and dally with them before
company, do thereby set other men's teeth on edge, and make their wives the less
shamefaced.

Advice to a Daughter. II. Love and Marriage.
1. Love like a Burning-Glass contracts the dilated lines of Lust, etc.

I Answer; you Theban Wittal, I will show you that conceptions and apparitions
are nothing really, but motion in some internal substance of the head; which
motion not stopping there, but proceeding to the heart, of necessity must there
either help or hinder the motion which is called vital; when it helps, it is
called delight, contentment, or pleasure, which is nothing but motion in the
head, and the objects that cause it are called pleasant, or delightful, or by
some name equivalent; the Latins have jucundum ajuvando, from helping; and the
same delight, with reference to the object, is called Love; but when such
motion weakneth or hinders the vital motion, then it is called Pain; and in
relation to that which causes it Hatred, which the Latins express sometimes
by odium and sometimes by taedium.

2. To cure youth wholly of this desire, etc.

I answer; You Tredeskin fopperie, and his Ark of fools toys, what dare you be
so bold, to place Ladies and gentlewomen in your Cabinet of November, which
weather-beaten experience has made wearisome to you?

3. For if ever Marriage, etc.

I answer; Its very true, some think outward beauty the only Jewel that
deserves wearing; yet the wise man counts it but an accident, that can neither
add nor diminish, to the worth of virtue as she is in her self: so as he never
esteems her more or less but as he finds her accomplished with discretion,
honesty, and good parts. If my Mistress be virtuous and nobly minded, my soul
shall love her, howsoever her body be framed; and if beauty make her amiable, I
shall like her the better: the Sun is more glorious in a clear sky, then when
the Horizon is clouded, Beauty is the wit of nature put into the frontis-piece;
if there be any humane thing may teach faith reason; this is it. In other
things we imagine more then we see, in this we see more then we can imagine, I
have seen (and yet not with a partial eye) such features and such mixtures, as
I have thought impossible for either Nature to frame, or Art to counterfeit,
yet in the face I have seen that which has out-gone them both, the
Countenance: oh if such Beauty be in the body, what is in the soul! or if such
glory can dwell with corruption, what celestial excellencies are in the Saints
above! who would not gaze himself into admiration when he shall see so rich a
treasure in so pure a Cabinet, unmatched virtue, in matchless Beauty? for if my
Mistresses body has more comeliness then her soul goodness, I like her the
worse for being but outwardly fair; wickedness in beauty is a traitor of the
bedchamber, poison in sweet meats; a vicious soul in a beautiful body is like
a Papist that will go to Church.

4. Those virtues, graces and reciprocal desires, etc.

I answer; John a Nokes, I have answered this in my last Paragraph; but Ladies,
behold, he scornfully says you are but like painted Boxes children and time
will empty of delight, and leave nothing but diseases.

5. Therefore I charge you, etc.

I answer; Here he inhibits marriage; when I say a good wife is a man's best
moveable, a scyonincorporate with the stock bringing sweet fruit, one that to
her husband is more then a friend, less then trouble, an equal with him in the
yoke, in calamities and troubles she shares alike, nothing pleases her that
does not him, she is relative in all, and he without her but half himself, she
is his absent hands, eyes, ears and mouth; his present and absent all.

6. Marriage like a trap set for flies, etc.

I ans. Pray Sir Kirk Dragooner why? she frames her nature unto his howsoever;
the Hyacinth follows not the Sun more willingly; stubbornness and obstinacy
are herbs that grow not in her Garden, she leaves talking to the Gossips of the
Town, and is more seen then heard; her husband is her charge, her care to that
makes her seldom non resident, her pride is but to be cleanly, and her thrift
not to be prodigal; by his discretion, she has children not wantons.

7. It were something yet, etc.

I answer; (You purlew of a Metempsychosis) a husband without her is a Misseny
in man's apparel: none but good women have aged husbands, a good wife is a
staff and a chair to her husbands; besides she is wife and R^ligious, which
makes her all this.

Why do you abuse women with the title of impotent, infected, loathsome and
diseased whores? and it must (you say) be incident to their weak natures.

8. If none of my persuasions, etc.

I answer; why? is beauty so immodest, you spleen of a blew stocking'd Justice,
are they all whores? by woeful experience, (he says) you must not yoke yourself
to another desires, unless you are ambitious of rendering your house as
populous as a Confectioners shop, to which the gaudy wasps, no less then the
liquorish flies, make it their business to resort, in hope to have a lick at
your honey-pot, etc. which he confidently affirms will break, and all women are
so frail, that many protestations will not rub off the horns of their
husbands; but for their excuse, after plundered of that their husbands do not
miss, they will say it was his fate or fortune, etc. you say (Sir) women are
all whores, bald, drowsy, mothey, and beauty is made by Tirement, Tailors,
Shooemakers, and Painters: and how happy he is, who has a wife wise enough to
conceal the real horns of her husband: your ugly misshapen lies have made many a
man and woman fall out, and no man but an Astrologer dares trust his wife
abroad or out of his sight now a days, but presently he fancies himself a
wittal with horns.

9. The English laws are composed so far in favor of wives, etc.

I answer; Pigwiggin Myrmidon you are severe against the sex, and so
uncharitable, as you think all women bad; yet others, I have heard durst affirm
they are all good; sure though you speak as you find, there is reason to direct
your opinion, without experience of the whole sex, which in a strict
examination makes more for their honor then you have acknowledged. At first
she was created his equal, only the difference was in the sex: otherwise they
both were man. If I must box you to the Text, and there argue, both male and
female made man; so the man being put first was worthier. I answer, you
(flea-biten canonick weed) so the evening and the morning was the first day,
yet few will think the night the better: that man is made her governor, and so
to be placed above her, I believe rather the punishment of her sin, then the
prerogative of his worth: had they both stood, it may be thought, she had never
lien undermost, and in that subjection, for then it had not been a curse, but
another estate which had nothing but blessedness in it.

10. Yet this may be said for it, etc.

I answer; you (Camel) rail against women, when all grant her body more
admirable and more beautiful then man's; fuller of curiosities, and noble
natures wonders, both for conception and fostering the producted birth; and can
we think that God would put a worser soul into a better body? when man was
created, it is said, God made man: but when woman it is said, God builded her, as
if he had been about to make a frame of rarer rooms, and more exact
composition: and without doubt, in her body she is much more wonderful; and by
this we may think her so in her mind; and though the soul be not caused by the
body, yet in the general it follows the temperament of it: so the comeliest
outsides are naturally (for the most part) more virtuous within. If place can
be any privilege, we shall find her built in Paradise, when man was made
without it.

11 Nevertheless there is not, etc.

I answer; this is certain, women are of a colder constitution then the boiling
man, so by this more temperate; it is heat that transports you to this
immoderate fury, it is that which hurries you to a Savage and libidinous
violence; women are naturally more modest, and modesty is the seat and
dewlling place of virtue.

12. We brook nothing restraint ties us to, etc.

Whence proceed these most horrid villainies, but from a masculine unblushing
impudence? what a deal of sweet do we find in a mild-dispositioned woman? when
a woman grows bold and daring, men dislike her, and say she is too much like a
man, yet in your self you magnify what you condemn in her.

13. Ask your self, etc.

I answer; Is not this injustice in you (Anonymus?) every man is so much the
better by how much he comes nearer God; man in nothing is more like him, then
in being merciful, yet woman is far more merciful then man, it being a sex
wherein pity and compassion have dispersed far brighter rays; God is said to
be love, and I am sure every where woman is spoken of, for transcending in that
quality; and this is not in the habit, but natural.

14. After that age, weariness, wisdom, or business, etc.

I answer; You enemy to woman, it was never found, but in two men only, that
their love exceeded that of the feminine sex: and if you observe them you shall
find they were both of melting dispositions. I know when women prove bad, they
are a sort of the vilest creatures; yet the same reason gives it, for optima
corrupta pessima, the best things corrupted become the worst; women are things
whose souls are of a more ductible temper then the harder metal of man, so may
be made both better and worse; you scandalize them with impertinent devices
they were never guilty of: it is true, they are not of so tumultuous a spirit
as man, so not so fit for great actions; natural heat does more actuate the
stirring genius of man; their easy natures make them somewhat more unresolute,
whereby men have argued them of fear and inconstancy.

15. Were it possible to assign to your choice the virtues, etc.

I answer; Here he fancies himself married to a virtuous woman, when in another
place he condemns them, and by woeful experience, he says they are all whores,
but men have always the Parliament and have enacted their own wills, without
ever hearing them speak: and then how easy is it to conclude them guilty?
Besides, education makes more difference between men and them, then Nature; and
all their aspersions are less noble, for that they are only from their
enemies, Men.

16. Our Beldam Eve to save her longing, etc.

I answer; Again he snarles bitterly, and thinks, after they were made ill, God
made them fearful, that man might rule them, otherwise they had been past
dealing with. I am fully minded to honor virtue in what sex soever I find it,
and I think in the general I shall find it more in women then in men, though
weaker, and more infirmly guarded: I believe they are better, and may be
wrought to be worse; neither shall the faults of some make me uncharitable to
all, nor the goodness of some make me credulous of the rest, though hitherto I
confess I have not found more sweet and constant goodness in man then I have
found in woman: and yet of these I have not found a number.

17. Though nothing can wholly disingage Marriage from such inconveniences,
etc.

I answer; You Neast Gull of a young Apocrypha, both sexes made but man, so
that marriage perfects creation: when the husband and the wife are together,
the world is contracted in a bed; and without this, like the head and body
parted, either would consume without a possibility of reviving. And though this
nameless wight be an enemy to the name of marriage, yet you may catch him
dabling in the use on it: Surely, he was made a Religious Hermaphrodite that is
not tending to propagation, nature in her work made him not truly so; for it
never made any thing in vain: He that is perfect and marries not, may in some
sort be said to be guilty of a contempt against nature, as disdaining to make
use of her sports and natural endowments.

18. The true extent of her estate therefore is first to be surveyed before you
entail your self, etc.

I answer; Now Sir, that which the Turks hold is not without some color of
reason: they say, he that marries not at a fitting time (which they hold is
about the age of twenty five years,) is not just, nor pleases God: I believe
it is from hence, that the vow of chastity is many times accompanied with such
inconveniences as we see ensue: I cannot think God is pleased with that which
crosses his first ordination, and current of nature; and in themselves it is a
harder matter to root out an inseparable sway of nature then they think of,
without they quench it in virtue and beauty.

19. As the fertility of the ensuing year, etc.

I answer; Choose a fit companion, a fit wife, a meet help; for the best
chastity of all I hold to be matrimonial chastity, when pairs keep themselves
in a moderate intermutableness each constant to the other, for still it tends
to union, and continuation of the world to posterity. And it is fit both in
nature and policy, that this propriety should be inviolable; first, in respect
of the impureness of mixed posterity: next, in respect of peace and concord
among men; if many men (as he says) should be interessed in one woman, it
could not be but there would infinite jarres arise. Some have complained of
Christian Religion, in that it ties men so strictly in this point, and when
matches happen ill, there is no means of remedy. But surely if liberty or
change were granted, all would grow to confusion: and it would open a sluice to
many mischiefs arising out of heat only, which now by necessity are cooled,
and made tame again.

20. Yet take one who thinks her self rather beneath then above you, etc.

I answer; Those I observe to agree best, you Episco-Mastix, which are of free
natures, not subject to the fits of choler; their freedom shuts out jealousy,
which is the canker of wedlock, and withal it divides both joy and sorrow; and
when hearts alike disclose, they ever link in love. Nay, whereas small and
domestic jars more fret marriages then great ones and public, those two will
take them away; freedom reveals them, that they ranckle not the heart to a
secret lothing, and mildness bears them without anger or bitter words; so they
close again after discussion many times in a straighter tie. Poverty in wedlock
is a great decayer of love and contentation; and riches can find many ways to
divert an inconvenience; but the mind of a man is all: some can be servile, and
fall to those labors, (he calls base drudgery) which another cannot stoop to.
Above all, let the generous mind beware of marrying poor; for though he cares
the least for wealth, yet he will be most galled with the want of it.
Self-conceited people never agree well together; they are wilful in their
brawls, and reason cannot reconcile them; where either are opinionately wise,
Hell is there, unless the other be a Patient merely: but the worst is, when it
lights on the woman, she will think to rule, because she has the subtiler
brain, and the man will look for it, as the privilege of his sex; then
certainly there will be mad work, when wit is at war with prerogatives.

21. I confess vast Estates are not so sensible, etc.

I answer; (Mr. new-fashioned Doctor Justice) where Marriage proves
unfortunate, a woman with a bad Husband is much worse then a man with a bad
Wife; men have much more freedom to court their content abroad. There are some
that account women only as seed-plots for posterity; (Anonymus) the Author of
the Advice to a Son, (worse;) he says they are whores, and only quench for
their fires; but surely there is much more good in them, if they be discreet,
they are women but in body alone; questionless, a woman with a wise soul is the
fittest companion for man, otherwise God would have given him a friend rather
then a Wife. A wise Wife comprehends both sexes; she is woman for her body, and
she is man within, for her soul is like her Husbands. It is the Crown of
blessings, when in one woman a man finds both a Wife and a friend. Single life
he commends (to his Son) cannot have this happiness, though in some minds it
has, many it prefers before it; this has fewer cares, and more longings, but
Marriage has fewer longings, and more cares; and I think care in Marriage may
be commendable, so I think desire in single life, is not an evil of so high a
bound as some men would make it, it is a thing accompanies nature, and a man
cannot avoid it.

22. Therefore (dear Son) if, etc.

I answer; Dear Daughter, some things there are, that man's conscience condemns
without a literal Law; as injustice, blasphemy, lying, etc. But to curb and
quite beat down the desires of the flesh, is a work of Religion rather then of
nature; and therefore says Saint Paul, I had not known lust to have been a
sin, if the Law had not said, Thou shall not lust. Votive abstinence some cold
constitutions may endure with a great deal of vexatious penitence; to live
chaste without vowing I like a great deal better, nor shall we find the Devil so
busy to tempt us to a single sin of unchastity, as he will when it is a sin of
unchastity and perjury too: I find it commended, but not imposed; and when
Iephtha's daughter died, they mourned, for that she died a Maid.

23. I have heard a well built woman compared in her motion, to a Ship under
sail; yet I advise no wise man to be her owner, if her fraught be nothing but
what she carries between wind and water, etc.

I answer; What she carries there, you (Scotch Wittal) in honor of her
Marriage, is privileged to the wedded; and though the Romans had their
Vestals, yet after their thirty years continuance, the cruelty of enforced
chastity was not in force against them. Single life I will like in some, whose
minds can suffer continency, but should all live thus, a 100 years would make
the world a desert. And this alone may excuse me, though I write against you,
and like of Marriage better: one tends to ruin, the other to increasing of the
glory of the world in multitudes.

24. But if once you render your self a pupil to whining love, etc.

I answer; Why do call it whining love? a good woman is a comfort like a man,
she lacks of him nothing but heat; thence is her sweetness of disposition,
which meets his stoutness more pleasingly; so wool meets iron easier then iron,
and turns resisting into embracing: her greatest learning is Religion, and her
thoughts are on her own sex, or on men, without casting the difference; and
dare you call these whores? believe me, dishonesty never comes nearer then her
ears, and then wonder stops it out, and saves virtue the labor; she will leave
such Dauphine youths as you telling your tales, and puts back the Courtiers
putting forward with a frown; yet her kindness is free enough to be seen, for
it has no guilt about it; and besides, her mirth is clear, you may look
through it into virtue, but not beyond.

25. To conclude, if you will needs be a, etc.

I answer; It would make a man in love that is an hundred years old, to see
these virtuous creatures, good women; and a good Wife has not behavior as at
a certain, but makes it to her occasions; she (if I may describe her briefly)
has so much knowledge as to love it, and if she have it not at home, she will
fetch it; and for this, sometimes in a pleasant discontent she dares chide her
sex, though she use it never the worse: she is much within, and frames outward
things to her mind, not her mind to them. She wears good clothes, but never
better, for she finds no degree beyond decency; she has a content of her own,
and so seeks not an Husband, but finds him: she is indeed most, but not much of
description, for she is direct, and one, and has not the variety of ill: Now
she is given fresh and alive to a Husband to increase and multiply; and she
does nothing more then love him, for she takes him to that purpose, and to
increase the world in multitudes.

Ladies, now your enemy is vanquished, you may take your pleasures.

26. But if this savours too much of the Stoic, etc.

I answer; He speaks still but faintly as a man out of breath; I Will give him a
serious reproof, and let him take rest a while: Oh vain man, be advised,
approach not the presence of such Angelical Creatures (as women) upon pain of my
displeasure, and their frowns, which frowns alone are able to destroy a
woman-hater. But Ladies, I must resolve your question, whether is more true,
that likeness is the cause of love, or love the cause of likeness? In agreeing
dispositions, I answer, the first is certain; in those that are not, the latter
is evident: the first is the easier love, the other the more worthy; the one
has a lure to draw it, the other without respect is voluntary: we women love
you for the similitude you have with us; God merely from his goodness, when yet
we contrary to him, since he has loved us when we were not like him, we must
strive to be like him, because he has loved us: we must be like him, being our
friend, that loved us when we were his enemies then only is love powerful,
when it frames to the will of the loved. Lord, though I cannot serve thee as I
ought, let me love thee as I ought: grant this, and I know I shall serve thee
the better.

Advice to a Daughter. III. Travel.
1. Some to starch a more serious face upon wanton, impertinent and dear bought
vanities, cry up travel as the best accomplisher of youth and Gentry, etc.

I Answer; I have discovered more with my eye, then Kings can comprehend in
their thoughts, and this in Travel: for indeed, men do but guess at places by
relation only; there is no Map like the view of the Country, experience is
the best informer. And one journey will show a man more then any description
can; the rest is not worth answering, his consequents.

2. Yet since it advances opinion in the world, without which desert is useful
to none but it self, etc.

I answer; He would not allow a man to move from the shell of his own country,
and thinks it an happiness for birth, life, and burial, to be all in a parish:
but surely Travel fulleth the man; he has lived but locked up in a chest, which
has never seen but one land. A kingdom to the world is like a corporation to
a kingdom; a man may live in it like an unbred man. He that searches foreign
nations is become a Gentleman of the world, (let Momus say what he will to the
contrary:) one that is learned, honest, and traveled, is the best compound of
man, and so corrects the vice of one country with the virtues of another; that
like Mithridate he grows a perfect mixture, and an Antidote.

3. If your genius tempted by profit, etc.

I answer; A genius is that which from God, to one of the seven spirits, (is
given) to be transferred by Sephiroth, through the several orders of Angels to
the spheres of the Planets: Lastly, the Moon rays it through the Elements, and
infuses it into the body of man; and how can this be tempted by profit?

4. Or in case this nation should again break out into partialities, etc.

I answer; To behold the war, Italy, France and Spain are pleasant, and as the
court of the world; Germany, China and Denmark, are as the city; the rest of
them are most Country and Barbarism, who has not seen the best of these is a
little lame in knowledge. Yet I think it is not fit that every man should
travel: it makes a wise man better, and a fool worse; this gains nothing but
the gay sights of France, vices of Spain, the Apery of Italy, and the exotic
gestures of Flanders, and the vanity of a country: a traveling fool is the
shame of all nations; he shames his own by his weakness abroad, he shames
others, by bringing home their follies alone; they only blab abroad domestic
vices, and import them that are transma^ine.

5. Let not the irreligion of any place, etc.

I answer; That a man may better himself by travel, he ought to observe and
comment, noting as well the bad to avoid it, as taking the good into use.

6. Shun all disputes, but concerning religion, etc.

I answer; Now without registring these things by the pen, they will slide away
unprofitably: a man would not think how much the charactering of a thought in
paper fastens it; litera scripta manes, has a large sense; he that does this,
may when he pleases rejourney over all his voyage, and observations of
countries, their religions and laws in his closet. Grave natures are the best
proficients by travel, they are not so apt to take soil, and they observe
more, but then they must put on an outward freedom, with an inquisition
seemingly careless.

7. Keep your zeal chained, etc.

I answer; How this Caterpillar of beauty operates! it were ( I say) an
excellent thing in a State, to have always a select number of youth of the
Nobility and Gentry, and at years of some maturity send them abroad for
education. Their parents could not better dispose them, then in dedicating them
to the Republic: they themselves could not be in a fairer way of preferment;
and no question they might prove very serviceable to the State at home, when
they shall return well versed in the world, languaged and well read in men,
which for policy and negotiation is much better then any book-learning, though
never so deep and knowing.

8. Do not imitate their follies, etc.

I answer; You Epidemical traveller, being abroad, my advice is, to converse
with the best, and not to choose by the eye, but by fame. For the State,
instruction is to be had at Court; for traffic among Merchants, for religious
rights the Clergy, for government the Lawyers: and for the country and rural
knowledge, the Boores and Peasantry can best help you.

9. Fall not in comparisons, etc.

I answer; All rarities are to be seen, without comparison, especially
antiquities, for these show the ingenuity of elder times in act, and are in
one, both example and precept; by these comparing them with modern invention,
we may see how the world thrives in ability and brain.

10. Condemn none with too much severity, etc.

I answer; Next above all, see rare men: there is no monument like a man alive,
we shall be sure to find something in him to kindle our spirits, and enlarge
our minds with a worthy emulation of his virtues, parts of extraordinary note
cannot so lie hid, but that they will shine forth, through the tongue and
behavior, to the enlightening of the ravished beholder. And because there is
less in this to take the sense of the eye, and things are more readily taken
from a living pattern; the soul shall more easily draw in his Excellencies, and
improve it self with greater profit: but unless a man has judgment to order
these aright in himself at his return all is vain and lost labor.

11. If the wisdom of the States of Holland, etc.

I answer; You Lybian pr^selyte, some men by travel will be changed in nothing,
and some again will change too much; indeed the moral outside, wheresoever we
be, may seem best, when something fitted to the nation we are in. And
wheresoever you go or stay, you should keep God and friends unchangeable; how
ever you return you make an ill voyage, if you change your faith with your
tongue and garments.

12. To the Eucharist met in the streets, etc.

I answer; Silence and obedience ought not in reason to be reckoned for a
desertion of truth where it cannot be maintained, but to the prejudice of what
the imperative power has declared so to be; submit therefore to the coustome
of the country, by the title of a civil respect; else you may be a murderer as
well as a Martyr, if you run unadvisedly into ruin.

13 Pity rather then spurn at those, etc.

I answer; It is folly to oppose any religious zelots, who think none worthy of
life are found out of the train of their own opinions.

14. Enter no farther into foreign Churches, etc.

I answer; and oppose not one ambiguous question against another, no less
dangerous to resolve; but profess it your business to learn not to teach, but
comply with compulsion, where conscience and reason gives you leave.

15. Consort with none who scoff at their own religion, but shun, etc.

I answer; You may observe how foolishly such a man cozens his own soul in
earnest, and is tumbled up and down from beggary to worship, and from worship
to baseness again.

16. Eschew the company of all English you find in orders, etc.

I answer; Lapsed English, that fall to the Papists, to promote that idolatrous
religion, invent lies and print them, that they may not only cozen the present
age, but gull posterity with forged actions, they will endeavor to disprove
Zerobabel, and will, if possible, make you confess money to be stronger then
truth.

17. Besides, he that beyond sea, etc.

I answer; Beware what company you keep, especially in strange countries, since
example prevails more then precept, though by the erudition dropping from these
tutots, we imbibe all the tinctures of virtue and vice; this renders it little
less then impossible for nature to hold out any long siege against the
batteries of custom and opportunity.

18. An injury in foreign air is cheaper passed over, etc.

I answer; And a Traveller may be nothing but a speaking fashion, if he take
pains to be ridiculous, and suffers himself to be spurned and injured, he has
seen more then he; has perceived, and is fit to be kicked for his folly; yet
some others I have observed in foreign parts, that make their atitre speak the
language, and their gate cries, behold us; they censure all things by
countenance and shrugs, and speak their own language with shame and lisping;
they will choke rather then confess beer good drink.

One makes his pick-tooth a main part of his behavior. Another chooses rather
to be counted a spy then not a politician, and maintains his reputation by
naming great men familiarly. Another chooses rather to tell lies than not
wonders, and talks with men singly, and his discourse sounds big, but means
nothing; his boy is bound to admiae him howsoever, he come still from great
personages, but goes with mean.

19. Play is destructive, etc.

I answer; So it is, you Buckram Athos, and it teaches a man the humors of
another, if not bought at too dear a rate; besides it, is better to be a good
gamester indeed, then men that learn no more then to be rich fools, and take an
occasion to show jewels given them in regard of their virtues, that were bought
in St. Martins: and not long after having with a Mountebancks method pronounced
them worth thousands, impauned them for a few shillings: and such provident
rich fools will pretend to familiarity with all the learned men in England; and
sometimes they indeed do make themselves fools, to please these fools, who
sometimes again upon festival days go to Court, and salute without saluting:
And at night in an Ordinary they canvass the business in hand, and seem as
conversant with all intents and plots as if they begot them.

20. He that desires quiet, and to decline, etc.

I answer; All favors, (you sometimes) Justice, and then Doctor, you that will
be of any trade, by virtue of a commission, to be a Justice of Peace, and by
the same a Doctor of Physic, (have this success, if they light on good ground
they bring forth thanks.)

What Nature has infused, you cannot cast out, correct you may: If you must
desire women's favors, do it so moderately, as your judgment and reason may be
still clear; if unawares you be overtaken, you must yet be careful to conceal
your self: so though your own passions be over-strong, others should not see
them, to take you at advantages. As many have been spoiled by being soothed in
their plausible desires to Ladies; so have many been abused by being malleated
in their troublesome jealousies and fears of a Mercenary woman.

21. If tempted by an impatient affection, etc.

I answer; I have combated a monster, and mastered him, I will write whilst he
pants out his lingering breath; and I advise all young Gentlemen, not to marry
uncomely women for any respects, for comeliness in children is riches, if
nothing else be left them; and if you have care for your reces of horses, and
other beasts, value the shape and comeliness of your children, before alliance
or riches; have care therefore of both together, for if you have a fair wife
and a poor one, if your estate be not great, assure your self that love abides
not with want, for she is your companion of plenty and honor. I never yet knew
a poor woman exceeding fair, that was not made dishonest, by one or other in
the end; favor is deceitful, and beauty is vanity, but a wise woman overseeth
the ways of her husband, and eats not the bread of idleness.

I my self have traveled Greece, Egypt, Arabia, and part of Africa, besides
Italy, Spain, France, and Germany, and could give you a thousand examples of
what I have here and in other books written: when you shall read and observe
the stories of all nations, you shall find innumerable examples of the like;
let your love therefore be to the best, so long as they do well: But take heed
that you love God, your Country, your Prince, your own estate, before all
others; For the fancies of men change, and so do women; and they that love to
day hate to morrow. But let reason be your School-mistriss, which shall ever
guide you aright.

22. Who travels Italy, etc.

I answer; Truly I never saw the lust of men in Italy, nor the charms of women;
but an ill name may be free from dishonesty, but not always from some folly,
which makes the Spaniard lock up his Ladies water-gap, and carry the key in his
pocket. France indeed is only guilty of Sodomy and unheard of lusts, Italy,
and Spain are not: I advise them not only to be free from sin, but from
suspicion, for it is not enough to be well lived, but well reported, and
oftentimes weighty matters are as much carried by reputation as substance.
Endure these things well noble Italy, and valiant Spain, for they come rather
by destiny, then by deserving.

23. Where you mean never to return, etc.

I answer; Emulation is the bait of virtue, for looking into the sweetness of
the reward, men undertake the labor.

24. Make no ostentation of, etc.

I answer; I saw a traveller, whose extraordinary account of men was, first to
tell them the ends of all matters, and then to borrow money of them; he offered
courtesies, to show them rather then himself humble; he disdained all things
above his reach, and preferred all Countries before his own. He imputed his want
and poverty to the ignorance of the time, not his own unworthiness, and
concludes his discourse with half a period, or a word, and leaves the rest to
imagination. In a word, his Religion and his Money are both in fashion, and
both body and soul are governed by fame; he loves most voices above truth.

25. Inns are dangerous, etc.

I answer; Inns are dangerous if men be not careful; so are strangers, and
servants; but let your servants be such as you may command, and entertain none
about you but yeomen to whom you give wages; for those that will serve you
without hi^e, will cost you treble as much as they that know your fare. If you
trust any servant with your purse, be sure you take his account ere you sleep;
for if you put it off, you may afterward for tediousness neglect it; I my self
thereby have lost more then I am worth: and whatsoever your servant gains
thereby, he will never thank you, but laugh your simpiicity to scorn. And
besides, it is the way to make your servants thieves, which else would be
honest.

26. Next to experience, etc.

I answer; Greek and Latin are the richest gifts a father can give his child;
Italian is useful, but French is a frothy form of speech, and except amongst
those that know no better, it is as fruitless as Scotch, and their books are
worse fancied then the Scots.

27. He that is carried by his curiosity, etc.

I answer; Bestow your youth in Traveling, so that you may have such comfort
to remember it when past, and not sigh and grieve at the account thereof. Spend
not your Summer flower of youth with Harlots, for they will study to destroy
you; and you may think their pleasures will never have an end; but behold, the
longest day has his evening, and that you shall enjoy it but once, that it
never returns again; use it therefore as the Springtime, which soon departs,
and wherein you ought to travel with such provision, then gathered for along
and happy life.

At your return, let your time of Marriage be in your young and strong years;
for believe it, ever the young Wife betrayeth the old Husband; and she that had
you not in your flower, will despise you in your fall, and you shall be unto
her but a captivity and sorrow. Your best time will be toward forty: for as
the younger times are unfit, either to choose or govern a Wife and Family; so if
you stay longer, you shall hardly see the education of your children, which
being left to strangers, are in effect lost; and better it were to be unborn
then ill bred: for thereby your posterity shall either perish, or remain a
shame to your name and family.

28. I can say little, etc.

He that has a great purse, may thrive in a strange Country; but I wish him
take heed that he fall not from the purity of the Protestant Church, to
infirmities, corruptions, errors, and the abominations of Plantations, and the
vile behavior of commonly a rude people; for God will punish sin with sin:
they being commonly like the Turks, that will not suffer the Jews amongst them
to sacrifice, for that was flat against their Laws; as we will not suffer the
Papists to worship the Mass, because against our Laws.

To the men-Readers concerning Women.
AS certain it is, there ought to be a great care in the choice of a Wife; so
the only danger therein is beauty, by which men in all ages, both wise and
foolish, have been betrayed. And though I know it vain to use reasons or
arguments, as John Heydon does, in the way to bliss and happiness, a book of
Hermetical Philosophy, of long life health, youth, riches, wisdom and virtue,
etc. there speaking of women in one place, says, They are imperfect men; and
other things (he says) worth your observation, to bring all to happiness and
bliss; and persuades you not to be captivated by beauty: for there being few or
none that ever resisted that witchery, yet I cannot but warn you, as of other
things, which may be your ruin and destruction. For the present time, it is
true, that every man prefers his fantasy in that appetite, before all other
worldly desires, leaving the care of honor, credit and safety in respect
thereof. But remember, that though these affections do not last, yet the bond
of Marriage dureth to the end of your life; and therefore better to be born
withal in a Mistress than in a Wife: for when your humor shall change, you
are free to choose again, (if you give your self that vain liberty.) Remember
secondly, That if you marry for beauty, you bind your self for all your life
for that which perchance will neither last nor please you one year; and when
you have it, it will be to you of no price at all: for the desire dies when it
is attained, and the affection perishes when it is satisfied. Remember (as Mr.
Heydon says in his book of The Rosacrucian Method of Physic) When you were a
child, that then you did love your Nurse, and that you were fond of her; after
a while you did love your dry-Nurse, and did get the other; after you did also
slight her: So will it be with you in your liking in elder years; and therefore
if you cannot forbear to love, forbear to link, and after a while you shall
find an alteration in your self, and see another far more pleasing then the
second or third love.

But methinks the Ladies begin to frown, and whisper forth these words; that I
am melancholy, and speak gravely and too solidly of the sex. I do take courage
again, and pluck up a youthful resolution; look in the perusal of History, and
you may find as many fair and brave examples of virtue given by women, as there
has been by men. Look over the roll of them, and you may easily fill each of
them into a sufficient commonplace; where many things put down as nobly done
by men, it may be are either brutish, heady, or passionate, whilst in the
women things appear more smooth and temperate; or if there be any think of
passion or exorbitancy, it is but an addition of luster to the sex, as a blush,
or glowing in the face sets off their beauty.

Imagine or wish a Governor to be of good entertainment, affable, open of
countenance, and such a one that harbors no crooked or dark designs; where can
you find such a one but among women?

Besides their natural sweetness and innocence, their talk is commonly directed
to such things, as it may easily be inferred, that their heads are not troubled
about making of wars, and deceiving the people, or enlarging of Empires, or
founding of Tyrannies. And what can be wished is in women: If it be a happiness
to a people to have a religious Governor, then all Philosophy and experience
teaches you, that the softest minds are most capable of these impressions; and
that women are for the most part more violently hurried away by such agitations
then men are. How few men Prophets does this age afford us in comparison of
Prophetesses? and some are but Astrologically read; the other by nature and
inspiration qualified. Women are great followers of Priests also; (their Genius
being set in beauty) (as you may read) in a book of Mr. Heydons lately
published, and called the Familiar Spirit, (are Angels.) Now in that book is
showed the name of every man's Genius, or Angel, and how to converse with it
distinct from the body; and that it will speak with an audible voice in a
corporeal shape, etc.

If you wish for mercy in a Ruler, women are the tenderest things on the earth,
they have tears at command; and if tears be the effect of pity and compassion,
and pity and compassion be the mother of virtue, must you not think that mercy
rules most in them, and is the soonest expected from them?

If you expect affection from them; have not women many times cut off their
hair, to make ropes for Engines, and strings for Bows? have they not given up
their Rings and Jewels to defray charges? have they not been content to perish
for their Husbands in their habitations? and what greater love of Country can
be shown? and how great would this be, if a woman looks upon her self as the
Mother of her Country? what tenderness would she not have toward the people,
her children? I could wish this noble sex were restored to that right which
nature has bestowed on it; and then we should have all quiet and serene in
Commonwealths: Courts would not be taken up with factions and underminings,
but all would flow into pleasure and liberty: instead of moulding of Armies, we
should be preparing of Masks; and instead of depressing of factions, we should
have balls and amorous appointments. So that men might follow their
handy-crafts, Oxen might plow, Mill-horses drive about the wheel, whilst all
this labor and sweat should serve but for the furtherance and easiness of the
Court: and no wars; for women being of tender conditions, and most part of
sedentary lives, would not engage in such rough employments proper only for
man, who is only the best kind of savage; over whom they have also this
privilege, that they can bring forth the greatest Conquerors, but man can
only destroy them.

Wine is strong, and nothing but truth excels women. But I see a volly of
objections coming on, such as I fear not to stand against, but will march up to
the head of this enemies Troop, and there I will charge him thorough, for
speaking so much against women. Indeed women ought to rule; and how many sots,
inconstant, obstinate, proud, talkative, cruel, naturals and changlings, by
virtue of a succession or conquest, by clubs and warlike stratagems, have
mounted the Throne? And women cannot be worse at worst then such men; and
withal, women are more easy and supple to be guided by wise Counselors; women
are excellent creatures. Peace a little, and hear one of King Darius young men;
read Esdras 3. Chapter, and the 10. Verse.

Thus paraphrased by Heydon.

O Earthly men most vain, do not confine
Strength to the potent Monarch, nor to wine,
Nor to the multitude; against their opinion,
Has not the women over these donion?
Women into the world them King have brought,
And all such people as have Empire sought
By Land or Sea, from the had being first,
Bred from their wombs, and on their soft knees nursed:
Those that did plant the Vine, and press the juice,
Before that they could taste it to their use,
Had from them their conception: they spin, they weave
Garments for men, and they from them receive
Worship and honor; needful they are no doubt,
As being such men cannot live without:
If he has gathered Silver, or got Gold,
Or found out ought that is precious to behold;
Does he not bring it to his choice delight,
Her that is fair and precious in his sight?
Leaves he not all his business and affair,
To gaze upon her eyes, play with her hair?
Is he not wholly hers? does he not bring
Gold to her, Silver, and each precious thing?
Man leaves his Father, Mother, Country, all,
(What he esteems most dear) to become thrall
In voluntary bondage, with his Wife
To lead a private and contented life;
Which life for her he hazardeth, and her
Before father, Mother, Country, does prefer:
Therefore by these you may perceive and know,
Women, to whom man does such service owe,
Bear rule over you. Do you not travel, sweat,
And toil, that of your labors they may eat?
Man takes his sword, regardless of his weal,
And Madman like, goes forth to rob and steal:
He sails the Seas, sounds Rivers (nothing fears)
He meets a Lion, and his way he stears
Through darkness, and what purchase, spoil or boot
Is got, he prostrates at his Mistress foot:
This shows his woman is to him more dear,
Then he that got, or she that did him bear.
Some have run mad, some slaves to them have been,
Others have erred and perished in their sin.
Do I not grant the King in power is great,
And that all Nations homage to his Seat?
Yet I have seen Apame her arms twine
About his neck, the Kings loved Concubine,
And daughter to the famous Bartacus,
I have beheld her oft-times use him thus;
From the Kings head to snatch the Royal Crown,
And smiling on him, put it on her own:
Then with her left hand on the cheek him smite,
Yet he has gaped, and laughed, and took delight
To see himself so used: If she but smiled,
(As if the power of him were quite exiled)
He laughed on her; If angry, he was fain
To flatter her till she was pleased again:
It Is true O men, whom I appeal unto,
Are they not strongest then who this can do?
And it is most true, that as women bring forth children into the world, as
they multiply themselves into these visible and corporeal souls, and after they
have brought them forth, are most tender and careful to bring them up; So it is
most fitting, having all these preeminences and indulgences of nature, that
when they were brought up, they should also have the rule of them: for a Potter
would think it hard measure, if after the pitcher were made it should sly in
his face.

Advice to a Daughter. IV. Government.
Contract not the Common distemper incident to vulgar brains, who still imagine
more ease from some untried Government, then that they lie under; not having
passed the first form of experience, where we may learn that Tyranny is no less
natural to power then lust to youth, etc.

1. I Answer; These Rules of Hypocritical Tyrants, (I will set down) are fit to
be known, that they may be avoided, and met withal, and not drawn into
imitation.

The Policy of a Tyrant to hold up his State, is first to make show of a good
Governor, by observing a temper and Mediocrity in his Government, and whole
course of life. To which end it is necessary, that this subtle Tyrant be a
cunning Politician, and that he be taken so to be, for that it makes him more
to be feared and regarded, and is thought thereby not unworthy to govern others.

We may be assured, that there is no greater Index of Ambition, then an
affectation of popularity, which appears in meek addresses to the people,
wooing and familiar condescentions, bemoaning their sufferings, commending a
more vigorous sense of them. And to make show not of severity but of Gravity,
by seeming reverent, not terrible in his speech, and gesture, and habit, and
other demeanor, as extreme kindness and fawning, which is always suspicious,
because often fraudulent: remember the Sileni, that use to kill with hugs and
embraces. I know and have observed, it is very usual for men to personate
goodness, til they have accomplished their ends; And this, sometimes by
pretending to take care of the Commonwealth; and to that end, to seem loath to
exact Monthly Assessements, and Excise of Beer and Ale, and other charges; and
yet to make necessity of it, where none is, to that end to fancy Plots, and
imprison those are of the better sort amongst a few silly fellows, and make
them partners in the design, which indeed may prove nothing; and to keep men in
arms, that he may continue his exaction and Contribution so long as he list;
and thereof to employ some in his public service, and the rest to hoord up in
his Treasury; and sometimes to give an account by open speech, and public
writing, of the expense of such Taxes and impositions as he has received of
the Republic, that he may seem to be a good husband, and frugal, and not a
robber of the Commonwealth.

2. Be not the pen or mouth of, etc.

I answer; I have observed, a man born obscurely, who as long as he was private
and poor, excelled in a soft and tractable disposition, but when by juggling he
had obtained the government of Arabia, there was none more odious for a cruel,
covetous and barbarick tyranny; and I observed of Sede Mahomet Alhayse, there
was never a better servant and a worse master.

And I know a good aim, much less a good pretense, cannot justify a bad
action, and therefore we ought to be as solicitous about the lawfulness of the
means as about the goodness of the end. It is a Maxim in morality, that honum
oritur ex integris, and in Christianity, that we must not do evil that good may
come of it; and we may possibly rescue our selves from future cosenage, if we
examine the lawfulness of every circumstance leading to the end propounded,
before we are tickled and transported with the beauty of the pretense.

As to forbid feastings at the usual times, and other meetings, which increase
love, and give opportunity to confer together of public matters, under
pretense of sparing cost for better uses: to that end the Courfeu belwas first
ordained by Willi. the Conqueror, to give men warning to repair home ^t a
certain hour.

3. A multitude inflamed under a religious pretense, etc.

I answer; To make schism or division under hand among his nobility, and
betwixt the nobility and the people; and to set one rich man against another,
that they combine not together, and that himself by hearing the griefs and
complaints, may know the secrets of both parties, and so have matter against
them, when he lists to call them to an account.

4. The example of Brutus, etc.

I answer; It cannot be then easily imagined, of what singular importance the
aspersing and blotting of a Prince is, to boil up popular discontent to that
height which is requisite for a rebellion: and here it must diligently be
enquired, if there have not been such lapses as have galled the people; and
though they be old sores and skinned, yet they must be searched and refreshed,
and exasperated with all the urging circumstances that come within the
invention of scandal. It must be remembered if any persons of public note have
suffered under the sword of justice, whose crimes can by art or eloquence be
extenuated, whose hand measure must be mentioned with tears, that so old
Traitors may be propounded for new Martyrs: this has been the ordinary method
of ambitious and wicked powers, and it was ever the most compendious way of
usurpation, to dissemble a strong affection to the country, lamenting the vices
of the Prince, and miseries of the people; not with an intent to rescue them
from servitude, but to get such a portion of favor as may lift us up to the
same pitch of honor on their shoulders; which having obtained we
transcendently abuse, changing the rods of royalty into the scorpions of
Anarchy, Aristocracy, or a free State.

5. Before you fix, consult all the objections, etc.

I answer; It is the fashion of fortunate Traitors to feed the people with
shells and empty names: as if their bare assertion could demonstrate to us
(against all experience) that it is freedom to be slaves to quondam peasants,
and slavery to be subjects to a true and natural Prince; and therefore if the
Prince be severe, he gives them Nereo's brand, a man kneaded up of dirt and
blood; if he be of parts and contrivance, he calls it pernicious ingenuity; if
he be mild and favorable to tender consciences, he declaimes against his
toleration; if he urge uniformity and decency in divine service, he rails at
his superstition. And because there is no such equilibrious virtue, but has
some flexure to one of the extremes.

But if the Prince has by carriage of extraordinary innocence vindicated
himself from obloquy (which shall scarce be, if small faults be rightly
improved) then Machiavels advice must be followed, to calumniate stoutly, till
the people have entertained something to his pre^udice: it is a figure in
Politics to make every infirmity a fault, and every fault a crime; and if the
people be disposed to alteration, these must first be urged against a Monarch
to depose him, which is commendable, if you can dress him up like a Tyrant; as
you may find it justified by an honest Scot: who complains that there are not
some glorious rewards appointed for Tyrannticides, etc. The Grecians gave
divine Honors and great gifts to those that killed Tyrants.

6. Submit quietly to any power, providence, etc.

I answer; It is wisdom so to do: and for my part, I will obey my superiors
without compulsion. I know the power of authority by woeful experience to be
very strong in other countries, and able to conquer the Saints, and to convert
innocence into faults; and he that peruses history shall find that there has
been no innovation so gross, no rebellion so hideous, but has had some
Ecclesiastical somenters; for such as want worth enough of their own, to reach
preferment in a regular way, are most apt to envy the just honors of better
men, and despairing to obtain their end by learning and piety, they aspire to
it by the crooked means of faction and schism: nor are these despicable
instruments to the Politician, for the sharpest for the sharpest sword in his
army cannot vie services with a subtle quil; you may see his business in
writing, preaching and disputing, that so his tongue is a shield to his patrons
opinion, and a sword to his adversaries.

The Jesuit reckons it in the number of his merits, if he may by any sinister
ways ruffle and disorder heretical kingdoms, (so he calls them) encourage
weak and unstable minds to slight magistracy, irritate divisions, tumults,
rebellions, absolve from oaths, and all sacred ties; so that it is hard to find
any tragical Scene, or bloody Theater, into which the Jesuit has not intruded
and been busy, contributing in a very high measure to evey fanatic insolence,
justifying the old Pope Joan, the picture of the whore of Babylon: these are
the firebrands of Europe, the forge and bellows of sedition, infernal
Emissaries, the Pests of the age, men that live as if huge sins would merit
heaven by an Antiperistasis.

7. If authority exact an acknowledgement, etc.

I answer; Submit, and observe, that there is no nation without some turbulent
spirits of its own, the dishonor of the gown and Pulpit, the shame, and
sometimes the ruin of their country; you would think they had their text from
a Gazet, because you hear so much of a Coranto in the application; that these
may be fit implements for the Governor: there are these requisite
qualifications, there must be a principal gift of wresting the Scripture,
vexing and urging the holy Text, constraining it to patronize the design: the
great Apostle expresses this in three very emphatical terms, 1. the cogging
the Die, making the word of God speak what they list, 2. Crafty applications
and expositions of it, 3. All the methods and arts of cozenage, guilding and
varnishing rotten doctrines; and this must be done in public Pulpits, vomiting
out flames and spirit of sulphur from that sacred Pegma, where he should
deliver none but mild and soft, that is, Evangelical Embassages.

8. He that suffers his conscience to mislead, etc.

I answer; It is pity the (crafty upstart) that will say to his brother, it is
a sin to be honest, should have liberty to go in private, and preach in
Parlours and meeting houses, where he is listened to as an Oracle: and here
commonly he is more Enthusiast then Scripturist, and his Auditors believe his
dreams to be as Canonical as the Revelation; like those Mr. Heydon speaks of,
their dreams are all new lights; or those this learned Gentleman chides, when
he tells them that every whimsey is not prophecy.

This subtle upstart that lately dropped from the gallow-tree into Styx, and
turned a Soland Goose, ought to be of some abilities in disputing; and what he
wants in Logic, he must supply in garrulity and babbling, for whatsoever he
affirms, the interest he has in his seduced hearers, improves into a
Syllogism: you ask after his Topics, he has his Arguments from Gregory, but
not the Saint, if after his weapons, he carries the name of Christ in the van
of Rebellion and Robbery; and the wound he makes is faction: those consciences
which will not surrender to his Parley, his master takes by storm: And thus he
abuses Christ, by pretending his favor to unwarrantable actions, he abuses his
Prince, by alienating the affection and allegiance of his subjects; he abuses
the Church by shattering it into rents and schisms, wounding it with a feather
from its own wing, snatching a coal from the Altar, to fire both Church and
State; and lastly, he abuses himself; for when the political Sophister has
made his best use of his seditious spirit, he leaves him to his own wild
distempers, having directed his own thoughts to another goal.

9. Ostentation of birth at no time decent, etc.

I answer; To keep the conquered quiet and peaceable, and well affected so much
as may be, by promises of titles of honor, the people may seem by being
conquered, to have gotten a Protector, rather then a Tyrant; for the Common
people, if they enjoy Peace, and be not distracted nor drawn from their
business, nor exacted upon beyond measure, are easily contained under
obedience; yet notwithstanding they are to be disused from the practice of
Arms, and other exercises which increase courage, and be weakened of Armor,
that they have neither spirit nor will to rebel.

10. Despise none not for meaness of blood, etc.

I answer; Defame not any woman publicly or privately to another, though you
know her to be evil; for those that are faulty cannot endure to be taxed, but
will seek to be avenged of you; and those that are not guilty cannot endure
unjust repro^h: and as there is nothing more shameful and dishonest, then to do
wrong, so truth it self cutteth his throat that carries her publicly in every
place, and despises the condition of another. Remember the Divine saying, He
that keeps his mouth, keeps his life: do therefore right to all men where
it may profit them, you shall thereby get much love; and forbear to speak evil
things of men, though it be true, and thereby you shall avoid malice and
revenge.

11. It cannot be looked upon as an Act of prudence to do more for another, etc.

I answer; Obligation to Governors: There is no argument more popular then
success in government, because the bulk of men is not able to distinguish the
permission of God from his approbation: And although it be in it self
fallacious and feeble, yet the misery of the conquered denies them the
opportunity to dispute it; for the opposition of the sword will never be
confuted by the bare fist of Logic; nor does the victor commonly permit any
ventilation of his dictatates; for when the body is a slave why should the
reason be free? A soldier in Lybia wondered any would be so importunate to
preach Laws and moral reasons to men with swords by their sides, as if arms
knew not how to descend to rational inquiries, but were enough justified by an
odd kind of necessity of their own creating, that all Laws are engraven on the
hilt of a victorious sword, to whose Mandamus all other Statutes must submit.

12. No government can be safely engaged by a single person, etc.

I answer; If he gratify his courtiers and attendants in that sort, and by
such means as that he may seem not to pleasure them with the hurt and injury of
his people, as with Monopolies, etc* I have often wondered with my self, what
should move governors to print justifications of themselves, and assertions of
their proceedings, which I suppose never made an understanding man a convert,
nor met with a cordial reception in any, unless the abuse of a few poor shallow
believers, be thought a triumph worth their pains: I have sometimes thought,
they do by these papers please themselves in their abilities to delude, and so
gratify their authority over the noblest part of man, by denying the liberty
of the thought, and subduing the power of the soul to an implicit coherence
with their own magisterial opinions.

But the Governor of the Turks, that Politician we must force our pen toward,
by quoting the success of his undertakings, besides the plausibleness and
insinuating nature of the proposition it self, has the advantage of power to
make us believe him, or any other such like governor that contrives these
designs. Nor is this bait laid by him, or any other I point not at
contemptible; many of parts and prudence, yea and of Religion, have been
staggered by it: some question whether he deserved the brand of Atheism,
considering the wild conceits they then had of their Gods; or differed from the
common Creed, crying out, O how the Gods favor Sacriledges! When he had a
merry gale after a sacrilegious attempt, the like said Dionysius; the best of
the Greek Historians calls the victory, the just Arbitress of the cause; so did
the Roman also. So hard it is to persuade mere reason, that virtue may be
unfortunate, and vice happy; and some adore the fortunate, and despise the
conquered.

13. A reconciled enemy is not safely to be trusted, yet if any, etc.

I answer; You must never trust any friend or servant with any matter that may
endanger your estate: and of this you must take an especial care, for else you
will make your self a slave to him that you trust, and leave your self always
to his mercy; and be sure of this, you shall never find a friend in your young
years, whose condition and qualities will please you after you come to more
discretion and judgment; and then all you give is lost, and all wherein you
shall teach such a one will be discovered: such therefore as are inferious will
follow you, but to eat you out, and when you leave to feed them, they will hate
you; and such kind of men, if you preserve your estate, will always be had:
and if your friends be of better quality then your self, you may be sure of two
things; The first, that they will be more careful to keep your counsel,
because they have more to lose then you have. The second, they will esteem you
for your self, and not for that which you do possess: but if you be subject to
any great vanity or ill, from which I hope God will bless you and all other,
then therein trust no man, for every man's folly ought to be his greatest secret.

14. Grant if ever a courtesy at first asking: for, etc.

I answer, nothing does more become a wise man, then to make choice of friends,
and advised in courtesies; for by these you shall be judged what you are: let
them therefore be wise and virtuous, and none of those that follow you for
gain; but make election rather of your betters then your inferiors, shunning
always such as are poor and needy; for if you grant twenty courtesies, and
give as many gifts, and refuse to do the same but once, all that you have done
will be lost; and such men will become your mortal enemies.

15. Be not nice in assisting with the advantages of nature, etc.

I answer you friendly where you do not abuse Ladies and Gentlewomen, and in
mild terms. There is some of this leaven in the judgment of most,
notwithstanding those brighter discoveries in the Noon of Christianity we live
under. A Bible thoroughly observed, would expound to us much of the riddle and
dark passages of providence: we are so short sighted, that we cannot see beyond
time without the Rules of Astrology. We value men and things by their temporal
prosperities, and transient glories; whereas, if we put eternity into the other
scale, it would much out-poise that worldly luster that so much abuses our
eyes, and cozens our understandings. I find it not in holy Writ, that God has
inseparably annexed goodness and greatness, justice and victory* he has
secured his servants of the felicity of a better life, but not of this; Christ's
Kingdom is not here, our happiness was not of this world: not does my Bible
show me any warrant for appeal to Heaven for the decision of this or that
intricacy, by bestowing success upon this party, or that cause, according to
its righteousness and due merit: there is a vast difference betwixt (...) and
(...), even in Scripture construction. The great Turk may justly exult and
prune himself in discourses of this nature, if they be once admitted and owned
by Christians. And I shall forbear any longer to think Mahomet an Impostor, and
must receive the Alcaron for Gospel, if I shall be convinced that temporal
happiness and triumph are a true Index of divine Favor. Our Religion has
something more to invite our closure with it; it proposes a convenience on
earth, like Heydons book of The way to bliss; but the Crowns and garlands are
reserved for Heaven, as bliss is. The money-god in Plato pretends a command
from Jupiter, to distribute as great a largess to the wicked as to the good;
because, if virtue should once impropriate riches, that fair Goddess would be
more wooed for her dowry, then for native beauty. So if Religion were attended
with those outward allurements that most take the senses, we should be apt to
follow Christ for the loaves, and overlook the spiritual charms, and more noble
ends of Christianity. The Heathens could say, happy privacy is a thing of
unhappy presidency: fortunate sins may prove dangerous temptations; but to say,
that God does signally attest the actions of such a person, or the justice of
such a cause, by permitting it to prosper, and taper up in the world, is such a
deceit as deserves our serious abhorrency.

16. It Is not dutiful nor safe, etc.

I answer; Princes must take care they be not made fools by flatterers; for
even the wisest men are abused by these: know therefore, that flatterers are
the worst kind of Traitors for they will strengthen your imperfections,
encourage you in all evils, correct you in nothing, but so shadow and paint all
your vices and follies, as you shall never by their will know evil from good,
or vice from virtue. And because all men are apt to flatter themselves, to
entertain the additions of other men's praises is most perilous: do not
therefore praise your self, except you will be counted a vainglorious fool;
neither take delight in the praises of other men, except you deserve it; and
receive it from such as are worthy and honest, and will withal warn you of
your faults.

17. It is not safe for a Secretary to mend the Copy his Master has set him,
etc.

I answer; He may if his Master be a wise man, and delights not in flatterers,
for they have never any virtue, they are over-base, creeping, cowardly persons.
A Secretary that is a fool, will love a flatterer, and hate a plain honest man;
A flatterer is said to be a beast that biteth smiling: David desired God to cut
out the rongue of a flatterer: but ^t is hard to know them from friends, so are
they obsequious and full of protestations; for as a wolf resembles ^ dog, so
does a flatterer a friend: a flatterer is compared to an Ape, who because he
cannot defend the house like a dog, labor as an ox, or bear burdens as an
horse, does therefore yet pla^ tricks and provoke laughter. A Secretary may be
sure, and so may you that he that will in private tell you your faults, is your
friend, for he adventures your mislike, and does hazard your hatred: for there
are few men that can endure it, every man for the most part delighting in
self-praise, which is one of the most universal follies which bewitcheth
mankind.

18. Write not the faults of person near the throne, etc.

I answer; Do not accuse any man of any crime, if it be not to save your self,
your Prince, your country; for there is nothing more dishonorable (next to
treason it self)then to be an accuser. Notwithstanding, I would not have you
for any respect lose your reputation, or endure public disgrace; for better it
were not to live, then to live a coward. I hate a coward: if the offense
proceed not from your self; if it do, it shall be better to compound it on good
terms then to hazard your self, for if you overcome, you are under the cruelty
of the law; if you are overcome, you are dead or dishonored: if you therefore
contend or discourse in argument, let it be with wise and sober men, of whom
you may learn by sober reasoning; and not with ignorant persons, for you shall
thereby instruct those that will not thank you, and utter what they have learned
from you, for their own. But if a man know more then other men let him utter it
when it may do him honor, and not in assemblies of ignorant and common persons.

19 That it is not unlawful to serve beer, office or arms, etc.

I answer; This is like Gusman the tattered Spaniard; and I pass it over as not
worth looking on, and go to the next Paragraph.

20 Court him always you hope one day to make, etc.

I answer; The fancies of men change, and he that loves to day hates to
morrow: let reason therefore, Don Guzman, be your school-mistris, which ever
will guide you aright.

21. It Is a natural guard, etc.

I answer; A governor will make friends, and knows how to improve any popular
gust he raised, because such a storm is his seed-time; and the Dutchmen boast
they can sail with all winds: the aspiring man observes the quarter whence the
fairest gales of preferment blow, and tacks about ship, turning his helm to
fill the sails of his ambition; nor can the compass point more varieties of
winds then his dexterous soul has changes and garbes, and suitable
compliances.

What the Orator calls his top and perfection, to make happy application to the
several humors and Genius of all sorts of men, qualifying his address with what
he knows will most charm a friend he treats, that the Governor does, not only
with his lips, but life you may find all those figures and tropes digested into
his actions, and made practical, that are in the other only vocal. He
remembers that of an Almanack-maker, who having now succesfully gained, and
written amiable predictions in flattery of three Princes, and still in the same
aspect of favor, unshaken with the vicissitudes he had run through: being by
my self asked by what means he preserved his fortune, he replied, he was made
of the pliant willow, not of the stubborn oak, always of the prevailing
religion, and a zealous professor: this easiness and bending is of absolute
necessity; for if the same temper which insinuated in violent times were
retained in a composed and settled government, it would be altogether
distasteful; and so on the contrary.

22. Mingle not your interest, etc.

I answer; Amongst all other things of the world, take care of your estate,
which you shall ever preserve, if you observe three things; first, that you
know what you have, what every thing is worth that you have, and to see that
you are not wasted by your servants and officers. The second is, that you never
spend any thing before you have it, for borrowing is the canker and death of
every man's estate. The third is, that you suffer your self not to be wounded
for others men's faults, and scourged for others men's offenses, which is, to be
surety for another; for thereby millions of men have been beggered and
destroyed, paying the reckoning of others men's riot, and the charge of other
men's folly and prodigality.

23. Let nothing unjustifiable, etc.

I answer; If religion be in fashion, you can scarcely distinguish this man
from a saint; he does not only reverence the holy Ministers, but if need be,
he can preach himself* if cunctation prevails, he acts L. if the buckler must
be changed for a sword, he personates the Prince of Conde: if mildness be
useful, Charles Stuart called King of Scots, is not more a lamb then he. If
severities are requisite, Ruperts butcheries are sanctities, compared with his:
as Cyclope Euripides, shifted disposition as he altered place, (being
voluptuous and jovial in Ionia, frugal and retired in Lacedaemon) so he
proportions himself to time, place, person, religion, with such a
plausibleness, as if he had been born only to serve that opinion which he
harbored but as a guest, whilst it continued in sway, having a room in his
heart; if occasion be, to lodge the contrary, and to cry it up with as much
ardour as he once used to extol the former; and thus like a subtle Proteus he
assumes that shape that is most in grace, and of most profitable conducement to
his ends; he abounds in a voluble wit, and like a changeling more turning then
a potters wheel.

He has this advantage of the Chamelion, that he can assume whiteness, for I
find him often wearing the vest of innocence, to conceal the ugliness and
blackness of his attempts in his Advice to a son.

24. Avoid the folly of Actaeon, etc.

I answer; A Princes secrets ought to be kept, and if he be a good governor,
he is inviolably constant to his principles of virtue and religious prudence;
his ends are noble, and the means he uses innocent; he has a single eye on the
public good; and if the ship of the State miscarry, he had rather perish in
the wreck, then preserve himself upon the planke of an inglorious subterfuge:
his worth has led him to the helm, the rudder is an honest and vigorous
wisdom, the sta^ he looks to for direction is in Heaven, and the port he aims
at is the joint welfare of Prince and people.

This constancy is that solid rock upon which the wise Venetian has built its
long-lived Republic, so that it is probable the maiden Queen borrowed her
Motto of Semper eadem from this maiden Commonwealth.

It is true, something is to be conceded to the place and time, and person of a
Prince; and I grant that there are many innocent compliances, Heydons Basilica
chymica is observable, there may be a bending without a crookedness, we may
circumire, and yet not aberrare; Paul became a Jew that he might gain the Jews,
but he did not become a sinner that he might gain sinners; he was made all
things to all men, but he was not made sin to any, that is, his condescensions
were such as did well consist with his Christian integrity.

Greatness and honors and riches, and scepters, those glorious temptations
that so much enamour the doting world, are too poor shrines for such a
sacrifice as conscience, which the Governor has so much abused by an
inveterate neglect, that it is become menstruous, Ephemerals.

25. Providence or a severer destiny has, etc.

I answer; When the choice of the affection dies, a general lamentation
follows; for we seldom find any without a peculiar delight in some peculiar
thing, though various as their fancies lead them: honor, war, learning,
music, do all find their several votaries, who also if they fail in their
souls wishes mourn immoderately.

26 Afflict not your self to see, etc.

I answer; The time is come about whereof Diogenes prophesied, when he gave the
reason why he would be buried grovelling, we have made earths bottom powerful to
the lofty skies: gold that lay buried in the buttock of the world is now made
the head and ruler of the people, putting all under it; we have made it
extensive as the Spanish ambition, and in the mean, have undeservedly put worth
below it. Worth without wealth, is like an able servant out of employment, he
is fit for all businesses, but wants wherewith to put himself into any: he has
good materials for a foundation, but misseth wherewith to rear the walls of his
fame. For though indeed riches cannot make a man worthy, they can show him to
the world when he is so; but when we think him wise, we appear to be content to
be misled with the multitude. To the rich I confess we owe something, but to
the wise man most: To this for himself, and his innate worthiness; to the other
as being causually happy, in things that of themselves are blessings, but never
so much, as to make virtue mercenary or a flatterer of vice: worth without
wealth besides the native nobleness, has this in it, that it may be the way of
getting the wealth which is wanting; but as for wealth without worth, I count
it nothing but a Rich Saddle for the State to ride an Ass withal.

27. One may attain to a higher degree, etc.

I answer; If his conscience will suffer him to swear to those subtle snares
the Governor lays in such an oath, as may furnish with a sense obliging to
the design, he may be preferred.

But it appears by sad experience, that in propounding of oaths, requiring
promises, and other solemnities, there have been multitudes induced to bind
themselves upon some secret, loose, and mental reservation, which they have
framed to themselves as a salvo in case of breach; so apt we are in affairs of
greatest importance, to advise more with corrupt wit then sound conscience: in
the catalogue of self delusion, you may possibly find these.

We are ready to interpret the words too kindly, especially if they be
ambiguous; and it is hard to find terms so positive, but that they may be
eluded indeed, or seem to us to be so, if we be disposed.

Some are invited to illicit promises qua illicit, because they know them to be
invalid.

Some are frighted into these bonds by threats, and losses, and temporal
concernments, with the expense of the value of a cellar of Beer; in a Scarlet
cloak, and a good suit of cloth lined with knavery; some with a Dicker of
Leather, and a good pair of boots, set up on the highest size of hypocrisy and
deceit, to step into preferment; and then they please themselves that they
swear by duress, and so are disingaged some are oath-proof, I mean there are
such sear-scul'd men, as will swear pro and con.

Some have learned from the Civilian Cleveland, and others of them, that though
he swear to a thing not materially unlawful, yet if it impedes a greater moral
good, it becomes void.

Some take liberty to swear, because they judge the person to whom they swear
incapable of an oath; as Philalethonus defends the breach of an oath to a
thief, from perjury: and this scribler of the Advice to a Son, to a Tyrant to
violate his faith is an honest perjury: the first sort of these falls most
porperly under the notice and practice of a crafty Governor, though he may
also use the last, but at different times.

28. Though Law perish, etc.

I answer; It is not difficult for him to cast his desire into such soft glib
expressions as will down with most; yea, with many that would absolutely
disavow the same in rough language; if he be unskilled in this black Art, I
commend him to the Pedagogy of the Delphick devil.

29. Though I hope I have now reason, etc.

I answer; In employments, there is this same method through all the world, in
general. All things come to their height by degrees, there they stay the least
of time in a prosperous profession, then they decline as they rose; only
mischief being more importunate, ruins their profession at once, what has
been long a rearing.

30 Avoid in your pleadings, etc.

I answer; Amongst all other professions, choose that which your Genius is
fittest for, as the learned Astrologer will tell you: the Law I would have have
you well read in, but not to know the smart of it; the practice of it is so
gilded with gold, that you may swallow a cause, and forget who may be purged of
all their goods and Chattels, Lands and Tenements, by your potions, or
neglects. Therefore take heed how you delay any man for lucre or gain, or how
you manage a bad cause for your Client: money I know is apt to bail a rich man,
when the honest poor man suffers, because he has no Acres to be his hostage. Be
not made the Ass to carry the burdens of other men; if your friend desire you
to be his surety, give him a part of what you have to spare, if he press you
farther, he is not your friend at all, for friendship rather chooses harm to it
self then offers it: if you be bound for a stranger you are a fool, if for a
Merchant, you put your estate to swim; if for a Churchman he has no
inheritance; if for a Lawyer, he will find an evasion by a syllable or a word,
to abuse you; if for a poor man, you must pay it your self; if for a rich man,
it need not; therefore from the Law Suretiship and defamation bless your self.

31. At a conferrence to, etc.

I answer; Every unbridled tongue in the end shall find it self unfortunate,
for in all that ever I observed in the course of worldly things, I ever found
that men's fortunes are oftener made by their tongues then by their virtues, and
more men's fortunes overthrown thereby also, then by their vices.

32. If you be to vote in any public etc.

I answer; The mouth of a wise man is in his heart, the heart of a fool is in
his mouth, because what he knows or thinks he utters; and by your words
men will judge you: such as your words are, such will your affections be
esteemed, and such will your deeds as your affections, and such your life as
your deeds: Therefore be advised in debates what you discourse of, what you
maintain, whether touching Religion, Scare, or vanity: for if you err in the
first, you shall be counted profane, if in the second, dangerous in the third,
indiscreet and foolish.

33. As excellent Painters were not wont to fix upon a single beauty, etc.

I answer; If you imitate greatness according to these directions, rather then
goodness advised by my self, it is most certain, there is no other tie of
security and establishment to a person that has ravished greatness, and
acquired violent oaths: for usurpation has only these two pillars, its own
Arms and Militia, and public oaths and acknowledgement; and it is scarce worth
querie, whether, when the gross of a Nation is thus bound, the oath be not as
valid, and the conscience as much concerned, as if it had been sworn to a
lawful Prince. It is reasonable, that an usurping power cannot upon any prudent
persuasion, have the same confidence in the love of the people that a just
has; nor is the following Government enticing to imitation; for never any
Kingdom badly acquired was well administered. The same with Doctor Culpeper,
where one objecting the vices of Princes, receives this answer; Therefore they
were not natural Princes, but violent usurpers, and so beholding more to fear
then love of their subjects. And therefore if the Governor by imitation of the
blessed means forementioned, can gain a Superiority, there is no trusting to
those ingenious guards, his own good, and the love of others. His best defense
is awe, and fear, and scaffold, and gibbet, etc. for he that has no voluntary
room in the hearts of his people, must use all means to gain a coercive.

34. Before I came to have leisure, etc.

I answer; Princes frailties and promises are like other men's, and may be put
into the same bottomless bag which Poets say Jupiter made for lovers
asseverations. Their words are as good as their oaths, for they are both
trifles: children are to be cozened with rattles, and men with golden words
from a Princes mouth.

35. He that seeks perfection on earth, etc.

I answer; Nature and Religion conjoined beget fear and love together,
admiration, reverence: and these are so rare for qualification, that they beget
long life, health, youth, riches, wisdom and virtue. And these are most
necessary to perfection, as you read in Heydons way to bliss.

36. Those that impute their good, etc.

I answer; God will teach you to know you are not wise enough to choose for your
self; and therefore will lead you to a dependency on him, wherein he does like
Charles Stuart, who feeds not the expectation of Favorites that are apt to
presume, but often crosses them in their hopes and fears; thereby to tie them
faster in their duty and reverence, to his hand that gives: and certainly you
shall find this infallible; though God gives not your desires, yet he always
imparts to your profit. How infinitely would you entangle your self, if you
could sit down and obtain your wishes? do you not often wish that, which you
after see would be your confusion? and is not this, because you ignorantly
follow the flesh, the body, and the blinded appetite, which look to nothing but
the shell and outside? whereas God respects the soul, and distributeth his
favor for the good of that, and his glory. God sees and knows your heart, and
things to come in certainty; you, but only by Astrology; which does often fail
of predicting truth, or happily by A Rosacrucian, who sometimes to my knowledge
loses himself in the clouds of the worlds occasions: and no man would be more
misarble, then he that should cull out his own ways; what a specious show
carried Midas his wish with it, and how it paid him with ruin at last? surely
God will work alone, and man must not be of his counsel: nothing puts
destruction on him sooner, then when he presumes to part the Empire with God.
If you can be patient, God will be profitable; but the time and means you must
leave to him, not challenge to your self: neither must your own endeavors
wholly be laid in the couch to late. The moral of the tale is a kind of an
instructive Satyr, when the Carter prayed in vain to Jupiter, because he did
not put his shoulder to the wheel: do your part with industry, and let God
point the event. I have seen matters fall out so unexpected; neither Astrologer
not Rosacrucian could give any successeful judgment of them; which have
tutoured me in all affairs, neither to despair nor to presume: not to despair,
for God can help me; not to presume, for God can cross you. It is said of
Marius, that one day made him Emperor, the next saw him rule, the third, he was
slain of the Soldiers: never despair, because you have a a God; never presume,
because you are a man.

37. As I would have you primarily intend, etc.

I answer; A Magistrate or a Prince that would establish a troubled Government,
must first vanquish all his foes; factious heads must be higher by a pole then
their bodies; for how will the folds be quiet, while yet among them there be
some wolves? He that would rule over many, must fight with many, and conquer,
and be sure either to cut off those that raise up tumults, or by a majestic
awe, to keep them in a strict subjection: slackness and connivence are the
ruins of unsettled Kingdoms, your passions and affections are the chief
disturbers of your civil State. What peace can you expect within you, while
these rebels rest unovercome? If they get a head your Kingdom is divided, so
it cannot stand. Separations are the wounds of a Crown, whereby neglected, it
will bleed to death: then you must strive to subdue; if you cut them not off,
you must yet restrain them. It Is no cruelty to deny a Traitor liberty, you must
have them be your Subjects, not your Prince; they must serve you, and you must
sway them. If it cannot be without much striving, you must be be content with a
hard combat, that you may have a happy reign; it is better you endure a short
skirmish, then a long siege, having once won the field you must keep it.

38. The like may be imagined of men, etc.

I answer; In all Nations two things are cause of a common prosperity, good
Government, and good obedience; a good Magistrate over a perverse people is a
sound head on a surfeited body; a good Commonwealth and a Ruler, is a
healthful body with a head-aching, either are occasions of ruins, both sound
preservatives. A good Governor is a skilful Ship-master, that takes the
shortest way, and the safest course, and continually so stears, as the rocks
and shelves which might shipwreck the State, be avoided, and the voyage ever
made with the strongest speed, best profit, most ease: but a wicked Magistrate
is a wolf made leader of the fold, that both satiates his cruelty, and betrays
them to dangers; to whom, if you add but ignorance, you may without Astrology,
prophecy or predict destruction: The Judges insufficiency is the Innocents
calamity. It Is an huge advantage that man has in a credulous world, that can
easily say and swear to any thing; and yet withal, so palliate his
falsifications and perjuries, as to hide them from the conusance of most. The
Ruler must be furnished with handsome refuges; if he be wise and Tyrannous,
that may seemingly heal miscarriages this way, he need not spend much time in
inquiry after such helps; these declining ages will abundantly furnish his
invention: but if the Commonwealth be obedient, and the Ruler worthy, how
durable is their felicity and joy!

39. Another error may happen, etc.

I answer; That City is safe, whose Citizens are obedient to the Magistrates,
and the Magistrates to the Laws. What made the Major Scipio so victorious, but
his wisdom in directing, and his Soldiers willingness in obeying, when he
could show his Troops, and say, You see not a man among all these, but will if,
I command him, from a Turret throw himself into the Sea? As it is in the larger
world, so it is in the little world of man; none if they serve the true Prince:
but have a Governor completely perfect: criticism it self cannot find in God
to cavil at; he is both just and merciful, in the concrete and the abstract, he
is both of them, who can tax him with either cruelty or partiality? Though your
obedience cannot answer his perfection, yet endeavor it: If Christ be not your
King to govern, he will neither be your Prophet to forewarn, nor your Priest to
expiate: if you cannot come near it in effect, as being impossible, you must in
desire, as being convenient: so though less, yet if sincere, you know he will
accept it, not as meritorious, but respecting his promise.

40. Neither can the, etc.

I answer; Let Christ be your King, Prophet and Priest; and as for the world, I
know it too well to persuade you to dive into the practices thereof: rather
stand upon your own guard against all that tempt you thereunto, or may practice
upon you in your conscience, your reputation or your purse, resolve that no man
is wise or safe, but he that is honest.

Serve God, let him be the Author of all your actions, commend all your
endeavors to him, that must either wither or prosper them; please him with
prayer, lest if he frown, he confound all your fortunes and labors like drops
of rain on the sandy ground: let my experienced advice sink deep into your
heart. So God direct you in all his ways, and fill your heart with his grace.

Advice to a Daughter. V. Religion.
1. Read the Book of God with reverence, and in things doubtful take fixtion
from the Authority of the Church, which cannot be arraigned of a damnable
error, without questioning that truth which has proclaimed her proof against
the gates of hell, etc.

I Answer; God has left three books to the world in, each of which he may
easily be found; the Book of the creatures, the Book of conscience, and his
written Word: The first shows his Omnipotency, the second his justice, the
third his mercy and goodness; so though there be none of them so barren of the
rudiments of knowledge, but is sufficient to leave all without excuse, and
apologies: yet in them all, you find all the good that ever either the heathen,
or the Christian has published abroad: in the first is all natural Philosophy:
in the second all moral Philosophy: in the third all true Divinity, to those
admirable pillars of all humane learning, the Philosophers God showed himself
in his Omnipotency and justice, but seemed as it were to conceal his mercy; to
Christians he shines in that which out-shines all his works, his Mercy: Oh, how
should we regratulate his favors for so immense a benefit, wherein secluding
himself from others, he has wholly imparted himself to us! In the first of
these, Brightman was not out, nor would I have you, but to admire his works, by
a serious Meditation of the wonders in the Creatures. In the second I would
have you reverence his justice by the secret and in most checkes of the
conscience: in the third embrace his love by laying hold on those promises,
wherein he has not only left you means to know him, but to love him, rest in
him, and enjoy him forever.

2. The prudent Consistory finding, etc.

I answer; Can a fly comprehend man upon the top of Monarchy? no more can you
comprehend God in the height of Omnipotency; there are as well mysteries for
faith, as causes for reason: this may guide you, when you have to deal with
man; but in divine affairs, reason must wait on faith, and submit to her
prerogatives. The conscience is great, but God is far greater then it.

3. He may be less prudent, etc.

I do not think the greatest Clerks are nearest Heaven, much of their knoledge
is superfluous; for Bellarmine makes four hundred questions of faith: And
Doctor Owen makes a gracious tale of a great many more; and not ten of them
which touches our salvation to understand.

4. Despise not a profession of Holiness, etc.

I answer; Words are not the difference of good men and bad; for every man
speaks well: therefore how noble a thing is virtue, when no man dares profess
any thing elss?

5. Hypocrisy though looked upon, etc.

I answer; As I think there are many worse then they seem, so I suppose there
are some better then they show, and these are like the growing Chestnut that
keeps a sweet and nutrimental kernel included in a rough and prickly husk: the
other as the Peach; holds a rugged and craggy stone under the cover of a velvet
coat: you should not deceive a good man either way, both offer a wrong to
virtue; the one shows her worse then she is, dulling her beauty with dim
colors, and presenting her with an harder favor then her own; the other does
varnish over the rottenness of vice, and makes goodness but the vizor of
hypocrisy, either are condemnable: painting the face is not much worse then
wilful soyling it; he is as well a murderer, that accuses himself falsely, as
he that did the Act, and denies it. One would obscure goodness with vice, the
other would palliate vice with goodness, fraud is in both; and I am sure no
pleasure can make deceit allowable: you must therefore strive to avoid both,
and with either seem as you are, or be as you seem; but if you will err on one
side, I had rather you should resemble a plain country man, that goes in
russet, and is rich in revenues, then a riotous courtier that wears glorious
apparel without money in his purse.

6. Criticismes and curious questions. etc.

I answer; If a man shall once take upon him to call that light which God calls
heavy, that sin venial, which God calls grievous, measuring any one sin by the
measures of his lusts and appetite, and not of his conscience: what shall let
him to do with the next that his affections stir him to, (the like reason
serving for all) and so go forward till he place his whole corrupted
affections in Gods room.

7. I can approve of none for, etc,

I can approve of none for, etc.

I answer; God who calls his elect unto himself to make them enjoy heaven,
compels none to make defection from himself: besides, the Devil never assails a
magisterial Divine; I mean a man so called, except he find him either void of
knowledge, the fear of God, or in controversy with his word.

8. I grant the Socinians are not, etc.

I answer; That in the direct worship of God himself, you ought to be guided by
the word of God, as he prescribes in the same, and not otherwise, as also in
the matter of sacrifices; but in the form and order of ceremonies, that indeed
is solely left unto the Church, but not the immediate worship, we may not
therein follow our own wills, that is the main difference between them and the
ancient Canons of the Church, if you may use a will worship, then you are in
the right with them, but if you may not, then you are in the right with us.

8. And as the Socinian Doctrine, etc.

I answer; The Devil where he cannot have the whole, seeks ever to get one part
of the soul, either the will or the understanding, which he may come easiest
by; as in Protestants the will, in Socinians the understanding: a learned
Socinian, and an ignorant, are of two religions.

10, Yet were not Purgatory, etc.

I answer; the Papists religion is like Homers Iliads of the siege of Troy, or
Virgils Aeneads of the beginning of Rome; both of them had a foundation of
truth; so had the Papists the Bible, but they have all added so much that the
first truth is almost lost.

11. But in conclusion you will find, etc.

I answer; If the Pope may err as a man, but not as a Pope, I would know why
the Pope does not instruct or reform the man, or wherefore the man does not
require the Popes instructions?

12. And yet it was no unhappy, etc.

I answer; It must needs show the Puritans and Papists religions to be both
ill, that they would plant them by liberty of conscience and war; whereas the
true Protestant religion rose by fasting and prayer, and is set up upon the
rock of faith, for every good work to mount up the soul to eternal rest with
God.

13. I confess the Millenaries, etc.

I answer; The true Protestant religion stands like a virtue between the
Presbyterian, Papist, Annabaptist, Independent, Quaker, Millenary; that is, an
extremity in the excess, this part of them in the effect; that aims at the
confusion of the State, this other makes confusion in the Church: let that
Prince that desires the welfare of his kingdom, crush the power of the first
part, and curb the malice of the other, so shall his Church be peaceful, his
state honorable, and on his head shall his crown flourish.

14. But for the vagabond, etc.

I answer; Although particular men of all professions of religion, have been
some thieves, some murderers, some traitors, yet ever when they came to their
end and just punishment, they confessed their fault to be in nature, and not in
their profession, the Roman Catholics only excepted.

15. And our new Levellers, etc.

Every age breeds some exorbitant spirits, who turn the edge of their own
sufficiency upon whatsoever they can devour in their ambitious apprehensions
and attempts, seeking rather a great than a good fame, and holding it the
chiefest honor to be thought the wonder of their times, which if they attain
unto is but in the condition of monsters, that are generally much admired, but
more abhorred: and such are the Levellers, and with them I place the
fift-Monarchy men.

16. It is observable in the present, etc.

I answer, it matters not much whether in government you tread the steps of
severe Hannibal, or gentle Scipio, so your actions be honorable, and your life
virtuous; both in the one and in the other, there is defect and danger, if not
corrected and supported by the fair repute of some extraordinary endowments, so
no matter, black or white, so the seed be good.

17. Will not such proceeding, etc.

I answer; It has been observed that in all innovations and religions (which
ordinarily have their rise from pretenses of religion or reformation, or both)
the breach and neglect of laws has been authorized by that great Patroness of
illegal actions, Necessity.

Now the wild error of Anarchy is never without such an advocate as this, for
he cares not to distinguish, whether the necessity be of their own creating or
no, as for the most part it is, being indeed an Apendix to the wrong he
undertakes, and signifies no more than that he is compelled to cover wrong with
wrong, as if the commission of a second sin were enough to justify the first.

He changes that old charitable advice, Benefacta benefactis aliis pertegito ne
perpluant, into vitia vitiis pertegito ne perpluant that so heaping one crime
upon another, the latter may defend the former from the stroke of Justice.

He adores a Maxim in Eugenius Theodidactus the Civilian, justum est bellum
quibus necessarium, and pia arma quibus in armis spes est, that war must needs
be just that is necessary, and those arms pious that are all our livelihood: it
were very incongruous to desire that man to leave his crutch that cannot walk
without, it is no less unnatural to invite him to quit his sword, whose life and
fortune leans entirely upon it.

18. Nevertheless though a high, etc.

I answer again, If he can insinuate the scope of the war to be zealous and
legal, a little daubing will serve to legalize the circumstances: that of the
Civilians must be remembered, Licere in bello quae ad finem sunt necessaria,
nothing is unlawful in war, that serves the end and design of it: the Oracles
of the gown are too tender for the sword men, and it may be he had wit in his
anger, who affirmed, that martial law was as great a solecism as martial peace.
If the people be once possessed that his aims and ends are fair, will never
expect that the media for attainment of his end, should be retrenched by the
strict boundaries of law; he manages that rule very practically, I may invade
any thing of any man's that threatens certain danger to me if I suffer him to
enjoy it. Now he can very plausibly make this certain danger or uncertain, as
shall best suit with his affairs: it is a broad liberty that Culpeper
concedes. If I have no other way to assure my life, I may by any means repel
any power that assaults it, though just; self-defence being a clear dictate of
nature; when life and liberty and safety come in question, there ought no
consideration to be had of just or unjust, pitiful or cruel, honorable or
dishonorable.

Now when the people have according to his desire got over the great obstacle,
and digested the plot for pious, it is easy to set all future proceedings upon
the score of liberty, safety, religion; and if he be constrained to use means
grossly unlawful, it is but to make them seem holy in the application, and all is
well; for it is the humor and Genius of the vulgar, when they have once rushed
into a party implicitly, to prosecute it as desperately as if they were under
demonstrative convictons of its justice.

He does make a virtue of necessity, because there is no other verttue will so
easily be induced to serve his proceedings as this; she may well smile upon
licentiousness, who has her self no law.

19. Keep then your conscience tender, etc.

I answer; It is either science or opinion which you mean by the word
conscience; for men say that such and such a thing is true in and upon their
conscience, which they never do, when they think it doubtful, and therefore
they know or think they know it to be true; but men, when they say things upon
their conscience, are not therefore presumed certainly to know the truth of
what they say; it remains then that the word is used by them that have an
opinion not only of the truth of the thing, but also of their knowledge of it,
to which the truth of the proposition is consequent: conscience I therefore say
is the opinion of evidence, and the Devil never troubles the conscience, except
he find the man either void of knowledge or of the fear of God.

20. Fly that self-murdering Tyrant, etc.

I answer; most Heresies have proceeded from mingling Philosophy with Religion;
from that, and obstinacy of Policy, have all the Papists errors risen: when
Christ tells them, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven.

21. All Religions but ours, etc.

I answer; Variety in any thing distracteth the mind, and leaves it waving in a
dubious trouble: and then how easy it is to sway the mind to either side? but
among all the diversities that we meet with none trouble us more then those
that are of Religion: it is rare to find two kingdoms one; as if every nation had
(if not a God) yet at least a way to God by it self, this stumbles the unsettled
soul; that not knowing which way to take without the danger oferring, sticks to
none, so dies ere he does that for which he was made to live, the service of
the true Almighty; we are born as men set down in the midst of a wood, circled
round with several voices, calling us; at first, we see not which will lead us
the way out; so divided in our selves, we sit still and follow none, remaining
blind in a flat Atheism, which strikes deep at the foundation both of our own
and the whole worlds happiness. It Is true, if we let our dimmed understanding
search in these varieties (which yet is the only means that we have in our
selves to do it with) we shall certainly lose our selves in their windings;
there being in every of them something to believe, above that reason that leads
us to the search: Reason gives us the Anatomy of things, and illustrates with a
great deal of plainness all the ways that she goes, but her line is too short
to reach the depth of Religion: Religion carries a confutation a long with it,
and with an high hand of Sovereignty, awes the inquisitive tongue of nature,
and when she would sometimes murmr privately, she will not let her speak:
Reason like a mild Prince is content to show his subjects the causes of his
commands and rule; Religion with a higher strain of Majesty, bids do it,
without inquiring further then the bare Command; which without doubt is a means
of procuring mighty reverence: what we know not, we reverently admire; what do
know, is in a sort subject to the triumphs of the soul that has discovered it.
And this not knowing makes us not able to judge; every one tells us, his own is
the truest and there is none I think, but has been sealed with the blood of
some; nor can I see, how we may more then probably prove any, they being all
set in such heights, as they are not subject to the demonstrations of Reason;
and as we may easier say what a soul is not then what it is, so we may more
easily disprove a Religion for false, then prove it for one that is true, there
being in the world far more errors then truth; yet is there besides another
misery, near as great as this, and that is, that we cannot be our own chusers,
but must take it upon trust, from others. Are we not often, before we can discern
the true, brought up and grounded in the false, sucking in heresy with our
milk in childhood? nay when we come to years of abler judgment, wherein the
mind is grown up complete man, we examine not the soundness, but retain it
merely because our fathers taught it: what a lamentable weakness is this in
man, that he should build his eternal welfare on the approbation of perhaps a
weak and ignorant parent? why do you neglect that wherein should be your
greatest care?

22. As it it manifest that most Princes, etc.

I answer; There are few which first fit that precept of trying all things, and
taking the best: Assuredly though faith be above reason, yet there is a reason
to be given for faith, he is a fool that believes he knows neither what, nor
why: among all the diversities of Religions that the world holds, I think it
may stand with most safety, that, which makes most for Gods glory, and man's
quiet. I confess in all the Treatises of Religion that I ever saw, I find none
that I would so soon follow as that of the Protestant Church of England, I
never found so sound a foundation, so sure a direction for Religion: as the
song of the Angels at the birth of Christ, Glory be to God on high; There is
the honor the reverent obedience, and the admiration, and the adoration, which
we ought to give him: On earth Peace; This is the effect of the former working
in the hearts of men, whereby the world appears in his noblest beauty, being an
entire chain of intermuted amity: And good will toward men; this is Gods mercy
to reconcile man to himself, after his fearful desertion of his maker. Search
all Religions the world through, and you shall find none that ascribes so much
to God, nor that constitutes so firm a love among men as does the established
doctrine of the Protestant Church among us, all other either detract from God,
or infringe the peace of men. The Jews in their Talmud say, before God made
this, he made many other worlds, and marred them again, to keep himself from
idleness. The Turks in their Alcaron bring him in discoursing with the Angels,
and they telling him of things which before he knew not, and after they made
him swear by Mahomets Pen and lines, and by Figs and Olives. The Papists
pourtray him as an old man, and by this means disdeifie him, derogating also
from his Royalty by their odious interposing of Merit: and for the society of
men, what bloody tenants do they all hold? as that he deserves not the name of
Rabbi, that hates not his enemy to the death, that it is no sin to revenge
injuries, that it is meritorious to kill an Heretic, with whom no faith is to
be kept; even to the unglewing of the whole worlds frame, contexed only by
commerce and contracts: what abhorred barbarisms did Selymus leave in precept
to his successor Solomon? which though I am not certain they were ratified by
their Mufties, I am sure, are practiced by the inheritors of his Empire.

23. But if S. Peter's pretended successor,etc.

I answer; In the Primitive Church of Rome, they were inferior to Bishops, and
were but seven in number, as Parsons of the seven Churches mentioned about
Rome; but how they came to place them before Bishops, and make of them Princes
and successors to S. Peter, and Potentates, and how they become the Electors of
the Papacy, I know not. In other Religions of the Heathens, what fond opinions
have they held of their Gods, reviling with unseemly threats, when their
affairs have thwarted them? as if allowing them the name, they would conserve
the Numen to themselves: in their Sacrifices, how butcherly cruel? as if (as
it is said of them) they thought by inhumanity, to appease the wrath of an
offended Deity. The Religion which I profes, establishes all in another
strain: what makes more for Gods glory, what makes more for the mutual love of
man, then the Gospel? All our abilities of good we offer to God as the fountain
from whence they stream; can the day be light, and that light not come from the
Sun? can a clock go without a weight to move it, or a keeper to set it? As for
man, it teaches to tread on Cotton, milds his wilder temper, and learns him in
his patience to affect his enemies; and for that which does partake of both, it
makes just God, a friend to unjust man, without being unjust either to himself
or man; sure, it could be no other then the invention of a Deity, to find out a
way, how man that had made himself justly unhappy, should, with a full
satisfaction to exactest justice, be made again most happy; as in Heydons book
of the way to bliss and happiness you may read: I would wish no man that is
able to try, to take his Religion upon others words; but once resolved in it
it is dangerous to neglect where you know you do owe a service.

24. It is no less worth your, etc.

I answer; That the Religion of the Turks was composed of the Jewish religion,
of the Christian, and of the Arrians; and the policy thereof was to draw
infinites of people to his subjection, that were uncertainly affected; as in
the Low Countries they use diversities of Religions to strengthen their power:
but this is a strange policy when God is neglected of man, man shall be
contemned of God; when man abridged God of his honor, God will shorten man of
his happiness. It cannot but be best to give all to him, of whom whatsoever we
have we hold. I believe it safest to take that Religion which most magnifies
God, and makes most for the peaceable conversation of men; for as we cannot
ascribe too much to him, to whom we owe more then we can ascribe, so I think
the most splendid estate of man, is that which comes nearest to his first
creation, wherein all thing wrought together in the pleasant embracements of
mutual love and concord.

25. Religions do not naturally, etc.

I answer; men are often in arguing carried by the force of words further
asunder than their question was at first, like two ships going out of the same
haven, their journies end is many times whole countries distant; the like may
be said of the differences of religion.

26. Let no seeming opportunity prevail so far, etc.

I answer; Fortunetellers, as you ignorantly call them, are properly called
Astrologers, and they know that man is the ball of times, that is, sometimes
taken from the plow to the throne; and sometimes again from the throne to a
halter, as inchanters ple^se, besides Astrologers. But you are governed by a
power that you cannot but obey, your mind is set against your mind to alter
you: Eugenius Philalethes the Welsh Philosopher questions whether this be
nature ordered and relinquisht, or whether it be accidental, or the eternal
connection of causes: I answer him it is neither, but the operating power of the
stars by Sepheroth exerting of the will of God; fear nothing but God.

27. Stamp not the impress, etc.

I answer; there is a providence that orders all things as it pleases, of of
which neither Astrologer, Geomancer nor Inchanter is able to render reason; for
it is a kind of mundane predestination, writ in such Characters, the late Kings
death, and now others, are so written, as it is not for any but a Rosa crucian
to read them; in vain you murmur at the changes that must be.

28. Be not easily drawn to lay, etc.

I answer; the power of witches is nothing, for we are always in the hands and
under the power of a Noble Protector; who never gives ill but to him that has
deserved ill, whatsoever befalls you, you must subscribe to with a round Soul;
It were a super insaniated folly to strugle with a power, which you know is in
vain contended with, if a fair endeavor may free you; you must practice it, if
that cannot wait with a calmed mind. Whatsoever happens as a wonder, you must
admire and Magnify; as the Act of a power above your apprehension. But as it
is an alteration to man, you must never think it marvelous, when every day a
Reputed witch suffers more changes then is of her self to imagine.

29. Be not therefore hasty to, etc.

I Answer; Self examination will make your judgment, charitable. It is from
where there is no judgment, that the heaviest judgment comes if you must
needs censure, it is good to do it as Suetonius writes of the twelve Caesar's;
tell both their virtues, and their vices unpartially: and leave the upshot to
collection of the private mind, so shall you learn by hearing of the faults, to
avoid them, and by knowing the virtuous practice the like, otherwise you should
rather praise a man for a little good, then brand him for his more of ill, you
are full of faults by nature, you are good not without care and industry.

30. As he offers an high indignity, etc.

I Answer; When God distinates a man to do good, he makes every opportunity and
occasion (though it seem never so harsh in man's eyes) to turn to his good, and
Gods glory: but when God leaves man to himself, he makes more opportunities
than he finds, and without occasion to work his own ruin, to his own shame:

31. Let not the cheapness, etc.

I Answer; Let that great rule be received that no man can be necessitated to
the sin of purchasing Church Lands, our divines generally damn an officious
lie; and the equity binds from any officious sin M. Heydon, speaking of the
Romans and Spaniards says, it is impossible to be ambitious without injury to
the Gods; Temples themselves are not exempted from the fury of conquering
Tyrants, the sacriledges of the Romans were as numerous as their Trophies, yet
their gods followed their triumphant Chariots.

32. Denounce no enmity, etc.

I answer; The Clergy is as full of changes as the Moon, for I cannot see one
of them settled in a Church, but before I have heard four Sermons, his face I
perceive is full of strange gestures, and his tongue of novelty.

33. Grudge not Tithes, etc.

I answer; The Minister of our Parish said to me touching conformity, that it
would be a scandal for himself to conform, yet told me he would allow that his
Son may do it; as if he living a fool all his life, desired so to die; and
would you not grudge Tithes to such? yet the labourer is worthy of his hire.

34. Yet I cannot but by the way, etc.

I answer; Let that eternal God which raised so brave a fabric out of such
indisposed materials; that weilds the world with his finger ever since it was
made; that controuls the waves, and checks the tumults of the people of all
Religions; that sits above, and laughs at the malignant counsels and devices of
wicked men: let his mercy be implored for the speedy succor of his distressed
Church, that the rod of Aaron may blossom; that the tabernacle of David may be
raised; that the subtle factious inventors of schisms may be caught in their
own snare: and that the result of all afflictions may be the granting his
glory, and exalting of his Scepter.

35. And here it may not improperly, etc.

I Answer; Let us mix our prayers, that God would forever banish those cursed
devices of Cardinal Wolsey and others I dare not name, out of Europe and the
Christian world; and damn them down to hell, from whence originally by policy
they came: and let such advisers as delight to abuse others, think of that
self-cousenage, with which in the interim they abuse themselves, God permitting
the devil to revenge the imposture; and whilst we are busy with politic
stratagems, subtle advices, and tortious Arms to invade the rights of others:
let us all consider, that this is not the violence that takes Heaven.

The Conclusion.
1. BEar always a filial reverence, etc.

I answer; Honor your Father and Mother, and enjoy the promise of the Lord,
and consider what a wise daughter says, that a wise woman overseeth the ways
of her Husband, and eats not the bread of idleness; these advices are very
naturally a mothers affectionate love to a child, therefore remember them.

2. Continue in love and amity with your Sister, etc.

I answer; I advice you to be so to your brother, and take his advice mixed
with your Mothers, in the admission of a servant you please with their consent
to accept as your Husband.

3. Let no time expunge his memory, etc.

I answer; Remember how much Mr. Culpeper and his Wife have done for you, and
thank God for your happiness.

4. What you leave at your death, etc.

I answer; Make your will, so that there may be no strife in dividing your
goods, chattels, lands or tenements; for the Lawyers will do by you and them,
as one did by a Cripple and a blind man, the one found an oyster, and the other
took it up; a Lawyer rides by, and they showing him the cause, he opens the
oyster and eats it, and gives them the shells: therefore be wise.

5. Be not solicitous after pomp, etc.

I answer; Let my burial be after the Protestant form, by a Minister of the
same faith, without the burden of a Tombstone, or any expense except a piece
of earth opened as big as my body, made ready to receive it, that it may grow
fit for etenal life, through the mercy and merits of Jesus Christ.

6. Neither can I apprehend such, etc.

I answer; Death is a sleep eternal, the bodies dissolution, the rich man's
fear, the poor man's wish; an event inevitable, an uncertain journey, a thief
that steals away man, sleeps father, life's fight, the departure of the living,
and the resolution of all, who may not from such sights and thoughts as these,
learn if he will, both humility and loftiness; the one to vilify the body,
which must once perish in a stenchful nastiness; the other to advance the soul,
which lives here but for a higher and more heavenly ascension: As you should
not care for too much indulgiating of the flesh, which you must one day yield
to the worms, so you should ever be studious for such actions as may appear the
issues of a noble and diviner soul.

7. And concerning a future account, etc.

I answer, Let it be a piece of our daily oraisons, that God would guard our
Pulpits from such Boutefeu's, as like Aetna and Vesuvius, belched forth nothing
but flames and fiery discourses of the day of Judgment, using the Scriptures
as preposterously and impertinently as some Pontificians, who transported with
the vehemence of Hildebrand's zeal, think the temporal Monarchy of Popes
sufficiently Scriptural, from the saying of Christ to Peter, Feed my sheep: far
be it from us, to entitle the Spirit of God to exorbitant doctrines. It is
easy to distinguish the Vulture from the Dove; the miscarriages of the Clergy
have a deeper stain from the sacredness of their function, as probably he that
invenomed the Eutcharist, has the more to answer for his a riple Crown. It is
manifest that we ^re fallen into the dregs of time; we ^ive in the rust of the
iron age, and must expect to feel, ultima senescentis mundi delivia, the
dotages of a decrepit world. What is become of truth, sincerity, charity,
humility, those antiqui mores? whither are they gone? did they attend Astrea
into heaven, and have left such dangerous successors, as cruelty, pride,
fraud, envy, oppression, etc.

8. To conclude Let us, etc.

I answer to pray to the Lord with lips for any corporal benefit, and yet to
have the heart fixed in confidence of any natural means is a kind of spiritual
adultery.

And I have seen a good beginning often end ill, sin in the bud is fair, sweet,
pleasing: but the fruit is death horror hell, something you must respect in
your way, most in your conclusion in the one to prevent all wilful errors, in
the other, to insure a crown, for as judgment has relation to the manner of
dying, so has death dependence on the course of living, yet the good end has
no bad beginning; it once had a good consequence makes the premises so esteemed
of, and a sweet relish at the leaving off, makes the draught delightful, that
at the first did taste unpleasant; that is well that ends well, and better is a
bad beginning that concludes well, then a prosperous on set that ends in
complaint: what if your beginning has been ill? sorrows overblown, are
pleasant; that which has been hard to suffer is sweet to remember, I care not
much what my youthful beginning has been, my end is drawing on, and age bids
adieu to the follies of youth, so my end will be happy; if my Sun set in the
New Jerusalem, I have lived well, however afflictions have sometimes clouded my
course.

Thus sixteen days has left you furnished (dear Daughter) an answer to the
Advice to a Son, which was printed five times before I saw it; And I hope, I
have answered the expectation of the Reader. Against the second Impression I
will make an Addition, and by that time his old rusty Sword will be new
furbished and ready to give me a breathing; but I am always provided of such
as these. Let him wisely be silent, and sleep securely.

Now you are taught to Live, there is nothing I Esteem worth learning, but the
way to Die.

I answer.

He that knows how to live, say I,
Will easily learn the way to Die.
The End.
AN INDEX, Of the Particulars Contained, IN THE Advice to a Son, Opposed in
this Advice to a Daughter.
1 Studies, etc.
1. FRee-schooles. 2. Universities. 3. Mere scholars. 4. More free education.
5. Collegiat discipline. 6. Physic 7. Probable Learning and Mathematics. 8.
Volumes. 9. Old and Modern Authors. 10. Histories. 11. Choice books,
negotiations, etc. 12. Converse. 13. Pedants. 14. Reading, etc. 15. Strong
lines. 16. Exercise. 17. of Style. 18. Letters. 19. Sordid phrases. 20. Writers
21. Poetry. 22. Music, 23. Clothes. 24. Buying. 25. Horses. 26. Riding. 27.
Wrestling, Vaulting, Fencing 28. Swimming. 29. Hunting, Hawking. 30.
Suretiship. 31. Public faith. 32. Bargaining. 33. Implicit judging. 34. Pride.
35. Superciliousness. 36. To Whisper. 37. Gesture in speaking. 38. Boldness.
39. Covetousness. 40. Servants. 41. Rising out of bed. 42. Eating, etc. 43.
Drunkenness, Constables. 44. Vile Plots. 45. Company. 46. Ieering. 47, 48.
Proverbs, Injuries, fighting Duels. 49. Insultings. 50. Ordinaries. 51. Dogs,
Boys, Whores. 52. Secrecy. 53. Boasting of 54. The favors of women. 55.
Married. 56. Great Ladies at. 57. Maskes played.

II Love and Marriage.
1. THe nature and effects of love. 2. Upon youth tempting it. 3. To Marry. 4.
Unhappily for beauty. 5. Without money and. 6. To swallow the fatal bait. 7. Not
answering expectation. 8. Marry not a famed Beauty. 9. Laws concerning Marriage
somewhat strict. 10. Though perhaps for the public benefit. 11. The result of
Policy. 12. Restraint troublesome. 13. Fruition tedious. 14. Wives, Lust,
Iealousy. 15. Discomforts from Children. 16. And other wedlock Conveniences.
17. Best palliated by an estate. 18. Portion Ioynture. 19, 20. The unhappiness
of poor Marriage. 21. As well as those too high. 22. Travel to avoid danger
from. 23. A handsome woman. 24. Fond love an ill Counselor. 25. Children how
much to be desired.

III Travel.
1. THe consequences Good and bad of Travel: 2. With an Ambassador. -- 3. As a
Merchant. -- 4. In case of War whither. -- 5. Direction about performing Divine
Duties. -- 6. Declining disputes of Religion. -- 7. Regulating zeal. 8.
Vindicating customs. 9. Comparisons. 10. Censuring fashions, Authors English,
11. The inquisition prohibited books. 12. The Eucharist. 13. Crucifixes. 14.
Foreign Churches. 15. Scoffers at their own Religion. 16. English in orders.
17. Or otherwise the worst Companions. 18. Injuries. 19. Gaming. 20. Women's
favors. 21. Impatient desires: charms of wenches in love. 22. Italian lasts.
23. Gifts. 24. Many removes. 25. Inns, new acquaintance servants. 26.
Experience, Languages. 27. Mahumetan in civility. 28. Plantations.

IV Government.
1. CHange, Commotions, tumults. 2. Ambitious Incendiaries. 3. A war for
Religion oppression. 4. Submit to wicked powers. 5. Weariness and fidelity. 6.
Submission to. 7. Recognition of present powers. 8. the Original of Dominion.
etc. 9. Titles of honor. 10. Mean birth. 11. Obligation to Governors what.
12. To a Prince, to a free state siding. 13. Enemies reconciled 'Trust not
ingratitude. 14. Courtesies promises. 15. Counsel, etc. 16. Not to nonplus a
Prince. 17. Secretaries. 18. Intelligences. in formers, Minions. 19. serving
wicked masters. 20. Observance. 21. Friendship. 22. Dependency. 23. Writing
things dangerous. 24. Revealing princes secrets. 25. Foreign Interests. 26.
Not to trouble you. 27. Monarchies and repub. compared for their preferments
and dangers. 28. Oratory 29. One profession as the Law a full employment. 29.
Not to defame in pleading. 31. To speak last, etc. 32. Debates in Counsels.
33. To imitate more then one. 34. Frailties attend the greatest Persons. 35. No
perfection here. 36. Success to be ascribed to providence. 37. Directions to
all Magitrates about preferments. 38. Punishments. 39. The soldiery. 40. The
Clergy.

V Religion.
1. THe Bible, Church expositors etc. 2. Audacious interpreters to be
restrained. 3. universal consent. 4. Profession. 5. Hypocrisy, Scandal. 6.
Criticisms, school divinity. 7. Controversies. 8. Socinians. 9. Popery. 10.
Purgatory, etc. 11. The reformation. 12. Works, profession faith. 13.
Millenaries. 14. Schismatics. 15. Levellers. 16. The present wild Errors. 17.
Tend to Anarchy, Moses, Mahumet. 18. Zeal in excess. 19. Tender consciences.
20. Obstinacy of Heretics. 21. Idolatry, Ceremony, Conformity. 22. Courtiers
and common peoples Religion. 23. Reason, the Scripture, belief, Antiquity,
Revelation, etc. 24. Honesty of Indians. 25. Difference of Religion; good
Conscience. 26. Fortune Tellers Hope and fear. 27. Divine vengeance. 28. Witch
craft. 29. Rash Censures, charity. 30. Impiety, improbity, injustice. 31.
Purchase of Church Lands. 32. Enmity to the Clergy, Religion established, new
lights. 33. Tithes. 34. wisdom of Moses. 35. Cardinal Wolseyes folly.

The Conclusion.
CArriage toward your Mother. 2 Sister. 3. Dr. Culpeper, 4. Your last will. 5.
My burial. 6. Death. 7 Judgment. 8. Close of all.

THE END.

