THE THIRD PART OF THE PRINCIPLES OF THE ART MILITARY. PRACTICED IN THE WARS
OF THE UNITED PROVINCES Under the LORDS the STATES GENERAL And his Highness
the PRINCE OF ORANGE.

Treating OF SEVERAL PIECES OF ORDNANCE, Carriages, Engines, Quadrants,
Morters, Petards, as also instructions for Master-Gunners, and Canoniers, with
diverse Instruments and Materials belonging to a war with their several uses
and practices, most briefly and lively demonstrated by LETTER and FIGURE.

TOGETHER WITH A LIST OF ALL NECESSARY Preparations appertaining to an Army,
With a Quarter for the General of the ORDNANCE, and of all Officers belonging
to his Train.

Written and composed by Captain HENRY HEXHAM, Quartermaster to the truly
honorable, Colonel GORING his REGIMENT, for the lovers of the Noble ART
MILITARY.

The second Edition Corrected and Amended.



ROTTERDAM Printed by JAMES MOXON. 1643.

TO HIS HIGHNESS CHARLES LODOWICK: PRINCE ELECTOVR COUNT PALATINE OF THE RHENE,
AND DVKE OF BAVARIA.
SIR,
AFTER I had traveled through the world in speculation, by translating and
augmenting of ATLAS MAJOUR in English, dedicated to his most excellent Majesty
your Uncle, and my dread Sovereign: I could give no rest unto my thoughts till
I had undertaken some thing of my own profession, which might give light,
understanding, and instruction, unto some young Gentlemen, Soldiers and
others, who desire to follow the wars, and to study this Art Military, for
their princes service, and the good of their Country. And where could I find a
fitter place, and a better subject to work upon, then in these United
Provinces, under the command of the Lords, the STATES GENERAL, and his
Highness the Prince of ORANGE, which now in regard of their long Wars may
truly be called a nurcery, and seeds belli, for the breeding and trayning up of
Soldiers, and verily how could I do better then to begin ad principium, with
the very first principles, and rudiments of the Art Military, Practiced in
these Wars, under the command, first of Prince MAURICE, of blessed Memory,
and now under the able conduct of that great and victorious Captain General of
our age, his Highness the Prince of Orange his Brother. Now besides what
experience my long service has gained under their Command, for the space of
forty years, as an addition thereunto, I have got some translations and
extracts out of the best and choicest Authors of our modern times, who have
writ upon this subject, to give luster unto it, and having before by the
assistance of God, run through the first two parts: I have now also finished my
third part, concerning all preparations and necessaries appertaining to an
Army, and so to put an end unto this laborious work, For in my first part I
promised the right honorable the Earl of Holland, and in my second part my
noble Colonel, that I would go through the three whole parts, for the arming of
a Soldier, de cap en pied, that is at all points, which now thanks be to God I
have done, to the end, that such as may go into, his Majesty's service, your
Highnesses, or any other foreign State or Princes, may gain some experience,
and reap some benefit by my labors, which is, and was the principal thing I
aimed at, For I hope, as old as I am, when these unhappy differences at home
are reconciled, appeased and composed, that God, who leads the hearts of all
Kings in his hand, as the Water of brooks, will so direct his Majesty's heart
for your right, that his Majesty will assist your Highness, and turn his
powerful Arms another way, and make your Highness General of a brave
British Army, for the vindicating of your injuries, and the recovery of your
lawful and ancient rights and inheritances, against the usurpers thereof.

I will not trouble your Highness any longer with a tedious discourse, seeing
my self, and thousands of true hearted Britains besides my self, (whenever
his sacred Majesty and our dread Sovereign shall lay his commands upon us)
shall be all willing to fight in so just a quarrel, for your Highness, and
lay our lives down at your feet, and your Queen mothers, for the regaining of
your Highnesses Rights and Countries.

This third part then of the Principles of the Art Military, comes in all
humility to present it self unto your Highnesses gracious pratronage, that
though it be mean in itself, yet it craves to comeforth to the view of the
world, under your illustrious name, which if it may be acceptable unto your
Highness, then I shall think my weak indevours happily sacrificed, and
acknowledge my self much obliged to your Highness, and shall not only be
bound to pray unto the Lord of Hoasts, to honor and bless your proceedings
here in this world with happy success, but also to crown you, your Royal
Mother the Queen of Virtues, and her princely progeny with eternal felicity
hereafter, beseeching your Highness to believe, that no creature living shall
more heartily fight, nor more willingly die in your service, then

Sir, Your Highnesses ever most humble, Obedient, and devoted Servant, HENRY
HEXHAM.

A BRIEF TREATISE of eight several pieces of Ordnance, as they are founded
under the Command of the Lords the States General of the United Provinces,
with their appurtenances, carriages, Engines, together with Morters and
Petards, quadrants, and Instruction for Master Gunners, and Canoniers with
diverse other Instruments and materials, belonging to the wars, with their
several uses, and practizes demonstrated.
THE FIRST CHAPTER.
Treating of the Leagues, Alligations, and Commixture of metals, wherewith
Ordnance are Cast, and made inthese Countries, and else where.

THe Alloye wherewith our Ordnance is made here in these Countries, is commonly
old cast brass pieces, ill proportioned, burst, or made unserviceable with too
much Shooting, and therefore, must be refounded into some better, and more
serviceable forms, or are such perhaps, as are too great for ordinary
Carriages and bullets. If these old brass pieces be of too fine a metal
(which yet is seldom found) the Mr. Founder may mingle some slighter copper
amongst it; yea so much as he in his judgment shall think sitting: so that the
Ordnance, which he makes be answerable to their proof.

Our new Ordnance then being founded with these new alligations, and alloyes
are commixted with three fourth parts of red Copper, made up in Sowes one
fourth part of Bell metal cast also in Sowes, and one ninth part of the finest
Cornish tin you can get.

These bricks are pieces of red copper weighing, about 50 lb. weight, cast
after the fashion of a square footed pauement, and your great Sowes, are pieces
of other Copper, melted one timelesse, then your brick Copper, where of some of
them weighes 200, 300. yea the greatest 600 lb. a piece, The is tin mix ed
amongst the Copper, and Bell-mettal, that they may run ne the better in
melting, which makes your piece more solid and firm.

But in Italy S. nor. Alexander Bianco (as master Norton oneof his matias,
master Gunoners, And Enginier cites in his practice of Artilerie) says, That
the best Alligations of these metals for Ordnance is for every 200. lb. of
Copper 20 lb. of tin, and 5 lb. of brass, or Latton is to be mixted
therewith. And Digeo Vffano a Spainyard, Captain of the Ordnance in the Castle
of Antwerpe, in his instruction of Artilerie affirms, that the best ligature
for Ordnance is 100 lb. of Copper, 8 lb. of tin and 5 lb. of Latton, and 10
lb. of Sow-lead, affirming that lead being tough and cold, makes the
peece-become hard. But le Sieur de Brissac, a french man in his militatie
discourses says, that the french, Founders unto every 100 lb. of Copper do
either ad 20 lb. of Bell-mettal, which is 25 pound of Tin and Lead for 100
lb. of Copper, orbrasse, or else 10 lb. of soft tin to every 100 lb. of
Copper.

The Lords the States have in the Hagh avery brave founderie, and a workhouse
joining to it, in which they do all their massive works, and behind that
aspacious room, where they Settand place all their carriages, which is kept
fair and dry, and besides the Master Founder has a house to dwell in, all
which belongs to the Land.

The Master Founder must be very careful in making choice of his powders, and
Earths wherewith he is to make his Mouldes for the Casting of brass Ordnance
in, that they be able to resist the fire, and receive the melted metals: So
that they may render them to be east, and founded neately, without being
Subject, either to be diminished, cracked, or peeld, when they shall be nealed,
which is such a matter, as without experience cannot be done well. Wherefore, I
will conclude with master Norton in his practice of Artillery, that good Earths
are neither fatt, nor lean, but between both, and of a fine and subtle
grain or mould, which soon dries, and remains firm, without breaking,
being able to resist the vehemency of the fire, and such Earths are most
commonly of a yellow, or a red color.

Now to find such Earths, as are fit for your work, it behooves you to sink
diversse pits, or Caves under ground, which have not bin much stirred. And
after you have begun your work, and Compounded your Earths in a bouke, or
heap, and wett, and moistened them like paste, beginn then to heat them with a
rod of iron, as the Potters use to do their Claye. Then take two third parts
of the whole lump, and mix it with lint of linen cloth, and then beat the
same together, until they be well incorporated, that they may appear all one
substance, and if any small stones should chance to fall amongst it, then pick
thene out, or bruise them, as small as may be, that the powders being well
tempred, may serve for your moulds and forms.

Of making of moulds for the founding of Ordnance.
THe Master Founder having prepared, and resolved of what kind, and what sort
of that kind the Ordnance is, which he intends to cast, he is then first to
make a perfect Model there of, either of timber, or of Earth, orboth, with all
the Mouldures, Ornaments, and compartiments, even as you would have the piece
to be, which you must thinnely anoint with soft hogt-grease, and then cover it
over uith a Colume of the before said tempered Earthp, made and dried by little
and little, augmenting it, until it be of a Competent strength, and thickness.
This Colume must be made so, as it may be taken into two or more parts, to the
end, to take the said model, or pattern out of yt, and it is to befortifyed
on the outside, with plates of iron, at long as the Chase of the piece is, and
with iron Wyres an inch each from an other, and lastly with y-ron Hoopes a
foot, or two assunder, to knock off, and on, as occasion shall require. Their
must elso be a smooth, and equal Cillender, whose Dyamitre must be just the
beigth of the Bore, and made of the same Earth, molded upon a strong Iron
square Bar, and upon a Cord woulded about the same, to make therewith the
soul, Concaue or hollow Cillinder of the piece, by placing yt (by help of the
Base, and Muzzle ring) exactly in the midst of the Vacuity of the outermost
Colume, which whenthe Pattern, or Model Shall Be taken out, will remain
hollow, to receive the metrall, that must make the body of the piece. All
these must be well ioynted together, polished smooth, dried Nealed, that the
metal may run fine, and come off smooth and neat.

Lastly, the pattern of the breech, with all the Mouldures, and Cascabell, is
in like manner to be Couvered over, by little and little with the same tempered
Earth, which must afterward be Luted neatly, and strongly to the breech end of
the outter Colume: all which Mouldures, Rings, Arms, Devises, Flowers,
Trunions, Dolphins, and Circles, may be at pleasure added there unto, upon the
pattern, either with wax, earth, or plaster, and so the perfect Impression
thereof will be received by the Concavity of the outward Colume, keeping still
the due prescribed proportion of the pieces (you intend to cast) accordingto
the kind and sort thereof, for the rest se master Norton in his 21, and 22
Chapters of the practice of Artillery.

Having thus digressed, I will return again to my former matter, and give the
gentle Reader to under stand, shat the States have Conditioned with their
Master Founder, that he shall be at the charge of making all Mouldures, Forms,
castings, borings, and finding of firing, for which he has from the States six
gildens, or 12 hillings starling, for the founding, of 100 lb. weight; so that
for a whole Canon, which weighs 7000 lb. weight, he has 840 gilders for him
and his men, the rest proportionally. Now when any old brass pieces are to be
cast, they are delivered to him by weight, and he is allowed him ten pounds in
every 100 lb. weight for dross and wast: for you must understand, that Copper
and brass have much more dross in them, then gould or silver, because the
finer the Alloye is, the lesser it will consume by fire.

The greatest number of new pieces cast in the States Founderie at the Hagh,
every year by the help of some, 20 men are six whole Canons, twelve half
Canons, and six long Field pieces, or demi Culvering, making in all the
number of 24 pieces of Ordnance. But of late years they cast diverse sorts of
french short Demi Canon, and smaller Drakes, as now the occasion of fervice
requires.

These Ordnance being founded and made, the Master Feunder is to deliver them
to the States upon Proof in the presence of some Commissioners, and the
Controuleur of the Ordnance, who are to ouersee them, and to take care, that
the piece, which is to be tried, be well loaded with her due weight of powder,
and bullet, and rammed well home.

The proof of a whole Canon which weights 7000 lb. weight, and carries an iron
bullet of 48 lb. weight must be charged with 32 lb. of fine powder, and with
the bullet above said well rammed home; but the ordinary charge then of it
will be noe more then 20, 19, or 18 lb. of sine powder at the least: A half
Canon which weighs 4500 lb. weight and shootes a bullet of 24 lb. weight, the
proof Shot must be 16 pounds of fine powder and the ordinary charge 12 lb.

A Field piece, which weighs 3200 pound weight, carrying a bullet, of 12 lb.
must be loaded with nine pounds of fine powder, but the ordinary charge is noe
more but six pounds.

The Faulconet, that weighs 2100 lb. which carries a bullet of six pound
weight, must be loaded with 4 and a half lb. of fine powder for it proofs
shotr, and with 3 lb. for its ordinary charge.

Note also, that a Canon, which shoots a bullet of 48 lb. must be bored for a
bullet of 52 lb.

Weight, A Demi Canon, which carries a bullet of 24 lb. must be bored for a
bullet of 28 pound.

Weight, A quarter Canon, which carries a bullet of 12 lb. must le bored for a
bullet of 16 lib.

A Faulconet which carries a bullet of 6 lb. weight, must be bored for a bullet
of 8 lb.

Your whole Canon, and Demi Canon, are commonly pieces for Battery, used at
seiges for to make a breach, but your Field pieces, and Drakes are to be drawn
to some sudden piece of service, as in the day of Battle, upon a Passage, or
upon Plate Forms, and Batteries made upon the line of Circumvalatione, or for
the defense of a Camp, when an ennemy is at hand, and the rest of the short
chambred Drakes likewise.

A Canon or a smaller piece of Ordnance, may shoot in 12 hours some 80
shoot, yea 100, if it be not Over Heated, but after you have made with it some
10 or 12 shot at the most, it must have a Cooling time, by casting over the
breech of it a Danck hair cloth a pretty while, and that will cool it enough.

For a whole Canon mounted upon a block wagon, or upon its own Catriage, it
is commonly drawn in these hollow, and marshie Countries, with a teeme of 15
couple of Bustie horses, besides the Thiller horse, making account, that every
couple of horses, must draw for their shares 600, yea 650 pound weight if they
be well putt to it. A Demi Canon with eleven couple and a Thiller horse, a
quarter Canon with eight coupple and a Thiller horse, and a Faulconet with
four couple and a Thiller horse, and your smaller Drakes with a number
proportionable to the weight abouesaid, yea even to a small Drake carrying a
bullet but of one pound weight, is drawn but with a Thiller horse. The length
of the chase of every piece both Reinforced and Chambred is noted above its
figure.

The Demonstration of the eight pieces of Ordnance, which are in most use,
under the Lords the States service.
And first of four pieces of Ordnance reinforced Plate A.
NVm. 1. is a Faulconet weighing in metal 2100 lb. weight, being 10 and three
quart of a foot long' which shootes an iron bullet of 6 lb. weight, which being
laid level by the metal, otherwise called the Horiozontall level 800, by
the Levelaxis, or dispart, commonly called point blanck 400, and at the bighest
range 4090 paces at 2 and a half foot to the pace.

Number 2 is a Field piece, or a quarter Canon, weighing 3200 lb. being 8 foot
and three quart of a foot long, which shootes an iron bullet of 12 lb. weight,
and carries by the metal 600, by the Axis or point blanck 300, and at the
highest range 3800 paces.

Number 3, is a Demi Canon, weighing 4500 pound weight being 10 and a half
foot long, carrying an iron bullet of 24 lb. weight, which will shoot level
by the metal, or Horiozontall level 800, by the Axis or point blanck 400, and
at the highest range 6000 paces.

Number 4, is a whole Canon, weighing in metal 7000 lb. weight, carrying a
bullet of 48 lb. weight, which shoots by the metal, or Horiozontall level
1000, by the Axis, or point blanck 500, and at the highest range 7000 paces at
two foot and a half to the pace.

I refer the Reader to the other ranges specifyed in the Quadrant and table
fallowing.

Of the other four pieces of Ordnance, called Drakes chambred Plate B.
NVmber 5. is a small Drake, weighing 280 lb. weight in metal, and is 4 foot
long, carrying a bullet of 3 lb. weight, charged with one lb. of powder, which
will shoot level by the metal 176, by the Axis, or point blanck 40 and at
the highest range 800 pace.

Number 6. is a Drake weighing 580 pounds, is 5 foot long corring a bullett of
6 lb. weight loaded with 2 lb. of powder, which will shoot level by the
metal 196, by the Axis or point blanck, 100, and at the highest range 2500
paces.

Number 7. is a quarter Canon Drake weighing 1130 lb. weight in metal, is 6
foot long carrying a bullet of 12 lb. weight, charged with 4 lb. of powder,
which will shoot level by the metal 264, by the Axis, or point blanck 140
and at the highest range 2500 paces.

Number 8. is a short Demi Canon Drake, weighing 2250 lb. weight in metal, is
7 foot long, carrying a bullet of 24 lb. weight, with 6 lb. of powder which,
will shoot by the metal, or Horiozontall level 340, by the Axis, despart,
or point blanck 180 and at the best, or highest elevation 2770 paces. Note by
the way, that the longer the chase of a piece is, being reinforced and well
charged, the further it will carry its bullet, and the stroke the more
violent, as you may see by long Culverings, and slinghs of some 24 or 25 foot
long in chase, whereof the experience has bin tried at Arnham in Gelderland,
where a long Sling lay upon a Bulwark, which shot from Arnham to Nemegen
being 6 English miles distant one from an other. Again, the Shorter the chase
of a pieces is, as in these Drakes, the shorter it carries the bullet, as you
may see by their several ranges.

Yet this does not always hold true for Count Maurice Prince of Orange of
blessed memory, tried ance a half Canon upon the Strand at Scheveling, giving
it the due charge of powder, and caused the Canonier to level in upon its
highest range, at 6000 paces, to try this conclusion, to see how far it
would carry, when it was shorter, caussed some two foot and a half of yt to
besawne off, made it be loaded again, shoot it off, and found that it carried
it bullet as far as it had done before.

To conclude, with Touch-holes, I have seen in Ostend upon the West Bulwark,
that some touch holes of Canon, were blown so great with often and continual
shooting, that I have putt my fist into them. Now such a touch hole being
blown some three or four incles, may easily be remedied. For if you bore the
hole round, and drive in a screw of iron into it, as thick as your finger, and
in the midst of the screw above said, bore a small Touch hole in yt, you shall
find this to last longer vnblowne, then any other way, which has bin
invented, for now when ordnance are cast a new at this day, for the preventing
of this two much blowing, they yse now to make such a touch hole with a screw,
as is here mentioned which will not so soon be blown great, and as your
brass or Copper Touch holes will.

THE SECOND CHAPTER.
Treating of a ladle, a Rammer, of a Sponge, and a Field Carriage for a piece
of Ordnance as shall be demonstrated under the Carriage.

THe figures of a ladle, a Rammer, and a Sponge is represented unto you under
the Faulconet, and field piece, with their just lenght, and thickness, after
which form you may make all others for what sorts of pieces you please, and
with all observe, that the bigness of them must be according to the Dyamitre
of the bullet which your piece carries. The lengh of the ladle under the field
piece with the staff and Rammer is 11 foot, and 9 inches and a half long. The
opening of the ladle is a foot and a fourth part of an inch. The brass plate
rounded to the staff, and to the height of the shoot, and due vent allowed is
five inches. The staff of the ladle 3 inches thick made of soft fast wood as
Aspe Beech or willow. The Rammer B is 4 inches, turned with hard wood, and the
length of the copper ladle a foot and ten inches, the staff to the neck on
both sides is 3 inches thick. The Dyamiter of the bullet is traced out with
bricks coming down from the ladle marked 1, 2, and 3.

The Sponge C. is couvered with rough sheeps skinns wool, and nailed to the
staff with Copper nailles so that it may fill up the Soul or Concavity of the
piece when it is to be scowred and cleared. Note also that the Copper ladle for
a piece of ordnance must be threetimes the length of the Dyamitre of the
bullet. Such a ladle costs the States 6 gl. 10 stivers, vidz. The staff 2 gl.
and 14 stivers for a whole Canon, for a half Canon 5 gilders, for a field
piece four gilders 10 stivers. And the Rammer, the staff, and the Sponge or
sheeps skin will cost two gilders 14 stivers.

You have also in the plate B figure, 9 represented unto you the figure of a
Carriage for a field piece with all the Dimensions, joints, and parts belonging
to yt.

The Naues, The cheek, called limbres, and the wheels are made of Elm, but
the Transoms, The Axeltrees, the spoakes of Oaken timber, and the fore carriage
of the wheels are made of the same wood, as the former are, but the Transoms
are elm and the cross beams of Oak as the ichnographie of the Carriage
Figure 9 shows.

The Lords the States have agreed with their Master Carpentes, to make them a
Carriage for a whole Canon for 134 gilders 10 stivers, namely the two side
pieces 15, or 16 foot long, 17 inches broad, and six and a half inches thick,
for 59 gilders, and to every carriage four transoms for 6 gilders. An Axeltree
for 4. gilders 10 stivers, The two wheels 37 gilders 16 stivers, for the
framing and making of the carriage for a whole Canon 27 gilders 10 stivers,
for an Axekree 1 gl. 10 stivers. for the making, of the wheels 10 gl. which
comes to in all, as above said to 134 gilders 10 stivers, and so the rest of
all Carriages proportionally.

The Demonstration, or Terciating of the whole Canon,
Number. 4. and also of the Demy-Canon Drake chambred, Number. 8. with their several
names and parts discribed.
NOte first that a piece of Ordnance is divided into three parts. 1. The
Breech, or chamber 2, the trunions, and 3 the Muzzle, or neck, and the length
of the whole piece is called the Chase, or Colume.

A. is the Cornish, brow, or base ring of the piece.

B. is thee pieces neck. C. the pieces Boutill, or Astragall called the mussel
Ringe.

D. The Reinforced ring, E The tronion-ring, and these a tronions are two
spyndles, upon which the piece lies in its carriage. E H. is that part of the
piece, between the Breech, the tronions, and the ears.

F I. is the Calibre, Mould, or the bore of the piece. G. is the touchhole,
and all the metal behind the touh-hole, is called the Breech. F H. is the
Coile of the piece. H. The Casacabel, or the out most pommel or button of the
piece. F L, is the mettaline Substance, and thickness of the Coile, about the
breech of the piece about the concave Cillender, otherwise, called the Soul of
the piece.

M. is the mettaline Substance at her ears, and Stays of Gravitie, by which
she is hoised up into her Carriage. So much of her bore, as contains the
powder, and shoot, is called the chamber, or charge cillender; the rest the
vacant cillender, and all the rings circles, andeminences at her mouth and
breech are called the Friezes. To conclude, the ordinary Canons of Battery is
seven eights of substance in their chambers five eights at their. Trunions, and
three eights at the muzzle, or necks of the Dyamitre of their Calibres, or
boores in thickness of metal. And thus much briefly for the demonstrating of
anyother piece of ordnance whatfoeuer.







THE DEMOMSTRATION OF THE NEXT Figures following, and first of a Block, or a
long Wagon: THE THIRD CHAPTER
THe first figure underneath number 10. shows you of what singular use and
accommodation your Block, or Lisng wagon o for the carriage, and drawing of a
piece of Ordnance, or for the carrying of small Punts, or Boats to clapp on a
sunden over a River, or a brook, when occasion may serve: therefore there is
no one Instrument more useful for the train of Ordnance then this is, and are
excellent good also to stopan Avenue or a passage croswise, where an Enemies
horse may break in upon an Army unawares, especially, when one has no time
to cast up a trench, or a traverse upon it. Besides, a piece of Canon will be
easilyer drawn, through moorish, foul, and sandy ways upon this, because
the piece lies more steddie, and is not subject to so much wrenching afide in
durtie and Ruttie ways, then upon its proper Carriage. Now whenever an
Enemy should draw near unto an Army by the help of the Fearne, you may
quickly hoize it up, and lay it upon its own carriage. The form and moddle
whereof is represented unto you in the figure following, noted number 10.

The second figure number 11. demonstrates to your eye a half Canon mounted
upon its carriage, drawn with seven couple of horse, and a Thiller horse, and
this to be understood in a good way: but if the way be foul, morish, and
durty, then for a whole Canon, weighing 7000. li. weight, you must spanne in
15. couple of horse and a Thiller; for a half cannon eleven couple and a
thiller; for a field piece or a quarter Canon six couple and a Thiller; for a
Falconet two couple and a thiller; and for a small Drake weighing 250. pound
weight. one horse. You must observe also that the mettle of one of the States
half canons weighs (as is said before) 4500 pound weight, the carriage and
iron work thereunto belonging about 900. pound, so that these horses are to
draw in all the weight of 5400. pound, and the other pieces proportionably.

The third figure, number 12. represents unto you this, that when you want or
cannot use Canon horses and Athrals, how you may then by the help and strength
of men, draw a piece of Ordnance to the topp of a hill, and there to make a
Platform for the battering of a Castle: Now presuppose you are to batter it
with 16. Pieces of Ordnance; to wit, eight Demi canon, and 8 Quarter canon, the
first carrying a bullet of 24. li. and the second of 12. li. and are to carry
along with you all necessaries, as Powder, Bullets, Match, bedding, traces and
diverse other materials. The question is how many Soldiers, Pyonniers, and
workmen are able to do this? which Diego Vffano in his 22. Dialogue resolves
in this manner following.

Of a Block wagon, and drawing of Ordnance.
First for 600. half Canon Bullets, each bullet weighing 24. pound, the whole
weight of them will come to 144000. pound. Now if you lay three of these
bullets, in a wheelebarrow, they will make 72. pound for every Soldier to
wheel, and will require 200. men to do it.

And for 600. quarter canon bullets, weighing 12. pound a piece, the weight of
the whole will be 7200. li: now putting 7. of these into a wheele-barrow, for
every man's share to drive, you must have 86. men in all, and every man as
before 72. pound weight.

Item for 168. weight of powder, for to charge these 16. pieces of Ordnance
withal, each half canon requiring 12 pound of good powder for its charge, and
for your quarter canon, or field piece 7. pound; you must have 240. small
firkins, or so many leather powder baggs to carry it in, and giving to every
Soldier 70. pound weight of powder, it will require the like number of 240.
men to carry it, as is represented unto you in the fourth plate and 12. figure
following.

Now for the Attelage or drawing ropes for these 16 pieces of ordnance,
represented unto you also in this fourth plate and 13. figure, is shown you the
manner of it, by dividing your men into three drawing files or teames,
according to the greatness of the piece which your men are to draw up, for a
Demy-canon, carriage, attelage, and all will weigh a matter of 6000. pound
weight, now giving to every man 60. pound weight to draw such a half Canon
will require a 100. men to draw it, and proportionably the 8. half canons 800.
men.

For a quarter Canon, carriage, attelage and all, will weigh 3000. pound
weight, now allowing to every 60. pound weight to draw, every of these 8.
pieces will require 43. men, so that for these 8. quarter Canons you must have
in all 344. men, which being (as is said) divided into three equal files and
distances, each drawing rope must have 14. men and one odd man over to go by.

And because it may sometimes happen, that by reason of the steepinesse,
badnesse, and unevenness of the way, you may be driven to dismount and remount
your piece ere you get up to the top of the hill, you must carry along with you
a Fearne, a winch, or a Scalet, with all appurtenances thereunto belonging, as
winding roaps, an iron goats foot, with a crow, pinns, truckles, pullies to
help you withal at a dead lift. All these Engines and Materials may
conveniently be carried on the shoulders of 30. men, insomuch that if you make
your calculation you shall find that you must have for the drawing of these 16.
pieces of Ordnance, and for all things above specified, the number of a 1703.
men without any difficulty will do the deed and draw these Ordnance
whithersoever you please. The Fearn the figure and its necessaries shall be
described unto you in the next chapter following.

Now for your attirals or drawing harness, to the end that every man may draw
alike share you must fasten a crossebeame or bar to the end of the fore
wagon marked as you see with A. B. through which you put your drawing roaps
into an equal distance, that your men may not hinder one another drawing,
having behind it three men to steer the piece aright, when you come to any
winding or turning in the way.

Again, if it be a whole canon or a piece of Ordnance, which you are to draw
through a trench to a battery, or some other place, where you would plant it,
and find these drawing ropes to short for the men that are to draw it, then you
must lengthen the ropes and fasten an other cross bar just in the very
midst, and this will guide your piece from wrenching aside for certain, the
shorter your drawing ropes be, the more steddier and easier your piece will be
drawn, to every drawing rope also you must have as many necklines to cast about
your men's shoulders as you have men, to the end they may draw with more ease,
strength, and take firmer footing. Nevertheless if you draw your piece after
this manner up to some steepy hill least the piece should fall downward and
overturn them, for the avoiding of this danger, they must in an instant whip
these lines over their heads to loosen themselves from them, or else cut them
on a sudden, but then it is safer to draw with their hands.

This manner of drawing of Ordnance is no new thing, but has been practiced by
the first conquerours of the West Indies, as Pizarre, Ferdinand Cortes, and
diverse others, who with the strength of men drew their Ordnance over hills and
mountains to the City of Mexico. Likewise Henry 4. King of France, of immortal
memory, used this manner of drawing of his Ordnance over the Alphes in his last
wars of Burgundy, and instead of pyoniers used lusty Swissers to do it

The 5. rings called in dutch, Mailles, number 14. is to try whether the
bullets which you are to choose in the Arsenall will fall through them, which
if they do, then they will fit your piece to a hair, the several bores and
calibres of your 8. piece of Ordnance described before.



THE RVLE CALIBRE, TEACHING ACANONIER How by the help of these five mailes or
iron ringed hanels, numbered A. B. C. D. E. he may fit the Calibres, or Boores
of these 8. several pieces of Ordnance, figured out above, as also by the
middle figure of a Canon bullet marked H. and decifered also by letter.


THE DECYFERING OF A CANNON Bullet, or any other piece by letters, as follows.
BEsides this manner abouesaid, by fitting your bullets out of the Magazin, for
the Calibres and bores of any piece of ordnance, by the help of the mailes,
the Caeron bullet marked H. shows you also another way to fit the Calibre of
a piece of ordnance, with a right bullet, by giving it the requisite vent. As
for example, take the just Diamiter of the mouth of your piece with a pair of
straight Compasses, and then devide the ouertur thereof into two equal parts,
and draw from the Center the circle marked B. A. and E. whose Center also is
noted to be D. which is the form and Circumference of your pieces mouth
orbore, Then set the two points of your compass upon the points A. and B. in
drawing one after another, the crossoe- lines under C. from whence you shall
draw a line parpendicular to D. down to the bottom of the circle marked E.
and from thence another line to the point A. Then set one of the points of your
compass upon the point E. and the other upon the line which you have drawn
from thence toward A. and mark well the point which the circle makes thereof
from F. where letting rest the point of your Compass, you shall raise the
other which was in the point E. upon the first line perpendicular, which you
have made from the crosse-line at C. by the Center to D. where the point C.
will show you how much less the bullet must be. Then the Dyamiter or Calibre
of the mouth of your piece, for giving it the necessary vent, so that putting
the one point of your compass upon the center D. and draw in the other which
is set upon the edge of the circumference and Largeness of the pieces mouth
O. to the point G. and so in making an other circle the Dyamiter thereof will
be the just and requisite calibre and Circumference of your bullet, and which
will fit thebore of a whole Canon, or any other piece which you shall desire.

There is a third way found out byskillfull Canoniers, by abating the twentieth
part of the Calibre of your piece in the circumference thereof, to the bullet
which with a sufficient abatement and vent for your piece, which rule is easily
found out by taking the just Dyamiter of the mouth of your piece.

OF A FEARNE, A SCALET, AND A WINCH.
The description of a Fearne, called in French a Guindall, in Netherdutch a
Bock, from a Goat, with a Scallet and a Winch, being of excellent use about
the train of Ordnance, Represented unto you in the fifth plate, and 14. 15. and
16. figures following.
THE Carriage being placed in a readiness, you are then to hoise up your piece
into it, which in regard of the weight of it, be it a Canon or any other great
piece of Ordnance, cannot be well done without the ingenious help of the Fearne
or Ghynne, ropes, a Goats foot or an iron crow, leavers to wind up the Rouler,
etc. especially when a wheel is graveled, and sticks fast in some deep rutt,
or rotten ground, then you must use the help of the Scallet or Winch,
demonstrated unto you in the figures following.

First then you must make and frame your Fearn, according to this model used in
the States service, which is accounted the best, number 14. and for the
goodness of it ought to be preferred before all others, and for the lightness
of it may upon a march be laid upon a wagon to be carried along in the train
of the Ordnance with the Scallet, Winch, and all appurtenances thereunto
belonging. It is made upon three feet, beams or supporters, triangular-wise,
upon which it stands. The demonstration is this a. a. a. are the three feet,
which at the top or head of it are industriously joined together, from b. to c.
is the length of it some 13. or 14. foot long: it is framed a foot broad, and
half a foot thick, d. and e. shows a great iron bolt with a round head, and at
the other end a cross wedge to clench and join it close together, f. g. is
the copper hook and ring, upon which the uppermost pullie or Truckle hangs,
h. the uppermost truckle itself, through which the ropes are let down and
woundup, i. i. the cable or winding roap, k. the lower truckle above the
Rouler, l. l. the plate-work within which the rowler turns in its bed and
sockets, m. is the rowler it self, n. n are the ends of the two roaps well
pleated and bound about, which are to be put through the ears of your piece
which is to be hoised up, o. o. the two oblique iron plated feet, upon which it
stands and rests upon the ground, and by reason they are so made, cannot so
easily slip away, or sinck into the Earth, but makes the Fearn to stand
steadfast and firm, p. p. are the holes into which the two wooden leavers are
put into the Rowler and wound up by two men, the one taking out his leaver to
put it into an other hole, while the other with all his strength holds the
rouler fast, q. are the two winding leavers, r. the Goats foot or iron crow,
necessary both for the Fearne, Scallet, and Winch. One of the winding roaps
must be at least 25. foot long, and in circumference a Geometrical inch, and
one fifth part, the ends whereof must be so wreathed and bound fast together,
that they must not loosen.

The main roap must be 73. foot long, and 1. and three four parts of a foot
about, the slip must be well wrought and bound about with packthred, which is
put through the two holes of the Rowler.

OF A SCALLET.
The other Engine is called in French a Scalet or a Ladderet, in Netherdutch a
Knape, which must have likewise a strong iron crow belonging to it, a thick
oaken board upon which the pillars or supporters of the weight stands, which
are well nigh two foot long and a foot broad and about half a foot in
thickness.

The two pillars of the Scalet must be enchased a quarter of a foot in the
thick board, to give it the more firmness whereupon they stand, and must be a
matter of 2. Geometrical foot high about the said board, and and part of a
foot thick each pillar as you see having 8. holes boored through them at an
equal distance one from another, through which you are to put your great iron
bolt, which with the iron crow must sustain and bear up the ponderosity: unto
this bolt there is an iron chain fastened to it, and nailed to the right hand
pillar as you may mark: the bolt it self ought to be one and one fifth part of
a Geometrical inch round, and one an a half of a foot long, each pillar must
stand at least half a foot one from an other. Upon this iron bolt, which may be
put into any of the holes as you raise up the piece, and as occasion serves,
rests your iron crow and leavers, and receives strength from it to lift up
your wheel piece, and all at a dead lift out of any rutt, moorish ground, or
place when it sticks fast in it, and as you raise it, by this engine, you may
clap thick fagots, or boards under the wheel, till you advance it higher to an
other hole.

The Winch or Windlace represented here unto you in the 14. figure, is called
in Netherdutch a Windaes, or a Dumcracht; and is a differing Engine from the
former, but of singular use also for the heaving up of a piece of Ordnance,
carriage, and all, let it be never so great, or any ponderous weight, as blocks
loggs etc. yea it is of such great strength and force that it is able to
overturne a house, and has no need but of one man to put it a work. Now to
make it strong and sufficient, it must be two foot long at the least, 1 foot
and a half broad, and half a foot thick, with avice, and a teethed scrue
coming out of the midst of the woodworke of it, and winding up its teeth by
the force of two secret wheels turning within the midst of the woodworke. This
Engine may also be used (as the former) for the lifting up of a piece of
ordnance out of adeep rutt, morish ground, or any dirt or mire into which it is
sunck; by laying of thick boards, and faggots under the wheel, as is said; and
this will be done quickly, so that you need not loose much time upon a march:
and thus much in brief for the making and use of these three Instruments. The
figures whereof follow in the next page.



HOW ONE IS TO MOUNT A PIECE UPON ITS carriage, by the help of a Fearne, or a
Ghynne. THE FIFTH CHAPTER.
BEfore you are to mount your piece, above all things you must have a singular
care that the Fearn be so firmly set, that it does not recoil or slip away in
any manner, and so that the rope, and pullie, or truckle, coming down from
the head fall just upon the ears of the piece: whereof to be assured, you may
let fall downward from the pullie above, a whipcoard with a plummet, or some
small stone hanging down: and turning the said Fearn, till the Plummet falls
just in the very midst, as is said.

If it be in a plain, even, and fast ground, you may have the less care in
setting firm and steadfast the feet of your Fearn upon it, but if it be a
Sandy and a soft Earth into which the feet may sink, or give back, according
to the greatness of the weight, then you must put plancks, blocks, or some
solid thing under the feet, setting tent pinnes about it, according as
necessity shall require, and as opportunity will permit you.

Your Fearn then being thus firmly placed and settled, the Gunner shall get up
by a ladder, or some stepps to the head or top of it, having the rope in his
hand, shall put it through the uppermost truckle of the head, and let it fall
down to the other, that he which catches it may put it through the left side
of the piece in his hand, to fasten it, (as we shall show hereafter) into the
ears of the piece, and so having put it through them, he draws it up till he
can give it to him that is above him, and then he puts it again through the
hole of the right hand truckle, and gives it down to him that is under him,
who reaches it again to him that is above: and so he fastens it to the head of
the Fearn, giving it some turns, till it comes under the uppermost truckle, as
you see.

This done, he must fasten it (with great discretion) to the lower truckle, by
putting the rope through the ears of the piece, putting the end of it through
three times, as well through the ears, as through the ring which is under the
said truckle: after this, you shall begin to hoise your piece, putting a great,
and a long piece of timber into the mouth of the piece to guide it aright, that
it does not swagg from one side to an other; a dangerous thing, which stricking
against one of the feet of the Fearn or against the Rouler, may break it, and
so hinder the whole work. Those which mounts it, must have a care to keep the
piece steddie and right, until the weight of the piece is well settled. The
General or his Lieutenant General, in the mean while having a watchful eye,
as well upon the ropes, as upon the feet of the Fearne; that the feet do not
slip away, or the rope be cadgeld one among an other, or drawing not alike, may
break. Therefore, when they begin to hoise the piece up, they must give a blow
or two with a staff upon the ropes, to part them a sunder, one from an other,
that each may bear an equal weight.

If you perceive that your Fearne begins to give back, then you must
presently let your piece sink, and underlaye, and settle well the feet of it,
and that as gently as may be, to the end the Cross beam, or Rouler may not be
disjoynted, or broken.

Finally, giving two or three turns to the Maine rope, upon the rouler or
winder of the Fearn, you must wind it up carefully, and very gently with the
help of two men only: in such sort, that when one of the levers or handles has
gone about, the other must be held fast till that the other man has put this
in its place to make likewise its turn about: or else the other man shall stay
his hand, till that his fellow drawing out his, has put it also in its hole;
which must be done so often till the piece be hoised so high, that you may put
your Carriage under it.

Also you must take heed that your piece knocks not against any part of your
Fearne, which might cause any disaster, or that the Fearne might break, and
letting the piece fall, a mischief may happen, and put all into disorder:
wherefore you must put the carriage under it very gently, that the Tronions may
fall just into the holes or clasping sockets of the carriage and so guide your
piece by the beam which it has in its mouth, that it falls softly to rest
upon its carriage, and then locking it well in, and fastening it with the
wedges, you may then loosen your ropes, and taking away the Fearne, your piece
being thus mounted you may draw it whithersoever you please.

HOW A CANONIER OUGHT TO CHARGE A PIECE. CHAPTER VI.
A Piece being brought to a Battery, and planted upon a Platform, having
powder, bullets, his linstock, scowrers, Rammers, and all things else in a
readiness, after he has stuck down his linstockin some place under the wind,
and first carefully cleared his piece with his scowrer and sheepe-skin within,
and sees that the touchhole be not stopped, or any dust or filth cleaving to
it, then one of his Companions, which is to assist him, (for commonly there
must be two Canoniers to every Canon, or great piece of Ordnance) brings him
the pouch barrel, with powder just before the mouth of the peeee, and putting
his Ladle or charger into it, fills it, and least it might be overfull, gives it
a little iogg, that the Surplus may fall down again into the barrel, after
this he puts it gently into the mouth of his piece, even till the end of his
Ladle comes up to the very brich and touchhole of his piece, and then turns
his Ladle softly, and lets it lie within the chamber of the piece, and drawing
out his Ladle almost to the mouth of his piece, puts it back again to take up
the loose corns which were spilt by the way, and to bring them up to the
charge of powder: this done he draws out his Ladle, and takes out of the
pouch-barrell a second Ladle full (for by trial before, he knows the weight
and charge of powder, which his Ladle will hold, and which his piece well
require) and so putting in his second Ladle full up to the former, draws it
out, and does as he did before, that no loose corns may lie in the bottom of
the mould of his piece, and in drawing out of his Ladle, he must have a care,
that he let fall any powder upon the ground, for it is a thing unseemely for a
Cannonier, to trample it under his feet. Then he takes a wispe of straw, hay,
or any other thing: and puts it so hard into the mouth of the piece (turning
his ladle to come to the end of his Rammer) he drives up the wispe and carries
up with it the loose corns, which happily may be by the way in the mould of
the piece, even up to the charge of powder, and then giving the stopper and
powder, two or three shoues, to make it lie close together in the chamber of
his piece, he draws out his Rammer, puts in his bullet, which roules gently
into his piece up to the wispe or stopper which keeps up the powder (all this
while his Companion stopping the touchhole with his finger, that no powder
flies out of it, but that it be also well filled and stopped with powder which he
may do out of his touch-horne afterward) and then puts in his second wispe
after his bullet. And the Canonier is to be forwarned, that he stands not just
before the mouth of his piece, while this is a doing, but aside of it, least a
danger or mischelfe might happen to him, and thus the piece having its due
charge both of powder and bullet, he shall cover his touchhole with a dry
sheepskin, after he has levelled his piece, and setting away his pouch barrel
of powder with the rest, in some Concaue, or hollow hutt into the ground
covered over with sodds or earth, he shall attend the Gentleman's of the
Ordnance his command before he gives fire.

An other observation for a Canonier.

Touching the charging of a piece Frons-berghen maintains, that one ought to
take in powder one half of the weight of the Bullet. Rivius and some others are
of the opinion, that the more powder one puts in, the swifter and further the
bullet will fly showing many reasons to prove it. But experience the mistress of
this Art teaches us otherwise: for a piece being loaded with two third parts
of the bullets weight in powder, sends the bullet going more swiftly, and will
carry it further, which has bin so often tried, that it is without all
contradiction, giving this reason, that the exhencia is so swift and violent,
that it bursteth out of the mould before the two third parts of the powder be
fired, and this has been found irrefutable.

Again others maintain, that if one should forcibly ram in the bullet then
the powder might take fire, ere it could cast out the bullet, and then would
cause the bullet to fly further then otherwise it would do, but you must
consider in so doing, you either endanger the break ing of your piece, or else
make it crooked and unserviceable, because your ordinary pieces will not bear
so great a charg of powder, this has bin tried upon the Sea strand at
Scheveling by the Hagh in Holland, before his Excellency prince Maurice of
famous memory, where first one and the same piece was loaded with ten pound of
fine powder to see how far she would carry her bullet. The place being marked
where the bullet rested, she was laden again with 9. pounds, which shot as
far as the ten pound did, but last of all she was charged but with 7. pounds
of the same powder, which carried her bullet further then the two former shots:
whence one may observe, that a piece of Ordnance may be overcharged, and
therefore a good Gunner ought to have a singular care to give his piece her due
measure and charge.

Of the Gunners service in general.
NOw forasmuch as Ordnance are Engines of force, reason, weight, and measure:
and the Gunners men exercised and experienced in them and their apurtenances,
in making platforms with defenses, Troniers, Gabbions, Loopes, Parapets of
earth, and Faggots about 23. or 24. foot high, of Faggots of 2. foot high of
earth, bed upon bed unto eleven foot high, and after 3. foot of Terraplene, to
raise the Troniers and Loopes, so that for the Canon it be 3. foot wide in the
Barb and within 12. foot wide without the lower part thereof to descend
scarpwise the better to discover the Enemies avenews, and offend them the more
freely, for avoiding the blast and smoke, and ruin, it would else make: For
the Culverings 2 foot and a half within, and 9 foot without will suffice, and
for less pieces, less measures. If the Battery be to be made with Gabbions,
they being filled with earth without stones, moistened, and rammed 7. foot a
piece in dyametre, 3. ranks between 2. pieces, if the place will permit or 2.
at the least, and 3. rows also one before another, setting one between two, so
if the 1. rank have 3. the second will have two, and the third one, but it
will be hard to make a safe Battery with Gabbions, Canon, or Culvering proof:
And each platform is to have 30. foot for the reverse of the Canon, and 27.
foot for the Demi Canon, he ought to see that it be levelled, or rising 1. foot
for 20. backwards the better to stay the reverse and facility, the bringing the
piece being loaded to the Loop: He ought to search and examine, the goodness
of the pieces, their Ladels, Rammers Spunges and Tampion, fitness and
roundnesse of the shot, force and goodness of the powder and match; And to see
all fitted accordingly, and to place the powder covertly, hid safe from the
fire of his own as also of the Enemies Ordnance, to see the Gunners take their
marks toward the under part, giving each under Gunner his charge.

HOW A CANNONIER OUGHT TO LAY AND Level his Piece and to amend a bad shot,
CHAPTER VII.
HAving time and Command to lay and Level a Piece, according to the ordinary
aim, to try how far it will carry, the Canonier shall take a long ruler, and
laying it upon the midst of the Frizes, as well of the brich, as of the muzzle
of the piece, and a level upon it, he shall raise or sink it, until the
plummet of the Level be just in the midst: then taking away both the Ruler and
the Level, he shall see even with the Frizes, the point or mark which this
aim discovers, which without doubt will be the place it will carry to; with
which according to the level of the mettell, whereof we will speak
hereafter, it will make but the half. But if he has no leisure so to use the
Ruler and Level, he may take his aim, or lay his piece, as he finds good,
according to the charge and proportion of his piece. If he strickes his mark,
he may then be assured, that his aim is right, and using the like weight of
powder, will always make the same shot.

But if his bullet carries over, he shall level his piece again as he did
before, and having got the first mark in his sight, he shall neither stir
nor move his piece: but shall take away as much of the Frizes of the brich,
till he sees the blow which the bullet gave, and which will be the true, and
right sight, which he presently may try by laying his piece upon his first
mark, which without any doubt he will strike.

Now if his first shot falls short, then he must do as he did before, levelling
his piece again and then without mooving it, he shall go and take away the
Frizes from the muzzle till he discovers the blow of the bullet, and then he
shall have the true sight; according to which, laying his piece upon the first
mark, he will surely strike it, if that there be no fault in the powder.

There is an other way of levelling of a piece, and amending of a bad shot, in
adding or diminishing the elevation, according to discretion. To wit, when he
shootes short of his mark, the piece is remooved and laid as before, afterward
he raises up the Muzzle as he shall judge, and as need shall require, that he
may strike his desired mark, observing well always how much this elevation is
made higher then his first aim taken, which he shall perceive if looking even
with the mettell, he shall see what mark it will show him.

How a Canonier ought to Level his Piece.

Then giving fire, and striking the mark before aimed at, he may be assured,
that his piece carries right, to which henceforward he shall give as much
height above the natural Level: if it fails, that is, if he over shootes his
mark, let him dispart that which his firstshot fell too short, with the length
of the same, for the lessening of the Elevation proportionably; in doing
whereof, without all question he shall see his shot remedied, and a right
shot made. And this is your common and ordinary way in which Gunners do most
exercise themselves in, with assurance that he which knows not by this means
to give the right elevation and range to his piece, is not worthy of the name
of a Canonier. Now for his better understanding I will give him this example.

Suppose a canon be mounted upon his carriage, and planted upon a plateforme,
and is to mark a shot at some white-stone or mark in a Wall. To do this, your
Gunner must take his aim as curiously as possibly he can Level with the
mettell of his piece, but if his shot falls to short, to help it he shall take
his aim again, and shall lay his piece as has been taught before: afterward
he shall raise it a point higher, so that whereas he had but 6. before, now he
has 7. points of the elevation, and afterward gives fire. If he striks his
mark let him always take the same aim and Level, But if he over shootes his
mark, let him level his piece as is taught before: by disparting the
difference of the first, from 6. with that of seven points, as discretion shall
guide him, according to the carriage of the first shot, and giving fire,
(without all doubt) he shall hit his desired mark. And his Piece being thus
raised he must keep in his sight the point or mark which is shown him, and
observe well the height which is above his mark, with assurance that when he is
to make more shot by keeping this elevation he will never fail. But if the
first shot lying upon the 6. points be to high, then he shall help that by the
same Rule in laying his piece lower, and so shall strike his mark whereby he
shall get credit and commendations for it.

A new devise by any staff, to level, mount, and imbase any piece.
ALso any piece may with a field Linstock, Rammer, or Sponge, or other staff
be mounted to any degree of the Quadrant, being thus prepared, first mark from
one end of that staff a distance equal unto the height of the pomel or
caskabel of the piece, placed level upon her platform, and then take the
distance between the center of the Tronions, and the pomell or caskabell, which
make or imagine a semidiametre of a Circle, and divide it by diagonals or
paralels, or otherwise into a 1000. equal parts. Lastly out of the table of
Sines, take the number answering to every degree out of the said 1000. parts,
and set that distance from the said mark downwards, and if the total Syne of
the table be 100000. omit the two last figures of each number thereof toward
the right hand, and if it be 10000000. then omit 4. figures of each number you
find in that Table, and the remaining number will show how many of those 1000.
equal parts are to be set downwards from the mark beneath the said level for
each several degree: Then drawing also 10. paralels or diagonals from the
first degree to the second, and from the second to the third, etc. successively
continued from each to his next, noting every degree with Arithmeticall
characters, so you may from six minutes to six minutes by those right signs
mount the piece, so set forth for any piece which it shall be prepared for. This
may also be described upon such a staff without the table of synes in a
mechanical manner thus, If you describe a Quadrant or quarter of a circle with
a semidiametre, equal to the distance from the center of the trunions, to the
center of the pomel or caskabel, and devide the Arch of that quadrant into 90.
equal parts or degrees, and then from each degree letting a line fall
perpendicularly upon the base side of the said quadrant, and lastly, each of
those right lines being thence transferred from the said first mark downwards
upon the said staff, and marking them with arithmeticall figures for each
degree, thereupon making also paralels and Diagonals as aforesaid, you may
thereby Geometrically and mechanically mark the same from 6. to 6. minutes as
before. The use of them is plain and easy, for if you bring down the center
of the caskabel or pomel of the piece to any number of the degrees thereon so
marked, for that piece, you setting the lower end of the staff to the platform
being even, although it be rising or descending backwards, I say then the axis
of the bore of that piece will be found to be elevated to the degree assigned: If
you be to imbase the piece, those lines and number also set above the first
named mark, will perform the like office there, in the thing required.

OF A QVADRANT LEVEL, AND OTHER Instruments for Ordnance, and the use of them
The form, proportion, and making of aquadrant and a Level, with an instrument
to show the use of it, is very necessary for master-Gunners; and Canoniers, for
the Levelling and aiming of Canon, other Ordnance, and Morters demonstrated in
the fifth plate, and 15. 16. and 17 figures following. CHAPTER VIII.
TO make a quadrant, as is fitting, one must first make the whole circle marked
1. which is divided by lines, running from its center into 48 equal parts; at
the end of each is noted the number thereof, enclosed in a space between two
little lines within an other circle, and between two Vergets or small rings,
where you see there is a space also, by which the said line is divided equally
in the midst.

With a quarter of this circle is made your Quadrant marked (2) being from l
divided into twelve points, making seven degrees and a half, so that in all
they make 90, which is just the fourth part of the 360 degrees of the whole
circumference of the world.

It may also be divided, as you see upon the white, each one the outside, into
45 points, whereof every of them make 8 degrees: so that the whole 360 degres
are comprehended within them, according to this form and devision is made your
other quadrant, noted (3) and is marked with, A. B. and C. divided into 9
equal parts, each of them making 10 degrees.

Now by these two quadrant, the plummet hanging in the midst from the point of
the 45 degree, which are also divided into two equal parts, is shown to you
the highest elevation and range of a piece, yea as ever the piece is able to
carry at length, as you may see in the figrues following of a Canon and a
Culvering.

The like is also shown you by the Level marked (4) for the aiming, and
levelling of pieces, when you are to take your mark aright, which also is
useful for the making of your platformes, and beddings for Ordnance, all which
are necessary for the Art of Gunnerie.

This may also be made by a quart of the former Circle, if you devide it into
12 equal points, and so noted and ordered, that you must beginn to count from
the midst of it, toward the ends or sides to the 6 point, so that your
plummet, being upon the 6 point just as the others, you shall, find that your
piece is laid at its highest elevation and range.

The Cartabon (or your fouresquare level) marked 5, comprehends also all the
circle abouesaid, and is divided into 48 points, according to the four
quarters of the world, that is, East, South, North, and West, making also four
particular Quadrants, whereof the forked dart coming from the center or midst;
shows all the lines, not only of the Circle, but also of the Quadrant, or
your four square level, and running in a line from the midst, marked with O
and N or with O and S, it will make a Level, and is in the first degree of the
right Quadrant, but coming from the midst, and between the said lines, it
will show you your highest elevation, as the other Quadrants have done. The
handle noted E. F. (if it be possible) must be 2 foot and a half long,
whereof each foot must be 16 inches, to the end it may make just 40 inches,
that in 3 foot and four inches of our ordinary foot, which is an ordinary
pace, or half a Geometrical one.

Of a Quadrant Level, and the use of them.

Each of these ought to have in the midst, and at the end a little hole going
from the one side of the handle to the other, which serve for this use, that
this instrument being set upon the brich of your piece, looking through one of
them above the highest Frizes: you may give a shreud guess how far your piece
will carry the bullet, according to the length, condition, and proportion
thereof. The two pins which you see on the sides of it, marked C F serve to
this end, that thereby you may discern the quality of the place, which you
would measure, the point dessigning by its fall from the East toward the
North, the length, breadth depth, and height of the same. Finally this
instrument contains many mysteries of great consequence, and is of excellent
use both for an Inginer, and a Canonier.

The common rule, whereby a Canonier may know how far his piece will carry,
and how far from one degree to an other, according to the elevation thereof,
let him first see how many paces it will carry being laid even with the mettle,
which afterward he shall devide by 50. and multiply the Quotient by 11. and
that will bring out the number of the further digression or range, which if he
devides again by 44. he shall then find the quotient to be the just number of
paces which the bullet will loose in the other ranges, degree by degree, as for
example A battering Canon will shoot its bullet being laid even with the mettle
a thousand ordinary paces, at two foot and a half the pace, which being
divided by 50. your quotient will give 20 which being multiplied again by 11.
it will give 220. paces, which is the number of the next digression, made in
the second degree of the quadrant, or the first after the Level abovesaid.

But all the other digressions or ranges, do always diminish even unto the 45.
degree. To know then what this diminishing is from degree to degree, even unto
the 45. which is the highest elevation, you must take the just number of the
digressions from the first to the 45. which will be 44. now deviding them by
the former number of 220. paces, you shall find your quotient to be 5. which is
the number which goes always, decreasing from the first to the last
digression, so that your Canon being laid upon its natural mark, in which it
is raised a degree above the Level, even with the mettle, making a 1000. paces
as is said, being laid upon the second degree, adding 220. paces to it as an
advantage, then it will carry the bullet 1220. paces before it stops. Again,
you may add the same to the third degree, but the former being the greatest
digression, as we have taught, this then, and all the others will always
diminish 5. paces, and will make but 215. above the 1220. of the second degree,
so that you shall have in your third degree 1435. paces. in the fourth degree
1645. in the fifth degree 1850 paces, in the sixth 2050. paces, in the seventh,
2245. paces, in the eighth, 2435. in the ninth 2620. paces, in the tenth degree
which is the first of the quadrant of 9. points, it will be 2800. paces, in the
eleventh, 2975. in the twelft, 3145. in the thirteenth, 3310. in the
fourteenth, 3470. paces, in the fifteenth, 3657. in the sixteenth, 3775. in the
seventeenth, 3920. in the eighteenth 4060. in the nineteenth 4595. in the
twentieth degree, which is the first of the second point, 4325. paces, in the
one and twentieth, 4450. in the two and twentieth, 4570. in the three and
twentieth, 4685. in the twenty fourth, 4795. in the twenty fifth, 4900. in the
twenty sixth, 5000. in the twenty seventh, 5095. in the twenty eight, 5185. in
the twenty ninth 5270. paces, in the thirtieth which is the beginning of the
third point, 5350. paces, In the thirty one, 5425. paces, in the two and
thirty, 5595. in the three and thirty, 5560. in the four and thirty, 5620. in
the five and thirty, 5675. in the six and thirty, 5725. in the seven and thirty
5770. in the eight and thirty, 5810. and in the nine and thirty degree, 5945.
paces, in the forty point which is the beginning of the fourth point, 5875. in
the 41. 5900. in the 42. 5920. in the 43. 5935. in 44. 5945. Lastly in the 45.
when you reckon but four half points of the quadrant, you have the highest
elevation or range, as you shall see in the figure following, which makes 5950
paces.

To conclude, a skillful Canonier exercising himself herein, will easily
conceive and know certainly how to level his piece upon any one of these
degrees and points, and how far it will carry, be it great or little: for
this calculation will never fail him, by observing this, that in giving the
chase or elevation of his piece, in what point soever it be of this rule or
degree reaches from 1. inch to 16. which is a Geometrical foot. The next
chapter following shall show you the use of it in levelling of Ordnance after
three manner of ways, to wit, even or level with the mettle, point-blanke, or
upon a higher elevation at a range.



SHOWING HOW A CANNONIER SHALL Shoot level by the mettle of his piece,
otherwise called the Horiozontall Level. Secondly, or by the Level Axis
vulgarly called by some Gunners the level point blanck. And Lastly at the
highest elevation and range, as the figure following shall demonstrate. THE
NINTH CHAPTER.
TO do this, he must first take a crooked compass, therewith take the highest
frizes to or base ring of the brich, and marking well the distance of the two
points which make the diamiter of the circumference upon a right line, then he
must do the like upon the frizes of the pieces muzzle or mouth, and set the
points of his Compass upon the said line in such sort, that setting the one
upon the first point which he had taken before, extending the other to the
second, he shall divide the distance between the two points toward the lower
part of the line, into the two equal parts, of which each will show him how
much the frizes of the brich does differ, or are higher then those of the
mouth. Therefore to lay his piece right, so that it may be levelled even with
the mouth, he must trace out this height upon a piece of wood or some such
thing, and put it to the highest frizes of the mouth, and upon that a rule,
which is so long that it will lie upon the frize of the brich, upon which,
hanging a level with a line and a plummet, he shall raise the piece or sinck
it, till that the plummet comes to fall just in the midst, and then he shall
have the boore thereof, right in the Level.

Then taking away the rule, and taking his aim upon the highest frize of the
brich, and the height which is upon the frize of the mouth, he shall mark well
the point which it shows him and surely in giving fire to his piece he shall
without fail hit his mark.

But it is needless always to set the said height upon the frize of the
mouth, therefore the Canonier shall hold it in his hand, whenever he would
shoot upon this point (which he is to do upon batteries, which have the mark
near enough) and shall take his aim level by the mettle of his piece, as
usually he does, till he has in his sight the mark he means to hitt, but
because the distance being too near, and that the bullet may carry over,
letting his piece stand without stirring it, he shall set the height which he
has in his hand upon the frize of the brich and observe well the point which
it shows above the said height, and after he has it, he shall lay his piece
again level by the mettle upon the said point, and he shall without fail hit
his desired mark. But this being something obscure, I will explain it by an
example, Suppose there be three points, as D. A. C. and that you would shoot
even by the boore of the level upon the point A. you must lay your piece
level by the mettle, but questionless you shall shoot over it, the distance
being too near at hand for his aim, so that in giving fire to your piece the
bullet will come to strike the point C. to hit then just upon the point A. you
must set the said height upon the brich and taking from thence your aim
(without moving your piece downwards) you shall have in your sight the point D.
from which having taken away the said height you shall lay your piece again
level by the mettle as before, and giving fire, the bullet will fly over D.
and strike just upon your desired mark A.

If occasion were that you would shoot at a mark which is too far for the aim,
level by the boore, and notwithstanding is so near for the Ordnance level, a
Canonier must use this discretion, to wit, the distance being a third part
further, he must then take away a third part of the height, and if it exceeds
the carriage of the level two parts, then he must also take away two parts,
and he shall snoot so right, that if it were for a wager he would hit a
shilling or at least a hat without failing.

This is your Ordnance pointeries against batteries, which according to the
instruction given before, one ought to approach as near an enemy as one can,
so that if you do not take heed to lay always this height upon the brich of
your piece, you will always overshoot your mark, contrary to the desire of a
good Canonier, which is always to beat upon the foot or foundation of a wall,
that it may tumble down, and be battered the sooner, for the easier entrance of
a breach, observing that it is one of the principallest considerations in all
shoots, that in making a good shot one levels his piece at the foot of his
mark, especially in shooting at a troup of horse, or a company of foot. But in
a stony place, a Canonier does willingly shoot short, because in striking upon
the stones or bricks, in razing them, he makes a hole much greater then the
bullet which goes through them. But in a plain place one must lay his piece
so, as the bullet may take them just in the middle, or about the girdle, and so
may kill a whole file, or a rank at a shot, yea though they should all fall
flat down upon the ground, yet they cannot all escape, otherwise if you level
too high, it may be accounted but as a lost shot. To amend then a shot too high
for this mark, you must level your piece upon the white or mark you shoot at,
then going to the mouth of your piece with a level line and a plummer, and
take there the height of the highest frize or ring to the bottom of the boore,
which you shall set to the frize of the brich, and from thence, and above the
frize of the mouth, you shall take (without stirring the piece) your aim,
marking well the place it will show you, then taking away the said height, you
shall lay your piece again upon the point it showed you, and so without
failing, you shall hitt the mark you desired. But if you piece carries to
short, it must be amended in this manner, lay the piece as before, then going
to the mouth with your line and plummet, take all the height of the frize from
the top to the bottom, in such sort, that your line may take the whole
Dyamiter of all the circumference thereof, and by this dyamiter, you shall take
the thickness of the ^ettle from the bottom of the boore, even to the lowest
part of the said frize, and laying this height upon the brich of the piece, and
levelling it upon the mark dessigned, which you would shoot at, you shall see
the good effect it will take: now for a shot that is made on either side of
your mark, it is to be helped in this manner following, if the bullet falls on
the right side of it, then you must lay or move your piece, and take your aim
so much on the left hand, and that you may not fail a hairesbreadth, now to
make the distance of the other side alike, you shall level your piece as
before, right upon your white, then take a long ruler, which you shall lay upon
the frizes, as well of the brich, as of the muzzle, and leaving it upon the
mouth, you shall take your aim removing it at the brich so long, till you have
got in your sight the place of the side shot which your bullet made, and
without taking away your eye, or your hand from this fight, removing the brich
of your carriage, till the brich of your piece, comes to be right in the midst
under the said ruler, which being done, take away the ruler, and take your aim
level by the mettle of the piece, and you shall find your piece to be turned
just as much toward your left hand, as it shot before on your right hand.
Moreover, there are many occasions, which may cause a bullet to straggle either
on the one side or on the other. The first is, when the boore is boored more on
the one then upon the other side, or by reason of the inequallity of the
mettle, or that the mould is not right: this cannot be imputed a fault in the
Canonier but in the Founder: nevertheless, if he be ingenious, he may help
this fault by his discretion trying his piece by his creuset in, or scaling
primer, and so help it as the fault may require.

A Piece also will carry sidelings, if the tronions be not just right the one
over against the other. Also if the platform be not laid even, but that the
one part is higher then the other.

Item if a Canonier it taking of his aim stirs his eye from the just middle of
the frizes of the piece, and though he has it, yet he may fail in not taking
his aim just in the middle of his mark.

Item if one wheel be higher then the other, the shot will fly always toward
the lower side.

Item if one of the wheels should stay upon a nail, and the other not, as
likewise when the one turns more easily then the other, and if one wheel should
stand upon dirty ground and the other on hard, or when one of the Cubes or
heads of the wheel is longer then he other.

Item When the bullet is not driven home alike, or lies more upon the one side
of the boore then upon the other: And Finally, the straying of the bullet upon
the one side may be caused by the vehemence of the wind, when it cannot be
helped.

Likewise a short or an overshot may be occasioned either by the force or the
weakness of the powder, or by reason of the unskilfullnesse of the Gunner
which knows not to lay and level his piece aright, neither knows the true
distance of the mark whereat he shootes.

All which I have marked at large, not as a matter to excuse an unexpert
Canonier but to give advice to the wise to have a vigilant eye upon all things,
and to follow the rules abovesaid; and so to prevent all inconveniences, for to
fail the first time may pass, the second may be pardoned, but the third time
is too much, and cannot be excused, because it is a certain sign of
indiscretion and want of judgment; And indeed there is no fault which we have
shown, but by discretion it may be remedied, whereof we have seen many examples
at the famous siege of Ostend, wherein a sound judgment was shown in this
kind, whereof I will relate two examples.

A ship running into the haven to get into the Town, which brought the enemy
some provision, a woman sat at the helm to make us ashamed, order was given to
a Canonier that he should make a shot at this Steeresse, who thinking it was
too cruel a thing to shoot at so weak a sex, offered to take away the helm
from between her hands, and to make the boat come floating toward us with the
flood, if she were not provided with an other, which he presently put in
practice, levelling his piece so right and discreetly, that indeed shooting of
the helm it fell in the water, and the boat came floating toward our quarter,
where it was pillaged and burnt in sight of our enemies.

An other ship lying at anckor, staying for a high water to come into the
Town, our men to sinck it made many Canon shot at it in vain, judging that
the distance was too far to do it any harm, whereupon they were forbidden to
shoot any more at it, and not to spend their powder to no purpose: But at last
there came a Canonier who promised not only to strike the ship, but also to
shoot the Cable in sunder, so that by favor of the water the boat should come
floating to our mercy, and indeed, levelling and giving fire to his piece, he
shot the Cable in pieces, and to the great admiration of all our Army, the boat
came swimming to our quarter. These examples I have related and will do others
in the following Chapters, to show the skill of a good Canonier that has
discretion and judgment in such occurrences, and to give encouragement to all
Canoniers and Gunners to do the like when occasion shall serve.



The first Dialogue. BETWEEN THE MASTER, OR GENERAL OF THE Ordnance, and a
Captain, to know whether a Demi Canon or a Culvering will carry furthest at
the highest range, and how a Canonier must level, and raise his Canon, and
Culvering to try it, as the two next figures following shall demonstrate.
GENERALLO. SENOR CAPTAIN, I have often heard that in trying of a Canon with a
Culvering, at random, it has bin found that the Canon will carry its bullet
further then a Culvering, and indeed I should be of the same opinion, if your
discourse persuade me not to the contrary.


Capt. My Lord there are many reasons, which one must yield unto, that a
Culvering will carry its bullet further then a Canon.


Genesis It may be so, yet I have heard many men say, who have tried it, that a
Canon will carry further, then the Culvering.


Capt. It may well be, but I would fain see the trial thereof, to the end it
might be certainly known.


Genesis How ought then a due trial to be made thereof.


Capt. Sure it is, that a Culvering is mounted upon a higher and a longer
carriage, then a Canon is, and that the crosse-beames upon which the brich of
the Canon rests, being higher then that of a Canon, and the piece being
longer cannot stoop so much as to elevate its mouth so high as a Canon can,
that has its carriage shorter, then the crossebeames lower, for the shorter a
piece is, the easier it may be elevated even to 45 degrees of the quadrant
above said, whence will follow, that a Canon being raised to a higher
elevation, must needs carry its bullet further then a Culvering, not that the
fault is in it, but that it wants its due elevation, for if it could be raised
to the same elevation and degree the Canon is, then you should see the
Culvering, would over shoot the Canon by far.


General. How so? then there must be some fault in the Inginier, that made
the metal of it, or else in the Carpenter in the making or frameing of the
Carriage.


Capt It may be in both of them, though they have done their best endeavor,
because they have not attained unto the height of this perfection: for as in
the Art of Gunnerie, so in the fabricking and framing of the other Engines and
Instruments, there are many secrets in them, which a common capacity cannot so
easily find out.


Genesis How shall we then discover this mystery, and to have a sure trial
thereof, that the one piece may have no more advantage then the other.


Capt. To have a true trial thereof, first the carriages of the one and of the
other must be so rightly fitted, and locked with crosse-beames low enough, to
give both the piece one and the same elevation, as you may see in the figures
following.

Secondly. They must be planted upon two plain and even plate forms.

Thirdly, if the Culvering cannot be laid upon the same height as the Canon is,
then you must take away so much of the Cross beam of the Carriage, that the
brich of it may sinck, and the muzzle lie upon the same elevation as the Canon
does.


General. What need is it then to take away so much of the Crosse-beames, and
so to weaken the Carriage, which may easelie be remedyed by digging a hole in
the ground, to make the brich of the carriage sink into it, till the muzzle of
the piece be raised high enough.


Capt. It may well be done, when there is no strife nor dispute about it, to
which the contrary parties will never agree, because of giving an advantage.


Genesis What advantage can there be in this, to have a piece to lie upon a
plat-forme, and to have the brich of the carriage sunk a little into the
ground.


Capt. I am of that mind, that a piece, which has the brich of the Carriage
stepped from trary part is will never agree, because of giving an advantage.


Genesis What advantage can there be in this, to have a piece to ly upon a
plate-forme, and to have the brich of the carriage sunk a little into the
ground.


Capt. I am of that mind, that a piece, which has the brich of the Carriage
stepped from recoyling, will shoot its bullet with a greater force and violence,
then that which lies freer upon an explanado, or a platform, And therefore to
give no advantage to a Culvering, it is better to shave of some of the
Crossebeames, to cause it to sink lower, then to ly in such a ditch by
raiseing the muzzell to the required height as you may see in the figures
following.


Genesis I have heard diverse disputes among good Canoniers touching this point,
Who thought that a Culvering, could not carry so far as a Canon, because this
piece being long, the bullet must go a longer way from out the chamber to the
mouth, and that before the bullet comes out, the powder in that while may loose
some of the strength thereof, whereas a Canon being shorter, and the flying of
a bullet out of the Canon shorter, the powder will send it going with a greater
strength.


Capt. I believe well that there is some reason for what you allege for the
length of a Culvering, and the shortness of a Canon, when they are charged
with that quantity of powder as their bullets require: but for your Culvering,
in regard of the length of it, you give it a greater charge, whereas for the
charging of your Canon, you give it in powder but half the weight of his
bullet, and to an ordinary Culvering, you give it, in powder, or the weight of
the bullet, but being a Culvering renforced, you may give it as many pound of
powder as the weight of your bullet.


Gen I will demand of you Sir one question more, and therewith conclude this
discourse, If you were to shoot at ships upon the Sea, what pieces would you
choose to be best either your Canon or your whole Culvering?


Capt. Of this you may be assured from one that has found it by experience,
that there is no better pieces to do this then your Canon.


Genesis Give me your reason?


Capt. Your Canon being shorter, may be laid lower, and better levelled,
considering also that their bullets are weightier then the others, and fly more
certain, because neither the wind, nor the humidity of the water, can have any
such great power to dead or hinder their sight.


Genesis How so? seeing your Culvering takes a greater charge of powder, then
your Canon, as you even now confessed is better, and will ding away the bullet
with a more violent force.


Capt. My reason is that the wind and the moistness of the water have more
power over a lighter, then of Canon bullet, which is heavier then a Culvering,
now if you were to shoot at a ship of a like distance, you must raise your
Culvering to your thinking two pikes length higher then the ship is, whereas
your Canon will require but one pikes length of elevation above it. Therefore I
have made many a trial of it at the siege of Ostend, both of a Canon and of a
Culvering.


Genesis Well Sir you have satisfied me, and given me good reasons for what you
say: but I pray you tell me whether a piece will carry furthest, which is shot
out of the Sea to the landward, or that which is shot from the shore side,
along the superfices of the water


Capt. This were a hard question to resolve, if one had not made experience of
it, Nevertheless I will tell you what I have seen, that we shooting into the
Sea from our batteries in Dunkirke at the Enemies shipping, which rid before
the Town, we could scarce reach them, But I have seen with admiration, that the
Enemy shooting from their shipping to us ward, their bullets flew from that
place, five hundred paces further, then ours did, where we stood, yea some of
them into the very Town of Dunkirke.


Genesis Surely I was of a contrary opinion, thinking that a piece planted upon
the firm ground, the bullet would fly further, and with a more violent force,
then that which is shot from a floating ship, because the piece in recoyling
shakes the ship, and by the shaking thereof, the bullet may loose some of its
strength, but these are secrets in nature, more admirable then apprehensible.


Capt. True it is, that there are many hidden and secret mysteries in nature,
but for this one may alledg some natural causes: for a bullet shot from a ship
to the land-ward, seeks its natural resting place: but that which is shot
from the land along the surface of the water, the bullet is forced to strive
against two elements, that is first against the air, which retains it with
all might, and secondly against the moistness of the water, which also deads
the bullet, causing it to stoop, for this has bin found by experience to be
true, that a bullet will shoot further into the Sea at a low water, then it
will do at a high Sea.


Genesis If a piece were so planted, that one could shoot both into the land, and
also into the Sea, by turning the said piece, the question is, whether the
bullet would fly furthest over the Land, or upon the Sea.


Capt. A Canon will carry its bullet a thousand paces further over the Land,
then it will do upon the superficies of the water, and though we have had no
certain trial of it: yet the siege of Ostend has taught us this experience,
that we may be assured of it: For in the channel by Newport, when the battle
in Flaunders was fought Anno. 1600. we shot at the Enemies shipping and men of
war, to make them give back, that our men might come up along the strand with
more safety, and less danger to fight, we found that our bullets, which were
shot at them from the land, could not reach them to do them any harm, but the
Enemies bullets, which were shot from their men of war, shot amongst us, and
flew five or six hundred paces over our heads.


Genesis That might well be, for perhaps the enemies pieces were either greater or
longer then ours, or else that they had finer, and stronger powder then ours
had.


Capt. The Calibres and boores of the one and of the other were alike, for
their bullets fitted our pieces, but indeed in the goodness of the powder
there might be some difference, and for our parts to charge them well, we put a
Ladle full of powder more then ordinary into ours, but this would not help.
This question I have asked many times, both of Gunners, and Mariners, who have
given me always this reason, that it was for some secret cause in nature, that
a shot being made into the land, should fly further, then that which was made
from the land into the water.


Genesis Though this troubled me a little yet I am glad to hear your reasons, and
the experience you have had. But I had almost forgotten to have asked you one
question more, which now I call to mind how comes it to pass, that all the
charge of the powder takes not fire, and is not consumed in a Canon, as well as
in a Culvering.


Capt. This is not any fault or advantage in the pieces, for one would think
that a Canon being shorter, and of a Larger bore then a Culvering a small part
of the powder might be expulsed or driven out before it be all fired, and that
a Culvering being long and straight, might keept in the powder till it takes
all fire, but this is done at a venture, and yet notwithstanding it happens
oftener in a Canon, by reason of the biggnesse of the boore, then in a
Culvering, for after you have given your piece its due charge of powder to
ram it up some what close into the chamber of your piece, you give it two or
3 shoues with the end of your Rammer, the powder being well corned; there lies
ordinarily some loose corns and dust by the way in the bottom of the mould,
which the wispe or stopping has not driven home, so that if a Canonier, does
not take very good heed, there will always be some part of the powder shed in
the piece, which will ly before the bullet, and when the rest of powder takes
fire those loose corns flies out, and cannot take fire, like as you see also
that some shreds and pieces of the stopping after the shot is made, and smoaks
without being consumed by fire. So that your Lo. may be assured that any piece
of ordnance be it either short or long, if the charge of the powder be well
stopped and rammed home and some loose corns which will fly back gathered well
up by the wisp, there will not be so much as one Corn, but will all take fire.
This is seen also in the trial of Bombards and Morters, which though they be
short, and large mouthed, fire and consume, all their powder, without loosing
so much as a grain.


Genesis Now I understand well, and confess that hitherto I have bin of the
vulgar opinion attributing the cause to the shortness of the piece and
herewith we will conclude. Here follows the figure of a Canon and a Culvering
elevated by level upon one and the same degree of the quadrant to try which
will carry furthest at range.




CONTAINING THE DEMONSTRATION OF Morters, and the use of them. THE TENTH
CHAPTER.
YOUR great and small Morters, are not only serviceable in a war offensive,
by shooting and casting of great Grenades, as of a 100, 150, 170 pound weight,
and smaller of 40 and 50 pound, but also by casting of Fire-balles, stones, old
rubbidge, and pieces of iron into Cities, Towns, and Fortresses, and may be
used also defensiuely, to be shot from Towns, and Forts besieged, into any
Enemies works, and approaches, especially they are of singular use, when an
Enemy has covertly approached, and lodged himself under some Bulwark, Tower,
or Turret, and is a beginning to undermine them, which if they do, you may
plant one of these Morters at a reasonable distance, on the inside of your
Wall, and shooting your Granado, as it were bolt upright into the air, by its
natural fall, it may light just into the Enemies works, and there with great
violence, breaking among them, it w ^ll make them cry, fly, and forsake the
place, you may also fire them out of a place, by casting good store of
hand-granadoes down among them, and so annoy them, that the work will be too
hot for them.

Two of these Morters are represented unto you, in the plate and figurs
following number. Now for the shooting away of your great Grenades or
Firebals, you must ever remember, but to take or 1/7 part of fine powder of the
weight of your grandoe or thing which you shoot, but if you are to shoot away a
bullet without any fire works in it, or some massy stone, or such like solid
thing, then you must take but half the weight of it in fine powder, which
having given fire to the Mortar, will send it going merrily.

The use of them is not to shoot in a right line, as other ordance do, but in
an oblique line, as you may see by the two figures following, unless your
mortar be mounted to 90 degrees, mounting them usually above 45 degrees, namely
to 60 70 80. and sometimes more or less, as the distance, and fall of your
Granadoe or shot shall require.

Having before shown you the making and use of the Quadrant, it remains now,
that I come to the charging and use of a mortar, now before you put in your
powder, it must be well sponged and cleared, whether you charge it with loose
powder, or Cartouch, turning the mouth almost bolt upright, the powder being
put into the chamber, you must stop it with a wade, either of Hay or okam, and
after a Tamkin of some soft wood, and this with the powder that was put in
first, it must fill up the whole chamber thereof, that there may be no vacuity,
between the powder, and the wadd, or between the wadd, and the shot, this done
the shot shall be put in at the mouth, with another wadd after it, but you must
have a care that your Mortar be not much mounted, least your shot flies out too
soon, and the wadd between the Tampkin, and the shot will not only save the
shot from the Tampkins breaking of it, but also is to avoid vacuities, which
may endanger the breaking of the piece by second expansions.

Now then having resolved of the premises, touching your piece, shot, and
powder, as above said, and upon the distance and monture of your mark, as the
rules and tables following shall direct you, then for the bending and disposing
of it to the assigned mark, lay first a straight ruler upon the mouth of your
mortar, and upon it place a quadrant (as you may see by the figures, or some
other instrument crosse-wise, to set the mortar upright for shuning of wide
shooting, and then placeing them fore- ^ight to elevate it into the resolved
degree of monture, to avoid short or overshooting accordingly, as the tables
following will teach you, for having made one shot, you may thereby, proportion
the rest considering whether you are to shoot with or against the wind, or
whether it blows toward the right or the left hand, whether weakly, or
strongly, and so accordingly to give or abate the advantage, or disadvantage,
which judgment and discretion will induce you thereunto, and the help of the
Rules following.

Now we will come to the use of a mortar, and that in this example following,
Suppose an Enemy be approached to the Basis, or foot of a wall, or a Bulwark,
and there is a rooting, and begins to make a mine, and having chambred his
powder, intends to blow it up, and that there is no other means left you, to
repulse, and hinder their egresse and regresse into it: but by shooting out of
your morters some Grenades firebals, stones and rubish among them, or at least
by casting many hand-granadoes down uponthem. To do this either by force or
policy, it behooves a good canonier, or fire-worker, to know first (as has bin
taught) how far his mortar will carry a granado, or any solid thing else, which
shall be shot out of it, being set upon such and such a degree and elevation as
the mortar figure will show you. As for example, takey our aim level with the
mould or mouth of your mortar, noted A upon the quadrant, and it will carry 200
paces, where you see the granado falls upon the letter A. but your mortar being
elevated to the mark B it then will carry its bullet 487 paces, if to the
second C, then 755 paces, if to the third D, it will carry 937 paces, if to the
fourth E, then 1065 paces, if to the fifth elevation F, then 1132 paces, if to
the sixth G, which is in the midst of the quadrant, and lies then upon its
highest elevation it will carry 1170 paces, as you may see by the several falls
of the bullets upon every letter* The second figure shows you a mortar casting
a granado upon a Castle, as you may see by the example.

Another table of Diego Vffane ^s for Mortar pieces, with their Randoms, made
for every degree, between the level, and 90 degrees, as follows.
Degr. Pac. Degrees, 0 100 89 1 122 88 2 143 87 3 364 86 4 285 85 5 204 84 6 224 83
7 243 82 8 262 81 9 280 80 10 297 79 11 314 78 12 331 77 13 347 76 14 363 75 15
377 74 16 392 73 17 406 72 18 419 71 19 432 70 20 445 69 21 457 68 22 468 67 23
479 66 24 490 65 25 500 64 26 510 63 27 518 62 28 524 61 29 526 60 30 534 59 31
539 58 33 543 57 34 549 56 34 552 55 35 5 ^8 54 36 562 53 37 568 52 38 573 51
39 477 50 40 580 49 41 582 48 42 583 47 43 584 46 44 582 45 582



TREATING OF COMPOSITIONS, MIXTURES AND INGREDIENCES FOR THE MAKING OF YOUR
Concaue, or hollow GRENADES, both great and small, to be shot, or cast out of
a Mortar, and also of your HAND-GRANADOES, to be cast into a Trench, a Sapp, or
the work of an Enemy. The Eleventh Chapter.
FIrst, take three parts of Canon powder well pounded, and sifted, one third
part of Greekish pitch, and half the weight thereof in brimstone, mingle these
two lightly together, and then add to them a half part of ordinary salt, and
afterward knead them well together, with oil of linseed. This done, fill the
pipe of a Cain, with some of this paste, and commixture for a trial of it: if
it carries the flame clear and fair, and blows out of the pipe, with an
offensive force, without cleaving to the pipe, into which it was put, then
without all question it is a sign and token of the goodness and perfection
thereof.

Now to charge a granado for your Mortar or Bombard with this mixture, and
ingredience: first you must take a round stick, to turn them about withal, of
the bigness that it may go just into the touchhole of your granado, which you
are to charge by reaching down to the very bottom of it, and give it a stamp
or two with the said stick, continuing so, filling and stamping it, until you
have filled up the concaue of your granado up to the touchhole of it within
three or four fingers breadth, then put into the pipe, or hole of your
granado, an artificial match, and fill it up round about the match, with the
aforesaid Ingrediences even up to the very top of it, which you may do with
your finger, without the help of the stick, because the match will stand bolt
upright in the hole, and in the verymidst of it. Lastly take a piece of course
linen cloth and smeare it over with pitch and wax well melted together, and
lay it over the mouth of your touchhole, in such sort, that the upper end of
your match may peep up a little through a small hole, made in your cloth, and
then you must bind it hard about, by making your cloth fast to the mouth of the
Mortar.

There are diverse other receipts, both for the making of your Compositions, for
great and small Grenades, much differing one from the other, but of all
others, this above is of excellent use, and therefore it is needless for me to
spend more time in the further search and description of them: only remember
this for a general rule, that in all compositions, mixtures, and ingrediences,
they must all be well dried, pounsed, and pulverized, but for your great
morters, it will suffice if they be lightly broken, the fall, breaking, and
operation of them, are able to tear, rend, and break down houses in pieces.
The figures of the grenades are marked ABC under, the Mortar figure.

The same ingrediences will serve also for your hand-granadoes if they be
finely dried, pounced and pulverized as is aboue-said, and thus much for your
Bombards Morters and grenades both great and small.

TREATING OF A PETTARD, WHICH IS A KIND OF A short piece of Ordnance, devised
of late years, for the blowing open of Gates, Ports and breaking down of
draw-bridges, Their making, use, and manner of charging are here discribed. The
eleventh Chapter.
THE Model or form of a pettard, represented unto you in the next plate and
figure, is not much unlike to a Grocers, or an Apothecaries Spice-morter, and
some are tapred much like a Coopers payle, little deeper then the Dyamiter of
their mouths but being not above in dyamitre at their bottom, or breech of
their mouths calibre, and in thickness of mettell ^ of the Dyamitre at their
breech, and lessening by degrees in thick nes toward their mouths, Their
magnitudes are some to hold but one pound of I owder, or less, and others to
hold 50 pound or more, and they usually allow four pound of brass, or five
pound of iron, to cast a pettard for one pound of powder, and two hundred 50
pound of brass, or 3 hundred pound for a pettard that shall hold fifty pound
of powder, using those proportions diminished for lesser, and augmented for
greater, as Mr Norton in his practice of Artillery describes.

The demonstration thereof out of Diego Vffano.

Being massy and heavy (whereof the figure A is the mouth, B the breech near
the touchhole) it must be carried upon a thick-board or planck, marked E E,
and then laid upon a Karr noted C D, which serves not only for the use of it,
but also to raise it, when you are to hang and fasten it upon a Port. This
planchier in the midst, has a round hole in it marked H, Through which the
nose, or mouth of your pettard is enchased. Above it there are two iron rings
to hang it on to two Crochets marked G screwed fast into the port marked A with
a match to give fire unto it. A A are the Bungs, or tampkins wherewith the
mouth of the Pettard is bunged up or stopped.

The outside on which the planchier is enchased being three inches thick is
even and plain, armed with strong plates of iron to defend it from splitting:
it is also to be underpropped with the forked rest, and stayed in the ground at
the hirder end to keep it from recoyling.

When you charge your pettard, you put a round stick into the very midst of the
mouth of it down to the bottom, about the length of half a cube and some two
fingers in circumference, and put no more into it at a time, then the better
part of a pound of fine come powder, and so fill it little and little, stamping
it well in, round about the said stick, with iron drifts or wodden stampers
within the concaue of the Pettard, until it be filled within one fingers
breadth of the top and have its due charge, then tume your stick in the midst
about draw it out gently and fill up the hole out of which you draw the stick
with fine powder that when you are to give fire at the touchhole, the whole
charge within may be fired in the twinkling of an eye, And having thus given
it the full charge, then stop the mouth of it closse with the bung or tampkin
noted A, which must be of the thickness of your little finger, and lastly cover
the mouth thereof with a thick waxed cloth, and power melted wax upon it some
two fingers thick above the tampkin, and thus much for the charg ing of a
pettard.

Now we come to the fastening and hanging it on a gate, to do this well, you
must first scrue in fast into the Gate the Crochets marked G. and make choice
as near as you can of the weakest place of the Gate or Port, where it may
easiliest be broken open, upon this hang your Planchier and put the mouth of
your Pettard through the hole of the Planchier above mentioned, then fasten it
firmly to the Port. There is also a third ring or a crochet, and the ear of
your Pettard through which you put a roap to bind your pettard fast to the Port.

And being thus fastened, and hung upon a port, nothing remains then, but to
give fire to it, but your Pettardier must have a singular care, that he orders
his match so, within the Touchhole, that is gives not fire too soon, but that
he and the men which help him may have leisure and time to come of with safety,
before the pettard burst open the gate, least any be mischeived with the
violence of the breaking of this diabolical Engine, which having taken its
operation, and the gate flying open, your men must presently enter, but one
caviat I must give you by the way, that while they are a fastening and hanging
on your pettard, to the gate, you must have a special care, to look to the
Percullies, that it be well underpropped to keep it from falling, for I my
self was onee upon a piece of service at Venlo, that year as the Marquis
Spinola took in Rhyn-berg, and having burst open one gate of the Town, the
petardier hanging his pettard upon a second gate, a woman throwing a great
stone down from the top of the wall fel'd the pettardier while he was a doing
his business, which gave the enemy so much time that they knocked down their
percullis, and so catched some 30 of Mounseur Chastilons Company between the
last gate and the percullies, who first should have entered the Town, and being
massacred and taken pirsoners, the surprising of that Town by this accident
failed. The figures following does demonstrate all things unto you that it may
be the better understood.



A QUESTION PROPOUNDED TO THE BATAVIAN INGINIERS, by Master John Baptista
Mathematician of ANTWERP, for the Battering of a HORNE-WORKE.
ACCORDING TO THE PROVERB. Let skill appear by good demonstration. And
Dissolved and Resolved by that famous Mathematitian, Master JOHN STAMPION of
the HAGH in HOLLAND.


The report (Ingenious Batavians) of some of your unskilfullnesse, has spread
it self far abroad, and flown I know not into what country, and yet no
special thing is come to the view of the world, whether out of your own self
conceit, or from some blast of Superbitie: It is so that I my self have
thought good to propose this question unto your ingenuity, as a Touchstone,
that it may be dissolved, according to the true Touchstone of that noble
Science of the Mathematics by which it may be known.

THE PROPOSITION IS THIS.
SUppose a General having approached to a certain Hornwork which is here
decyfered by the Letter H. and has come with his line or fapp near unto the
moat of this Hornework, and there desires to cast up a royal battery in the
place noted A. for to flanck upon E. D. and D. C. in such sort, that the force
of the Canon may beat as well upon the Face as upon the I lanck, to wit,
Proportio Equalis, by an equal proportion. Together that the two wings C. D.
and G. I. and the distance G. D. which are all alike to each other, may be
flancked with the lines and blows, yet so, as the distance of the battery A.
to the point C. be no more then sixty Rodd or six hundred foot, and the breadth
of the Hom-work to be as M. N. or O. P. and being measured, is found to be 34.
Rodd, 7. foot, and 4. Inches. The question is how this must be wrought.

Moreover of the same Hom-work the face is as much as the two greatest
valuation of 1. a. there a. 1. aaaaaaaa. 875. aaaaa. 3470. aaaa. 20640. aa.
104040. a. are alike to 5. aa aaaaa. 1147. aaaaaa. 28182. aaa. 118800. and the
distance A. C. no surther then 900. foot. O. A. and the rest of the conditions
as abovesaid. The question is to find out the breadth of the Horne-work, and
also the other parts as is abovesaid.

THE MATHEMATICAL DESSOLVTION UPON THIS Antwerpian Question: Dedicated to all
the Lovers of that noble Science, by Master John Stampion de John,
Mathematician.


Sirs. The wing of fame has of late fluttered out that now our ingenuity is
brought to the trial of the Touchstone, by proposing of a certain Question
under the name of Senior John Baptista of Antwerp, whose pate is swollen with
self conceitednesse and pride, which being not worth the answering, I will
come to the solution of it, ra ^her to give satisfact on to our Batavians, then
to fulfill the desire of the Propounder: And this may serve as an introduction
unto it, to the end, that the honor which he does assume unto himself, may not
wholly be appropriated to him.

THE DESSOLVTION.
LET this figure above of a Horn-work (as he says) be decyfered by H. whose
breadth M. N. is known to be 34. Rodds, 7. foot, and 7. inches, and the
required battered noted A. whose place is likewise found out by the known
conditions. The first co ^dition is, that the violence of the Canon planted
upon the battery A. beats with as much force upon the flanck E. D. as it does
upon the Face C. D. whence it is manifest, that the Angle of the espaule or
shoulder EDC. being divided into two equal parts with the right line T. V. D.
A. that then this battery of necessity must come to be in the right line T. D
A. Secondly, that the face D. C. and I. G. and the distance D. G. may with the
like Canon shot be flancked and beaten upon by the battery A. that is, when as
the Angles I. A. G. G. A D. D. A. C. are alike one to the other, whence will
follow, that through the five points, C. D. G. I and A. a circular
circumference will pass. Now for that which concerns the third known part,
namely, as that the battery A. must be no further from C. then sixty rodd, or
six hundred foot, A. being the greatest distance in the circumference as is in
the third book and fifteenth proposition which is taken from of the
middle-line of Euclids propositions, we have found out according to this
preparation, the middle line as C. Y. to be sixty rodds, the right line C. I.
to be nine 34. rodds, 7. foot, and 7. inches, or 34. 77/00 and the lines I. G.
G. D. and D. C. to be answerable one to another. Let G. now be the Center, Then
substract I. G. and Q. D. cutting through C. I. in A. and F. then will I. A. or
I. C. be alike to one of the lines, I. G. etc. because now Q. I. stands alike
to I. G. as I. G. is alike to G. A. and by the fourth proposition of the sixth
book, as Q. A. is alike to A. F. so also Q. G. is to G. D. or as I. G. is to G.
A. the cube upon I. G. with the corpse which is made upon the quadrate I. Q. as
superficies, and the depth I. C. are together alike to the corpse upon the
Quadrate I. Q. as superficies, and the depth to be three times the length of I.
G. whence will follow, as well by the corporal cutting of a dye, as we have
shown in our New Algebra which shall shortly God willing come out in English,
as by Sectione Com. by which I. G. is found to make 28. -- V 263. so does E. F.
or D. C. likewise, and lastly the Angle E. D. C. being divided into two equal
parts by the precedent T. D. then you have the cutting of A. in the
circumference out of Q. where your battery is to be cast up.

Now whereas Mr Stampion has not expressed the finding out of the face G. I.
by reason of the little space contained therein, the more because he has fully
shown the Dissolution thereof in his new Algebra, we will here demonstrate the
whole working thereof, how the face G. J. by his new Algebra annexed hereunto
is to be found out.

The operation.
Setting down for G. I. x. so comes xxx + 31293 alike to 2700. x. or xxx --
2700. x like to -- 31293. which is an equality in the third case of the Algebra
of Mr. John Stampion, which being changed by the second case comes to be xxx --
2700 x. as 3129. is alike, out of this vacant number 31293. is extracted a
Cubice-root, 2700. times, the side as Mr. Stampion teaches in his new Algebra,
page 112. and 113. comes the valuation of x 57. whereof the whole working shall
here be set down as follows.

The finding out of the first Letter.
^

The finding out of the second letter.
^

This 57. is now the valuation of x as xxx 2700. x is like to 31293. for the
same value the sign -- set down comes 57, for the least valuation of the
equality then in xxx -- 2700 x is alike to 31293. Now to find out by this 57.
the length of the face, G. I. as follows in the Rule fol. 138. of his new
Algebra, that is, taking the half of 57. which is 28. and multiply the same
quadrate, and the product will be 812. whose tripple is 2436. and being
subtracted out of 2700. the number x. remains 26; whose square root is V.
263. and being deducted from the half of 57. as being 28 there remains 28. --
V263. for the length of the face G. I. and E. F. and D. C. does as much also.

Observe the manner of the Operation.
^

A Dialogue. CHAPTER IX.
General. HAving brought your Approches near unto a Town or a Forttesse,
whether would you choose a Bulwark or a Curtain to be battered with your
Ordnance?


Captain A. Town may be assaulted in diverse places, sometimes you assault one
side, when as you make your Battery on an other, Sometimes you choose a
Bulwark, otherwhiles a Curtain to be battered, with this intention, to take
in the Town, as soon as possible may be. As for me, if I were to take in a
great Town which is populous, I had rather choose to batter a Curtain, then a
Bulwark, which has a high catt, or mount upon it: especially, seeing that in
great Towns the Bulwarks lying one far from an other, they do show the skirt
of the Curtain very open.


Genesis Why would you rather choose a Curtain then a Bulwark?


Capt. Because your Bulwarks are always stronger and better fortified then
your Curtain, and being as it is the principal strength of a place, and better
furnished with platformes, flancks, etc. will require more time, labor, and
charge to batter then your Curtain.


Genesis But what General is so ill experienced, as to labor to batter a
Curtain, having two strong Bulwarks on both sides of him, to flanker him when
he is to put over his Gallerie, and to give an assault upon the Curtain:
peradventure for his labor and pains, he may be well beaten.


Capt. Soft (Good Sir,) Suppose that after a great deal of labor and pains
you have battered a Bulwark, and falling up to the breach to assault it, you
find it cut off, and an Enemy lodged in it, must you not then begin to sap
forward again, to make a new battery, whereas on a Curtain there is not that
means of cutting it off, as upon a large Bulwark.


Genesis Have you ever seen the experience of it?


Capt. Yes Sir, the Prince of Orange took in the Bosch by a Bulwark, and also
Breda, but Mastricht was taken in by making a breach, and springing of a mine,
upon the Curtain between Jonger Port and a bulwark, howsoever the Town of
Cortes upon the frontiers of France, was first battered by the Archduke of
Austria upon the point of a Bulwark, near unto the very joint of the Curtain,
where a high, and a strong turret stood, which did annoy us much, so that we
could not advance forward, but were constrained to leave off our approach on
that side, and began to make a new Battery for a breach in a Curtain on the
Field-side, where there lay a strong Bulwark to defend it, which did our men a
great deal of harm, but wohsoever with great difficulty and much ado, we took
in the Town that way, by lodging our selves in the Curtain: Likewise the city
of Cambray was battered, and taken in upon a Curtain, for all there were two
strong Bulwarks that flanked it, which if we had run our line upon a Bulwark,
we should not have forced it so soon, yea such an occasion might present it
self, that a General may be forced to batter both the one and the other, or to
find out some secret way by undermining a wall, and blowing it up with powder.


Genesis This is for your great Towns, but what say you to a Castle, a Cattadel,
or some narrow Fortress, how will you go to work to take in those with the
best advantage.


Capt. As for your Forts, and Castles, it is much better to batter them upon a
mount or a Bulwark, then upon a Curtain: my reason is this, that in these your
Bulwarks lying close one by an other, will flank one an other with the greater
force, and hide the Curtain much better to defend it, so that one cannot so
easily force it, if the said defenses be not taken away.


Genesis Go to then; a Town then being to be battered, either upon a Curtain or a
Bulwark how many pieces of Ordnance would you have to do it, and how, and in
what manner would you place, and plant your Ordnance upon your batteries to
make a good breach?


Capt To effect this, I would have 18. pieces of canon and half canon, (for
lesser pieces for battery are now grown out of use).


Genesis Whether would you choose more whole canon or half canon?


Capt. To batter a place well either upon an stony or a earthy wall, you may
assure your self, the more whole canon you have, the greater and the
moresufficient your breach will be: for your great battering pieces do spoil,
and beat down any thing, which does meet with their great force and
violence: howsoever of late years, experience has taught at diverse seiges
that your half Canon which are more portable, having good store of them,
will do the business asvvell as your whole canon.


Genesis But at what distance would you make your batteries, for these 18. piece.
of Canons and how near unto the place, which you intend to batter.


Capt. I would counsel a General to approach as near unto that place as
possible may be, and make his batteries some two or three hundred paces one
from an other, and that if it were possible to advance covertly the Approach and
sap, even up to the Counter-scharfe, and very brinke of the moate, to prepare a
way for his Gallerie: not only to batter that place being at hand with the
greater force, but also to keep in, and hinder an Enemy from Sallying out
upon the beseigers, to discover and dismount their Ordnance in Casemates, or if
they have sunk any in their walls or False-bray, and so to terrify them,
that they dare not stir out.


Genesis I am also of your opinion, and hold it for good, yet I fear this will
not be so soon done, and is sooner spoken, then executed, and that before you
can bring your approach and sapp so far it will cost you warm blood, and a
great many men's lives, if you have a stout Enemy within to deal withal, and
one that is very Vigilant, and careful to stand upon his Guard, and his
defense.


Capt. It Is true, this cannot be done without danger, and the loss of men,
but he that is fearful must stay at home, and not come into the wars where
there is neither place nor time, which does free or exempt him from danger: yet
the danger is not always so great, especially in such places, where you have
Earth enough to work with, to cast up your sapps, and to heighthen and deepen
your Approaches, which will show you the more higher you find the ground in
Approaching to the edge of the moate, the deeper trenches you may make and cover
your self by casting up of blinds continually, to keep you from the sight of
the besieged, and it is better when you have brought your approach as it were
under them, then if you were 200. or 300. paces distant from them.


Gene. I pray you Good Sir, how would you plant, and devide these 18. pieces of
Canon?


Capt. I would make a great battery with 8. of them to beat upon a right
line, either upon a Curtain or the point of a Bulwark (which the General
shall find fittest) Two batteries with each 3. Canon to play slope-wise from
the great battery as the ninth plate and 28. and 29. figures shows, and two
batteries, with two half Canon a piece to play as it were cross-wise upon the
breach, and thus you see your 18. peeees planted upon 5. bateries, as you may
observe in the ninth plate and the two figures of a Curtain and of a Bulwark
following.


Genesis Good Sir tell me I pray you how many shot will these 18. pieces of Canon
make in 10. hours, and how much powder will they require.


Capt. In 10. hours they may make some 1500. shot, and will require a matter
of 25000. pound weight of powder, that is 150. barrels full, each barrel
containing 160. pound weight in it.


Genesis You make your account then that every piece in the space of 10. hours is
to shoot 80. shot, that is 8. shot an hour for every piece.


Capt. You may make 10 shot in an hour if you please, if your pieces be
renforced, but as for your ordinary pieces, they have not mettailline substance
enough to bear it: considering also that after you have made 40. shot out of a
piece, it will be so heated, that it must have a cooling time, which must be
at least an hour, for otherwise your piece being grown over hot, it may cause
danger.


Genesis Me thinks that 80. shot for a piece in so long a time were too little,
having often heard, that in that while, a piece may wellbe shot of 130. times,
can you give me your resolution upon this?


Capt. I will tell you Sir what happened once in the Island of Bomble Anno 1599.
we planted a piece by a mill, by which we did annoy the Enemy very much, so
that they were forced to make a battery, and planted a whole Canon and a
demy-canon upon it, seeking to dismount ours. Now shooting with this piece from
four of the clock in the morning, till eleven toward noone, this piece had a
cooling time the space of two hours, and about one of the clock, we began to
play with it again, and continued shooting with it till 4. a clock in the
afternoon: but this piece being not able to endure the force and heating of so
many shot, we were constrained to leave off with it and yet ceased not shooting
with our other pieces from an other battery by command from Don Jews de
Valasco General of our Ordnance, and shooting croswise with some other of our
pieces, we put the Enemies two pieces to silence in the space of an hour, a
Soldier of ours standing by, was curious to keep a taily of the number of all
the shot we made from the morning till four a clock in the afternoon, and
showed me 80. notches, which deducting the two hours cooling, our piece
planted at the mill made 8 shot in an hour, which was as much as could be
required of it.

Senior Diego Vffano give your Translatour leave to interrupt you a little, and
so to conclude this discourse. If you remember at the seige of Ostend which you
mention often in your Chapters and dialogues you were without, and I was within
the Town, that on the seventh of January Anno 1602. Stilo Novo, After Sir
Francis Vere of famous memory (who defended and kept the Town against you) had
deluded you with a Parley, only to gain time, and to make up our Canon and
Sea-beaten works, along the skirt of the old Town, his highness the Archduke
resolved to assault us, and that morning began to batter Sand-hill and
Schotenburgh, to make a breach for you against that night, with intent to
Assault us (as you did) and to have entered the Town, and have put us all to
the sword, the Relation whereof you shall hear in the end of this book. Now
you had placed and planted your 20. pieces of Canon to batter them in this
manner, 8. from your battery at the foot of the downs, 8. from a battery on
the right hand of the downs, 6. more which you had made upon the sand, and as
it were raised out of the sea: the first shot upon the breach in a right line,
and the other 2. slopewise, as your two figures following do demonstrate.
These 20. pieces of Canon toward noone had a cooling time, for a matter of
some 2. hours, just as you have said, and afterward you began to batter the
breach and old Town again, till it was almost twilight, and then they cooled
again, till you were ready to give us an assault, and before you fell on as I
do well remember, you shot of one of your Canons with a hollow bullet which
flew over the Town and made a great humming noise as a warning piece to the
Count of Bucquoy, who lay on the East side, that you were then ready to fall
on, and that he should do the like, this was your Signal: Now General Vere
knowing well your intent, gave order to the Gentleman of our Ordnance who had
the guard upon Sandhill, that he should keep a true taily, and an account of
all the shot you made that day with your 20. pieces of Canon upon the breach
and the old Town which being cast up, there were found to be made that day
from morning till night 2200. shot, which was found to be an 110. shotfor every
piece, and 11 shot an hour for every piece, which is more then 8. but I verily
believe your pieces were renforced. This by the way, and so I return again to
your own dialogue.


Genesis (Good Sir) I pray you show me how you would batter the point of a
Bulwark (as the figure 28. following demonstrates,) and give me some reasons
as well defensive as offensive.


Capt. I am willing to give your Lordship content, and say, If I were to batter
the point of a Bulwark or a Bastion, I would have the same number of battering
Canon, and planted in the same for me and manner as they were for the Curtain
and to shoot sloope and crosswise also, and if your approaches were advanced so
far they should be planted upon the very brinke of the moate and upon the
Counterscharfe, I would plant 4. of them so, that they should dismount the
Enemies Canon in their Casemates, or any if they had sunk them in their
Falsebray which should wait upon that occasion.


Genesis I am of your mind and prefer such a battery before all others who are
of the opinion that they had rather choose a Curtain then a Bulwark to be
battered.


Capt. You have heard my reasons for that, and see the figures following traced
out to you. But as for your Bulwark the besieged may cut it off (as you may
mark in the figurs of retrenchments and Cuttings off in the second part of this
book) for indeed it will be a hard matter to force an Enemy out of a Bulwark,
who is resolved to loose it by peecemeale and degrees and there is not so much
danger in assaulting of a Curtain, which being once well battered and beaten
down with your Ordnance, you have an easier way and entrance to fall on with
your troops of men, to enter the Town or Fortress, but for the defense which
is made from your flanking Bulwarks, or your Casemates, you must make batteries
upon the brinke of the moate against them, (as is said) to dismount the Enemies
pieces, and to flanker with your Ordnance the parapets of the Bulwarks to
beat them about their ears, that the bulwarks may lie the more open to you,
and I think this way is the least danger.


Genesis But the besieged their cuttings off, may they not be made as well upon a
Curtain as upon a Bulwark?


Cap. No, for the Rampire being thinner, you have neither so much ground, nor
the like accommodation in a Curtain as in a Bulwark, and indeed, a Governor of
a town or of a fortress if he were put to his choice, had rather to be
assaulted on a Bulwark (then on a Curtain) by cutting it off into the form of a
half moon, that he might make a new resistance, and defend it with a less
number of men: Besides, in a Bulwark the besieged have this advantage over the
Assailants, which is very dangerous for them, that they may make a mine within
the bowels of their Bulwark, when an enemy shall attempt to assault it, and
thinking to enter the breach, and take the town, they may be blown up into the
air by a countermine, the like also may happen to the besieged, the
Assaillants springing their mine also in a Bulwark, when they think they stand
upon their best defense.


Genesis May not the like be done also in a Curtain?


Cap. No, It will not take the like effect as in a Bulwark, for a breach being
once made in a Curtain, for as an enemy may assault it at large, so they may
bring a greater number of men to fight to help to defend it, whereas in a
bulwark they are pend up and straighted in a narrow place, which may be cut
off, and will require a fewer number of men to defend it, whereas those which
are to force it, must be constrained to bring up a great many men to assault,
who in an instant may be in danger of blowing up.


Genesis Your reasons (good Captain) are not to be slighted, but as for me, I hold
it safer to batter and assault the breach of a bulwark then of a curtain. For
though the besieged may cut it off, and defend it with a fewer number of men,
yet the Assaulters have this advantage over the besieged defendants, that they
have more place and elbow room, and may find a less resistance then in a
Curtain, seeing that one may make as great a breach in a Bulwark, as in a
Curtain, because your Ordnance may beat it flat and level with the ground, and
choosing rather a Bulwark: I will here with conclude this discourse, and now
show you the figures both of the one and of the other in this plate following.




HOW A CANONIER OUGHT TO GOVERN himself in making of a good shot. CHAP. X.
AN occasion may happen sometimes, that a piece must be curiously, and justly
Levelled, especially, when one is to dismount an enemies piece, which lies in
some secret port hole or Casemate, which may hinder and annoy the Besiegers of
a town, or Fortress. It behooves then a good Gunner, to know well the
condition and quality of his piece, having had the trial of it many times. For
it is impossible, that a canonier can, let him be never so expert, know what
his piece will do before he has practice and experience of it. He must not
shoot at all adventures, neither must he in charging of it, ram and stopp
the powder too hard, but that it may take fire in the twinkling of an eye, and
that his piece may not recoyle to much, for it is most certain, the less the
powder is rammed in, the less will be the recoyling of the piece, and the
easier is the shot. The like consideration must he also observe in his bullet,
that it be not driven in too hard, but that it lies gently in the mould, and
have such vent as is requisite. Finally, he must lay his piece by the Quadrant
above taught, and Level as they ordinarily use to do, taking his aim just in
the midst of the frizes, having marked well with a small file the point or
button of the sight, and this may be done very easily, if he has a care to
prevent all the accidents reckoned up in the 9 Chapter especially, those which
makes a piece shoot aside, considering that a good shot makes a Canonier to be
beloved and respected.

The fittest pieces for this effect are your ordinary cannons, demi and quarter
canon, your culverings, demi and quarter.

Such a good shot the General ought to take notice of, and to recompense such
a Canonier liberally, not only to encourage him that made it, but also the
other canoniers to do the like Jews Collade in his manuell practice writes,
that at the Seige of Sienna there was a piece planted upon the Lead, or walking
place of the great church which overlooked the Besiegers approches and did them
much harm, and though many shot were made at it, yet they could not dismount
it, till at last there was a German canonier found, which at the very first
shot, did not only dismount it, but also shot the canonier, and some that
stood by him, making their Legs and arms fly up into the air. Which the
Marquess of Martinia, General of that Army seeing, it pleased him so much,
that he took a chain of gold from off his neck, and gave it to this Canonier,
which had made so brave a shot, which did not only encourage this canonier,
but also stirred up others thereby to gain the like recompense and reputation,
when as occasion might present it self.

The like was done also (though not of that account) at the fiege of Ostend,
There was a boat, which would come through the channel into the Town, and
running in, the rudder was shot off by one of our canon bullets, whereat the
shippers were much affrighted, and withal let their anchor fall, and were glad
to save themselves by swimming into the town, leaving so their boat riding at
an Ankor between the dike and the Town, which Marquis Spinola perceiving,
enquired among his Captains if there were ever a soldier so venturous as to
swim to the boat and cut the cable of it, for which he should not only be
advanced but also he should be liberally rewarded. Upon this there were many
brave soldiers offered to do it: but when it came to the push, and had stripped
themselves to go into the water, the enemy within powered so volley of shot upon
them, that they began to flinch and grow faint-harted, the Marquis being loath
to venture his men, and to employ so great a courage for so small a matter,
called them back again. But at last there came an excellent canonier
considering as well the service that he might do to his Marie, as the pleasure
which the Marquess might take in it: offered himself, and entreated me being
then General of the Ordnance, that I would be pleased to give him leave, that
he might make some shot at it, with promise, that within two or three shot he
would shoot the cable asunder, and make the boat come floating to us to the
downs side.

Upon this I gave him leave, though I feared, both powder, and bullets would be
misspent: with the first shot he missed, but with the second he struck the cable
in pieces: so that the boat indeed came floating to us. This brave shot pleased
the Marquess exceedingly, and commending this canonier greatly, gave him a
good piece of gold, or two and besides promised to advance him.

It is true Senior Diego Vffano, your translator being then page unto General
Francis Vere, who then commanded within this Town, was then a spectatour of
it, and Sir Francis Vere and diverse Officers which looked on, commended also
your Canonier highly, for making so brave a shot, but I will put you in mind of
two or three other, more famous then that. If you remember, there lay a whole
Canon of ours upon the West Bulwark, which carried a bullet of 48. or 49 pound
weight, and as it was a brave piece, so had it an excellent Canonier, one
Francis Nelson an Englishman, who served Queen Elizabeth, of ever blessed
Memory, in the Brill, he shooting so sure with it, that he dismounted 2. or 3.
of your pieces which were planted upon your high Catt upon the Downs, for a
revenge you did make a battery of 2. or 3. Canon to dismount our piece, and one
of your Canoniers made so good a shot, that he shot his bullet just into the
very bore or month of our Canon, ours being charged, your bullet and ours
striking together in our Canon, from that violent blow flew sparks which gave
fire to some loose corns of powder which were not well driven home, and so our
piece giving fire to it self, sent you back your own bullet, and ours to
accompany it, without breaking or doing any harm to our piece, and this is
most true, for there are some Officers yet living that saw it.

The second was this, you had a half Canon that indevoured to dismount one of
ours, which also sought to dismount yours, both Canoniers having levelled their
pieces as right as possibly they could, and giving fire at an instant together,
your bullet and ours meeting one another in the air, with the violence of that
encounter, both bullets breaking, the pieces of them flew up as high into the
Air as Paul's steeple, if Vandermyle the Controuler of the States Ordnance were
alive, he could tell you that this strange shot is true, as well as I.

And now you are a discoursing, I will truly relate two or three more unto you
which came from your Catt, Some of our Run-awaies could tell and show you
almost in what house General Vere lay in Ostend, and you had a shrewd spite
at him, for some days you have shot eight or nine Canon shot through the upper
part of his lodging, and one night amongst the rest, having bin the round, for
he was very vigilant and careful to look to your proceedings, and by all means
possible to hinder your approaches, coming home after Sun rising, when he knew
there was no danger, he went to take his rest for 3. or 4. hours, and lay
down and slept upon his bed in an upper chamber, awaking he called for a clean
shirt, and while his footman was ayring of it before a Charcoale fire in the
Chimney, while one that was then his Page was a pulling a silk quilted
was-coate over his ears, and calling for the shirt to put it over his head,
his footman coming with it, just came a Canon bullet of nine and forty pound
weight, through a winescot bedstead just by Sir Francis Vere and his Page, the
Lacquey coming with the shirt, shot both his bowels and the shirt to pash,
which blood light and sprang on him and his page: Was not this a narrow escape?

After this Sir Francis Vere would lie no more in this upper chamber, but
removed his own lodging to another lower Room, howsoever from your high Catt
or Mount you could find us out again. For a while after, Sir Francis Vere
going every night the Round, and visiting the Guards without the Town, to
discover how you did advance your approaches, and to make you buy that ground
full dearly, The Sun being up came home to take his wonted rest, till ten a
clock before noone, making our nights the days, and part of the day our night,
for a resting time The same page after Sir Francis Vere had called for him,
came into his chamber, and having a little firkin standing by the hearth, in
taking up a few Charcoale ashes into it, comes an other Bullet of some 48 pound
weight from your Catt, shootes through the utmost part of the chimney, a little
above the mantle tree, and the bullet having come through a good part of the
forehouse, and being somewhat deaded, falls just by the pages ears, into the
very firkin, which the page was a putting the ashes into, brake it, and made a
dint upon the hearth, all the ashes flying out, the page giving a leap toward
his Masters bed, for we could scarce see one another, because the ashes made
such a dust, and presently fell down above twenty great brick-bats, which the
bullet had loosened in the chimney (had he not leapt away) upon his head, this
was an other escape, but for a revenge the page got one of Sir Francis Veres
sentinels, that stood in the street before his door, to crew up this bullet in
a wheel-barrow up to the west bulwark, to the English Canonier before
mentioned, and because you write in your former Dialogue, that one bullet may
fit the Calibre or bore of another piece, this bullet fitted so justly our
Canon above mentioned to a a hair, which was sent going to you again, piping
hot out of our Canon to your Catt: and he made so good a shot, that I verily
believe, he sent some of you to Purgatory, for we could discover some Arms and
Legs which flew up into the Air, and so you were paid with your own coin.

One or two more, and then I have done, You may remember the seventh of
January, that day which you did batter Sandhill, and the skirt of the old Town
before mentioned, for all your often shooting, yet there was one half Canon lay
upon it, not far from your breach undismounted. The same page, after he had
taken his Level, gave fire upon two Horses and a Wagon which came riding
along the strand from Albertus Sconce, toward your Pile Battery, it seems
laden with powder or bullets, he made so direct a shot, that he struck his
mark, killed one of your horses, and the Wagon shot a pieces. The page being
overjoyed with this shot, he would needs make an other, and whiles he was a
levelling his piece at an other mark, one of your Canoniers turns a piece
aside from the Pile Battery, and shoots just in at the very port-hole of our
half Canon, and came so right, that it licked off a pound or two of the mettle
of the Muzzle upon the upper Frizes of our half Canon, some pieces of this
mettle killed a Gentleman that stood by as a spectatour, and shot Sir John
Ogles Cook into his belly, which was there likewise, but the page which stood
behind the brich, a levelling the piece with his thumb, escaped, and had no
harm, but your bullet flying by his ear made such a humming noise in his
head, that he thought there had been a swarm of Bees in it. This I have
written, not for any Ostentation, but only to show you how miraculously (yea
even in the greatest dangers) God can preserve his servants, according to his
promise: Psalm. 90. verse 7. A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand
at thy right hand, yet it shall not come nigh thee.

One more, and then I will end my digression: at the last seige of the Bosch
the year we took it in, Anno 1629. We having advanced our approaches close
under your little Skonce, a musketteir of ours, putting the nose of his Musket
through the Musket baskets to give fire, one of your Firelocks lying upon the
snap for him, gave fire upon him just at the very same instant, and shot his
firelock bullet right into the very mouth or boore of his musket, so that the
bullet striking against the scrue of his brich, brust open the touchhole of
his musket, and a piece of the bullet came out of the said touchhole, while
the Prince of Orange, Sir Horace Vere, Colonel General of the English, and
diverse other Officers stood by, and thus you see how wonderfully it pleased
God sometimes to preserve his creature.

Now I come to you again, where you exhort all Master-Gunners, and Canoniers,
that will study this Art, that they with great care and diligence practice
these rules abouesaid, for the levelling, aiming, and taking their marks
right, remembering, that there is more dexterity, and cunning to be shown in
shooting at a ship, sailing away swiftly before the wind then at a Troop of
Horse, or Men marching softly upon the Land, or to dismount a piece planted
upon a Tower or a Bulwark, where you have an immovable mark, especially when
as you are to shoot upward.

This Art must be learned and practiced, when you have not much to do, that
when necessity calls for your employment, you may then not only be able to do
your Prince and Country service against their Enemies, but also gain your
self fame and reputarion.

Now having treated at large in the former Chapter, how you shall level your
piece point blanck, level with the mettle or at a range; according to the
elavation you give it, To shut up all, take this observation along with you,
that if the muzzle of your piece, or the button of it be higher then those of
the brich, then it will carry over, Again, if you take your aim from the
button resting only upon the thickness of the Mettaline-substance, your
bullet will always fall short. But if your frizes, be alike, as well at the
muzzle as at your brich, then you shall be sure to shoot level with the
mettell of your piece, and shall not fail to strike the mark you shoot at if
it lies within the terms of the points above esaid.

NOW AND IN WHAT MANNER A GENERAL OF THE Ordnance ought to plant his Canon in
a day of Battle, whereby he may most annoy an Enemy.
Lutracted out of the second Treatise of Don Diego Vffano his fifth Dialogue
between the General of the Ordnance, and a Captain, as follows.
General, SIR, I would fain know of you, how Ordnance ought to be placed in a
Day of Battle, for to gaul the Enemy most?


Captain, I make no question but your Lordship having had experience in the
Wars of Savoy and Hungary, can tell better then I am able to speak, and if I
should use a tedious discourse, it might then seem that the Scholar might
presume to teach his Master.


Genesis Howsoever, in such a case I would willingly take the advice of an old
experienced Soldier, and especially of such a one, who has served in these
parts. As for me, I dare not boast of any great experience, having had enough
to do to look unto my own affairs, neither have I had much leisure to inform
my self well about Artillery. But now seeing I am to receive that charge upon
me, I pray you tell me, as a man who has been beaten thereunto, and has had
long experience in the Wars, how they do use to plant Ordnance in these
quarters.


Capt. Sir, There has been but a few battles fought in these parts, and to
speak truly I am not able to satisfy you touching this point. Nevertheless, I
will tell you what I have seen in two, wherein I was present. In the one the
Ordnance was planted in the head of the Battalions, and in the other between
them, two by two, and three by three, upon the flanks and wings of the
Musketeers, and blinded with the wings of the Cavallerie. But as for me, I am
of the opinion that it is best to plant some pieces in the front of the Army,
which may play upon the Enemies troops on all sides: seeking out always for
this effect, some places of advantage to place them in, that you may not be in
danger of loosing your pieces. And though you cannot get such an advantage, yet
your pieces being in the head of your Battle, will be of less service,
because when you are to come to the Chock and joining of Battles, they may in
some wise annoy your own men, which I saw in one of these Battles abovesaid.


Genesis Therefore I think it were fitter they should be placed upon both the
flanks, and in the Reere of the Battaillions, by leaving a free place of Arms,
which may give no offense to our own men.


Capt. I can hardly believe (Illustrious Sir) that that would be so expedient,
for an Enemy perceiving that the Front is left bare without Ordnance, he will
take the more courage to fall on, and come up to the charge: Therefore, I hold
it more fitting, that the Artillery may be divided some here some there, both
before the Front, and upon the Flanks, placed some fifty or an hundred paces
one from another, and then there will be no danger when the Enemy shall come
up to Chock, to encounter you, or offend our own men, especially when they are
fastened to them by drawing-Ropes and iron Rings, that upon an instant they may
be remooved and turned for the advantage of our own Troops, and give fire as
fast as they can charge and discharge among the Enemies Troops, which is a
matter of great moment for the obtaining of a Victory.

But it happens very seldom that such convenient places can be found for the
planting of Ordnance in a Battle, as were to be wished, for oftentimes one
shall be driven of necessity to make choice of such places as the ground will
afford, by reason of woods, hills, marish grounds, and such like
disadvantagious places as you may meet withal, and for which one can give no
certain rule, but that the General by his wisdom and discretion may make
choice of the best advantages, which may annoy the Enemy most, and give the
least offense to his own men, either by dazzling them by the sun, the raising
of Dust, and which way the wind drives the smoke, both of Ordnance and small
shot, which though little in themselves, yet may prove to his men great
impediments and disadvantagious. But leaving these things, we will now return
again to our former discourse, because your Lordship is of the opinion that the
Ordnance ought rather to be planted upon the wings and flanks of the
Battailions then otherwise, which I dare not approve of, in regard that when
the Troops are to encounter with the Enemy, and come up to the charge, our own
men may be more annoyed by our own Ordnance (which may breed a confusion) then
the Enemies; when as the wings of our horse which are upon the flanks shall
come up to charge the enemy, so that our own pieces might puzzle them greatly,
when as they are to play from the flanks, besides the mischief which might
happen among our own men. Therefore one ought to be very careful and
circumspect in planting them, and this is that which out of my own experience I
am able to say upon this question. Wherefore I do advise every Captain of the
Ordnance, and Master-Gunners, to use some light field pieces, and small Drakes,
which upon every occasion may be remooved from one place to another, and
courageously advanced to the places of most advantage, which might offend the
Enemy.


Genesis Sir, The reasons you use have given me good satisfaction, but I pray you
resolve me of one thing more, that is, how a General of the Ordnance ought to
carry himself in the day of Battle.


Capt. In such a time the General is to show most his wisdom, discretion and
experience, which chiefly consists herein, that he and his Lieutenant keep
their train together in good order, to have a vigilant eye upon all accidents
that may fall out, and to make choice of such ground for the planting of his
Ordnance as the General of the Army and he shall think best, to see that all
things be in a readiness, the Ordnance well placed, and that the
master-Gunners, Gentlemen of the Ordnance, and Canoniers do their best
endeavor, and acquit themselves like men. It is partly also his charge to see
that the whole Army be well provided with Munition, as powder, bullets, and
match, because the Ammunition marches under his Train, He is to be near the
General of the Army upon all occasions, to receive his directions and
commands, and to see them executed speedily, and to know of him after what forr
^ he will make his Battle, that he may plant his Ordnance accordingly, and so
to find out hills and heights, to play over his own men, and offend the Enemy
most. And when an Enemy shall present himself, and come up to the charge, to
draw and plant his Ordnance as near their horse as possible may be, to hinder
them from breaking in upon the divisions of foot, taking along with him Saylors
and Pioniers to help to draw up the Ordnance, and sufficient guards to defend
them, and this is that which in so great a business is the charge and duty of
the General of the Ordnance, and which may be required of him.


Genesis Captain, This discourse has pleased me well, and given me good
contentment, and I am glad that I met with you upon this occasion. Adieu.


THE TENTH CHAPTER.
TREATING OF THE DIVERSE SORTS OF BRIDGES used in the service of the Lords the
States of the United Provinces.

MAny a brave occasion in the wars has bin lost for want of Bridges to pass
over a River a Brook, or a Moate, therefore the States for any piece of
service, have always diverse bridges in a readiness, both small and great.
The smaller sort for any sudden enterprise, or for putting over the moat of a
Town, a Hom-work, or a Half moon are 3. as first a Cork bridge now not in use,
secondly a Bulrush bridge, the pieces whereof are ten foot long, and six or
seven foot broad, that four men may go over them in Front, described unto you
in my second part in the Chapter of Approches, figure 159. whereof many pieces
being joined fast together with ropes and Ankors, will lay a bridge over a
moate, a brook, or a ditch for men to pass over, the third sort is a wicker,
or a basket bridge, as shall be hereafter described.

Moreover they have three sorts of other Bridges, namely, a small boat bridge,
with beams, plancks, roaps and ankors, which are carried upon long wagons in
the Army, whereof you may see one of them in this treatise, chapter the third,
figure ten, of these we have commonly twelve, that goes along with our Army
upon a long wagon, drawn with 15. couple of horses, and a Thillet horse.

Besides those above mentioned, there are two great bridges, the one called a
punt bridge, which is laid longwaies, end to end over the Rhine, or any other
great River, and the other a Maze schip bridge, as you shall see in the figure
following.

Command then being given to the Captain of the Bridges and his men, for the
first they lade Ordnance, and all manner of equipage in those great Punts, as
beams, plancks, cordage, cables, anckors, windlasses, winches, and all other
necessaries, to bring them up to the Rendevous.

Now when the Captain of the Bridge is to lay a great Punt bridge over the
Rhyne, or the Whale, as at Nemegen, Schencksconce, Wesell, or at Rhenebergh,
taking first the breadth, and distance of the River from the one side to the
other, they can easily give a guess, how many of these punts being 50 foot
long, and 10. foot broad, will serve to reach over the River. The first punt
then being laid longwise from the edge of the one side of the River being
fastened to two great Stakes (and Anckers) driven into the ground, they then
lay at the furthest end of the first punt. and other punt laying Brush at both
ends of the punts, which rises and falls, that horse and wagons may pass over
them, and always fasten and bind them together with ropes and cables which
stays the punts, by casting out ankors and cables into the stream, to hold
them fast together, and thus they do till they have laid over 15. or 16. of
these long punts which will reach over from the one to the other side of the
river, at the end whereof there are cast up two half moons, (if it be not
near a Town, and a Steckado or two Gats made, that none may pass over it
without leave, having always a guard to defend it and keep it from burning.

Number 37 is the figure of a piece of a basket Bridge, such a one as was used
at our last enterprise upon Hulst, made of wicket, about the bigness of ones
middle finger, with supporters of wickers within it, as hedges, a foot distant
one from another, to strengthen it, and help it from bending, when one goes
over it, being also matted in the bottom, and covered round about with waxed
Canvas, being carried between two men, with two cool staves some 13 foot long,
as two men carries a hand barrow, being laid crossewise piece to piece, and
fastened together with ropes, and at both ends anckors, the length whereof from
a to b is 6. foot, and the breadth from c to d two foot and a half, and is a
foot in height, so that 2 men in front may go over a moat upon any surprisall
of a Town.

Number 38 is a Maze bridge laid crossewaies, such a one as our Army passed
over the Maze at the Grave, Venlo, and Mastricht, having beams some 15 or 16
foot long, and cross beams over the Maze schips, with plancks from the one
side of the river to the other, and is held fast together by cables and
anckors, as the figure following of such a bridge does demonstrate.

Number 39 is the figure of a Mathematical Horse watermill, first invented by
Vitrivius, and is of singular use for the drayning out of water in Marrish
grounds and places, being drawn but with one horse, as the figure
demonstrates, and by relieving it with fresh horses and a Driver may go night
and day: the experience whereof we saw at the seige of the Bosch, what
abundance of water twenty of them drayned out of the overflowne Meddowes and
the River of the Dummell, which did help and further our Approaches greatly.

Number 40. is the figure of a Water Scoupe, made after this manner following,
first you take three long pooles or Sparrs, and at the top bind them together
with a match or a Cord, from the top whereof discends an other Cord, which is
bound fast to the have of the Scoupe, as you may see, and the feet of the
Sparrs put into the ground Triangular wise, with which you see the figure of a
man casting water out of a moate or a ditch. This plate P following will show
you the Figures of all that is said above.



THE DEMONSTRATION OF A COPPER OVEN, A KNEADING Trough, and a Bread Chest, with
the appurtenances thereunt o belonging.
NVmber 41. is the figure of a new invented Copper Oven, set upon three Iron
chimnies for the baking of bread for an Army, having at both ends two mouths
or doors, which opens and shuts, whereof the length of one of them from a to b
is nine foot long, the breadth from c to d is three foot, the height from e to
f to the top is a foot and a half, and the bottom upon which the bread bakes
marked g h is two foot and a half. This Oven (as is said) stands upon three
Iron chimnies, noted 1. into which fuel and turf is put to heat this Oven, how
many loafes, and pounds of bread it will bake in three hours, the list
following will show you.

Number 42. is the figure of a Kneading Trough, which from k to i is seven foot
long, and from m to n is two foot broad, the ledge or cover o is three foot
high, and the bottom p is almost two foot broad, to this kneading trough, you
must have water pailes, dow knives, peeles, to draw out the batches of bread,
and all other necessaries belonging to a Baker.

Number 43. is the figure of a Bread chest very useful in the wars for the
carrying of Bread and Biscuit upon a march, whereof the length from q to r is
eight foot long, the breadth from s to t is four foot long, the height from u
to w is three foot to the Cover, and the roof or Cover from w to x is likewise
three foot high. This Bread-chest being set up a wagon, and drawn with three
lusty horses, will carry a thousand, yea twelve hundred pounds of bread or
biscuit, if need require the Figures follow.



THE DEMONSTRATION OF MATERIALS USED IN OUR WARS FOR the making of Trenches,
Approches, Saps, and works of Fortification, as follows.
Number 44. is a short plated Shovell to work in a Sapp or in a Gallery. Number
45. is a long plated Shovell. Number 46. is an Iron Crow, or a Goats foot.
Number 47. is a Hatchet to cut wood with. Number 48. is a Mattock. Number 49.
is a spade with plated iron. Number 50. is a Sod-Spitter. Number 51. is a
Pickaxe. Number 52. is a two handed Rammer to drive Palizadoes into the Ground.
Number 53. is a wheele-barrow to carry earth and Sodds in, for the making up of
works Palizadoes of two sorts you shall find in my second part in the chapter
of Approaches. figure 166. And Frize Ruyters or Turne-Pikes in the same
chapter, figure 165. And foot angles or foot tanternailes in the same chapter
figure 147. All other warrlike preparations, and neceessaries you shall find in
the list following.


The Office, and charge of the General, or Master of the Ordnance, and all
other Officers subordinate under his Train of Artillery Munition, and
Victuals, as the particular lists of all preparations, and necessaries
belonging to an Army shall be here demonstrated.
THe General or Master of the Artillery (as is shown in my second part of
the chief officers of the field page 9.) is a very honorable charge and has
command and super intendencie over all the Ordnance, Arms, Munitions, Engines,
Materials and Instruments for work, yea, of all things belonging to the
Ordnance, and has also absolute Command over all Inferior Officers
appartayning to the Train of the Ordnance, as over the Lieutenant of The
Ordnance, The Controuler, The Clarke, of the Ammunition, and Materials, The
Gentlemen, of the Ordnance, and Master Gunners, Canoniers, Armores, Inginiers,
The Captains of the Pyonters, and Mineurs, over all Smiths. Carpenthers, and
wheel wrights, over all Artificers, and Handie-crafts-men, and all such as do
attend upon the train of the Artillery, Munition, and Materials. And when the
Army is to go into the field, he sends his wartants and patents out to all
officers under his Charge, to meet him at the Rendevous.

Now for the better help, and discharging of his office, he has a Lieutenant
of the Ordnance allowed him, who in his absence has absolute command also
over this Train, and is given him as an assistant, to help him in the
execution of his Commands.

And because the General, or Master of the Ordnance, is commanded in his
Commission, and particular Instruction, to keep a perfect account of all
great, and small pieces of ordnance, Equipages, Munitions, Materials, etc. he
has allowed him a Controuler of the Ordnance, which Controuler is obliged, and
bound to keep a pertinent list of all the pieces of ordnance great and small
in the Arsenals, and Magazines, belonging to the Land, registring the weight of
them, the Arms, and other things, that stand upon them, as likewile what
weight every bullet is, which every piece of ordnance does shoot, who cast
them, how they came to belong unto the Land, moreover, to keep notice of all
Carriages, wheels, plated, or vnplated, yea off all thingselfe belonging to
the train of the Artillery, as may appear more at large in his Instruction.

Unto this Train of the ordnance there are allowed two Commisses, or Clerks,
one for all things appertaining to the ordnance, The other over the Munition,
Arms, Materials, Tools, and over all other necessaris, belonging to the
Army, as shall appear in the list following.

The Council of State, having resolved for the field, they send for the
Controuler of the ordnance, and gives him a list of all necessaries belonging
to the Canon, where of the Controuler delivers a coppie of yt to the Clarke of
the ordnance, who receives charge to take on certain Conductours to the number
of some 40, that by their help and care, all things contained in the list,
may be in good order taken out of the Arsenals and Magazins of the Land, and
to see them well embarked, or put upon wagons to be brought with all expedition
to the Rendevous appointed, and because the Ordnance, Munitions, and Materials
may be taken out of several Towns and Magazins, he gives to every Conductour
his charge in writting, to lade such Ordnance, Munition, and Meterials, in
those places as he is appointed which they are to shipp, and bring them up to
the place designed, as they will enswere to the contrary, if any thing should
be lost.

A List, or Supposition. What Ordnance, Munition, Matterials, and other
necessaries, are useful to be carried into the field with an Arime, as
follows.
IMprimes for battery 6. whole Canons reinforced, 14 Demi Canons reinforced, 6
long Field pieces, carrying a bullet of o lb. weight, 16 short Demi Drakes, of
24 lb. bullet, 12 quatre Canon Drakes of 12 lb. bullet, 12 short Drakes, or
Sakers of 6 lb. bullet, and 14 small Drakes of 3 lb. bullet making in all 80.
For o whole Canon spare Cariages, 6 for the 14 demi Canon Drakes 8 for the
quarter Canon Drakes, 6. for the Faulconets, and saker Drakes 12, facit in all
29. Spare Ship Carriages for these several pieces of Ordnance 20. Spare
wheels proportionally for the Ordnance above speecifyed of all sorts. 20.
Fore-waggons, or Carriages 80. Spare wheels for the fore said Carriages 22.
Block wagons and long wagons to lay, ordnance on, 25. Spare fore and after
wheels 12. Spare Thillers for the Block wagone 3. Spare long wagons for the
Block wagons 2. Spare Axeltrees, and draughts 3. Sledges, to draw ordnance on
8. Fearnes, or windlaces complete 8. Eshellets, ormartinets. 6. Iron Crows, or
Goats feet, handspikes, and levers of all soorts. 20. Brass pullies, or
truckles 20. Winches, or the Endless screwes 12. Iron bolts. 10. Spare kanns of
Salett oil, for the Engines abouesaid 6. Tarr, or grease boxses, 25. Spare
hoggs-grease for the Carriages. 1300. For every piece of these Ordnauce
abouesaid, three ladies, three Rammers, and 3 sponges a piece facit 240. Sponge
Copper nails 1200. Sheep skins, to make spunges off 400. Wooden levers for
the Ordnance 50. Iron Crows 20. For 6 whole Canons bullets of 48 lb. 2000. For
14 demi Canons, bullets of 24 lb. 3000. For 6 field pieces, o ^ demi culvering
of 12 lb. 1500. For 16 Faulconets of 6 lb. bullet 1000. For the Demi Canon
Drakes of 24 lb. 2500. For the quarter Canon drakes of 22 lb. 2100. For the
Sakers of 6 ib. bullet 2100. For the small drakes of 3 lb. bullet 2200. The
Gabinen and Canon bassketts, are made in the Field, some 6. or 6. and a half
foot high, and 3. foot in dyamiter, and costs 18. sts. d'peece Latton, Boxses
for the cartredge shoot for every piece 100. facit in all 4000. Powder for
these 80 pieces of ordnance 400000 lb. Match in Bundles 300000. Pouch-Barrils
for the charging of ordnance with each a wodden hammer, and his dich 80.
Haire-cloaths 100. Hurdles to plant ordnance on which are stiff 500. Hand
Barrowes 50. Musket Baskets of all soorts. 1200. Wooden hoockes 20. Thiller
Harnase complete 150. Spare roapes and other harnase. 150. Plated cross
staves for the drawing roapes after every couple of horses 189. Whip cord to
bind with all 1000 pair. Horse collars. 800. Drawing roapes of 40 fadome a
piece 30. Half drawing roapes 30. Steering-roapes 60. Windlasse Roapes 8.
Strycking roapes 8. Drawing lines ^0. Neck lines to draw up shipping, or use
full about ordnance 40. Ramming blocks to drive in piles, in the ground 12.
Small Rammers to drive in piles 10. Spare roapes 12. Great Iron hammers 7.
Beams, and underlayers for plat-formes, and other uses. 10. foot long 500.
Planckes for bedding and other uses 4000. Sparres 6000. Spades 1000. Showells
2000. Axses 500. Hatches 500. Hand bills 500. Pick axses 300. Mattocks 300.
Iron hammers for the Greacers of ordnance 12. Lanternes 30 lb. Candlet 300.
Frie-lights to putt in pitched roopes 20. Leather pailes to quench fry with all
30. Canvas pieces, to make blinds with 30. Pack thread 20. Sail yarne 4 lb.
Firkins of ronnd pitched roopes 12. Bolts, and clenchers for the Axeltrees of
Carriages, and the Block-waggons 60. Bolts for the Thiller carriages 60. Bolts
and clenchers for the long wagons 60. After hooks for the carriages 20. After
Nails 50. Spare clenchers and wedges for the ordnance 40. Wedges for the block
and long wagons 160. Small sheires, with bolts and rings 100. Shieres with
chains 30. Nails for the bolts 150. Great iron Nails 150. Iron Staples 100.
Latton Boxses with cartriedge shot 1000. Towe of diverse sorts 100 lb. Bundles
of roapes and Cordage 10. Nails 8 inches long 600. Nails 7 inches long 2000.
Nails 6 inches long 6000. Nails 5 inches long 12000. Double sizd nails
20000. Single sized nails 20000. Small nails and lath nails of all sorts
20000. Bundles of bar iron 400 lb. Plate iron, and small bars for smiths
3000 lb. Of staue steel 1000 lb. Item all smiths Tools, and vtensiles. All
Carpenrers Tools, as many as shall be need full. Two great Morters, mounted upon
their Carriages. One small Mortar for each 100 granades of 160 lb. fore he
great, and 100 grenades of 20 lb. for the esser. Hand grenades to cast into
saps, trenches, and works.
A list of some other Materials, and necessaires, which the Clarke of the
Materials uses to carry with him to the Field, to make a Magazine of in the
Army as follows.
Powder for Musketeers 500000 lb. Match in Bundles 80000. Sow-lead to cast
muskett bullets with 50000. Moulds of 12 bullets a piece to cast in 50.
Haire-cloaths to cover the powder with 60. A Great many of old pieces of sails
to make blinds with 1000. Spare Musketts 500. Spare Musket rests 1000. Spare
Bandeliers 500. Spare Muskett stocks 300. Pikes 16 foot long besides the head
2000. Half-Pikes with Loops staue-feete 300. Corslets, and Head pieces 300.
Armors of proof with Caskets of proof 100. Iavelines double pointed, with
iron to putt through the tres of Turnepikes 1500. Match-Hornes to blind light
matches upon an enterprise 3000. Running wagons with two wheels, and Iavelins
put through the Axeltres 300. Short Palissadoes to drive into the ground with
long tenter nails 6000. Iron hammers to strick the nails in 50. Wodden
hammers to breck open the barrils of powder 200. Great Boorers to boore holes
with (...). Twelve firkins of foot angles, or four square tenter nails
12000. Ice spurcs with lachets 6000. Pieces of Bulrush bridges for an
Enterprise to pass over a moate, or ditch 150 pieces. Hand-barrowes to carry
sodds 150. Shippers hooks short and long 150. Long iron rakes with 3 or four
teeth 150. Great Beetlets 1000. Water scupps 200. Mathematical water horse
miles, to drayne out water, se figure 37. 3. Spiters to spit sodds with all
300. Bagger Netts to work in a gallery 25. Crooked iron Showels, with long
hafts to work in a Gallery 12. Spades 10000. Showells plated. 2000. Mattocks
1000. Pickaxses 600. Great iron hammers to break stone walls with 100. Axses
of all sorts 1200. Hatchets and Hand bills 100. Great Pincers 8. Great and
small hammers 38. Tron crows of all sorts 30. Draggs 25. Nails both great
and small enenuto lath nails of all sorts 200000. Lanterns and blind lanterns
of all forts 40. Candles 400 lb. Torches 565. Fire-lights 25 and pitch roapes
600 pieces. Barrils of pitch 6. Barrils of Tar 4. Woll-sacks 200.
Howerglasses 50. Untempered chaulk in barrils a last. Ship-Katroles of all
sorts 220 single. Double Ship Katroles 70. Drawing lines to draw Shipping
against the stream 60. Baggs to fill earth withal upon an Approach 2000.
Ammanition chests to put them in 6. Blinds of Kanuas 150 foot long each piece
200. Plancks, Sparrs, Heames of all forteg ood slore for ordnance, palissadoes,
galleries, and other works, some shorter, and some longer as occasion may
serve. Great block pile-driuers, with all their roepes, and appurtenances 2.
Tow-handed Rammers for two men to drive in pallissadoes with 20. 50 pieces of
bulrush bridges, couvered over with Kanvas, with their ropes, and coards to
fasten them one to on other and ankors each pieces being 10 foot long, and of
^ote broad, Cork bridges each bridge containing 10 pieces joined to gether, and
each 10 foot long 2. Cordage of all soorts 400 lb. Windlases or winches 2.
Leather pailes to quench fire with 300. Handsawes, two handed sawes, and great
timber sawes 250. Angers of all sorts, wimbles, and Adases 50. Good slore of
Carpenters. All things necessary for 100 Karres, to carry earth in complete
wheel Barrowes 2000. Spare wheels and iron pin for them 500. Single sawne
pla^ckes for the wheel barrowes 300. Quarter staves, or great Beacons to lay
out the quarters with all with flaggs 200. Haspels, and Turn pikes, with their
Iavelins small and great 100. By this List abouesaid, one may eassely
understand, what Munitions, Materials, and necessaries are need full to be
carried into an Army, of all which the Clarks of the Amu nition, and the
Materials shalldeliuer them out by the help of their Conductors, as the
occasion of the may service require, and also receives them into their
Custody again.
The Wagon Master General, his Lieutenant, and Conductours march under the
Train of the Ordnance.
BEfore the Army rises to the Field, the Lord General sends out writs for the
Wagon Master General, that he shall send for his Conductours, to press and
take, up so many wagons, as the greatness, or litleness of the army may
require, it may be in every quarter 6, 7, 8. yea 1000. Wagons, and each
wagon to be furnished with three lusty horses, and a dryver, every weggon
having 3 gilders a day, so long as the Army is in the Field, and the
Conductours 30. stivers per diem.

A List of the Wagons to beemployed as followed.
FIrst for the General of the Ordnance his Train 150. For the Lord General
him self, as many as his train shall require. For princes Earls, and Lords
volunteers as many as they shall have use for. For the Lords the Deputed States
for the Army as many as they have use for. For the Clarke of the Munition, and
his train Ineluding also the Controuler, Inginiers and Conductour two
compaines of Pyoniers, and the Carpenters 120. For the Sariant Majour General
of the Army 2. For the Commisse or Klark of the Victuals and his train 320.
For the Quartermaster General of the foot 2. For the Provost Marshall
General 3. For the three principal Chiurgians of the army 3. For the
Treasurer of the Army 3. For the Waggon-Master General, his Lieutenant,
Conductours, Wheele-makers, Smiths, and Tow-workers 7. For the Quartermaster
of the Horse 1. For the Lieutenant General of the Horse 6. For every Colonel
of the foot some 3 some 4, according to the greatness of their train, A
Lieutonant Co ^onell 1. For every Sariant Majour 1. For every Quartermaster of
the foot 1. For the Preachter of a Regiment 1. For every foot Company in the
Army 1. The Bridgmaster has under his charge all sorts of punt bridges and
small boat bridges: the ordnance and all things else carried up to the
Rendevous in punts. The Commise General or Clarke of the shipping when the
Army is to go into field is to send forth two Conductours to press so many
Ships in every Town and quarter, as the General shall give hrm order for, and
as the greatness of the Army may require.
A List of the Baggage Ships, and for all Officers that follows the Army.
FOr every Colonel and the chief Officers of his Regiment Ships 3. For every
troops three of horse 1. For the Lord General and his train 21. For the
Lord Marshall 5. Forforrain Lords and Earls 28. The Quartter-master and the
Provost go in the Ship appointed for the Officers of the field For each
Captain of the Pyoniers a Ship 3. For the Theasieier of the Army 1. For the
Advocate Fiscall and his Recorder 1. For the chief Master Gunner 1. For the
Captains of the Carpenters 2. For the Prevost Marshall General 1. For the
General of the Ordnance 1. For the Klarke of the Ammunition 1. For the Klark
of the Ordnance 1. For the Klarke of the Victuals 1. The Waggon-Master General
1. The Captain of the Kanon Horses 1. The Commise or Klark of the Shipping 2.
The Sariant Majour General of the Amy 1. The Quartermaster General 1. The
Controuler of the Artillery and Munition 1. The Controuler of the
Fortifications 1. The Inginiers, and their Assistants 1. The Prevost Marshall
over the Shippers, and saylours 1. Ships allowell for the transporting of sick
and wounded soldiers 20. Spare Ships for foreign Lords and Volunteers 10. For
the Prevost Marshall General of the Cavaillerie 1. For the Physician and
Apothecarye of the army 1. Besides all these every Company so long as they
lie a Ship board have three, four, or five Ships coming out of garrison till
they march a land, where of some of these Ships have three gilders, some a rixe
dalder, others two gilders a day, according to their hurden. The Commisse or
Klark General over the Victuals, has superintendence and care over all manner
of Victuals, as also Victuallers and Sutlars, which follows the Army, and
has under his charge diverse Conductours, and Bakers as the service may
require. First if be a long expedition, so that noe bread, or Victuals can
come up to the Army from the Shipping by convoy, or to any town beseiged it
will be needful for him to have meal barriled up 156 lb. in a barrill 3000
barrils Which 3000. Barrils will require 600 wagons. For the keeping of it in
Shipping before it be loaded on wagons he must have 5. Conductours, and Ships
9 All necessaries must he have also belonging to Bakers, and Bakers. As also
40. Kopper Ovens such as you see figure 47. each oven carried upon a wagon,
Troughs, dowknifs, pailes For these 40. Kopper Ovens six great kitchen tents,
with two or three chimneies in them. Now one Oven being 9. foot long, and 2
in breath, will bake in three hours a batch of 50. long loaves of bread each
loaf a foot long, and 5. inches broad, which bakes at a time, 300 lb of
bread, and one Oven will bake in 24. hours 300 loaves of bread, which makes
1800. lb. And 40 of these ovens being well heated, will back 6. times in 24.
hours, 12000. loaves, which at 4. lb. each loase, comes for one day to 48000.
lb. and for two days if the Army rests 96000. lb. a reasonable proportion of
bread 960000 lb. Item chief for the Army in store 500000 lb.
The Demonstration for the Quartering of the General, or Master of the
Ordnance, and all Subordinate Officers marching under the Train of the
Artillery.
FIrst this Quarter is in breadth, or Front from A. to B. 600. foot, and from
B. to C. is 300. foot in Depth, which never takes up any more ground in Depth,
but only the Ordinary measure, for all the streets in yt, are but 20. foot
broad, and are marked D. E, and is the Park or empalement of the General of
the Ordnance is ground, with his Attendants, men, and Horses, as yon may
evidently see in the raized Figure.

Number. 1. is here a Park or a square of 100. foot: In which park his Tents,
and Measures are set up as the first is as follows, a Hall or place of 12
foot in square, and a Gallerie beyound that, and the great Hall of 6 foot
long, and 6 foot broad. The great Hall or dyning room is 24. foot broad,
and 12 foot deep. The two Pavillions are 12 foot square. The Gallerie
reaching from the one Pavillon to the other is 20 foot long, and 6 foot
broad. The Gallerie from the great Hall to the gallerie of the two Pavillions
is 10 foot long, and 6 foot broad. The Curtains of the Tents are all of
them six foot deep, and the two first Pavillions are likewise 12 foot
square, and the Kitchen is 24 foot long, and 12 foot broad.

F. Is the park, or quarter of the Lieutenant General of the Artillery, and
for the Master Gunners, and Gentlemen of the Ordnance, their servants, and
Horses, which park is 100 foot broad, and 40 foot in depth. The Tents of the
Lieut. General, are of this Measure following. The great Hall is 16 foot in
depth, and 10. foot broad. The Gallerie 6 foot long, and 6 foot broad. The
Pavillions are 8 foot in square.

G. Is the park for the Matterials of Ammunition, as spades, showelles,
Hatches, Bills, Axes, Pickaxses, Mattocks. planckes, beddings for Ordnances,
beams, wheel barrowes, and diverse other things. This park is 140 foot in
depth and 130 foot broad.

Number 5. is the Hutt, or a Tent for the Clarke of the Matterials.

Number 6, is a Hutt, into which all things are laid, which must not take wett.
As Match, candles, and otherthings.

Number 7. is a Common Kitchen for all the Conductours, to dress their
victuals in, and made there to keep the quarter from fyring.

Number 8 are the Conductours Hutts, some 8 or 10 foot in square.

H. Is the park into which are laid, all the materials; instruments, and
tools belonging to the Ordnance, as also anckours, powder, and bullets, and
diverse other things, which park is 140 foot in depth, and 130 foot in
breadth.

Number 1. is the Tent or Hutt of the Clark of the Ordnance.

Number 2. is a Hutt with all manner of Ammunition, belonging to the Ordnance,
which ought not to receive wett.

Number 3. is the Common Kitchen.

Number 4. is a Cave, or Sellar to lay in Gunpowder.

Number 8 are Hutts for the Conductours of the Train.

I. Is the park or quarter for the Master Gunners, or Gentlemen of the Ordnance
the ordinary Gunners, and Canoniers whose depth is 70 foot, and 40 foot
broad.

K. Is the park or lodging of the Master of the fire works, with his
Conductours, and men, whose park likewise is 70 foot in depth, and 40 foot
in breath.

L. Is the park, or quarter of the Petardiers, and their men, which is also 70
foot in depth, and 40 foot in breath.

M. Is the park of the Master of the Batteries, and his men of the same
greatness.

N. Are three tents, or hutts for the Captains of the Saylours, and mariners
to attend upon the Ordnance, the Attiralls, and drawing harnasses for the
Ordnance and for the Mineurs.

O. Are all hutts 8 foot in square, each for two Saylours, and two Mineurs,
The sreetes alsoo between every row of hutts is 8 foot broad.

Their quarter is 140 foot in depth and 90 foot in breath.

P. Is the park, or quarter of the Clarke of the Fortifications, and his
Conductours, being 60 foot in square.

Q. Is the park and quarter of the Inginiers, and their Conductours, being 80
foot in depth, and 60 foot in breath.

R. Is the quartermaster of this train his quarter, or lodging being 60 foot
in square.

S. Is the park or quarter of the Captain of the Canon, or drawing Horses,
and his Conductours, being also 80 foot in depth, and 60 foot in breath.

T. Is the quarter, or park for the makers of Gabions, or Canon baskets, and
Musket baskets, being 40 foot in breadth and 60 foot in depth.

V. Is the Armourers park, and the quarter for the General of the Ordnance,
with their workmen. Farriers, and Smiths belonging to this Train, being 60
foot in depth, and 30 foot in breadth.

W. Is the Chirurgians park of this Train, 60 foot in depth, and 20 foot
broad.

X. Is the Provost Marshall of this Train, 60 foot in depth, and 30 foot
broad.

Y. Is the Farriers, or Master Smith his park 80 foot in depth, and 25. foot
in breadth.

Z. Is the Carters or Wagon men's and laborers, 80 foot deep, and 35 foot
broad.

a. Is the Coopers park 80 foot in depth, and 25. foot in breath.

b. Is three Hutts or Tents for the three Captains of the Pionniers, a. are
the Hutts of the Pionniers with their Lieutenants, whose hutts, are in the
front of the rows, and each Hutt is 8 foot in square, whose park is 90 foot
in breath, and 140 foot in depth.

6. Is the park, where in is set the carriages of Wagons, and drawing Horses
for the Ordnance, which is to be understood such as are to pass upon the
watch, and Canon for any sudden piece of service, and to thend, the horses
may not be then to seek. The two Hutts within the park marked 9. are for the
Conductours and wagon Men. This park is 140. foot in depth, and 80. foot in
breath.

Thus much for the Geometrical model of a quarter for the Artillery.



An Index, Of the principle points handled in this third part.
THe first Chapter, of the Leagues Alligations and Commixtures of Mettalls,
wherewith Ordance are made. page 1. Of the Mouldes, and founding of Ordance.
page 2. The Demonstration of eight several pieces of Ordnance, founded in the
States General their service. page 3. The second Chapter is of a Ladle, a
Rammer a Sponge and field carriage for a piece of Ordnance, and the
demonstration and terciating of any piece of Ordnance, and a carriage. page 4.
The third Chapter of a Block, or along Wagon, and the sigures of a piece of
Ordnance drawn both with horse and men. page 5. The rule of Calibre for these
8 pieces of Ordnance. page 8. The fourth Chapter of a Fearne, or a Ghynne, a
Scallet and a Winch, otherwise called the Endless screw. page 9. The fifth
Chapter how a piece of Ordnance is to be mounted upon it carriage. page 12. The
sixth Chapter is observations how a Canonier ought to charge a piece, and of
the Gunners service in general. page 13. 14. The seventh Chapter how a
Canonier ought to Level his piece, and to amend abad shot. page 15. A new
devise by any Staff or Ruler, how to Level mount, or imbase a piece out of Mr.
Nortons practice of Artillery. page 16. The eight Chapter of several
quadrants, a Level, and other instruments for Ordnance and the uses of them.
page 17. 18. The ninth Chapter, showing how a Canonier shall shoot Level by
the Metal of his piece, or by the Level Axis, otherwise called point blanck.
page 20. 21. 22. The first Dialogue between a General of the Artillery and a
Captain to know this question whether a Culvering or a Demy-Canon will carry
furtherst. page 24. 25. 26. 27. The tenth Chapter is of the demonstration of
Morters, and the use of them. p. 28. 29. 30. The eleventh Chapter of the
compositions, mixtures, and ingredients for the making of great and small
Granades. page 31. The 12th. Chapter of a petard, the manner of charging of it,
and the fasting of it to a Gate or port. page 32. 33. 34 A question between
two Mathematicians for the Battering of a Horne-worke proved by the Rule of
Algebra. page 35. 36. 37. 38. The second Dialogue between a General of the
Ordnance and a Captain whether it is better to Batter a Curtain or a
Bulwark. page 39. 40. 41. 42. 43 The 13 th. Chapter how a Canonier ought to
govern him self in making a good shot. page 44. 45. 46. The third Dialogue
how and in what manner a General of the Artillery ought to plant his Ordnance
in a day of Battle. page 47. 48. 49. 50. The 14th. Chapter of diverse sorts of
Bridges used in the service of the States General of a Mathematiciall
Horse-Water-Mil, and a Water-Scoupe, of a Copper-Oven, a kneadingh-Tsough a
Bread, or Biscuit-Chest, and of diverse sorts of Matterials used in the Wars.
page 51. 52. 53, 54. Finally, the Office, and charge of the General and Master
of the Ordnance, and all Officers under his train, wit a list, and supposition
of what sorts of Ordnance, Munition Matterials, and other necessary, and
preparations, are useful to be carried into the field with an Army. page 55.
56. 57. 58. The Demonstration of a Model and sigure of a quarter for the
General of the Orduance with all subordinate Officers, marching under his
Train. page 59. 60

