HERODIANS OF ALEXANDRIA HIS IMPERIAL HISTORY OF Twenty Roman CAESAR'S and
EMPERORS of his Time. First writ in Greek, and now converted into an HEROIC
POEM.

By C. B: Stapylton.

-- Virtus post funera vivit.

LONDON Printed by W: Hunt, for the Author. MDCLII.

An ADVERTISEMENT.
PEradventure some will say this Labor is superfluous this work is already in
prose, what need this verse come limping after; Indeed I confess all is but
one dish of meat severally dressed; yet we often see one baked and another roast of
the same kind (rightly sauced and seasoned) is more acceptable then a third of
a contrary kind which is not so good in quality: If here be any thing
praiseworthy it belongs to Herodian that Famous Greek Historian, who was the
Author; as touching the Translator I suppose he did it for his recreation, and
for ought I can perceive does not much care whether you give him thanks or no,
because he has not told his name: for my part that have put it into Rhyme, if I
could, it should have been verse; for I do Ingenuously confess my self much
obliged to the History, seeing so many mighty Monarchs and high Estates one
while at the top of Fortunes wheel, and anon turned topsy turvy, or cut off by
an untimely death, has made me the better able to digest my own misfortunes;
I therefore thought it better thus harmlessly to spend my vacant hours,
whether any one give me thanks or no, then to trouble my brains with former
losses, when neither they or I was guilty thereof: robbed and undone I was by the
rebellion in Ireland, and I partly know what set them awork, yet leave the
revenge to God, Ascribing unto him all Honor and humble Thanks for my present
Affliction and miraculous Preservation, which I have formerly showed elsewhere:
but of one thing I assure you, if I had part of my Lands and goods again, I
should employ my self (by honest industry) to improve them (as formerly I did)
and not in making verses; for I am now too sensible of that old adage, there
goes but a pair of sheers betwixt a Poet and a beggar.

To say any thing in excuse of Translations I think it needless to good and
generous natures, and to the other, with Courtly Sir Io: Harrington (to one
that said of his excellent Poem it was but a translation) I say I will give one
but for another as he did in one of his Epigrams: yet of your clemency I desire
you to excuse the plainness of my Rimes, because I have been by profession a
piece of a Soldier and not a Scholar. If the matter be not delivered
faithfully, it would be an invention rather then a Translation, therefore
whoever will please to try one Canto, if he hit the sense and keep the words
better, the submission is already made: and if any marvel to see some Stanza's
of eight lines now and then intermixed, the best reason I can give you is, that
where a sentence could not well be comprehended in six, I let it run on to
eight for the more emphaticall expression as the matter required; if you will
have another reason, I allude to a Cardinal that used to say I and my King. So
I say it seemed good to me and my Muse, as willing to give you some Novelty
which you and I observe daily either for better or worse: some nice pallats (of
late) would not have a verse to end with many syllables, some others say it is
to find fault with a fat Goose; it is enough for me to say that Sir Phillip
Sidney and Sir John Harrington both used and affected it. Some also do
endeavor hands to usher in their Poems which I do not think mine worthy of,
neither indeed do I affect it, or else it is possible it might have been done:
if the Wine be good it needs no bush, I care not for a gaudy signe-post it
often deludes the Expectation. Lastly, I desire two things of the courteous
Reader, one is to mend the faults of the Press; the other, that he will please
to remember what is before mentioned touching this Authors long and unjust
exile out of his Country, with great charge of Family, through many Imminent
dangers and grievous sufferings: This if he Heartily consider he will less
marvel why these Books are not publicly sold, but only presented to such
Generous hands as are in their goodness sensible of this Authors misfortune.

THE APPROBATION of this History, by diverse Authors of Eminent Place and
Esteem.
PHOTIUS the Patriarch, in the 99. Chap^er of his Greek Bibliothicke. HERODIAN
neither swells with Superfluity, nor omits ought that is Necessary: in a word,
he is not inferior to any, for all Historical Perfections.

HENRY STEPHAN in his Latin Dedicatory Epistle to Sir PHILLIP SIDNEY (of
Glorious Memory perfixt before HERODIANS Greek History. THe reading of
Herodians Historical Work, will be a matter of singular Profit and Pleasure
to the Courtiers of this Age; for he represents (as in a Glass) the Emperors
of that Age and their Courts; with Comedies, Tragedies, and Tragicomedies. It
is most certain, that he was both an Eie-witnesse and an Earewitnesse of many
things which he writ. No Roman History did ever comprise such wonderful
Changes happening in the Roman Empire, in so small a Circle of Time.

POLITIAN in his Epistle to POPE INNOCENT the 8. HAving bethought my self
(...) of all the Greek Historians I should translate (according to your H.
Command) I resolved at last on HERODIAN that Excellent Writer, who having long
continued in the Emperors Court, and being very aged, undertook to write the
History of his Time: which he has performed, not only eloquently, but withal
most frankly and faithfully. Your Holiness shall find in him great variety of
Persons and Actions, many strange things, and frequent Examples of Fortune,
reeling (as it were) sometime one way, sometime another: as also wonderful
wise Counsels, accompanied with unexpected Events; and sage Precepts, delivered
in a style full of Maejesty and sweetness: lastly, a very Magazin of
Morality; and (as it were) a Mirror of Humane Fate: whence all men may select
choice Documents conducing to the Weal and Advancement of a private and a
public Estate.

M. D. WHEAR, the public Professor of History in the most Noble University of
Oxford, in his Book, De Ratione and Methodo legendi Historias, page 34.
HERODIAN, a most polite and judicious Author, has with singular Eloquence
described the Acts and lives of many Caesar's and Emperors.

The Heads of Herodians Induction.
DIverse (he says that have taken pains to compile Histories) have rather
affected Learning and coined language to gild and embosse their discourse, then
to mine and search out the truth which is the soul of History.

Others too much transported with spleen of one hand, and partiality of
another, as touching Tyrants, Princes, Cities etc. have not rightly pourtrai'd
her Image.

For his part he has not writ out of vulgar aires, but out of his own
knowledge and faithful Collections.

He doubts not but the rare intelligence of what he writes will be very
acceptable, for in two hundred years before the first Emperor Augustus till
Marcus Aurelius he begins with, there has not been so many various changes and
events, as of civil and foreign War, Pestilence, Famine, Earthquakes, lives
of Princes, and Tyrants, so strange and uncouth, which former Ages could not
parallel.

Rome had in sixty years more Emperors then was proportionable for the time,
some young and dissolute, some of riper years more fit to govern and manage:
the disparity of their years and conditions were Accomp^nied with diversity of
manners and Actions; the particulars exactly observed we come now to specify.

THE NAMES OF the Roman Caesar's and Emperors, whose Acts and Lives are
Recorded by Herodian.
An. Dom.163 MARCUS AURELIUS ANTONIUS, L. VERUS
The two first consorts in the Roman Empire* An. Dom.182 COMMODUS. An. Dom.195
PERTINAX. An. Dom.195 JULIAN. An. Dom.196 NIGER, in Asia SEVERUS, in Italy
ALBINUS, in Britany
all at once. ANTONIUS, GETA,
Brothers and Colleagues. An. Dom.219 MACRINUS, and DIADUMENIANUS Caesar, (his
Son)
An. Dom.220 ANTONINUS, or rathe^ Pseud-Antoninus. An. Dom.224 ALEXANDER.
MAXIMINUS. QUARTINUS.
An. Dom.2^7 GORDIAN the Father. GORDIAN his Son.
An. Dom.239 MAXIMUS, ALBINUS,
Colleagues. An. Dom. 241 GORDIAN, Nephew to the elder GORDIAN.
CANTO I.
The ARGUMENT.
Marcus his Reign and Life is here related,
The breeding of Prince Commodus his Son,
And how his Daughters he bestowed and stated;
His Clemency the Nobles all had won;
Yet does he doubt on Commodus his weal,
And on his deathbed does the same reveal.
1.
I Have not Homer's Wit, or Virgil's Skill,
To gild the Acts that I do now recite;
Nor can, with Ariosto, frame my Quill
To rock the Reader in such deep delight;
Yet take it here as well as I am able,
This is a Truth, much of the rest a Fable.
2.
The Emperor Marcus many Daughters had,
Yet of his Sons there were but only twain,
Verissimus did dye a little Lad,
Commodus the elder he sought to train
In Virtue, Learning, and the liberal Arts,
Sending for Tutors from all foreign parts.
3.
When as his Daughters were to Marriage bent,
Best men that were his Senators among,
For Sons in Law to match with them he sent;
Regarding not what wealth did them belong,
So that they were with Excellence endowed,
Goods of the mind were Chief by him Allowed.
4.
With Princely virtues he was richly clad;
Antiquities both excellent and rare,
Or greater knowledge no where could be had;
For he with Greek or Roman might compare,
As witness well his Writings, Wise and Sage,
Which extant are until this present Age.
5.
A Prince he was so sweet and debonaire,
Of Temper meet, to all men that he saw
His hand he gave, and Language passing fair,
Charging his Guard to keep no one in awe,
An Emperor he was both wise and stout
Just were the Words and Edicts he set out.
6.
So grave he was and continent of life,
That Famous men for Learning great did flourish;
To imitate their Princes without strife
Men do delight when they such virtues nourish.
Now whatsoever he did in Peace or War,
In North or East, or Barbarous Countries far*
7.
Already that in writing is Committed
By men of Learning and of worthy fame:
Yet those Occurrents must not be omitted
Which I observed as I went and came;
For he deceased, Herodian an Officer of State.
I office had in state,
Then what I know my task is to relate.
8.
Marcus now weakened was with Toil and care,
Worn out of Date with old decrepid Age,
A grievous sickness fell unto his share
When in Now Austria, and Hungary.
Panonia he did last engage;
But when he saw recovery was past,
Prince Commodus did make him sore Aghast:
9.
For being young and in the heat of youth,
Perchance puffed up with High Imperial power,
Might soon be drawn to set aside the Truth
By Delators in some unlucky hour;
To take his swing, and rove abroad at Random,
Good Arts and Exercise for to Abandon.
10.
Such is intemperance when we do begin
To Riot once in pastime meat or dri^ke,
Then shake we off the yoke of Discipline,
On sensual Seneca calls Sensuality the Sovereign good of Beasts
Blandishments we only think;
Good Marcus this had often known before,
Which makes him now his Sons Estate deplore.
11.
He mighty was in wisdom, and profound,
Calling to mind the Princes that were young,
Such as for virtue were no whit renowned,
Or ranged were the middle sort among:
Denise of Syracuse astray did wander,
The Successors eke of great Alexander.
12.
Dionysius.
Sicilian Epicure did give reward
To such as Novelties could best invent,
Alexanders Captains had no regard,
But Honor lost and all good Government.
Infamous was the Life of See Justin. lib. 24.
Ptolomy,
Surpassing bounds of Civil Modesty.
13.
Antigonus would Bacchus personate
With Ivy wreath; and green boughs on a Spear
(Instead of Macedonian Coronate)
He did in place of Kingly Scepter bear:
Examples such as these did Marcus strike,
Fearing his Son might hap to do the like.
14.
That dreadful * Nero came within his mind,
Vile Butcher he so to dissect his mother,
A savage Act unfitting Humane kind;
Domitian was much-what such another;
The shapes these Monsters wore did often appear.
As he revolved his mind 'twixt hope and fear.
15.
The Germane Nation likewise he did doubt,
Not being all entire at his devotion,
Were sometimes Newter, often in and out,
As they were pleased, or as they liked the Motion;
These Barbarous people do themselves withdraw,
Save when his noble presence did them Awe.
16.
He therefore doubts they will despise his Son,
His youth he thinks cannot this Nation quell,
Though often times they have by me been won,
Yet now I fear they will again Rebel;
Such is their guise, when they occasion see,
They Will scorn his youth, though they were ruled by me.
17.
Thus in these Moods good Marcus is perplexed,
He calls his trusty Friends and does implore 'em;
I mean his Lords and Kinsmen that were next,
And sets the Prince, young Commodus before 'em;
Lord with what Horror his good heart is vexed,
For fear the young man should not keep decorum;
Then raising up himself upon his Couch,
He makes a speech that nearly did them touch.
18.
No marvel now if you bemoane my Case, Marcus speech

For men are Led by Nature to lament
Their Kinsmen, but things Look with such a Face,
Being upon their uttermost extent;
So doleful are they to consideration,
They now excite our due Commiseration.
19.
'Twixt you and I yet is more special Band,
You know full well how I have loved you dearly;
Love may like Love (in right) again demand,
This is the Cause that I have called you near me,
That I may Judge in this most dangerous season
If I preferred you by the rule of reason.
20.
If so I gave to you deserved honor,
And did advance you with the best occasion,
She is a Lady when you look upon her
That will admit no Fraudulent Evasion:
I challenge then that you to me be grateful,
To fail therein I guess you deem it hateful.
21.
You see your Pupil entering April Age,
My Son that now must wade in broken Seas;
You Pilots are, I know, both grave and sage,
I pray you see he take not too much ease,
Lest he misguide and steer a naughty Course,
So ship wrack will invade with open force.
22.
So many Fathers therefore be to him,
By Counsel good, and your discreet instruction,
No worldly Treasure can be such a lim
Him to support, preventing sad destruction:
The Subjects Love is Princes surest guard,
When worst are down and best men are preferred.
23.
Best way to Reign well, and to live secure,
Is not by Cruelty to purchase fear;
Let mildness win, and Clemency endure,
For then best Servants love their Sovereign dear:
So Jealousy and Flatt'ry's set apart,
Severity can gain no gentle Heart.
24.
But when they are led by loving inclinations,
They never will withstand his just desire;
Yet if oppressed by his unruly passions,
Such misdemeanour sets them all on fire:
Then what does he deserve what gold, what gain,
That may do what he list, yet will refrain?
25.
Wherefore if you by prudent Admonitions
Shall plant in him a care for to do well,
And often inculcate with your repetitions
To mind him of this Tale that I do tell,
A worthy Prince he will be of Conditions,
And you your selves for this shall bear the bell.
Immortal so my memory you make
If you agree this friendly course to take.
26.
No sooner did good Marcus end his speech,
But swooning ripe he backward fell in bed,
Which made all present there full loudly shreech
Distracted-like, supposing he was dead;
One day he Marcus dies April 17. Anno Dom. 181.
lived, then was of pain released,
Giving this kind farewell he so deceased.
27.
Leaving behind a redolent perfume,
A seemly pattern for the future Age;
No after Monarch can hold fairer Room,
For wisdom high, and eke for Learning sage,
Better to none may be Applied this Doom;
Valiant in War, in Peace as free from Rage;
So soon as known that his dear life did fail,
Both Commons and the Army weep and wail.
28.
Yea, in the Roman Empire all throughout
This Message was received with weeping tears;
He was deplored both near and far about;
At his decease increased was their fears.
A temperate Prince he was without all doubt,
Such ought to be that wieldy Scepter Steeres;
Some called him Guide, some Emperor, some Father,
Then him to lose, their own lives they had rather.
29.
Nor any was deceived, or did outrun
His noble Praise and worthy Commendation;
But now his Funeral Obsequies were done:
It seems it was their guise and Country fashion
The Counsel should present the old Emp'rours Son,
To satisfy the Armie's Expectation;
And Largess money on them to bestow,
To press, as 'twere, the service that they owe.
30.
Then order was that Heralds should proclaim
By Counsel grave, and also from the Prince,
That they the Common Benefit did aim,
Of negligence none should them once convince;
And that the Soldiers, altogether met,
Might hear and see that there should be no let.
31.
When Commodus had done his Sacrifice,
In midst of Camp ascending up his Throne,
Attended by his Kin and Council wise,
For Fathers loss making most grievous moan:
Yet that in him there might be no neglect
Began his Speech, and said to this effect.
CANTO II.
The ARGUMENT.
Marcus now dead young Commodus succeeds,
Unto the Army he a Speech does make;
His Courtiers show their black and evil deeds,
Which makes the Grave Pompeianus to quake:
Stately Triumphs, young Commod' posts to Rome,
Whom dear they Love, recording Marcus Tomb.
1.
O fickle Fate that never steady bides,
Thou wheel'st about to weave the web of woe,
What haste thou make to wound us in our sides,
The Noble Marcus now is laid full Low:
How we lament, and have done ever since,
We set aside to tell what said the Prince.
2.
That you and I have Cause to mourn alike
I make no doubt, Commod's speech.
for both have equal Loss,
Since that my Sire the hand of death did strike,
It is to both of us a heavy Cross;
You know full well he Father was to all,
Then both alike we ought to moan his fall.
3.
He called me fellow rather than a Son,
Esteeming that to be a Soldiers Note;
By Nature one, the rest by Valor won.
How often he did into your Arms promote
My Tutelage, that you might be my guard,
I hope therefore you will his Love reward.
4.
The elder may repute me foster child,
The younger termed my Schoolfellowes in arms;
How often he has us taught with counsels mild,
Whereby we might avoid ensuing harms:
He brought us up in virtues exercise,
The better to resist when dangers rise.
5.
Now after him has fortune made me Prince,
Not factiously or yet by usurpation;
For I in Court was bred and born long since,
You cannot deem me stranger to your Nation:
When as I came I not in cradle rested,
But eftsoon was in Princely purple vested.
6.
To Heaven now my father is translated,
Amongst gods residing as we are resolved;
And that on me the Rule of right is stated,
All humane care and worldly things devolved:
I hope you will not like me as a Dative,
But truly love me as your Emperor Native.
7.
What great effects this true love may produce
Will be apparent by your good success;
You will not give these barbarous people truce,
Till you have bravely conquered more and less:
To the Ocean you this Empire shall extend,
And win Immortal glory at the end.
8.
You Will crown the memory of our common father,
Who as we ought believe hears what we say;
Most happy then are we our selves the rather,
That he our words and deeds beholds this day:
The noble Acts you did before this season,
Were guided by his prudent care and reason.
9.
What under me, now Prince you do atchieve,
Peculiar Trophee will be to your name;
If you proceed, cause none I have to grieve,
We purchase shall such everlasting fame,
As will innoble this my tender age,
And crown your valor with a loyal badge
10.
If at the first we these Barbarians curb,
They will not then despise our infant Reign*
Nor dare they once our Royal will disturb,
Both you and I shall eased be of pain:
For when they see their own harms cost them dear,
They afterward of us will stand in fear.
11.
Having thus said, the soldiers he assured
With money, then to Palace did return;
A short time he his fathers friends endured,
Against their directions was not seen to spurn:
They gave him counsel tending unto wealth,
Permitting recreation for his health.
12.
But diverse of his Court within a while
Themselves into his favor sought to wind,
And by ill means this hopeful Prince beguile,
With pleasures vain they did corrupt his mind;
Placing their whole delight on belly cheer
And brutish In venere and ventre.
lusts as eftsoone will appear.
13.
The sweet delicies that was used in Rome,
They do recount what brav'ry was there;
How plenty great from all parts there did come,
And wished him thither for to make repair:
How The greatest River next to Nilus.
Ister banks were fruitless, barren, cold,
And subject to much rain they then unfold.
14.
Your grace does drink the waters muddy frozen,
While your inferiors warm baths do enjoy;
Sweet air of Italy by them is chosen
When you live here with care and great annoy:
With sweet allectives and such pleasures named
These parasites this young Prince had inflamed.
15.
He therefore then his Council called together,
And told them he had great desire to see
His native place, now having wind and weather,
To speak the reason then full loath was he:
But yet, as if it had not been for solace,
He said he feared the rich Imperial Palace*
16.
Might seized be into some great Lords hands,
And this conceit the rather did him fear,
Because use might be made of trained bands,
Which could not be if once he came so near:
This made his Counselors for fear to shake,
And grave Pompeianus was first that spoke.
17.
He eldest was and married had his sister,
No man so fit of all the Princes kin
That was with him upon the banks of Ister
To show their case, and thus he did begin:
No marvel if my dear and Sovereign Lord
Dislike this place which is to be abhorred; Pompeianus speech.

18.
So all of us possessed with equal care,
Have like desire to see our native home:
But yet our business bids us to beware
We from this barbarous people do not Roame,
Till that we finished have this dreadful war
From them (my Liege) we ought not be so far.
19.
This does import that we should yet refrain,
Domestic good may after be enjoyed;
Time lost will not so soon be had again,
At Rome I fear we shall with ease be cloyed:
Then good my Lord think where your Grace resides
Is Rome, Vbi Imperator ibi Roma.
with all her Ornaments besides.
20.
But if abruptly we break off this war,
We honor lose and danger do incurr;
Let our advise be to your grace a bar,
Beseeching you that here you will demurr:
For if from these we do remove so far,
And be so hot to run upon the spurr,
We animate these thieves and rebels arch,
To think that we for fear do thus dismarch.
21.
Now if your majesty do still proceed,
Extending conquest in this Northern part,
Until the Empire reach in word and deed
The Ocean sea to make these Rebels smart,
What Triumph then will fall unto your meed,
The City greets you with a gladsome heart,
When you with chained captived Kings notorious
And barbarous The captives went before the Triumphant Chariot*
Princes shall return victorious.
22.
Thus ancient Roman Heroes did attain
And purchase to themselves such high renown;
To fear domestic broils it is in vain,
Prime Senators are here with you in gown,
And the Armies force to undertake the pain,
With treasure eke of the Imperial Crown:
Your fathers noble acts above the rest
Confirmed has to you Each loyal breast.
23.
From person grave this was disswasion strong,
It did for present time abate the edge,
None could do more the Senators among,
So well he placed the words he did allege:
The Prince not having wherewith to reply,
Dismissed the Lords as if he would comply.
24.
But soon anon his fawning Courtiers came,
Persuading him no longer now to stay;
With sly deceit they play their after-game,
Still pressing him with them to ride away:
No further then with counsel he advised,
His wits were crazed and senses quite disguised.
25.
Then instant he sent letters unto Rome,
And called for such as were with him to go;
Yet order gave that Armed Troops should come
To guard the banks of Ister against the foe:
Which charge when as the soldiers understood,
Much of the Barbarous people they subdued.
26.
And many other with rewards they wonn,
So well this greedy people loved cash;
Therefore the feate was so much sooner done,
What cared they to come within the lash,
So they their wonted roving course may run,
To live by forage, spoil, and such like trash:
This is the cause that makes them not to fear*
To sell their truce be market cheap or dear.
27.
Of this the Princes sycophants were sure,
And having there of coin a mighty mass,
That all things might be left the more secure,
They brought their naughty matter so to pass;
That whatsoever this people did demand,
Was sent to them by Commodus command.
28.
As soon as in the Army was proclaimed
That all of them might to their home retire,
To quit the barbarous enemies they aimed,
The City sweets to taste was their desire:
Nor to this motion were they slack or surly*
For in the camp they have with hurly burly.
29.
And when these news were spread and known in Rome,
The people all were ravished with joy,
To hear young Commodus to them' would come,
Their hearts were glad and free from all annoy:
No marvel; for this hope they had the rather,
That he was son unto so good a father.
30.
His present journey then he took with speed,
And welcome was in every town and place;
More have he made the less he took good heed,
He posting rid as he would run a race:
Yet when the people understood the cause,
They entertained him with their full applause.
31.
But when he drew near to the City Rome,
There went to meet him all the Roman Peers,
And Commons eke to bid him welcome home:
For very joy the elder sort shed tears;
Some flowers had, and Lawrells other some,
To gratulate this Royal Prince of theirs:
They love him dear for father that was dead,
And that he was amongst them born and bred.
CANTO III.
The ARGUMENT.
Young Commod's Birth and person we describe,
He gladly is received into Rome;
The false Perennus of a naughty Tribe,
And Lucill also had a rightful doom:
What feast they do for Jupiter provide,
And how the Roman Priests themselves do guide.
1.
HOw wild is youth when once it gets the head,
A lively pattern here we may behold;
You see this Prince, now that his father's dead,
To take his swing is more then wisely bold;
Forsaking counsel of the grave and hoary,
As will appear when you observe the story.
2.
Full three descents he nobly was descended,
Extracted from the Right Imperial Line;
His birth by fathers side is well commended,
By mothers eke who named was Faustine:
From Adrian, Trajan, and good Anthony,
This gallant Prince derived his pedigree.
3.
Nor was he only Noble for descent,
Or so remarked for his youthful prime,
But God withal such His description.
lovely feature lent,
With constitution good and look sublime,
Majestic too, with sparkling eyes and fair,
All which was graced with yellow curled hair.
4.
For whensoe're he walked in the Sunn,
His locks would glister like to flaming fire,
And many did suppose the same was done
With powdered Gold, or else with Golden wire:
Some said it was Divinity on earth,
His head this glittering luster had from's birth.
5.
Besides, his cheeks began with silken down
To blossom forth like Roses in the spring;
The Romans did this brave young Emperor crown
With all the hearty love that they could bring;
Acclaiming from their steeples and their towers,
Strowing his way with garlands and with flowers.
6.
Thus having made his entry in the City,
He first went to the Temple Built on Mount Palatine.
of great Jove;
His heart was yet inclining unto pity,
He had respect unto the gods above;
Praetorian Bands that were both stout and witty,
And Senate eke he thanked for their love:
Then after all this rare delight and solace
Himself reposed in the Imperial Palace
7.
Some few years after he gave due regard
To fathers friends in matters most of weight;
But yet ere long they from the same were barred,
Perennus an Italian did them slight;
He made him Captain of Praetorian Bands,
All matters then went through Perennus hands.
8.
This Emperor young in pleasures he did prompt,
And suff'red him most sensually to reign;
In all affairs he took the chief account,
As being for the Prince too mickle pain:
He scraped still and never was content,
But studied more his Incoms to augment.
9.
By Calumny he daily did invent
Old Marcus friends to bring into dispute;
With witness false he also did indent,
By wrong surmise the Prince was often mute:
All this was done to further his intent,
That he the sooner might obtain his suit;
For by their deaths the goods to him did fall,
Thus secretly he did this Prince inthrall.
10.
The thought of Father and of Counsel grave
Did for a season temper his respect;
But fortune hard, did so his wits deprave,
That suddenly he did us all neglect:
The cause (...) made this young Prince so to fear us,
His Lucill^*
sister first did wed with Lucius Verus.
11.
Whom Marcus took in government colleague,
And to oblige in strongest bond of love,
His daughter gave, to make the firmer League,
Both worth and prudence did this kindness move:
And after this her husband was deceased,
Her state and dignity was not decreased.
12.
For to the grave Pomp'anus by her fire,
She was again bestowed to her content;
They also leave from Commodus require,
Who did confirm this match with full consent;
Permitting her to use her State and Honor,
Who like an Empress had attendance on her.
13.
On Theater her chair of State erected,
And also fire according to the fashion,
Was borne before to make her more respected
As well at home as of each other Nation;
But Commodus, when married had The Empress.
Crispine,
She taking place His Sister*
Lucilla did repine.
14.
This honor new she thought did her disgrace,
Yet durst not tell her purposed design
To seize the Empire; but forbor^ a space,
This deed shall not be known to husband mine:
She knew right well her Lord the Prince did love,
Which was the cause she never did him move.
15.
Quadratus was the man must be employed,
With him of lightness she was much suspected;
She told him how her pomp was now destroyed,
And wished her friend to see the same corrected:
So he persuaded by this wicked elfe,
Had near undone the Senate and himself.
16.
The manner thus amongst others that conspire,
Quintianus a desperate youth and bold,
He did inveigle unto his desire,
Presuming that he would be nothing cold
To kill the Prince with dagger or with knife,
For which he promised large to save his life.
17.
Soon after this he stood in corner blind,
As to the Amphythe'ter came Commode;
And when he passed according to his mind,
He gave a stab proclaiming it aloud;
How that the senate this to him had sent,
And once again to stab was his intent.
18.
But instant he was seized by the guard,
And guerdon had (though seeming to relent)
As 'twas to him a most condign reward
That on such wicked message would be sent:
Thus hap'ly was the Emp'rours safety wrought
By his discovery that so ill was taught.
19.
This plotting was the prime and chiefest ground
Which brought so many Nobles to their fall;
It in his mind did print so deep a wound,
For enemies he now suspected all:
Nor could forget the speech the youth did make,
When he assayed his life away to take.
20.
Perennus laying hold on this occasion,
Did counsel give the Gallants out to root;
And Nobles eke there must be no evasion,
He their estates confiscate did to boot;
Great wealth he got by this his lewd persuasion,
Himself as judge not sitting at the foot:
All that conspired (with Commodus own sister
Though lightly, but suspected) had a glister.
21.
Then such as Commodus had cause to fear,
Perennus with his skill did thus remove;
Though most of them did hold the Emperor dear,
And some affected with Paternall love:
Now he had got him in his own tuition,
He need prefer (he thinks) no more petition.
22.
The Empire he accounts as his own,
His sonns To command Illyria, after called Dalmatia, now Slavonia.
must be preferred at any rate;
Praetorian Bands he will not let alone,
But largess gives to fortify his state;
And when the Prince had fetched his latest groan,
A straw they care not for the peoples hate:
But how this treason strangely was detected,
And Prince yet safe is now to you directed.
23.
A sacred Pageant Or Agon.
do the Romans use,
To grace great Jupiter Capitoline;
To celebrate the people not refuse,
But do repair and think it very fine:
The Emp'rours custom to be present there,
As chief with Priests that do attend each year
24.
Anon the Prince on lofty Throne is set
To veiw the actors (for their feats renowned)
The Theater full, spectators all are met,
The Cornets play and Trumpets shrill do sound;
Each one is decent, placed in his degree,
Attending for to hear and eke to see.
25.
Before that ought was either said or acted,
Half naked one starts out amidst the Stage;
You might have thought how it was one distracted,
But that his gesture showed him to be sage:
With staff in hand and scrip upon his shoulder,
In this attire no doubt he was the bolder.
26.
Then standing still he beckned with his hand,
And silence craved that Commodus might hear;
No time quoth he upon these shows to stand,
You rather ought the present danger fear:
Perennus sword is hanging over your head,
Which soon you must avoid or else be dead.
27.
This man has raised up a mighty Band
Of men, with money, to possess your room;
He purposes for to invade your Land,
Illyrian Army likewise hither come:
This plotted is by him and by his son,
Which instantly prevent or be undone.
28.
Thus said the fellow, whether thereto moved
To get a name, or by instinct divine;
He was obscure, and therefore him behooved
To win reward that he might sup and dine:
However it made Prince Commodus afraid,
It matters not what others thought or said.
29.
But woe to him that in this shape he turned,
Perennus bids he shall be apprehended,
And as seditious frantic to be burned,
Though what he said, perhaps could not be mended:
Thus suffered he for being over-bold,
Untimely truth is better kept then told.
30.
Howbeit some that loved the Emp'rours weal,
And to Perennus bore deserved spleen,
Did well and wisely in this matter deal,
As knowing how corrupt the man had been,
And how in the Prince his favor he did steal
By practice vile, as ever yet was seen:
They so devise, the Prince did soon abhor it,
Perennus and his children smarted for it.
31.
To make the matter full, there British soldiers some say.
soldiers came
Unknown unto Perennus or his son,
Brought stamped coin with Image and their Name,
That Commodus might see what they had done;
Perennus little thought of so much blame,
Off went his head as fast as it might run:
By soldiers thus the Traitors were discarded,
Who for their service richly were rewarded.
32.
Then for Illyria posts went to his son,
Deliv'ring Letters in the Emp'rours name;
Such speed they make he knew not what was done,
Full little dreaming of his Fathers shame;
The Posts inform him why they came so fast,
Both Prince and Father wills him to make have.
33.
To come to Rome was for his high promotion;
The reason why they brought not fathers letter,
Enough he thought the Princes Royal motion,
And then his own exceeding much the better;
Unknown to him his father had disaster,
He thinks all true and rides to Rome the faster.
34.
What though the plot and first design had mist,
His fathers might shall make up all at Rome;
But this was a conceit of had I wist:
For to the Prince he is no sooner come,
But by his mandate he is forthwith slain,
This was the life and end of traitors twain.
35.
Then two Praetorian praefects made the Prince,
To delegate to one it was not best;
For so the one the other would convince,
If he to much did feather his own nest:
But while he did about this business hammer,
Another Treason broke out in this manner.
CANTO II.
The ARGUMENT.
Maternus rebels, his plot detected;
Tho mother of the gods, her holy day
And story with river strange infected,
To make men geld their genitors away:
A plague and famine great is now at Rome
Cleander next into the Scaeane does come.
1.
O Fond ambition* how did thou transport
The mind of those we late had on our stage!
Unhappy they that left so bad report
To such as lived in their ensuing age:
I further might enlarge, but yet this Text
We set aside to see what follows next.
2.
A soldier one that named was Maternus,
A Rebel stout, and insolent bravado;
He is the next man now that does concern us,
To him resorted many a renegado.
Unto his motion they themselves do yield,
Committing spoil in City Town and Field.
3.
This booty got does numbers more invite,
Who promised are to share and have reward;
From far and near they come both day and night,
That now he seems to have a mighty guard:
Not like a pack of thieves, but armed men,
Who Cities take and break open every denn.
4.
They prisoners do let loose and malefactors,
Who soldiers turn for pillage and for prey;
They range abroad and are become great Actors,
To Gaul and Spain they take their ready way:
Thus sack and burn does he and his adherents,
While Commodus does send to his Vicegerents.
5.
With cowardice he charge them as base,
Commanding them an Army straight to levy
These free booters from thence away to chase;
Which when they heard they thought it would be heavy
For them to stay upon this hollow ground,
So slink away by rotten bogs unsound.
6.
In Italy they yet make rendezvous,
Maternus there began to look full big,
In sterner manner then he wont did use,
Devising with his mates to find a jigg,
That he thereby might make himself a King,
Urging success his former acts did bring.
7.
So gallant he that now he would attempt
To hazard life and all upon a chance,
Then live in vile dishonor and contempt;
He was resolved to lead them such a dance
As might become a noble heart and bold,
This tale to all the rest he queintly told.
8.
But well he knew he had not force at hand
With Commodus to fight it out in battle;
He therefore meant to try Praetorian Band,
To see if he could catch them with a rattle;
Then to discern how they approved or not,
Will now appear when you perceive his plot.
9.
The Romans make a Feast at every spring
In honor to the mother of the gods;
Their precious stuff the Citizens do bring,
With Parcimony they are all at odds;
The Prince himself at this time does not scorn
With Jewels choice her Image to adorn.
10.
Then liberty to revell and to mask,
All men at pleasure may themselves disguise;
That now it will not be an easy task
To know the dolt from rich men or from wise:
Maternus thought this time fit for his Treason,
And how to Act he showed his fellows reason.
11.
Which was himself and accomplices to arm,
At all points like unto the Princes guard,
And so the halberts pass not doubting harm,
Or care by whom they shall be seen or heard:
For being held as part of the Emp'rours train,
They might him kill and so return again.
12.
The City he approached with this intent,
And took along with him a Troop select,
Though some were villanes, other some relent,
And to the Emperor do this Thief detect;
Then he with fellows had deserved hire,
Some hanged by th'neck, Maternus burnt with fire.
13.
The Prince then having sacrificed with thanks,
And to the goddess made his supplication,
Her holiday was kept with all the pranks
That do belong to such a fond devotion;
For he himself did foot it on his shanks,
Which made the people make another motion:
Though some perhaps do reckon this a toy,
A second day they kept for him with Joy.
14.
Why then at Rome this goddess did esteem
And worship both apparent and in creeks,
Their own records must testify I deem,
Because it is not known amongst the Greeks:
But how to them this matter did befall,
Attentive be then, I begin my tale.
15.
They say by ( Jove) her Their chief goddess.
Image was let fall,
Who made it, or of what, it is unknown;
No humane work they creed it is at all,
But that it was from heaven sent or thrown
To Pessinus, which is a Phrygian Field,
Though such a fall has heard of been but seeld.
16.
Some others at a battle make report,
Which by the Phrygian Ilus there was fought;
For likely his it might be in such sort,
For Lydian Tantalus he set at naught:
The quarrel thus about a way they plead,
Or for the stealing of young Ganimed.
17.
But when they had long fought on even score,
And how on both sides many men were slain,
That name it did assume, and not before
This slaughter, which was made upon the plain;
And some do tell a tale of Ga^imed,
How he poor youth on this place was found dead.
18.
For so they say that when his brother strove
To rescue him from lovers fond embrace,
In pieces he was pulled with Ardent love
And so left dead upon this very place.
To salve this matter some say mighty Jove
From both did take him by indulgent grace;
And hereupon he Honor had divine,
Bearing the Cup when Jove carouseth Wine.
19.
The Phrygian orgies in this Pessinus
Of old were celebrate with lasting Fame,
And on the banks of the River Gilus,
Whence gelded priests of goddess had their name;
Who drinks thereof shall go a gelded Plin. l. 5. c. 32.
elfe,
Come there who list, I mean to save my self.
20.
Now when the Roman state began to flourish,
If goddess Pessinus they could obtain,
Apollo told their Empire she would cherish
To overtop the rest with might and main;
To Pgrygia then did they dispatch Embassage,
Who gently entertained the Roman message.
21.
Being extracted from Aeneas line,
There were of kin by right Descent of blood;
The Image then they sent to them in fine,
To blame were they if it had been withstood:
To Tiberi mouth at length this Ship did come,
Which was the only part then longed to Rome.
22.
All suddenly the vessel stuck so fast,
As if withheld by some supernall power,
In vain they haled and pulled, till at the last
A Vestall Virgin came in lucky hour,
Who was accused for losing her virginity,
Wherefore she fervent prayed to the divinity.
23.
That if she were not guilty of the crime,
The gods would please to take some pity on her,
And send her strength at this most needful time,
To clear the vessel for to save her Honor:
Then she besought the people not to grudg
If goddess Pessinantia were her Judge.
24.
Whom they admit, her girdle then untide,
The people heard what Orisons she used;
The goddess would command the Ship to slide,
If she were free of that she was accused:
When to the Ship her girdle she had bound,
She pulled it to the shore both safe and sound.
25.
The Romans now the goddess much admire
With whom you are acquainted in this story,
And eke the Virgin chaste as they desire,
Now she is clear I hope you are not sorry:
This tale is long whereof I have no more,
Some it may please that heard it not before.
26.
And now to Commodus we make repa're,
Who had good cause to double his Lifeguard;
For since Maternus Treason did him scare,
He them commanded to keep strickter ward,
To Suburb-house he went or Country farm,
Leaving the Court for fear of further harm.
27.
Both Rome and Italy were much infested
With pestilence, which did them sore torment,
And strangers there that for their Traffic rested
Great cause they had their fortunes to lament:
For men and beasts destroi'd by some ill influence,
Did make the City smart through so much confluence.
28.
The Prince by his Physicians was persuaded,
That to Laurentum he should make repair;
For so the plague might better be evaded,
There Antidote against the plague.
Laurel was with cool and temperate air:
A Seat that stands in Register for Fame,
Of Laurel did Laurentum take the name.
29.
There fragant sents and pleasant shade of Baies,
Which would avail against the fierce infection,
The Citizens were also showed some ways,
How to prepare a praevalent confection;
Their ears wherewith and nostrils to anoint,
Such Odours sweet the Doctors did appoint.
30.
They reason thus if senses praepossesse,
No fulsome air so soon therein can enter;
Nor shall they be enforced to such distress,
But they abroad to exercise may venture:
Yet did this plague outrageous make them die,
That men and beasts on heaps were seen to lie.
31.
A grievous dearth was also in the City,
Procured by one that once was sold a slave,
Cleander Phrygian, greater was the pity,
That he had means to make himself so brave;
By cunning slight so well he sung his ditty,
He had from Prince what he could wish or crave:
From Page to more degrees so well he fared,
At length he made him Captain of his guard.
32.
Rank of success he was so puffed with pride,
For Empire now he meant to turn and wind;
Great mass of treasure and of Corn, beside
Monopolies he got of every kind,
When Citizens the greatest want did 'bide,
He sought to win them all unto his mind:
With Donatives he would the soldiers gain,
And commons should have plenty for their pain.
33.
A An Activity Court
Gimnasse also and a statley Bath
He did erect the people for to catch;
But yet such grudg to him the vulgar has,
That they his craft and proud design will watch:
Their liberties by him was brought in thrall
They therefore now detest him great and small.
34.
In public The'ter first they him disgrace,
Yet are not so content to vent their spleen,
But run with open mouth unto the place,
Whereas they thought their Prince was to be seen,
And Justice they do cry for more and more,
Until the Subburbs all were in uproar.
35.
This while to wantonness the Prince was bent,
In inner private Rooms did not the tumult mind,
For that Cleander looked how to prevent;
Who having placed the horsemen so behind,
They overthrew and wounded whom they list,
The City foot unarmed could not resist.
36.
Whereon they to the City fled amain,
Followed by Cornets of Cleanders horse,
Great numbers of the common people slain,
And trampled under foot without remorse;
The Lanciers pursued to the City gate,
Killing outright, such was the woeful state.
37.
The Citizens at home soon understood
The slaughter made of neighbor was and friend;
From off house topps they throw both stones and mudd,
Tyles and firebrands they from above do send:
The commons now that better understand,
Dart from aloft, not fighting hand to hand.
38.
Their doors were shut, themselves were out of Reach,
They killed some and many put to flight;
Others they wound and better manners teach,
Their heads rung noon though it was almost night;
Some were thrown down, some from their horses leaps,
And tumbled on the stones that lay on heaps.
39.
The Bands of Foot that in the City sesse,
Did likewise come the Citizens to aid;
They flock together, all make up a mess,
Which front the Troopers terribly afraid;
Yet none durst to the Emperor make address,
To tell him what was either done or said,
Till that Fadilla Commodus his sister
Took heart of grace, and told him of this stir.
40.
To her they could not well deny access,
With hair dishev'lld and mourning weeds she run,
And plainly told how they were in distress,
Without some present help they were undone:
This Lady sister, fair and seemly maid,
Fell at his feet, and thus to him she said*
41.
Your Majesty with pleasures here is filled, (...) speech.

You little know our danger or your own;
We your flesh and blood like are to be killed
Part of your force and Cities overthrown;
Such outrage as Barbarians would not offer,
Your servants acted have, and more do profer.
42.
He whom to greatest Honor you preferred,
Is now become your deep and deadly foe;
Cleander commons has and soldiers stirred,
They both of them against you now do go:
He hated is of one, and loved of the other,
Both are up in Arms killing one another.
43.
Your Royal City now with blood is filled,
And we shall smart for this un^uly geere,
Unless you cause this sycophant to be killed,
Nor we or you can be in safety here:
He author is of this most wicked part,
If not cut off your Majesty will smart.
44.
Thus having said, her hair and garment rent,
Her Noble speech had put the rest in heart;
The Prince afraid and sorry to be shent,
That he should be the cause of so much smart;
Without delay he for Cleander sent,
And taught him how to play so lewd a part,
Him he arrests, and doomed him to be dead,
So did this wicked traitor lose his head.
45.
Which fastened was and sent upon a Spear,
That all the commons and the rest might see:
Imagine well you may how glad they were,
More welcome unto them could nothing be:
Then that which caused had this bloody broyle
Was sent to cease their cruel fight and toil.
46.
The soldiers then perceiving he was slain,
Whose quarrel they so dreadfully had fought,
The Emp'rours favor they beseech again;
Their lesson new they once more would be taught,
He was abused they discerned plain,
Though this their knowledge is full dearly bought:
Yet better late then never is repentance, Proverb.

Now they and commons both do like the sentence.
47.
They also their revenge extended further,
Two sonns was all his children left behind,
Both them and his adherents they do murder,
Left not a man that had to him inclined;
In this garboyle they must with him part stakes,
Their bodies dragged and thrown into a Jakes.
48.
Lo how ambition here has played its part,
A man puffed up bears high and lofty sail.
With all his flies and Fautors in that art;
Now fortune smiled and then anon did fail,
She cares for Cleander not a f --)
But him despised and turned her fickle tail,
Whom she from low degree of late preferred,
Again debased and all their matter marred.
CANTO V.
The ARGUMENT.
Both Credulous and cruel is the Prince,
Rome fired is and Prodigies appear,
Undecent sports of folly him convince,
A goddess strange and gifts of the new year,
Fair Marcia his Selected Concubine
With others do conspire his death in fine.
1.
HOw practice some to gain their wicked ends,
When once the Reins into their hands are put;
They post too fast; outrunning all their friends,
So Tyrant-like they play the greedy gut:
This was the case of covetous Cleander,
When he so far from Loyalty did wander.
2.
Now Commodus is needlessly afraid
Lest Commons rude new matters should attempt,
But counsel wise persuaded him and said,
His presence straight would quash the late contempt;
To City then he went to clear the cause,
And there received was with great applause.
3.
Thus having past such sharp and threatening pikes,
A while he did in Palace him repose;
Yet friend and foe eftsoone he kills and strikes,
So jealous was of every Brute that rose;
He credit gave to every Accusation,
Though never so false, such was the Alteration.
4.
To sensual pleasures he was whole enslaved,
That took up all his time both day and night;
Himself not like a Prince he now behaved,
All Noble acts he did abandon quite;
All persons good he banished as insidious,
And kept Buffoones debauched and perfidious.
5.
He Coaches ran and skirmish'd with wild beasts,
More then became the Splendour of a King,
In rioting and all voluptuous Feasts;
With fawning Parasites his Court did Ring:
Strange sights amazed the City full of fear,
Stars did at noon as in the night appear.
6.
With blazing Comets of a wondrous length,
All Creatures, much contrary to their kind,
To bring forth monsters had unusual strength,
Yet that which most afflicts the peoples mind,
And made them fear their mischief would come (...)
Was this ensuing hideous disaster.
7.
That stately Temple dedicate to Peace
In Rome, the like was no where to be found;
Storm there was none, and tempests all did cease,
Quite burned was unto the very ground;
Whether by fire above or fire below,
Or little shake of earth no man did know.
8.
This sumptuous Temple was both Rich and Strong,
With Donaries most curiously Adorned,
Of Silver-bright and Massy Gold among;
No marvel therefore if the wealthy mourned,
For Treasure Prime that did to them belong,
And herein kept, was melted quite or burned:
This fatal night, like had not been before.
Astonish all, and made the Rich men poor.
9.
Here was both private and a public loss,
Which sad event all rufully Deplore;
Yet when this Stately Fabric burned was,
The flaming fire increased more and more;
To buildings Chief it made a further Rape,
The goodly Fane of Vosta did not ^scape.
10.
Palladium Image that was secret kept,
By Romans held in sacred veneration,
From Troy they say, was either brought or lept,
And therefore had the greater estimation;
Not seen before, the Vestall Virgins carry,
And through the Sacred Street to th, Palace harry
11.
In City perished many Famous Pieces,
The Fire could not be quenched in sundry days,
Till that the rain from Heaven fell in fleeces,
Then for Celestial Aid they all give praise:
In this conceit among them were no odds,
The fire begun and ended by the gods.
12.
The Temple Burnt thus consecrate to Jove,
Some said did show their future ill success,
And that calamities would still increase;
Some others hoped it might be but a guess,
Yet this Conjecture proved not only bare,
As in Succeeding Books I will declare.
13.
These dire mishaps the Citizens surround,
And fall so thick in one another neck;
They sowrely look, think Commodus the ground,
His dismal deeds he cares not to check;
The base Exploits which do so public sound,
Are Pregnant ever at his Call and Beck:
His vain excess is known to all Notorious,
Nor does he veil it, but is more vain glorious:
14.
Yea to such drunken dotage he was grown,
He now refused flat his Fathers Name,
Abjuring Marcus, and what was his own,
He Hero'les is of Jove deriving Fame:
From Roman habit he so often was in,
He thrust himself into a Lions skin.
15.
Sometimes a massy Club in hand he bore,
Which made him in Extremity ridiculous,
Then Purple Amazonian Robe he wore,
With Pearl and Gold Embroydered perspicuous;
One was a garb for Females fit to wear,
The other more then Masculine Austere.
16.
He daily thus invented new Attire,
New Names he gave to Months within the year,
Leaving the old as Fancy did require,
Such as his Surname would more proper bear;
The most whereof to Herc'les he referred,
As Hero Chief who ought to be preferred.
17.
His Statues also he would have Erected
About the City, and at Senate Door,
An Archer like, that he might be suspected,
Ready to shoot, to terrify the More;
Which at his end, the Senate (to deface)
Brought Liberty To a god^esse amongst the Romans.
Her Image there did place.
18.
Now Commodus no longer could contain,
Himself would Act upon the public Stage;
With his own hands fierce wild Beasts must be slain,
At sharp with swordmen he would like Engage;
The news thus blazed, then people far and near
Came flocking in as well to see as hear.
19.
A marksman sure he was with Dart or Arrow,
Numidian Darters could not well compare,
Whatsoever he aimed though as little a Sparrow,
His Parthian Archers would not miss so rare,
When time was come to show this Action bold,
The Theater was full as it might hold.
20.
A Tarras was set up for him to round,
So far aloft he need no danger fear,
Which made some think his valor was not sound,
But rather skill in shooting did appear:
Of Bucks and Does and other horned Beast
Great store he killed, but yet of Bulls the least.
21.
None escaped him, from Tarras he so Darted,
Lions, Panthers and Beasts of Noble sort,
Such rare dexterity he there imparted,
In mortal wounds they felt but little sport;
He nimbly hit the head or else the heart,
When Beast was roused aimed at no other part.
22.
Noe sooner struck but dead they fell and stark
Wild Beasts were brought from far of every kind;
Such as in Pictures they before did mark,
They all beheld except there were some blind:
At once he slew and showed (not in the dark)
Beasts strange that came from Aethiope and Inde,
From East or West, from North or yet from Sou^h
Was instant slain, so well his ^eere he Couth.
23.
Some Estrich of Moresco once he shat,
Which spread their wings as Sails to help their running;
The Forked Arrow took the neck so pat,
It marvel was to see such See the L. of S. Albans, bisto. Centur. 4.
wondrous cunning;
The blow so fierce that er'e the Fowls were dead,
They ran a certain Space without a head.
24.
A Panther likewise brought into the List,
With speed and force a simple man did seize,
That all men thought of death he had not mist,
But him the Prince with lucky hand did ease:
He had no harm in any limb or joint,
The Panthers t^eth were struck with Javelin point.
25.
A hundred Lions each to one a dart,
It was observed another time he slew;
Their bodies falling right so overthwart,
They easily might be numbered in the view*
In all of these miscarried not a Dart,
But struck the stately Beast in Head or Heart.
26.
These Active Feats became not well a Prince,
Yet 'cause they were of Valor dextrous proof,
Were not unpleasing to the peoples sense;
But when that he in The'ter stood aloof,
And played the naked fencing Gladiator,
This certes was a dire and dismal matter.
27.
To see a Noble Emperor so descended,
After so many Trophies had been won
By Famous Ancestors of Right commended,
Should thus become a base ignoble Son;
In stead of fighting with the rude Barbarian,
Had now disguised himself like to Maide-marian.
28.
How far unlike was this a Roman Prince,
To make such sordid and so vile digression:
What though he do his opposites convince,
We all do know it was a base profession;
To yield to him they are not void of sense
They know him King not master of defense.
29.
He ranged so far and flatly played the fool,
His Princely Palace He would now forsake
To take his lodging in a fencing School:
Of Herc'les Name no more account did make,
But of a famous Swordman late deceased
Assumed the Name, in that he best was pleased.
30.
Where Romans had an Image of the Sunn,
A high Colosse, and held in great esteem,
The head struck off was by this Frantic donn,
To place one like his own he fit did deem,
But not subscribed with Sir Name Father wonn;
Such Glorious title nothing fit did seem,
But Victor of a thousand Gladiators
Was best to him, though grief to all Spectators.
31.
But now it is time to leave these foolish pranks,
The City will no more endure this yoke;
The Day at hand they give to Janus thanks,
And yearly make his Holy Altar smoke;
Their eldest god who Saturn entertained
(Thrust out by Jove) when he came and complained.
32.
It Latium had to Name of his conceal,
Wherefore it is a custom to this day,
That first to Saturn they do make Appeal,
Then to old Janus they are wont to pray;
His Image with two Heads they make appear
Of new the first, but last of the old year.
33.
This Ancient Feast all Italy do mind,
The Romans to their friends give little toys,
Both Gold and Silver of the neatest kind,
^o enterchange their Love and new-come Joys;
With Gifts and Presents thus begins New Year,
Then choicest Silks and Purple Robes they wear.
34.
Now Commodus intends no such Solace,
Or Purple wear or Robe fit for a Prince;
He will not Issue forth from out his Palace,
But from a paltry common School of Fence;
He must not now be Cumbred with such matters,
But Armed will be seen amongst Gladiators.
35.
When this to Marcia he had once imparted,
Who was his Dear and Choicest Concubine,
His Lewd Devise she purposed to have thwarted,
Before his feet she fell with watery eyne:
She Empress like had what she could desire,
And Honors all excepting that of fire.
36.
She prayed his Majesty not to profane
The Roman Empire with so vile a sport,
Nor let his Sacred person to be ta'^e
Amongst Ruffins lewd in such a desperate sort:
But when she saw he was not of his keeping,
Nor could prevail, Proverb.
she thence departed weeping.
37.
He sends for Laetus and Electus both,
General and Chamberlain he bids take care
His Hests to keep, who were exceeding loath,
In fencing School his lodging to prepare;
Next morrow he would Sacrifice forsooth,
As custom was, for cost he will not spare,
And to the Romans show himself in Arms,
He and his Fencers giving fresh Alarms.
38.
These two most humbly prayed him to desist,
And not commit such rude Unprincely Act;
Though they were grave he will do what he list
And from his presence he in rage them pakt:
Then in his Chamber (to repose at noon
As was his wont) his plot contrived soon.
39.
There did he write down in a Table book
The Names of those he doomed to death that night;
Electus, Laetus, Marcia too must look,
With many more, to taste his Irefull spite:
Old Senators his Fathers loyal friends
Must now be brought unto their dismal ends.
40.
And this he did lest Censuring should mate
And countercheck his black and dismal deeds,
He means to give away their goods and state;
To Soldiers and to Fencers straight he speeds,
That one of them his person might defend,
The other would delight his whimsey end.
41.
When this was done and Book left on his Pallat,
His Chamber door he thought none durst to enter,
A little Boy, as little wit in sallat,
Could hardly speak, yet had the hap to enter;
Such pretty Boys the Romans use to have,
Half naked dressed, with Gold and Silver brave.
42.
This Boy did Commodus Extremely Love,
And very often he lay with him in bed,
Called Philo Commodus, as much as Dove
Or Darling, he thus of his Name was sped;
The Boy was full of play and went to clamber
(As Commodus did bath) to his bed Chamber.
43.
While thus he Lav'd and revell'd with his Minions,
This Book the child took up and went to play;
By power Divine it was in some opinions
That Marcia chanced to meet him by the way;
Whom dearly she did Love, and late had mist him,
Now took him in her arms all and to kissed him.
44.
But lest he should with pretty Childish toying
Blot out some matters that might be of weight,
Taking the Book to free from his Annoying,
Commodus writing she perceived straight;
And longing now as women often do use,
She needs must read, yet found but heavy news.
45.
First she, next Laetus and Electus dies,
With such a number of the Noble Train,
Then sighing deep she thus laments and cries,
O Commodus is all my Love in vain?
Have I endured your flatterers and flies?
Is this the Guerdon I have for my pain?
You soon shall know this sober hand of mine
Shall quickly dash your drunken Lewd design.
46.
She forthwith then for Lord Electus sends,
Her bosom friend and Princes Chamberlain;
The plot that was to make them all amends,
See here quoth she this night you must be slain:
He reads as though he somewhat was amazed
Of Egypt he, those are not easily daz'd.
47.
In Choler he again sealed up the Book,
To Laetus sent it by a trusty friend;
He startled was and with a ghastly look
To Marcia came, there business did pretend,
As if he came to dress the fencing School,
Though Commodus his pulse they mean to Cool.
48.
This was a Color fair for them to treat,
Which soon begot a sound determination,
To save themselves Marcia may do the feat
Without delay or more procrastination;
With poisoned Cup which she could handle neat,
To show him what was his praedestination:
She must present, and neither faint or falter,
This was the means to keep them from the halter.
49.
First cup he drank her custom was to offer,
If that he Bath or else do sup or dine,
And he accepts kindly of her proffer;
The which she fills with Aromatic wine,
And so presents with Spice as she had don't,
This off he qua^fs according to his wont.
50.
He thirsty was with Bath and Chasing Beast,
But now his heavy head is in a slumber;
They must not tell with what they did him feast,
But rather how much pains had bred his Cumber:
These three Commands the rest to void the Court,
'Twas for his ease now having done his Sport.
51.
For thus it was with him in drunken fits,
When he had either Banqueted or Bathed;
No set time had to come within his wits,
The several sort of pleasure had him Scath'd:
A while thus resting in this sorry plight,
His stomach ill, and head grew very light.
52.
Extremely unto Vomit then he fell
With too much drink, or else with over feasting;
If hap'ly so the Poison might expel,
With Marcia and the rest it was no jesting:
Or else perhaps some Antidote had taken,
As Princes often use to shun their Bane.
53.
How e're it was the Vomit did not cease,
Conspirators began to be afread;
If that his strength his poison should release,
And he come to himself, they were but dead:
While thus about this matter they do wrangle,
They all agree Narcissus shall him strangle.
54.
Narcissus was a bold and desperate youth,
On their reward and promises he bears;
This was the end of Commodus in sooth,
Since Fathers death he reigned thirteen years:
Of high descent he noble was and Prime,
And was the goodliest person of his Time.
55.
For dextr'ous Darting second unto none,
But yet his Life ignoble was and foul;
Wherefore you hear they make but little moan,
Nor at his end the people do condo^^:
Now of this Theme no longer we must dwell,
Repose a while, and I the rest will tell.
The End of the first Book.
The Second Book.
CANTO VI.
The ARGUMENT.
Describe we Pertinax his high degree,
With Laetus speech and Emperor proclaimed;
The Senate in his choice do all agree,
Informers quelled, good Government is Aimd,
Trained Bands rebel, Strangers extol the State,
He murth'red is, though some repent too late.
1.
LO here the fatal end of Prodigality,
When men delight in Riot and excess,
More wholesome Doctrine is the mean frugality
That checks the will when once it does digress:
The greater he that does himself inthrall,
The more his shame and greater is his fall.
2.
Commodus slain, Conspirators devise
From Soldiers how the matter to conceal;
They know it is time to put on some disguise,
Two trusty friends must now the matter heal:
The manner how while they in brief discuss,
In Fardel Course his Corpse they roundly trusse.
3.
And carry forth in stead of household stuff,
Which straight they do convey away in post;
The drunken guards say not so much as muff, Proverb.

Regarding not what did concern them most;
With ready Coach before that any mist' um
In dead of night they hurry to A City.
Aristum.
4.
The chief conspirers fall into debate
What way was best to save their Triple necks; Electus, Laetus, Marcia.

And cause they would avoid the peoples hate,
They gave it out he died of Apoplex;
For he so often did sleep with drunken pate,
They well might creed no Treason did him vex:
Thus Tyrant dead that peace might take effect,
They first conclude some grave man to elect.
5.
Consulting then they Pertimax resolve
Most fit to undertake this weighty charge;
On him it was that Marcus did divolve
His chiefest trust, and he who did enlarge
His conquest from the North unto the East,
And brought the Barbarous People to his Hest.
6.
Him Commodus both spared and revered,
For gravity and poverty his praise
Was ground sufficient that he was not feared,
By wealth he never sought himself to raise:
In silent night when doors were shut and pent,
To him Electus, Laetus, also went.
7.
The open the doors they do the Porter Call,
Who upon summons peeped soon without,
And seeing Soldiers with their General,
To Master ran amazed with fear and doubt;
Who him Commands they should not be rejected,
For now the mischief came he long expected.
8.
They say he Waved the Terror of the night,
And never changed hue or bed forsook,
But with undaunted and a manly sprite,
A Courage bold, and unappaled Look,
Said here I am, you need to seek no further,
I am the man that you are sent to murder.
9.
This end indeed I looked for every Tide,
I marvel Commodus has been so ^lack;
Of Fathers Friends I last of all Abide,
And now Expect to follow on the Track:
Perform your Errand that you come about,
And me discharge of further fear and doubt.
10.
Then Laetus thus, O Noble Sir Remove
These Scruples which do now your mind infest;
Distrust not those that do you dearly Love,
We come with Diadem you to invest;
The Tyrant dead, you Chosen are above
All others, as the man Accepted best:
Electus, I, and Marcia do signify,
That you above the rest we mean to dignifie.
11.
To whom again good Pertinax replied,
I am (to be deluded in this sort)
Too old; forbear and do not thus deride,
Or think that with a Coward you make sport;
Then said Electus, since you will not 'bide
By that whereof we make so true report,
Or deem, we gladly crave not your Command,
Peruse this Book, you know Commodus Hand.
12.
Good Friends they were to Pertinax of old,
He plain perceives the business how it goes:
Thus much disclosed again he waxed bold,
And yields himself to be at their dispose;
Yet that the Soldiers might not be too Cold,
They thought it best with them to make a close;
And that from Power they might the matter take,
Laetus the General did it for his sake.
13.
The night grew on, it being almost spent,
Next day a feast in honor of New Year;
For trusty Messengers in have they sent,
Commodus death that they might make appear;
How Pertinax now Prince would ease their bands,
When once this was divulged, they clap their hands.
14.
Excess of Joy was spread all over the City,
In every corner and in every street;
The people run and sing a pleasant Ditty,
Glad tidings tell to every one they meet;
The men renowned for wealth and eke for worth,
That were in danger, now come peeping forth.
15.
Such men of Tyrants stand in greatest doubt,
To Temples then and Altars do they Trudge;
Some Tyrant Cried, Fencer some other flout,
Nor any one hereat was known to grudg:
Such as before durst not appear in unity,
Dare now proclaim assured of impunity.
16.
But some for fear do to the Army post,
Lest Soldiers rude should not this Prince admit;
For under Tyrants they do ravin most,
But this perhaps will not their spoil remit:
Yet to persuade they mean to undertake,
And Laetus to the Army gently spoke.
17.
Our Prince while're is dead of Apoplex, Laetus Speech.

Do what we could to keep him safe and quiet;
The drunken fits his brains did so much vex,
His night disports and gormandizing diet;
All which together did him so perplex,
They Death procured by vain excess and Riot:
In stead of whom, we and the Romans bring,
A man approved most fit to be your King.
18.
To you which Vet'rans are his worth is known,
He also was a guide unto the City;
Not only Prince but Parent to each one,
Fortune has sent us as it were in pity;
Whose Government if you do now promote,
Will glad your fellows that are far remote.
19.
Such as the Marches of the Empire guard,
His Surnamed Britanicus for Service there.
Noble Acts and how he was inclined,
Remember yet, and how by him they fared
The Barbarous people now will change their mind:
Nor shall we need with money them to win,
His only Name will awe and keep them in.
20.
When Laetus once this pithy Speech had made,
The Soldiers 'gan to pause and to demurr;
Yet were the Common People all so glad,
They soon Appeased the Tumult and the sturr;
'Twas Holiday, unarmed the Soldiers came,
So all agreed the Emperor to proclaim.
21.
They less in number were and intermixed,
To give consent they therefore thought it best;
No further difference then was them betwixt,
Nor did they seem as if they had been pressed:
But all with Laurels made great Joy and solace,
Conducting him to the Imperial Palace.
22.
Now he good man himself was somewhat pensive,
Not that he wanted courage or was faint;
But yet he took this Act as reprehensive,
And feared it might his former prudence ^aint;
Then that it might in him be less offensive,
He thought it best the Senate to acquaint,
How after such a sudden change of Tyranny,
The Crown was fallen into a meaner Family.
23.
No Symbol yet of State he would admit
With fire before, according to the kind,
Till that he knew if they approved it,
Or else he was obedient to their mind;
Whom when they saw, they all with one accord,
Augustus Call, and eke their Sovereign Lord.
24.
This Title was of Envy as he thought,
And studies to avoid it all he might:
Full well I know quoth he, this Honor ought
To be preferred where there is greater Right;
Amongst you many are of higher Race,
To whom compared I count my self but base.
25.
My years have also worn me out of Date;
Set me aside and choose some Noble Peer;
Lo there a man ordained is by Fate,
How right it is that he be placed here;
Glabro is he must ease me of this moan,
Whom straight he handed to the Regal Throne.
26.
He was descended of Aeneas Race,
And twice he had the Consular Degree,
Yet back again he did resign the Place,
O Pertinax this Seat belongs to thee:
When now no longer he could shun their suit,
He made this Speech, concluding the dispute:
27.
My Lords, P^rtina^ speech.
your Fervent Zeal and good Affection
In this debate most manifest Appears*
For that you please of me to make Election
Before so many Great and Noble Peers:
Your Faith and worth that herein is so Large,
Serves as a prop the Burden to discharge.
28.
These Favors yet so rare and so sublime,
Intimidates even at the very sight,
For Benefits so great at such a time
Will not so easy be for to requite:
Then how I may deserve what you conferr,
Is task too great, and does me much deterr.
29.
The Lasting Glory of a Sovereign Prince
Consists not merely in a Chair of State,
But in those Royal Acts which may convince
Such as Malign, or do repine thereat:
The Evils past which they before endured,
Must by his prudent Care be salv'd and Cured.
30.
Our grifes remain, good turns are often forgot,
No sooner done but shortly fade and perish:
Who is it that injuries remembers not;
But him that seeks the Cure they seldom Cherish,
Though he secure their Goods with all his might,
No thanks say they, it is our proper Right.
31.
Best Change that happens for the Public good,
Is little worth to private men undone,
And such as lived profuse when Tyrants stood,
If once reduced a desperate Course they run,
Accusing all of sparing Innovation,
Though they reform with prudent Moderation.
32.
Yet since excess of gifts as heretofore
Can not be done, except we do oppress
And put the people in the like uproare,
As erst they were when want did them distress;
Nor that our selves do covet any more
Then what is just, and all of them confess;
You will I hope with Counsel me assist,
That each may have his own, not what he list.
33.
This Speech convai'd such Meekness and such Love,
With cheerful hearts they do him all revere;
Then brought him to the Temple of great Jove,
And other gods of whom they stand in fear:
When he had done the wonted Sacrifice,
He to the Palace went in Princely wise.
34.
When it was voic'd how Graciously he spoke,
And Commons had received what he had writ,
All men were pleased remembering well the yoke
That on their necks so heavy erst did sit;
The Soldiers Spoil he also ^ought to choke,
By making Edicts for the purpose fit:
Thus did he plant good order and Civility,
With Spirit meek and Garb of affability.
35.
Although their Prince he governed as a Father,
Were he at home or else in judgment Sat,
Good Marcus steps did imitate the rather,
'Cause he reproved quarrel and debate:
All men affect this rule (without severity)
Reduced to welcome Peace with great security.
36.
His Princely Virtues gained had such Fame,
The Nations and Confederates round about,
Did all agree to deifie his Name;
The Barbarous People whom he often did rout,
Do now come in to fortify the same,
Though Late Revolters, Rebels fierce and stout;
Ambassadors declare from ev'^y part,
The Romans had promoted true desert.
37.
Now of this Change the Commons were full glad,
Unto this civil Rule to be recal'd;
But yet the guard of Soldiers were as mad
To see their Rape and insolence forestalled;
Which they resent and are no long time Idle,
But do resolve not to endure the bridle.
38.
Yet for a while they do but grudg and grumble,
Two months there was for all men to Appeal,
Then Fortune blind did topsy turvy tumble,
What he designed for good and Common weal;
And that the Commons might no more be scanted,
He first decreed the wast Lands should be planted.
39.
Yea though what was the Princes own demean,
To Husbandmen he gave it to manure,
With promise likewise during all his Reign
From ten years Tax their Farms should be secure;
The Emp'rours goods he also did disdeign;
To stamp his own name he would not endure,
Nor take unto himself at any rate,
But said they did belong unto the State.
40.
Since Tyrants Death all Tolls and Impost ceast,
At River Banks, Highwayes and City Ports,
An Optimacy now their harm releast
Informers false that daringly resorts;
He strict Commands they forthwith shall be banished,
And for their former faults severely punished.
41.
Both Rich and poor were safe and free from strife,
A fellow then a Prince he seemed rather;
His Son not at the Court, Led private Life,
To Schools of learning often went the Father,
And Public exercise did eke frequent,
In Pomp or State he seldom came or went.
42.
His Rule so just inflamed the Soldiers rude,
Their insolence and Rapine now decreast
O Savage minds! they in a Frantic mood
His Death complotted at a dreadful Feast;
Then in their fury to the Court they pranc'd*
In Warlike March, with Swords and pikes Advanced.
43.
The Courtiers had no care themselves to Arm,
Within the verge each left his several place;
For being frighted with this sharp Alarm,
They eftsoons fell before the Emp'rours Face,
And prayed that he would save himself by slight,
The People (they were sure) would aid his Right.
44.
Although he knew their Counsel well Advised,
Yet did not think it was a fit Decorum
His former Glory should be so disguised,
To be afraid and run away before'um;
Then unamaz'd a Princely stand he made,
And reasoned thus their malice to dissuade:
45.
The life you seek to you is little gain,
Or loss to me, Arrived at this Age;
All Humane things we ought to count as vain,
Yet Honor do I wear as chiefest Badge:
You are by Oath my Person safe to guard,
Whom if you kill, small will be your reward.
46.
My Conscience tells me I have wronged you never,
And if at Commod's death you do repine,
No man that breaths is born to live for ever;
Yet well you know it was no fault of mine,
My Innocence pleads for me altogether,
Of Least suspect in me there is no sign:
Though he be dead, if you forbear this hate,
You shall have Largess fit for your estate.
47.
This Speech concluded, diverse did retreat,
Such Awe The like effect of Majeste in Q. Olym. See Justin. l. 14.
they had and Reverence of the Prince
Yet others killed him in a furious heat,
Worse deed was never done before or since:
But now the people all was in a sweat;
And lest they should of madness them convince,
To 'th Camp they get Immured in their Walls,
This end Renowned Pertinax befalls.
48.
Great Cries were made for him and Lamentations
In every Coast, and throughout every City;
Now fresh in mind they bear their old Vexations,
Their Father dead, who is that will them Pity;
Full well they know they must have new Taxations,
Thus Frantic like they sing a woeful ditty;
The Nobles and the Rich to shun their Harms,
Do all retire unto their Country Farms.
CANTO VII.
The ARGUMENT.
Praetorians put the Empire unto sale,
And Julian buye^ it with the Commons Curse,
Niger is praised who tells a subtle Tale,
Plays and Revels of Idleness, the Nurse;
He makes a Speech and Emperor is elected,
Yet too secure, of Error is detected.
1.
THough life we Lose, yet must we not give o^'e,
Our study how the Commonweal to save;
Example Late we showed you heretofore,
Whose Virtues Live though he be laid in grave:
This is the Hope we have in doing well,
Good Fame we get, which after Ages tell.
2.
When all was hushed, the Soldiers from their Walls,
Proclaim aloud the Empire to be sold,
And all the People round about them Calls
To know the man that will depart with Gold;
Avouching, that he need not fear to scorce,
For him they would invest with Armed Force.
3.
Of all the Nobles that were left behind, Bravery of a Roman Spirit.

None would appear, this offer they did scorn;
Yet Julian he was of another mind;
He thought with Honor to Exalt his horn,
And in his Tipsy Cups when he was Jolly,
His Wife and Daughters do promote his Folly.
4.
Then up he gets and hies him from his Pallat, The R^m^n* sat not at Tables.

With Parasites that could his humor tell,
When Wine was got into his drunken Sallat,
He aptest was for gain to buy and sell;
Aloud he calls and to the Soldiers told,
His Chests were full of Silver and of Gold.
5.
Another Copes-mate came, Sulpitian hight,
That proffered ready Money at their Call;
But him refused, the lot on Julian light,
Whom yet they keep in pledge upon the Wall,
Till they received the sum which he did offer,
Then let him down accepting of his prof^er.
6.
Commodus Laws he promised to restore,
And Statutes eke which Senators pulled down,
With Liberty, such as they had before;
The Soldiers also should have many a Crown,
More then he promised, or they could demand;
For why, he had it ready at Command.
7.
The Soldiers straight allured with this Hope,
Proclaim him Prince by Commodus Surname,
With Ensigns spread (who rather ^arn'd a Rope)
And Pictures gay he to the City came,
When first in Court according to the Guise,
He finished had the wonted Sacrifice.
8.
Yet stronger then accustomed was his Guard,
For that by bribes the Empire he did seize,
Or else perhaps the people had him scared,
His shameless dealing nothing did them please;
And lest they should affront him in the way,
The Soldiers put themselves in Battle ray.
9.
Being thus Prepared they ready were to fight,
Amidst their Troops they placed him among,
And over their heads they bore In form of a cestudo. vid. L^^psius de mibit
Romans
their Targets right,
The better to avoid the Peoples Throng,
Or Tiles from houses might not on them light,
To the Palace they conducted him along:
The Commons on this matter fell to scanning,
And stood aloof with Cursing and with Banning.
10.
The Soldiers now do ravine in Extreme,
The world appeared as if it were in Dotage;
Both high and low were slumbring in a Dream,
Not any sought to Catechize this Brocage:
The Princes Death and many more beside,
(With Sovereign Rule) the Mutineers deride.
11.
Thus Julian the Empire having Ravished,
Did State Affairs and Princely garb neglect,
In Riot and disorder foul he lavished,
For which the Soldiers roundly him detect;
And now at length they jeered him and taunted,
His Coin fell short whereof so much he vaunted.
12.
The Exchequer Commod's vain disports exhausted,
And Soldiers falling short were much offended;
The Commons knew their minds, and to them posted,
Whereby his matter was not much Amended;
They rail and scoff when er'e he comes abroad,
And of his lewd behavior lays on Load.
13.
In public Horse-race of Ovall form able to contain 100000 Spectators.
Cirque they Julian cry down
And Niger called to rectify the State;
They will no more be ruled by such a Clown,
Already are their wrong to vindicate:
This Niger was of Syria President,
A place of all the rest most Eminent.
14.
As far as Euphrates is his Command
Of Fame renowned and held in high esteem;
In all Assemblies they for him do stand,
Another Pertinax he now does seem;
They Julian brand with shameful defamations,
And Niger cry with Royal Acclamations.
15.
When Niger heard the other so contemned,
And that they cried up him in every meeting,
Julian for falsehood standing thus condemned,
Himself he knew should have the fairer greeting;
The better to promote these high affairs,
He sends his Captus to divulge these aires.
16.
This silent Course did carry least suspect;
For when they saw he sought not to invade,
With Votes they woe him, as he did expect;
From all parts come Acceptance to persuade;
The Syrian Nation also are as prone
Him to invest in the Imperial Throne.
17.
The Syrians Their Character.
much to Niger were devoted,
For that his Rule so gentle was and mild;
On Plays and Pastimes over much they doted,
By suff'rage his they sooner are beguiled:
At Antioch he Bals and Maskes promoted,
To which the People run as they were wild;
To take the Sovereign Rule they him beseech,
Then up his Seat he mounts and makes a Speech.
18.
How I have ruled you with a gentle hand, Nigers Speech.

And Punctual been in all my undertaking,
Is known I think to all men of this Land,
Nor is the Tale I tell of my own making;
The Romans cry as erst to you was told,
The Empire Late is basely bought and sold.
19.
To undertake so great an Enterprise,
Presumption were without good grounds before:
So might it be Imputed Cowardice,
Friends to forsake when they our help implore;
For this Cause I convened you that are wise,
To give advise in this so great uproar:
And if by Counsel rightly you design,
It will be to your praise as well as mine.
20.
Nor is our Hopes contemptible or vain,
The Romans of themselves are so resolved,
Usurping Julian shall no longer Reign;
On them the Worldly Rule is sole devolved,
Praetorian Bands, besides of Cash defeated,
Do now complain how they by him are cheated.
21.
And nothing surer is then our Design,
So forward are they that our succor crave,
Of Opposites there is no manner sign,
The Soldiers know full well he is a knave;
His credit's cracked, he is of Breach detected,
Then show your freedom how you stand affected.
22.
The Army thus; O Emperor our Augustus,
With Purple Robes your Grace we thus invest;
And that you may have better cause to trust us,
This Title we confer above the rest:
Then fire before they in his Mansion Place him,
With all the Regal Titles that may grace him.
23.
Niger was glad at heart of this success,
He now had little doubt of Sovereign State;
The Romans and the rest both more and Less,
European Nations do congratulate;
Ambassadors from all parts make Approach,
And Emperor him salute at Antioch.
24.
From Tygris and Euphrates Princes send,
Rejoicing much and promising their Aid;
Both men and money they will to him Lend,
With Thanks and Gifts he to this Message said:
Of quiet rule he had assurance good,
And hoped to weild the Scepter without blood.
25.
He in this confidence too long reposed,
With Antioch'ans and the Neighbors round,
To Theaters and Sports himself disposed,
By which appear^d his judgment was not sound;
To Rome he should have gone, not staid in Syria,
Or yet neglect the Soldiers in Illyria.
26.
But these he hoped would side with Eastern Forces,
While thus demeaned be on the shallowes Anchored*
For Ister Banks and Rhine observed his Courses,
Full little thought he they would prove so cankred:
But in this story if you take some pleasure,
I will receite the rest at further leisure.
CANTO VIII.
The ARGUMENT.
Severus we describe his Dream and Policy,
A Speech he makes and Emperor is Elected,
He Expedites to Rome surpriseth Italy,
Julian is slain, of Bribery detected,
Train Bands are caught, which could not be evaded,
A Speech to them whereby they are degraded.
1.
THe world you see is like unto a Stage,
Where every Actor plays a several part;
Some King, some Lord, some Servant is or Page,
And some think juggling is a pretty Art:
So Julian here for Empire late durst Barter,
And Soldiers for his money Sealed his Charter.
2.
Some Garrisons were kept as erst I told
On Ister Banks, and on the River Rhoyne,
The Roman Empire to defend and hold
Against the Barbarous people that adjoyne;
Severus was of Africa by descent,
And (...) whole Pannonia President.
3.
This was a Gallan, Brave, and Active man,
Yet in * his mood of Spirit somewhat furious;
Austere of Life, his visage pale and wan,
Of Labor great, in Travail nothing curious;
Of quick Resolve and nimble Apprehension,
To execute what er'e was his Intention.
4.
The Roman Empire hovering in the Air,
And Meteor like uncertain where to fall;
Catch that catch may, he see 'twas open fair,
Then in this Market he set up his stall:
Usurping Julian was too much Pragmatick,
And Niger dull so muddy brain phlegmatic.
5.
He also had Presages by his dreams,
Which credit best obtain by their Event,
Although to some they prove uncertain Theams,
That cannot guess what good or harm is meant,
And often fail, for surely they are gleams
If one could rightly hit of their intent;
Then one of his I must not here omit,
Because I find it in the Book he writ.
6.
When Sovereigne Rule on Pertinax did light, His dream.

And he is Leigeman sworn in Word and deed,
Then went he home and dreamed that same night
He saw him mounted on a Gallant Steed,
Adorned with Princely Trappers as was meet,
Which Carried him along the Sacred Street. A street in Rome.

7.
But when he should into the Forum enter,
Where Democratick Popular rule
people make their meeting,
The Prince to ground the Beast threw at adventure,
Which seemed to the rest a homely greeting;
Yet to himself he came with fair Decorum,
On whom he mounts and gallops through the Forum.
8.
Severus then was lifted up between
The People there, and him they all adore,
A Brazen Image stands to be seen,
This to Record which never was before;
By this his Dream he Cogitates alone,
He was Divinely called to the Throne.
9.
His Captus straight about him he convenes,
Resolved to try how they his Rule affected,
And plainly told by what unworthy means
The Sacred Empire is so much neglected;
Then to his purpose all the Soldiers leanes,
Trained Bands of Treason foully is detected:
Thus of this matter they debate no further,
But will revenge good Pertinax his murder.
10.
Full well he wist that Pertinax his Name
In their Illyrian Army shined Glorious;
For there in Marcus time he gained Fame,
And over the German Nation was Victorious:
A man of Prudence and of Moderation
None might compare in all the Roman Nation.
11.
A Soul of sweet and ^genious disposition,
The Assinats (he knew) they songht to have,
And he with them will make due Inquisition,
If they consent it is all that he will crave;
With this his fair and winning Proposition
This easy People like to Sheep he drove;
And linckt them all in Chain of perfect Unity,
Whereon he grounds his further Opportunity.
12.
They Their description.
in this Region are a race of men
Of mighty Limb, and Body somewhat full,
Tall Soldiers too if once their Foe they ken, Quaere Gu^d^mar Bishop Spoletto.

But yet of slender Wits and temper dull;
Such subtle Drifts they meet but now and then,
When therefore this did penetrate the Skull:
They him believe, then do themselves submit,
And in his Style the Sovereign Title writ.
13.
The dull Pannonians thus he set in order,
With Promise large to every Northern President,
Great Hopes he gave the Regions that did border,
Of Right pertaining to the Roman Regiment;
A deep Dissembler and a subtle Plotter,
A crafty Fox and cunning as an Otter.
14.
To falsify his Oath to serve his turn,
To Cogg and feign he queintly knew his part; A Dark subtle Prince.

Against his Letters that they might not spurn,
His pen often told what was not in his heart:
Their burdens he Avouch'd should not be heavy,
Whereby great store of Soldiers he did Leavy.
15.
And Pertinax Surname he did assume,
For that he knew was worthy of Esteem;
Both current in Illyria and at Rome,
^o like an humble Saint he then did seem:
Yet you shall see he was no tardy Drone,
But first this Speech from his Exalted Throne.
16.
The Zealous Love to gods that you revere, Severus Speech to the Army.

By whom you swore your Emp'rours true Devotion,
In this contest does singular appe're;
For me I never thought of such promotion,
But still Obeyed my Sovereigns Just Commands,
And will with you correct Praetorian Bands.
17.
What you require I purpose to pursue,
The Sacred Empire now does suffer much,
Which you and I will rectify anew;
Yet Commod's slips we will but lightly touch:
His youthful strain deserves Commiseration,
For Fathers sake let us use some mitigation.
18.
His fault you know ought rather be imputed
To Sycophants, which did his youth mislead;
But Pertinax of Noble Fame reputed,
By wicked Hands so Direfully struck dead,
And Julian eke that in his Seat did Mount,
These dismal deeds we call unto Account.
19.
Of Commons he and Soldiers is detested,
They now perceive his purpose to delude,
By Craft and Bribes he got himself invested,
Thus shamefully did in the Throne intrude;
Yet if defend this wretched Act they durst,
Your skill in Arms will put them to the worst.
20.
You often skirmish with the Rude Barbarians,
With toil and Travel, scorning heat and Cold;
Trained Bands are Pamp'red like unto Maidmarians,
In Martial feats who ever knew them bold;
You A Military Exercise.
Hunting use, they live like Lazy Carrions;
Your Shout and Shock, they dare not once behold;
You water drink and wade through Rivers frozen,
They stall fedd are, and wanton ease have chosen.
21.
If any do the Syrian Force misdoubt,
Withal they may their Cowardice Collect;
They from the Country never marched out,
Or had to Rome Intention or Respect:
These Silken Syrians are no Soldiers Martial,
But are to disports and pastimes over Partial.
22.
Though they of Antioch do on Niger dote,
Since none yet like an Emperor does appear,
The Towns and Cities that are more remote,
Of you and me do stand in double fear;
They think you will advance to pay their Cote,
And me they know since I did Govern there:
Our fury they will shun and their own harms,
They must subscribe to us in feats of Arms.
23.
Then let us instant march and seize on Rome,
The Princely Palace we shall soon obtain;
For so to us an easy Rise will come,
And due revenge on Julian we shall gain:
Divine Presages praedicts us good Event
If your Victorious Arms cross their Intent.
24.
This Speech he ended thus and nothing lacks,
The Soldiers leap and shout with Acclamation,
Augustus they him call, and Pertinax,
With cheerful Votes they make this Proclamation;
Then lightly Armed, their geere they trusse in Packs,
Without delay or more procrastination:
He gives them Largess fit for such a journey,
Himself in person needs no Attorney.
25.
Scarce suffering once his weary Troops to rest,
He marched with Courage bold and nimble Speed;
They post away as some do to a Feast,
Yet Cates have none but what they barely need:
He fellow-like no Pomp would have at all,
Which made the Soldiers ready at his Call.
26.
Then through the great Pannonia was his Race,
Where eftsoons seen a Prince preventing Fame,
And up the Italian Hills he climbes apace,
Before they knowledge had from whence he came;
Such quick approach the People heard of never,
Which puts the Cities in a shaking fever.
27.
They Arms had left, and took them to manure
Their Country Farms, living a quiet Life;
The former Armies made them so secure,
With Barbarous folk they have no fear of strife:
Forsooth (say they) our troubles have an end,
Our Roman Power to all parts does extend.
28.
Indeed when first Augustus seized the Monarchy,
So quiet and Pacifick was his Rule,
The people fell to lasie kind of Lethargy,
Their wits grew dull as either Horse or Mule:
Because that none should interrupt the Hierarchy,
His Soldiers guard even to the utmost The furthest Northward.
Thule;
Some parts had Ditches, Rivers deep and Fountains,
Some Deserts had, some Rocks and craggy Mountains.
29.
No marvel then if they were sore aghast,
To see such mighty Troops of armed men,
Not knowing where the Frontiers they had brast,
To march so fiercely thus within their ken;
Severus yet they heard it was at last,
Which partly put them in their wits again:
No help at hand, they thought it best to greet him,
With Laurels in their hands they run to meet him.
30.
Yet where he came he made but little stay,
Except it were to do his Sacrifice,
Or to salute the People in the way,
His head of other matters did devise;
The first design was quick to post to Rome,
To bring usurping Julian to his Doom.
31.
Who now from Commons had but little Hope,
And less from Soldiers that do him detest,
He thought the time was come to stretch a Rope,
His guilty Conscience did him so molest;
He Labors friends and scrapes beyond all measure,
Defacing Temples to engrosse the Treasure.
32.
This wicked deed was for the soldiers hire,
Who never the more will ease him of his moan,
By former breach he known is for a liar:
Assistance now Trained Bands will give him none,
His friends advise he shall the Alps preclude,
Yet naught could stop the Vengeance that ensude.
33.
To Italy these Mountains are a Wall, The Alps.

This Nature added to that happy soil;
Yet Julian Dastard durst not budge at all,
But with the Soldiers does himself turmoile;
He them entreats the Elephants to Train,
That Riders might command with Bit and Rain. Elephants Trained.

34.
The Northern Army thus he thought to Daze,
As being unacquainted with this Beast;
But shortly he himself was in Amaze,
Severus straight did interupt the jest:
His men the City entered several ways,
And the other taken tardy in delays.
35.
(Disguised) by night they enterprise the Town, Stratagem.

In Julians bosom er'e he was aware;
Some wore a Frock, some habit of a Clown,
And now the Common People do not spare:
Julian from Dastardy, Niger of sloth,
Severus, he must carri't from them both.
36.
How glad would Julian be to share a part
Of Sovereign Rule, No Receipt against fear.
or utterly resign;
But Senators that knew his fainting heart,
To cut him off do thus resolve in fine:
A Tribune was at hand, to him they leave him,
Who of his wretched life does soon bereave him.
37.
Then Noble Lords from Senate had Commission,
To Grace Severus with Imperial Crown;
Thus had he what he sought by their Permission,
And was invested in the Regal Throne:
When all things came so fitly to his hands,
He lays a plot to catch Praetorian Bands.
38.
The Tribunes and Centurions he pursues, His subtlety.

With promise fair they shall have due reward,
To bring their men as in the solemn shows,
For they quoth he (once sworn) shall be my guard;
The Soldiers then not doubting further harms,
Do soon consent to lay aside their Arms.
39.
So Issue forth with Laurel Branch in hand,
And Equipage as to a Solemn Feast;
Severus this was made to understand,
For he their welcome had demurely dressed:
While they before him do their Presents bring,
He casts his Troops about him in a Ring.
40.
This was a Martial feate to catch a dolt,
Yet he Commands they shall not wound or strike;
You may perceive he was a crafty colt,
For his was Armed with Javelin and with Pike;
Praetorians then when he had thus surrounded,
With Lofty voice this Speech to them propounded:
41.
You see how much our skill does yours surmount, Severus speech to the
Praetorians.

You now are caught and stand at my devotion;
For black and ugly Deeds you must account,
His blood you spilt by whom you had promotion:
Good Pertinax the Prince that none offended,
Whom you (his guard) should rather have defended.
42.
You next for Coin the Roman Empire Truct,
As if it did belong to you direct;
Yet when you had the Princely Marrow sucked,
You durst not once your Merchant man protect:
But when he came in quest'on, you eftsoons
Betrayed, like Villanes false and base Poultroones.
43.
A thousand Deaths for your Enormous Crime
Too little were if I your due should render;
Pollute my hands I will not at this time,
Or Learn of you, my Wit is not so slender:
Yet since the Royal Blood you have not spared,
You shall no more be of the Emp'rours guard.
44.
Of Nobleness I give more then I owe,
My Soldiers first ungirdling your Attire,
Your Souls and Bodies on you I bestow;
Then pack away far off, you I require.
For near this City if you dare be found,
I here decree you shall be hanged or drowned.
45.
The Illyrian Soldiers ready at their duty,
Praetorian Swords with Gold and Silver wrought,
They quick ungirt, full glad of such a Booty,
These knacks for feasts and solemn shows were brought,
For Scarfs and Feathers yet they further raked;
Trained Bands they stripped, and left them all stark naked.
46.
These Novices thus taken with a wile
(Though glad of Life) depart with heavy cheer;
Full sore they rue they did themselves beguile,
To leave their Arms that they were wont to bear:
Thus to be cast they count a shameful Doom,
And others graced that must supply their Room.
47.
A further plot this Prince had to secure
Their Camp, lest they to that return again;
Some Troops of Horse he sent to make it sure,
And seize the Arms, for that must them constrain:
Thus these Assassinats were justly banished,
And for their breach of Oath condignly punished.
The End of the second Book.
The Third BOOK.
CANTO IX.
The ARGUMENT.
Severe at Rome against Niger now prepares,
He of the Britains has some kind of doubt,
Albinus (Caesar) forthwith he declares,
Herodian writes of seventy years throwghout;
Nigers intends to fortify Mount Taurus,
His General is defeated by Sevarus.
1.
HOw careful ought we be our Lives to spend,
For sure we shall be recompensed at last,
I^ ill we live we must expect such end,
So Julian sped that now is gone and past;
Yet on this Text I must no longer dwell,
But let you know what to the next befell.
2.
Severus enters Rome in Battle range,
The People at the first were sore afraid,
His daring and his Enterprise was strange,
Yet blood was none to make them ill Apaid;
Then Peers and Commons glad were of the change,
With Laurels in their hands they to him said:
For Wit, for Judgment, and Heroicke Deeds,
They now perceive all other he exceeds. H's Elogy.

3.
Great welcome there was made this Prince to greet,
The Nobles and the Commons him salute,
Due thanks he does return as then was meet,
Yet cared not much with them to hold dispute;
But to the Temples of the gods he rode,
Then at the Palace makes his first Abode.
4.
Next day into the Senate House he went,
His Hand he gave and pleasant Speech Addressed:
For Princes death revenge was his intent,
And this to all he solemnly professed;
For Optimacy he will frame a plot,
All Bribes and Tyranny shall be forgot.
5.
Except by Law none life or goods should loose,
So Marcus rule and Pertinax his mind,
Informers should not catch them in a noose,
Thus stroaked he the Senators in kind:
Some Credit gave, His Censure.
some said they were but mocks,
The Elders said he was a wily Fox.
6.
However the Soldiers tasted of his bounty,
And Commons eke had Donative of Corn,
His Fame was spread in every County,
Though late you heard they thought themselves forlorn;
Then quick he marched with Soldiers good and trusty,
Against Nigers men, who yet were dull and rusty.
7.
He joined to his men Italian youth,
The flower (I mean) for dignity and place;
When Soldiers in Illyria heard the truth,
They speed away to meet his Troops in Thrace:
Of Galleys and of Ships he pressed a Fleet,
With Mariners and Necessaries meet.
8.
A mighty Magazine he soon had got,
Provision now must not be with the least;
For well he knew though Niger was a Sot,
He did Command the Nations of the East;
And then in Brittane he had not forgot,
With Valiant men it was no time to jest:
We must quoth he beware of those behind us, He had some fear of the
Britains.

As Soldiers good whose General is Albinus.
9.
This man of Honor was and high descent,
Severus then that well could play his prise,
Lest that he should be cross to his intent,
Did lay a bait to catch him in this wise;
By Sugared Letters and congratulations
He makes to him most loving Protestations.
10.
And thus in Courtly Phrase does Caesar Style him,
Desiring him the Empire to protect:
This Glorious Title quickly did beguile him,
No Stratagem herein he does suspect;
Severus said I gouty am and old,
You Noble, Young, A Gallant brave and bold.
11.
Albinus rashly swallowed down this gudgion,
Severus then to give the better gloss
Desired the Senate not to take it in dudgion,
For he their wisdoms had no will to cross;
Yet now he prays they gently will incline,
All which was done to blanch his own design.
12.
Then Coin he stamped, and Statues did advance
To Albine Caesar as he had projected;
His Subtle Wit had Lulled him in a trance,
And Niger now he means to see corrected:
Illyrian Force he gathers in a Body,
Then roundly marched against this dullard Nody.
13.
What stations by the way, what Speech or prodigy,
What Conflicts and what Number there were slain
Of such before as writ his Acts or Elogie,
Some Records do unto this day remain;
Yet these aside Herodian never fears, Herodian writes of 70 years of his own
knowledge.

To tell the truth observed in seventy years.
14.
Now Rome was seized Severus is proclaimed,
Niger starts and calls in his Vicegerents,
By Sea and Land expects to be maimed,
Yet Ports he stops and sends to his adhaerents;
From Parthia aid he craves, His Preparation.
and from Armenia,
With other Bord'ring Nations to Atrenia.
15.
Some Neutrals speak and will themselves defend,
Some Answer they with Council will confer,
A band of Archers those of Atra send,
The gross was made with Soldiers he had there;
Some youth of Antioch were more bold then wise,
For Niger they will help to play his prise.
16.
Of Taurus then the Precipice and Mount
He fortified with Straits that do belong; Mount Taurus fortified.

Impassable this place by his account,
With walls he did munite exceeding strong:
This was unto the East a Barricado,
And served him as a block to make Bravado.
17.
For Taurus lifting up a lately Ridge
'Twixt Cappadoce and Country of Cilicia;
Does part the East and North as with a Bridge;
In Bizance Now Constantinople.
too he placed a strong Militia,
(The Chief and mighty City then of Thrace)
For strength and wealth none like unto this place.
18.
Propontick Straights this City did enclose,
Like Benefit by Water and by Land,
From Impost, Fish, from Corn, and Fruit it rose,
Large fertile soil was also near at hand;
This City he preoccupates before
Severus foot could reach the Asian Shore.
19.
Of Milstones squared the wall was made compendious,
So Cemented in whole and every part,
You might have thought the (frame was so stupendous,)
It Nature was, not done by Workemans Art;
The Ruins yet that lie on heaps so Ample,
Declare the Force of them that did dismantle.
20.
And thus did Niger order his Affairs,
With Skill he thought; and on the other side
Severus was not slack, but quick repaires
With Soldiers stout, incounters all to 'bide;
Yet 'cause they did Byzantium fortify,
To Cyzicum he wheels his Fate to try.
21.
Aemylian Leivtenant was to Niger,
Who well observed his Enemies intent,
Because he was the General of this War;
At Cyzicum to meet the Foe he went,
And both sides for Encounter do prepare
To fight it out with Sword and Pike they meant;
In bloody Conflict Nigers Force was routed,
Illyrian Soldiers clapped their hands and shouted.
22.
Some said this happened through Aemylians fraud,
(Who envied Niger as to him superior)
Some said his children that at Rome Abode
Was ground hereof, not that he was Inferior:
They by their Letters humbly him besought,
By suffrage his their Freedom might be wrought.
23.
As Co^mod. erst, Severus took a Care
Their Children to secure that had Command; His Policy.

And these among the rest he will not spare,
If Parents do his enterprise withstand;
For such with Guards along with him do fare
In all his journeys both by Sea and Land:
Then if their Fathers Niger will Assist,
He can revenge and kill them when he list.
24.
Now Nigers Force at Cyzicum overthrown,
Through Mountains of Armenia fled amain,
And have to take mount Taurus as their own,
Some others back through Asia went again;
But when Severus Fame was understeud,
The Cities next fell into deadly feud.
25.
Perhaps not much for Love or hate to either,
But through a deadly rancor of their own;
And though they do intend good will to neither,
Yet when Intestine Broils with them are grown,
The men most Eminent for worth and place,
They often extirpat, or at least disgrace.
26.
This strife with them so formerly did lurk,
It slav'd them unto Macedon and Rome;
And as you see at this day to the Turk,
That Greece hereby endures a Fatal Do'me:
So they at Cyzicum and Nicomede
Niger reject, and for Severus plead.
27.
The Citizens of Nicaea then in spite
For Niger stood, and Soldiers Entertained,
That thither or Bythinia took their flight;
Such Umpirage Malignity had gaind;
From Cities then they Issue out amain,
As from their Camps and fight it out again.
28.
But after Battle terrible and hot,
And that Severus Victory had gained,
To Taurus Streights him Niger quickly got,
With such his scatt'red Forces as remained;
Where having left enough for that Design,
He went to Antioch for more men and Coin.
CANTO X.
The ARGUMENT.
Mount Taut's Assault, of Moors, and bloody fight
Is now my Task the Story you to tell;
And what a blow on Nigers neck did light,
Whereby his head from off his shoulders fell:
Severus Winters march we do unfold
Against Albinus and the Britains bold.
1.
WIse men conclude the Golden Mean is best,
And once my self enjoyed that happy State;
But now the wheel is turned I am distressed,
By powerful hand of overruling Fate:
So these that strive about unweildy Crown,
One mounts aloft another sinketh down.
2.
Mount Taurus Fort Severians do Assail,
A Passage craggy, rough and hard to win;
On both sides now they fight with tooth and nail, Proverb.

Neglecting quite the danger they are in:
On such as climb to scale the Guarded Tower,
They from the top do stones and Rubbage power.
3.
Defendants well secured most bravely fought,
Here few men serve great Numbers to repel;
And what they got by pain was dearly bought,
The Walls were high, great Cataracts there fell,
From Mountain tops, there also was a Fort
To bar the Entrance from desired Port.
4.
While this Assault, news came from Cappadoce,
As from the Cities mentioned late before;
Through Ancient grudge new Mutinies arose,
Which put them all into a fresh Uproar:
In Syria the men of Laodicea
Antioch defied and Tyrus in Phaenicia.
5.
Of last discomfiture quick Tidings came,
Which made them thus revolt from Nigers part;
Severus therefore Emperor they proclaim,
Whom Fortune served now as well as Art;
And Niger erst of gentle disposition, Fessae Morocco, formerly Mauritania.

In rage he fell to bloody Inquisition.
6.
Forthwith he sends unto the Barbarous * Moors
(Who were by nature savage fierce and cruel)
To turn the Laodiceans out of doors,
That to the fire had added so much Fuel;
Their City then they enter in a Throng,
Put all to sword that were both old and young.
7.
In Frantic mood then marching unto Tire,
They pillage, kill, none meets them but he dies;
Then set their City on a flaming fire,
And Niger Leavies up his new supplies:
Mean while Severus men do still persist,
Yet at Mount Taurus of their purpose mist.
8.
Nor had they hope to carry such a work,
Impregnable with Praecipice and Mount;
In Bulwarks safe their Enemies do lurk,
Of them without they make but small account:
But see the chance, from off the Mountains rapt
A sudden flood, which strong Foundation sapt.
9.
Here may you see how nature vanquished Art,
The deluge thus with Massy Building stopped
Bare all before, at least so great a part,
The rest away by piecemeale quickly dropped;
To them within this seemed something tart,
Lest by the legs they should be shorter lopt:
The Water down, each one to save his head,
In dark of night did quit the place and fled.
10.
This Accident Severians greatly cheer,
As if it hapt by Providence divine;
Guard of the Mount thus being fled for fear,
They easily scale and entered in the Line:
When Niger heard these Tidings, he in have
Does Congregate an Army huge and vast.
11.
With num'rus Troops he marched then Amain,
His Antioch youth Alacrity expressed;
At Called by Alexander N^copolis for his victory there.
Issus Bay there was a goodly Plain
With Hills environed for this purpose best:
Yet Nigers men undisciplined and wilful,
Severians were both Exercised and skillful.
12.
Now in this Plain along the Coast they wander,
A place for Battle not unlike a Stage;
Some say where Macedonian Alexander
With Asian Darius did Engage,
And then as Ancient Stories make it forth, The Northern Regions most Martial.

The East was likewise vanquished by the North.
13.
As Victors Trophie still the City stands
Aloft, with Brazen Image of his Fame:
It so fell out that these two mighty Bands
Not only met, but Fortune had the same;
Both sides to fight over night they ready were,
Not daring once to sleep for Care and Fear.
14.
Next Morn the Generals by the rising Sun
Alike encourage Soldiers to Assail,
Accounting that who e're the Battle won,
Must Emperor be and bear the Loftest Sail;
Great slaughter then and mighty deeds were done,
Where Darts and Arrows flew as thick as hail:
Spectators there report a wondrous matter,
The River Issus ran more Blood then Water.
15.
At length the Orientals turned back,
Some took the Woods and some the higher ground;
Illyrians to pursue them were not slack,
But gave them many a deep and deadly wound;
Then Niger Mounted on a gallant Horse,
To Antioch fled bereft of all his Force.
16.
Full little Comfort there he had to rest,
For Sons and brothers people mourn and wail;
He makes have so much he was distressed,
To Suburb-house, when all things else did fail,
To hide himself; but e're he went to bed,
The Horsemen that pursued struck off his head.
17.
Thus Niger Ends in business too remiss,
Though otherways of temper mild and Sweet;
Severus then that was no friend of his,
Did him and his Adhaerents homely Greet:
He bearing Spleen with hard and cruel heart,
Put all his friends to death that took his part.
18.
Though some perhaps unwilling were compelled,
He therefore did to them the harder measure;
Yet soldiers that in Battle Late were quelled,
He did forgive and call them home at leisure:
In this no doubt he had a subtle drift,
Experience taught him how to wind and shift.
19.
For some among the Barbarous folk remained,
And taught the use of Sword and Lance to boot;
Wherewith to fight with Romans skill they gained,
Who er'st did backwards from their Horses shoot:
And Armorers did also there betake 'um,
That showed the use of Arms and how to take 'um
20.
Severus thus the o'recame Orient,
The Kings of Parthia and Armenia next,
Nigers confederates to invade he meant,
But that Albinus much his thoughts perplexed;
Him therefore first he means to undermine,
As Chief that stood 'twixt him and his design.
21.
He heard Caesarian Title did him puff,
And Senate Peers invited him to Rome;
This web he thought was made of homely stuff,
Worse News to him in absence could not come:
And 'cause no graceful part Albinus wanted,
He greatly feared by him to be supplanted.
22.
Yet at the first resolved no open War, His plot against Albinus.

But rather to dispatch him by a Train,
For that as yet there seemed no cause of Jarr;
His Posts he meant should put him out of pain,
When from his Guards they see him once apart,
He gave them Charge to Stab him to the H'art.
23.
To them he also many Poisons gave,
That might infused be into his Cup;
But that his friends intending him to save,
Bids him beware when he does dine or ^up:
Severus er'st (say they) has been perfidious,
A Branded person, noted as Insidious.
24.
For Nigers Captains had him foully blasted;
Their Children eke whom since he put to death,
His turn once served then Oath no longer lasted,
But most unkindly stopped their vital breath:
By these his actions they were so much scared
Albinus straight did double his Lifeguard.
25.
Into his presence no man was admitted,
Severus sent till first he had been rackt;
And those his Posts so ill themselves aquitted,
Their Masters Credit now withim was cracked:
Severus then perceiving how it went,
A Speech he makes his Army to content.
26.
On me let no Ingratitude reflect, Severus speech touching Albinus.

You know in League I did Albinus take;
When me alone you graced with all respect,
A part I gave to him for friendships sake:
Yet now as open Foe he does protest
Against us both that placed him before the rest.
27.
Our Noble deeds of Arms he does despise,
And all the gods by whom he often did swear;
He up in Arms against us eke does rise,
When all of us he rather should revere:
To him I Honor gave before all other,
What could I more have done unto a Brother.
28.
Ill Offices to do I count a Crime,
So most unmanly to endure a wrong:
We questioned Niger in convenient time,
To which of us the Empire should belong;
Litigious then, Ambition both did guide,
But this of Albine we may not abide.
29.
He sole of Grace admitted was Compe^r, Caesar implye^ Heir apparent.

When to Imperial Stems it 'Long'd of Right;
How dare he then once put us in this fear,
That vanquished have the Orient with our might?
Since to Affront us he is so unwise,
By Arms I mean his rashness to chastise.
30.
Here Gallant men at Arms and Roman Force
Are come as friends and entered in our List,
Who 'ist that can approve his witless course?
Are Island Britains able to resist
Our prowess, that so many fields have won?
Assure your selves his glass is almost run.
31.
He wallowes deep in Riot and excess,
Not like a Soldier but a Brutish Swine;
Then let us advance with wonted cheerfulness,
Our Guides before us are the gods Divine;
Whom to dishonor he so false has sworn,
And our Erected Trophies holds in scorn.
32.
Thus having said, the Soldiers do proclaim
Albinus Traitor with full demonstration;
He gives rewards now having hit his aim
Which they receive with shouts and Acclamations;
And then Advanced, concluding with the rest
To send some Troops Byzantium to invest.
33.
This City Nigers Soldiers held that fled, This Fate had Rochel.

A Famous place, by Famine after taken,
And quite defaced when they had lost their head;
Most of the Dwellers now had it forsaken,
Vassals the rest to Perinth do Approach,
So they of La^dice had Antioch.
34.
But Cities he repaired that Niger spoiled, His Watchword, Labor mus.

Then hasts away with Soldiers blithe and Jolly,
Through thick and thin by winters March they moyl'd,
Not resting on the Workday or the Holy;
Sometimes bare headed through the Snow he toiled
Though some perhaps might think it was a folly:
Yet Soldiers this did imitate in brief,
And took example from their Royal Chief.
35.
The streights Alpine he sends Force to seize,
And passage into Italy to Bar;
Albinus 'bides secure (he thought) in peace,
Till rouzed with the noise of present War;
Then of his Fate to try the doubtful Chance,
Disbarkt an Army on the Coast of France.
36.
His Mandates straight in every Province there
He sends about to call him to his aid;
Severus Name the most part kept in fere,
Yet other some unluckily obay'd:
But what event, and which of them did best,
The Canto next ensuing will digest.
CANTO XI.
The ARGUMENT.
Albinus and Severus fight it out,
The Britains win by Albine bravely led;
Yet next Encounter they are put to rout
And Albine Caesar shorter by the head:
Severe turns greedy, fierce as wildest Beast,
And makes his expedition to the East.
1.
We never think enough we do acquire,
Such is the nature of Ambition blind*
The more we have the more we do desire,
A vice too incident to human kind;
Example store we have in every Age,
So of these two that now are on the Stage.
2.
Severus now was entered into Gall,
With skirmish light at first they did begin;
Yet soon they fight a bloody field withal,
On both sides to Assail they never lin:
Of Victory as yet there was no sign,
'Twas hard to say to whom it would incline.
3.
The Britains bold in Arms were not Inferior,
They stoutly fight and kill without remorse;
The wing Severus charged was Superior,
Whereby he was dismounted from his Horse:
So being Cumbred sore with dust and smoke,
Was forced at length to quit's Imperial Military Mantle.
Cloak,
4.
And hide himself, till Tidings some might bring,
Mean while the Britains follow on the chase
With merry glee, and do their Lauds.
Paeans sing;
But Laetus came with fresh supplies in place,
Then at them once again he had a fling,
And staid their rage, though to his own disgrace:
Some said his men at first he did restrain,
Severus dead, that Empire he might gain.
5.
And this conceit was proved by the Event;
For when Severus got his former State,
He unbethought him, and for Laetus sent,
To take his head for what he did of late:
Yet first this set the Illyrians so afloat,
Severus mounts again in Purple Coat.
6.
The Britains thought them Masters of the Field,
Presuming so the sooner to This lost the English to the Normans.
disband;
But now their Harvest little Fruit does yield,
They charged were with fresh supplies at hand:
Lugdanum Lions in France.
Walls that they might not be killed,
They strive to reach, but could not long withstand;
Then City Sacked, the Soldiers that were sent,
Albinus head Severus did present.
7.
Two Stately Trophies thus in East and North
He raised, and other Deeds without compare
By him were done as Stories make it forth;
Examples such with us are seen but rare:
Not Caesar, Severus the greatest Conqueror of the World.
Pompey, Scylla, or great Marius
For speedy March Excelled, or Battles furious.
8.
One man to kill three Emperors Elect,
And Trained Bands surprise by cast of Wit;
To keep his Soldiers in such due respect,
To make them for his drifts and purpose fit;
For Conquest great and skilled in every kind,
Search where you will the like you shall not find.
9.
Though fatal Honor of Albinus ceast,
Yet now Severus Deeds were intermixed
With Indignation, fierce as any Beast;
He caused his head to be on Gallows fixed,
To Rome his conquest he inscribed has,
To Albiu's friend a Postscript of his wrath.
10.
The Affairs in Britain he with heed enclosed,
Two Presidents he leaves with equal part,
The Gallick matters likewise he composed,
Then Strikes Albinus friends unto the h'art;
And now to Rome (with speed) he is disposed,
Where many more are like to feel the smart:
Him Commons meet with L^urell Acclamation,
And Senate Greet with feigned Congratulation.
11.
Full well they knew his Nature to Oppress,
If he contrive there will be no Evasion;
Yet first unto the gods he makes Address,
Next to the Palace taking no Occasion,
Then Largess gives, as he no grudg had borne;
To Soldiers Coin, unto the Commons Corn.
12.
Great Privilege he to the Soldier gave,
Augmenting Wheat, then with their wives to dwell,
And Rings to wear, with other Jewels brave;
To change their manly diet was not well,
What care they now their Betters to deprave,
And when they will mend their manners who can tell:
Who would have thought a man of his Severity
Could so decline the Militar Austerity.
13.
When Fancy thus had led him to Enact,
In Senate he ascends his Princely Throne,
Albinus Friends he charge with Compact,
Unhappy they, that thus have cause to moan;
Of Letters sent by some he does Produce,
And other some he blames for holding Truce.
14.
With them that did resist him in the East:
Thus quarrels picks with all Albinus friends,
Of Peers and Nobles not of them the least,
He put to Death for Avaricious Ends;
Though Candid words he gave as sweet as honey,
They now perceive too well he loved money.
15.
If he pretends his Enemies to quell,
It Is Gold and pelf that does his rancor spur;
Though he in Wit and Valor does excel,
Yet Avarice does here his Honor blur:
Great slaughter this his Covetise did move,
His Government was more of Fear then Love.
16.
Yet Popular Applause he seeks to gain,
Exhibiting rare Shows of every kind;
A hundred wild beasts often times are slain,
That came from far, to please the peoples mind:
He Largess gives to catch them in a Train,
With Active sports their Votes that he may wind,
And vigils some like Ceres have I Herod Secular games.
seen,
With Balls and Masks and Interludes between.
17.
These shows at this time Secular they Name,
Because three Ages used to intervene, In Honor of Apollo and Diana Sun and
Moon.

And Bedles went about to spread the Fame
Through Italy the People to convene;
For that their years would let them know no more,
Or were they born to see the like before.
18.
At Rome he stayed a while his Sons to State
In Sovereign Rule, that after him must rest;
Yet 'cause with Romans he had held debate,
He Triumphed not but Marched to the East:
His quarrel was the Barbarous folk to spoil,
That had with N^^^r bred him such Turmoyle.
19.
Armenians thought it best to make their peace;
They Hostage gave and store of money sent,
Desiring him their Trespass to release,
For unto him no further harm they meant:
Augarus King would likewise do no Damage,
But Archers sent assuring him of Homage.
20.
Full blithe was he thus to secure Armenia,
Away he marches making short Abode,
Then passing by the Country of Albania
Into Arabia Foelix made a Rode;
Whence O'drate Herbs and many Fragrant Spices
Are brought to us, as rare and choice Delices.
21.
When he had wasted many a Town and Village,
None being able to resist his will,
To Atrae came with store of Coin and Pillage:
This City stands mounted on a Hill,
Well fortified with Bullwark and with Wall,
And manned with excellent Archers stout and tall.
22.
Severus then encamped it before,
And gave to them within a fierce Assault,
Of Rams and Warlike Engines he had store;
Yet brave resistance made his men to Halt,
Great Vollies they received of Shot and Stones,
Some killed outright, some making grievous Mo'nes.
23.
Then Pots they filled with little Venomed Beasts,
And over the Wall upon Severians flung;
Some crawled on the Soldiers Face and Breasts,
Which bite and hiss and privily them stung;
Nor could they well the stifling Air endure,
The Clime was hot and bred the Calenture.
24.
Of that they rather dye then by the Foe,
The Soldiers droop, this was a lucklesse Leaguer;
Severus thus without Effect did go,
In all his Life he never looked so Meaguer;
He Victor was when e're he struck a blow,
But failing here he counts himself a Beggar:
And now he thinks himself was overcome,
Because he fought and did not overcome.
25.
Yet Fortune soon again did on him smile,
He was the man she will not long neglect*
Though late his Hopes she seemed to beguile,
It happened better then he could expect:
His men inbarqu'd, and he himself full sorry,
Yet fell not on the Roman Territory.
26.
As was (no doubt) the scope of his intent,
Both men and ships by violence so harried
Near Ctesiphan, to Parthian Banks were sent,
For Stormy winds them back again had carried:
The King whereof so little did discern, (...) securus (...) time secu^itatem,
S^. Ber.

He thought Atraenians did not him concern.
27.
Much less he looked for any such disaster,
For Romans against their wills were thither driven,
Which made them strive to get a shore the faster;
Then all the Plains of Cattle soon were shriven,
And Towns were burnt with ravaging and Spoil,
When Artaban expected no such broile.
28.
The Barbarous folk at unawares they slay,
And City sacked, committing spoil and Rape,
Both Female Sex and Children led away,
The King with Horse had much ado to 'scape;
Then back again they go unto their Ships,
But first his house of Gold and Jewels strips.
29.
This Victory not got by choice but chance,
Obtained when he had so little hope;
To Roman Peers his Letters did advance,
Which signify how he with them did cope:
He Tables sent with Laurels trimly dight,
To represent his Conquests got in fight.
30.
And hereupon the Senate do decree
The Surname of the Nations he had wonn,
And all the rest with them do well agree,
Triumphant Honors unto him be done;
But how he came, and what was his Pretext,
Read if you please the book that follows next.
CANTO XII.
The ARGUMENT.
Severe in Triumph enters into Rome,
His Sons dissent, he news from Britain hears;
The Traitor Plautian had a rightful Doom,
Severus dies oppressed with grief and Fears:
His Relics kept when he of life did fail,
Antonine and Get out of Britain sail.
1.
MUst Virtue needs corrupted be with Vice,
Some say indeed as handmaid that Attends;
And here we see Severus was not Nice
To kill and Plunder all Albinus Friends:
Though this for Ancient Adage seem to make,
Let us beware and better counsel take.
2.
Affairs in the East Severus had composed, He visited Mysian and Panonian
Armies; Mysia, now Servia and Bulgaria.

His Sons (bigg youths) along with him he took;
With sound Advice good Orders he disposed
In every Province and in every nook;
Triumphant wise the Romans him enclosed,
With Presents Rich much more then he did look:
Then he again with Pageants, sports and Feasts.
And Largess great, does grace his welcome guests.
3.
This overpast, he minds State Affairs
For many years at Rome, he Lived in quiet,
And sought to Train his Sons that were his heirs;
But they corrupted by the Roman diet,
With Plays and revells fall into excess,
And through debate, from virtue do digress.
4.
They first dissent 'bout fighting Cocks and Quails,
And wrestling boys, they adverse parts suborn,
When e're they met they used to turn their Tails,
And at the length each other flatly scorn:
Inveterate Spleen no longer is prorogued,
Thus whetted on by Servants that collogu'd.
5.
Severus yet these Delators did quell,
And said to Bassian, eldest Son of mine,
In this contest (my Child) you do not well,
Thou Mar^^s Surname have my Antonine;
Then learn of him to shun debate and strife,
I Will choose for thee a fair and pleasant Wife.
6.
The Daughter unto Plautian this he meant,
Whom he esteemed as his chiefest Guard, Some say his Catamite in younger years.

His kinsman, and of Africa by descent,
So he himself as formerly you heard; See the (...) of Friendship.

This man he Captain made of Trained Bands,
Who at the first had neither House or Lands.
7.
So insolent he grew from low Degree,
In rich'd with Goods of such as were condemned;
Beyond the rest most impudent was he,
Both Peers and Nobles were by him contemned;
To gain his ends as false as false might be,
And tide of Masters will he so much 'steem'd:
His Daughter wedded was to Elder Prince,
Though Antonine could never love her since.
8.
Nay more, Forced Marriage.
he did the Lady so despise,
That often he threats her dearest life to spill;
This loathed match did so much him disguise,
It made him vow her Father eke to kill:
Who knowing well he was a desperate youth,
Began to fear it might be so insooth.
9.
Resenting this he will not 'bide the check,
Severus now diseased was and old,
And martial men the rather at his beck,
Excessive wealth withal to make him bold;
The Roman Senate highly him reveres,
And to the Commons gracious he Appe'res.
10.
A Stately Garb in Senatorian Robe, Plautian the greatest Favorite of the
world.

A Sword was borne before him where he went,
With Scepter also and a Princely Globe
He does the Emp'rours Person represent;
Majestic Walk to make the people fear him,
Some might behold, but very few come near him.
11.
His Ushers do proclaim how all that meet him
Shall turn aside, or downward they must look;
Not once presume to be so bold as greet him:
Severus this in great derision took,
And him Commands to be of better carriage,
Though he was Paranymph and made the Marriage.
12.
This Mandate seemed to him a plain Affront,
The Tribune Had the Command of 1000 Soldiers.
Saturninus he does call;
For this rebuke did make him think upon it,
How he with them might raise a sudden bra'll:
The Tribune come, he instantly does woe him,
And with a Look composed thus speaks to him:
13.
Now is the time for you to consummate
The Love to me you often have professed; Plautians Speech.

And for your merit I Will not be ingrate,
Of Noble Honor you shall be possessed:
To be as I am take it to your choice,
Or else be dead obeying nor my voice.
14.
The Enterprise though great should not affright,
Or Emp'rours Name amate a Gallant mind;
Your turn is to relieve the Watch this Night,
And in their Beds you easily will them find:
You may from me contrive a Message Right,
Then kill them both and serve them in their kind;
For man or boy what need you care a doit,
Your Honor will be great in this Exploit.
15.
The Tribune first a little does demurr, In warm Climate people are wise.

A Syrian born of wise and nimble sent,
Yet soon resolved to make but little slurr
Against his rage, but on his journey went;
Yet first that he no danger might incurr,
His warrant he beseech'd for this intent,
Then he would kill them both that stood before him,
Liking the plot as Emperor did adore him.
16.
This was the Course when Tyrants did Command,
To kill without Judicial form of Law:
So Plautian boldly yields to his demand,
What others think he cared not a straw;
Yet gave in charge when this was done withal,
He might have Word the Palace to forestall.
17.
Or else perhaps when it was noised abroad,
Some others might his grand Design prevent;
The Tribune therefore made but short Abode,
But with Commission on his errand went:
There (as his custom was) he walks the Round,
Yet still he thinks the project was not sound.
18.
Two men at once in several place to kill,
He could not once conceive within his breast;
This wicked deed to do he had no will,
But to disclose it thought for him was best:
When at the door to talk he does begin,
Severus bids the Guard to call him in;
19.
Who said your Deaths man as he makes account, Saturninus to Severus.

That sent me hither with this ready knife,
I come, he thinks, into your Seat to mount;
But I my self resolve to save your life,
It Is Traitor Plautian seek into it no further,
He me commands You and your Son to murder.
20.
This Scedule bids you may believe Inditing,
You cannot long delay without your danger;
I undertook to bring this present Writing,
Lest you perhaps might suffer by a Stranger:
Then that you may no further be annoyed,
Bestir your self this Traitor to avoid.
21.
On Plautians trust Severus much relied,
This matter is said he by fraud devised;
He thinks his Son, that could not him abide,
Had framed it thus to make him more despised:
He calls the Prince and taxes his Delusion,
For sure quoth he this is a mere Illusion.
22.
But Antonine profoundly does deny it,
The Tribune eke produces Plautians Warrant;
Then swore the Prince that he should dear abid't,
And thanks the Tribune for his Loyal Errant;
Who also knew he must make good his Charge,
Then to them both he does himself enlarge.
23.
What further proof then this do you require,
Except himself should Evidence the same;
Which if you please I humbly do desire
Some trusty friend may call him in my Name:
Then you shall know if it be true or not,
So all be hushed and none descry the Plot.
24.
They thus agreed, there goes a trusty Friend
Bids Plautian come, for Princes both were slain,
The Palace he might seize and Throne Ascend,
Him to resist there is none will take the pain:
To this Advise he willing ear does lend,
The Empire now he doubts not to gain;
Some few Attendants wait him to the Court,
And he a Curaice wears to mend the sport.
25.
As soon as come he past the Corpse de Guard,
Not knowing yet what was to him intended;
The Tribune met him without Watch or Ward,
As all were well and nothing could be mended;
And seemed then as if he would him Lead
Where he had thrown the bodies that were dead.
26.
Him Emperor he saluteth for the nonce,
Severus bids the Traitor vile to take,
The Warders then fall on him all at once,
And now he sees his Head was at the stake;
He humbly prays they will not him misdeeme,
Or let this plot so work his disesteeme.
27.
Sir, this is but a gull and cunning trick,
Severus yet upbraids him as ingrate,
And he again does touch him to the quick,
Recording still his service done of late:
In Prince his heart some pity did remain,
Till that his Armor was discerned plain.
28.
Then Antonine in Choler soon replied,
For simple guls it seems you do us take;
He bare him grudg and could not him abide,
Answer quoth he to questions that I make:
Why come you thus e're we for you have sent,
Your Curace shows your Traitorous Intent.
29.
With that the Tribune he commands to kill
This Traitor base, as ever yet was born;
Both he and all the rest obey his will,
Then throw his Carkase out of doors in scorn:
To pride and lucre all his life did tend,
Which cut him short and caused this shameful end.
30.
Severus now in Suburbs spent his time,
Or on the Coast Campania betwixt Rome and Naples.
intending State Affairs;
His Purpose and his Actions were sublime,
To breed his Sons that were to be his heirs;
Who in their sports had different success,
By Parasites inflamed more or less.
31.
But Antonine (now Plautian dead) in Chief
To wife, and all the rest was formidable,
Needs dye she must or else have no relief,
Thus in his Garb became intolerable:
Severus though, to her and hers was bounteous,
Augustus Augustus dealt so with Antonius his Sons when he became his enemy.
Severus sent these into Sicily.
like to Sons of Mark Antonius
32.
And now he sought his Sons to reconcile,
Acquainting them with Stories New and Old;
How Brothers Jarr'd and did themselves begi'le;
He also showed them Temples full of Gold,
Which soon would wast and Fortune leave to smile,
If they observe not what to them he told:
His men of Arms and all that he had wrought,
(If they dissent) he said would come to naught.
33.
Sometimes he smiles, sometimes he reprehends,
But yet his Sons persever worse and worse;
Their Sycophants for base, unworthy ends,
In Quarrels, Lusts, and Idleness them nurse:
Though some had hire according to their merit,
Severus yet had Anguish great of Spirit;
34.
Which to Augment there news from Brittane came,
By Letters sent to him from his Viceroy,
How that the Barbarous People play their game,
And Pillage Planters to their sore Annoy:
This to prevent he wills him send more Forces,
Or come himself with armed men and Horses.
35.
Though News were sharp Severus was not sad,
Inclining still to Honor and to Action,
But of this opportunity was glad
To weane his Sons from Riot and from Faction;
For Rome delights and sports with them in ure,
He meant a Soldiers life they should endure.
36.
For journey then, now he is old and Gouty,
He straight prepares, though carried in a Litter;
The younger sort were not more quick or doughty,
Though some might think him for a pallat fitter:
Yet with his Sons the business so contrived,
He (ere they looked) on British shore Arrived.
37.
The Brittanes started do their Agents send,
But found delay and went without dispatch:
Their former faults they gladly would amend,
No will they have to meet with such a Match:
But he from them a Surname means to carry,
And to that end he and his Soldiers tarry.
38.
It seems this soil was full of Boggy Pens,
The Soldiers Bridges make for want of ground,
And thence they think to chase them from their Dens,
Or else by fighting give them many a wound:
These Britains were a People rude and Naked,
And eat raw flesh as often as roast or baked. Their Elogy.

39.
About their necks they Rings of Iron wear,
As Eastern Barbarous People do of Gold;
Their pounc'd and painted bodies do appear
More furious when their Foes do them behold;
For Caske or Curaee they nor care or fear,
Yet are with Sword and Pike, King and Queen of Weapons.
Pike and Target fierce and bold:
From Pooles and Fens the Foggy Vapors fly,
Which always makes a dark and cloudy Sky.
40.
Severus now had all things he desired,
To further his, and Barbarous folk annoy;
At York to guide he Geta then required,
He was a stripling and his youngest boy;
Yet Council grave he did to him assign,
And took with him his eldest Antonine.
41.
When they had past the Bounds and River Banks,
They skirmish light and often got the better;
But when the Woods and Bogs their men disranks,
The Barbarous People were not much their Debtor:
Their safe Retreits served them the War to spin, Lost 50000 men in this
service.

The Romans Lose as often as they did win.
42.
Severus being sick with Age and faint,
Left Antonine to prosecute the War;
But he fond youth his Honor foul did taint,
And through neglect does all the matter mar:
His Brother he despised, and sick of Father,
To get the Sovereign Rule aspired rather.
43.
Physicians he Accused of much Delay,
His Fathers Death to hear he would be feign;
And dealt with them to make him soon away,
The place he said does sole to me pertain:
This brave old man as Stories tell in Brief, Severus dies of grief.

Expired not so much with Age as grief
44.
A Famous man, and Victor over more,
In Civil broils and Countries far Abroad,
Then any Emperor that was him before;
He Left his Sons of Treasure many a Load,
With Soldiers eke most skillful in their Trade,
But Antonine (now Chief) great Havoc made.
45.
He first began to bath his hands in Blood;
Physicians and his foster Father eke,
That had his frenzy formerly withstood,
Of Goods and Lives they soon were both to seek:
That he might Reign alone without another,
He bribed the Soldiers to depose his Brother.
46.
But herein they deserved great Applause,
That hands upon this Bargain would not strike;
For in the Fathers will there was a Clause
That both of them should Honor have alike:
Then Peace he made when Words were light as Cork,
His Mother and his Brother were at York.
47.
To them he goes, and being altogether,
The Empress and the Lords for State Affairs
Endeavored Discontent should hap to neither
Of these two Brothers, now the Fathers Heirs;
No remedy I see, quoth Antonine,
But to Accord, thus crossed in my Design.
48.
Then both the Brothers, equal now in Power,
For Rome prepare, and carry Fathers bones;
Where they arrived in a lucky hour,
To place in Sacred Sepulcher of Stones:
As Victors first they Marched through Gall,
Severus life and death you see withal.
The End of the Third Book.
CANTO XIII.
The ARGUMENT.
Two Emp'rours next do enter Rome in state,
Severus deified, and Funeral show,
Parting the Empire through a deadly hate,
The Empress forbids, Antonine Geta slew;
He Cruel is, both prodigal and Savadge,
And of the German Soldiers learns to Ravadge.
1.
What was thy fall O Lucifer but pride;
Was It not enough that thou thy self transgrest,
But both the Sire and Brothers to divide,
And Murder too a Crime by thee professed;
Thus puffed with pride to kill about a Crown,
Much better lost or spurned up and down.
2.
The Princes and their Mother go to Rome
With jarrs and fresh debate, what ere she said,
To eat together once they will not come,
Of Poisoned Cups were both alike afraid:
The Palace (once at Rome) is wide and vast,
There to divide they make the greater Have.
3.
They thither come then, as the Custom was,
With Laurels, People welcome them and Peers;
The Emp'rours foremost of them all do pass
In Purple Robes, and seemed to shed some Tears;
Next after them, according to their Turn,
The Consuls march bearing Severus Urne.
4.
In Pompous State they do this Urn in-shrine,
With Marcus dear amongst the Emp'rours best,
And in the Temple did their Rites divine,
Then to the Palace Princes went to rest;
Yet several Guards and several Lodgings ^^ose,
And all the doors betwixt securely close.
5.
They showed themselves but to content the People,
And then their meeting at the Common Gate;
They both were stiff as any Wall or steeple,
Which now the Romans greatly wonder at:
Their Semblance yet each other did but threat,
Till Fathers Name was deifi'd complete.
6.
In that the Brothers were no whit at odds,
This solemn Rite inviting them to pity,
The Romans call it placing with the gods,
Which first begins with mourning over the City;
The Corpse in Sumptuous manner once interred,
The Stately show no Longer is deferred.
7.
An Ivory Deification of an Emperor.
Bed over spread with Cloth of Gold
In Palace Porch Erected is on high,
Which mournefully spectators do behold,
A waxen Image of the Prince does lie:
On one side sit the Noble Lords in black,
And over against fair Ladies do not lack.
8.
But they in white according to the guise,
Thus for a week they Cherish him and Nurse;
And often come Physicians that are wise,
Who do conclude the Patient worse and worse:
But when he seems dead to all Beholders,
Young Knights and Gallants take him on their shoulders.
9.
And carry him along the Sacred Street,
Unto the place where stands the Ancient Forum,
The Magistrates and Senators him meet,
On Scaffolds built the people all deplore him;
Then quire of Boys and Ladies sighing Welody,
With Hymns and Paeans making doleful Melody.
10.
This done, the Bed they take to Mars his Field,
And there a Structure make quadrangle-wise,
Then many Lesser Circ'led Rooms they build,
Dry wood within, without it is their guise;
Rich Tapestry and Pictures seen, but seil'd
With Ivory statues of a comely Sise:
To that you may this Building well compare,
Which Ships to Harbot guide is called a Phare.
11.
The Bed brought in they throw in heaps of Spice
And Odours sweet the best the Earth Affords,
Herbs, Fragrant Fruits, Gums, Arabicke and A City.
Nice,
The Provinces and Cities search their Hoards;
Which Persons great Ambitious are to send,
As Presents choice to dignifie his end.
12.
When they had raised this Aromatic Pile,
The Knightly Orders mount on Gallant Steeds,
Then prance and wheel about this Princely I Will,
Performing many brave and Active Deeds:
And farther yet to grace this Mass of Treasures,
They join in fides to dance the Pyrrhick The Funeral Dance.
Measure.
13.
And Charioters 'bout the Frame do ride,
Bearing the Roman Worthies Represents;
Then Fire with Torch is set on every side
By him that for the Empire next indents;
An Eagle eke from Turret Top does slide,
When Herbs and Spices burn with Fragrant Sents:
The Romans think she carries up his Soul,
Whom they Adore, and amongst the gods Enroule.
14.
This done, the Brothers home again return,
But eftsoons fall into their deadly feud;
Worse Flame then erst within their bosoms burn,
And utterly their better part subdued:
The things that either side would have in Action,
To such as Loved them both were great distraction.
15.
Most part to Geta, gentle youth inclined,
Because he Learning loved and manly Art;
But Antonine they knew of stubborn mind,
And would because of many broken Heart:
Their Mother seeing them at such Discord,
Assayed in vain to bring them to Accord.
16.
They now resolve the Empire to divide,
Lest one by the other might be Circumvented;
This was debated by their Mothers side,
Their Counselors and Kinsmen eke convented:
Then they to Geta Asia do Assign,
And Europe fell in share to Antonine.
17.
Their Camps at Chalcedon and Constantinople Propontick Gulf divides both
Continents.
Bizance should
Each other face, and both the Frontiers keep;
The passage so they may defend and hold,
That neither into others part do creep:
Alexand'r or Antioch for Counsel one,
In Rome the others shall recide alone.
18.
Numidian Moors that lie upon the South,
To Anton' fell, Geta in the Orient.
While thus, their Mother came with open mouth,
And said, my Sons I am not so content;
If you so soon can part both Sea and Land,
Divide me too and kill me out of hand,
19.
Each take a part of me and glut his Will.
This said, with many Tears she claspt them both,
Who now began to think they had done ill,
And to offend her seemed very loath;
Their Counsel then was presently dismissed,
And both content at this time to desist.
20.
Yet hope of Reconcilement there was none,
In all Elections different sides preferred;
And such as for Redress did make their moan,
More partially then justly were deferred:
Yea at their Sports they contraries maintain,
And sought their Cooks and Cupbearers to train,
21.
With promise Large to poison Sauce or Cup.
Yet howsoever this Bargain they respect,
Such care is had when they do dine and Sup,
This drift of theirs not yet could take effect;
When Antonine thus mist by plots and Charms,
He killed his Brother in his Mothers Arms.
22.
When this was done he runs and cried amain,
As if himself were likely to be killed;
With help of Guard the Camp he did obtain,
The Soldiers knew not yet what blood was spilled:
There Images were kept of Veneration,
Before whom he falls with thanks for Preservation.
23.
The Soldiers all Amazed unto him flock,
Some spoke their mind, and some upon him gaped;
But then to let them know he did not mock,
Discovered plain how narrowly he escaped:
In sad Conflict some took their latest groan,
Praised be his Fate he Emperor was alone.
24.
This Speech of his a little was distracted,
To stop their mouths he double Largess gave,
Whereby they weigh not much what he had Acted,
But money took such store as they would have;
By this exploit he all in pieces tears
The Treasure Father got in eighteen years.
25.
A Traitor now young Geta must be thought,
In Temple thus this night he him secured,
The Coin the Soldiers had their Lesson taught,
Of double Guards they Antonine assured;
Through City then to the Senate he makes way,
Desiring them to hear what he could say:
26.
I know Domestic Murder has a Brute
Whereby the Most such Actors do malign, Antonine to the Senate.

Though he that is vanquished do receive the fruit
Which must of Force be done to him condign;
And such as are not Partial and self-willed,
Do know it is better kill then to be killed.
27.
Besides, if one to Cowardice be bent,
And seek by poison to Effect his mind,
The other brave as proves by the Event,
What else does he but serve him in his kind;
That he against me has such practice wrought,
For you to know I have his servants brought.
28.
Their own Confessions will the matter clear,
And when in Mothers sight could not refrain,
But he with more did put my life in fear,
It Is not denied I have him justly slain:
How others did like mischief thus prevent,
I can recite you many a President.
29.
First founder of our City Romulus
His Brother quelled, who his endeavors Jeered:
Nero omit Brother to Germanicus,
Domitian eke who Brother Titus feared;
Phylosophick Marcus of dear accounpt
Dispatched Son The report was Marcus. poisoned him, but Victor says none but
lewd persons bele^ved it.
Lucius for his late Affront.
30.
So I my self by juster vindication
Prevented poison from a deadly Foe,
Thank you the gods then for my preservation;
Examine these if this be true or no,
To Govern so is my determination,
That quietly you may both come and go:
As Jupiter does other gods exceed,
So Emperor one amongst men is like decreed.
31.
This said in Rage on Fathers Friends he frowned,
Then Senate left with pale and ghastly look;
To Court he hurries, where he threw to ground,
And Brothers Servants killed in every nooke:
For Officers, yea Infants he inquired,
Who out of Doors were thrown on heaps and fired.
32.
Unhappy they that knew of Get's Affairs, They had not the Honor of decent
Funeral.

For all of them were put unto the Sword;
Wrastlers, Char'oters, and all the players
That him delighted by their Deed or Word,
And wealthy Senators he also slew,
That Brothers Friends were either old or new.
33.
An Aged Woman Commodus his Sister,
Was Honored much as she was Marcus Daughter:
Because she with his Mother wept and kissed her,
'Twas Crime enough to bring her to the Slaughter:
His Wife he killed that little harm had done,
With Severus and Pertinax his Son.
34.
Lucilla's Commodus Nephew.
Son and all the Royal Blood,
With Presidents, he killed, and Procurators,
And all that erst for Brother Geta stood,
Or any ways his Favorites or Fautors;
Whole nights to kill and slay he did not stick,
And buried eke the vestall Virgins quick.
35.
At Last, to make his Cruelty the more,
At Circen sports in honor of Neptune.
Circen sports where he himself was set,
A deed was done like never was before,
His Soldiers killed Spectators that were met:
A Chari'ter some silently did scoff,
This was pretense enough to cut them off.
36.
Thus having played these mad and Div'lish prancks,
Perhaps some guilt of Concience might him sting,
Upstarts as one expecting little Thanks,
And to the North he now will have a fling;
E're Long he did Arrive on Ister Banks,
That better in a Rope deserved to swing:
Sometimes at Race, sometime in Chasing Beast;
Sometime in Judgment sat, but that the Least.
37.
This People he Accounts his fellow Soldiers,
And for his Guard the strongest of them chose;
Off Cast the Roman habit from his Shoulders,
And Cassocks wore with Silver Trimmed like those;
Then yellow Perwig of the German Fashion,
Which made him dear to them in Estimation.
38.
Nor did the Roman Army this disgust,
Because he was in gifts (to them) profuse,
And often labored with them in the dust,
And dug and delv'd in Trenches for their use;
Then Bridges built and Stones and Mortar carry,
As if he were a Workman Manuary.
39.
He Junkets left and sparing was of Diet,
Contenting him with wooden Cups and Platters,
And fellow Soldier was to him more quiet
Then Princely state, he thought of no suc^ matters:
A little Wheat he took to knead in Cakes
One to suffice, that in the Embers bakes.
40.
Thus for a while he quiet as a Loach
Disdained not with them to go on Foot;
He rarely rid on Horsback or in Coach,
His Arms he bore most willingly to boot:
The Imperial Standard also he would carry,
Which made the strongest Bearer often weary.
41.
Then of a Soldier good, and Brave Commander,
With Barbarous people thus he got a Name;
And marvel much it was to a By-Stander,
How such a timbred man should do the same:
But of the rest if you delight to hear,
The Canto next will make it soon appear.
CANTO XIV.
The ARGUMENT.
Anton' of Achilles and Alexander
Will act the part, and offer at their shrine;
To quarrel, Massacre and woe does wander,
Great Parthia's Daughter serves him to combine
More murder yet, he conjures and is slain,
Macrinus chose, great fight, and Peace again.
1.
Malicious Pride why do thou still outrage,
By thy suggest was Abel killed of Cain;
Some do commit the like in every age,
So Geta here by bloody Brother slain:
Though we forget what formerly has past,
Yet blood for blood will vengeance have at last.
2.
Now Antonine from Ister Bank departs,
And takes his journey down along by Thrace;
Great Alexanders Statues he imparts
To them at Rome, and every other place:
Pictures Entire Ridiculous were set,
That you might see how both their Faces met.
3.
His habit changed from that of Ister Banks,
With Macedonian Turban now he is dressed;
His Sould'ers also styled the Phalanx,
And Captains called as Alexanders erst:
Then Spartan youths he sent for near at hand,
Them termed Laconick and Of the Cities
Pitanite Band.
4.
Securing Towns to Pergum next he went
Some Physic there to take, for health, his will is;
To Illium Troy.
then his second march be bent,
To grace the Tomb of Fame, renowned Achillis,
The which he decked with Garlands trim and Flowers,
Patr'clus lackt, Vid. Hom Ili. l. 23.
for whom he poutes and Lowers.
5.
Yet that he might this Hero seem to Act,
This part he played amongst his other pranks;
His Faestus died, some said it was his Fact,
For which his Friends did give him little thanks:
However the Corpse to feed his fond desire,
Was brought to Fun'rall Pile and set on fire.
6.
Then Beasts he killed, An ancient kind of Funeral.
a Violl to the same
Effusing Wines, and praying to the Winds;
But People laugh when hair is thrown in flame,
Bush natural was so thin he little finds:
Generals he Scilla and Haniball affected,
Whose Images and Statues he erected.
7.
Through Asia thus he minded these Affairs,
And then in state from Illium he departs;
Yet in his way to Antioch he repaires,
Whom they receive perhaps not with their hearts:
To Alexandria next he makes his Rhodes
Their Hero to revere, but more their gods.
8.
There Sacrifices of whole A hundred oxen.
Hecatombs
He order gave for him should be prepared;
This hit the Alexandrians over the Thumbs,
Whose Cockbraines wist not how the blow toward:
Yet joy they make and entertainment such,
For any Prince was never made so much.
9.
Sweet Music, Aromaticks and Perfumes,
Light Torches, Gelsoms, Odours and Musk Roses,
Arabian Spices, and the Richest Gums;
The Emperor and his Army Round incloses,
Who first to Sacrifice in Temple went,
Then Incense makes and hundreds Oxen brent.
10.
Next offered he at Alexanders Shrine
His Purple Robe, and Rings with Parrag Stones,
His Belt, his Scarf, and choicest Jewels fine,
Then laid them all upon the Tombed bones:
The People overjoyed Feast day and night,
But little dream what Feast for them is dight.
11.
This was but Color and his plausibility,
For them to Massacre was his intent;
At Rome he heard this Peoples incivility,
How they for Brothers death to scoff were bent;
And so their cutting quips and wonted jeering
Of him and his, came often to his hearing.
12.
The jests of Open truth most keenely bite,
And men resent them ever at the worst;
This turned his fury into such despite,
They now have cause to think themselves accursed:
While they with Plays and Sports do squib and flash,
Through dire revenge must ay endure the lash.
13.
The manner thus, when Festival was over,
As he had Trained some in Phalanx Order,
Their gallant youths he wills them to discover
Both of their own and Regions that do border;
He Macedon and Spartan had before,
Now Alexandrian should make one more.
14.
Regarding late the Honor he had done
Unto their City, and their Heroes Tomb,
They to this project were the sooner won,
So bring themselves unto a Fatal doom;
Submitting thus to be at his dispose,
Them all unarmed, his Soldiers do enclose.
15.
These Dullards then were taken in a Toil,
The Watchword once dispersed amongst the Rout,
With Havoc great the Soldiers kill and spoil,
Some cut off Heads, some scatter limbs about:
To Murder young and old they do not stick,
Some thrown in pits, and some they bury quick.
16.
Some Soldiers eke receive deserved hire;
For grapled once with them of equal strength,
They hale and pull and wallow in the mire,
Then in one grave together lie at length;
The slaughter ended, round about the shore,
And Nilus mouth was died in Purple gore.
17.
The Surname Parthicas he next Affects,
A Conquest much he covets in the Orient;
Ambassadors he sends with his respects,
Who tutored well upon this Errand went:
Our Prince, say they, had rather then his life,
The Daughter of your King to make his Wife.
18.
An Emperor he and eke an Emp'rours Son, Embassage.

None therefore fit for him but such a Queen;
If once this Royal Intermatch were done,
And of the Barbarous people known and seen,
Impediment no more would then remain,
The World might Governed be betwixt them twain.
19.
The Roman Foot excelled in Sword and Pike,
For number Parthian Archers, and for skill
In discipline, the World had not the like,
With necessaries ready at their will;
There may by this Affinity and Truce
Both parts into one Monarchy reduce.
20.
Your Cities Odours yield, fine Silks and Spice,
The Roman Countries Minerals and Trades;
In this division Merchants are not Nice,
But traffic often by stealth, and Vessels Lades:
If we conclude their practice will not reach,
But intercourse be had without impeach.
21.
At first the Parthians like not this dispatch,
Or can conceive it tends to their quiet,
For Romans with Barbarians to match,
Who Language differ, habit, and in diet;
The Roman Prince may match among his Peers,
And so was pleased this Noble King of theirs.
22.
But Antonine his Suit does reinforce
With Ample Gifts and Solemn Protestation;
Then some persuade it was the wisest cource
To give consent to this Solemnization:
Whereat from Shouts the people did not cease,
In Hope to have a sure and lasting Peace.
23.
Antonine Rivers past, and makes ingresse
As free as if the Country was his own;
Who entertainment had of more and less,
Which eke to King Artabanus was known:
And he prepared as eagerly again,
To meet the Bridegroom in an open Plain.
24.
Crowned Altars Sacrifice with Odours Sweet,
And Floury Chaplets, Vestures wrought with Gold,
With Pipe and flute they do this Gallant Greet,
Then Music, Dance, and all the Mirth they could:
To this their sport he seemed so much affected,
His Treachery was not by them suspected.
25.
But now they were together in a Rout,
Both Faith and Oath he sticks not to infringe;
For when his Soldiers compast them about,
Fall on, quoth he, we have them in a spring*
The tipled Parthians run as in a maze,
Then Romans kill and follow on a Chase.
26.
King Artaban was rescued by his Guard,
Some few with him had much ado to fly,
The rest of them were put unto the Sward,
Their Arms were off and Horses were not nigh:
The Bride might think this was ill-favored bedding,
Yet who do Weapons bring unto a Wedding?
27.
When as this mighty Massacre was made,
The Soldiers rest from killing and from toil;
Yet cruel still according to their Trade,
They Cities burnt and bare away the spoil:
Thus Antonine departs from Parthian grounds,
And marched along into the Roman Bounds.
28.
To Senate then, at Rome, he Message sent
(Who heard before of all the pranks he played.)
How he to them had vanquished the Orient,
This to Agnise they seemed well apaid;
And though they knew him false in Word and Deed,
Triumphant Honors never the least Decreed.
29.
In Mesopotamia he kept his Court,
Where for a while himself he did Devote,
To Combat Beasts with Races and like Sport,
And there he meant to pay Macrinus Co'te: Two Generals Audentius and Macrinus.

Two Generals then, Audentius for the War,
Marcrinus Law, and pleading at the Bar.
30.
This Prince Macrinus, used to taunt and check,
Averse to him in diet and Attire,
As Coward faint he threats to break his neck,
For service done this was ungrateful Hire:
But lo what hapt, Magicians he consults, Conjuring.

And longs to know his end by their Results.
31.
Maternian eke who Governed then at Rome,
Had word to call the Wizards far and near,
To know of them what death should him become,
Or who it was he needed most to fear;
If Spirits told or he did so combine,
He writes back word to look unto Macrine.
32.
The Letters sealed and sent away in Post,
At Court arive in their convenient Tide,
Where Antonine was making mickle boast
Of Chariot Race how gayly he could ride;
And being thus so earnest in his sport,
He bids Macrinus see what they import.
33.
Macrinus with the Letters did retire,
And lights on that which might him sore molest,
You need not bid him throw it in the fire,
Yet he acquaints the Emperor with the rest;
And doubting now he must not long respire,
Before Maternian sent he thought it best
To call a friend, to wit* Captain of 100 men.
Centurion Martial,
Who had good cause to be a little Partial.
34.
For Brothers loss whom Anton' caused to die
Without due form or process in the Law,
These two together plotted by and by
The Prince to kill, then do themselves withdraw;
That of the crime they might not be suspected
Till it was done, which shortly was effected.
35.
At Carrae Antonine from Palace went,
To visit once the Temple of the Moon; De Luna.

In have was Martial by Macrinus sent, See Mr Seldom de diis Syris.

Who thought it long till he this Deed had done,
For that no harm (at Church) the Prince did look,
He private went and small Attendance took.
36.
And by the way he went aside to Ease,
For manners sake his Servants stood Aloof;
But Martial Beck'ned, Hoe Sir, if you please,
I something have to say for your behoof:
Then ran so fast e're Antonine could mind,
He with his Dagger Stabbed him in behind.
37.
Though Martial fled, he shortly had his Hire,
The German Horse, that was the Princes Guard,
Pursued so fast they trod him in the mire,
Their Javelin points he had no skill to ward;
This Murder noised each one was of his keeping,
Macrinus was the first that fell a weeping.
38.
And time it was lest he should be suspected,
This Prince to Soldier fellow was and friend,
None else as yet but Martial was detected,
They thought he took revenge for brothers end;
Macrinus sent his Ashes, to be buried,
Unto his Mother that at Antioch tarried.
39.
And there for Childrens loss her self she slew,
If not compelled, as some would have it thought;
Thus Antonine this end upon him drew,
For Brothers death and Murders that he wrought:
He once defunct, the Soldiers (in a muse)
Bethink themselves whom Emperor they should choose.
40.
For Artaban was marching hitherward
To seek revenge for breach of peace and Murder,
Audentius therefore safely shall them Guard,
If he be pleased they mean to seek no further;
But he replies (with Modesty) I cannot,
You see, quoth he, my time is super-ann'ate.
41.
The Colonels.
Tribunes then persuade to choose Macrinus,
Who after, you shall hear, with him combined;
The Soldiers say the Parthians near behind us,
We will not now be obstinat inclined:
King Artaban approch'd with mighty Band,
Macrinus counsels thus him to withstand;
42.
For public loss no marvel if we mourn,
He was our Prince, yet Fellow did appear;
Though all of us to dust at length shall turn,
Yet while we live his Name to us is dear:
But now we have performed the Funeral Rite,
The present danger does our care incite.
43.
The Barbarous King is here with Eastern Power,
Who have a quarrel good in their conceit;
They say we did their people all devour,
When they unarmed did think of no deceit;
And killed his kinsmen in unlucky hour,
When entertainment they had made us neat:
To skirmish light no leisure time will yield,
But you must fight it out in open field.
44.
This breach of Oath, if true, is somewhat biting,
Our Prince, not we, ought answer for the Fact,
Which is already done by fatal smiting;
We Romans are, like Romans let us Act,
Then keep your Ranks to bar them of their Ends,
The Roman Empire now on you depends.
45.
The Barbarous are unmarshall'd, wanting Art,
And like enough themselves to overthrow;
You disciplined in whole and every part,
And by your Order have the skill to know:
The Foot their Ranks, the Horsemen sure in Seat,
Whereby you shall your Enemies defeat.
46.
Like Romans charge as often you have done,
The Barbarous people once again to quell,
That men may know your conquest was not won
Through fraud or breach of Faith, as they do tell;
What matter is it how they excuse their harms,
So you prevail by skill and Force of Arms.
47.
The Soldiers They feared the Parthian more then any Nation.
(in a straight) this Speech Allowed,
And instant put themselves in Battle ray;
The Barbarous folk with mighty Host and Proud
Advancing, were next morn by break of day:
As was their guise, they Invocate the Sun,
And then with Shouts upon the Romans run.
48.
The skillful Romans did their Battles Range,
With Horse and Darts Moresco flanked each side;
Their The Frame of their Battle.
Maniples with Intervals do change,
To flat the Charge and 'bate the Assaylants Pride;
Though they with Lance and Shot of Arrows Gall,
Yet hand to hand they by the Romans fall.
49.
But yet e're long, with numbers overprest,
The Romans make as if they would retreit;
Withal, they sharp and pointed Engines wrest,
And hide in Sand the Barbarous Folk to cheat;
Which made their Horses halt with grievous pain,
Great store of men and Camels eke were slain.
50.
The first and second day they fiercely fought,
As Victors both they to their Camps retire,
The third, Barbarians to enclose them sought,
As if they would them catch in net of Wire;
Which Romans to prevent their Front dilate,
So skillful are they both in this debate.
51.
Yet at the best to both was slaughter sore,
And heads of Carcasses were seen to lie;
Macrinus thinks their rage was so much more,
To take revenge that Antonine might die:
He saw to fight it out was their intent,
Debating thus, with Heralds Letters sent.
52.
Which do inform that Antonine was dead,
For breach of Oath and League he had his hire*
Macrinus chosen Emperor in his stead,
To be at peace with them was his desire;
And that they may be friends as heretofore,
Their spoil and Captives he will all restore.
53.
The Parthian Lords do each one take his Seat,
To hear the Message that the Romans sent,
And in the midst King Artaban the Great,
Whom with the rest these Tidings do content;
The truth of Anton's Murder cooled his heat,
To take his spoil and Captives now is bent:
Then toward home he makes his next Approach,
Macrinus likewise went to Antioch.
The End of the Fourth Book.
CANTO XV.
The ARGUMENT.
Macrinus writes the Senate him confirms,
He afterward commits a s^ttish Error,
Then Maesa subtle Lady stands on terms,
Bassian called Antonine made Emperor;
Macrinus flies, pursued by Antonine,
And shortly after headless is Macrine.
1.
NOthing but black Designs to murder still,
We know we have a dire and ghastly Foe;
The serpent old that wrought our former ill,
Does yet persist to work our Thrall and woe:
Then let us pray to keep us from the power
Of Lion fierce, that will his prey devour.
2.
You heard how former Antonine had end,
Another of the Name will soon appear;
Still sad revenge on Murder does attend,
But to Macrinus Lend a while your ear:
How he to Roman Senate did direct
His Letters sealed, which spoke to this effect:
3.
I count it needless many words to use; Macrinus Letter.

You know if I my Office did neglect,
Or else in conversation was profuse,
When I was chose Praetorian Or General of the Army.
Prefect;
To me and such the Prince himself Commits,
And for your sakes I bare his frantic Fits.
4.
When he through flatt'rers did you Tyrannise,
And me of Lenity did often Tax,
Resist I would not him in any wise,
Lest he in ferall Choler worse should wax;
The Parthick War that like was to undo us,
By perfect League I have confirmed to us.
5.
My Government shall cause no bloody strife,
Then of my Rise I hope you will approve;
You ought to prise a good and virtuous life
^Fore Nobles that to help you never move: Quid gens sine mente?

What Is got by Commodus or Antonine,
Or such as wholly to their Lusts incline?
6.
From Fathers they derive their Rule and Right,
But those on whom the Empire you conferr
Will not abuse their splendour or their might,
Or scornfully the meaner sort deterr:
Such as the Rule do gain by moderate Actions,
Most careful are in all their great Transactions.
7.
Your Counsel and Assistance I will crave
In all Affairs that may concern the State,
Good Marcus Rule and Pertinax in grave
Shall you restore in what you lost of late;
More praise has he that raises first his Fame,
Then he that boasts the Race from whence he came.
8.
This Letter read each one bestowed his Vote,
Imperial Honors they to him decreed;
Yet not so glad Macrinus was aflote,
As Antonine had got deserved meed:
For full account they make now he is dead,
To escape the danger hanging over their head.
9.
Accusers false and such as were unjust;
If Servants or Informers so invent,
Were all of them upon the Gallows trust,
Macrinus for a year was so intent:
But Soldiers all disbanded or sent home
He should have caused, His Error.
and then have gone to Rome.
10.
Upon Macrinus there they call and cry,
But he at Ant'och staid to trim his beard;
His Garb and Speech he used sparingly
As Marcus wont, which formerly you heard:
Yet in his manners he was nothing like him,
Which made both Soldiers and the rest dislike him
11.
Austere the one and of a Temperate Diet,
But he to Masks and Revels was inclined,
With Jewels dect of vain excess and Riot,
Effaeminate, much like to Women kind:
Of Parallel in him there is no sign
With Marcus Sage, or Warlike Antonine.
12.
The Soldiers eke were pinched with courser fare,
While he in Silks and Cates did much abound;
Now for his Rule they do no longer care,
His Fate is near and Fortune turns round:
To leave his charge there can be no Evasion,
And Maesa subtle Lady gives Occasion.
13.
From Country of Born in the City Emesa. See M. Sands description Journal, p.
207
Phaenitia came this Cone,
That Long in Roman Court had led her Life,
To Empress Julia (Sister she alone)
Antonin's Mother, and Severus Wife;
One dead, the other killed, she went from Rome,
With all her goods Macrinus sent her home.
14.
In flourishing Estate she got much Wealth,
And now in age does back again return;
Two Sons there were as she says, got by stealth.
Which to her Daughters twain were also born:
They Striplings were as yet, not able men,
Bassian fourteen and Alexander ten.
15.
Phaenitians built an Altar to the Sun,
Adorned with Silver, Gold and precious Stones,
To worship which they often devoutly run,
These two young men were Priestlings both at once;
This god no Image had but Massy Stone.
At bottom round, at top sharp like a Spire. See M. Seldom de Dis Syric. Sint.
c. 1.
Cone.
16.
This Stone of Coleur black had shining spots,
And Figures some, not made by humane Art,
But fell from Heaven, it seems they are such sots;
In Priestly Office Bassian played his part,
His upper Coats Imbroid'red were with Gold,
A Crown upon his head you might behold.
17.
His under Coats were also tissued over,
A comely youth withal, of rare Aspect,
However a Priest he seemed like a Lover,
His Garb and Beauty all of them Affect;
With Pipe and Flute full often here he vapors,
And round about the Altar frisks and Capers.
18.
The Soldiers lay the City then before, Emesa.

To Guard the Frontiers of Phaenitian Bounds,
And they this Temple visit more and more,
To see this stripling Dance his Priestly Rounds;
Devotion part, but more his gesture called 'em,
Then to his Mother Masa they extolled him.
19.
If that be true she told to them or not,
Uncertain is to some and in dispute;
She said how Antonine this youth begot,
Although another Father bore repute,
That to her Daughters he did often resort
When with her sister she lived long at Court.
20.
And more she said, that she had Treasure great,
Which she would give the Army, for consent
To place her Nephews in the Princely Seat;
This Brute was noised and amongst their fellows went,
Who say, if she will feather so their Nests,
Both she and hers shall be their welcome guests.
21.
To the Camp away she hies in dark of Night,
Her Children, Friends, her Goods, with Bag and Baggage,
Before the Town was privy to her flight,
Some vagrant Troops conducted had her carr'age;
Young Bassian was Proclaimed at easy rate,
And him they cloth in Purple Robe of State.
22.
With these their gods they brought provision store,
Lest they perhaps be straightned with a Siege,
Macrine at Antioch, as you heard before,
Will not be pleased they have another Liege;
Yet hope they have his Soldiers will combine,
When as they know the Sons of Antonine.
23.
For they indeed are weary of the lash,
The grudge they bare Macrinus is not New,
And now they hope to have good store of Cash,
They soon persuade themselves that all is true;
Macrinus scorns the boys, the Soldiers blame,
And Captains sends these Rebels new to tame.
24.
When Julian that commanded his in Chief
Came near the Camp Approaching to the Walls,
They mount aloft (to show their mind in brief)
On Turret tops, and boldly to him Calls:
Lo here the youth that is our Emp'rours Son,
Come join with us or else you are undon.
25.
They show withal their purses full of Chink,
A bait no doubt Macrinus to betray,
However it causes them without to think
That all was true they heard their fellows say;
The youth they swear is like their Emperor dead,
So all agree and cut off Julians Head,
26.
The which they send for token to Macrinus:
The Gates are open their fellows let them in,
And now they cry, he shall no longer blind us,
For all his threats we care not once a pin;
We all together can withstand a Siege,
And fight a Battle for our Sovereign Liege.
27.
Macrinus then intends to force their Camp,
Which they prevent by Marching to the Field;
There furiously they 'gan to rage and stamp,
Resolved to fight, and rather die then yield,
But all was well, for Fortune leaves Macrine,
His Soldiers fly and go to Antonine.
28.
And now he finds himself in desperate Case,
Yet while his middle Battle firmly stood,
His Purple Coat he 'gins for to Unlace,
And flies himself with such as he thought good;
Disguised thus away by stealth he went
And hid himself, misfortune to prevent.
29.
Before they knew of this his sudden flight,
His Guard that was the old Praetorian Band,
Did stand awhile and bravely for him fight,
Supposing he himself was near at hand:
But when no further News of him they hear,
They all were struck into a Panick fear.
30.
But yet a^on of Hope they better sped,
The Renegades that came to Antonine
Assurance gave how that Macrinus fled,
Then he proclaims the Soldiers all are mine;
But Chief to these he sends present word,
They shall repair to be of his own Guard.
31.
They to the Heralds credit gave and yield,
Forthwith he sends Macrinus to pursue,
At A Sea-Town in view of Constantinople.
Chalcedon he thought his nest to build,
But him the Soldiers overtooke and slew;
Some said in have he meant to go to Rome,
The Winds were cross and brought him to his dome.
32.
For there at first he should have rendevoz'd,
So having neither Fortune or Forecast,
The Soldiers thus his Lenity abused,
And brought him to this fearful end at last;
With him his Son young Caesar Diadumeine
Was taken there, and with his Father slain.
CANTO XVI.
The ARGUMENT.
Young Anton's Freakes and cruelty we tell,
He freedom takes to violate a Nun,
Yet Frames excuse as if he had done well,
Then Marriage makes between the Moon and Sun;
His god Inthrones then plays and Revels vain,
Next he himself is by his Soldiers slain.
1.
MAcrinus here of whom we late did treat,
Not bloody was or caused the Peoples Te'res;
His fault was that he kept himself too neat,
Consulting not among the Roman Peers:
A Crime much short to that of Antonine,
What caused like Fate we leave to power Divine.
2.
Antonine Emperor the Army do salute,
His Friends and Grandam guide the East Affairs;
His years unripe such matters to dispute,
Then straight for Rome his Journey he prepares:
Old Maesa thinks at Rome to spend her years,
Though Commons are not glad nor yet the Peers.
3.
At Nicomede he Winters by the way,
And falls to worshipping his Country Deity,
Whose Priest he was Attired in Rich Array,
Then Antique Dance which showed but little Piety*
Gold, Purple, Tissue Embroid'red on his Gown,
He Crownets wears much like a Persian Crown.
4.
Phoenician Garb, or like the M^des he used,
The Greek and Roman Habit was too mean,
But Maesa thinks his Honor he Abused,
And by persuasion seeks him often to weane;
But he of Shalms and Flutes provides a noise,
Delights in Gambols and his Priestly Toys.
5.
These prancks She said were Barbarous and Exotic,
The Senate would not like this Garish Dress,
You dote quoth he, your eyes are in your Pocket,
I am their Prince and will be never the less;
Then such Fantasticks as himself devise,
To try how Romans would approve their guise.
6.
His Picture Large and of his god the Image,
Bedeckt in Pontificials goes to Rome,
And such he bids as are of Noble Lineage,
With all their Superficials thither come:
Then uppermost over Victory to place it,
That Sacrificers and the rest may grace it.
7.
This god by him was termed Heliogabulus,
And when he entered Rome with all his, Train,
Report which some before Esteemed Fabulous,
Was to spectators now discerned plain;
He Largess gives as was the Emp'rours guise*
Exhibits shows, and Fencers play their Prize.
8.
A stately Temple to his god he builds,
With Altars store for Sacrifices meet,
Then hundreds Sheep and Oxen of the Fields
He kills, and burning heaps of Odours Sweet,
With Rundlets of the daintiest Wine betwixt,
The blood ran through the Temple intermixed.
9.
Then round about the Altars falls a skipping,
To Instruments consorted in their kind,
With many of his country Women Tripping;
Some By these dances the Gentiles intimate that every part of their Body must
be employed to serve their gods.
side, some leap before, and some behind,
The Noble Knightly Orders Stand at gaze,
While Entrails and the Aromaticks blaze.
10.
Not Persons mean but by the Captains Chief,
On Golden Plates these Spiceries are borne,
And Officers of State wore to their grief
Phaenician hanging sleeves which they do scorn,
Like Syrian Prophets.
seers, with linen Shoes in Brief,
Yet all this Harvest yields but little Corn:
Though such as in these mysteries he placed,
He counts with chiefest Honor to have graced.
11.
Amongst this geere he plays a tragic prize,
For at this Mirth he hears how some do scoff;
So puts to death some Noble rich and Wise,
Which made the rest to get them further off:
Augusta Princely Lady takes to Wife,
Of Honors Strips, then turns to private life.
12.
And after this to be in Love pretending,
A Vestall Virgin took from Sacred Cell
Against the Law, to marry her intending,
The People thought he counsel had from Hell;
When Senate blamed this Sacrilegious Act,
He Letters writ and answered thus the Fact:
13.
This is I think, qu^th he, no mortal sin,
I was Inthrall'd by Magic of her beauty;
A Priest that has no hair upon his Chin,
To wed a priestesse is no more then duty:
This he will have to be a sacred match,
Yet soon he gave this second Wife dispatch.
14.
A third he took of Commodus Alliance,
Such pranks as these were played by our young Anton^;
But yet to give these Holy Rites defiance,
He showed himself more then a common VVanton
And now these Matches were with him so rife,
His Country god must also have a Wife.
15.
They Pallas Image then produce with Joy,
Which Romans kept in Secret Veneration,
And never seen since it was brought from Troy,
Till Temple burnt with fiery Exhalation:
This goddess to his Chamber brought with Solace.
He marries to his god within the Palace.
16.
Yet shortly after he forbids the banes,
For that she was too Martial clad in Arms;
Urania next with in his mind rema'nes,
To worship her we now must go in Swarms:
Adored she was amongst the Carthaginians,
Quen Dido chief that came of the Phoenicians.
17.
This Image at such time she did Erect,
When Carthage built by cutting of Cut into Thongs, compast as much ground as
contained the City.
Ox Hide:
A name she had by Africans select
Of hers; the Queen of Stars, vid. S^ld.
Moon she called was, beside
Quoth he, that we may have the fairer Weather,
The Sun and Moon we marry will together.
18.
A Braver Match was never till this hour,
From Temple then they Gold and Silver bring
With her to give unto his god for Dower,
Who said it was a very seemly thing;
Together then they brought them at his Bidding,
With Feasts and Joy prepared for the Wedding.
19.
He did in Suburbs mighty Temple rear,
Had shows by night, with Stage-plaies Feasts and Races,
There brought his god from City once a year,
And in Caroch with Gems Adorned him places;
Six Steeds in Rich Caparisons does fetter,
And backward goes himself to guide the better.
20.
The way was strewn with Filings thick of Gold,
His Guard supporting him on every side,
The People run with Torches to behold;
Presenting Flowers and Garlands to the Bride;
His god was shrin'd with all the Pomp he could,
Though such devices men may well deride:
The Images of all the gods were carried,
With Sumptuous gifts the couple thus were Married;
21.
By gifts, I mean, the Temples Rich Donaries,
Imperial Robes, with Plate and Jewels eke;
The Nobles, Gentry, Soldiers in quandaries,
Yet at these sports they must not be to seek;
To Turret tops he fetches more Vagaries,
Thence Largess throws, such never was the leeke:
Apparel This was done by Ticquets for the Receipt.
Rich, Gold, Silver, Linen fine,
All sorts of tame Beasts gave, excepting Swine,
22.
Which he and all Phoenicians do Abhor.
The Throng was such that some to death were trod,
Some killed with Pikes, more then they looked for,
Such Fatal Feast befell his New-come god;
With many more of these Unprincely Pranks,
Though Grandam Maesa gave him little thanks.
23.
She feared e're long the Soldiers would disgust,
And if his folly brought him to his end,
She home again to pack commanded must
In private life her latter days to spend;
She prays that he (which thus Astray did wander)
Would Caesar make his Cousen Alexander.
24.
He was her Grandchild by her youngest Daughter, Maesa to Antonine.

Then this into him finely she instills;
That since he was a Priest and served the A^'tar,
The gods require him to perform their Wills,
Their Offices and Orgies to prepare,
And Viceroy make to free from Humane care.
25.
But yet no stranger he should substitute,
His Cousen German fit, so near Allied,
Then neither Office would be destitute,
But both the Governments might be supplied:
If this he granted through his Princely Favor,
Both he and she would do their best Endeavor.
26.
This will appease the Ghost of Antonine,
To see that you his Sons so well agree,
He got you both on Daughters Saemis and Mammaea.
two of mine,
This is a course as fit as fit may be;
Thus did this Beldam giddy Anton' flatter,
And of her Daughters lightness makes no matter.
27.
For this she did the Soldiers to Allure,
Then Caesar was he made by Antonine,
And Consul eke which Senate do Assure,
But here their Wits did certainly decline;
No more but four years 'twixt their Ages run,
Yet the one must Father be, and the other Son.
28.
Whom he in all his Rites did seek to Train,
Mammaea Mother was of other mind;
These whimsey Frenzies she does much disdain,
And sends for Tutors of the liberal kind:
Such care she took to weane him from this Antic,
That he might sober prove and not a Frantic.
29.
Yet Princely Exercise.
wrestling sometime as an Active Sport,
She will permit him for his Recreation,
But most unto his Tutors must Resort,
To Antonine a mere Pedantick Fashion;
Who now repents what he before has done,
Because he sees they mean to spoil his Son.
30.
For which some of his Tutors roundly Trust,
And in their Rooms he Revellers promoted;
Unprincely sports he used to serve his Lust,
All men perceive that now he plainly doted,
Chief Offices of State disposed must
To such as for their Lewdness were denoted;
Fiddlers, Dancers, Jesters, Charret-drivers,
Debauched Ruffins were his State Contrivers.
31.
This was a mad and drunken distribution,
Besides his Gewgawes and his Garish Dresses,
Which made the Soldiers set their Resolution,
Not to regard his garb or Silken Tresses;
In Alexander there was less Privation,
To whom his Mother gave good Education.
32.
And now 'twas time to see how matters went,
His Mother heeds, and to his business looks,
She would not let him eat what Anton' sent,
But duly minds his Butlers and his Cooks;
For that disease she undertook the Cure,
And money gave the Soldiers to Assure.
33.
Now Antonine intends to kill them both,
The Mother and his new Adopted Son,
Which Grandam A politic Lady.
Maesa would be very loath,
Too blame am I, quoth she, if this be done;
She knew of all his Plots as well as may be,
And was withal a very subtle Lady.
34.
Because his projects still she did prevent,
His Son no longer Caesar is saluted;
But when the Soldiers heard of his intent,
No force say they that we will have disputed:
With bitter Threats they 'gin to fret and Stamp,
Restrain his Guards and locked them in the Camp.
35.
Young Caesar they demand and him will see,
This Startles Anton', makes him take Caroch,
Adorned with Gems as rich as rich might be,
Then to the Camp his Son and he Approach;
Their Gates they open with seming merry cheer,
Conducting them unto the Temple there.
36.
That night they had their Lodgings both prepared,
Prince Caesar yet the Army best Applaudes;
When Antonine saw how this matter fared,
Hie time it was to lay aside his Gaudes:
The Chief of them he had in most suspicion,
He executes as Authors of Sedition.
37.
The Soldiers mean to take this just occasion
To help their Fellows in this dangerous case;
Now Anton's Fautors die without Evasion,
His Rimers, Dancers, and his Juglers base;
Not so content, their fury so extreme is,
They kill himself and eke his Mother Saemis.
38.
Their Carcasses the people hale and rakes,
Enough to make a kind heart shake and shiver,
And them they threw into the public Jakes,
Which voided are into the Tyber River;
Then that their young Prince might not rove at Random,
They him commit to's Mother and his Grandam.
The End of the Fifth Book.
I have thought good to give you here the Character or Elogy of this last
Antonine, taken out of the best Authors.
HIs Apparel was extreme brave and Gorgeous: yet he never wore one Garment
twice. His Shoes were embellisht with Diamonds, and Oriental Pearls of the
most Caracts. His Seats were strewed with Musk and Amber. His Beds were
covered with Cloth of Gold Tissued on Purple, and embossed with Gems of
inestimable Value. His Way was strewed with filings of Gold and Silver. His
Vessels, even of basest use, were of Obryze Gold. His Lamps burned with
precious Balmes and Gums of India and Arabia. His Fish Ponds were filled with
Rosewater. His Ships in his Theatricall Sea fights, floated in Rivers of Wine.
His Bathes most magnificently built, when he had once used them, were still
plucked down, and new built. His Plate, of refined Massy Gold; but never
served twice to his Table. His Rings and Jewels infinitely Rich; yet never
worn twice. His Concubines numberless, but never lain with twice. Every
Supper in his Court cost 1000 pounds sterling. When he lay near to the Sea, he
would eat no fish: when he was farthest in the Continent, he would eat no
Flesh. Whole Meals were furnished with Tongues of singing Birds, and Brains of
rarest Creatures. All Europe, Asia, and Africa, with the Islands adjacent; in a
word, the Globe of Earth and Sea (whereof he was LORD PARAMOVNT) was not able
to fill this GVLPH. In his Progress, he was attended by 600 Charrets fraught
with Concubines, Catamites, and Pandars: for whom, he built a Seraglio in his
Court; where himself (in the habit of a Curtez^n) used to make solemn
Speeches to them, terming them, his Brave Fellow Soldiers and Companions in
Arms: [What gallant Instructions he gave them I forbear to mention] He caused
to be gathered in Rome Vid. Lipsium de magnitudine Roman^^.
ten thousand Weight of Spiders, ten thousand Mice, and a thousand Polcats;
which he exhibited to the Roman Peers and People, in a public Show and
Solemnity, professing, that now he perfectly understood how mighty a City Rome
was. Lastly, [to omit other more strong Prankes] he summoned a S^natum.
Parliament of Women, to consult about Tires, Fashions, Dresses, Tinctures, and
the like Weighty and Important Affairs.

The Sixth BOOK.
CANTO XVII.
The ARGUMENT.
Prince Alexander next Reforms the State,
Maesa deified, Persians them Invade,
The Roman Letters they despise and Hate.
A Muster over Italy is made;
Alexander against the Persian goes,
And sends Embassage to his Sturdy Foes.
1.
YOu see the end of Luxury and Riot,
What means this flesh and blood so to Rebel?
How happy is the poor man's rest and quiet,
That does within his homely Cottage dwell!
Far better be a Beast or Brutish Swine,
Then live and die the death of Antonine.
2.
This end had Antonine and his Adhaerents,
Then were (for managing of State-Affaires)
Maesa and Mammaea created Regents,
Who straight the Commonwealth amiss Repaires;
Sixteen were chosen of the Ancient Peers,
Remarkable for Wisdom and for years.
3.
This Government was pleasing unto all,
Their gods removed of late they reinvest,
For Antonines they make account but small, Skillful in both parts of War,
Tactick and Stratagematick.

Though he and they so garishly were dressed;
His scounderels were all of them disgraced,
And men of Honor in their rooms were placed.
4.
The Empire stated thus, old Masa died,
All solemn Rites unto her Hearse were done;
For like an Empress she was At which they used a Peacock for a woman, as an
Eagle for a man. See the fourth Book of this history.
Deified,
Mammaea left sole Guardian to her Son:
And now for Rule he was of decent Age,
She sought unruly passions to Assuage;
5.
Which happens often to Natures that are best
When Parasites have got the upper hands:
To stir her self she therefore did not rest,
Till she from Court did all of them disband;
She prayed him in debates to end the Strife,
Which he observed and led a Princely Life.
6.
In fourteen years his Empire had no stain, His Elogy.

None di'd without due process in the Law;
Since Marcus time there was not such a Reign,
For Love they him Revered more then Awe:
His Mother though heaped Coin, as she pretended
To give his Soldiers, which he not commended.
7.
Their goods she spoiled he thought on him reflected;
And when he had obtained a Noble Wife,
The Lady was by her too much neglected,
And forced from Court to lead a quiet life:
As Empress she alone will take upon her,
Maligning much at this her Daughters Honor.
8.
Her Sire she killed over come with Passion blind,
Because he spoke what did not her content:
The Lady into Africa was confined,
All which was done without the Sons consent;
Though duty binds, yet herein was his Error,
He gave her too much sway to others Terror.
9.
Excepting this he ruled without offense;
Now Posts in have from Syria hither ran,
And brought such news as quickly called him hence,
The Persian King had killed great Artaban; Wore a double Diadem.

And worser news they added to the Story,
His Troops he marched in Roman Territory.
10.
In Mesopotamia he his Standard Reares,
And on he comes as greedy as a Wolf,
By all his gods he most devoutly Swears
The Country's his to the Propontick gulf;
The Persians Right which they derive from Cyrus,
Till Alexander overthrew Darius.
11.
Whosoever says against he counts a Toy,
The Countries of Jonia and Carry
Was Governed by a Persian Viceroy,
Which he will have or else himself will die:
What heretofore was under their command,
He counts his Honor, and will that demand.
12.
This dismal news when Alexander heard,
Because in peace his youth was ever trained,
No marvel if they made him much afraid,
He Counsel craves how this might be restain'd;
Who soon resolves, they will without neglect
Embassage send, which spoke to this Effect.
13.
You ought, say they, to keep within your Bounds,
And not to stir new Tumults, or this War;
For if you do approach the Roman grounds,
Our Soldiers will your enterprise debarr;
When you perceive what praise to them, redounds,
You then will wish you had not come so far:
He minds them often what those before him wan,
Augustus, Lucius, Severe, and Trajan.
14.
They thought that this would be a cooling Card;
But when this Bri^^e was to the Persians born,
They make return as yet they were not scarr'd,
And flatly do their message hold in scorn:
They mean to fight and not contest in Words,
And so Assail the Guards upon the Fords.
15.
With spoil of booty r^^k of their success,
Their Empire now they doubt not to enlarge;
And Artaxerxes thought himself no less,
Who was the first that durst the Parthians charge,
To get again what formerly was Lost,
When Alexander foiled Darius Host.
16.
These Countries of the East were dealt in Shares
By those that next the Conqueror succeed,
Till that they spoiled themselves by civil Wars,
Then Parth'an Arsace did sub'ly proceed:
Revolt he plotted by the Macedonians,
Who Crowned him King, and eke the next Barbarians.
17.
These Countries got he left unto his heirs,
With other more, he next to Parthia wan,
Where he and his did flourish many years,
Till Artaxerxes killed great Artaban;
Who now will them unite to Persian Crown,
And eke advance to pull the Romans down.
18.
With this to stir begins the Roman Prince,
His Captains and his Honor does Invite;
Best men he Musters now in each Province,
That these insulting Persians he may smite:
And since these Barbarous ^olk will not Atone,
His Soldiers calls and speaks thus from his Throne:
19.
Brave Fellow Soldiers now I wish I Could
Speak my Applause and likewise your content, Alexanders speech.

I know Sweet Peace is better bought then sold;
But since our Foes to Prejudice are bent,
And us to harm do show themselves despitefull,
What we perform we ought to count delightful.
20.
Who does the wrong deserves little grace,
Nor who repels deserves to be hated;
The Persian King stepped in his Sovereigns place,
And Traitorously the Kingdom has Translated:
So in despite of our Majestic Power,
Our Coasts and Countries he presumes to scower.
21.
By gentle Letters first we fair entreat,
From claiming others Right he would desist;
But he to fight and Challenge grows in heat,
Insatiate is and will do what he list:
To break the Peace it was not your desires,
Yet let him know you will fight when need requires.
22.
You Vet'rans that such Famous Battles won
By conduct of Severus and my Sire,
Still let them see your Courage is not done;
You younger sort that Honor do Aspire,
Let former quiet breed no alteration,
But of your Valor make full demonstration.
23.
The Barbarous folk are fierce to them that shrink,
But will not stand when Battle once is set;
When you do thoroughly charge, away they slink,
And think it well when they some booty get:
If we our Order keep (with little pain)
We shall them quell, and safe return again.
24.
This said, with shouts the Soldiers Joy Express,
To the Senate eke he spoke to like Effect,
And then Commands for Journey to Address
That they the Persians sooner may Correct;
The Rites performed according to their guise,
Both he and Romans part with wa^'ry eyes.
25.
His Rule so gentle was they love him dear,
As also that amongst them he was bred;
To Illyrian Nations straight he does appear,
Great Forces raised he thence to Antioch led;
Once there, he makes all Warlike Preparation,
His Soldiers Training in a Martial Fashion.
26.
By Treaty once again he offers Peace,
He thinks his presence may persuade or fear,
The Barbarous Prince will not his claim surcease,
But sends four hundred of the tallest there:
Like Heralds clad in rich and brave attire,
His men to daunt and cause them back retire.
27.
They Message had, how that King Artaxerx
Commands them * Asia and Syria to refrain,
Or else be sure he will them sore perplex,
Till Jonia and Caria he regaine:
For what divides Aegean and Pontick gulf,
There Is none shall rule except it be himself.
28.
This errand cross to Roman Princes mind,
He bids these men shall seized be and stripped;
Their dwellings into Phrygia were assignd,
And narrowly they escaped from being whipped:
Yet banishment from home enough he thought,
Their fault no more then Sovereign Message brought.
29.
This done he means t'invade the Barbarous Foe,
Though some of Egypt Syria did embroyle;
Yet that with skill he salv'd without a blow,
And took a course the rest might not recoile:
His Army now is equal to Barbarians,
Which he divides into three Battalians.
30.
One Northward marched through Confines of Armenia,
Who seemed to be the Romans steady Friends,
That way he purposes to enter Media,
The next where Euphrates and Tygris.
Rivers meet, yet of their ends
Your expectation must a while prorogue,
Till we can tell you where they disem^ogue.
31.
The third and best he took himself to lead;
Thus several ways the Persians they invade,
Not feed men (as the Romans) but in stead
They go to Wars with men of every Trade,
And Women often are Must'red on the Plain,
Who booty get, then to their house again.
32.
Not used to Camps or trained in Martial skill,
So Romans mean to take them unprovided,
And Alexander thinks to work his will
On them that have his Embassage derided;
But what event befell to either State,
The Canto next ensuing will relate.
CANTO XVIII.
The ARGUMENT.
Of Archery high Hills and Romans foil,
Alexander (...) and comes to Rhine,
German Rebels, and Heralds keep a ^oile,
Describe we then the Emperor Maximine,
This journey puts the Romans to much pain,
Prince Alexander is by Soldiers slain.
1.
IF true or no Mammae^ was unchaste,
Uncertain is, but so it was proclaimed;
To make her Son a King she was in have,
Too many have at such Ambition Aimed:
Our gain by fraud does always turn to loss,
So we as they come home by weeping-crosse. Sentence.

2.
The Persians are Esteemed as Archers good
In War, or when they stay at home to feast;
If so it is a means to get their food,
With Bow and Shaft they seldom miss wild Beast:
Though Alexanders plots were deep and wise,
Yet Fortune favored not his Enterprise.
3.
The foremost Army through Armenia went,
So clambring over each Mountain craggy top,
To burn and pillage Media they are sent,
And Persian King their Passage seeks to stop;
The steepy Hills secure the Roman Foot,
On Persian Horse to serve it was no boot.
4.
In Parthia The second Army enters,
Which to the Persian King was uncouth News,
If this be got for Persia next he venters,
Another purpose therefore he pursues:
Some Force he left lest Media should be lost,
Then into the East he goes with mighty Host.
5.
First Roman Army do their March retard,
For that the Barbarous folk did not proceed;
They thought their Prince advanced with the third
In The mdidle part as erst it was agreed:
There also was a rendezvous Assigned
To keep the prey and Prisoners that they find.
6.
But lo a hard disaster here befell,
He neither goes himself or Army sent;
Whether it were he Loved himself too well,
Or that his Mother fond, crossed his intent,
To keep him still at home her wit she bends*
Which brought them both unto their dismal ends.
7.
The Army that the Barbarous Country entered,
Through want of his reserve were all defeated;
But for the hope of that they had not ventred,
By too much confidence thus being cheated:
The Persians run upon them unaware,
And they like birds were taken in a snare.
8.
They were too few so many to repel,
To stand upon their Guard they now contrive,
And think they have themselves acquitted well,
If so they may but keep themselves alive;
Their Targets joined while cloud of Arrows fell,
But compast round like Bees within a Hive,
Receiving grievous Wounds and deadly pain,
With brave resistance, every man was slain.
9.
This to the Romans was a heavy cross,
Of Better men remains no Record,
Young Alexander much laments the loss,
And Soldiers tax him deep for breach of Word;
The Persian puffed does bear aloft his Crest,
But Alexander.
he with grief and Sickness is oppressed.
10.
Heat of the Clime he could no longer brook,
Nor yet Illyrians bred in moister air,
Them and the rest along with him he took,
Then unto Antioch makes his repair;
For better Fortune now he must not look,
Both he and those remained were in despair:
His Army perished thus that was three fold,
With Sword and sickness or the Mountains cold.
11.
To Antioch come fresh Fountains, cooler air,
In better state of health did him restore,
His credit lost he Labored to repair,
To Soldiers left of Coin he gave great store;
This was he knew the way to get him praise, Pilulae aur^ae best Physic for
soldiers.

And chiefest help an Army new to raise;
12.
For so he must if Persians them pursue,
But news he hears their King his men dismissed,
Though his were slain it also was as true,
The Barbarous folk to follow had no list:
Of multitudes their Number did abate,
For Romans sold their lives at dearest rate.
13.
Their number not their Valor overcame,
As now was plain by keeping home in quiet,
Yet Alexander follows on his game
At Antioch with frolicking and Riot;
The Persians eke are tender of their lives,
Ay* loving home their children and their Wives.
14.
While thus he staid Illyrian Posts came hither,
And Message brought how Germans past the Rhine:
This sudden news perplexed him more then ever,
To hear the Northern Rebels lewd design;
He all must lose, or make have, choose him whether,
And bring his force e're more of them combine:
They Havoc make, great Cities burn and Villages,
And round about the Country sacks and pillages.
15.
This tale him vexed and eke Illyrians grieved,
Their fellows late in Persia put to slaughter,
(He staid behind that should have them relieved)
And now their friends by Germans shortly after;
They were at him exceedingly enraged,
That them betrayed when they for him engaged.
16.
Now Alexander Italy does fear,
Ill^ria was for that the only Ba^r;
The Eastern Nations seldom of it heat.
Disjoined both by Sea and Land so far;
To make new War the time does him constrain,
Though he had rather stay then take the pain.
17.
Yet now (though loath) he makes an expedition,
His Forts and Sconces fortifies at home.
Then Northward goes to make due inquisition;
And when his Soldiers all a^e to him come,
Encampeth on the River Banks of Rhyne,
Then Bridge of Ships and Barges does Assign.
18.
Over Rhyne and Ister men in Summer sail,
The Channels of them both are deep and broad,
But in the Winter froze with Snow and Hail,
And Ice so thick they bear a mighty load;
To carry Water, pitchers they have none,
But hewes out Ice, and bears it like a stone.
19.
This Army had some Regiments of Moors
And goodly Band of Archers from the East,
With Parthian Fugitives run from their doors,
All these the German People much infest;
The nimble Nimble footed.
Moors at Distance cast their Darts,
And Archers hit their naked Heads or Hearts.
20.
But when it came to blows the Germans were
Not much Inferior to the Roman Foot,
Which Alexander put in grievous fear,
Who Offered Peace with store of Coin to boot;
The Germans always greedy are of Ghelt,
Well known to him that thus their pulses felt.
21.
And he himself was weary of the War,
Which made him thus Assay to buy his Peace;
The Soldiers from this Bargain were as far
They sought for gallant service more then ease:
His mind (say they) is more of Masks and Revels
Then to correct the Barbarous German Rebels.
22.
Now in this Army was one Maximine,
Borne at a Village near the Inmost Thrace,
In younger years he was a Shepherds swain,
But afterward became of comely Grace;
He chosen was to serve in Troop of Horse,
Where he improved well in skill and Force.
23.
Command of Towns and Armies he obtained,
And now by Alexander so employed,
Naught wanting from the Noble youth remained,
To learn of him they all were overjoyed;
By sleight and Gifts he does their Favor gain,
They all were linkt to him as in a Chain.
24.
Panonians most were those of younger sort
For Prowess that do Maximine regard,
They show the matter now was not in sport;
Yet Alexander still his Mothers Ward,
How he inclined to Revell and to Feast,
And lost his expedition in the East.
25.
Nor ought material against the Germans done*
These things they often had in repetition,
Upon an other point they also run,
None for the Empire stood in Competition*
Or fitter then their fellow Maximine
To end the work upon the River Rhyne.
26.
Resorting thus into the Field in Arms,
When Maximine to train them was addressed,
They Emperor him (...) with fresh Alarms,
And then with Purple Robe do him invest,
Which he threw off; My Friends, quoth he, forbear,
Till hi^^ to kill he heard them vow and Swear.
27.
If he refuse: now if this were a plot,
Uncertain is, and rests still in doubt;
Yet they resolve, though it were so or not
The Sovereign Rule he must not be without:
Then faineth he, this Oracle's foretold,
So does submit and will the Empire hold.
28.
And since the Army needs will have it so,
Before the Rumor shall abroad be spread,
Or that Alexander may come to know,
They shall surprise him though it be in bed;
His Guard that knows not what is done in Field
Must give consent or be compelled to yield.
29.
With Donatives he does the Soldiers cheer,
And promised them a double share of Corn,
Then forth to Alexander much in fear
He leads them on as against a man forlorn;
Who manly leapt out of his Royal Tent,
Yet wept and trembled all the way he went;
30.
Accusing Maximine as most ungrate
For Honors done him, perjured and disloyal;
The Soldiers rage he strives to mittigate,
Of his amends they shall have open Trial:
The Guards that was about him swear devoutly
They will Assist him and defend him stoutly.
31.
When night was past and Maximine at hand,
Alexander came back into the Plain;
But when he saw of Foes a mighty Band*
He minds the Romans of his gentle Reign,
And prays them Arm to vindicate his Right;
Some grieved, some pitti'd him, but none would fight:
32.
Some wished the Prefect and his Courtiers might
Receive the meed of their deserved blame;
Some said this blow should on his Mother light,
That Soldiers scanted, and debased his Fame;
While thus they parlie, what was wrong or right,
Maximines Army to persuade them came:
They wished them leave this puny Prince and Mother,
For skill in Arms they now had chose Another.
33.
Then as they Vote for Emperor Maximine,
Back Alexander went unto his Tent,
Reproving sore his Mothers lewd design; Extreme calamities confound the
spirit.

But now it seems too late he did repent.
His deaths man he expects out of hand,
For Maximine the Tribunes does Command
34.
To put them both unto a sudden death,
With all their friends and such as did resist;
They rusht into his Tent and stopped the breath
Of all save few that by escape they mist:
Yet they were apprehended shortly Auter,
And added to the former bloody Slaughter.
35.
This end had both the Mother and the Son,
A gentle Prince of mild and temperate Reign;
His Edict was, none should to death be done
Except the Law did first inflict the pain:
His Rule and he much Longer might have lasted,
Had not his Mother thus his Honor blasted.
The End of the Sixth Book.
The Seventh BOOK.
CANTO XIX.
The ARGUMENT.
Magnus Quartinus Prince against his will,
A trick the Traitor Macedon to cool,
Romans and Germans are at Battle still,
They fight like mad men in a durty Poole;
Maximine cruel by Informing Dolts.
At Rome they are devout, Africa revolts.
1.
YOu see the Fatal end of these two Brothers,
How Pride and Lucre taught them to Aspire;
Which also brought Confusion to their Mothers,
Who for that purpose did with them conspire:
Yet time nor death we see of foe or friend
Instructs our lives or manners to amend.
2.
The Fourteen years of former gentle Reign
Received a strange and sudden Alteration,
For Maximine that caused them to be slain,
Was low of Birth and Barbarous Education;
By Blood he meant the Scepter to maintain,
No whit ashamed of his Assassination:
He knew the Senate liked not his proceeding,
But would despise the baseness of his Breeding.
3.
Right well they knew he was a Shepherd bred,
Then for his Active strength a Soldier pressed;
So Fortune merely by the hand him led
Thus in the Roman Empire to invest:
His spleen and cunning shortly he disclosed,
And all the Ancient Senate discomposed,
4.
With other Officers, upon pretense
They knew not how to govern in their places;
To Rome they must, he quickly packt the ^mence,
And Alexanders Servants eke disgraces:
The Nobles gone he set afoot his Tyranny
With Soldiers aid, and plotted further villainy.
5.
A chance there hapt which made him much more keen,
Some Captains and the Senate did conspire:
A Noble man there was that hight Magnus Quart^nus.
Quartine,
And Consul once, him most of them desire;
He to this Emperor was accused in Brief,
How with his friends he dealt to make him chief.
6.
When Maximine the Sovereignty had got,
By deeds of Arms the Soldiers to confirm,
He built a Bridge, and thus was laid the Plot,
Or at the least some so much did Affirm;
That from the Germans he might not return,
Magnus devised they should it cut or burn.
7.
Maximine.
He chosen was for skill in those Affairs,
Which Alexander did too much neglect;
But he his Army Trained to the Wars,
And they for Action him do most affect:
The River was so broad and deep of mire
When this was done, he could not back retire.
8.
But to the Barbarous folk must be betrayed,
Now if this Rumor feigned was or true,
It was enough for him it so was said,
And such as was suspected soon did rue;
For without process they were forthwith slain,
Or other plea that did thereto pertain.
9.
The Osroen Archers first this work began,
Magnas was one of Alexanders friends,
For whom they grieved, to him therefore they ran
Of late dismissed, whom they will make amends;
They give him fatal Robe and carry fire,
And him to be their Emperor they desire.
10.
Of this before he neither thought or knew,
Then shortly after sleeping in his Tent
His friend Macedon most unmanly slew,
He Captain was, and first that did Assent;
Yet now as he to Maximine was true,
Quartinus head he forthwith did present,
And he as glad to see him made away,
But Macedon must for the Reck'oing pay.
11.
Instead of thanks he as the Author Chief,
Was put to death, and had deserved end,
Who now appeared a Murderer and a Thief,
That first Rebelled, then killed his dearest friend:
These matters to the fire added fuel,
Though Maximine himself was fierce and cruel.
12.
A mighty Bulk he had and Visage grim,
Nor Greek or Barbarous might with him compare;
He leads his Army over the Bridge with him,
And on the Germans makes a cruel War,
With Darters, Archers, Roman^ and Armenians,
Parthian Fugitives and captived Attrenians.
13.
This Mass confused by Alexander raked,
Was now increased and trained well to fight;
Moresco Darters little more then naked,
And Archers show the Germans cunning slight:
They nimbly start to work their VVarrlike Feats,
Then back into the gross as quick Retreats.
14.
Though Corn and Harvest ready was for Sickle,
The Barbarous People fled and none resisted;
Their Buildings apt to fire are dwellings fickle,
He burnt and Pillaged whatsoever he listed:
The Germans rarely Build with Stone or Bricks,
But little sheds laid over with boards and sticks.
15.
Thus Ravadg'd he and Burnt the Fields amain,
And gave the Soldiers Cattle for their prey;
The Barbarous left the Champaigne and the Plain,
Then to the Boggs and VVoods they have away;
There skulk and VVatch Advantage meet to take,
And when they see their time Eruptions make.
16.
Here Trees will break the Arrows force and Darts,
And Boggs unknown the Romans dare not venture;
But these more skillful in those wilder parts,
And swimmers good do make no bones to enter*
The fight begins which turned to their smarts,
More boggy Poole was not above the Center;
The Soldiers wish for open Field and Large,
Yet Maximine most bravely gives the Charge.
17.
He plunged amongst them to the Horses Belly,
The Barbarous folk resist and stoutly fight*
But some he kills and some he treads to Jelly;
His men ashamed he was so foully dight,
Leapt after him into this durty Meare,
Then both sides slash and limbs in pieces tear.
18.
The Roman Prince in Person bravely fought,
Barbarians most were killed in Mud and Sand:
The Purpled Fenns with blood so interwrought,
It seemed a ghastly Sea Fight on the Land;
Yet afterward his Honors came to naught,
Though Troops he led and grapled hand to hand:
This Battle Roman Senate had by Letter,
And eke by pourtrait to discern it better.
19.
Soon after that this brave exploit had end,
Then did this Champion stout without comparison
His boot and Prisoners (in Panonia) send
To Sirmion where he kept his VVinter Garrison,
And there prepared his Force against the Spring,
At his dispose the Barbarous folk to bring.
20.
A Warrior brave and likely to subdue,
And at the utmost Ocean set his Rest
With Glory great, but for the bloody Crew
That did the Roman People so molest:
What better he the Barbarous folk to kill,
When they at Rome the blood of Subjects spill?
21.
Informers base not only were permitted,
But whetted on good men to Circumvent,
And Crimes ripped up (perhaps not true) Committed,
When former Princes had the Government:
So hard their ^ap convicted by this egging,
Some lost their lives, some Rich men went a begging.
22.
This he pretends was for his Soldiers pay,
His ears were open to every false surmise,
Both Consuls and Commanders haled away.
Vicegeren^s eke, with Rich men and the Wise;
Informers had admittance night and day,
Over East, West, North and South they do Revise;
Some stripped of their Estates some others Baff'ld,
Some banished were, some did upon a scaffold.
23.
So long as this to private men extends,
And does not Trench upon a General Nation,
The Commons seldom mourn the great men's ends,
Depraved through envy, tax or Molestation;
Therefore they stir not, but the matter slighted,
And are withal exceeding much delighted.
24.
But Maximine with this was not content,
To take the Nobles goods and Lives withal,
He from the common stock will Force a Rent,
And treasure seize laid up in their Guild Hall;
The City store, when dear the market grows,
To buy them Corn or grace their solemn shows.
25.
He Sacred Donaries from Temples took,
With Statues of the gods and Ancient Or Semigods
Heroes
To melt for Coin he rifled every nook,
With Horrid Facts as ill or worse then Neroes;
This caused their sores to rancle and to fester,
They now in earnest saw he was no jester.
26.
All over the City was a mournful cry
To see things Pillaged, Romans devout.
Sacred and profane;
No Foreign Force to rob or make them die,
And yet their Holy Altars brought to bane:
This Sacriledg engendered so much hate,
Whole Countries now began to execrate.
27.
The Soldiers also do not take it well,
For that their Friends and kinsfolks them upbraid,
Though all might take occasion to Rebel;
From gods above they yet implored aid,
Desiring them to make their grievance less,
As being loath to Force their own redress.
28.
For three years space he used this bloody Traffic,
But Tyrants Reign is fickle and unstable,
Revolt and Tumult now began in Africa*
Of false Promoters thither got a Rabble;
At Carthage one exceeds in his opinion,
For that he was become the Emp'rours minion.
29.
Indulgent most he to his Checquer Friends,
If any just they lean against their will,
Less honest they more fit to serve his Ends,
Their Neighbors goods and lives withal to spill:
Young Gentlemen and Citizens not rare,
This African had got within his snare.
30.
Some at their sentence are extremely grieved,
Yet Promise large their forfeit to redeem,
Mean while contrive how they may be relieved,
And to the Procurator friendly seem;
The Country clownes they gain into their plot,
Who come and hide the Weapons they have got.
31.
Together come they make a mighty Troop,
For Africa was Populous of Country people.
Boors;
When day was come they did no songer droop,
But cheerfully advancing out of doors,
The Gentlemen Command not yet to Act,
Lest Soldiers hinder their intended Fact.
32.
The Gallants in their Bosoms hide their Daggers,
To pay the promised money they pretend;
But Instantly the Procurator Staggers,
For him they slew and brought to sudden end:
As Soldiers draw their swords to Rescue knaves
The Country men resist with Clubs and Staves.
33.
They laid about and put them all to flight,
Which done the Gentlemen resolve in fine
To stand it out if it were wrong or right:
And thus they pitch upon a high design;
The Governor must now be of their Faction,
They purpose to imbark him in this Action.
34.
The Commons eke they stir up to rebel,
And apt they are save fear of Maximine;
They march whereas the Governor did dwell,
Proconsull he at age of Seventy nine,
One Gordian well seen in state Affa'res,
The fittest man to ease them of their cares.
35.
They have good hope of Roman Peers Assent
This to Conferr, his other Acts to crown;
He Noble was by Birth, of high descent,
And best deserved the place of Chief Renown:
While thus of weighty matters they dispose,
He kept at home intending his Repose.
36.
These Gallants with this Train and naked Swords,
Came where this good old man on Couch did rest,
They him salute by fair and gentle words,
And so with Purple Robe anon they him Invest;
He stirrs about as then the time affords,
Beseeching them they will not him molest,
But give unto their Sovereign what was due,
And spare his life that no Extortion knew.
37.
But Gordian they do the more importune,
Who all this while was in a fearful Maze;
They will him to accept this present Fortune,
As he upon this tumult stood at gaze:
The Chief of them stepped out with Sword in hand,
As in the Canto next you will understand.
CANTO XX.
The ARGUMENT.
Gordian Chose, then follows private Slaughter,
Capellian gives to Africans defeat
Prince Gordian and his Father dies soon after,
Joves Temple Romans choose their Laws to treat,
Two Consuls Rule the Senate do desire, Maximus and Albinus.

Commotion raised and Rome is set on fire.
1.
LEt me not have the vulgar for my Judge,
Though Maximine deserved what they intend,
Yet often we see when they begin to grudg,
Good Rulers chance upon as Fatal end;
Of late I told you Gordian was afraid,
Next hear the Speech that unto him was made:
2.
Good Sir, A Speech to Gordian.
quoth one, two dangers you enclose,
The first at hand as we the case do put,
The latter time hereafter may disclose,
Choose now if you in pieces will be cut,
Or rather to our motion straight incline,
To quell that hideous Traitor Maximine.
3.
This all your former Noble Acts will Crown,
More Honor gain you from the Roman Nation;
But if denied, we kill and strike you down,
You may believe our Solemn Protestation:
The Procurator has his due reward,
And we shall Smart if we do once retard.
4.
We for his Barbarous sharking have him slain,
No hope of Pardon therefore we expect,
You shall the Imperial dignity attain,
If you consent to what we did Project;
So you and we shall both escape the blame,
And purchase to our selves Immortal Fame.
5.
This said, the rest impatient of delay,
Proclaim him Prince without Procrastination;
Though coy at first (with Age) as worn away,
Yet soon they see a little Reluctation:
He calls them friends, and bids them not to fear,
At their request the Scepter he will wear.
6.
And hereupon the Africans Rebel,
Put Gordians Statues up, Maximines down;
From Thystrum he at Carthage went to dwell,
Was there invested with Imperial Crown:
This City had fit site with buildings rare,
And next to Rome with any might compare.
7.
With Gallant Youths he bravely was attended,
And Laurel rods with fire before him borne,
That Rome could not the matter well have mended,
All Africa held Maximine in scorn:
Now Gordian writes to private friends and Peers,
Whom they accept, and gladly him Reveres.
8.
To Soldiers and to Commons he was kind,
Both mild and Just he thus began his Reign;
Informers run or smart that stay behind,
Then he commands Vitalian shall be slain;
A bloody Monster that remained at Rome,
To Maximine a base officious Gro'me.
9.
Vitalian was Praetorian Prefect;
And lest he should be cross to his Design,
Some daring youths he sent to this Effect,
With Letters sealed as if from Maximine:
When he in Closet was these Letters reading,
They should him stab, not once the matter Pleading.
10.
The chance was right, they found him all alone,
To show their writs, and as he viewed the Seals,
They gave the Stab which made him sigh and groan,
Then made Escape, for none the Fact reveals;
Those that attended neither stop nor strike,
For Maximine did use to do the like.
11.
Such tokens often he sent to dearest Friends,
The youths now have unto the Sacred way
To tell the Message Gordian to them sends,
Then aid from Consuls and the people pray:
They give it out that Maximine is slain,
Which news is liked, for all detest his Reign.
12.
Distracted like men ran upon these Aires;
Maximnies Honored Statues were defaced;
The People to the Senate now repaires,
And Gordian with his Son as Emp'rours graced:
Amongst base Informers these great Havoc makes,
Their Agents trail'd and thrown into the Jakes.
13.
Some guiltless perished in these civil bro^les,
Some houses rifle, and their Neighbors plunder,
Some Freedom cry, yet stir up new Garboiles,
In time of Peace this bred the greater wonder;
Sabinus them to quiet took great pains,
Yet they with Clubs dashed out his aged brains.
14.
While Commons rage the Senate look about,
News came how Maximine was yet alive;
They send unto the Provinces throughout,
And for their safety do with them contrive,
Persuading that they will to them adheare
Him to depose who kept them all in fear.
15.
Their Embassage was welcome unto most,
Then all the Catchpole Officers were slain,
Whole Provinces Revolt through every coast,
Except some few that Maximine did gain
To kill the Posts that first the news ^omented,
Or send them to him to be worse tormented.
16.
Though first the news did nettle to the quick,
He seemed not yet the matter to regard;
Some days he studied to devise a Trick
With Counsel how the plot might be debarred:
This accident some said fell in the nick, Maximines Speech.

Yet of his spies they kept good watch and Ward;
With speech composed as Pen could well direct,
He to his This Speech was at S^^mion penned by some of his counsel.
Army spoke to this effect:
17.
News somewhat strange I shall to you relate,
Yet not so strange as moving unto laughter, Himself ^^literate.

Wars raised are against you out of hate;
Not Germans who you often have put to slaughter,
Or yet the Nations Bord'ring on the East,
But Carthage will Promote a doting Beast.
18.
To Act a King they have advanced a cripple,
What Discipline, but Dances, Jiggs and Quips;
What weathercocks eke the Roman People,
Appears by their failings and their slips;
Though Traitorously they have Vitalian slain,
When we approach their Projects are in vain.
19.
No marvel if my continence displease,
And valiant Acts reputed are as cruel;
Debauched Deeds suits better with their ease,
And he for this Accounted is a Jewel:
The man of whom they make so great bravado,
Is Gordian that puft-past Titulado.
20.
Against such as these we are to make defense,
The name of War is Epithete unmeet;
For if we once do march away from hence,
With Olive Branch they fall down at our feet,
Or run away to shun the Fatal blow,
That I their goods upon you may bestow.
21.
This said with many thundering Execrations,
With stern disdain full looks and Tragic Action,
For Italy he makes his Proclamations
To quell the City, Senate and their Faction;
Then gives unto the Soldiers Double pay,
And forward marched upon the second day.
22.
Romans, Germans, Confed'rates and Allies,
With Engines eke against Barbarous folk prepared
He took with him, recruiting his supplies;
Yet slowly marched through passage rough and hard,
Upon Panonians Chiefly he relies,
Who him proclaimed and was his trusty guard:
His Title to secure and their own ease,
He them Commands on Italy to seize.
23.
News unexpected now from Carthage came,
Which in this journey Maximine o'retook;
Capellian meant to free himself from blame,
Numidian The most Southerly Province of the Roman Empire.
Charge he had to overlook,
Which he attained by Maximines good grace,
But Gordian late discharged him of his Place.
24.
An Ancient grudg betwixt them long had been,
He therefore relisht this Affront in scorn,
More expert Soldiers no where to be seen,
Who long against Barbarians Arms had borne;
To Carthage walls he brought them well Arraid,
Which made old Gordian piteously afraid.
25.
The Citizens send out tumultuous crew,
And chose the younger Gordian for their Chief,
Bred up in sports, their Discipline was new,
Yet what they could they got for their relief:
This sudden fright great hurly burly makes,
Some Daggers wore, some Clubs, and some had stakes.
26.
Numidians good Horsemen were and Darters,
The Carthages were quickly put to rout;
They make such have outrunning all their Quarters,
That treading one another under Foot,
Such numbers fell in heaps upon the ground,
Some Nobles and the Prince could not be found.
27.
The Women cry and make a grievous moan,
Numidians there children kill and mangle,
Both old and young were heard to sigh and groan,
Old Gordian (in bed) himself did strangle,
Who Honor had till now and many a friend,
Thus he and eke his Son came to their end.
28.
Capellian Temples robbed and Nobles slew,
As if it were in Maximines defense;
Yet secretly he Soldiers to him drew,
Lest Maximine miscarry far from thence:
When as these dismal News in Rome was told,
Both day and night they Consultation hold.
29.
Joves Temple was the Seat where they consult,
In Sacred place they do his aid implore,
Then after Counsel this was their result: Albinus Maximus.

Two Famous men must still this great uprore,
As to and fro the Senate reason thus,
They Albine choose with colleague Maximus.
30.
But yet the Commons mean to make a broile,
And seek this new Election how to choke;
With Stones and staves and Clubs they keep a coile,
Nor will submit unto this double yoke:
The Gordian line they will not have secluded,
Though with a wile the Senate them deluded.
31.
Old Gordians Daughter had a little boy,
Which some lift up and carry through the crowd;
His Name once known the people shout for Joy,
And him young Caesar they proclaim aloud:
The storm thus past they fall to mirth and Solace,
Mean while the two Elect marched to the Palace.
32.
Another mischief followed on the neck,
Some Soldiers that belonged to Maximine,
At Senate pressed, and had unlooked for check,
By listening how the Senate did incline:
Those that unarmed played this simple part,
Two Senators In this combustion they wore private Daggers which at other times
was not usual.
did stabb unto the h'art,
33.
The rest that were of this combined Band
To save their lives betook themselves to flight,
Then Gallican came forth with bloody hand,
Pursue, quoth he, let vengeance on them light;
Some People kill with clubs, some stare and stamp,
Some pelt with Stones and cha^e them to the Camp.
34.
The Soldiers now prepare to man their Walls,
And Gallican in Rome does raise Commotion;
On public Armories the People falls,
There Is none of them but relish well the Motion:
Some come with Swords, some Spears and Battleaxes,
And now or never think to quit their Taxes.
35.
The Soldiers skillful drive the Commons back,
And wounding some the rest seek to retreat,
Which soon perceived they mean to hold them tack,
So open their Gates and give them whole defeat;
They Actors killed and some that were spectators,
And amongst the rest were slain the Gladiators.
36.
This did the Roman Senate much enrage,
They Council call, then Arm a Gallant crew,
And Maximus with them does first Engage,
Yet Soldiers of his men great numbers slew:
Albinus sends an Edict forth in have
To make them friends, and pardon what is past.
37.
Both parties scorn to yield to this Decree,
The Commons chokt the Springs that served the Camp,
A worse devise then this there could not be;
But now the Soldiers angry cuds do champ,
Then forth they rush and fight till all retire,
And in pursuit they set great Rome on fire.
38.
To stop the flame both Rich and poor Turmoile,
Some carry hooks, some water Conduits turn,
But yet the Soldiers load themselves with spoil,
Though Innocents within the houses burn;
Thus did this raging fire without all pity,
More houses burn then would have made a City.
39.
While thus at Rome these Fatal broiles arise,
In Italy does Maximine Arive;
At Altars often he did his Sacrifice,
And hopes his presence there shall make him thrive:
How he and his adhaerents came to fare,
The Canto next ensuing will declare.
The End of the Seventh Book.
The Eighth Book.
CANTO XXI.
The ARGUMENT.
Scouts and Maximines Soldiers good Array,
Of Ema, Alps, Aquileia we define,
Crispinus next then message we display
Unto Aquileia sent by Maximine,
Crispinus speech, god Bell, Assault in vain,
The Romans prudence, Maximine is slain.
1.
When grace does want, no strength can along avail,
No Confidence in Charrets or in Horses;
Now Maximines great Boasts begin to fail,
Though he was mighty both in Bulk and Forces:
Our projects and our plots grow out of season,
When once the will prevails above our reason.
2.
Yet Gins he sets in every nook and Angle,
And pries in bottomes for the Ambuscadoes;
He casts his Legions into form Quadrangle,
To Circumvent his Enemies Bravadoes:
Himself and Guard do follow in the rear,
His Horse completely Armed with Shield and Spear.
3.
Moresco Darters, Archers of the East,
His German Horse he marshalled in the Front;
The shock at first to undergo at least,
Both grim and fierce they were to 'bide the b^unt:
By this you see it was his drift and scope,
To place Barbarians in the Forlorn Hope.
4.
In Battell-ray they marched over the Plain,
And at the City Ema did Arrive;
But all the dwellers thence to fly were fain,
As having little hope therein to thrive:
They Temples burnt with Gates and all the rest,
And no provision left for man or beast.
5.
Full glad was bulky Maximine of this,
He thought the rest for fear would make him way;
The Soldiers pincht with want yet did not miss,
But marched to the Seem to be above the Clouds, reach over all Italy from
Tirrhen Sea to the Ionia bay, now the Gulf of Veni^^.
Alps by break of day:
Then fear of Ambush made them slack their pace,
And cause they had to doubt that steepy place.
6.
But when they past the Alps without^en stop.
They Paeans sing Lauds and Hymns.
with Joy and merry cheer,
For Maximine discerned from the top
The Italians fled, possessed with Panick fear;
Success, quoth he, must needs to us redound,
Now they forsake the vantage of the ground.
7.
Aquileia The greatest City then of Italy, now Algar.
yet against them shut her Gates,
To which Panonians gave a fierce Assault;
But they (by spears and stones) with broken pates
(And Arrow shot) give back and make a halt:
When Maximine his stoutest men forsake it,
Himself makes have to try if he could take it.
8.
This City was both Populous and great,
To all the Coasts a Famous Town of Mart,
Who thither brought Commodities and Meat,
From Sea and Land by Industry or Art;
Provision thus arriving at their shore,
Besides their own Invited strangers store.
9.
The Villagers for safety thither fled,
Some to their Friends, and some to get reward,
Of multitudes thus was the City sped,
Their Gates they Close and Walls do bravely Guard;
Two Noble Consuls Crispinus, Meniphilus.
were in stead of Liege,
That made provision for a lasting siege.
10.
Both springs they had and River by their Wall
Instead of which, Thence called Aq^ilcia.
which served for great defense;
A Court of War now Maximine does call,
And message did propound to send from thence;
These men, quoth he, are Soldiers good and tall,
We therefore must infatuate their sense:
He Captains had whose children were within,
These men he sends and they their speech begin;
11.
How Maximine their Sovereign Liege and Lord
Does will them lay down Arms to live in peace, Message to the Aquiscians.

He as a Friend is ready to Accord,
Will former faults remit and give release;
Them to destroy by him is much abhorred,
From Countries ruin if they yet will cease:
He knows withal your loving Inclination,
And does believe it is others Instigation.
12.
This near the Walls was told by his Commity,
And they above do give attentive ear;
Crispinus doubting they within the City
Might open their Gates, surpised with sudden fear,
He runs about and does them all adjure,
Beseeching them with patience to endure, Crispinus Speech.

13.
And bravely for your country fight in Bar,
Against Tyrants pride and his alluring words;
Far better is the Fortune of the War
Freedom to gain by your victorious Swords:
Although they seem the stronger in your view,
Great numbers often are vanquished by few.
14.
Men fight in others quarrel with less h'art,
No Glory get yet undergoes the danger:
But each of you in this have equal part
To save your own not injuring a stranger:
Resist them bravely on these certain grounds,
For to your selves this victory redounds.
15.
Crispinus thus (of Reverend Aspect)
With Eloquence the Burgers to persuade,
That they might seem the Agents to neglect,
And Arm themselves the Tyrant to degrade;
The entrails promise fair as say their Diviners.
Sages,
Much credit give Italians to presages.
16.
Of Oracles besides they make report,
Their Patriall god some God Bell, vid. Seldom de dis Syr^^.
Bell, some call Apollo;
The Maximines.
Soldiers said they saw him often resort,
And fighting in the Sky their Troops to follow:
If this they said that they might not be To save their credit being repulst.
shent,
Once foiled the Brute was cleared by the event.
17.
The Agents thus come back without success,
And Maximine in Choler makes speed,
A River broad and deep was in excess,
The Bridges broke his cumber more to breed;
This River like their own some Germans dream
That made attempt, but perished in the stream.
18.
His Army he entrenched to shun surprise,
For want of Barge another course is taken;
To build a Bridge his Engineers devise,
With empty Casks they found in Towns forsaken:
And these to fetch away his Horsemen gallops,
Which being bound together float like shallops.
19.
This work to see himself took great delight,
So past his Army over near the City,
Out-Vines and Orchards made a gallant sight,
Which Soldiers Burnt devoid of shame or pity;
Encamping them from danger of their Borders,
He frames his Squadrons into several Orders.
20.
Assault was given after one days rest,
They shoot and sling and barter Camisadoes;
Both parts endeavor now to do their best,
On every side the Wall they make scaladoes;
Aquileians also brave resistance make,
For City, Lives, and all are at the stake.
21.
The Suburb Buildings all were haled down,
And Engines framed on the Timber work;
Now Maximine begins to rage and frown,
Such deadly feud does in his bosom lurk:
To Rome (because this City him withstood)
He will not go but through streams of blood.
22.
He and his Son young Caesar ride about,
And promises the Soldiers great reward,
Whom from the Town with stones they pelt and clout,
Nor do their numbers any thing regard:
On those that scale the Wall and pass the ditch
They from above pour down hot scalding Pitch.
23.
Their Bodies scorched, their Armor off they strip,
The Liquor scalded so without remorse,
Despoyled so they tasted of the whip,
By nimble wit more then by open Force;
They also fired their Engines and their Carts
With brands of Pitch and Rosin sharp as Darts.
24.
Both sides with equal terror fought awhile,
But soon the Soldiers to Assault are slack;
Unequal number did them first beguile,
Till thus the Town had beat them bravely back;
And Maximine that lately made such vaunts,
He and his Son are scoffed with bitter taunts.
25.
But when he saw he could not have his Will,
In rage he waxt and bristled like a Bore,
Some of his Captains he Commands to kill,
The rest ere long do mean to quit the score;
The bloody Deeds which he has done of late,
From both sides now engender equal hate.
26.
Aquileians stored were for man and Beast.
But Maximines were pinched sore with want:
They spoiled the fruits which now would be a Feast,
For all provision grew exceeding scant:
The Romans also had so blockt the way,
That Famine much increased every day.
27.
Some Nobles eke were by the Senate sent
Port-Townes to Guard, and every Neighbor Coast,
That Maximine could know how nothing went
At Rom^, where he intends to rule the Roast;
Encumb^red thus he does his Choler vent,
But this was it which him perplexed most,
He could not take the Town with all his Art,
Nor get to Rome for want of Barg and Cart.
28.
In Italy the People all conspire,
Barbarians eke in East and in the South;
The Soldiers too provoked are to Ire,
And all on him exclaim with open mouth;
Their drink was such as came from dirt and mire
They water want to satisfy their drouth:
Dead carcasses polluted had the River,
For they that lost their lives were thrown in thither.
29.
The Army now in this extreme distress,
And Maximine reposing in his Tent,
Because they saw no hope to have redress,
Some Soldiers of the Camp unto him went;
For Famine had them brought so lean and meaguer,
That they resolve to quit this pinching Leaguer.
30.
And this to do, no better way they find
Then Maximine to kill, and eke his Son,
His Guard was also privy to their mind,
Thus all agreed this happy Deed was done;
Their Carcasses exposed were to scorn,
And both their Heads forthwith to Rome were born.
31.
Their Government deserved had no less,
His Pictures now and Ensigns they do tear;
Those being dead that did them sore oppress,
Both Italy and they were void of fear:
Thus came this bloody Tyrant to his end,
That did the Roman State in pieces rend.
32.
The Army thowas struck into amaze,
All were not pleased at this their sudden Action,
Pannonians and the Thracians came apace;
Yet when they see the most were of this Faction,
To say the plot was right they thought it best,
And made a show of Joy with all the rest.
CANTO XXII.
The ARGUMENT.
News came that caused a Jubilee at Rome,
Triumphant Embassage comes next in play,
Maximus and Albinus dreadful doom,
Who first are stripped and beaten by the way*
Praetorian Soldiers did this wicked Deed,
And Gordian Caesar placed in their steed.
1.
IF good men fall we pity them at least,
Not so when Tyrants have deserved end;
Good Conscience makes up a daily Feast,
But Horror to the guilty God does send:
As Maximine so all that run his race,
Must die detested, Infamous and base.
2.
The Soldiers laying now aside their Arms,
Like men of Peace go boldly to the City*
The Tyrant dead they doubt no more Alarms,
As Friends, say they, accept of us for pity;
The Captains yet this motion do reject,
And show them Pictures of the three Elect,
3.
Adorned with Laurel Crowns in open view,
Whom they revere with Joyful Acclamations,
And wished the Soldiers to ag^ize their due,
So Roman Senate make their Proclamations:
If you expect to have our free Accords,
You must receive them for your Sovereign Lords.
4.
This said, they gave them Market on the Walls,
Which they embrace with glad and willing h'arts,
Of Wine and Bread and sustenance not small;
Aquileia stored was from several parts,
Apparel, shoes, of nothing they were scant,
This Soldiers wan regarding their own want.
5.
They saw there was no hope to bide the Siege,
But Famine rather likely to befall;
Well satisfied they were with their new Liege*
And pa^ly friendly near the City Wall:
Thus Peace and War appeared both at once,
The Gates yet shut they lodge in Camp and sconce.
6.
Thus at Of Aquileia see Plin. lib. 3. c. 18.
Aquileia while these matters past,
Some Posts to Rome were sent with Tyrants head,
With Laurels in their hands the People have,
Shouting for Joy that Maximine is dead;
And by the way the Emp'rours new elect
Were raising Force the outrage to correct.
7.
Some aid of Ancient Love the Germans sent,
Thus they a mighty Host did then prepare;
But both their heads the Messengers present,
And tell them how this Labor they may spare;
Take part with Romans now the Army me'nt, Victoria Impulverea.

And Honor those whom Senate did declare:
At this good news they make the Altars smoke
For victory got not striking once a stroke.
8.
When Maximus had done his Sacrifice,
Two Knights on Lances both the head^ do bear
Once come to Rome, the gladsome People rise,
And Jubilee Proclaim for that whole year*
None can express their (...) of Joy*
For Tyrants death that did their (...) Annoy.
9.
They cluster thick into the public Horse-race yard would contain above 200000.
Cirque,
Whole Hundred of Beeves.
Hecatombs Albinus sacrificed,
The Magistrates and Nobles went to Kirk,
They now appear that were before disguised;
For fear to lose their beads they cease to moan;
The axe that threatened theirs had lost its own.
10.
Thus Posts and Heralds sent with Laurel Brance
To every Coast and Province round about,
With Holiday at Rome they leap and Dance;
Then marches Maximus the marshes out
Ravenia A sea town belonging to Venice.
from, the Aquileians he greets,
And past the place where seven Channels Eridanus and other Rivers. See Pl^. l.
3. c. 16.
meets.
11.
The Aquileians open their gates discharged of Bands,
Prime Agents come from all the Cities round,
With Vestures Triumphant Embassy.
white, and Laurels in their hands;
Their Guardian gods with massy Gold were crowned,
These Images were bought with goods and Lands,
And now amongst the Donaries were found.
Thus Maximus they do congratulate,
And green leaves on him heap a sign A Roman Ceremony.
of state.
12.
The Soldiers also met like men of Peace,
But their submit was through Accommodation,
Their spoil and plunder being like to cease,
He being dead that served their inclination;
When Maximus had done his Sacrifice,
He to the Army spoke as was the guise:
13.
To join with Romans now the sweet you find, Maximus Speech.

A Joyful peace instead of War and hate;
Besides you save the Oath that did you bind,
The mist'ry Sacred of the Roman State;
Long may you keep these benefits in mind,
And not be moved to stir up new debate:
But give to them and us all due content,
Whom they have chose for worth and high Descent.
14.
To Empire none has Patrimoniall right,
But you and we are joint Administrators;
The City is indeed an Empress bright,
Both Peers and Commons ought to weigh these matters:
If you your selves as Liege men do contain,
We shall to you return our Care again.
15.
You flourish shall and have a happy Peace,
The Provinces about you will have truce,
All hazard of your lives and goods shall cease,
By your example all of these conduce;
We being two that undergo the load,
Shall quiet all Domestic and abroad.
16.
We shall Assistance give to one another,
Nor think revenge against you will be sought,
Both Rome and we will love you as a brother,
Perdy you did but what Commanders taught:
Let all that is past betwixt us be forgotten,
And live in League when Tyrant's dead and rotten.
17.
Thus said, he promised them a large amends
Then at Aquilea makes a short repose,
From thence he went to Rome to meet his Friend,
Part of his Army to their station goes;
The Pikemen of his Guard attend him must,
And German aids in whom he most did trust.
18.
He Nobly Governed when he had that place;
Now when he made his entry into Rome,
Albinus and young Caesar came apace,
Both Peers and Commons bid him welcome home;
Some give him gifts with due Congratulations,
Him all receive with joyful Acclamations.
19.
Thus for a while they Governed well and right,
And all the Common People were content;
But Soldiers cankred hearts were full of spite
At their Appla^^e that were of high Descent:
The Germans in their Office were not Idle,
Kept as they thought their Insolence to bridle.
20.
Their The Praetorians.
outrages confronted thus, they fear
Lest some such Train Severus erst invented
Might quite degrade them and their Bands Cashiere,
Or the Germans for that place indented;
Wherefore at Solemn Feasts This Feast kept yearly to Jove for preserving the
Capitol.
Capitoline,
Where sports and shows were graced with cates and wine,
21.
They to the Palace run in Bedlam rage,
And will the good old Emperors surprise,
Though they in all the rest were grave and sage,
'Bout Sovereign Rule to strive they were not wise:
Albinus double Consul least despaires,
And Maximus for skill in State-Affaires.
22.
For Birth and Worth 'twas hard to find a best,
And each to yield to other were as loath;
But yet their strife in this unwise contest
Was ruin and destruction to them both:
Maximus heard Praetorians were the Jury,
And sends for German Guards to stop their Fury.
23.
Although they both in danger were of Murder,
And that these Troops the Traitors might have matched,
Albinus wills they shall proceed no further,
Lest he alone should be the man dispatched;
For well he knew they Maximus Adore,
'Cause he their Province ruled so well before.
24.
Praetorians therefore he would not repress,
So uncontrouled is the hand of Fate,
But said the Germans would himself suppress,
And Maximus invest in Sovereign State:
While this Impa^iance kept them at a bay,
The Soldiers come and door keepers give way.
25.
The good old men they hale out of the Court,
And raging mad do Barb'rously entreat 'em;
They tear their cloths in most unseemly sort,
Then pull their beards and by the way do beat 'em:
If of these Crimes us any one convinces,
These are (say they) but Senatorian Princes.
26.
To the Camp they hurried them through midst of City,
Intending not to kill them in the Palace,
But torture them alive without all pity,
For greater pain, and more to show their malice;
But fearing now the Guards would pay their coats,
Who came amain, they cut the Emp'rours throats.
27.
Whom baffled thus with all kind of despite,
Their Corpse into the open way they threw,
Then held Of this Ceremony vid. Pet. Pithae adversar. l. 2. c. 6
up Gordian Caesar in their sight,
And said to him the Princely Throne is due;
We killed but those whom Commons so rejected,
And in their stead young Gordian have elected.
28.
He Nephew is to elder Gordian,
Whom they and Nobles forced to be our Prince,
You cannot say there was a better man
That ruled us long before or ever since;
So taking him to the Camp to lodge and diet,
They locked their Gates and after this were quiet.
29.
The Germans find the Massacre is ended,
And think it best to make a fair retreat,
Since what is done and past cannot be mended,
They being dead for whom they were in heat;
These Emp'rours both were Gloriously descended,
The which Praetorians thus did kill and beat:
And now young Gordian aged thirteen year,
Began his Reign and ruled the Roman Sphere.
30.
The Fate of twenty Caesar's here at full
Presented is, the rest may have the chance
To wake some other pen, for mine grows dull,
Nor can my ruder lines their Fame advance;
I told you at the first I had no skill,
Yet hope you may accept of my good will.
31.
With care they got a Crown upon their head,
And here you see how dismal were their ends
Sacrce three of them did die upon their Beds,
A warning good to me and all my Friends:
If you be pleased, for more I do not look,
In Love to you this task I undertook.
FINIS.

