AN HEROIC ELEGY Upon the most Lamented Death of that Excellent Hero Sir
Edmund Wyndham, Knight Marshal of ENGLAND.
A Wake ye dead, ye glorious Heavenly Host,
And bid your Welcomes to a new come Ghost.
A Ghost of Honor, Robbed with Christian Grace,
Who now has fought his Fight, and gained his Race;
Who has passed bravely over this Worlds great Stage,
Adorned with Crowns of Honor and of Age.
He was a man of most accomplished Parts,
The learned Master both of Arms, and Arts.
Doubly Palladian so he does poffess
The Crown of Glory and of Righteousness.
Nay, what to mortal more be added can?
He was a most unblemished honest man.
Who amongst you can boast a greater thing,
Than to have been nursing Father to a King.
And such a King who studies still to bless
These Kingdoms with a lasting Happiness.
Nay, in the fiercest heats of Wars Alarms
Did carry him in's heart, as well as Arms.
So that His Majesty's most Royal Sense
Placed Marshals Staff, where he might's Conscience.
For his Endeavors always were to bring
Great Glories to his Gracious God, and King.
Farewell good Windham then, whose virtuous Soul
Did all Rebellious Vermin here control:
Who beat long Serpents out of their round Beds,
And broke the many headed Hydra's Heads.
He was the Glory both of Sword and Gown,
And known Supporter of the Royal Crown;
Which he appeared to be in th'worst of Times,
When all this Land was laden with foul Crimes;
When all Religion too was banished hence,
And Treason passed for good Convenience:
When horrid Rebels kept their King in Awe,
And Civil Arms were cried up Common Law.
When all these Kingdoms were in mischief hurld,
He stood unmoved, the Eighth Wonder of the World:
Fixed like that Empiraeum, nor did know
Or care for Tumults of these Orbs below.
These Orbs below, I mean which still go round,
And never are quiet till they do confound.
When base Rebellion was pure Virtue made,
And ourst High Treason was become a Trade;
He like another Archimed did bring
Engines to work, to Reinthrone his King.
Those Engines sure were Angels, that he sent
To help his oppressed Prince in's Banishment.
When all was out of help, nay hopes of man,
He then advanced his Angels Guardian.
He never feared Rogues Pillage, nor spared Purse
That he might clear his Country from that Curse
Which when His Majesty well understood,
He Would have him like himself, so great, as good.
Nor could his gracious goodness make a shift,
To give this Land a more Basilick Gift,
Nay, sure his Royal Favor could afford
No greater Honor, than his Marshal's Sword:
And who could better manage it than he,
Whose Soul was the rich Sheath of Loyalty.
Who can but humbly prostrate, now adore,
So brisk a Soul, in body 'bove Fourscore;
Yet he must yield at last to cruel Death,
But for a Pause to gain immortal Breath.
Where he does now his Io Paeans sing
For his good King on Earth, to Heaven's great King.
More Comfort is, that he has left behind,
Such Noble Sons, the high Offspring of his Mind;
That you cannot choose but hope that we shall see
These Kingdoms blessed in their Posterity.
Let Hackney Poets now make haste, and run
To court the Glories of the Rising Sun;
Whilst honored Windom's Coarse, more like the Sun
Shines forth most glorious at his going down.
And so he meets in that most pompous Dress,
In the other world, the Son of Righteousness.
London, Printed An, Dom. 1680/1.


