An HEROIC POEM ON THE Observator.

-- His men's generosa moveri,
Accendique solet similem ad virtutis amorem.
Claud. LONDON: Printed by J. Streater, for H. Million, Living in St.
Pauls-Chain, Stationer. MDCLXXXV.

AN Heroic Poem ON THE OBSERVATOR.
WHen by the Justice of Divine Decree,
Great Exiled CHARLES, with God-like Majesty,
Resumed his Injured Throne; and thence once more,
Our banished Blessings Caesar did restore;
The easy Laws reclaimed the guiddy Throng,
And Halcion Years then smoothly danced along,
Such firm secureness on each Face appeared,
The Sword of Justice was more Loved then feared,
'Twas now, that all the fierce Grandees of Hell,
(Enraged to see their late raised Machin fell)
Issued new Summons to their aged States,
To frame fresh Projects by their black Debates,
And once again by their Infernal Wile,
Ransack the Glories of our happy Isle;
Long this Divan, in consult brooding Sat,
To hatch the Embri'o of malicious Fate;
At length each Fury had his Charge apart,
And dismal Scheamst' assist their powerful Dart:
The Work began; and the Invading Host,
Wrapped in dark Mists approach't the Brittish-Coast;
Whose Guardian Angel, soon with watchful Eyes,
Descried the Intent of such a base Surprise.
With quick expanded wings from Heaven fled,
And darting came to good L'ESTRANGE'S Bed.
That LOYAL BARD who was alone thought fit,
To stem the Torrent of a Devil's Wit,
Whilst the bright Messinger his head sustained,
His buissy Fancy thus he entertained.
Thou best of Subjects, to the best of Kings;
Hear now the Tidings, that an Angle brings;
A Band of Feinds, from the Abiss are sent,
To raise new Feuds from long hid Discontent.
Though Princely Grace, has seemed to quench the Rage,
Which late has stained the Anuals of your Age:
The Embers yet, fanned by this Hellish Crew,
In rapid Flames will soon break forth a new.
Rise then and stop the progress of the Foe,
Kind Heaven has chose you to divert the blow;
With that his balmy Plumes extending forth,
He kindly grasp't so true entrinsick Worth:
Then touched his Tongue with a Celestial Dew,
Blessed the Event, and swiftly upwards flew;
Soon the good Man awoke, and pond'ring weighed
The deep impressions, which the Vision made;
Not Unobserved before, by his Dread Pen,
Had escaped Remarques of base ungrateful Men;
He saw the Tracts in which they warely crep't,
He saw't (and for their desperate Folly wep't)
He saw the Gloss of every weak Pretense
Drawn forth to shroud the Bulk of their Offense,
And blind the Peoples Rash Unthinking Sense.
Strait then he rose, and with Profectick Skill
Sure to disperse the gathered boading Ill,
Fled to his Prince with quick and zealous Care,
And thus employed his Royal Master's Ear.
Heaven Bless the KING --
Still lives the Seed of that Gigantick Race,
That did attempt the Godhead to displace,
Their impious hands, but late they did imbrew
In Royal Martyr's Blood, and now pursue,
Their brutish Rage, against Indulging YOU.
Strange is the guilt of that pernicious mind,
That dares conspire against a Prince so kind.
With feigned Chimeras they amuse the Throne,
And seem to watch what they assault alone.
A guarding shield is reached in friendly show,
By the same Hand that means to give the Blow;
Trust not the Service of Phanatick-zeal,
The worst of Crimes, draws a Religious Veil.
This said: The Monarch with a smiling Look,
Close to his Bosom the Great Prophet took.
Told him with Grateful thanks, he did approve,
The apparent Candor, of his Active Love,
Bad him prepare to countermine that Spite,
That Is laid to spring the Bulwark of his Right,
That on his Judgment, he did most rely,
Best to defeat the daring Enemy;
Bad him make known, the Cheat of Clamorous Fears,
And Charm the deafness of deluded Ears.
When thus L'ESTRENGE, had his Commission given,
(The King confirming the assigned of Heaven)
Entered the Lists, and Boldly did Oppose,
The joint Attaque of all his Monarchs Foes.
Convincing Reason, was his Gorgen-sheild,
And steadfast LOYALTY this Champions Field.
With Vollies of his Wit, their Phalanx Rent,
And Dagon fell with Potent Argument
Let Us now erect a Due Triumphal Arch,
Whilst Troops of Flamens shall attend his March,
And then Ye Muses all in consort join,
Thus whilst we pay, our Offerings at his Shrine.
HAIL Matchless HE! HAIL our Auspicious Guide,
The Clergy's Darling, and the States-men's Pride;
The happy Patriot, whose industrious Care,
Has quel'd that Storm, which boundless did Appear,
That never was a Calm 'till now, or means more dear.
When Faction did like a Contagion spread,
On you the Nation leaned it is drooping Head,
Who next the Throne, such Sovereign deeds did do,
An age of Miracles revived in You,
From You i'ts Peace, must Gratfull England date,
Bles't Esculapius of the salved State,
Who wrought that Cure, which seem opposed by Fate.
In vain would Rebels Piously disguise,
Their black Designs or longer cheat our eyes,
Their gilded Cavils, now false Lights are known,
And all their Specious Pop'lar Shams o're-thrown,
Whilst your profounder reasons gain these odds,
Like Arons swallowing up the Egiptians Rods.
HAIL OBSERVATOR! Genius of our Age,
That stood the shock, of the Phanatick Rage,
Like Oedipus so Sacred now to all,
You saved your Country, with these Sphynxes Fall,
Who veiw your Conquests, with dispairing Eyes,
To see us flourish, and You gain the Prize,
Yet Eney't self, must give you this applause,
Never was better Pen, or better Cause.
HAIL once more our Palladium of defense,
Great Oracle of Wit and Eloquence,
The truly fit to speak a Nations sense.
Our English Tully who has still prevailed,
Your Pen succeeded where the Sword has failed;
Your Weighty Lines still such Impressions took,
Not more the Voice, which from Mount Sinai spoke:
When stubborn Jews upon their Faces fell,
Submitting straight, who did before Rebel.
Hence seem the Furies now of discord fled,
Whilst you appear a Cherub at our Head;
This does security to our Peace afford,
Your Wits as dreadful as the Flaming Sword.
FINIS.

