THE FIRST PART OF THE PRINCIPLES OF THE ART MILITARY, Practiced in the Wars
of the United Netherlands, under the Command of his Highness the PRINCE Of
ORANGE our Captain General.

For so much as concerns the duties of a Soldier, and the Officers of a
Company of Foot, as also of a troop of Horse, and the exercising of them
through their several Motions.

REPRESENTED BY FIGVRE THE WORD OF COMMAND AND DEMONSTRATION.

Composed by Captain HENRY HEXHAM, Quartermaster to the Honorable Colonel
GORING.

The Horse is prepared against the day of Battle, But safety is of the Lord,

Prover. 21. 31. The second Edition newly corrected and amended.

Printed at DELF in HOLLAND, for the lovers of the noble ART MILITARY. ANNO
1642.

Cum Privilegio.

TO THE JLLUSTRIOUS WILLIAM. By the grace of God, borne Prince of Orange, Earl
of Nassau etc. Marquis of Veere and Vlissing etc. Baron of Breda. AND Lord
General of the Cavallrie, in the service of the high, and mighty Lords, the
STATES GENERAEL of the United Provinces.
JLLVSTRIOVS AND NOBLE PRINCE,
AMong the many Arts professed in the World, the Art Military practiced in our
modern Wars of these United Provinces, (the Nurcerie of the Milita) ought
not to be accounted the least: for what magnanimous, brave vailliant Generals,
Chieftaines, Commandours and Soldiers of all nations have bin bred, and
brought up in this Academia, and Sede belli is sufficiently known to the
World, and what honorable Actions, and memorable services they have done and
performed, returning victorious out of the Field, I leave to the testimony of
History. Especially, the Almighty God, the Lord of Hoasts has so blessed your
generous House, as namely, your grandfather Prince William, your uncle Prince
Maurice, both of immortal memory, and now your victorious Father, Prince
Fredrick Henry our Captain General, as instruments for the defense of his
afflicted Church, the true protestant Religion, and for the maintenance of the
Privileges, and freedoms of the Land and has crowned them with an never-dying
name, against the violence plotts and subtle machinations of one of the
mightiest Potentates of all Christendom. What glorious actions the Almighty
God has wrought by them, for the deliverance of his Church and people in this
Land the Historigraphers of our times strive as with Trumpets to sound forth
their fame. For if we cast our eyes backward to times past, and the beginnings
of our Wars, when this State consisted but in a handful of people, and a few
Towns and were in great distress, and compare it with the State of the Land
as it is now, we must acknowledge how wonder-fully God has blessed, and
protected these Countries against all the Tyranny, and treachery of the Duke
of Alva, the Bishop Granvelle, and diverse other Spanish Gouvernours, and that
he by his out stretched Arm, has extenpsed the Limits, and bounds of these
United Provinces, even (as it were) from the Sunne-rysing, to the Sun
setting, and what has all the Peruvian Gold, and the Topazan Silver availed
them, we may therefore truly say with the Apostle, If God be with us, who
can be against us.

Again, if we consider what God has done for this Land of later years, it
is a wonder in our eyes how remarkeably and with what good success he has
blessed the able Conduct, and dessignes of his highness your Father: for in
the beginning of his Generallship did he not take in Groll, and Oldenzeel, and
that heauen-blessed Surprisall of Wesel, even when the Ennemy was entered almost
into the bowels of this Country and just at that time, when his highness was
engaged so deeply at the Seige of the Bosch, and carried that invincible
town, against the expectation of all men? The year after Rhyenbergh, and then
became master of the strong town of Mastricht, and took it before the noses of
two great armies, which lay between us and home, then his and your own city
of Breda, within seven weeks and a day, after we putt spade into the Earth,
and brake ground toward it, whereas Marquis Spinola lay almost a whole year
before it. And last of all the strong Castle and House of Gennep, which did so
much annoy these Countries; These victories and Lawrils I have briesly related,
to refresh your highness memory withal, and to the end, that we may give
the glory and praise unto God for them.

As for my self, J have seen these things, and have served this Land two and
forty years, and learned some experience in these Wars, which made me take
penn in hand, to writ the Principles of the Art Military, practiced in these
Wars, first under the Conduct of your Uncle Prince Maurice of blessed
memory, as now also under your victorious Father for the instruction of such
English Gentlemen, and Soldiers, who are willing to come into the States
service, and for the informing of their Judgments the better, and with a great
deal of labor, charg, and pains have represented this noble art by the way
of Figure, the word of Command and demonstration, and having once shown one
of my three parts to his highness your Father, it pleased him in your presence
to give me encouragement, to turn my English books into Netherdutch. In
obedience whereof, I translated my first part for the exercising of a foot
Company, and a troop of Horse (and God willing intend to do the other two
parts in time) and dedicated it to your highness, And now the wars of my
native Country and Jreland which the Almighty compose, calling for them
again, as I dedicated my first part unto your highness in Dutch: so now I
most humbly beseech your highness, that under your gracious acceptance and
patronage this second Edition may come again to the view of the World in my
maternall tongue, both in these Countries and in England, and I shallbe bound
not only to pray unto God for you and her highness Royal your dearest
consort to bless you being our future Hopes next under God hereafter, and a
sprigg sprung from that noble house of Nassaw, to give you the like success
and victory over our Ennemies as he has done to your predecessors: but also
to crown you, and her highness Royal with everlasting felicity hereafter
resting.

Your highnesses humble and submissiue servant, HENRY HEXHAM.

THE OFFICERS AND DVTIES BELONGING TO A FOOT COMPAGNIE THROVGH ALL THEIR
degrees, from a private Soldier to a Captain as follows, And first.
Of a Centinell, or a private Soldier.
A Centinell or a private Soldier ought to uuderstand well his duty, to come
to his squadron, or company at seasonable times, at the drums beating, or
otherwise, or when they are to draw in arms, and to set the paradoe. To be
very vigilent, and careful upon his centinell-ship, and to have as many eyes
about him as Argus had, suffering no man in the night to pass without crying
Qui vala and calling his Corporal to take the word, un less he be commanded
to come in silently. He must also take delight in the handling, and use of his
arms and see that he keeps them fix, neat, and clean, and go handsomely
in his clothes. He must play the good husband, and menage well that little
means he has.

In marching or standing, he must have a singular care to keep his rank and
file, and not to stir out of it (without command) yea if he were sure to kill
an enemy: he ought also in fight, and in the day of battle, to hearken well
to his officers command, that when his officer may fall, or cannot be heard in
a charge: he may be acquainted with the sound of the drum, when it beats a
march, a charge, or a tetreate. He must not be given to sharking, and
oppression, but as Saint John Baptist teaches us in the Gospel, Luke 3. 14.
to do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be content with his
wages, he must be no Drunkard, whoremaster, or thief, knowing how honorable
his profession is, and how dear his reputation should be unto him; but ought
rather to arm himsele with these christian virtues, the fear of God, praying
morning and evening, and with Moses, to number his days that he may apply his
heart to wisdom, he should of all men be prepared to welcome death, seeing
that a bullet in a moment, may send him from earth to heaven. Morever, he must
be diligent, active, sober, patient, courageous, discrete, and courteous.
Careful nesse and labor will exercise him, and fortitude, with valor will
teach him to execute, and suffer patiently all fategations of the war.

To conclude, I would have a gentleman, and a soldier ambitions of his
preferment, and advancement: knowing how many brave Generals, and commanders,
even from private soldiers (passing through all the degrees, and offices of a
soldier) have raised their advancement, thinking that he may also come to the
like height of honor, withal remembering how many worthies, Emperors, Kings,
Princes, Dukes, Earls, Nobles, and gentlemen have been of this honorable
profession, and what Heroic, and brave actions they have performed, how many
brave Battles they have fought and what victoires they have gained, leaving in
history Traphes of their memorable actions, to eternize their everliving memory
to posterity.

Of a Gentleman of a Company.
IN a company of foot, there are also Gentlemen, especially in a Generals, or
Coronels company, they ought to have many brave gentlemen of quality, valiant,
and capable of perferment, when the General, or coronel shall find them
worthy, and deserving.

The first duty then required in a gentleman, or private soldier is obedience,
as appeared by the Centurion, in his answer to our Savior in the holy Gospel,
which teaches us obedience, saying, I am a man under authority having
soldiers under me, and I say to this man go, and he goes, and to another
come, and he comes, and to my servant do this, and he does it, Math. 8. 9.
For without this a whole army is worth nothing, and to this virtue also, he
must join love, and respect to his Captain, and superior commandour.

A Gentleman's duty at his first entrance into the profession of a soldier,
following a Generals, or coronels company, is to stand centinell for a month,
to learn the first degree of a soldier, that he may be the better able to
command others, when he is advanced. In places of danger, either in the field,
or approaches he is to lie perdu, with his pistol, and sword, and not to budge
from his place, till he be relieved: not to retreat for one man, but in case
of more, then to fall back to the fecond, and discovering an enemy coming off
betimes and silently, he must give the Alarm so, that the Corpse de guard, or
company may be provided to defend them selves.

A Gentleman also is to go the Round with the captain of the watch, or his
fellow-gentlemen, either in field or in garrison, to give the corporal of the
guard the word, and to charge the centinells to look well about them.

Of a Barbier Chirurgian to a Company.
THere ought to be in a Company, a good Barber Chirurgian, both to trime the
soldiers, and to have skill in Chirurgerie, that when the company watches in
approaches, and guards, where there is danger, he may be at hand (in the
absence of the Chirurgian of the Regiment) to bind up and dress hurt, and
wounded men, in doing there of, he is to be free from all other duties,
belonging to the company, seeing he is an officer allowed in the States list.

Of the Clarke of a Company.
THe Clarke of a Company ought to be an honest, and a sufficient man, whom his
Captain may entrust for the fetching of his months pay, and the due and
seasonable payment of the company: his duty is to keep the muster-roule, to
have it upon all occasions in a readiness, to enter his men, both into his
muster-roule, and pay bill, to receive the service money of the Company, to see
the soldiers or their hostises where they lie duly paid it, and to deliver up
every pay-day, a true pay bill unto his Captain, or chief officer.

Of a Drum Majour.
Every Regiment ought to have a Drumme-Majour, to whom when it is watch time,
the other Drums are to repair, there to beat a call, and to march with his
Company that is appointed for the guard. A Drum-majour ought to be a grave man,
able to instruct the other Drums to beat a true march, and other points of
war, to see the Drums that beat upon a march to be duly relieved, and also
to speak diverse tongues, and to be wise, and cautelous what he shall speak
to an Enemy.

Of the Drummers.
EVery company also ought to have two good Drummers, that knows how to beat
a call, a slow, or a swift march well, a charge, a retreat, and a Reveille: He
should also be a linguist, because oftentimes he may be sent unto the enemy,
for the ransoming of prisoners, his duty is coming to the camp, or garrison of
an enemy, having his Generals pass in his hat, to beat a call, till he is
fetched in, and because he shall not discover the weakness of guards, works,
or trenches, he is led blindfold, and so carried to the Commander, and place
where his prisoners are, with whom after he has ransommed them, he is to
return to the camp, or garrison.

Of a Gentleman of the Arms.
THe next in degree is the Gentleman of the Arms, who ought to be the eldest
gentleman of a company, whose charge is to look diligently to the arms, of
the company, to mark and figure them, and to keep a list what number, and
figure every soldier has upon his Arms, to cause the soldiers to keep
their arms neat and clean, and if any thing be amiss, or broken, to bring
them to the Armorers to be repaired, and if any soldier have his pasport, be
sick, dead, or run away, himsefe, or the corporal is to bring up his arms to
his lodging, least they be lost, and to keep them clean, till he delivers
them to some soldier newly entertained. Moreover, he is to visit the gards, to
see that their arms be in good trime, to keep the powder, bullets, and match,
and to deliver them out to the corporalls and Lanspersadoes.

In diverse companies, especially in great garrisons, there is a corporal of the
Gentlemen, who is to acquaint them in the field, when they are to lie perdues,
and in garrison to call them out in the round-house, to go the round according
to their sennority.

Of a Corporal.
EVery company is divided into three squadrons, and every squadron has his
Corporal and Lanspresado, he is the head of the squadron, and ought to be an
honest and able man, and sufficient to discharge his duty, sober, modest, and
peaceable. He is first to have a squadron roll of all the gentlemen, and
Sentinels names of his squadron, and when any new soldiers are entertained, he
is to instruct them in the use of their arms, and must not suffer the old
soldiers to mock, or geere the younger, if they do not their postures as they
ought: seeing that every man in every science, and profession must have a time
of learning, before he can be perfect: and if he does not well he must go over
and over again with them patiently, until such time, as he has made him a
good muskettier, or pike-man, for which he shall get commendations of his
captain, and his officers.

In marching either in his squadron, or company the eldest Corporal is to lead
the right hand file of the musketeers, the second corporal the left hand
file, and the third in the midst of the devision.

Being with his squadron upon his guard, he is to provide them wood, coals,
and candle light, to keep a continual fire day and night.

Having an outguard, he shall do his best endeavor to strenghten as much as
in him lies, his little corpse de guard, and set out his sentinels according to
the avenues, or commings on of the enemy: for the cutting off of a centinell,
and the surprising of a corpse of guard, is of a great imporrance, and may
endanger sometimes the overthrow of an Army. And therefore it behooves a
corporal to be very careful and vigilant, and to visit his sentinels often,
to give them charge to look well about them, to relieve them duly, and not to
suffer them to stand to long, especially in cold weather.

His duty also is not to forget the word, but to imprint it in his memory, when
the Captain of the watch goes the first round, he shall with his sword drawn
against his breast give it him, and so receive such orders from him as he shall
command him. And afterward when the round comes again, he shall cause the
rounder, or gentleman with his sword drawn to give him the word, before he let
him pass, and if upon his guard, himself, or his centinells should hear,
see, or discover any men, or light-matches, to have his men in readiness with
bullets in their muskets, and their matches lighted, and to come in silently to
give his superior officers inteligence thereof, that they be provided before
the alarm be given, to resist an enemy, and to defend the guard. To conclude,
he is to distribute powder, bullets, and match out of his squadron, and to have
a care, that they keep their arms neat and clean. And not suffer the holy
name of God to be profaned, or taken in vain upon his guard.

Of a Sarjant.
NExt unto the three chief officers of a company above mentioned, follows the
Sarjants of a company, where of there are two to a private company, and three to
a Colonels or a double company. The word Sarjant is borrowed from the French,
and signifies a charge-bearer. A Sarjant then should be a man of experience,
stirring, and vigilant, and to have these three qualities, a wise man, a man of
spirit, and a man of courage, for a good Sarjant is a great help to his
captain, and other officers, in helping to execute their commands. He must be
also able, and sufficient to teach the soldiers the true and perfect use of
their arms, his duty is to march upon the flank of the company or devision,
to see that the soldiers keeps their ranks and files, and in the field or in
garrison to lead the squadron to their guard, to carry to prison with his
halbert (the sign of his authority) such offenders, as his captain or
superior officer shall commit to the Provost marshall. In excercising of the
company the Sarjants places are upon the right and left flanks, to look that
the soldiers stand right in their files and ranks, and to see that they
perform the terms of direction in every motion given by the Captain in the
front, to cause the musketeers to make ready by ranks and to lead them up to
the place where they are to give fire. Moreover his duty is to attend on the
Sarj'. maiour of the regiment, when he is to give out orders, and from him to
receive the word, and other orders, to give it to his captain, lieutenant,
ensign, and corporal, to fetch ammunition, powder, and match, and other
materials for the company, also to set out perdues, and see them duly
relieved, and thus much of the duty of a Sarjant.

Of an Ensign.
AN ensign ought to be a generous, able young man, above all things to be
careful of his honor, and reputation, and not to meddle with the company, but
only his colors, which is recommended to his charge, neither to command any
thing to the soldiers, unless in the absence of his Captain, and Lieutenant,
having then full power, and command over them and to lead in the head of the
company, with a Corslet and Pike. He ought to be beloved of all the gentlemen,
and soldiers of the company, and to be kind, affable, and liberal unto them
and to do them all courteous offices to their Captain, which will gain their
love and affection toward him.

His place marching in a devision, or battaille (unless it be a Generals or a
Coronells Ensign) is to march between the third, and fourth rank of the
pikes, and when the General, or some Prince passes by in marching, he is to
veil his colors, and if standing, to step up into the Front to do the like
reverence, without moving of his hat. He ought to have a singular care, that
his colors be guarded, as well to his lodging, as in other places.

Also in the day of battle, seeing he carries the honor, and Ensign of his
country, rather then to loose them, he ought to make them his winding sheet,
and in the company, or in a body or devision, he is to march with gravity, and
modesty, and thus much of an Ensign,

Of a Lieutenant.
FIrst, it may be demanded, why a Lieutenant is so called, and the reason
wherefore this name is given him. A Lieutenant then is a French word compounded
of Lieu a place, and tenant the participle of the present tense, which
signifies in English, holding, or keeping, from whence he takes his name, and
is as much, as if one should say, a Lieutenant is he, which holds up, and
supplieth the place of his Captain or Governor. He is also called in the
Germane tongue Lieutenampt, which is as much to say, as having the charge, or
office over men: because that in the absence of his superior, or his captain,
his office, and quality imports as much, as if the Governor, or captain
were present himself, and therefore Lieutenant, being a name rightly imposed
upon him, he is to take care, order, and govern the company, and ought to be
honored, obeyed, and respected, as if the captain himself were present.
Hence it is also that a King has his Viceroy, a Prince his Administratour, a
Potentate his Marshall, or Chancellor, a Lord his steward, and a Coronell, or
Governor, his Lieutenant Coronell, or Lieutenant Governor.

A Lieutenant then must be an able, and sufficient man, capable of his charge,
and experienced in the wars, understanding the duty of a Captain, because he
is to execute it in his absence, and to be an ease unto him.

He is to receive all orders, charges, and commissions from his captain,
assuming no authority to himself, unless in the absence of his captain: for
it is certain that every military charge, ought to go by order, and to be
received from his superior Commander.

When it is required, he is to give his captain wise counsel, and to advise,
and consult with him for the good of the company, especially in the time of
action, and in matters of importance.

He ought also by his command to appease quarrels, between soldier, and
soldier, not to be partial, or favor one man more then another, for it is a
point of justice, to compose a quarrel, and to give satisfaction to the party
interressed, in so doing, he shall support his command and gain himself
reputation. But in a matter of importance he ought to acquaint his captain
therewith, that he may punish the offender, by committing him eitheir to
prison, or causing him to give satisfaction to the gentleman or soldier
wronged, and that for the avoiding of bloodshed.

A Lieutenant also must know how far his authority extends in the presence of
his captain, and that his captains honor and reputation ought to be as
tender and as dear unto him as his own.

In his captains absence, he is to govern the company well, to take care that
it be duly exercised, to command the inferior officers, as the sarjants, and
corporals to do their duties, to make them teach the soldiers the perfect use
of their arms, that when they shall come to be excercised by his capt, or
himself, they may be in a readiness.

When his captain excerciseth his company himself, his place is then in the
Reere of the company, to see that the words of command, which is given by his
captain in the Front, be duly performed, and executed by the soldiers in the
rear: likewise in marching his captain being present, he is to bring up the
reere of the company, and in his absence to lead it, in the Front to the gards,
and paradoe, and to see that every soldier do their duty upon their guards,
and thus much briefly for a Lieutenant.

Of a Captain.
EVery company has a Head, (to wit,) a Captain, who in the Allmaine tongue is
rightly called a Haupiman, a head man from the word Haupt, which signifies a
Head, and from the Latin word caput, from whence the name of a Captain is
derived in French, English and Dutch. For, as the Head is the principal member
that governes* and rules the body, and unto which all the other members are
subordinate; so likewise the officers, and soldiers of a company ought to
govern, and carry themselves, according to the charge, and command of their
Captain.

A Captain then having so honorable a place, as to be the chief of a company
ought to be very capable of his charge, and as he ought to carry himself with
austerity, and gravity in the point of his command, that he may be obeyed,
feared, and respected of his soldiers; so should he also carry himself
toward them, as a loving, and kind father (seeing they must live and die
together) in paying them duly, in helping, and relieving them in their wants,
nesessities, and sicknesses, neither must he be given to coveteousnesse in
keeping back from them, that which is their due.

And as he is to love, countenance, and to make much of such soldiers of his
company, as carry themselves bravely and stoutly in the face of their enemy,
which deserve well, seeking by all means to advance such, it will give
encouragement to others to do the like: so ought he also to punish vice
severely, quarrellers, and offenders, for the good and example of others.

A Captain should also be religious, loyal to his Prince and country that he
serves, just, temperate, liberal, wise and discreet, valliant in the field
before the face of his enemy: valliant in towns and forts besieged, and for
his honor, never to give consent in yielding up any place, till it be past
relief, and that there is no possibility to hold it out any longer.

A Captain also ought to instruct, and inform his soldiers in the point of
their duties, to train them up, and to exercise them well in the use of their
arms, as well himself as the officers that are under him, and to see that they
readily obey, and execute his commands, which is the life of war, and one of
the principal things, required both in a Captain and a soldier.

The scale. The arming of a pikeman 2 The arming if a muskettier



NEXT Follows the Postures of the Pike, and Musket, represented by figure,
having the word of command under every of them, with brief observations on the
first page, answering to the number of every figure.
THe postures of the Pike may be done, either standing or marching. In marching
(as well as in standing) a pike-man may advance, shoulder, or charge his Pike,
either to the Front; to the Reere, to the right, or left flank, according to
the term of direction given him by his officer.

The postures likewise of a muskettier are also done, either marching, or
standing, by himself, or in his squadron, company, or division.

A good muskettier that is ready, and well made by his officer, will fall
naturally and gracefully to the doing of his postures, and will take delight in
handling of his Musket, avoiding antique, and dancing postures, which hertofore
have been taught by some officers, but now is grown ridiculous, not beseeming
and becoming the grave comportment, and carriage of a Soldier.

A Captain then, having a commission given him to raise a company, ought to
make choice of the taller, and abler men for his pikes, and of the shorter,
stronger, and well set with good legs, for his musketteires: yea, such as may
be able to endure both hardship, and labor. And thus much as a short preamble
by the way, before we come to show the figures of the postures them selves.

Brief observations upon the postures of the Pike, answering to the number of
every figure following.
1 SEt the but end of your Pike near your right foot on the outside, holding
it right up in your right hand, about the height of your eye, and your arm a
little bending, and your right foot forward.

2 With the right hand alone bring your Pike just before your body, bearing it
directly right up, raising the but end from the ground, then take the Pike with
your left hand about the height of your gridle,

3 Forsake the Pike with your right hand, and with the left hand alone raise up
the Pike, that the But end be about the height of your thigh, then take the But
end in your right hand, without stooping to it.

4 Forsake the pike with the left hand, and with your right hand alone carry
the pike right up locking the pike between your shoulder and arm, your right
hand holding the but end of the pike, about the height of your hip.

5 Sink your right hand a little, and with your left hand take the pike, as high
as well you can reach, and bring the pike just before your body.

6 Forsake the pike with your right hand, and bring down the pike in your left
hand, that the but end be near unto the ground, then with your right hand take
the pike about the height of your head.

7 Forsake the pike with your left hand, and with the right hand only set the
but end on the ground, on the out side of your right foot, as in the third
posture.

8 Bring the pike just before your body, and raise the but end from the ground,
bearing it forward, then take it with your left hand a little beneath your
right.

9 Bring forward the pike with your left hand, and take it in your right,
reaching backward as far as well you may.

10 Forsake your pike with your left hand, and with the right only lay it upon
your right shoulder, bearing the but end about a foot from the ground, holding
your thumb under the pike, the better to govern it, carrying the pike forward.

11 Bear your right hand with the pike backward, as far as well you can, with
your left hand take the pike forward, and with the right bear the pike upward.

12 Forsaking the pike with the right hand, cast the point forward, that the
but end may conveniently be taken in the right hand.

13 Take the but end of the pike in your right hand, holding it about your hip,
and raising the pike with your left hand about the hight of your breast, carry
the pike directly before you, your left foot tward.

14 Raise the right hand and stretch it backward, your left hand being at your
breast, your left elbow against your hip.

15 Bear down the but end of the pike with your right hand, and raise the
pike with the left, and so advance, as in the sixth figure.

16 Sink your right hand, and with your left take the pike as high as well you
may reach, brining the pike just before your body.



17 Forsake the but end with your right hand, bearing forward your Pike in the
left hand, and take the pike backward in the right hand, as far as well you
may reach.

18 Forsake the Pike with your left hand, and with your right only lay it upon
your shoulder, or as in the twelfth figure.

19 Bear the pike with your right hand backward, take it forward in your left
hand as you may conveniently reach, bearing the pike with your right hand
upward.

20 Forsaking the pike with your right hand, bear it over your head, and at
the same instant turn your body to the left hand, that you may conveniently
take the but end of the pike in your right hand.

21 Having the but end of your pike in your right hand, stretch your right arm
backward, and set your left hand at your breast, etc, as in the sixteenth
figure.

22 Slip your left hand forward as far as well you may, and lift the pike
upwards to your head, and with the right hand bear the but end some what
downward.

23 Forsaking the but end of the Pike with your right hand, bear up the pike
over your head with your left hand only, at that instant turn your face to
the right hand, and be ready with your right hand to take the Pike more
backward.

24 Having the pike in the right hand, forsake it with your left, and with the
right hand only lay it upon your shoulder, as in the 12 and 20 figure.

35 This is to be done in three motions, as the contrary is shown in the
ninth, tenth eleventh figures. Bear the pike with the right hand backward,
with your left take it forward, bearing the but end downward, then slip down
your right hand a little above your left, and set the but end on the ground, as
in the ninth figure.

26 This is to be done by several palming postures, with the right hand bear
the but end of the pike backward, as far as you can, and continue palming
till you come to the head of your pike.

27 With yout left hand hold the pike a little below the head, your right hand
more backward, as far as the cheeks, or arming reach, set your right hand
upon your hip, your elbow stretch forth, and your left hand more forward
before your breast.

28 Remove your right hand to your left, and in your right hand only carry
your pike, your hand being upon your hip.

29 This is to be done by several palming posturs backward, bringing forward
your right hand as far as well you can, and with the left hand gripe the pike
backward as far as you can.

30 Forsake the pike with your right hand, bring forward the pike with the
left, and take it backward with the right, and so continue palming, until you
have the but end of the pike in your right hand.

31 Stretch your right arm backward with the pike in your hand, your left hand
at your breast, and your elbow upon your hip, as in the sixteenth figure.

32 This is to be done in three motions, first bearing the pike right up before
the body, and so forward as from the advance in the 6, 7 and 8 figures, only
you must observe to set the but end of the pike at the inside of the right
foot, which is your close order.

33 The but end of the pike resting against your right foot, take it in your
left hand, abouthe heigh of your gridle, and step forward with your left foot,
the knee bent, lay your left arm, upon your knee couching down low, and draw
your sword over your left arm.

34 Raise your body right up, set your pike against your right shoulder with
the left hand, the but end being still upon the ground, then put up your sword.



Brief observations upon the postures of the Musket, answering to the number
of every figure on the other page.
1 THis figure shows a muskettier marching with his musket on his left
shoulder aslope holding the but end of it with his left hand, and his match
between the two lesser fingers, with his rest in his right hand, and his right
leg before.

2 How he carries his musket shouldred with the rest cross, close to the
inside of his musket his match between his two fingers, holding his thumb
upward to the forke of the rest, and his right leg before.

3 Draw the right leg to your left, and withal sink your musket, and then slip
your rest, griping it with your right hand between the brich and the thumb-hole,

4 Hold the musket upright, in your right hand, and on your side, raise your
left hand to the forke of your musket, and set your thumb against the Forke.

5 Sink your right hand, and gripe the musket fast in your left hand, with your
rest on the out side, holding your thumb hard against the care of your Fork, to
lock the rest fast to your musket in your left hand, that you may have the use
of your right hand, to do the posturs following.

6 Take your match from between your little finger, with your thumb, and the
second finger of your right hand, being turned with the palm from you.

7 Bring the right hand with the match backward, and your left hand with the
musket and rest forward, turning your face a little backward, and blow of your
match with a good blast.

8. Holding your match between your thumb and second finger, then bring it to
the cock, and press it into the cock with your thumb.

9 Your thumb and finger being upon the cock, and your second and third finger
under the cock, pull the cock down to the pan, and with your thumb and middle
finger, either raise or sink it, that it may fall right into the pan.

10 Lay the two fore fingers of your right hand upon your pan, the thumb behind
the schutchin of the pan, the easier to lift up the musket, and so bringing up
the musket with both hands toward your mouth and yet not stooping, blow again
your coal.

11 Open yonr pan with your two fingers, and withal bring back your right
hand to the thumbe-hole of your musket, your second finger to the tricker, and
with your left hand fix the forke of the rest to your musket, your thumb
against the forke, and set the pick end of the rest upon the ground.

12 Lie on, and lift up your right elbow, bringing the but end of your musket
with in your shoulder, near your breast, winding your shonlder to it, holding
it fast from recoiling, presenting a fair body, the small end appeareing a
little above your shoulder, having the left leg before, bending a little
with the knee, and resting stiff upon your right leg, take your mark breast
high.

13 First, sink the but end of your musket, and with the rest bring it to your
right side: then stepp forward with your right leg, and carrying your musket
in your left hand, fall away.

14 Take the match out of the cock with the thumb, and second finger of your
right hand, holding the musket and rest in the left hand only.

15 Return the match between the two lesser fingers of your left hand, from
whence you had it.

16 Bring up the musket with the left hand only toward your mouth, and
withal, blow your pan stiffely, not stooping with your head, in the mean time
take your touch box in your right hand, as this figure shows.



17 Hold your touch-boxe between the thumb, and forefinger of the right hand
only and so prime as shows the figure.

18 Lay the right thumb over the barrel near the pan, and with your two
fore-most fingers shut the pan.

19 Hold your musket fast with the right hand at the breech, the left as
before, turning the pan downwards, that the loose powder may fall off.

20 Hold your musket in both hands as before, heave it up toward your mouth,
not stooping blow off the loose dust, or corns.

21 Hold your musket in both hands as before, bear it upright toward your
left side, and with all step forward with your left leg, then holding the
musket only in the right hand at the breech forsaken your rest.

22 Having forsake your rest, take the musket into your left hand, about the
middle of the barrel, so as the but end touch not the ground, trailing your
rest between your musket, and your body.

23 Take your charg in your right hand, with the thum, band fore finger there
of, thrust of the cover.

24 Draw back your left hand with the musket, as far as conveniently you can,
and with your right hand put powder in to the boore of the barrel, holding the
charge between your thumb and forefinger only, as this figure shows.

25 Take your bullet forth of your bag, or out of your mouth, and then put it
into the muzzell of your musket.

26 With your right hand turning the palm from you, draw forth your scouring
stick, bearing your body, and your left hand with your musket, so far back
as you can.

27 Having drawn forth your scouring-sticke, set the rammer head against your
breast, and slip your hand closse to your rammer, that you may the easier put it
into the muzzel of your musket.

28 After your bullet, least it should fall out again, either in skirmishing,
or upon a slooping trench, put in some Hearts hair, or some other stopping, and
then with your scouring-sticke ram home your powder, bullet, and stopping
twice or thrice.

29 With your right hand turned, draw your scouring stick out of your musket,
as before.

30 Your scouring stick being drawn forth of your barrel, turn it, and bring
the scouring-stick end to your breast, and so slip your hand within a handful
of the end.

31 Beturne the scouringstick into its socket; from whence you had it.

32 Bring forward your musket with your left hand, and bear it right up, take
it into the right hand at the breech, and so hold it in your right hand only,
either to showlder it or to lock yt to your rest and so much for your marching
postures.



The standing postures of the Musket, and how to make ready upon the rest. in a
squadron, Company, or division.
1 BRing up your left hand, with the forke of the rest to the musket, and pick
your rest upon the ground, your left leg, somewhat bending, as in this figure.

2 Take the match between the thumb, and second finger, as in the 16 figure
marching.

3 Turn a little with your head behind your pan, and blow your match with a
good blast.

3 Holding your match between your thumb and second finger, cok it, as in the
eight figure marching.

5 Your thumb and fore finger being upon the cock, and your second, and third
finger under the eock, pull your cock to the pan, and raisiug, or depressing
it look that it falls right into the pan.

6 Hold the two fingers of your right hand upon your pan, and the thumb behind
the scutchian.

7 In presenting draw back first your left leg to your right, and withal
stooping a little with your head to your pan being guarded, blow off your coal.

8 Lying on (as in the 12 posture marching) opening your pan, fall back with
your right leg, bring your right hand to the thumbe-hole of your musket,
presenting a fair body, hold your musket hard and closse between your breast
and your shoulder blade, and pulling your tricker with your fore finger give
fire.

9 Having given fire, bring up your right leg again to your left as in the 7
figure, and withal un cock your match.

10 Set forward your left leg again to your first stand, and return your
match between the two lesser fingers of your left hand, and after that do
these postures following, as in the figures marching, viz Clear your pan,
prime your pan, and shut your pan, as in the 17, 18, and 19, posture marching.

11 In taking up the rest, hold your musket right up, cast off your loose
corns, and falling back with your left leg somewhat stradling, bring up the
pan even against your mouth.

12 First blow off your loose dust, or corns with a stiff blast, and then
cast about yout musket to your left side, falling a little back with your left
leg.

13 Having forsaken your rest, hold the musket fast in your left hand, about
the middle of the barrel, so as the but end touch not the ground, and bringing
forward the muzile of your musket to charge, your right hand being at liberty,
do these postures following namely, Open your charge, Charge with powder, draw
forth your scouring stick, shorten charge with bullet put in stoping ram
home, with draw your scovreing stick, shorten, and return as in the 23, 24,
25, 26, 27, 28, 29, and 30 figurs marching.

14 Bring forward your musket with your left hand, bearing it upright, taking
it into your right hand at the brich, withal bring forward your left leg even
with your right, as in the 11 figure.

15 Hold the musket bolt upright in your right hand, and having, the rest in
your left hand, slip your right hand, and your thumb upward to the forke, as
in the marching posture number four.

Note by the way, that from this poizing posture, you may either join your rest
to your musket, es in the fifth posture marching, or rest your musket as in the
first figure standing, or else shoulder your musket, as in the next figure
following.

16 Having your musket poized, hold the rest a hand full under the forke, then
bring the musket, before your body, and your rest cross over it behind your
thumb-hole, and so with both hands lay it gently on your shoulder, having the
rest a cross your body, drawing in your right leg to your left, and then
falling back again with your right leg to your stand, either stand or march
away. And thus much for the standing postures of the musket.



Brief observations for a Muskettier.
When a Muskettier is to be excercised in his squadron, Company, or devision,
all postures both marching, and standing are readily done, and reduced to these
three words of command, to wit.

Make ready. Present. Give Fire.
For first a good Muskettier, which has all his postures perfectly, hearing
his officer give the first term of direction make ready, will quickly run them
over, even from vnshouldring of his Musket, to the guarding of his pan, which
is the sixth posture standing, and the eleventh marching before he comes to
present.

Secondly, in presenting he will be fure to blow his match well, open his pan,
and fall back with his right hand to the thumbe-hole of his musket, and having
his forefinger upon the tricker, setting forward his left leg, will attend
the next word of direction.

Thirdly, lying on before he comes to give fire, bending his left knee, will
fall back with his right leg, bringing the butt end of his musker, close
between his breast and shoulder, raising his musket fast, and hard to his
shoulder will keep it fast from recoyling, and resting firm upon his right
leg will give fire.

Having given fire, he takeeth up his musket, and rest gracefully, and bringing
up his right leg again, falls away in his rank, returns his match, cleares
his pan, prims his pan, and does quickly all his postures standing, or
marching, as has been taught, and which shall be shown more at large by
figure, when we come to the excercising of musketeers in gross.

Practiced in the wars of the united Netherlandt.
NOw follows the true form of exercising of a Foot Company of 40 pikes and 40
musketeers besides officers, represented by figure, the words of Command and
demonstration: but before we come to the particular motions, it is necessary
for a young soldier to know first what a File and a Rank is.



Files
number
1 The Leader of the right hand file. 2 The leader of the left hand file. 3 The
middle file on the right hand. 4 The middle file on the left hand. 5 The second
file next the right hand. 6 The second file next the left hand. 7 The third
file from the right hand. 8 The third file from the left hand.

The Demonstration. Ranks.
Letter.
a The first Rank of Leaders. b The last Rank of Bringers up. c The Ra^ks of
the Leaders of half files to the front. d The Rank of the leaders of half files
to the Reere. e The second Rank next the front. f The second Rank next the
Reere. g The fourth Rank from the front. h The fourth Rank from the Reere. i
The third Rank from the front. k The third Rank from the Reere.

THirdly, to understand well the three distances, namely, Open order, order and
close order.

The Definition.
Open order then, or the first distance is, when the soldiers both in Rank,
and File, stand six foot removed one from an other, as the scale, and this
figure following show.



Observations.
BEcause the measure of these distances cannot be taken so exactly by the eye,
we take the distance of six foot between File and File, by commanding the
soldiers, as they stand, to stretch forth their arms, and stand so removed
one from an other that their hands may meet.

And for the Ranks, we make account we take the same distance of six foot,
when the butt end of the pikes do almost reach their heels, that march before
them.

THe second distance, or your Order is, when your men stand three foot removed
one from an other both in Rank and File, and this order is to be used when
they are embattailled, or march in the face of an Ennemy, or when they come to
stand, or when you will wheel, as this next figure represents.



Observations.
We take the second order, or distance between File and File, by bidding the
soldiers set their arms a Kenbowe, and put themselves so closse; that their
elbowes may meet. And we reckon we take the same distance between the
Ranks, when they come up almust to the swords point.

Note, that when you march throw any country, you most observe three foot
only from File to File, and six from Rank to Rank.

The third distance, or your close order is commanded by this word Close which
is, when there is one foot and a half from File to File, and three from Rank
to Rank, as this Figure demonstrates.



OBserve that though this figure stands but at a foot and a half distance:
yet this is for the pikes only, and must never be used, but when you will
stand firm to receive the charge of an Ennemy. The musketeers must never be
closer, then the second distance of three foot in square, because they are to
have a free use of their Arms.

THis figure represents the 40 pikes, and 40 musketeers, standing in their
order because the page will not bear the first four motions in their open
order.



Here begins the words of Command. 1 Stand right in your Files. 2 Stand right
in your Ranks, 3 Silence.




Here begins the first motion. 5. To the right hand.
IT is to be noted, when you are commanded to be As you were, you are ever to
turn to the contrary hand from whence you came, As for example, if you did
turn to the right hand, you are to return to the left hand, and so in the rest.

As you were, that is, as you stand in your order in the figure above marked
with the letter I.

9. To the right hand about 10. As you were. 11. To the left hand about. 12. As
you were.


An Observation.
These turnings to the right or left hand, or to either hand about serve for
the given or receiving of a charge upon the right or left Flank, or in the
Reere about.

As you were,
Because there is now room enough this figure shows them standing in their
open order of six foot distance one from an other both in rank and file from
which standing they are to do these motions following.

13. Ranks to the right hand double. The Demonstration.
The 2. 6: 8 and 10 rank from the front marked with the Letters. b. d. f. h.
and k. moves all together and doubles into their order on the right hand of the
files numbered 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. and 8. making 5. ranks at their double open
order of 12. foot, and 16. men in each rank as is seen in this figure above.





The Demonstration.
This motion differs not from the former, but only that the utmost man of the
second Rank, and subsequently all the other ranks which moved before comes now
up together to their order on the left hand of the files numbered, 8. 7. 6. 5.
4. 3. 2. and 1.





17. Files to the right hand double. The Demonstration.
The 2. file (next the right hand) moves and falls back between the right hand
fiile, the 4th file between the 3. The 6. between the 5. and the 8. (or left
hand file) between the 7 fiile all to their order, making four fiiles, 20.
men deep, and 12 foot distance betwixt file and file, as in this figure.





The Demonstration.
The files which moved before stand now still. and the 2. file next the left
hand file falls back between the left hand file the 5 file between the 6 the 3
between the 4 and the 1 (or right hand file) between the 2 file making 20
men deep, and 12 foot distance betwixt file and file as before.





19. Half files to the right hand double your front. The Demonstration.
The leader of the half file on the right hand, (noted f) steps to his order
beyond the right hand file number 1. and also all the rest of the files
stepping to their order on their right hand, comes up together between the
files numbered, 1. and 2. 2. and 3. 3. and 4. 4. and 5. 5. and 6. 6. and 7. 7.
and 8. into the Ranks marked a. b. c. d. and e. at their order of three foot
distance in file, and 6. in rank, as this figure above shows.





20. Half files to the right hand double your front. The Demonstration.
This motion differs not from the other, but that the leader of the halfe-file
on the left hand and consequenitly all the rest of the files, steps to their
order on the left hand, and comes up together between the files numbered 8. and
7. 7. and 6. 6. and 5. 5. and 4. 4. and 3. 3. and 2. 2. and 1. into the ranks
marked (as before) with the letters a. b. c. d. and e.





The demonstration.
When you will Countermarch to the right hand, the first Rank of Leaders
numbered 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. and 8. only must advance one stepp forward with
the right leg, and then turn, and all the other Ranks must march first up to
the place, from whence the first Rank did countermarch, before they turn,
where the Sariant stands marked with a star. This figure shows that between
the ranks a and d there are 8 ranks met at their order, and the Captain
counter marching to the Reere, with the first Rank of Leaders, to the 6 rank
marked f. and the Lieutenant, with the rank of bringers up noted K. toward
the front to the rank noted e. which represents the Countermarch incompleate,
as is seen in this figure above.

This figure shows the Countermarch complete, when the Captain (or Officer)
is come with the first Rank of Leaders to the place, where the bringers up,
and the Lieutenant stood, and the Lieutenant with the bringers up to the
Captains place, standing in their open order in rank and file, as this figure
demonstrates.



Observe likewise, if you will now Countermarch to the left hand, the first
rank must stepp forwards one stepp with the left leg: and then turn, and
all the other Ranks behind, must come up to that place before they turn,
where the Sariant with his Halbart stands as before. 25. Ranks to the left
hand countermarch.



Note that this figure (as the first) shows the Countermarch incompleate as
before.



This figure shows, that the Captain is countermarcht up with the first rank
of leaders into that place, where the front stood before, and every rank, and
file in their open order.

The like countermarch is performed, either on the right, or left flank by
giving first this word of command, To the right, or left hand, omitting the
naming, either of Ranks or files, in saying only, To the right, or left hand
countermarch, which you lift.

Observations before you wheel.
First Files to the right, or left hand, or to the middle.
Close to your Order. To 3. foot between File and File.

If you would close your files to the right hand, the outermost file on that
hand stands still, and the next on the right hand, (numbered 2*) moves first to
their order, and then all the files ciphred, 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. and 8. the left
hand file closes in all to their order. And if you would have them close to the
left hand, the outermost file also on that hand stands still, and then the file
next the left hand (numbered 7) moves first, and afterward all the other files,
noted 6. 5. 4. 3. 2. and 1. (or the right hand file) close all to their order.

But if you desire to have your files close to the middle, then the two middle
most files numbered 4. and 5. close first to their order of three foot, and
having their distance, the other files numbered 2. 3. and 1. on the right hand,
and the files, 8. 7. and 6. on the left hand closes both ways into their order.

Secondly Ranks to your Order Close.
that is To three foot between Rank and Rank.

Note, that in this motion also the Ranks, which stand in their open order on
the other page, marked with the Letters, bc defghi and k moving all to gether
in an even front, comes up to their order, or distance of three foot, as this
figure demonstrates, where both files and ranks stand in their order of 3
foot distance



Observe, that when you exercise a company single, you double your front before
you wheel, in regard the body is small: but in a devision, or a greater body,
you close both your ranks and files to your order (as above) omitting the
doubling, and then wheel: but being a single company when you wheel to the
right hand, then double your front to the left hand: for so the leader of the
right hand file will keep his place on that corner toward which you wheel.



This figure before you wheel shows your men to stand in their close order in
file, and their order in rank, as (...).



Again when you wheel to the left hand, double your front to the right hand,
and then the two leaderson the left hand, do but only turn their bodies like
the point of a Compass, to that hand whereto they wheel, while the body comes
about with a faster motion and an even front.



Note also, that after you have wheeled to which hand you list, and as often as
you will, you give in a single company this word of command, Half files as you
were, that is, as they stood in their order both in rank and file before; but
in greater bodies where the doubling is omitted, you first open your ranks, by
giving this term of direction. Ranks backward to your open order, and then
likewise your files by commanding. Files open (both ways) to your open order
of six footes as this figure both in rank, and file represents.

In opening of Ranks and Files, you must make all the Files or Ranks, saving
the outermost on that hand from whence you mean to open (which must stand) to
move altogether, till the second Rank or File from that which stands, have
gotten its distance, and consequently all the rest.

Having performed the former Motions you may afterward exercise your company of
Pikes, and Musketeers together, or if you pleafe each a part.

To begin then with the Pikes you may command them to do these motions
standing, to wit.

Advance your Pikes. Order your Pikes. Shoulder your Pikes. Charge your Pikes.
Order your Pikes. Traile your Pikes. Check your Pikes.
But these Motions are to be performed, both standing, and marching, namely.

Charge your Pikes. Shoulder your Pikes. To the right hand Charge. Shoulder
your Pikes. To the left hand Charge. Shoulder your Pikes. To the Reere Charge.
Shoulder your Pikes. Stand. Order your Pikes.
First, note that in charging half the Ranks only must charge their Pikes,
the other hindermost half of the Ranks, do but port their Pikes that is,
they carry them so couched, over the Heads of the foremost as may give them no
offense, either in charging, or retyreing. Besides, this way the Pikes are not
so subject, to be broken by the shot of the Enemy, as when they are advanced.

Secondly, they must likewise observe, when they charge standing, to fall back
with the right leg, and marching to step forwards with the left. Standing,

Thirdly, the exercising of your Musketeers is likewise performed either or
Marching.

That is, either by Ranks, or by Files after three manner of ways, to wit,
first having an Enemy in your front. Secondly in your Reere, and thirdly upon
your right, or left flank, as these figures following in exercising of 260
Pikes and Musketeers (besides Officers will demonstrate, whereof the first
shows the manner of giving fire standing, upon an Enemy in your front, by
commanding these three terms or direction) underneath.



This figure above shows, that the first, and second rank of both the wings of
Musketeers, having given fire are fallen away, and are a doing their postures,
till they come in the vacant Ranks in the Reere noted, i and k, while the
third and fourth Ranks (on both flanks) make ready, and advances up to the
same ground where the first were: even with the front of the Pikes:

Note also, that the first Rank falling back with their right legs, bending
their left knee, lies on and gives fire (as has bin taught) and the first
Rank falling away, the second Rank in presenting, having their pannes guarded,
blows their matches, opens their pannes, and steps forward with their left
legs into the place of the first rank, lies on, gives fire, and fall away
while the rest of the body of musketeers mooues up to their place, and so two
ranks at a time, making ready, you may give fire as often as you list.

You must observe likewise, that the musketeers in all these motions, do turn
to the right hand, and so to have a cingular care, to carry the mouths of
their muskets aloft, as well when they are shouldred, as in priming, as also
when they keep their pannes guarded and come up to give fire.

Moreover, if an Enemy should appear on either your right, or left flank, and
that you resolve to maintain your ground, and would gaul him from either
flank: it is performed by giving first this word of command To the right or
left hand, which you please, and then making an interval of 6 foot distance
between the two middlemost leaders of the half files, e and, for the half
rank on the left hand, marked a b c d and e do fall away between the files to
the Reere before the pikes and the half rank on the right hand k i g h and f,
on the right flank likewise, you may give fire from either, or both flanks, as
you list.

Again if an Enemy should show himself in your Reere, the like is done by
giving this term of derection, To the right hand about, and having given fire
upon them, fall away to the place, where the front stood, even in the same
manner as you did before.

The manner of giving fire marching and advancing toward an Enemy is
performed, as this figure following represents.



In advancing toward an Enemy, two Ranks must always make ready together,
and advance ten paces forwards: before the bodies, at which distance, a Sarjant
(or when the body is great some other Officer) must stand, to whom the
Musketteirs are to come up before present, and give fire. First, the first
rank, and whilst the first Rank gives fire, the second Rank keeps their
muskets close to their pannes guarded: and as soon as the first are fallen away,
the second presently presents give fire, and fall after them. Now, as soon as
the two first ranks do move from their places in the front, the two rancks
next it must unshoulder their muskets, and make ready: so as they may advance
forward ten paces, as before, as soon as ever the first two ranks are fallen
away, and are to do in all points as the fmorer. So all the other ranks
through the whole company, or division must do the same by two one after an
other.

A way how to give fire retreating from an enemy, which is performed after this
sort as this figure following shows



As the troop marches, the hindermost rank of all, keeping still with the
troop makes ready: and being ready the soldiers in that rank turn
altogether to the right hand, and give fire, marching presently away a good
round pace to the front and their place themselves in a Rank together just
before the front. As Soon as the first Rank turns to give fire, the Rank
next makes ready and does as the former and so all the rest.

Last of all the troop, or whole wing of Musketeers makes ready altogether
standing and the first Rank without advancing, gives fire in the place it
standts in and speedily as may be yet orderly falls away the Ranks doing the
same successively, one after another.

A manner how to give fire, either from the right or left hand flank, as these
6 files of 60 Musketeers demonstrates.



To the right hand, present, give fire, Captain, to the left hand, present,
give fire.

The Demonstration.

The company or division marching, the outermost file next the enemy are
commanded to make ready, keeping still along with the Body, till such time, as
they be ready, and they turn all to the right, or left hand, according to the
fight of their Enemy, either upon their right or left flank, and give fire all
together: when thy have discharged they stir not, but keep their ground, and
charge their pieces again in the same place they stand. Now as soon as the
aforesaid file does turn to give fire, the outmost next it makes ready,
always keepeing along with, the troop, till the bringers up be past a little
beyond the Leader of that file that gave fire last, and then the whole file
must turn and give fire an do in all points, as the first did, and so all the
rest one after another. A Sarjant or (if the troop be great) some better
qualified Officer must stand at the head of the first file, and as soon as the
second file has given fire, and has charged, he is to lead forwards the first
file up to the second file, and so to the rest one after an other till he has
gathered again the whole wing, and then he is to join them again in equal
front with the pikes.



A BRIEF, Index of the points, postures, and several motions, contained in
this first part of the Principles of the Art Military.
THe first is the duties of a private Soldier, a Gentleman of a Company, and
of all the Officers belonging to a Company of Infanterie or Foot, pages 1. 1.
3. 2. The Arms belonging to a Pike-man, and a Muskettier represented by figure
4. 3. The directions and the Postures of a Pike-man pages 5. 6. 7. 8. and 9. 4.
The directions and postures of a Muskettier marching, pages 10. 11. 12. and 13.
5. The direction and the Centinell postures standing, page 14. and 15. 6.
Brief observations for a Muskettier page 16. 7. The beginning of the
exercising of a Company of Foot, consisting of 40. Pikes and 40. Musketeers,
and the definition what a File and a Rank is, with the Demonstration of the
dignity of Files and Ranks, page 17. 8. Of the three distances, observed in
exercising of a Company to wit Open-order, Order, and Closse-order,, with the
definition thereof, and observations there-vpon page 18. and 19 9. Of
conversions and turnings with the words of Command pages 20. and 20. 10. The
standing in open order, fit for the doubling of Ranks and Files page 21. 11.
The doubling of Ranks pages 21. 22. and 23. 12. The doubling of Files pages
24. 25. 26. 27. 13. The doubling of the Front by half files pages 28. 29. 30.
and 31. 14. The Countermarchings, either to the right or left hand pages 32.
33. 34. 35. 15. Observations before wheelings page 36. 16, The wheelings to the
right or left hand, or about pages 37. 38. and 39. 17. The opening of Ranks and
Files page 40. 18. The posture; of the Pikes, commanded either marching or
standing, and the several givings of fire pages 41. 42. 43. and 44.
For the Cavallrie.
19. Secondly, the duties of a private Horse, a Gentleman, and the several
charges, and Officers belonging to a troop of Horse, beginning with letter A.
pages 1. 2. and 3. 20. The Arms belonging to a Curassier and a Harquebusier,
page 4. and of the managing of his Horse, and their Arms represented by figure
page 5. 21. The directions and postures of a Curassier, and a Harquebussier,
represented with their words of Command in two great plates pages 6. 7. and 8.
22. The exercising of a Esquadron of Cavallrie, according to his Highness the
Prince of Orange, by the way of figure, the word of Command and directions
page 9. 10. and 11 23. His Highness order for filing and marching of Horse
page 12.
Thirdly an Appendex of Marshall discipline enacted and statuated by the Lords
the States General and his Highness, for the Militia of the United Provinces,
beginning with letter A. B. C. D.

THe Book-binder is to follow in this first part in binding it, first the Title
and Dedication, sheet then letter A. B. C. D. E. E2. (and the half sheet for
turning pages 21. and 21. because a half sheet comes in here.) E3. F. G. H. I.
K. L. L2. and this half sheet which makes L3. and so ends this first part: for
the Printer according to the figures of the pages, has committed an error in
not figuring the pages right.

FINIS.
BRIEF Instructions of the Duties of a Horseman, and the several Officers
belonging to a Troop of Horse, practiced in the service of the Lords the
States General of the united Provinces, under the Command of his highness
the Prince of Orange.
FIrst, the Cavallrie, or Horse are ordered into two Troops, namely, either a
Troop of Curaissiers, which are heavelie armed, consisting of able and lusty
men, and the highest and strongest horses, or a Company of Harquebussiers, or
Carabines, which are more lightly armed, as shall be discribed in the States list
following.

The Officers then of a Troop of Horse, and the duty of a Horseman, or a
centinell, through their several degrees are these, 1 A Horseman 2 A
Good-Smith, or Farrier. 3 A Clark or Fourrier. 4 Two Trumpetters. 5 Three
Corporals. 6 A Quartermaster. 7 A Cornet. 8 A Lieutenant, and 9 A Captain, and
of these in order.

Of a private Horseman, and a Gentleman of a Troop of Horse.
His duty consists chiefly herein, First, that he fears God, Secondly,
that he respects, honors and obeys his superior officers. Thirdly, that he
does noe violence, outrage, or wrong to any man, Fourthly, that he manage well
his horse, and bring him to readiness, Fifthly, that he keeps his arms, and
pistolls neat and trime. Sixthly, and lastly, that he carries him self
vailliantly upon service in the face of his ennemie, and to be careful upon
his march in keeping his order in rank and file, and to be vigilent upon his
watch, and sentinelship, and to do all other duties belonging to an honest
soldier, whereby he shall gain the love of his Captain, and Officers, and so
by his good carriage, and deserts make himself capable of better advancement.

Of the Smith, or a Farrier.
His duty is as occasion serves, to drench and let blood the Horse of the
Troop, and allwaies, either upon a march, or in a quarter, to have in a
readiness his buggett of tools, horse shoes, and nails, whenever he
shall be called upon by his Officers, or when any Gentleman, or soldier of the
Troop shall have use of him, and for this reason, that he must duly attend
upon the Troop, he is freed from other duties, and has a greater pay then an
ordinary Horseman.

Of a Trumpetter.
Every Captain of a Troop of Horse, ought to have two good Trumpetters, who
cannot only found the Bouteselle, that is, a call to horseback, a march, a
charge, and a retreat: but also to speak diverse languages, to be wise
discreet and circumspect, especially whenever his General, Captain and
Commaundour shall have occasion to send him to the Ennemie upon a message, or
for the ransoming of prisoners, and that when he is with the ennemie, he must
be wary and cautelous what he speaks, and to let noe words slipp, which may
be disadvantagious to the service of his prince and Country, and that he
observes, and marks well, how and in what manner the Ennemes works and
trenches lie, that he may make report thereof to his General, or Captain at
his return, and give him intelligence of whatsoever he has heard or seen. A
Trumpetter also ought to be lodged near his Cornett to be in a readiness upon
all occasion, to sound an Allarm, that the Troop may betimes putt on their
arms, and get a Horseback.

Of the Clarke to a Troop of Horse.
The next degree to a Trumpetter is the Clarke of the Troop, or as some calls
him the Fourier, whose duty is to fetch moneys, to pay the Officers, and
Soldiers duly, to keep a perfect Musterrolie of all the names, and Surnames
of the horsemen of the Troop, and to procure their Billers, and their lodging
moneys, when they lie in guarrison, and to deal uprightly and justly with the
Company.

Of a Corporal.
As a Compaigne of foot, so also is a Troop of Horse divided in to three
esquadrons, or Corporalships, over which a Corporal commands, whose duty
is tokeepe a perfect roole, of the Names and Surnames of every Horseman of his
esquadron, and to cause them to have their horses in a readiness, to see that
their arms, pistols, and Carabines be fix, and kept in good trime, whenever
they shall have occasion to use them, and that they be careful and vigilent
upon their watch, that the sentinels perform their duties well, that he
relieves them in due time, and that now and then he exercise them in the use of
their arms upon their guards, and other places. Seeing he also is a good help,
and an Assistant to his Lieutenant by preventing of disorders and disputes, and
by composing of quarrels which may arise among the soldiers of his
esquadron. yea and to do whatsoever else belongs to a worthy Corporal, that
he may gain the love of his Officers, and attain unto better advancement.

Of the Quartermaster.
Every Troop has also a Quartermaster, whose duty is to see that the Troop
be well lodged and quartered both in field and in Garrison, especially, when
they are separated and quartered apart from the Army in villages and houses,
more over his duty is likewise to attend the Quartermaster General, and to
receive from him such houses for his Captain and the Troop as he shall
appoint him, after which he distributes those houses to the esquadrons and
Troop, acconding to their seignori^es, Also he is often employed in ferching
of the word and orders. If the Regiment or Troop be quartered about the army
in Campaignie, then he is to observe, and keep that form, which the General
has ordained for a Regiment of Horse, and as the Quartermaster General shall
show him.

Of a Cornet.
A Cornet ought to be a brave young Gentleman, full of spirit and courage and
though he be young, and has noe great experience, yet time and service will
teach it him, and afterward make him ambitious of greater advancement. He is
chosen so, because he may be capable of his place, and that charge which is
committed to him from his General and Captain, and rather upon any piece of
service to loose his life, then his honor, and reputation. He ought also to
carry him self amiable, loving, and affable to the Gentlemen and Soldiers of
the Troop, where by he shall gain their loves, and affections, and who will
gladly upon any occasion hazard their lives for him and that badge of honnour
which he carries. To conclud, a Cornet in the absence of his Captain, and
Lieutenant has absolute Command over the Troop. The Cornet Sometimes marches
in the head of the Troop, but when the Troop is to be embattailled, his place
is between the third and fourth rank, for the better safeguard of his Cornett.

Of a Lieutenant.
It is necessary that the Lieutenant to a Troop of Horse be an old able
Soldier, and well experienced in the wars, and who upon diverse pieces of
service has shown his worth and valor, and for his deserts has raised
himself from inferior degrees as from a Corporal and a Corner, to this charge
wherein he is now, and from it to make himself fit for higher preferment. He
is a great help and an Assistant to his Captain, and therefore bears the
name of Lieutenant, who supports and keeps up his Captains place and
authority, and who in his Captains absence has absolure commannd over the
Troop. It is his office also to prevent, and compose quarrels and disputes,
arising among the Horsemen of the Troop, to carry a severe hand over the
wilful, and obstinate offenders by punishing them toundlie for the exsample
of Others, and to countenance favor, and encourage those that carry them
selves worthily, and to discountenance malefactors, till they are sorry for
their disorders and offenses. Moreover he is to give charge to the Corporals
that every man manages, and keeps his horse in a readiness, that they keep
their arms neat and clean, and their Pistols, and Carrabins six, and to
exercise the squadron himself in the field or upon their guards. He ought also
to be a good Guide, and to know well the passages, and avenues of a Country
for the expediting of a sudden surprise.

His place when his Captain is present, is to bring op the Reere of the
Troop, causing the Horsemen to follow their Captain and Cornett in good
order, and that they keep duly their Ranks, and files, and to have an eye,
that none of them straggles out of his rank or file.

Coming to fight either in Battle, skirmish, or ortherwise, when his Captain
and Cornet is to give a charge upon an Ennemie, he keeps him self always in
the Reere with his sword drawn, to animate, and encourage the Soldiers to
fall on; and if any one of them should play the Coward, break out of his rank,
or run away, if he should kill him, he has the mends in his own hand, and the
Lieutenant may well answer it to his chief: for such a coward, or faint
hearted soldier, by his evil exsample shows others to runaway, which may
not only be the overthrouw of the Troop, but also of a whole Regiment. His
duty is also to visit the guards, and to see that the sentinels discharge
well their duties, and to give Command to the Corporals that they be duly
relieved. That upon the sight of an Ennemie they come in orderly, and guie the
alarm betimes, that the Troop may draw into arms, and be in a readiness to
entertain the Ennemie, or else have leisure to reteate unto stronger forces
for their defense.

Of a Captain.
The Command, and charge of a Captain of a Troop of Horse is very honorable,
and it ought to be given to a man of respect, and quality, and one that is
descended of a noble birth, whose valor, and worth may be answerable
thereunto. He ought also above althings to be religious, fearing God,
temperate, moderate, just, Continent, wise, and discreet, curious in the
choice of his men, and horse, and to see that they be well managed, ready, and
his Troop well exercised, That they carry themselves vaillantly upon service,
in the face of the ennemie, and to be careful, and vigelent upon their watch,
Countenancing the good, and puinshing the badd. In doing where of, these
Christian virtues will gain him honor, love, and respect, not only among
those of his Troop, whom he Commands, but also of his Chiefs, and all other
men besieds.

But if a Captain either of Horse, or foot be debauched, leads an
intemperate, and a disorderly life, given to covetousness, lucre, and gain,
he gives an ill exsample to those, whom he commands: for if he himself does
commit such vices, how can he fasten a reproof upon a Soldier, or how can he
with a good conscience, punish that fault in his soldier, whereof he is guilty
himself? for surely a Captain being the head of a Compaine (from whence his
name is derived) who governes him self well, and leads an un blame able life,
guies a good exsample to his inferior officers, and the soldiers of his
Compaine, who lives under his Commannd.

He ought likewise to observe, and keep punctually all the orders and
Commands given him by his General, to be with his Troop at the Rendevous
upon the time appointed. To respect and obey his Chiefes, and Superior
Officers. He is upon all occasions to be first on Horseback, and upon all
services to carry himself courageously in the face of his Ennemie, to show
noe sign of fear in the greatest danger, least he should give discouragement
to his soldiers. He ought to take notice of those soldiers under his
Commannd, who carry them selves vailliantlie, and couragioustie before their
Ennemies, to encourage them, and to reward them according to their deserts, and
to take notice of the names and surnames of every Gentlemen and Soldier of
his Troop, and sometimes to take the advice of some old experienced soldiers
of his Compagine. He ought not to suffer the Horsemen of his Troop to ravage,
and spoil the Country, nor to pillage, and plunder the poor husbandmen and
Contributaire pesants, contrary to the orders, and proclamations of the
General, for obedience is the first Christian virtue required in a soldier,
and thus a Captain by his valor, worth, wisdom, and discretion may aspire
and attain to a higher degree of honor and Command as his service and merit
shall deserve, and thus much in brief for the soldiers, Gentlemen, and
Officers appertayning to a Troop of Horse.

OF THE ARMS Belonging to a Curassier, and a Harquebussier, according to the
Placcard of the Lords the Statee General of the united Provinces.
HAving shown the several duties of a soldier, a Gentleman, and the Officers
belonging to a Troop of Horse, it rests now that we come to the arming of
them as follows. In a Cuirassier then is required, that he be a man of an
able body, who is mounted upon a strong, and a lusty horse, that he has on a
good buff-gerkin, a short sword, or Coutlase by his side, a skarff about his
arms, and body of his princes coullour, to distinguish him from his Ennemie
coullour upon any service, or in the day of battle.

He ought to be mounted upon a strong, and a lusty horse, or Gelding, which
is fiueteene palms high, according to the measure there of ordained by the
States Edict, namely, to meat his height with a cord of that length,
beginning from his fore-hoofe upwards to his shoulder blade, and so to the
lower part of his maine, and likewise to be provided with a good Sadle, and
Bridle, with two good pistolls hanging at his sadle bow, in two strong pistol
Cases, the length of the pistol barrils, being at the least four and twenly
inches long, carrying a bullet of twenty in the pound, and of 24. which will
roll in to his pistol.

For his Arms about his body, he is first armed with a close helmet or a Cask
pistol proof upon his head, 2. with a Gorget about his neck, 3. His breast and
back pieces, which ought to be pistol proof, 4. His Pouldrons and vambrases
his Guard de reins, 5. his gandes, 6 his Cassets or thigh pieces reaching from
his girdle beneath his knees, and (as is said) two pistolls hanging at his
saddle, and thus a Curassier is armed decap en pied at all points even from the
head to the foot.

The arms of a Harqut bussier, is lighter, to wit, first with a Cask open
before. 2 with a gorgett breast and back pieces, which ought also to be pistol
proof, a good Carabine hanging at his belt about his body, where of the
length of the barrill ought to be at the least three foot long, which will
carry a rolling bullett of 17 in the pound, having his Touchboxe, and Cartouch
all in a readiness, provided also with a good Horse 15 palms high and well
managed, with a good Sadle, Bridle, Coutlace, and a skarff as the Figure on the
other sijde demonstrates.

Of the managing of his Horse.
A Cuirassier, and a Harquebussier being thus armed, It is very needful, that
a horseman be skillfull in the well managing, and making or his horse ready
for service, and to bring him to his command and obedience, namely, to teach
him to pace, trott, gallop, and to run a full Careere, how he is to advance,
to stopp, and go backward, and to turn and wheel with readiness, to which
hand his Rider shall please. Now to bring his horse to this, and to learn him
to turn and wheel with dexterity, he must often use him to ride the ring,
first with a greater circumference, and then little and little by lesser degrees*
as first upon his pace, then upon his trot, and so to the gallop and Careere.
These things he may be taught by using the hand, leg, and voice. For the hand
(observing not to move the arm, but only the wrist) if you would have him to
face to the left hand, then a little motion of the little finger on that rein,
and a touch of the left leg (without using the spurr) does it, but if to face
or turn to the left about, a harder, etc. If you would have him to trott, then
you are to move both your legs a little forwards, if for the gallop to move
them more forward, and to move your body by little and little forward with it.
After every motion performed, it were good to keep him a while in that
motion, as when you bid him stand to stand a while etc. Also it were not a
miss after every thing well done, to give him some bread, or grass as a
reward. For the voice you may use the words Advance, Hold, Turn, or the like,
but because the voice cannot always be heard, it were good to use him chiefly
to the motions of the hand and leg. It will be also very useful to teach him to
go side ways: this he may be brought unto, by laying his Provender some what
far from him in the manger, and by keeping him from turning his head toward
it. He must also be often used to the simell of Gun powder, the sight of fire,
and armor, and the heareing of short, drumms and Trumpetts, etc. and that by
degrees and with discretion. When he is at his oats (a pretty distance from
him) a little powder may be fired, and so nearer to him by degrees, you may
also shoot of a pistol some distance off, and so nearer and nearer. In like
manner, ye may use him to a Drum or Trumpet. The groom may some times dress
him in armor, and he may be used (now and then) to eat his oats from the
drum head. It will also be very useful to cause a muskettier to stand at a
convement distance, and both of you to give fire upon each other, and there
upon to ride up closse to him, also to ride him against a complete armor, so
set upon a stake, that he may over throw yt, and trample it under his feet:
that so and by such other means your horse (finding that he receives noe
hurt) may become bold to approach any object. He may also be used to
mountanous and uneven ways, and be exercised to leap, Swim, and the like.
Thus far Captain Cruso who has wrote worthily of this subject in his 27
Chapter page 34 and 35. And he that desires further directions for the art of
rydings and managing his horse, let him read Monsieur Pierre de la Noue in his
Cavallerie Francoise and Italienne, also the Instruction du Roy de France en
l'exercice de monter a Cheval, par Antoine de Plurier, Francisco Melzo, and
diverse others to whom, refer the Reader for brevitie sake.



NEXT Follows the Postures of a Curassier, and a Harquebussier, with the words
of Command, and the demonstration answering to the number of every figure, as
they are set down by Captain Cruso in his 29 chapter, and represented by
figure.
IT is to be supposed, that noe Cuirassier or Harquebussier, will presume to
mount on horseback, or repair to his Cornet, before his pistol, Harquebuse,
or Carabine be spanned, primed, and laden: and his Cases furnished with
Cartouches, and all other Equipage belonging to himself, his horse, and arms
made fix and in a readiness. The first figure then shows a horseman how he
is to mount on horseback, and takes both reins hanging in a loose position over
the Horse neck, and upon the pummell of the Saddle, and first lays hold on
the ends of the reins above the button in his right hand, and with the thumb,
and the two first fingers of that hand, draws them to an even length. Then
putting the little finger of his left hand, betwixt both reins under the button,
with the other three fingers of the same hand on the further rein, and his
thumb on the near side of the button to graspe both reins, that so (before he
endeavor to mount) he may have his horse head in balance and at command:
then grasping the pummel of the sadle with his left hand, and standing with his
full body to the horse side, and just betwixt the bolster, and cantle of the
sadle, always on the near side of the horse, with the help of his right hand,
he shall putt his left foot into the left stirop, and with his right hand
taking fast hold on the highest part of the Cantle behind, he shall (with the
help of both hands) gently (yet strongly, and in a right posture without
inclyning his body to either hand) raise himself until he may stand
Perpendicular upon his left foot, and then putting over his right leg cast
and place himself in the sadle.

2. With the right hand he is to turn down the Caps of the pistol cases.

3. He is to draw the pistol out of the Case with the right hand, and always
the left pistol first) and to mount the muzzle of it, as in posture 15.

4. He is to sink the pistol into his bridle-hand, and to remove his
right hand toward the muzzle, and their to rest the butt end upon his thigh.

5. He is to sink the pistol into his bridle-hand, and taking the key, or
spanner into his right hand, puts it into the Axletree, and winds about the
wheel till it stick, and so to return the Spanner to its place, being usually
fastened to the side of the case.

6. Holding the pistol in the bridle-hand (as before) he is to take his
priming box into his right hand, and pressing the spring with his fore finger,
puts poudre into the pann.

7. He is to press in the pan-pin with his right thumb, and so shuts the pan.

8. With the bridle-hand he is to cast about his pistol, and to hold it on
his left side, with the muzzle upwards.

9. With the right hand take forth your cartouch out of your pistol case: for
now flasks are grown out of use amongst us.

10. Put your cartouch into the bore of your pistol.

11. He is to draw his rammer out with his right hand turned, and to hold it
with the head downward.

12. Holding the rammer head in his right hand (as before) he is to take the
bullett out of his mouth, or out of his bullett-bagg at the pistol case, with
the thumb and fore finger, and putt it into the muzzle of the pistol, and the
Rammer immediately after it, and then rams it home.



13. He is to draw forth his Rammer with the right hand turned, and to return
it to its place.

14 With the bridle-hand he is to bring the pistol toward his right side, and
placing the butt end upon his thigh, pulls down the Cock.

15 He is to take the Pistol into his right hand, mounting the muzzle upward.

16. Having the Pistol in his right hand (as in posture 15) with his
forefinger upon the tricker, he is to incline the muzzle (with a fixed eye)
toward his mark, not suddenly but by degrees (quicker or slower according to
the space he rides) and that not directly forward toward the horse head, but
toward the right, turning his right hand so as the lock of the pistol may be
upward, and having gotten his mark he is to draw the tricker, and so give fire.

17. He is to return his pistol into the Case, and then draws out his other
pistol (as occasion may serve) and does as before, and thus much for the
postures of the fire lock pistol.

Now concerming the Snap-hane pistol, or Snap-hane Carabine (more usual in
England then in these Countries) those postures, wherein they differ from the
fire-lock pistol are these following, which beginn with the 18 Figure.

18. Holding the pistol in the bridle-hand as before has bin showed in Figure
14. with the right hand he is to bend the Cock.

19. With the right hand he is to pull down the back lock, and to secure the
cock from going of.

20. With the right hand he is to draw down the hammer upon the pan.

21. With the right thumb he is to thrust back the back-lock, and so to give
the Cock liberty. The 22. the 23. and the 24. figures show the marching
postures of a Harquebussier or a Carabine.

The Postures for the Snap-hane Carabine used in England, are some thing
differing from the fire-lock pistols, which Captain Cruso has set down in
his 30 Chapter, and Follio 43. and are these.
1. Order your Carabine. 2. Sink your Carabine into your bridle hand. 3. Bend
your Cock. 4. Guard your Cock. 5. Prime. 6. Shutt your pann. 7. Cast about your
Carabine. 8. Take forth your Cartouch. 9. Lade your Carabine. 10. Draw your
rammer. 11. Shorten your Rammer. 12. Lade your bullet and ramm home. 13. With
draw your Rammer. 14. Shorten your Rammer. 15. Return your Rammer. 16. Recover
your Carabine, 17. Order your hammer. 18. Free your Cock* 19. Present. 20. Give
fire. For the use of his sword he is to demean him self as the Cuirassier
Observations for the making of Cartouches.
Seeing that flasks are now grown out of use among our Horsemen, for the
gaining of time, and the quicker giving of fire, especially upon a skirmish, or
in a battle, it is needful for to make Cartouches. Now the Cartouch is to be
made of white paper, cut out of a convenient breadth, and length, and rolled
upon a stick (or the Rammer if it be not too little) fit (according to the bore
of the barrel) to contain the due charge of powder and the bullett. The
proportion of powder usually required is half the weight of the Bullett: but
being strong and fine pistol powder, it is held too much in the opinion of
some men. Having molded then the paper to fit the Calibre, or boore of your
pistol (as is said) the one end of it is to be turned in (to keep in the
powder) and the due charge of powder to be putt into it at the other end, which
powder is to be clossed in by tying a little thread about the paper, then the
bullett is to be putt in, and that also to be tied in with a little thread, and
when the Curassier, or Harquebussier is to use his Cartouch, he must bite of
the paper at the head of it at the powder and, and so putt it into the barrel
of his pistol with the bullet upward, and then ram it home for a readiness
upon any piece of service.



Brief observations touching the exercising of Cavallerie, through their
several motions, as it is commanded amongst us by the Prince of Orange, and
what a young Horseman ought to know before the exercising of his Esqadron, or
troop begins.
FIrst as among the foot Companies, so the Horse troops are ranged into Files
and Ranks, and their choicest men are made Leaders of files, and bringers up.

Secondly, Distance is also observed, namely, Closse Order, and Open Order.
The Closse order is taken at three foot distance, and the open order at six
foot distance, between rank and rank, and file and file, yea, noe more then
a Horse can well turn about, and in the standing of six foot, or open order
in rank and file they are to do their motions.

Thirdly, it is necessary, that a Horsman understand well the several motions
used in the exercising of a troop, or Battaillon of Horse, which are these
three observed amongst us. 1. Facings. 2. Countermarching. 3. Wheelings.

1. The use of Facing, either to the right, or left hand, or to the Reere, is
to make a Troop, or Battaillon of Horse perfect to be suddenly prepared for a
charge on either Flank or in the Reere. 2. Countermarches serve either to
reduce the File-leaders into the place of the Bringers up, and so to have the
best men ready to receive the charg of an Ennemie in the Reere, or to bring
one flank into the place of an other. 3. Among the Horse Wheelings, either to
the right, or left hand, or to the Reere about, is of excellent use to bring
the Front which consist of the ablest men to be ready to receive a charge, or
to give a charge upon an Ennemie on either Flank, or in the Reere.
Note that doubling of Ranks, doubling of files, as also doubling of half
files, and half Ranks is ommitted amongst our Horse, because according to his
highness Command, the files of the Horse are but five deep, in regard
whereof there is always an odd rank.

The Demonstration of the figures on the other side, answering to every Number
of the words of Command videlizet.
4 Shows the form of a Squadron of Horse, consisting of 30 men standing first
in their close order, at three foore distance one from another both in Rank and
file. 5 Shows that their ranks are opened backward to six foot distance, or
their open order in rank and file. 6 Shows that their files are also opened
to six foot distance, and now stands in their open order both in rank and
file. Note that in opening of their files, the two middlemost Files open first
to their distance of 6 foot, and the other files both to the right and left
hand also, till they are in their open order. 7 Shows the clossing of their
files to their closse order, observing also that first the two middlemost
files, take their distance first of 3 foot, and consequently the rest,
clossing both to the right and left hand. 8 Shows that the ranks are also
closed to their closse order, and that both ranks and files stand three foot
distance one from another as Number 4 demonstrates. Number 9 This motion is
performed by turning and facing all to the right hand. Number 10 This is done
by bringing them again to the first form in turning all to the left hand.
Number 11 To face them to the Reere, is done by turning all to the right hand,
till their faces front in that place, which was before the Reere. 12 Is to
reduce them to their first form by turning all to the right hand. 13 This is
performed by turning all at an instant to the left hand. 14 This serves to
reduce them to their first form, number 6 by turning to the right hand. 15 Is
to face them to the Reere, by turning all to the left hand, till their faces
front in that place, which was before the Reere. 16 This is done by turning all
to the right hand, standing in their first form as number 6 shows. 17 Shows
the Counter march from the right flank by turning all to the right hand. 18 Is
to bring them again to the right flank, by turning to the left flank. 19
Shows the Countermarch from the left flank, by turning to the left hand. 20
This reduces them again to the left flank in turning all to the right hand and
by giving the word of Command As ye were, and then they stand in the first
form, as number 4 demonstrates before they come to wheeling. 21 Shows the use
of wheeling, eitheir to the right hand, or the left hand, and is to bring the
front which is supposed to consist of the ablest men, to give or receive a
charge eitheir upon the right or left flank, or in the Reere, as has bin said.


THE ORDER, Which his Highness the PRINCE OF ORANGE, will have duly kept and
observed by the Captains of the troops of Horse upon their March, without any
alteration therein, unless by express Command.
Every troop shall be divided into three Corporallships, and in filing them,
they shall always follow this order, to wit, that before every Corporallship
an Officer shall ride. The Captain of the troop first, the Cornet before the
second, a Corporal before the third, and the Lieutenant in the Reere of the
Troop. And if any of these Officers should be wanting as the Captain of the
Troop, the Lieutenant shall march in his place, and if the Lieutenant be
wanting, a Corporal shall march in the place of the said Lieutenant. And if
they have any Bedets, a principal Soldier shall be appointed over them, to see
that they keep their closse order in marching. The Quartermasters place is to
march with the Lieutenant in the Reere.

2. The Files shall never be made noe deeper then five horses, how great or
small so ever the troop be: so that if the troop consist of a hundred Horse,
every Corporallship shall have five, or six horse in a rank, and five in a
file. And the Officer shall be careful when he is to draw out the files in a
narrow way, which is long and that there can pass but three Horses in a rank,
then they shall devide the Corporallship into two parts: but if the way will
permit it, then they shall not devide the Corporalship, but march with five or
six in a Rank as abouesaid.

3. The Officers shall command the Soldiers expressly that in marching, they
always keep the distance of three foot between file and file, and six foot
between rank and rank, and that they never ride noe faster then the pace,
unless they becommaunded to the contrary.

4. There shall be noe more distance left, between each Corporallship, then is
needful for an Officer to march betwixt them.

5. The Lieutenant and Quartermaster, which brings up the Reere of the Troop,
shall take care that the Soldiers in the Reere shall begin to march, as soon
as those in the front move, and that they observe well their distance, and see
that they do not straggle out of their ranks and files.

6. A Troop of Horse standing in Battaille, the Lieutenant and the
Quartermaster shall have their place in the Reere of the Troop.

7. In marching and filing of the Troops, they shall follow one another so
closse, that there shall be noe more place left, but as will serve just for the
Trumpetters Horses, and the Captains.

In the year 1635. his Highness ordered the Lords the States Horse consisting
of eighte troops of Curassiers and Harquebussiers into Regiments, to wit four
troops of Curassiers into one division, or Battaillon, and four Troops of
Harquebussiers into an other Battaillon, both which made a Regiment, over which
a Colonel Commanded. Note also that coming to march over a Heath, or a
Compagnie. As the foot, so may the troops and Regiments of Horse be
embattelled, and ranged into three Brigades, as the Avantguard, the Battle and
the Reere, which is a goodle sight. And thus much in brief, of the Officers,
of the Arming, of the managing, of the exercising, and marching of our
Cavallrie and Horse, Practiced in the Wars of the United Provinces, under the
charge and command of his Highness the PRINCE of ORANGE our Victorious
General.

FINIS.

