VOX SECVNDA POPVLI. OR, The Commons gratitude to the most Honorable PHILIP,
Earl of Pembroke and Mongomery, for the great affection which he always bore
unto them.

By Tho. Herbert.

My reward is from above.



Printed in the year 1641.

To the right honorable Philip Herbert, Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery, Baron
Herbert of Cardife, and Shirland, Lord Parre and Roos, of Kendal, Marmion, and
Saint Quintine, Lord Warden of the Stanaties in the County of Devon, and
Cornwall, Lord Lieutenant of Kent, Cornwall, Somerset, and Wiltes, Lord
Chamberlain to his Majesty, Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter,
Chancellor of the University of Oxford, and one of his Majesty's most honorable
privy Counsel.
Great SIR,
THe fancy of my Muse is forced to pause.
If that your Honor do require the cause,
It Is this, I was not able to express
In you, what is Great Britains happiness.
I long was wooed to write your deserved praise,
And by so doing, promised was the Bays,
Which Caesar's Virgil wore, but tender years
To write that subject, filled my Muse with fears;
But yet again a Herberts name did move
Me for to write, and in it express my love,
Or rather duty, to your Honors fame,
Who as yet did never deserve the least blame,
Which envy would enforce; Pardon I crave,
That is the boon which I alone would have,
From you (great Sir.) Alas I was too bold,
For to write that, I do know you hold
As nothing; it is your sole desire
To inflame England with a zealous fire.
THOMAS HERBERT.

BEfriend me Apollo, lend me Orpheus lire,
TO inchant the ears of men, make them admire:
Take home my Muse unto thy clearest spring,
And wash her clean, then teach her how to sing
Heroic strains; for I must dedicate
This Poem to a man that scorns curld fate:
He Is true to King and country, all will say;
The clouds of treason never eclipst his day.
Some Angel dropped a quill from out his wing,
And bad me write, whilst he called Fame to sing.
O glorious Cl^o, wash my muddy brain,
And teach me write some high aspiring strain,
such as might make the starry host to wonder,
And make great Jove forget that he can thunder.
But I Am amazed, and this is all I fear,
Jove thinks himself not safe whilst Pembroke's here.
Methinks I see how Mars looks pale to see
A man in arms, more brave, more stout than he:
And Neptune tell't, his skill upon the main
Is more than can b'exprest by my dull strain;
And Hermes offers him the greatest ods,
To yield him Messenger unto the gods.
Once Venus viewed him as he walked to see
The Spring adorned in her green livery:
She strait forgot Adonis, and grew coy
To her aspiring Mars, and called him Boy.
Wished him look down upon the fertile earth,
Who had out-shone bright heaven by his birth.
Hebe was so overcome with his bright eyes,
She Would like to have drowned the bright translucent skies.
Looking on him, she stumbled, all appalld,
The place she died with Nectar, Galactia called;
Nor is it heaven alone admires to see
This royal man, this brave Epitomie
Of all true virtue, he is the worlds wonder,
Men's shouts do clangor in the air as thunder.
Have you not seen men holloo forth this strain,
God save our King, and the Lord Chamberlain?
Have you not heard them whisper as you go,
There goes Lord Pembrook, terror to our Foe?
The King does hold him dear, the reason why,
None of his race did with a tympanie
Of high aspiring treason break, but all
Were true by proof, they were authentical.
I Am struck with wonder, I cannot express,
In his brave parts, our Kingdoms happiness.
I Have seen some meteors glimmer in the sky;
But after one brave blaze they fall and die.
Your fixed stars, though, still keep their course and stand,
As Vassals, Tendants to great Jove's command:
To make reply, my Muse dares not aspire,
He Is sure to burn, that does but touch the fire.
He Is sure a Fool that strives to pull down stars,
I must not speak, when any high wheel jars.
It Is now Vox Populi that is my Theme,
Come quick invention, from Pernassus stream:
Bring Tempe's sweetness on thy nimble wing,
Perfume the bright air, which so loud shall ring
At thy return, as did the youths of Troy,
When they enjoyed brave Hector, Priams joy.
Touch the earth weeds, make them in sweetness join,
With the fine planted fragrant Eglantine.
As thou come by make thou O Pembrooke laugh,
We write Encomiums not an Epitaph.
When thou have done this then return again
And Helicon reward thee for thy pain.
Give me that man that scorns the teeming earth,
When it is in labor with abortive birth:
He equals the best seconded by none,
And Golden lines shall garnish his brave tomb.
The common voice will always thus express,
In the brave Herbert lies our happiness:
Thou art that Hermes Usher to the sun,
Thou art his Gardiant when the day is done:
You are a Plague to Papists, friend to those,
Who to base Antichrist are sworn foes.
The Pope does tremble at our Herberts name,
The Turks and Sultan heap your spreading fame.
Let us rejoice and Io sing as loud
As thunder shot from a divided cloud.
Our King's the Sun within our Horoscope,
A terror to the Devil and the Pope;
Our Nobles are those fixed stars which do shine
In their due place, each man in his line,
Those who have strived t'usurpe our great Joves throne,
My joys so great to them I cannot mourn.
Brave Pembrooke has so filled our hearts with joy,
The Commons cry this is the pride of Troy.
One that will venture each limb with his life,
To keep the Vulgar from all foreign strife.
O what a joyful thing it was to hear,
How we not long since lovingly did cheer.
The Commons hearts, when Justice they did crave,
He pawnd his Honor, Justice they should have.
Which to the Commons did give such content,
As that their prayers quick to heaven they sent.
That more such Peers in England he would send,
So should all Taxes cease, and Schisms end.
Another said, had Wentworth been like him,
He had not feared in bloody streams to swim.
Or if that Fiend, a third man he did say,
Each man his verdict of him, did bring in,
Not our convicting him of Traitors sin.
His virtues all admired singing again,
Long live our King Charles and his Lord Chamberlane.
Long live our King and crown him with such Peers,
That he may reign most joyful many years.
Your true hacht Eagle will not prey on flies,
Nor good men blot themselves with treacheries:
Virtue shall live, but Infamy kills dead
Each sprouting fortune in her maidenhead.
You that are stained with treasons inky blot,
And envy those men which as you are not,
Look on our subject, Envy will grow mild,
To hate this man none sure can be so vilde.
Shall the whole kingdom ring a peale of praise
Unto your Honor, and shall not I raise
My Ela strain, and stretch my throat to sing,
Out-caroll all our birds in the pleasant spring?
But O! one virtue here among the rest
I have observed, deserves the term of best:
Your Honors humble daigning to give ear
Unto the abjectst vassal that comes near
Your Honor; but pray pardon my dull pen,
That I should foremost of an host of men
Uncase my rustic Muse, which bawles so loud,
As if begot of Ixion in a clowd.
Your virtues do deserve a Virgils strain,
An Ovids verse, and not a homespun brain.
The splendour of your virtues dim the skies,
Which I cannot look on with a Buzzards eyes:
Your Sails spread high, with greatest fortunes flow,
Excuse my gazing up, standing below.
The Commons voice runs thus of you, I see
The abstract of virtue, and Epitomee
Of all Morality: He is the man
That gains the hearts of all, do what all can.
Methinks it is nonsense to gainsay the right,
Or to deny the Sun-beame gives clear light:
Vox Populi does speak, we all agree,
Our best estates owe Chamberlain a Fee,
Which must be paid with love, for he loves all
Which loyal are: Desert daserves no fall.
O! had my Muse been eloquent to raise
A fancy which might elevate the praise
Of his scarce paraleld virtue, surely then,
Writing his worth, I had got praise of men.
But O, my wits were dull, I wanted strain,
Calliope slept, she was not in the vain
For to assist me. Ye Commons me excuse,
If height of your good wishes I abuse:
My wits were dull; but yet to after-age
His merits shall be shown upon the stage.
FINIS.

