REPORTS AND CASES TAKEN In the third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh years
of the late KING CHARLES.

As they were argued by most of the Kings Sergeants at the Common Pleas Bar.

COLLECTED and REPORTED, By that Eminent Lawyer, Sir Thomas Hetley Knight,
Sergeant at Law, sometimes of the Honorable Society of Grayes-Inne, and
appointed by the King and Judges for one of the Reporters of the Law.

Now Englished, With an exact Table of the Principal matter therein contained,
and likewise of the Cases, both Alphabetical.

LONDON, Printed by F. L. for Matthew Walbancke at Grayes-Inne Gate, and Thomas
Firby, near Grayes-Inne in Holborn, 1657.

To the Reader.
READER,
I Have here recommended to you some few Cases, Reported by one eminently
famous in the Law; One whom (I believe) the King Ex certa scientia and mero
motu advanced to that Honorable Employment, as you find.

The Cases we see are Modern, and therefore more generally known by most of
your Ancient Practicers now being. There is excellent Learning in every Case,
To which you have the Testimony of a worthy Person, Sergeant Clark. You may
perchance wonder why one Case is particularly in French! Truly the Esteem that
I not only set upon the Law, but its pristine Language, induced me to give the
Book a relish with that, which is not ungrateful (I believe) to any Lawyer. If
others carpe at it, because they understand it not, or have any particular
Odium to the Tongue, I desire them not to rant at my Author, but let their
Mothers Tongue hiss at me. To invent Terms and Panegyricks on the Author, or
his Writings, with that vulgar intention of some, will make me ridiculous, and
be dishonorable both to his Person and Profession. But the greatest Rhetoric
and Epethites you can endeavor at, to complement the Reporter (because if
there be a failer of Selling, the Stationer will say the Remora was in my
Epistle, and not in the Cases) is not so great as. Reader these are Sir Thomas
Hetleys Reports.

I Conceive that these reported Cases may be very useful, and so fit to be
printed.

Jo. Clark.
9th Febr. 1656.
A TABLE OF THE CASES Contained in this BOOK.
A
ABree against Page. 9 Ayliffs Case. 10 Abrees Case again. 15 Andrews against
Bird. 33 Allen against Westby. 93 The same. 117 Andrews against Hutton. 130
Alleston against Moor. 167
B
BLackhall against Thursby. 2 Bowet and Langhams Case. 9 Bear against Hodges.
12 Bailiffs Servant. ibid. Bear and Hodges again. 16 Beguall against Owen. 31
Booth against Franklin. 33 Barret against Barret. 63 Bradlies against Johnson.
63 Bromleys Case. 66 Lady Burtons Case. 68 Bentons Case. 73 Bateman against
Ford. 81 Benson against Saukeridge. 84 Bibble against Cunningham. 89 Binge
against Hodges. 107 Bristows Case. ibid. Bromfields Case. 110 Brown against
Hancock. 111 Barleys Case. 118 Braces Case. 120 Brag and Bristows Case. 126
Bells Case. 134 Beckrows Case. 138 Bill against Sir Arthur Lake. ibid. Boydens
Case. 148 Bachus and Hiltons Case. 150 Browns Case. 164 Buts against Foster.
165 Baker against Webberly. 171
C
CHichely Dame against Bishop Ely. 17 Creedlands Case. 18 Vicar of Cheshams
Case. 54 Comins Case. 60 Comin against Carre. 61 Crooks Case. 72 Conyer's Case.
77 Cholaner against Ware. ibid. Cocket against Delayhay. 114 Calthrop against
Allen. 119 Coventries Case. Clotworthy against Clotworthy. 137 Costrill against
Sir George Moor. 143 Cambridge University. 145 Clotworthy against Clotworthy.
148 Wife of Clobarn against her Husband. 149 Cason against her Husbands
Executor. 158 Cave Sir William against Sir William Fleetwood. 159 Canterbury
Archbishop against Hudson. 164 Crompton against Waterford. 167 Coxhead against
Coxhead. 168 Champues Case. 166 Collins against Thoroughgood. 171 Chamberlins
Case. 172 Crosses Case. 177
D
DUncomb against Sir Edmond Randall. 34 Davies against Fortescue. 56 Doyly an
Infants Case. ibid. Dicksons Case. 64 Deakins Case. 73 Doswell against James.
79 Dolbins Case. ibid. Dicksons Case. 90 Den against Borough. 105 Dickson
and Ux. against Blyth. 110 Den and Sparks Case. 113 Dawthorn against Bullock.
131 Sir Richard Dorrell against Blagrave. 135 Deins Case. 148 Dixy against the
Bailiffs of Darby. 159 Darlyes Case. 177
E
EAton and Morris's Case. 11 Eve against Wright. 21 Eaton against Ayliff. 94
Eaglechilds Case. 167
F
FAwkner against Bellingham. 28 Fawns Case. 31 Fawkner against Bellingham. 38
Feaks against 69 Fenne against Thomas. 73 Fawkners Case. 74 Fossams Case. 79
Fox against Vaughan and Hall. 86 Faulkners Case. 88 Fortescue against Jobson.
90 Fox Sir Charles's Case. 91 Fawkner against Bradly. 95 Farrington against
Kemarre. 101 Fowlers Case. 116 Feltons Case. 126 Farmer against Sherman. 133
Fawkenbridges Case. 144 Flower against Vaughan. 147 Foxes Case. 157
G
GAmmons Case. 17 Giles against Balam. 19 Gammons Case again. 26 Goodridges
Case. 37 Garton against Mellows. 50 Grimston against an Inkeeper. 51 Grange and
Ux. against Grimstone. 55 Gerrard against Boden. 80 Groves against Osborn. 81
Gammon against Malborn. 84 Ganfords Case. 85 Gamons Case. 93 Goddard and Tylers
Case. 100 Gosse against Skipton. 117 Gooderidges Case. 119 Grays Case. 134 Gee
against Egan. 169 Green against Bronker et al. 166 Gosse against Brown. 175
Gibbes against Jenkins. ibid.
H
HUmbleton against Buck. 4 Hartopp and Tucke against Dalby 14 Humbletons Case
before. 21 Heels Case. 32 The Vicar of Hallifaxes Case. 34 Howes Case. 38
Hassel Executors Case. 48 Hodges against Franklin. 51 Harris against Mar. 57
Harvey against Fitton. 68 Hobsons Case. 73 Holt Sir Thomas against Sir Thomas
Sandbars. 74 Holford against Gibbes. 85 Hamkeridges Case. 88 Humbertons Case.
97 Howsons Case. 104 Hall and Blundells Case. ibid. Holmes against Cheney. 106
Humlocks Case. 109 Holmes against Cheny. 113 Harding against Turpin. 132
Hutchinson against Chester. ibid. Sir John Halls Case. 130 The same. 131 Hide
against Ellis. 133 Haws's Case. 141 Hides Case. 146 Harris against Lea. ibid.
Hitcham against an Attorney. 169, 172 Hadves against Levit. 176
I
Johnson against Morris et al. 30 James et al. against Thoroughgood. 31 Ireland
against Higgins. 52 Ienkins Case. 52 Johnson against Williams, 55 Jenkin
against Lime. 56 Ieffreys Case. ibid. Jacobs Case. 75 Ienkins against Dawson.
78 Jacob against Jacob. 83 Iohnsons Case. 88 Isham and Lawns Case. 97 Jenkins's
Case. 119 Iohnsons Case. 145 Iennings against Cousins. 165
K
KItton against Watts. 12 The King against Clough. 83 The King against the
Bishop of Canterbury. 99 Keen against Cox. 119 The King against the Archbishop
of Canterbury et al. 124 Knight against Simonds. 146
L
LOwen against Cocks. 63 Lynne against Conningham. 95 Luvered against Owen. 121
Litman against West. 123 Lashes Case. 132
M
MArsh against Culpepper. 1, 8 Mady against Osan et al. 4 Marshes Case again.
11 Manser against Jews. 18 vel 21 Moor against Penrud dock. 38 Manninghams
Case. 115 Mercer et ux. against Cardock. 119 Monday against Martin. 120
Middleton against Sir John Shelley 133 Merrick against King. 137 Sir Richard
Moors Case. ibid. Moor against Everay. 144 Mosses Case. 148 Mortimers Case. 150
Earl of Mulgrave against Ratcliff. ib. Malins Case. 164 Male against Ket. 172
N
NOrtherns Case. 57 Norbery against Watkins. ibid. Norris against Isham. 81
Norton Joyce et al. against Harmer. 88 Newton against Sutton. 105 Nortons Case.
110 The same. 117 Napper against Steward. 133 Nurse against Pounford. 161
O
OWen Dorothy against Owen Price. 22 Owen against Price. 29 Overalls Case. 157
Overalls Case. 158
P
PAston against William Manne. 5 Provender against Wood. 32 Peto Sir Edward
against Pemberton. 52 Perriman against Bowden. 59 Palmers Case. 62 Panton
against Hassell. ibid. Pease against Thompson. 66 Peitoe's Case. 71 Plowmans
Case. 73 Peter's against Field. 75 Perkins against Butterfield. ibid. Mrs. Peels
Case. 107 Port against Yates. 114 Page against Tailor. ibid. Pinsons Case. 125
Plummers Case. 130 Countess of Purbecks Case. 131
R
REadings Case. 18 Rows Case. 32 Margery Rivers Case. 35 Rivets Case. 60
Roberts and others. 61 Rothwells Case. 91 Row and Dewbancks Case. 94 Rolls
against How. 117 Read against Eaglefield. 122 Rises Case. 147 Rawlings's Case.
161 Rawling against Rawling. 163 Raveys Case. 175
S
SMith against Dr. Clay. 3 Smith against Secheverill. 51 Score and Randalls
Case. 57 Score against Randall. 66 Symons against Symons. 66 Stamford and
Coopers Case. 72 Spark against Spark. 73 Saulkells Case. 78 Swintons Case. 84
Stanleys Case. 93 Dame Sherleys Case. 95 Sacheverills Case. 105 Strange against
Atthowe. 116 Spencer Sir John against Scroggs. 121 Stone against Walsingham.
123 The same. 128 Smith and al. against Panel. 132 Scot against Wall. 133
Starkey against Tailor. 139 Simcocks against Hussy. 142 Starkeys Case. 143
Sheriff Surrey against Alderton. 145 Springhall against Tuttersbury. 157 Stone
against Tiddersly. 177
T
THomas et Ux. against Newark 2 Tailor against Phillips. 10 Thomas's Case. 38
Thomsons Case. 53 Tomkins's Case. 57 Traver against the Lord Bridgewater et Ux.
62 Tomlins's Case. 64 Thomas against Morgan. 67 Tomlinsons Case. 75 Executors
of Tomlinsons Case. 76 Thornells Case. 93 Thomas and Kennis's Case. 97 Thompson
against Thompson, 110 Turner against Hodges. 126 Tailors Case. 136 Turner
against Disbury. 149 Tomlins's Case. 163 Tomlinsons Case. 168 Tomkins's Case.
171
V
VIner et Ux. against Lawson. 14 Viner against Eaton. 86
W
VVIlcocks Case. 27 Wood against Simons. 34 Wilkin against Thomas. 52
Wildshires Case. 54 Wentworth against Abraham. 55 Warberleys Case. 57
Winchester Bishop against Markham. ibid. Wilkinsons Case. 56 Waterton against
Loadman. ibid. Winchesters Mayor and Commonalties Case. 57 Wolfes Case. 59
Wilkinsons Case. 59 Waddingtons Case. 59 Williams against Bickerton. 63 Wilkins
against Thomas. 65 Watson against Vanderlash. 69 Wakeman against Hawkins. 72
Williams against Thirkill. 73 Wilkinsons Case. 76 Wimberley against Tailor et
al. ib. Whiddons Case. 77 Wakemans Case. 78 Wiggons against Darcey. 79
Woolmerstons Case. 85 Warmer against Barret. 87 Walsingham and Stones Case. 107
Wroth against Harvey. 119 Winchcombe against Shepard. ib. Marquess of
Winchesters Case. 120 Wilson against Peck. 129 Wats against Conisby. 132 Dr.
Wood and Greenwoods Case. 135 Sir Francis Worthly against Savill. 142 Wardens
Case. 146 Wood against Carverner. 147 Williams against Floyd. 168 Waters
against Thomson. 171
Y
YOungs Case. 54
A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL MATTER IN THIS BOOK.
A
THe assumpsion of the Husband shall in an Account charge the Wife fo. 1.
Action upon a libellous Letter. 10 Action for perjury, and what makes it. 12
Where a demand intitles to an Action 13, 16 Whether a Tenant in Quid juris
clamat may attourn, without being sworn to do fealty to the Lord. 16 Action for
words brought by a Maid. 18. An arrest on Christmas day going to Church, in the
Churchyard, may be censured. 19 Attorney fined for arresting in Actions of
Debt without original. 29 Assumption upon marriage. 30 Action for saying one
forged Deeds. 31 Action on the Case for stopping a River. 34 An Action for
words brought by a Counstable. 36 Consideration upon an Assumpsit is not
traversable, but he ought to plead the general Issue. 50 Action upon the
Statute de Scandalis magnatum. 55 Those who sue at the Assise have protection.
33 Action for words. 63 Action for words against a Surgeon. 69, 70, 71
Warrant of Attorney may be entered after the Record removed. 59 Action for
words, he has forged a Deed, etc. 114 Action for saying he is falsely forsworn
before, etc. 119 Whether in an Account there ought to be a certainty for what.
85, 106, 113, 122 Alimony is not within the High Commission Court. 95 High
Commissioners have no conusans of Adultery. 108 Administrator has the same
power as an Executor. 116 Appearance by Attorney saves an Obligation given to
the Sheriff to appear. 117 Action for calling one a Daffidowndilly. 123 Action
the Case for words against Attorney. 139 Convicted Barretor spoken to a common
person is actionahle. 143 A man having Land in right of his Wife in trust, they
cannot both join in the Action, but the Hushand only. ib. Action for words,
Thou have stolen my corn out of my Barn. 172 An Action for Welsh words. 175
B
Where a Bailiff shall be charged for money levied by him without warrant. 12
Justification as Bailiff upon a Distress. ib. Recovery in Battery had against
one, the other in another Action for the same Battery may plead the First. 20,
33, 49 Garton against Mellows in Battery. 50 In Battery against Baron and Feme,
the wife ought to plead as well as the Baron. 10
C
What amounts to a forfeiture of a Copihold. 6, 7 In consideration the
Testator was indebted and you will forbear, good consideration. 8. 62 A Chanceller
cannot alter a Judgment at Common, see how he may proceed against him. 20 One
may distreyn for amerciament in a Court Leet. 21, 62 Judgment given in an
Inferior Court, shall not be executed by Writ of a Superior Court. 26 Officer
of Common Pleas ought to be answered in any Action de die in diem. 29 They may
examine in Chancery before Trial. 30 Appearance of Clarks in Court ought to be
in proper person. 36 Writ of Covenant brought upon a Lease of a Parsonage. 54
Cestui que use in tail, what remedy. 57 Where Habeas Corpus on occasion may be
returnable immediate. 2 Custom the life of a Copihold. 6 Leet is the Kings
Court. 62 If a Chattel personal be suspended by suit, it is gone for ever. 71
The breach of the Covenant is the cause of Action. 212 If Copiholder make a
Lease for years to commence at Michaclmas, it is a forfeiture presently. 122
Where Custom ought to be showed, and where not. 159 A Writ of Enquiry may be
granted after Verdict, when the Jury omit the damages. 161 Upon Contracts the
party shall have the Action to whom the Interest belongs. 176
D
NO discontinuance after Verdict. 3 To deny the Rent is a Disseisin. 6 Demand
of Rent ought to be according to the reservation in the Deed. 59 Declaration or
Replication ought to be certain to all intents. 60 Debt by Paroll discharged by
Paroll. 73 Beasts distrained for Damage fesant not put in the open Pound, if
they dye the Distreyn is chargeable. 75 A demand before a Distress, if the
Demand is out of the Land, if not then, see 86 Where Damages shall not be
mitigated. 93 Where a Demand ought to be certain, and where not. 109 On a
Devastavit a Writ de bonis propriis issues. 110 If a Debtee mary Debtor, what
becomes of the Debt, see 120 In what Cases A, must declare tam pro domino rege
quam pro seipso. 122 Double delay not allowed. 126
E
DElay in arrear of Error not hinder Execution. 17 If a Sheriff remove his
Prosoner out of the County without command, It is Escape. 34 Where he permits
him to go for his pleasure, Escapes lies. ibid. Ne unque Executor found against
him upon a Scire fac. shall be only de bonis testat. 48 Eject. firm. lies
against Tenant at Will, if he leases for years. 73 If the Conisee permits the
Conisor being in execution to go at large, be an Escape. 79 Excommunication to
strike in the Church. 86 If an Executor dies before probate, the Goods belong
to the Administrator of the first Testator. 105 A Rent upon Condition reserved
to the Executors, goes to the Administrator. 115 If a devise be void, if no
Executor be made. 118 Ejectments do not lie of a Manor. 146 In Ejectment he
ought to show the certain quantity of Land. 176 Ancient Demesne is a good Plea
in Ejectments. 177
F
A Franktenement cannot pass from a day to come. 29 Feoffment to the use of a
Stranger, ought to be tendered to him. 56 Denial of the Rent a Forfeiture. 6 A
Subject may have a Forest, but not a Justice Seat. 60 No Clergy for Felony
committed upon the high way, otherwise upon the foot way. 75 In a Formedon he
ought to make himself heir to him who died seized last of the EEstate tail. 78
Felony to take Pigeons out of a Dovecoat. 149 Fieri Facias no Bar to the
Capias although part of the debt be satisfied. 159
I
INdictment quassavit for incertainty. 35 Upon a Judgment, if the Money be
paid to the Attorney it is good, but otherwise of a Scrivener. 48 Inne-Keeper
ought to say in his Action, transiens hospitavit. 49 If Land be descended to an
Infant, the Sheriff shall surcease his extent. 54, 59 Judgment had against an
Infant may be reversed. 65 Judgment reversed for want of Pledge. 59 Imparlance
roll may be amended. 143 Infans habeat eandem actionem possessoriam qualiter
antecessor. 160 An issue mistaken cannot be amended. 164
K
IF the King enters upon any Tenant, a Petition of right lies. 29 The King
cannot take a man in execution out of Prison to his wars, causa vid. 57.
L
Whether a Lease to two be determined by the death of one. 85 Whether a Grant
of Estovers out of another place, than was the Lease, be good. 78 Libell for
the Seat in a Church. 94 Where upon a Lease the Heir shall be estopped, and
where not. 91 Libell for Tithes of two pecks of Apples. 100
M
What things go to the making of a Feme sole Merchant. 9 Where inter-mariage
is but a suspension of a promise. 12 An action brought in consideration of a
marriage. 50 How a Lord shall recover in a Writ de valor maritagii. 55
O
FOr what Causes an Outlawry may be reversed. 93
P
IN Partition no damages are to be recovered. 34 Prescription for Sallery of a
Vicar is tryable at Common law. 33 Prohibition where the thing might be tried,
and proved at Common law. 15 Where Prohibitions shall be granted and where not.
19, 27, 28, 49, 50, 51, 60, 68, 69. Parson cannot discontinue. 88 Prohibition
upon words. 94 A Protestando is no Answer. 104 Symony a good suggestion for a
Prohibition. 116 Whether a Prohibition may be without alleging a Custom. 117
Per minas pleaded. 121
R
Whether the word Successive so makes a Limitation of a Remainder, good matter
and Cases thereupon. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26 If a Feme sole Executrix of a Term mary
him in reversion and dies, the Term is not drowned. 36 Release of Actions and
Suits substantive bars Debt. 15 Null tiel Record replied where Recusancy convict
is pleaded by the Defendant, the Record must be shown. 18 Where a Reversion
passes without Attornment. 73 Where one Request may serve for several Debts. 84
Whether on a Rescous the Action shall be brought by the Plaintiff against the
Rescousor, or against the Sheriff. 95 Where no averment against a Record. 107
Where a Feme shall be remitted, and what makes a Remitter. 110 No Rescous can
be of Goods. 145 Arrerages for rent upon an Estate for life cannot be forfeit
for Outlawry. 164
S
TO grant a Supersedias there must be execution erronice emanavit alleged. 30
Surrender determines the Interest of all parties but a Stranger. 51 In Case of
Symony the Statute makes the Church void. 51 No fee due to the Sheriff for the
executing of a cap. utlagat. 52 That he might arrest the Kings Servant upon
this Writ. ibid. Quicquid plantatur solo cedit solo. 57
T
TRover and conversion brought for a load of wheat. 22 A discharge of Tithes by
the Parson for years runs with the Land, and not with the person. 31 Where toll
ought to be pleaded in Trover and conversion. 49 Trespass against Baron et feme
dum sola fuit, both shall be taken. 53 If Part and Portion a like make joint
tenancy, or tenancy in Common. 55 Trespass brought by Baron and Feme, they must
not say ad damnum ipsorum, otherwise of Jointenants. 2 Tithes of Fish due
merely by Custom. 13 Tithes, where due by the Common law of the Land, no
Prohibition. ibid. Tithes of Limekills. 14 The word Equally makes Tenancy in
Common. 64 No Trespass lies against a Disseisors Lessee 66 Where Tithes of
young Cattle. 85, 93 Tithes for hedging Wood. 18 A Term evicted on Elegit is
grantable upon a Statute Merchant or Staple, not tithes for milk of Calves. 100
No Composition for tithes for life without Deed. 107 No tithes for Estovers
burnt in an House. 110
V
A Special Verdict may be amended according to the notes given to the Clark. 52
A Verdict finding matter repugnant, or which cannot come in question, binds not
the Court. 4 If a Scrivener, not the party, reserve more than just interest, no
Usury. 11 Where the Visne and the return differ, it is not good. 83 If
Defendant dies between Verdict and Judgment, Judgment will be stayed. 90
Whether Beer Brewers are within the Statute and intent of Victuallers. 101
W
Waste committed by a Stranger, the Lessee dies, no remedy against the
Seranger. 97 Tenant for life and he in remainder may join in Waste. 105 The
Warden of the Fleet nor Westminster never may take Obligations for Diet. 146
REPORTS AND CASES TAKEN In the third, fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh years
of the Reign of the late King Charles, etc.
Ralph Marsh against John Culpepper.
RAlph Marsh brought an action upon the case against John Culpepper and Anne
his wife, for an Assumpsit made by Anne, dum sola fuit. And afterward the
Assumpsion is found by verdict. And Davenport moved in arrest of Judgment, for
that, that there was not a sufficient consideration; for whereas the wife was
Administratrix to Goddard her first husband, who was indebted to the Plaintiff
(for so the Plaintiff declared) and that he intended to sue the wife as
Administratrix, and that the wife requested him that two might surveigh the
account between her husband and the Plaintiff, to which the Plaintiff assented,
and that two surveighed it accordingly, when it appeared that the debt was due,
and that then the fore-acknowledgement, of her husband to be so indebted; In
consideration of the premises, assumed to pay the debt, part at Michaelmas, and
the other part at a convenient time after: But there is noe consideration to
make her chargeable, de bonis propriis, as their purpose is to make her, (by
their Declaration against her) and not as Administratrix: For it is not
mentioned that in consideration that she had assetts, or that the Plaintiff
would forbear to sue her, or otherwise, etc. So that the debt of her husband by
the Assumpsit cannot be changed to her own debt. And it is not like Banes case,
Co. Re. 9. 94. For there the Plaintiff was to forbear to sue him; and for that
assets is not requisite. The like is Beeches case, 15 Eliz. in that Court
reported, New Entries, fol. 2. Richardson of the same opinion, because there is
not any consideration, naught but the assent of the wise to the account; which
will hardly charge her de bonis propriis. See Co. lib. 6, 41.

Pasch. 3. Car. Com Banc.
Thomas and Ux. against Thomas Newark.
THomas and his wife brought Trespass against Tho. Newark for beating of the
wife, and taking of the goods of the husband only, ad damnum ipsorum; and
afterward the matter was found by verdict; and it was moved, that the
Declaration was naught; for the wife cannot join for a Trespass done to the
husband alone; but in a trespass done to the wife alone, the husband ought to
join, and for that the Court awarded, quod quere^ nil capiat per bill. But it
was said by Crook and Yelverton, if ba^on and feme bring trespass for the
beating the wife, the husband may declare for a trespass done to him, ad damnum
ipsius, etc. But it was said by Hutton, if two join in trespass for taking
goods whereof they were jointly possessed; one of them in an action cannot
declare for taking of the goods of him alone: Which was agreed by Crook, etc.

Blackhall against Thursby.
ONe Blackhall petitions in the Court of Requests, to compel Thursby. Lord of
the Manor to admit him to a Copyhold surrendered to his use, which he refused
before to do. And also forbad one, to whom the Copyhold was demised by
Blackhall, to pay him any rent Upon which it was decreed that Thursby should
admit him to a Message, and 17 acres, whereas the Copy was of a Message, and
3 acres; and also that Thursby should set forth the bounds of the Copyhold,
which he had defaced and removed, and that he pay the rent. Hitcham moved for a
prohibition; for he said it was more just for a Court of Equity to compel a
Lord to admit his Copyholder; for before admittance he cannot have an action,
and he has no remedy at the Common Law: And so if a Copyholder removes or
defaces the bounds of the Copyhold, it is proper for such a Court to design
them. To which the Court agreed; but they would not compel him to admit him to
the Message and 17 acres, where the Copy is but of three acres, which would be
unjust; unless that the 3 would comprehend the other 14. But parcel or not
parcel of Copyhold, belongs to the Common Law to try. But the Court denied the
prohibition for that cause; for the Justices said, that that admittance to 14
acres does not bind the title; but it sets at liberty as to that. But if they
had decreed; that he should be admitted and also enjoy it to him and his heirs,
then the Decree had been unjust, and a prohibition for that. But for part of
the Decree which touched the rent. It was agreed by the Court, if Thursby
receive the rents, the decree was just, that he should pay it; but if he did
not receive the rents, nor take the profits, but only forbad the Tenant to pay
the rent, and he would save him harmless. Then if it was decreed that he should
pay the rent, a prohibition to that part should be granted. And Harvey Justice
in that case said; That he knew it to be adjudg'd, that a surrender, with the
appurtenances, would pass land; And of a Message and 3 acres would pass more
acres; if diverse Copies successively have been so. And upon questioning of
Blackhall by the Chief Justice for saying, that after there was a Decree in the
Court of Equity, an Order of the Common-bench could not supersede the Execution
of it. And Justice Yelverton declared, That when he was in the circuit at York,
a poor man who sued before him in forma pauperis was arrested by process from
the Council of York. And that upon notice of it, he commanded a writ of
privilege to be made for him, but the Officer of the Council would not obey it;
upon which he claps in a Habeas Corpus returnable at a certain hour; and the
Officer came without the body, and refused to deliver the prisoner; and said
that he had not power to control the process of the Council. And upon that he
set a fine upon him of 40 l. and his Act was approved on by the whole Court.
For every one that sues before the Assize, ought to have free egress and
regress, and staying while his business was ended: And afterward the Lord
President said to Yelverton, that he would complain to the King and Privy
Council of him, for that he had transgressed his authority and power. And the
Court said that they would justify it, etc.

Smith against Doctor Clay.
HEnden moved for Doctor Clay Viccar of Hallifax, that a prohibition might be
granted to the High Commissioners of York For that, that these Articles by one
Smith were preferred against him, etc.

First that he read the holy Bible in an irreverent and undecent manner, to the
scandal of the whole Congregation.

Secondly, that he did not do his duty in preaching; but against his Oath, and
the Ecclesiastical Canon had neglected for sundry mornings to preach.

Thirdly, that he took the Cups and other Vessels of the Church, consecrated to
holy use, and employed them in his own house, and put barm in the Cups, that
they were so polluted, that the communicants of the Parish were loath to drink
out of them.

Fourthly, that he did not observe the last fast, proclaimed upon the
Wednesday, but on the Thursday, because it was an Holyday.

Fifthly, that he retained one Steveson in one of the Chapels of ease, who was
a man of ill life and conversation (scilicet) an Adulterer, and a Drunkard.

Sixthly, that he did not catechize according to the Parish Canon: but only
brought many of Dr. Wilkinsons Catechisms; for every of which he paid 2 d. and
sold them to his Parishoners for 3 d. without any examination or instruction
for their benefit. And that he, when any Commissions were directed to him, to
compel any person in his parish to do penance, he exacted money of them, and so
they were dismissed, without inflicting any penalty upon them, as their censure
was. And that he and his servants used diverse menaces to his Parishioners, and
that he abused himself, and disgraced his function, by diverse base labors
(scilicet) He made mortar, having a leathern a prou before him, and he himseif
took a tithe Pig out of the Pigsty, and afterward he himself gelded it. And
when he had diverse presents sent him, as by some, flesh, by some fish, and by
others ale, he did not spend it in the invitation of his friends and
neighbors, or give it to the poor; but he sold the flesh to Butchers, and the
ale to Alewives again; And that he commanded his Curat to marry a couple in a
private house, without any license, and that he suffered diverse to preach,
which peradventure had not any license, and which were suspected persons, and
of evil life. It was said by Henden, that they cannot by the Statute of primo
Eliz. cap. 1. meddle with such matters of such a nature, but only examine
heresies, and not things of that nature, and that the High-Commissioners at
Lambeth, certified to them, that they could not proceed in such things; and
advised them to dismiss it; But they would not desist, and the Judges,
Richardson being absent, granted a prohibition, if cause were not showed to the
contrary.

Note, it was said by the Justices, a discontinuance could not be after verdict.

Humbleton against Bucke.
THeophilus Humbleton was Plaintiff in an Assumpsit against Bucke, and declares
that whereas there was a controversy between one Palmer, who pretended to be
Lord of the soil, and the Inhabitants of such a Village concerning Common in
ripa maritima, which Palmer claimed to be his own soil. The Tenants claim
common there, and a liberty to cut grass, and make hay of it, and to carry it
away. Palmer incloses the soil; Humbleton enters upon the place enclosed, and
also takes the grass, being one of the Tenants: And Palmer brought a Trespass
against him, and then Bucke assumes to the Plaintiff, in consideration of a
Iugg of Beer, and in consideration that the Plaintiff in the Trespass hanging
against him, would plead a Plea in maintenance of their title of Common, he
immediately would pay to him the half of his expenses; or if he failed of that,
he would pay him forty pounds. And further, he said, that he pleaded not guilty
in that action of Trespass, which was found for him; and that he expended so
much money, the half of which the Defendant refused to pay to him, etc. The
Defendant pleads non defendit sectam in maintenance of their Common, which was
found against him. And Davenport moved in arrest of Judgment; because that he
ought to have pleaded such a Plea, by which the title of Common might come in
question; but when he pleads not guilty, he disclaims the matter of Common: And
also the word immediately is not to be taken so strictly, that he should pay the
money in the same instant, etc. But the Plaintiff must declare what costs he
had expended, and then he shall have reasonable time by the Statute to pay the
money. But Athowe answered, that the verdict which was in the Kings Bench helps
him; For it was there found, that that land was the Kings wast, and that Palmer
was not owner of the soil, and therefore for that his plea was good: for the
title of Common cannot come in question. Richardson Chief Justice said, that
that is not a maintenance of the title of Common against Palmer. First, he
cannot give that verdict in evidence, in a prescription for the Common; and the
maintenance by that Plea of not guilty is for the soil, and not for the Common;
and whoever is owner of the soil, the title of Common is not specially against
Palmer, but it is general against every one in the world. And so was the
opinion of Harvey and Crook: And Crook said, that although the verdict had
found the Assumpsit, and so admitted, that that plea was for maintenance of the
title; yet that shall not bind us. For if a verdict finds matter which is
repugnant, or a thing which cannot come in question, it shall not bind us. But
by Justice Yelverton it was said; That because the Jury have found the
Assumpsit, they have admitted all the residue; And for that we do not doubt of
it no more than the Jury have decreed. As in an Ejectione firm. If they be at
issue upon the collateral matter, it shall be admitted, that there was an
ejectment, and so it was adjudged. But this cause was deferred to another time,
to be argued more, etc.

Meridith Mady against Henry Osan, and aliis.
MEridith Mady brought debt against Henry Osan, for that he and 5 others were
bound to perform the Arbitrament of three elected by them and the Plaintiff
concerning all tithes and all other matters of controversy between them, and
that they still and all the Parishioners should perform and stand to the award
made, etc. And upon breach of the award made, was the action brought: For the
award was, that when any of the Parishioners clip their sheep, they ought to
give notice to Mady the Parson, to the intent that he or his Servants may be
there: And the Defendant did not give notice, etc. The Defendant by rejoinder
pleads, that Allen and others, that they were Deputies to receive the
Tithe-wool, and that they, or one of them were present at the clipping: and so
they demur. Athowe said, that notice ought to be given to the Parson himself,
for perchance he would be there himself had he notice. And for that, the breach
alleged is not answered. And also he said, that they, or some of them were
present, and does not name him as he ought, for he may come in issue, etc.
Richardson, If the Arbitriment was made for some things within the submission,
and some things without; It is good for those things that are within, and void
for the residue; And although the Parishioners did not submit, yet it is good,
because the six are bound for them. Hutton said that the Award for the notice
is not good; for it is not well assigned, where the notice should be given. And
an Arbitrament ought to be reasonable, but it is unreasonable that he ought to
inquire Mady, wheresoever he is to give him notice, as Cook 77. Salmons Case.
Crook said, that the Award is good, and it shall be intended, that the Parson
is always resident in his Parsonage, as a Surrender or an Attournment shall be
intended upon the Land, and it is not requisite to name any place. And it
seemed to Harvey, that the Arbitrament was good, although that all the
Parishioners had not submitted to it. Because that these were bound for them.
18 E. 4. 22. and 1^. 1. And Judgment was afterward in the next Term given for
the Plaintiff.

John Paston against William Manne.
John Paston brought an Ejectione firm. against Manne, and a special verdict
was given to this effect, (scilicet) Edward Paston was seized of the Manor of
Bingham, parcel whereof was the Land in question, grantable by Copy. And he by
his Deed indented, in consideration of a Marriage to be had between Tho. Paston
his Son, and the Daughter of I. S. covenanted with I.S. to stand seized of the
Manor, to the use of his Son for life, and after to Mary the wife for life,
the remainder to the first Son between them in tail, with diverse remainders
over. The Marriage was solemnised, and they found moreover, that there was a
Custom, that the Lord might have liberty of fould course for 100 Sheep,
throughout all the Copiholdland: lying in the East and North field, the
Customary places and Lands in these Fields not being enclosed, from the Feast
of St. Michael, to the Feast of the Annunciation, if the grain was carried in
by that time; Or otherwise from the time of the carrying in to the
Annunciation, if it be not sowed with seed again, and that those 15 acres in
question, be in the Cornfield. And that Thomas Paston granted that Copihold to
the Defendant in Fee, and that in 14 Iacobi, the Defendant enclosed the Land
without License of the Lord, and if License was obtained then he ought to have
paid a Fine which the Lord would have assest. And if any of the Tenants enclose
without License, they find, that they have used to be punished, and pay those
penalties, which the Lord would assess. And they also found, that that incloser
by the Copiholder, was with a Ditch of six foot in breadth, and 3 foot in
depth, and that the land which he dug out, was but to make a Bank upon the
Land, upon which a hedge of quick thorn was set, and that four gaps were left
in the enclosure of nine feet in breadth. And they found that the Defendant did
not at any time compound for a Fine. And then they find that the Copiholders
which before this enclosed without License, were amerced, and commanded upon a
pain, before a certain day to throw up their enclosures; And now for this
enclosure Thomas enters for a forfeiture, and dies, his Wife makes a Lease of
it, and the Defendant ejects the Lessee,

Atthowe held that he had forfeited his Copihold, for that enclosure is against
the Custom of the Manor, which is found. For the Custom is the life and soul
of a Copihold; as it is in the 4 Rep. 31. Brownes Case. The breaking of that is
a forfeiture, and make the Copiholder have an Estate at will merely, whereas
before he had an Estate not merely at the will of the said Lord, but secundum
volunt. domini. And so by the enclosure the Lord cannot have his fould course,
and so the custom is broken. 42 Ed. 3. 25. For not doing the services, the
Lord may enter and have the Emblements. If a Copiholder makes a feoffment, it
is a disseisin; for which there may be an Assise of novel disseisin de libero
tenement of Lands, whereof the profits, or of the Rent issuing out of the Land
there is a forfeiture. And Littleton said, that a rescous Replevin Enclosure,
and denying the Rent is a Disseisin. And what is a Disseisin of a Freehold is a
forfeiture of the Copihold. Rescous by a Copiholder is a forfeiture, for all
the books say, that a denial of a rent is a forfeiture. And it is held, that if
a Copiholder brings a replevin, it is a forfeiture, and the Lord may enter
presently; But if he avow, then perchance he has dispensed with it. And an
enclosure is more strong than a denial, 11 E. 3. Assise 88. cited in Taverners
Case, 4 Rep. The heir cannot have an Assise before entry: but if the Defendant
menaces him, or stops up the way, it is a Disseisin, 14 Ass. plac. 19. 8 E. 2.
As. 374. A stopping up of the way is a disseisin; but if he can go another way,
he can have nuisance 29 Ass. 49. But it will be objected, that the Lord had
another remedy: for he might have an Action of the Case. And for that not enter
for a forfeiture. But an Action of the Case does not restore him to the
Freehold, but give damages only. And if an Assise be brought, it affirms the
Disseisin, and makes forfeiture; and that agrees Taverners Case, That where
several Copiholds were granted by one Copy, a rent denied of one, forfeits that
and not the others. But admit it is a forfeiture, if the leaving the Gaps
dispense with it. And it seemed that not; for he loses the profit of the
Fould-course, for 500 Sheep, would tear their fleeces by such a narrow passage:
and the enclosure is an impediment to hinder their spreading in their feeding;
And so every one also may enclose, and leave gaps: and the Lord perhaps,
compelled to put and remove the Sheep ten times in one day, and so the Sheep
worse at night than in the morning, etc.

Secondly, if the Lord had given License, then he would have had a Fine, but he
would so be his own Carver. And the Lord had no remedy for a Fine upon
admittance after Surrender, 4 Rep. 46. He had no remedy there by Action of
debt, nor by Action of the Case, without promise to the Admittance, etc.

Lord grants a Copihold Escheat, he ought to improve his Fine before; or he
has no remedy; for he is not compelled to grant the Copihold again, and
therefore he shall have what Fine he will. And it is not found also who may
enclose paying his Fine. A Lord admits a Copiholder for life with remainders;
the admittance of Tenent for life, was the admittance of the remainder, but he
shall have his Antefine, 4 Rep 23. And if they may enclose paying a Fine; then
the Lord had an Estate at the will of the Tenants.

Thirdly when it is found that the Lord amerced and commanded upon pain, etc.
that is no mitigation or dispensation of the forfeiture. For ruinous Houses
pulled down is a forfeiture, without Custom to the contrary, Because no waste
lies against a Copiholder, as against Lessee for years, And yet the Lord in
favor may amerce such a Copiholder if he will; and that is no dispensaition
but an affirmation of the forfeiture. And so because the Lords were
conscionable and would not take the forfeiture, that does not prove that it is
a Dispensation.

Fourthly, the making of the gap and hedge of that latitude, etc. is waste, and
for that a forfeiture. 22 H. 6. Waste 46. There it is agreed, that if Land be
dug to make a Bank, and if more be dug than is necessary, that is waste,
if it be not cast down again, for the Land might be made barren. 41 E. 3. Waste
82. There it is not waste, for the Land is better than it was before; But it is
not better if it be arable Land, for the Trees and Bushes shadow the Sun from
the Land. Dyer 361. And if none had been folded there, yet it should not have
been waste. Fodder in Meadow is waste: but there it was found by the special
verdict, that the Land was imbetterd. If Lessee for years does so, it is a
forfeiture, 2 H. 6. 17. There it is said; that permitting the Land to lie fresh
is waste; But thorny is no waste, for the Less may grub the Thorns up, and it
shall be better Land; wherefore he prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff. But
Sergeant Henden argued for the Defendant; and conceived that in the whole cause
pleaded, there is not any thing in it which makes a forfeiture. There are two
things in it to make that enclosure and waste, And first, That an Enclosure
without License is not a forfeiture.

First, every Act that makes a forfeiture of a Copyhold ought to be a
dis-inheritance to the Lord, etc.

Secondly, a voluntary Act against the Custom, etc.

Thirdly, in this Case there is not any Custom found which makes a Forfeiture;
And for that any Condition in Law is excluded: A Copiholder is in, tenens
secundum consuetudinem manerii, and therefore an Act that makes a forfeiture
ought to be against Custom, and a dis-inheritance to the Lord of his Copihold;
and not of a Collateral thing. As a Trespass upon the Demesus of the Lord is
not a forfeiture, 21 H. 7. Kell. 77. 9 Rep. 76. Combs Case there has the same
rule. The Custom fixes his Estate so long as the Tenent does the services, and
observes the Customs. Hill. 16 Iac. Com. Banc. rot. 335. Brettyes Case. Two
Copiholders are, and one release to the other, is no forfeiture. Dyer 221. One
part of the Services there was to make Presentiments, and if he refuse it is a
Forfeiture. If a Copyholder fell Trees it is no Forfeiture, because it may be
for the reparation of Houses. But an Act afterward, as selling them, may cause
a Forfeiture, 9 H. 4. Waste 39. A Copyhold is not forfeited by Outlawry in a
personal Action; for the Lord is not prejudiced by that; And yet the King shall
have the profits, by which the Lord is estranged from the Tenement, 5 H. 5. 2.
New Book of Entries, 228. Hill. 4 Iac. rot. 172. Com. Banc. in the end of the
Case resolution is to this purpose. If Copyholder be summoned to the Court, by
common Proclamation or express notice, and he does not appear, it is no
Forfeiture. Because it is but a failer of Services, and no denial; And for
that neglect he may be punished and fined.

Secondly, it was resolved, that non-payment of the rent, although it be a
failer of Services, or if he had said he could not now pay if, is not a
Forfeiture; But to forge new Customs is a Forfeiture, for that tends to the
dis-inheriting of the Lord, Dyer 228. The Case of pay meant of a Fine which
admits the diversity appears Cook lib 1. 4 28. Now this enclosure is not a
Dis-inheritance, or a voluntary Act to estrange him from his Lord. And then the
Custom ought to make that a Forfeiture which is not so found. And it was a
rule in P. 19 Iac. That a bare Enclosure is not a Forfeiture of a Copyhold. And
then it is found, that he shall not enclose without License, But it is not
found, that if he should enclose without License, it should be a forfeiture.
And there is neither express nor tacit condition that it should be a
Forfeiture. And then it is found that he may amerce and command that the Hedge
should be pulled down upon pain, etc. The intention is not that he had two
remedies; And it is not to be found in our Books, that one Act causes a pain,
and a forfeiture also. And so the custom shall be taken favorably for the
Copyholder, and strictly for the Lord; for a forfeiture is odious in Law. 4.
Rep. 9. There the Custom is found, that not appearing at four Summons is
expressly a forfeiture. And to the objection that is made, that he had not any
remedy for his Fine; the Verdict answers that, that he may put a pain upon him.

Secondly, he encloses, and leaves three gaps: It was objected, that an
Enclosure was a disseisin, ergo a forfeiture. In some Cases that Enclosures
shall be disseisins there is no question: But there is, if they be Enclosures
with gaps. The Enclosure that deprives him of all his remedy is a disseisin in
Rent, but otherwise not. For Littleton says, if he enclose, that he cannot
distrein: I conceive this diversity. If a Copyholder makes a disseisin of any
thing appertaining to the Copyhold, it is a forfeiture; for then he does an
act that estranges the Lord from his Tenant; but if the Lord had any profit
accrewing out of the Copyhold, and he disseiseth him of that, Whether you will
make that a forfeiture? As if the Lord had herbage out of the Copyhold, a
disseisin of that is not a forfeiture, unless it be particularly by Copy of the
Grant. The making of the Ditch is objected to be waste, and therefore a
forfeiture: I agree if it be waste, it is a forfeiture. It is not a forfeiture,
if a Copyholder dig a Marle-pit and Marles his Land; for the Land is
imbettered by it. It is objected, that it is a forfeiture at Common Law, 22 H.
6. 41 E. 3. waste 821. If Lessee for years plough a Meadow it is not Waste, for
it tends to a matter of Husbandry. Natura Brev. title waste. Dyer 361. pl. 12.
Lessee for years converts Land to Hop ground: It was the opinion of Popham Lord
Chief Justice, 30. Eliz. that it was not waste. And for that that the Land by
this Enclosure is imbettered, it is not waste, and the Lord had no prejudice,
because the gaps were left. And the Court said, that it is to be presumed, that
all the Land was imbettered by this Enclosure, if it be not expressly showed to
the contrary. Sed adjournatur, etc.

Ralph Marshes Case again.
ATthome said, that the consideration also is good, and there is a double
consideration of the Premises. For she promised to pay that debt, part at Mich
etc. So there was a day given, or it was due presently: And that is the
consideration: Crook said, that it is no consideration. For it is not expressed
that he showed the account: But that they surveyed it, which is not but an
implication that he showed it: And he said that he intended to sue him, and
then he in consideration of the Premises etc. Which was a thing executed before
the obligee showed the obligation to the Obliger, that in consideration of that
promise to pay the debt is not a good consideration. In consideration that the
Testator is indebted, etc. I will pay at two days is not a consideration. But
in consideration that the Testator was indebted, and you will forbear, is a
good consideration. That you will forbear paululum temporis, is not a good
consideration, without expressing for a day, or etc. as it is adjudged, etc.
Richardson in consideration that the Testator was indebted, is not a good
consideration: And then in consideration that he made appear that the debt is
due, is not good; for he ought to do that before it can be paid: But more
after, etc.

Abree against Page.
ABree brought an Action against Page, who pleads that the Plaintiff had
released to him after the Obligation made, upon which Debt is brought: All and
all manner of Errors, and all manner of Actions, Suits, and Writs of Error
whatsoever, which the said John for any matter or thing, etc. And I the said
John am by these presents excluded of Writs or Suits, Actions of Error, or
Suits against him the said, etc. Upon which the Plaintiff demurred. Amhurst
said, that the Action is barred. The pretense is that that Release extends only
to Errors. Littleton said, the Obligation makes the Duty presently; And a
Release of all Actions shall bar him. 8 Rep. Althams Case. And Bullocks Case,
an Obligation shall be taken more strongly against him that makes it. 19 H.
6.42. Two have Goods in Ioynture, and give all their Goods: their several Goods
pass also. And if two grant rent, their several rents pass also, according to
their several Interests; And then he said it should be a bar of all Actions and
Suits, and that amounts to a Release. 21 H. 6. 51 H. 6. one was bound to save a
Sheriff harmless against I. S. And he pleads that he was taken by a Capias, and
made an Obligation, and that he kept his day; And that was adjudged a good
Plea: Which shows, that words not formal may bar an Action, etc. Richardson
said, If the Release be of Actions and Suits Substantive, no question but Debt
is barred, and that Deeds (he granted) should be taken more strongly against
him that makes them. He agreed to the Cases put by Amhurst. But more after, etc.

Bowett, and Langhams Case.
ELlen Bowett procured a Corpus cum Causa out of the Common Pleas to the
Sheriff of London; who returns that she was imprisoned upon a Suit against her
by George Langham as a Feme sole Merchant according to the Custom there. Now
the Truth was, that her Husband being a Vintener was pressed by the King to be a
Soldier: and goes over-Sea. The Feme afterward takes an House, and buys Wine
of Langham, who trusted her, supposing she was a Feme sole Merchant. Afterward
the Husband returns, and the Wife denies to pay for the Wine; and the doubt was
if the Feme was a sole Feme Merchant by the Custom so, or not: and the words
of the Custom were read. That where the Wife meddles in a Trade, in which the
Husband may meddle nothing, she shall have all advantages, and shall be sued as
a Feme sole Merchant, etc. But by Richardson and Yelverton, She is not a Feme
sole Merchant within the Custom; For her Husband exercises himself the same
Trade. And a Feme sole Merchant by Yelverton ought to be the Widow of a
Tradesman who takes a second Husband, and afterward exercises the Trade of the
first Husband.

Secondly she ought to be a Feme Covert, and not a Virgin or Maiden.

Thirdly, she ought to be of another Trade than that which her second Husband
was: For if she may exercise the same Trade of her Husband when he is over the
Sea: the Husband may go over Sea and return within a year, and then she is a
Feme Covert, etc. And so make her a Feme Sole or Covert at his pleasure. And
Richardson and Yelverton said, that that would be a prejudice to all the Wives
in London, so that they would never be freed from imprisonment. But Crook,
Hutton, and Harvey to the contrary. And they said that if the Husband meddle
with the Trade of his Wife, then she is not chargeable as a Feme sole Merchant;
But if the Husband be over Sea, or become Banckrupt or relinquish his Trade,
and the Wife exercises the same Trade, or they both exercise the same Trade
distinctly by themselves, and not meddle the one with the other, She is a sole
Merchant; or otherwise it would be a great inconvenience. For the Wife when her
Husband is over Sea, would contract and gain much Goods of others into her
hands, and the parries shall not have any remedy. But Richardson said, that he
who sells ought to take notice, whether she be Feme Covert, or feme sole
Merchant by the Custom or not, his peril.

Ayliffes Case.
AN Action of battery was brought against Ayliffe and his Wife, for a Battery
done by the Wife upon the Plaintiff. And the pleading was, that the Baron and
Feme came and defended the force and wrong, etc. And the Baron for his said
Wife says, that she is not guilty; And upon that the Issue was joined, and
found for the Plaintiff against him, And in arrest of Judgment, it was awarded
that the Issue was ill joined; For the Wife there pleads nothing. So there was
nothing done at that time with the Suit.

Tailor against Philips.
Tailor, and Margaret his Wife exhibit a Bill in the Council of Marches against
Phillips and his Wife; For that the Wife of Philips had sent a scandalous
Letter to the Wife of Tailor: And the Letter was written to this effect (ut
sequitur) Mrs. Tailor, I have often heard of your clamorous tongue, whereas if
you want matter against your Enemies, you exclaim of your Friends, and give
out, that I am jealous of my Husband with Mrs. Anne: he was never so precise to
take on him to be ashamed how he liked the Border of a Woman's Pettycoat; and
you being not able to throw the first Stone at him, need not to have been one
of his Accusors; Neither know I what he can be accused of, unless it were, for
being in your Chamber before you were up: Which I never heard was prohibited to
any, neither know I why it should be to him. You may challenge me for a Coward,
that I meet you not at the Cross, as you have challenged others, having been a
Pupil in the School of Scoulding, and a rare Artist therein, But I durst not
have done it, lest I should have been so hoarse, that it might have have been
said, I had the Pox. And the Court proceeded to the hearing of the matter, and
sentenced the Defendant to be imprisoned; and fined 40 l. to the King, and 40
l. damages to the Party. And Sergeant Henden moved for a Prohibition for that,
that their Instructions are, Whereas there be diverse Books, News, and Tales
spread abroad, and Libells made, by which the Subjects are abused, and the
Peace may be broken, you shall proceed against such Persons, till the Authors
be found out, and they be punished by fines, imprisonments, papers set on their
breasts, and the like. And he said that those words are not accomtable at
Common Law; and therefore are not as they seem within their Instructions. But
admit that, yet they have not power to give damages to the Party. Richardson
said, In the Star Chamber, libellous Letters, that are spiteful and scandalous
to defame any, although that they bear not an Action at Common Law; yet they
are punishable there, and also they give damages to the Party wronged; But
there is difference between the Star Chamber and that, etc. Henden said, that
Magna Charta makes the difference. Quod nullus liber homo capietur aut
imprisonetur nisi secundum legem terrae. So by the Common Law and their
instructions, they have not power to give damages to the party. Richardson
chief Justice, said that no prohibition should be granted, for the Fine of the
King; for they have power in that Case without question, and to the punishing
in that matter. And if they err in Judgment for the Libellious Letter, and
adjudge it to be Libellious where it is not, We cannot award a prohibition, nor
grant error. But for the damages, that Court differs from the Star Chamber: for
the Star Chamber had its power by its self, and differs from the Common Law;
But that Court is by Commission, and therefore they ought to follow their
Instructions. And therefore a prohibition as to the damages shall be granted.
And Yelverton also was of the same opinion; but he said, there was another
clause in their Instructions; And for that a prohibition, as to the damages
shall be granted, Hutton and Harvey said, That if the suit was by information,
than it is clear that damages cannot be given. But it is by Bill, so in nature
of an Action; as I conceive, which concludes, that they were damnified. But it
is now brought too late to grant a prohibition, where the parties have admitted
the action: But a day was given to show cause, why a prohibition should not be
granted quoad the damages. And so they concluded for that time.

Note, that it was said by the Court: That if money be lent upon Interest, and
the Scrivener who makes the Obligation, reserves more then 8. l. in the 100. l.
That, that is not an usurious Contract. See the cause, etc.

Eaton and Morris^s Case.
EAton and Morris being reputed Churchwardens (but they) never took any Oath,
as the Office requires, present a Feme Covert upon a Common report for
Adultery, etc. And the husband and wife Libel against them in the
Ecclesiastical Court for that defamation. And when sentence was taken, and
ready to be given for them, the Churchwardens appeal to the Arches: and for
that, that that presentment cannot be proved but by one witness, they sentenced
the Baron and Feme. And now Ward who that term was made a Sergeant by a special
call, moved for a prohibition: but it was denied by the Court; for they were
Plaintiffs first. And also it is a cause which this Court had not any Conusance
of.

Marshes Case before.
MOre of Marshes Case which is before.

Richardson, Hutton, Harvey and Yelverton said, That the consideration also is
good. For although that it be not expressed that the Plaintiff himself showed
the accounts; yet it appears fully, that they were upon the request of the wife
viewed. And it shall be intended by Common presumption that the Plaintiff
himself showed them, for he had the custody of them, and is owner of them. And
the Books of Merchants are their secrets and treasure: and they will not show
them by their good will. Now it is not like to the case of an Obligation; for
there the certainty of the debt was before, and he was compellable to show it.
But the certainty here cannot appear without great search and labor, and there
can be no compassion to show their Books. And by Hutton Justice: There is no
question, but, if the promise had been made after the Suit commenced, it ha^
been good. No question by Richardson, and it is agreed by all, That if the
Defendent had required the Books to be brought to his house, or to another
place, it should have been good: And there is not any difference, although the
Books were shown in the shop by the servant; for he permitted his Books to be
viewed, etc. And Yelverton said, that Beechers Case and Banes Case is more
infirm than this Case is: And yet adjudged there to be good: And so it was
awarded that Judgment should be entered for the Plaintiff: Si non, etc.

Of a Communication of Marriage.
A Communication between I.S. and A. was of the Marriage of I S. being
possessed of a term for years, and of certain goods, promised to A. that if she
would be married to him, and they had issue a son, that he should have the
term: If a Female, that she should have the moyetie of the goods. And after
they intermarry, and have issue B. a daughter. The husband dies, and B. brings
an action upon the Case against the Administrator of I.S. By the Court, she
cannot bring the action, unless as Administratrix of A. or in the name of A.
And the Case of Stafford was recited. Where there was a Communication between
Stafford and a woman; That if she would marry with him, that Stafford would
leave her at his death 100. l. And after the intermarriage and death of the
husband, in an action brought by the wife, the question was, whether the
promise was extinguished by the intermarriage. And after grand disputes, it was
resolved, that the intermarriage was but a suspension of the promise. And so it
was concluded.

Kitton against Walters.
KItton brought debt upon the Statute of 5. Eliz. cap. 9. for Perjury, against
Walters, for an Action of Trespass, for Battery was brought against him by I.
S. and he pleaded not guilty, and that the Defendant was brought as a witness:
And that he falsely and corruptedly deposed, and did not speak voluntarily,
that the Plaintiff in the Trespass was wounded and beaten, etc. And that he
could not labor for half a year, etc. And upon the general issue pleaded, it
was found for the Plaintiff; and Hendon moved to have Judgment. But it was
objected, that the party grieved shall not have that Action; for that he did
not say, voluntary deposuit, etc. For although that he falsely deposed, wherein
voluntary is not, but a conclusion, and voluntas ought to be in the premises:
and corruptive does not include that; and so was the opinion of the whole
Court. And it was awarded, that the Plaintiff, nil capiat per breve.

A servant of a Bailiffs Case.
IT was awarded by the Court, that where a Servant of a Bailiff of a Franchise
was sworn to serve a Process, and by deputation from the Bailiff, he ought not
to have served a Process, but to such a sum: And he serves a Process of a
greater sum without any warrant, and after levies the money, and parts with it:
That the Bailiff shall be chargeable, Quod nota.

Bear against Hodge.
Bear was Plaintiff against Hodge for taking of his Cattle. The Defendent was
known as Bailiff to Thomas Wise, who was seized of twenty acres, etc. (whereof
the Land in question was parcel) in Fee. And that it was Leased to Harris for
99. years, if he and his two sons should so long live, and rendering a Rent at
the four usual Terms in the year; and the best beast at the death of every one
of the three in the name of an Herriot, or 5. l. at the election of the Lessor.
And now for Rent arrear at Michaelmas, and for an Heriot after the death of
Harris, he avowed, etc. The Plaintiff confesses the Lease and reservation, and
as to the Heriot, he demurred. But for the Rent he said, that he tendered the
Rent upon the Land toward the latter time of Michaelmas day: and that none was
there to receive it. And that afterward he tendered it to the Lessor himself,
out of the Land, and he refused it; And that after that time no demand was
made; but that he, after the tender always was and yet is Tenent, etc. and
brings the money into Court; And upon that he demurred. Henden said, The Avowant
may distrein without any new demand; and that Case had been adjudged in this
Court before. For although that the Rent be tendered, yet it remains due
notwithstanding; and then he is able to distrain. 15 Iac. in this Court, rot.
710. Crowley brought a Replevin against Kingsmill, who avowed, For that the
Plaintiff held of him by Fealty and 10 s. rent. And for the Rent he distreyned
the Plaintiff. And that at the day he tendered the rent upon the land, and none
was there to receive it, as it is said, etc. And upon debate it was adjudged,
that he may distrein without demand. 7 rep. 29. Maunds case, you may see that a
Rent-seek shall not be distreined after tender without demand; For if by his
demand he is entitled to his Action, then there ought to be a new Demand, 21 E
4. 17. 7 E 4. 40. 20 H. 6.1. cited in Pilkintons Case. If you will be excused
of the Distress; there ought to be a tender of the Arrerages at the time of the
Distress. Richardson, Hutton and Harvey all agree, That the Distress is good to
have the Rent, but not to recover Damages; because he does not all he might
do. And Richardson said, That 2 H. 6. 10 H. 6. 20 E. 4. 10 E. 4. and the Case
in the Assise, and the whole current of Books was to the same purpose. Harvey
Justice said, that if a tender be upon an Obligation at the day, he saves the
penalty; but if another Demand be afterward, and he refuses to pay: he cannot
plead unque prist. And Justice Crook cited a Case in the Kings Bench 16 Eliz.
between Cropp and Hambleton, where a Rent upon a Lease was reserved to be paid
at Michaelmas. And if by forty days after, etc. And in the mean time, after
the first and before the last, the Lessee tenders to the Lessor himself. And
adjudged that it saves the Forfeiture. For it is for his ease, that he ought to
tender upon the Land. And by the same reason also, when he has tendered it to
the Person himself, and said that it is uncore prist. and will demur upon that,
and not take advantage of his non-tender at the Distress: the Damages are
saved. But Yelverton was against that. For it is agreed, that a Distress is
local, so then we cannot sever Damages, when the Law has coupled them, and
made incident to the Distress. Sed adjournatur, etc.

Tithes.
ONe libells for Tithes of Fish which is due merely by Custom. And the
Defendant pleads, that time out of mind, etc. they have paid no Tithes of that.
And Henden Sergeant moved for a Prohibition. And Richardson replied and said,
it is merely a Customary Tithe, as Rabbits, etc. Whereof no Tithes are due by
the law of the Land, and a Prohibition shall not be granted. But all the other
Justices affirmed, that there shall be a Prohibition granted; because that the
Custom ought to be tried by the Common law, and they make a difference between
modus decimandi which is also Customary, and where there is a Tithe precedent
due, and that modus converts it into another Duty. There no Prohibition shall
be granted. But it shall be tried in the spiritual Court, whether there be such
a modus decimandi, or not, And that Case in the Custom makes the Duty it self.
But he alleged the modus to be for two pence, and the Parson for three pence,
shall be tried by the Common law. And they said, that so was the opinion in the
grand Case, of lead ore. And Hutton said, that so it was determined in the Case
of one Berry, for tithes of Limekills; which are as Minerals, and are not
tithable by the Commmon law. But when the Custom is tried then they in the
Ecclasiastical Court may proceed upon it.

Hartop and Tucke against Dalby.
HArtop and Tucke brought a Quare impedit against Dalby as Incumbent, and the
Issue between them was; Whether the Church of Essenden was appendent to the
Manor of Essenden, or in gross. And the Plaintiff to prove the Appendancy,
gave in evidence, that H. 6. seized of the Manor and Advowson, grants to
Margaret his Wife the said Manor habendum una cum advocatione for her
Ioynture, etc. It was said that if the advowson was in gross, it could not pass
so, not named in the Premises. But of an advowson appendent otherwise it is. As
it was agreed in 38 H. 6. 36. Abbess of Syons Case, which was granted by the
whole Court. Henden to disprove that evidence, alleged, That the Advowson being
made any time in gross, It can never be appendent again. And he showed also how
H. 3. was seized of that Manor with the Advowson, and that he granted the
Manor to I. S. for life, excepta advocatione. By which Grant it seemed to him,
that it became in gross. And said that the Judgment of the Case in 38 H. 8.
38. was for that cause, and that they did not ever find it contradicted. And so
totis viribus be maintained that to be in gross, But all the Justices were
against him, And that that is not but a disappendency pro quodam tempore. And
so was the better opinions in 38 H. 6. as the Case is in Dyer 33 H. 8. 48. 6.
of a Villain. If the King grants the Demesus of a Manor for life; After the
death of the Lessee, it is a Manor again. And if an advowson appendent be
granted for life; After the Lessee it becomes an Appendent again. And so if a
Manor with the Advowson descend to two Copartners; And the Advowson is
allotted to one, and the Manor to the other. If there the Sister who has the
Advowson die without Issue: it is then appendant; and yet there was a severance
in perpetuity. And Yelverton went to the Justices of the Kings Bench to have
their opinions. And they all agreed, that it was but a temporal disappendency
during the life, without doubt. Bramston said, the Manor is granted and the
Advowson by E. 6. to the Lord Saint John, to be held by several tenures, The
Manor in Chivalry, and the Advowson in soccage, which is a strong presumpsion,
that the Advowson was in gross. But the Justices agreed, that there may be
several Services, and yet the Manor and the Advowson nor severed. And a Manor
may be granted, parcel to be held by one Tenure, and parcel to be held by an
other Tenure, and yet remain entire. And afterward verdict was given for the
Plaintiff, etc.

Viner and his Wife against Lawson.
VIner and his Wife libells against Lawson in the Council of York, for a
promise to pay 600 l. to the Wife, for her Marriage, And suggested that they
could not precisely prove it by one witness, that they might have remedy at the
Common Law. But Lawson denied the promise upon his Oath: and yet they
proceeded, and Lawson prayed a prohibition, and it was granted. For if it may
be proved by some witnesses then it is tryable by an Action of the Case, etc.
And so the Jurisdiction of the Common Law is ousted.

Abrees Case.
MOre of the Case which you saw before, etc. Henden argued that that release is
but special, and that it extends only to errors. And first, for that the
intention of the parties is principally to be regarded. And ex praecedentibus
and consequentibus optima fit interpretatio. The precedent clause is only a
release of errors, and then the consequent suits: And in the last clause,
release all Actions, and suits of error before.

Secondly, a release is particular, and may be by inference of other words have
a general sense; yet particular construction shall be made, Nisi impediatur
sententia or intentio partium: For that also Suits in the middle of the clause
shall have relation to the other words. And to that purpose is, 28 H. 8. Dyer
19. A Grant to the Lessee, that he shall have the Rues for hedges (by the
assignment of the Bailiff of the Lessor) and for necessary fuel to burn. And
the opinion of the Court was that he should have the fuel also by assignment,
9 E. 4. 43. 6. A man submits himself to the Arbitrament of I.S. de omnibus
actionibus personalibus sectis and querelis. And it was ruled that that word
personal refers to all. And the Case in question is the very Case as that in
reason, 10 H. 7. 8. A man grants the Custody of his Park, and all the
Windfalls, etc. And it seemed there, that the grant of Windfalls is absolute:
for that, that the intent cannot be otherwise, Pasc. 36 Eliz. banc. Roy.
Between Pidgeon and Gibson, Norff. The Case upon the special verdict was in
Trespass: and Pidgeon the Father makes a feoffment to his younger son, by which
he grants thus, Omnia illa messuagia mea and tenementa in East Bockham, that
late were Patris mei, and since in the Tenure of N. D. and C. And it was
adjudged, that that land did not pass by that Feoffment. For where particular
words are in the end, the middle shall never be taken general. And so also 8.
rep. 150. Althams Case. There it was resolved, that where it had particular
words, there all shall be of the same nature, etc.

Thirdly, expende circumstantias and intentio nihil intelligetur, which may be
intended also in Suits more than in actibus: For will you have Action
particular, and Suits general? And so the intention appears in the first word
Errors, and the subsequent are but declaratory: And although that Suits is
lastly put in the second Clause, yet there it is not but a surplusage; And that
which is not released by the first (Suit) cannot be by the second: For it is
not but a repetition of that which was before. Richardson, the words are, All
Writs, Actions and Suits by error. Without question it shall be intended but
errors: Or if it be so: And all Actions and Suits of error, It cannot extend
but to errors. Hutton. In that release there is not any word of debt; and
therefore it seemed that the intention was not to release other actions, but
errors. And it was adjudged in this Court in a Writ of Annuity. A release was
pleaded that the Plaintiff acquitted him, of one payment, for half of the year,
and released to him all Actions. Suits and Demands; And adjudged, that that
release does not bar him, but of the arrearages of a year.

A Quid juris clamat.
IN a Quid juris clamat, The Tenant was adjudged to Attourne. And the question
was, whether he might Attourne without being sworn in Court to do fealty to his
Lessor. And Brownlow, chief Prothonotary said, That all the Presidents are,
that he shall Attourne and do fealty, by which the Tenant was sworn to do
fealty: and the fealty was taken for an Authority.

Bear and Hodges Case.
MOre of Bear and Hodges Case, you may see before. Davenport said, that a man
cannot distrein upon an actual demand, which ought to be to the person, upon
the Land. And for that, the distress is tortious, and damages by the Common Law
are given to him, who made the Replevin; But to the Avowant damages are only
given by the statute of 7. H. 8. cap. 4. 21 H. 8. 19. Now the Rent is not in
question (for it was taken to pay it) but the damages: and the Tenant had done
all that he can: and it is not reason that he pay any damages. And the
diversity between a Replevin, and debt for Rent after such a tender. That a
local tender excuses the damages, appears H. 4.4. Tidthorps Case, 38. E. 3. 13.
Debt. An Obligation is indorsed, to pay the money at Easter: and he tenders it
at the day to the Obligee, who refuses it because he lives at another place.
And now because that no place was named for the payment, the tender was good,
and shall excuse him (without any other demand) of the damages. Littleton said,
that a tender of Homage excuses, until a new demand, 21 E. 4.4. And there a
difference seemed to some, between fealty and homage. But Bryan said, that a
tender of fealty also (until a new request) to his person, excuses damages:
because that fealty may be done by Attorney, 22 H. 6.31. 7 E. 4.4. puts the
case of Rent to the same intent. Cook, Littleton, 7. 28. Maunds Case. The third
resolution is a ground for our Case. There it is said, if Terre-tenant tender a
Rent seck, upon the Land: The Grantee cannot demand it upon the Land in the
absence of the tenant: that it ought to be to the person upon the land: For
what can the tenant do more than he has done already. And the Statute of
Westminster 2. cap. 9. gives ease to the Tenant, When the Lord distreins
immoderately and unnecessarily. For an immoderate distress may be the ruin of
a tenant: And therefore the Statute says, Nec habeat Capitalis dominus
potestatem distringendi tenentes in dominico suo, dum praedict. Tenens offerat
ei servitia debita and consueta. 30. Ass. Fitzher. N. B. 69. G. If Cattle be
distreined damage feasant, and tender of sufficient amends is made, The
Distreiner is liable to damages for the detinue, although not for the distress.
And to the same purpose is, Cook lib. 8. 140. Carpenters Case, 5. rep. 76.
Pilkintons Case, etc. The second question is, whether a Bailiff, without
command of the Lessor, (when he had refused to take the Rent upon a Lawful
tender) may distrein: And it seemed that he cannot. And the second resolution
in Pilkintons Case came to that question: That a tender of amends to a Bailiff
amounts to nothing: And the question upon a Herriot is, Whether the Lessor may
distrein without declaring his election; and it seemed that he cannot: For that
is no Heriot which may be seized; As the Case in one Woodland and Mantles Case,
there it is certain. And because the Law vests it in him immediately after the
death of the tenant. But so it is arbitrable, and cannot vest before Election:
and also the Tenant does not know which he ought to provide before, and
declares his election. And it was demanded, for that it is not reasonable that
he shall be liable to a distress, and cannot by any possibility prevent it, 2
Rep. 36. Sir Rowland Howards Case. I cannot find any president where an Avowry
is made upon a disjunctive reservation, without allegation that he had declared
his Election. Although that the Lessor in that Case may distrein without
declaring his election, yet the Bailiff cannot: for he cannot justify as
Bailiff for an Arbitrable thing, without express command. Acceptance of Rent by
a Bailiff cannot alter the Tenancy. For although that he had power in Law to
receive the Rent; yet he cannot by Law alter the Tenency, by his acceptance,
without the Lords Command, Dyer 222. A Bailiff may demand Rent, but cannot
enter for non-payment without express command: And when he avows, he cannot
avow any thing, which does not appertain to his office. And for that, that it
is an arbitrable thing, which cannot be transferred from the person of the
Lessor his Heirs or Assigns, that distress is well taken, etc.

If a Writ of Error was brought in this Court, and the day of the return is
long, to delay the party, as if it be more than the next Term, the Court may
award Execution, quod nota, etc.

Gammons Case.
ONe was obliged in the Ecclesiastical Court not to accompany with such a
woman, unless to Church or a Market overt. And afterward he was summoned to
the Ecclesiastical Court, to say, whether he had broken his Obligation or not:
And Ayliffe moved for a prohibition, which was granted. For that that the
forfeiture is a temporal thing; And it does not become them in the
Ecclesiastical Court, to draw a man in examination for breaking of Obligations,
or for offenses against Statutes.

Dame Chichley against Bishop of Ely.
DAme Dorothy Chichley brought a Quare impedit against the Bishop of Ely and
Marmaduke Thomson: And declared that Thomas Chichley was seized of the Advowson
of the Church of Whiple in Cambridgeshire, And presented Marshall, and died
seized, and the Advowson descended to Thomas his son, who by Indenture granted
it to East and Angel, and to their use, and the use of the Plaintiff for life.
And he being seized of the Church, it became void, etc. But Thompson pleads
that he is Parson imparsonee ex praesentatione of the King. And confessed that
he was seized as aforesaid; but that he was seized also of other Lands in
Capite, and dyed, and that his son Thomas was, and now is within age, which is
found by Office. And so the King by his Letters Patents after avoydance
presents Thompson, who was instituted and inducted: Absque hoc, that Thomas
Chichley granted by his Indenture to the use of his wife, etc. And the
Plaintiff replies null teil record: Upon which the Defendant demurs. Atthowe
for the Defendant: Although the Plaintiff may have a Writ to the Bishop when
his Title is traversed. And admit there be no Inquisition, Yet the King may
present before Office found, 20 E. 4. 11. An Advowson being void is not but a
Chattel, and for that it is vested in the King without any Office. And you may
see many Cases to that purpose. Richardson said, If it be not by the Statute,
32 H 8. The King may grant Wardship of Land before Office. Atthowe. Also there
is Traverse upon Traverse, which should not be. Hendon argued for the
Plaintiff: And he says he is Parsona imparsonata, and does not say, before the
purchase of the Writ. For the Incumbent by the Statute of 25 E 3. cap. 7.
cannot plead unless he be Incumbent ante diem impetratitrationis brevis,
unless he be Incumbent pendente lite he cannot plead, etc. Hutton. If one be
presented, instituted, and admitted before the Writ, and inducted after and
before his Pleader, He may plead well. And it was resolved by the whole Court,
That the pleading of the Parson was good, without the words, Ante diem
impetrationis brevis: And that all the Presidents are according to that. But
more afterward, etc.

Alice Readngs Case.
ALice Reading brought an Action upon the Case against I.S. And dedeclared
whereas she was a Maiden, and had many Suitors, the said I. S. said, That Alice
Reading was with child, and did take Physic to kill the Child. Upon which
words, diverse men refused her. And upon not guilty pleaded, it was found for
the Plaintiff. Finch Recorder moved, that those words were not actionable; For
that, that it is not said precisely, that she took Physic to kill the child;
and that the Physic might have such an operation without her desire or
purpose: and also there is not any Suitor in special named; And as it is in
Anne Davyes Case, 4 Rep. 16. 6. where it ought to be proved precisely to the
Jury, that such a one was Suitor, and refused her. But here there was no such
proof. And he alleged in the Case of Sell which was adjudged. Where one
declares that he endeavored to mary a Woman, and that she refused him, upon
slanderous words. And it was adjudged against him; For that, that a Conatus is
not sufficient, but yet Judgment was given for the Plaintiff, without any
reason alleged. Cook lib. 4. 16. 6. The Lady Cockins Case.

The Case of a Recusant convict.
DEbt is brought upon an Obligation; And the Defendant pleads that the
Plaintiff is Recusant and convicted according to the Statute of 21 Iac. cap. 5.
and demanded Judgment of the Action. The Plaintiff replies, Null tiel Record.
And a day was given to bring in the Record. Crowley Justice demanded, what
course he would take to make the Record come in: And said that the Indictment
was before the Justices of Peace. And the Court said that the Defendant ought
to have pleaded the Judgment if he shall be answered; For the disability is
not but quousque, etc, As of an excommunicate Person. 8 E. 3. Crook Justice. If
a Plea be in disability of the Person and be pleaded in Bar, it is peremptory.
And so was the opinion of the Court. And the Debt of a Recusant is not
forfeited to the King, as in Outlary. But if he fail of payment of the Penalty
imposed by the Statute; Then, etc. And the Court said that if Null tiel Record
be pleaded in Bar, it is an Issue, and Judgment shall be given upon failer of
it. And the direction of the Court, for the bringing in of the Record was, That
a certiorari should be directed out of that Court, to the Justices of Peace
where the Indictment was taken. For Presidents were alleged, that that Court
sent a Certiorari to the Justices of Assise (a fortiori) to certify that in
the Exchequer, and so come by times into that Court, etc.

Creedlands Case.
CReedland Administrator durante minori aetate of a Son of his Brother; and the
Son died, and made the Wife of Hindman his Executor, who called Creedland to
account in the Spiritual Court for the Goods. And he pleads an Agreement
between him and Hindman, and that he gave 80 l. in satisfaction of all
Accounts. But they did not accept the Plea. For that a Prohibition was prayed
to be granted. Richardson, If the party had received the money in satisfaction,
for which there shall not be Prohibition granted, but if there had been only an
agreement, without payment of money, then otherwise. Crook. It is a spiritual
matter, and they having Jurisdiction for to determine of all things concerning
that. But the agreement prevents, that it cannot come into the Spiritual Court,
etc.

Giles against Balam.
GIles libells against Balam before the High Commissioners, for an assault made
upon him, being a spiritual Person. And Atthowe prayed a Prohibition. For
that, although their Commission by express words gives them power in that Case,
yet that Commission is granted upon the Statute of 1 Eliz. And it is not within
the Statute, although it be within the Commission, yet they have not
Jurisdiction. The words of the Statute are, That such Jurisdictions and
Privileges, etc. as by any Ecclesiastical power have heretofore been, or may be
lawfully exercised for the visitation of Ecclesiastical Estate and Persons, and
for reformations of the same, and for all manner of Errors, Heresies, Schisms,
Abuses, Offenses, Contempts, and Enormityes, etc. Those words extend only to
men, who stir up Dissentions in the Churrh, as Schismatics, or newfangled
Men, who offend in that kind. Henden Sergeant: The Suit is there for
reformation of Manners; and before that new amendment of the Commissions,
Prohibitions were granted, if they meddled with Adultery, or in Case of
defamations. But now by express words they have power of those matters; And
that matter is punishable by the Commissioners for two Causes.

First, there is within the Act of Parliament by the words annexed, all
Jurisdictions Ecclesiastical, etc.

Secondly, It gives power to the Commissioners to exercise that; And that is
merely Ecclesiastical, being only pro reformatione morum, etc. The King by his
Prerogative having Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction may grant Commissions to
determine such things, 5 Rep. Ecclesiastical Cases, fol. 8. And Richardson said
the Statute de Articulis Cleri, gave Conusance to the Ordinary for laying
violent hands on a Clerk. But you affirm that all is given to the
Commissioners. And for that they should take all power from the Ordinary. But
by the Court, The Commissioners cannot meddle for a stroke in Church-land, nor
pro substractione decimarum. And yet they have express Authority by their
Commission; For by that course, all the Ordinaries in England should be to no
purpose. And so upon much debate a Prohibition was granted.

On an Arrest on Christenmas day.
It was said by Richardson, chief Justice; That upon arresting a man upon
Christmas day going to Church in the Churchyard, He who made the arrest may be
censured in the Stat-chamber for such an Offense. Quod nota.

It was also said by Richardson, If a man submit himself out of the Diocese to
any Suit, that he can never have a Prohibition. Because that the Suit was not
according to the Statute 23 H. 8. commenced within the proper Diocese; as it
was adjudged. Quod nota.

Manser against Jews.
MAnser brought debt against Jews the Bishop of Banger, and had Judgment and
a fieri fac. upon that to the Sheriff of Middlesex, who returns, That he was
Clericus benefaciatus habens nullum Laicum feodum. And Hitcham Sergeant to the
King, moved for direction of the Court, what Process ought to issue, or may
have a Writ to the Metropolitan, to make sequestration; as it is 21 H. 6. 16,
17. 34 H. 6. 29. Richardson said, If you can satisfy us, That the
Sequestration ought to be against the Bishop, as against a Clerk; Then the
Metropolitan shall do execution. Hutton said, A Bishop had Temporalties, and
for that the Sheriff ought not to return nollum habet Laicum feodum. Richardson
demanded whether the Statute of Westminster. the second, which gives Elegit extends
to the Temporalties of a Bishop. Hutton not. Harvey and Crook said, That he
ought to have first a Testatum est, and then we may dispute of that. But
Hitcham doubted whether a Testatum est may issue to Wales. Richardson, an
Elegit may issue, and why not then a Testatum est. And they in the Kings Bench
grant it without doubt.

Stevens against the Bishop of Lincoln, etc.
STevens and Cross were Plaintiffs against the Bishop of Lincoln, Holms
Incumbent, and Holsworth Defendents in a Quare impedit, And the issue was where
the Prochein avoydance. It was given in evidence, that a Feme was seized for
life of the Advowson: And he in reversion in Fee, being an Infant, grants the
prochein avoydance. And after when he in the remainder came to full age: He
reciting that grant, concessit and confirmavit praedictam advocationem habendam
quando contigerit vacare. And afterward the Wife dies, and the Church happens
to be void. And it was said by Davenport; That that is not a new Grant, but
only a confirmation. Crook Coo. lib. 6.14. Treports case; Tenent for life, and
he in remainder makes a Lease; if the Tenant for life dye, the Declaration
should be that he in the remainder made the Lease. And so also by all the
Justices, it should be a confirmation, during the life of the Feme.

If Judgment be given in an action at Common law; the Chancellor cannot alter
or meddle with the Judgment given against him. But he may proceed against the
Person for a corrupt conscience; because he took advantage of the Law against
his conscience, quod nota, etc.

William Watsons Case.
AN action of Battery was brought against William Watson for battery committed
by him insimul cum I. Watson. And Judgment was given against him, and damages
and levied and paid to the Plaintiff. And after in another Action which was
brought against I. Watson, and he also was found guilty. And Diggs moved in
arrest of Judgment, for that that he had recoveted, and had execution against
W. Watson. But by the Court, Where several actions are brought against two for
the same battery, and a recovery is had against the one, and an action is
brought against the other, and that found also, The Court can never intend that
to be the same Battery Because he may commit 20 Batteries in one day. But if he
may take any advantage of the first recovery it ought to be showed in pleading.
But if there be but one Original against both, and several Declarations
produced, when he has recovered, he has damages against the other: But if he
recover against the other before he had execution against the first, Then he
had his election to have whether damages given against the first, or the
damages given against the other. And Coo. lib. 11.56. Heydons Case, by
Richardson is to the same effect,

Eve against Wright.
Eve brought a Replevin against Wright who was known as Bailiff to the Lord
Peter's. For that the Lord Peter's had a Court Leet within the Manor of Writtle.
And that he distreined for an amerciament upon the Plaintiff at that Court Leet
of the Lord, etc. And upon issue that he had not such a Leet, The Jurors found
that the Lord Peter's at the time when, etc. had a Leet within the Manor, and
that the Tenants ought to come to his Leet. But also they found that the Warden
and Fellows of New College in Oxford had a Rectory also within the Manor of
Writtle called the Roman fee: And that they time out of mind, etc. had a Leet
within that Rectory, and that the Plaintiff is a Resiant within the Roman fee:
But whether upon the whole matter, the Lord Peter's had a Leet upon all the
Resiants within the Manor of Writtle, they prayed the discretion of the Court
in that. And it was said by Richardson, That the matter is found expressly for
the Lord Peter's. And if the Court seemed to be agreed, then he assess'd
damages, and that Verdict was clearly for the Defendant. And if the matter in
Law might well come in question, as the Jurors intend (scilicet) whether a
Person will be compellable to two Leets, yet Judgment shall be given for the
Lord Peter's. For it might be a general Leet of the Hundred, or a special Leet
within a Manor within the Hundred. As it is expressly 21 E. 3.34. And the Case
of the Countess of Northumberland and Devonshire, was in this Court before this
time agreed. Crook Justice, 18 Iac. Banc. Reg. One Cooks and Sables Case, there
was agreed to this purpose. Though a man is not compellable to be attendant to
two Leets, although they be held at several days; Yet by that Custom they may
be attendant. Like to Walgraves Case which was adjudged in this Court; That a
Manor may be held by Copy of another. And that the Lord of a Copyhold-Mannor
may grant Copyhold. And this Judgment was affirmed good in the Kings Bench in
a Writ of Error. For Custom has abolisht that; And the opinion of the Court
was, That he cannot be attendant on two Leets, if they be held at several
days. It was said by Richardson, That the Lord of the Roman fee, shall not be
Subject to the Leet of the Lord Peter's. As appears by 21 E. 3.33. And Crook
said, That that Book was good Law. For there when the party is amerced in the
one Court, he cannot be punished in the other Court for the same offense. And
afterward Richadson and the whole Court said, That he himself shall be subject
to another Court, for his resiance, or otherwise, he should be exempt from
every Leet.

Humbletons Case.
MOre of this you have before. Now they afterward come, and the Case was
recited in some thing different from the former (scilicet) That there being
such a Communication as before, the consideration was, That Palmer having now
brought an Action against him, he should defend the said Suit in maintenance of
their Title of Common, and that immediately after Judgment given, he should pay
him half his costs or 40 l. Upon which this Assumpsit is brought. And the Issue
was, Whether he defended the Suit in maintenance of their Title of Common, and
it was found against the Defendant. And by the whole Court, the Plaintiff had
well declared the consideration. For the words are that he maintain the Title
against Palmer; for the promise was after the acttion brought. And the
Plaintiff is not to prescribe what Plea he will plead; but that he defend that
Suit. And then when Palmer is not owner of the Soil, as appears in the
evidence in the Kings Bench. And so if a pretense to common fail, he should be
punished for a Trespass where he ought not, Palmer being an Introcer upon the
King. And every Commoner may break the Common, if it be enclosed; Although he
does not put cattle in immediately. But he may infriender by the other
Commoners or his Tenants, and his Title of Common only excuses him of the
Trespass. And also the Jury had found that it was in maintenance of the Title
of Common expressly. And so Judgment was entered for the Plaintiff, pleno
consensu.

Dorothy Owen against Owen Price.
DOrothy Owen brought an action of the Case against Owen Price upon a trover of
Conversion of one Load of Wheat, and one other of Barley, within the Rectory of
Broody. And upon not guilty, the Jury found a special Verdict to this effect
(viz.) Marmaduke Bishop of St. Davies seized of the Rectory of Broody, and a
Manor parcel of the Bishopric, 3 August. 27 El. makes a Lease of them being
formerly demised to Anne-Davyes, and the two Daughters P. and C. habendum a die
datus for their lives successively, viz. to A. and her Assigns, for her life,
rendering the ancient rent; and afterward the first of September 27 El. makes a
Letter of Attorney to I. S. to enter in the Rectory and Manor, and there to
deliver seisin secundam formam Cartae, which he did accordingly. The Lease is
confirmed, the Bishop dies, and Wilburn his Successor accepts the rent of A.
and without any entry makes a second Lease for two lives to the Defendant, and
he is translated. Laud the next Successor before any acceptance makes another
Lease for three lives, to the Plaintiff. And the Defendant took and converted
the Grain, etc. Finch the Recorder for the Plaintiff, who endeavored to
destroy the two first Leases. And as to that, the first Lease is not
warrantable by the Statute, 1 El. that depends upon consideration of two things.

First, Whether the word Successive so makes a Limitation of a Remainder etc.

Secondly, Whether the Lease in Remainder be out of the Statute 1 El. also that
I ought to maintain, That although the Lease is not warranted by the Statute,
yet it is not void, but voidable by the Successor, And that also contains two
points.

First, Whether it be void by the Common law (scil.) When a Lease is made to
two habendum a die datus, and livery be 3 days after by Attorney be not good.

Secondly, Whether it be absolutely void by the Statute. As to the first, a
Lease succcessively habendum (viz.) to A. and her Assigns for her life. That
Habendum well settles the Estate by way of remainder, and it is not a
Ioynt-estate. 8 E. 3. There the doubt is first put, but the difference is,
Where it is habendum successive generally, then it is a Ioynt-estate; But if it
be with a reference and declaration, it is a good remainder. Br. 104.
successive generally does not make any remainder, unless in case of a copyhold
sibi and suis make an inheritance, 30 El. in Banc. Roy. 8 Rot. 856. The Lord
Sturton makes a Lease to Thomas Hubhard, habendum to him and two others
(scilicet) successive for their lives, and to the longer liver of them. And it
was adjudged, that none, can take by that Deed, but Thomas Hubbard only; Who is
only the party named, and that it is no remainder, for it is not made certain,
who begins to take by the Remainder. Greenwood and Tilers Case in the Kings
Bench. There such a Lease is made, and the word Successive comes after the
limitation of the Estate. And the Judges gave the difference between this Case
and Hiliards Case. But after in the Exchequer-Chamber, it was agreed to the
contrary. So that Successive put generally does nothing; But when it is showed
who takes first, then it makes a Remainder. Dyer 361. habendum successive,
prout nominatur in Indentura. It was ruled that that was a Remainder. And this
Case is more strong, for every one is named in his order. And then if it be not
a Ioint-estate, but in remainder, it is not warrantable by the Statute of 1 El.
6. Rep. Dean and Chapters Case of Worcester. And that Statute had relation to
the Statute of 32 H. 8. of making of Leases; For the Statute of 1 El. ought in
reason and equity to have the same constructions, as the Statutes aforesaid;
and so it had been adjudged in one Wheeler and Danbyes Case. Then that Lease
although it be void, yet is not absolutely void, but voidable, etc. And as to
the point in Law, the Livery is good as it seemed. But now if there was a Lease
for life, or a Feoffment de die datus, and Livery made the same day, by the
Feoffor himself or his Attorney, that it should be void. For the day of the
date should be excluded, and the Livery cannot operate in futuro; For it is res
ponderosa, and it can never expect and be in suspense. 2 Rep. 55. Bucklers
Case. But I confess in this last Case, a favorable construction ought to be
made, where the Possession had long continued according to the letters Patents;
Which should intend that the Livery was in the same instant; And in a thing
that lies in Grant, the same construction is made; as if Rent in Common in esse
should be granted, de die to come, the Grant is void, Bucklers Case before. H.
8 H. 7. 33. 8 H. 6. 35 coment. 145. Throgmorton and Traceys Case, agrees the
difference of a Rent granted de novo, and a Rent in esse. 9 E. 2. tit. Dower.
So that a thing granted cannot be, to begin at a day to come; But not by the
reason only given, that he cannot reserve a particular Estate to himself; But
because it is a Frank-tenement which ought to pass presently, Pasc. 5: Iac.
Kings Bench, Sir Robert James Case. In a Replevin against him and Adams it was
agreed; That if a Reversion be bargained and sold at a day to come for years,
it is good. And so also is Sir Rowland Haywards Case. 2 Rep. 35. If a Feoffment
or a Lease for life was a die datus. If the Lessor or a Person the next day
make Livery it is good without question. For the absurdity that a
Frank-tenement should be in suspense is not so: for the life is given by the
Livery after the date. And there is a great difference between things that lie
in Grant, and a Feoffment. For in Case of a Grant, that is a die datus, it
cannot be made good. In Case where a Feoffment is made, the Deed is the
evidence, and all is not done before the Livery. But in the other Case after
the Livery, nothing is to be done by the other, And that is the reason of
Buckleys Case, That an attournment cannot make the Grant good, or the form of a
Deed. But where Livery is, it passes by Livery only, where no Estate is
mentioned. Also one Bowls and Smyths Case. The Prebend of Bow makes a Lease
for 3 lives, a die datus, and makes Livery after the day; Adjudged that the
Lease and Livery were good; as it is in Greenwood and Tilers Case in the Kings
Bench, Trin. 10 Iac. rot. 1039. and 18 Iac. Argued at Sergeants Inn. One Will.
Long, and Alice his wife, by Deeds makes a Lease to Fisher and Anne his Wife,
and Joan his Daughter, habendum at Michaelmas next after the date of the
Indenture, for lives successively. The Lessor and his wife after the day past
makes livery in person, secundum formam chartae. Long dies, and Alice receives
the rent of Fisher. Fisher and his wife die. Alice makes a Feoffment to I. S.
Greenwood the Lessee of Joan, brought an Eject. firm. against Tyler the lessee
of I. S. And these points were resolved, That the livery after the day, made
the lease good, which is the point now single in question.

2. Alice and Joan cannot take jointly.

3. That Joan cannot take a greater Estate than for her own life, and not pur
autur vie. For it was not the meaning of the Deed. But there they held, that
the Successor after the lives, was the Remainder. But afterward in a Writ of
Errror it was denied.

4. That that acceptance of the rent ties the Wife; Which could not be unless
the rent remain good. For the assent ought to be manifest by Deed. So that the
Deed is good to direct the estate. and prove the Assent. For otherwise the
Feoffment so had avoided the lease. But where the Person is disabled it is
otherwise. As if a Feoffment be made by a Feme Covert, and livery made by
Attorney, the Deed is void.

But now the grand doubt is, whether the livery after the day by Attorney be
good. I will agree that if the letter of Attorney was made the same day, that
the deed bore date, the livery is void. For it shall not be in the power of an
Attorney to invalidate or validate the lease made by an other. So if a letter of
Attorney be contained in a Charter of feoffment, or be in another Deed,
delivered at the same day; The delivery upon that Deed shall be naught. And the
Attorney by his livery cannot make the lease or feoffment good, no more than
(in Bucklers Case) an atturnment can make a Grant good. 9 Iac. com. banc. rot.
1414. Walter, and Dean and Chapters Case of Worcester cited before. In a Writ
of covenant. There a lease was made by E. for three lives bearing date the 10
of November. 42. E. and a letter of Attorney to deliver seisin. The Attorney
delivered seisin a year after, when two rent days were incurred. And it was
doubted whether that livery was good: because that two rent days were passed,
before he had executed his Authority. And it was adjudged good. And it was not
like the Lord Cromwells Case, 2 Rep. Where a performance of a Condition for the
avoidance of an advowson was void, no time being limited. For in Case of
authority, it may be executed 10 years after. So that what the Feoffor himself
may do, he may give authority to another to do that. For if he be bedridden, or
other infirmity, shall the law so fetter him, that what he can do himself, he
cannot in the same Case do by any other? For although you may say, that he may
make a new lease: yet perhaps he is tied by Covenants or Obligations so, by
which he shall be worse entangled. And the reason of the expectancy of the
Frank-tenement also, which an Attorney may make good or bad; a lease of another
is included. Because where it is mischievous to none, the law does not envy the
Ease of the party, as Combs Case is. A Surrender, by an Attorney of a Copihold
is good: and we can (you know) appear by Attorney in actions, and acknowledge
Judgments. But it will be objected, that livery by Attorney is not good
without a Charter of Feoffment, as Kirkby said, 16 H. 7. fol. 51. Plo. 6. And
if those Books are not law. Yet Greenwood and Tilers Case, before recited, will
resolve that doubt; That the Deed is not void if the livery be after; and if
the Entry be presently, he is a Tenent at will, or a Disseisor, as it is in
Bucklers Case, For it cannot be made good by any thing after. Yet the Deeds
remain, or otherwise his acceptance did not bar him. I confess that an
Authority to make livery cannot be made by Paroll, as 10 H. 8. 11 H. 4. for it
may be revoked by Paroll. As a Will which cannot be made but by writing, yet it
may be revoked by Paroll. 26 As. But an authority to make a Lease is made by
Paroll, 30 E. 3.31, 32. If a Deed purporting an Estate in Fee simple be read to
the Feoffor, who is an illiterate man, to pass only an Estate tail; And a
Letter of Attorney was to deliver seisin secundum formam Chartae, which is well
read to him; Yet it was resolved that all is void. And that he may plead it was
not his deed, to the letter of Attorney. For if the Deed be void, the Letter of
Attorney which releases to it is void also. But I conceive, if it be put in a
Deed that gives Land a die datus, and the Attorney authorized by express words,
delivers seisin three days before; that livery may be good. And then it is
more strong when he appoints his Attorney after the day; as it is in this Case.
A Feoffment made from a day past is good, and the time before the livery is
idle. And for another reason in Case of Assurances such nice constructions
ought not to be made. And because there is no difference whether livery be made
in Person or by Attorney. Now there is a difference between an Authority and
Conveyance, H. 20. and 40 Eliz. in an Ejectione firm. in this Court, Marriots
Case. A Charter of Feoffment was made to the Lessor of the Plaintiffs, 10
September. And the Feoffee reciting that that Charter was made the 11 of
September, authorized him to take livery secundum formam Chartae. And it was
resolved, because the date was mistaken, although all other circumstances
agreed; Because that the authority ought to be taken strictly, that that is a
void livery. But in Dyer 116. A Lease is made the 30 day of August for 21
years, and afterward the Lessor reciting that the Lease was made the 6th of
August, demises the Land habendum after the first Lease determined. And it was
resolved to be a good Lease: because that the beginning and ending of the Lease
agreed; And in the Case of Marriot, it was resolved.

Secondly, That an Attorney cannot be without Deed.

Thirdly, Although that the Feoffor in person makes livery, yet it is void;
Because that the Attorney cannot take the livery upon that Deed without that
authority. But where that one may do that thing himself, and he gives the
Attorney the same authority: It is all one if Feoffment be made to I. S. and I.
S. makes an Attorney to take livery, whereof livery is made, yet is good; And
it is all one, as if livery had been made to I.S. himself. 19 H. 6. A Feoffment
upon Condition that he enfeoff I. S. void by the Statute of 1 Eliz. or
voidable: and it seemed it was but voidable by the Successor, by entry or by
action. You may see that the words are as plain as may be. They shall be
utterly void to all intents and purposes. But quid haeret in litera. For her
meaning was, That it shall be void by the Successor, and that construction had
always been made 3 Rep. 19. 11 Rep. 73. So the Statute 23 H. 6. of Sheriffs
had been expounded. 7 E. 4. 4. There cannot be non est factum pleaded. And upon
the Statute of Usury; That an usurious contract shall be void; Yet the Statute
ought to be pleaded. Acts of Parliament where there are many doubts, shall be
expounded by the Common law; For that, that at the Common law a Freehold
cannot he helped but by Entry. 11 H. 7. There is a diversity between a Lease
for years, and a Lease for life. Dyer 222. And it is the dignity of a freehold
to reduce it by freehold. Then if it stood with the Common law; It is not to
be void without Entry. For as a solemn Ceremony created, the same must defeat
it. The Statute shall be so expounded. And if it was in Case of a lease years
of a Bishop, it shall not be void without Entry. 3 Rep. Pennants Case, Dyer
229. 8 H. 5. 11 E. 3. Commen. 139. It was never the meaning of the Act to make
it actually void. For if the words are pursued strictly, then it shall be void
immediately against the Bishop himself. Then the Successor in lieu of a
benefit, shall take an advantage of the Statute; For he cannot make Leases but
of things usually demised, 32 Eliz. Sale and Sale against the Bishop of
Coventry in a Quare impedit. It was adjudged, That a Quare impedit well lies by
an Executor for disturbance made to the Testator. And also that a Lease for
years is good, notwithstanding the Statute. The Statute does not intend the
benefit of the Lessee, but of the Successor himself: And the Successor had his
Election to accept the Rent or the Land: And if it should be void, his Election
is gone. Tallengers and Dentons Case 4. Jac. A Lease is made by the Bishop of
Carlisle, of the Tithes which is out of the Statute: And there it is void
against the Successor. For that, that he has no remedy, for the Rent reserved
upon it. And that point is so adjudged upon the Statute of the 13 Eliz. Walters
Case before resolved, that a Lease made by Dean and Chapter, not warranted by
the Statute, is but voydable against the Successor, Pas. 6 Iac. rot. 1041.
Wheeler and Danbies Case: Robert Bishop of Gloucester, 30 Eliz. makes a Lease to
Jasper, habendum a die datus, to him for life, the remainder to William,
rendering the ancient Rent. The first Lessee dies, the Successor having notice
of it, and that diverse Rents were behind, commanded his Bailiff, that he
should receive the Rents. The Bailiff enters them, and receives Rent of that
Lessee, the Bishop having notice of it. And these points were resolved.

First, the Jury finding a Lease, a die datus, might be intended good, for that
the Entry was made after the day: yet the Jury finding a thing impossible, does
not conclude the Judges.

Secondly that a Lease in remainder is not warranted by the Statute, 1 Eliz.

Thirdly, that the Lease was but voydable by the Successor: for the Statute was
made for the benefit of the Successor, but the grand Question was, of the
manner of acceptance, and resolved.

Fourthly, that the acceptance binds the Bishop, and the Authority given to the
Bailiff, and also his receipt. For it differs where the Bailiff of his own
accord receives Rent. Dyer. And they also say, that that was to perfect an
estate settled. And it differs from an Attournment, which is to perfect an
estate settled: For there notice is requisite, etc.

Gammons Case again.
HEndon said, that a Scire facias does not lie upon that record: because an
action of debt well lies: For no president can be shown, that a Judgment given
in an inferior Court, may be executed so. For first, that Court shall not make
an Instrument to execute Judgment given in another Court. It is seen that an
Attaint lies of false Judgment given in an inferior Court. Take the Case in
14 H. 4.4. And so if issue be joined in an inferior Court without custom: It
shall not be removed to be tried so, And so it is our Case, etc. Secondly, the
Statutes do not give them power (viz.) 26 H. 8. and 34 H. 8. makes the matter
clear that it cannot be. Error in an Assize before the Justices of Assize, will
not lie in this Court. For Judges Itinerant are superior. And those Judges are
appointed by Act of Parliament; and so the Judges also in Wales are by Act of
Parliament: And having power a Oyer et terminer. It is not found that after
Judgment a Certiorari had been received to remove the Record out of an
Inferior Court: And the mischief would be, if Judgment should be given for
20. l. it should be executory through all the Realm, where they have but a
special Jurisdiction. And also the tenor of the Record is only removed, and
execution cannot be out of the tenor of the Record. Dyer 369. Plow. 52.
Richardson. The question is, whether when the Record is so removed, whether it
shall be idle: If Judgment be given in an Inferior Court, which holds Plea by
prescription, or by grant, and removed by Writ of Error, if the Judgment be
affirmed we may award Execution. 16 Iac. There is an express president of a
Judgment in an Inferior Court and a Scire facias is granted so. And also a
Scire facias is granted in lieu of an action of debt. For by the Common Law he
might not have a Scire facias after the year; but an action of debt. And by the
Common Law debt lies in that Case. Harvey and Crook Justices, said, that Court
shall not be an Instrument to execute Judgment in an inferior Court, which
they cannot. And also the Land of the Defendant shall be liable to an execution
in any place in England: where before only the Land within the place was
liable. And also the purchaser could never find out what executions might be
upon the Land. Richardson said, that the mischief would be great on both sides.
For otherwise what Judgment was given: The Defendant would remove his goods
out of the Jurisdiction of the Court, and then the Plaintiff had no remedy but
by new original. And Crook Justice. If a man brings an action in a Court, he
ought to examine what the end of that will be. For it is a president, a man
ought to respect things in their end. For it is his own folly to commence an
action, where he cannot have execution. For that, he may commence his action,
and have execution in any place in England, And although that a foreign Plea in
an Inferior Court may be tried so, yet it is by Act of Parliament (viz.) 6 E.
1. 12. which proves by the Common Law there was no remedy.

Tithes of Pigeons and Acorns.
A Parson Libels in the Spiritual Court for Tithes of Pigeons and Acorns: And
the Defendant prayed a prohibition: Because the Pigeons were spent in his own
house: and the Acorns dropped from the Tree and his Hogs eat them. And it was
said by the Court, Acorns are Tithable, 11 Rep. 49. But then they ought to be
gathered, and also sold. And a prohibition was clearly granted.

Thomas Wilcocks Case.
MOre of the Case of the University of Oxford.

Thomas Wilcocks, Mr. of Arts in St. Mary Hall in Oxford, was sued in the
Chancellors Court there, by Anne wife of Ralph Bradwell and Christian her
daughter; For calling the wife Bawd, and old Bawd; and the daughter; Whor., and
scurvey pockey-faced whore. And they procured two Sentences against Wilcocks,
and upon them he had two prohibitions: And Davenport moved for a Procedendo:
for that, that by their Charter which was confirmed by Parliament, The
Chancellor or his Deputy shall have Conusans of all causes personal, where one
of the parties is a Scholar, And the Charter was showed in Court, which was to
this purpose, That they shall hold Pleas, etc. or Secundum morem Universitatis,
or Secundum legem terre. And the custom was to proceed according to the Civil
Law. And it was resolved:

First, that the King by his Charter deprives the subject of his Liberty and
Privilege of Trial: As he cannot by his Letters Patents alter the nature of
Gavelkinde Land; but by prescription he may alter it in particular places: As 9
H. 6. 44. In corpus cum causa to the Chancellor of Oxford, was certified that
the prisoner, Pro extensione detentus fuit and convictus. And an exception was
taken for that, that he should have been indicted and convicted: and it was
answered that it was Mos Universitatis, And by Hutton Justice. That custom was
to be intended to be by prescription. But so the Charter is confirmed by Act of
Parliament, it is as good.

Secondly, that there is a good cause of action in the Chancellors Court. For
Wilcocks who is one of the parties is a Scholar, and the Charter was only made
for the ease of Scholars, that their Studies might not be interrupted, by Suits
in other Courts: But then he ought to be a Scholar resident in the University
at the time of the Suit commenced there. And he ought to be only one of the
parties. And for that, if another be joined with him, he shall not have the
privilege or benefit of the Charter: as it is 14 H. 4. 21. and by Richardson
chief Justice, that is not a privilege which may be waved: for every person
may Recusare jura introducta pro se: But that it was an exempt Jurisdiction,
and differs where the privilege goes to the person. As if a Clerk, in his
Court will sue in another Court, or suffer himself to be sued, that is a Waver
of the Privilege.

Thirdly, that a Proeedendo shall not be granted, for that, the Charter is not
pleaded; for the Judges give Judgment of the Record, and the cause of their
Judgment ought to appear by pleading of the Record. And also a prohibition is
granted where by Demurrer, or by Pleading, and not by verbal surmise there
ought to be a discharge. And in the case of a prohibition, It is not like the
Case of 35 H. 6. 24. Where Conusans is one time allowed by Charter shown, and
another Record there should be allowed without demand, without other showing:
But Yelverton Justice, to the contrary, That it might be remanded upon pleading
of the Charter. And he said, that there was a difference, where the suggestion
was upon matter of Fact, as prescription, etc. Where an issue may be taken,
there it ought to be pleaded in writing, which appears fully by the mean of the
Court, and not by suggestion.

Fourthly, it was resolved that a prohibition may be granted, in case where the
Court cannot give other remedy, for the ease of the Subject, who is the party;
as it was adjudged in the Court of Requests: Upon the custom of London,
concerning Orphans, a prohibition was granted; and yet no remedy at Common Law
was afterward to be expected, Trin 5. Car.

Fawkner against Bellingham:
FAwkner against Bellingham in a Replevin. The Avowry was, for that, that the
Defendant was Lord of a Manor, and of Lands which were Chauntry Lands; and
held of him by Rent and other Services; And after coming to the Crown by the
Statute of 10 E. 6. cap. 14. Who granted it then over by Letters Patents, etc.
And now the Lord distreins for Rent, and avows that he had not seisin within
forty years: And whether seisin was requisite for him who made the Conusans,
was the sole question in the Argument.

First, for that, that it is a new Rent created by the Statute of 1 E. 6. For
when that Land is granted to the King by Parliament, yet the King has
operation upon it, and may dispose of it.

Secondly, that the Land passed from the Priest and others, by their assent
confirming it. And it is a Grant of the Seigniory by the Lord himself unless
the saving hinder it. But so by the Grant the Rent is extinguished: And the
saving is so a creation of a new Rent, 1. rep. 47. Altomeoods Case. And there
is diversity between a Rent-service, viz. where the Tenant grants Land to the
King, and he grants that over: He cannot distrein upon the Patentee: for it is
distinct from a Rent charge. Stamford prerogat. 75. Mich. 20. E. 3. 17. And so
it is ordered by the Statute de Religione, when he enters by Mortmain, that he
ought to revive the Services, Stam. 27. If the King enters upon my Tenant,
there a Petition of Right lies, Dyer 313. 10. rep. 47. By the saving in the
Statute of Wills, etc. A primer Seisin is given to the King de novo, where he
ought to have it before: And then being a new Rent no Seisin is requisite.
Secondly, the second reason is, for that there is a new remedy: and then no
matter whether it be old Rent or new Rent, Finchden. A Rent granted out of
White-acre, and a distress out of Black-acre, the Rent yet remains, and there
is one thing part of the Rent, another of the remedy: Because the Rent is only
altered in quality, Dyer 31. There our Case directly. Now the Statute of
Limitations is a Statute for the good of the Common wealth, to settle
inheritances and possessions. And it should be expounded liberally: Then if a
scruple be of the Act, it ought to be expounded benignly. And so it is of all
other Statutes which settle possessions: Always shall be expounded favorably
for the ease and benefit of the Tenant and Lord. And for that adjudged, That a
Copyhold and Leases for years are within that Statute. And the Statute of 32 H.
8. 11. rep. 71. binds both King and Realm, because it is for the public good.

Owen against Price before.
BRamston argued for the Defendant. I agree that Lease to be a Lease in
remainder; and I admit also that, that Lease is warranted by the Statute, 10
Eliz. For that, that he is not punishable of waste: And the case admits two
questions: whether it be a void Lease at Common Law.

And First, In respect of the limitation.

Secondly, there is not any Livery in the Case.

Wherefore first of all, it had been said a Frank Tenement cannot pass from a
day to come, in case of a Grant. 38 H. 6. 34. 8 H 7. Claytons Case 5. rep. It
had been agreed that a Livery made the first day by himself or by his Attorney
should not be good. And moreover if by his Attorney after the day, if his
Grant may be granted, the same day it is not good. And then I hold that the
date of the Grant of Attorney is not material, Trin. 43 Eliz. rot. 402.
Conibar. It was resolved in such a Case as that is: That the Livery is not
good. And the reason was, that the Livery had not relation to the Deed, which
was void in Law. Bucklers and Binsluns Case. The release was made 1 May, as
this, and executed by Attorney, and by Attorney authorized the same day, the
second of May. And it was adjudged to be void by the same reason. Greenwood and
Tilers Case. He had much insisted upon that: yet in the enlargement of the
Case, this point was resolved. That if the Livery was by Attorney, it should
be void, and the reason there was, That although that the deed was void, yet
the Livery made in person ought to be good. But the Deed can never by Livery be
made good, which was void to that purpose. And it had been said and objected,
that it might be done in person, and therefore by Attorney. I agree that by
that Livery an Estate passes, but not by the Deed. But the Livery makes it pass
out of the Interest that the Lessor had. But by that reason that such a Lease
shall be good, where Livery is by the Lessor himself, will not stand with our
Case. And diverse Cases declare this difference. 23 E. 3. 31, 32. A Deed of
Feoffment is made by Mawbry, where he had nothing in the Land, and after
purchases and makes Livery, Secundum formam Chart. That estate passes but not
by the Deed. But if Livery had been there made by Attorney it had not been
good. If a Feme Covert, or a Monk makes such a Charter of Feoffment, and after
Coverture or deraignment: Makes livery then by Attorney: such livery then cannot
be good; For he cannot exceed his authority, which was to make good his first
Deed. 22 H. 6 32. A feoffment of a Manor by Deed of two acres, all pass, not
by deed but by livery; but if by Attorney otherwise it is; Livery according to
deed, (where there is not any) by Attorney is void. Kelway 64. A lease made by
Baron and Feme may be pleaded without Deed. Coparceners agregate cannot make a
Lease without Deed; But a Bishop or a single Corporation may: and it shall be
good against him, but not against his Successor; Dyer 19. 17 E. 4. 17.
Littleton said, Where an Estate passes by Deed, then the Livery is but a
Ceremony. And in the Chapter of Conditions, he in the remainder shall be bound
by Condition in the Deed. Because that he took by that. So that by your reasons
you would make that acknowledgement and inrollment by the Grantor himself, to
be a Ceremony; and yet nothing pass. And the rule in Magdalen College Cases. If
you will have a thing by Deed, to be naught, no subsequent Act can make it
good. And then the lease is made to three, and the Grant of Attorney to deliver
seisin, to 3. and he delivers seisin but to one; although that the others take
in remainder. Yet he ought not to take upon him the cognizance of law, but
pursue his authority. A lease is made for years the remainder in fee, and a
Warrant of Attorney to deliver seisin to him in the remainder. And the Attorney
delivers seisin to the Tenent for years, It is not good. And yet in Law it
ought to be made to him. 11 H. 7. 13. A feoffment and a letter of Attorney to
deliver seisin to two, and he does it but to one, That is a disseisin, and
absolutely void by the Statute, Dyer 177. Hill. 39. Eliz com. banc. rot. 941.

Johnson against Morris and Edmunds
Johnson brought a Trespass against Morris and Edmunds, quare clausum fregit et
herbam suis depastus est, etc. The Defendant said that all the time of the
Trespass, he was seized of the Manor of Amner; And that they, and all their
Predecessors, had a Sheep-walk in the place assigned, etc. and for all the
year, but when it was sowed for all the sheep leavant and couchant upon the
Manor, etc. The Plaintiff replies that the Defendant such a day put 200 sheep
within that Land, and that those sheep were levant and couchaut upon the
Chauntry fold; Whereupon the Defendant demurred. Crowley Justice. The
Declarations are general of sheep, without expressing the number; and for that
the Justification is good in the generalty; and now when the replication is of
200 sheep, and does not say alias, it is naught. Hutton, It is not directly
put, that the Chauntry land is parcel of the Manor, and then we cannot so
intend it, and yet by the Demurrer it is confessed. Richarson, It is not
sufficient to say, that they were levant and couchant upon the Chauntry fold;
without saying absque hoc, that they were parcel of the Manor. And it is
uncertain whether there were other sheep: and we by Imagination cannot intend
it, etc. Harvey and Hutton, The Replication is good; For that, that in the
Replication he now declares of what sheep he complained before; And he does not
agree the sheep which the Defendant has justified; but he mistakes his
Justification. For he brings his action for another thing; As the Trespass is
made, quare clausum fregit; The Defendant justifies for a way, and the
Plaintiff says that he went out of the way; It is a good replication. And a new
Assignment of the Sheep is contained in the Replication, the Declaration being
general. And although that he did not say directly, that the sheep are other.
Yet put all the parts of the Replication together, and it will appear that they
are other. But Richardson and Crook on the contrary. The Replication is not a
confession and avoidance, nor traverse of the bar, if it had been said, Ducent.
alias oves. But then the Declaration had been avoided, and the Defendant might
plead not guilty to them. And although it was said, levant and couchant upon
the Chauntry fold, yet it is but an argument: and express allegation in bar
cannot be answered by arguments. For a prescription is for Ewes, and the
Trespass quare oves etc. generally. The Defendant alleges his prescription, and
avows that they were oves matrices. And the Plaintiff replies that they were
oves verveces. That is not good without a traverse absque hoc, that they were
oves matrices. And the Case put before of Justification by way was agreed; For
there it was confessed and avoided by Replication. And also that Case alleged
by Hutton to be adjudged. A Battery is alleged to be done the first of May. The
Defendant justifies deson assault them. the same day. The Plaintiff replies that
that Battery was four hours after the other Battery. And it was traversed, and
well, which was ordered by the Court that an alias should be added in the
Replication, etc.

Fawnes Case.
Fawn an Attorney in this Court, had arrested diverse persons, by Process
without original in Actions of debt. And where the King ought to have for every
hundred pounds in the Obligation 10 s. for a Fine, if the sum exceeded 50 l.
And when the original is sued, the said Fawn took the money to himself of the
Clyents. And the Cursiter complains to the Chancellor, and be informs the
Court. And it was said by Richardson, because he had taken his oath which every
Attorney ought to take, That he shall do no falsity; And also we by our Oath
bound to punish such offenses: Therefore his sentence was: That his Name should
be put out of the Roll, and thrust over the Bar, and committed to the Fleet;
Which was executed accordingly. 20 H. 6. 37. and 41. E. 3. 1. Which Cases prove
the same.

James and Thoroughgood against Collins.
James and Thoroughgood brought Trespass against Collins. And the Case was
this, A man makes his Testament and gives to 5 men their heirs and assigns,
certain Houses in Fleet Street, etc. All of them to have part and part alike,
and the one to have as much as the other. And whether the Defendants were
Iointtenants or tenants in Common was the Question; and it was adjudged and
resolved that they were Tenants in Common. And the same Case in 2. 3 Phil. and
Mary in Bendlows Reports is adjudged so. And also in Lucan and Locks Case in
the Kings Bench It was afterward remembered and agreed to be good Law,
Ratcliff; Case. Advise to two and his Heirs, in Ioynt-tenency by the whole
Court, against the opinion of Audley.

It was said by the Court, that an Officer of the Court ought to be answered in
any action de die in diem. Quod nota, etc.

Beguall against Owen.
BEguall brought a Writ of Partition against Owen before the Justices of
Assise, at the grand Sessions in Anglesey. And the Defendant pleaded the
general issue. The Plaintiff prefers a Bill in English, and says that Owen is
Tenant in Common with him, and that diverse of his VVitnesses which can prove
his Title are so aged, that they cannot come to the Sessions, and desires a
Commission to examine the Witnesses concerning the Title in perpetuam rei
memoriam. And Henden moved for a Prohibition; For that, that Cause would be
dangerous for the Subject, that such Testimonies taken in his absence should be
for trial of his Title.

Secondly, That that examination before the Trial is against the Statute of 26
H. 8. And although they have it in Chancery, yet it is not so here. But it was
denied by the Court: For there was never seen such a President, Of a
Prohibition to a grand Sessions. And by Yelverton. They have it in Chancery;
and if it be not prescribed in what manner they shall have it, it should be as
in the Chancery. Hutton, That Commission is not prejudicial to the Subject,
although a Prohibition be grantable. For such Testimonies are not used but
after the Witnesses are dead; And a man cannot preserve them alive, and
perchance his Title rests upon their Testimonies.

Jane Heels Case.
Jane Heel Administratrix of her Husband, brought an action of Debt upon an
Obligation made to her Husband the Testator; The Defendant pleads a Recovery by
the Testator upon the same Obligation, and that he was taken in execution, and
that the Sheriff suffered him voluntarily to escape. The Plaintiff replies Null
tiel Record of the Recovery; Upon which there is a demurrer. Davenport, That
the Judgment was but a conveyance to their matter in Bar, and it ought not to
be traversed. But it was said by the whole Court, That the Judgment in it self
is a good bar, if it be not reversed. 6 Rep. 45. Higgins case. The execution
upon that, is not but a consequence upon the Judgment. And without the
Judgment, Escape is not material for to make the traverse good. And so
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Issues.
If the King by his Letters Patents grant to the Corporation all Issues within
any places; The issue that the Corporation it self shall forfeit, shall be
excepted by intendment of law. For otherwise it would be a defrauding of
Justice; For then the Corporation would never appear. Which note in the Case of
Dean and Chapter of Ely.

Provender against Wood.
PRovender brought an action upon the case against Wood, For that the Defendant
assumed to the Father of the Plaintiff upon a marriage to be solemnised between
the Plaintiff and the Daughter of the Defendant, to pay him 20 l. And it was
agreed by Richardson and Yelverton nullo contradicent. That the action well
lies for the same. And the party to whom the benefit of a promise accrews, may
bring his action.

Mrs. Rows Case.
Mistress Row was arrested by a capias corpus ad satisfaciendum, by a Bailiff
in Middlesex, within the Bars in Holborn, which is within the liberty of
London. And Hitcham the Kings Sergeant prayed a Supersedeas, For that, that the
arrest was false. And the Court agreed, that a Supersedeas cannot be granted.
For a Supersedeas it cannot be alleged Executio erronice emanavit, but there
the Execution is well granted. And if it be returned by the Sheriff generally;
It ought to be intended well served; although that the Affidavit be made to the
contrary. But in this case a Corpus cum causa shall be granted.

Booth against Franklin.
BOoth Farmor of a portion of Tithes for 5 years; without Deed demises a Farm
which he had in the same Parish to Franklin for years; and afterward he
libells against him for tithe of that Farm. And Franklin said he was not
Farmour. And Henden prays a Prohibition for that.

First, That the Lease for Tithes is without Deed: but he may be discharged of
his own Tithes without Deed; As was adjudged before in this Court.

Secondly, the Lessee is not to pay tithes for that Farm. For although the
Parson makes a Lease of the Glebe for years, he paid tithes; But if a Layman
who had the impropriation leases the Glebe, the Lessee does not pay tithes. But
the Court denied the case of the lease of the Parsonage impropriate; And said
that the case of Perkins and Hind was adjudged to the contrary in that very
point. And also if he purchase other lands in the Parish (which are discharged
of tithes in his hands) and he demises them, yet the Lessee pays him tithes.
And the opinion of the Court was, If one contract with the Parson for discharge
of the Tithes of his lands for years, and demises his lands to another; yet he
shall not have tithes, but the discharge runs with the land. But if one take a
lease of his Tithes by deed, and makes a demise of his land, he has tithes of
the Lessee. And the direction was, that the Lessee of the Farm ought to show
expressly in the Ecclesiastical Court that the Farmour had not a Less by Deed;
and a Prohibition was granted. And it shall be admitted, that the words of the
libell being Firmator, conductor and occupator was good,

Ralph Andrews against Bird.
ANdrews brought an action upon the Case against Bird, and declares that Bird
sued a Trespass in this Court against him; and upon not guilty pleaded, the
issue between the aforesaid Ralph Andrews, and Robert Bird was tried at the
Assizes, etc. And that there Andrews showed in evidence a Deed of feoffment
concerning his Title, and the verdict passed for Andrews. And afterward Bird
spoke these words (scilicet) That Andrews procured the Deed to be forged. And
upon not guilty pleaded, it was found for the Plaintiff. And Atthowe moved in
arrest of Judgment.

First for that, That in the Record it was entered that the Issue was inter
praedict. Robertum, where it should have been Radulphum.

And secondly that the words were not actionable. Richardson said, as to the
mistake, it was helped by the word aforesaid. And although that it was inter
praedict. Andrews, it should have been well; For it cannot be intended, but the
same Andrews. And Crook Justice cited Dyer 260. Cook and Watsons Case to be the
same Case, and 11 H. 7. Penningtons Case, That the words were actionable; For
the Statute punishes forgery, and the procurers of forgery. And it is all one,
although he did not say falsely procured, as the precise words of the Statute
are; Yet it shall be intended, that that is employed in the word Forge. But if
it had been said, the Deed given in evidence was forged, that was not
actionable.

Wood against Symons.
VVOod against Symons in a Prohibition, in which Symons libels for Tithes of
Hay. And Wood suggests for the Prohibition, That he used to pay tithe of Hay in
specie, in consideration whereof he used to be discharged for all Doles,
Green-skips, and Headlands, not exceeding the breadth that a Plough or a Teame
might turn about the Lands. And Henden moved for a Consultation; For that it is
said about, etc. that is circa terras arabiles. When the truth is there are
Skips at the side of Lands, as broad as the Lands themselves; and then he would
be discharged of them also. Whereas it ought to be at the end of the Head-lands
only. Richardson said, that in arable lands enclosed, Pasture is at the end and
at the sides, which is mowed, and yet discharged of tithes. But the Court in
respect there was a Prohibition granted said, That he ought to join Issue or
demurre upon the Declaration.

Summons.
IN a Writ of partition after the Summons an Estrepment was granted, and
generally against the Parties and their servants. For in partition no damages
are to be recovered. Quod nota.

Escape.
IF a Sheriff remove his Prisoners out of the County without being commanded,
it is an escape. But if he remove them from one place to another in his County
as he changes his Gaol, it is not an Escape: But if he remove prisoners for
their ease and delight in the same County, it is a Escape. As the Case was
cited by Harvy. That one went with his Prisoner to a Bear-bating in the same
County. And it was adjudged an Escape. And Hutton Justice said So that if a
Sheriff permit his Prisoners to go to work for their benefit, it is an Escape.
And the Question was, if in an Audita Querela for a voluntary Escape of one in
Execution, there should be bayl; and the opinion of the Court was, That if it
appears, That the Cause upon which the Audita Querela is grounded, is called a
good proof by the Record, and that he should not be bayled, unless good and
special bayl.

Duncombe against Sir Edward Randall.
IN an action upon the Case between Duncombe and Sir Edward Randall for
diversion and stopping of a River, It was agreed by the Court, That if one had
anciently Ponds which are replenisht by Channels out of a River, He cannot
change the Channels, if any prejudice accrue to another by that. And yet the
effect by prefluxions, is to have the Ponds fed out of the River. But sic utere
tuo ut ne laedas alieno.

The Vicar of Hallifaxes Case.
A Chaplain that was under the Vicar of Hallifax, libells against him for his
Sallary. And he prescribes that the Vicar ought to pay the Chaplains four
pounds a year, And the Vicar prays a Prohibition.

First, for that he alleges, That the Chaplains were eligible by himself; And
because that Chaplain was not elected by him, He is not Chaplain; But he is in
of his own wrong, etc.

Secondly, That prescription for Sallery was tryable at the Common law.
Yelverton, the Sallery is spiritual, as the Cure it self is spiritual, for
which it is to be paid. As the Case in Dyer 58. Pl. 4. But a Prohibition was
granted, until it was determined to whom the election appertained. And that
now depends by Prohibition in this Court.

Assault and Battery:
TRespass of Assault and Battery was brought against two, and the one of them
appeared, and a Verdict was found against him; The other was in the insimul
cum. And damages were taxed against him who appeared. But the Court by view of
the Plaintiff, increase the damages from 30 l. to 40 l. And afterward a
verdict was given against the other Defendant, and damages also were taxed.
And Thime moved that the other Defendant had murdered the Officer who came to
serve the Execution upon him for the 40 l. And so they by possibility might
recover nothing against him, that the Court would increase the damages against
this Defendant upon another view of the wound. But the Court denied that; For
they can have but view one time in this Action. But if they had brought several
Actions then it had been otherwise. But he directed him to stay all until the
first Defendant was hanged. And then they may make a view and increase the
damages.

Margery Rivets Case.
A Judgment in Debt was brought against Margery Rivets Administratrix, durante
minori aetate of her Son. And in a Scire facias against her, she pleaded in
Bar, that she was Administratrix, etc. and that such a day her Son came to full
age (scilicet) 17 years, and that after she refused before the Ordinary; And
that the Administration was granted to a Stranger; And that she had delivered
all the Goods in her hands at the time of the Writ brought or after, etc. The
Plaintiff replies and confesses all the Bar: But that before the delivery of
the Goods, and Administration granted by the Ordinary (devastivit) and does not
say that praedicta Margery devastavit. The Defendant joins Issue Quod praedict.
Margery non devastavit. Which was found for the Defendant. And Hitcham the
Kings Sergeant moved in arrest of Judgment; For that, that there was no Issue.
For every Issue ought to be returned certain, and the Issue grows upon the
affirmative; Then the word of the Defendant quod praedict. does nothing, for
the affirmative makes the Issue. Coo. Countess of Salops Case. A Bar may be
taken upon Common intent. But a Replication ought to be precise and certain. In
the Exchequer Chamber. Tho. Harris's case. One pleads that he was seized of
White acre and Infeoffac.. And adjudged naught, for it ought to have been
feofavit inde. For he may be seized of White acre, and enfeofft of another
acre. And also it may be said, that another devastavit, although that the wife
was Administratrix. Atthowe observed all the course of the Reeord; there is not
a word of Margery in the Replication, but only in the recital: But says ante
diem quo devastivit. And the Replication cannot be taken by intendment, and it
cannot be amended; For it is not vitium scriptoris, nor is it so much as ipsa
devastavit. But if it had been said that praedict. Margery had Goods in her
hands, sexto Decembris, et devastavit, then it should have been good. Crook.
She said, that she delivered Goods to another Administrator, and then he
replies, that before that time devastavit. It cannot be intended that any other
Devastavit but the Wife. And Hutton said, that that seemed to him to be good.
But Yelverton replied, that it did not seem to him to be good, and it cannot be
intended Margery. The Replication is the Title of the Plaintiff, As upon a
scire facias without a precedent Judgment. For the Duty of the Plaintiff is
when the Defendant had confessed himself to be subject to his Charge one time,
As in debt upon Arbitrament; and the other pleads no arbitrament made. And in
point of arbitrament to pay money, It is not sufficient for the Plaintiff to
say, That the money was not paid at the day: But he ought to affirm that the
Defendant had paid it, etc. And so there also Margery is not named
affirmatively in all the Replication. For if her name had begun any sentence,
then she might be intended. And although it be now after verdict, yet the
verdict will not help. So it was adjourned for the present.

Robert Barret against Margaret Barret his Mother.
RObert Barret brought an action of debt against his Mother, for an Obligation
made to him, the Condition whereof was thus. That she shall perform all that
part of her Husbands Will, that of her part is to be performed, and observed
concerning the Goods, etc. And that she shall use, occupy and enjoy all the
Lands and Tenements to her demised, according to the true intent and meaning of
the Will. The Defendant recites the Will, which was, that her Husband gave her
one Message and Land for her life; Excepting all the Timber Trees and Wood.
And further willed, That she make no waste nor estrepment in the Houses, Lands
or Timber Trees, nor her Assigns nor any other for her. And further willed,
That if she shall happen to do any such waste; That then she shall pay to
Robert Barret the double value of that to which the waste shall come or amount
unto; Being indifferently valued by two chosen by themselves. And furthermore
he willed, That there ought to be forty load of Wood per annum, taken for fuel
upon the Land demised, of such Trees which have been used to be lopped for 30
years before. And so she pleaded, that she performed the Covenant in all, etc.
And the Plaintiff replies, that the Defendant had decouped a Grove of Wood,
containing by estimation one moiety of an acre, and 6 Elmes, and 20 Beeches and
Sallows, and Maples, and Thorns, being of the age of 33 years. Whereupon the
Defendant demurred. But Atthow argued for the Defendant, and he said, That
there is not any breach of the Obligation alleged, all Timber Trees are
excepted; And because when she cuts them, there is no waste, but a trespass to
Robert; And the Will is, That she shall not do waste. For if she had entered
into other Lands and cut Trees out of the Lands of the demise, that had not
been a Forfeiture of the Obligation. But it shall be objected, That then that
clause had been void; if his intention shall not be construed of waste to be
done in the Trees; Then the second breach is not well assigned; For the words
are, If she does waste, that she pay the double value. And then although that
waste be done, You ought to allege that she did not pay the double value: for
if she had paid it her Obligation is saved. But Hitcham the Kings Sergeant on
the contrary. The breach is well assigned. The Case rests upon the words of the
Obligation, and the intention of the Will: and then the Intention will appear,
That she cannot commit waste in the Trees, although it be excepted. And I
conceive it is within the words, for it is that she occupy and enjoy the Lands
demised as aforesaid. Now if I grant my Land, I ought to demise my Trees also.
And if I be obliged not to commit Estrepment in my Land, If I pull down a
House, it is a forfeiture of the Obligation. For if Tenent at will pulls down,
no waste lies against him, But he shall be punished by an action of the Case,
for it is destruction and waste at the Common law, In any of the Houses, Lands,
or Timber trees. And what Timber trees may be meant. But those are excepted,
when all are excepted. Dyer 323. Pl. 29. After the Statute of 23 H. 8. Nothing
was left in the Feoffees al use. One would stand seized with his Feoffees to
the use of I. S. And adjudged that that is a good demise of the Land. Ed. 6.
conveys the Manor of Framingham in fee farm, and afterward grants the Fee
farm: and the Grantee demises his Manor of Framingham, and the Fee farm
passed; for that that it was usually called by that name. And Thorntons Case 3
El. He gives all his Land that he purchased of I. S. And he did not purchase
any of I. S. but I. S had conveyed it to I. D. of whom he had purchased. And
adjudged good, Sir Edward Cleeres Case, Co. lib. 6. 17. So there it ought to be
of such waste, as he in his apprehension esteemed to be waste. But it may be
objected, that she did not pay the double value. But I conceive, That if you
will that that be paid, yet the Will is broken. For if you will by one clause
that she commits not waste, and by another if she do, that she pays the double
value, and she does not pay it, she breaks two clauses. That ought to be
pleaded by you. If the Statute prohibit a thing, and if he offend against it,
that he shall pay, etc. I say that he may be indicted upon the very
Prohibition. So that you would show this in excuse of Waste. But I conceive
that it is not excused upon the Statute of H 6. Richardson chief Justice. All
the Obligation goes to the intention of the Will, which may be collected by
circumstances out of the Will. And then the sir Elmes are merely the others,
not the Sallows, Maples, Beeches, and Thorns, by which the intention is broken.
Now the Law will not allow that to be waste which is not any ways prejudicial
to the Inheritance. So when the Husband said, she shall not commit waste, It
was not his intention to restrain her from that which the Law allows. Thorns in
some Counties are adjudged waste, where Trees are scant. But a Grove ordinarily
is Underwood. And then if she committed waste, the Husband took upon him to
impose the penalty. And although that she enter into an Obligation, yet it is
that she is restrained by the Will of her Husband, and he intended it for a
benefit by that imposition of forfeiture; and therefore we ought make a benign
construction. And for the Obligation that the non-payment of the forfeiture
ought to be showed by the Defendant, I conceive otherwise. For the breach ought
to be averred, as the Will is. And where a breach is alleged for a forfeiture.
It ought to be pleaded, so that it may be traversed. Cook on the contrary. If
the Obligation be that she perform the Will, then peradventure that shall be no
forfeiture.

Gooderidges Case.
AN Indictment of murder against Gooderige. There was an exception taken, for
that, that the Indictment was; That the said Francis who was murdered such a
day, apud quandam Down. vocat. Westmen down in Comitat. Hampton, insultum
fecit, and quod ibidem habuit and tenuit quoddam glad. in his right hand, and
praedict. Fran. percussit, and does not say ibidem percussit; and for that
naught. For it is not a necessary intendment, that the percussion was at the
same place. Also he said, Whereof instanter obiit, that is no certainty; But by
argument that he died in the same place. And for these causes, and because it
was body for body, the Indictment was sufficient.

It was agreed if a Feme sole Executrix of a term mary him in the reversion,
and dies, the term is not drowned, but the Administration of it shall be
committed. Otherwise perhaps if she had purchased the reversion. And it was the
case of Owen. If the Executrix Debtee mary the Debtor, That the debt is not
gone, but the Administrators other wife shall have it.

Moor against Penruddock.
MOor had a Latitat against Penruddock the Sheriff of Wilts, Who returns that
he himself was Sheriff, and could not be arrested by any, or imprison himself.
As in Plats Case; a Feme Jailer marys a Prisoner, that is an Escape; For he
cannot imprison himfelf. Yet the Court ordered that he ought to appear and find
Common bayl.

Thomas's Case.
AN action upon the Case by a Constable of a Parish against Styleing for
saying, Thou art a bribing Knave, and have cousened the Parish of Wilden in
rates to 30 l.

Hores Case.
Hoar a Clark of the Common Bench brought a Bill of Privilege there. And the
entry was, quod praedict. Hoar per Tho. Maun Attornat. suum obtulit se. And
Judgment given, and upon that Error: For among Clarks of Court, their
appearance ought to be in proper person.

Fawkner versus Bellingham.
LE case de Fawkner versus Billingham fuit ore argue per les Judges. Et
Yelverton teigne que seisin nest requisite, et pur ceo nest deins le stattute
de 32 H. 8. 2. et ceo pur 3 reasons, primo pur ceo que le stattute de primo E.
6. est le title sur que le Avowry est fait car le defendant ne poet conveyer
cest rent al lui sans monstre le saueing dems ceo stattute car sans le saueing
touts les servises sout merge 27 H. 8. Parliament. Alton Woods Case primo rep.
47. Et avowry ore ne seroit come fuit al Common ley mes sur tout le matter. Dyer
313. plo. 91. Et il doet declarer tout son cawse come est in un Accon dl case
cenx chooses doieut monstre: primo doet monstre tout le stattute, etc.

Secundo il doet monstre que le Roy ad bone title al ceo terre come Chauntery
terre, etc.

Tertio que le party que claim cest rent est person deins le saueing, etc.

Quarto que il nest deins ascuns des exceptions dl stattute, et ceux doet ee
monstre in secula seculorum cy mults foits que il distraine. Et sur ceo son
count est sur le act de parliament. Et si arreages suerout al le Suor. devant
cest stattute le Snory eeaut per le stattute extinct que issint fuit perde come
4 rep. donque le rule dl ley est ou Avowry on, etc. est ground sur le matter de
record. ne seroit weaken per future temps in matter de fait quelcumque Quare
Impedit per effluxion de temps fuit ouste, etc. per 32 H. 8. si ne soiet vide
per le stattute de primo Marie cap. 5. a. mes si diverse Coparceners voient
fair partition a presenter per lour turn in cest Court per bre. de Covenant
on droit de Advowson ils poient aver scire facias too anus apres sur cest
composition car est per matter de record come si recovery soiet ewe Scire
facias gist sur ceo in eternum 33 E. 3. title and 3. et i 4. 6 E. Trin. 3 Car.
Com. Banc.
4, ii. Annuity per prescription est deins le stattute de Limitations mes si
soiet un foits recover Scire facias gist sur ceo al ascun temps car le declarer
sur le record et ne ou le Annuity fuit done, mes on le record est fcilicet in
Middlesex. 18 E. 4. 18 et 19 E. 4. 1. les records del Court sont appel le
Treasury dl Roy donque le Treasury dl Roy continue touts foits, et est current
in touts ages issuit de records, etc. Keiell. 123, Common use sans temps de
memory oue un manor si fuist grant per office al primer: ne poet ee claim
come appendant pur ceo que est per fine: Et pur ceo si le stattute de 32 H. 8.
navoit limitte le temps dl Scire facias sur fine poet aver al ascun temps mes
ceo est denis, les express parolls del Stattute, null auter Scire facias est
denis cest stattute: secundo diversity est inter le enlargement de temps sur
cest Stattute and suspension il agree Collins Case Coment. 32 i. que in Case de
Q are Impedit and ravishment de guard etc. que est null Equity per Construction,
des Judges poet gainer temps ouster les strict parolls dl Statute. Et Dyer 266
mes se suspension est auterment car Grauntor et Grauntee per lour agreement
poet stop le Glass que le temps ne incurger cy swifte come est in 4 rep. 11.
Si Suor release al son Tennaunt ey long que I. S. avoit heirs de son corpse et
60 anus pass et I. S. devye sans heir del Corpse et uncore il poet distrainer
pur le temps per les parties et suspend et poet e'e auters Cases. Si Sinor
voloit releasor son Tenaun distresses pur 60 anus sil poet aner apres sans
seisin, deins 40 anus car le Su'or durant cest temps ne poet compeller le
Tenant a paier les services. Et que cest est bone release 1 H. H. 4. 1. et 4.
si null distress est sur de terre pur 40 anus il poet distrainer al fine de 40
anus Lex non cogit ad impossibilia. Et issuit si le Tenant voet releasor le
Tennancy al Signeour pur 60 anns le Suor poet apres distrainer. Et si deux
Coparceners sont et un in vie dl pierpur chase rent charge de liu in Fee et il
devye cest rent est suspende tanque partition soiet sait coment que soiet apres
pur 400 anus distress. est loiall pur le rent que estore revive. Et donque si
Grauntor et Grauntee poet save ceo per lour assent a fortiori poet e'e sait per
assent de Act de parliament car 4 chooses sout Assent: per act primo que le rent
serroit save.

Secundo que serroit sever del signiorye et deveigne rent seck, etc.

Tertio que touts former seisins serrout fruitles car estoiet come rent save
per parliament, etc.

Quarto que le stattute done null distress pur cest rent uncore les Judges done
distress pur ceo car le stattute sane ceo et one le remedy aver ceo mes ceo
n^st done per le statute mes construction des Judges. Et issuit le construction
sur primo E. 6. overrule le stattute de 32 H. 8, etc.

Secundo nest deins le intent pur ceo que le stattute ne extend al ascun rent
mes seisin doet e'e necessariement allege come in rent service est necessary
26 H. 8. Com. 945 E. 62, et 63. et 13 H. assise br. 60, etc. Et donque ne vnque
seisine apres le stattute de Limittation est bone plea. Et in ceux on le
comencement nest scavoy de eux come Annuity per prescripsion horse de Coffers on
Corrody and icy seisin est properment dee allege et sout denis le stattute
mes le comencement de cest rent scavoy scilicet per primo E. 6. mes jeo ne
intend que est novel rent mes veiel rent one novel privilige car ore estoiet
per lui mesme on fait parcel dl service.

Secundo cest rent.

Tertio null distress de common droit est incident al ceo come fuit devant per
le privity inter le Owner dl rent, et le owner dl terre. Et le distress est
annex all ceo per Construction, des Judges a satisfye les parolls del stattute.
In ma'nnor such like form and Conditions as if this sentence had never been
made, etc.

Quarto cest rent est support sans se seisin et e'eant devant restrain per le
stattute de 32 H. 8. Mich. 3. Car. Com. Banc.
seisin estore per primo E. 6. Mich. 3. Car. Com. Banc.
Auter act mise a large arrear et cest rent est parcel dl ma'nnor come suit
devant et poet passer one le manor sans fait come le case de 31 assise plo 23.
1 H. 4. et 22 ass. plo. 53. 30 E. 3. Stathum. Warranty. Tertio est mesme rent
in continuance destate fait Fee-simple: Et est mes a fairer ceo al. le
stattute de Limitations est oppositum in subjecto. Et les parolls ne sane le
rent in le mesme manor, etc. oue ceux differences sout satisfye car auterment
vous comitmults absurdityes scilicet que continnue rent service et que le
Signiory continue mes les Construction est que le rent continue al le prim.
Owner cy liberal pur estate et remedy cy free pur perception come devant imo
melius car ore il poet distrainer al ascun temps et est pluis fort que si le
distress fait expressement done per le stattute car donque poet e'e release
mes cest distress donque per construction ne poet e'e release car la ley
create ceo come un hand maiden al waiter sur le rent.

Mes voet e'ee demand horse de quel womb cest rent seck issue, etc.

Respons horse de null womb forsane le womb dl Parliament et primo E. 6. unde
sequitur que rent seck est scavoy a aner commencement et donque un original
est scavoye est horse stattute 8 rep. 64. pur ceo que cest stattute suit sait
pur deux reasons, etc.

Le primer que Jurors nedoieut e'e trouble al searcher in temps uncertain, etc.

Le second que dormant Titles poient e'e dettermine.

Le third le stattute de limitations Merton cap. primo Westminster le primer
cap. 39 West. le second cap 26 coment que ceux stattutes confine al certain
temps uncore si le comencement de chose poet e'e monstre al le Court fait horse
de eux. Et ore le stattute de 32 H. 8. sweep touts ceux stattutes away come
Limitations, 45 E. 41 63. si apres le stattute de limitations de assizes et
devant le stattute de Quia Emptores terrarum Ancestors de I. S. soiet
infeoffe dl terre tenus de Feoffor per fealtye et rent et Avowrye et fuit pur
ceo rent ore si le special matter soiet monstre per quel appeirt quant on Surye
commence ciy est null plea que Suor ne fuit seisie apres le stattute de
Limitattions de Assizes car le Court doet indger de special matter disclose et
le seisin de tiel reut ne unque ferroit traverse and 21 H. 7. Kell 31. per
Read mes si rent survive soiet sait sans date devant temps de memory. Si le
sait so^et de 20. s. et ill ne unque fuit seize forsane de 10. s. que non unque
avoit ne unque seisie est bone plea.

Et pur ceo il est mise all bre de customs et services et uncore cest rent est
entire. Et fi home tient dl Roy imediatement, et il voet obtain License a
fair Feoffment a tener de lui mesme come est usual, and il fait Feoffments
rendant rent et Fealtye ceo est cleerement horse dt Stattute de 32 H. 8. pur ceo
que est novel tenure et le License est touts soits sur record in le Chauncery
et pur ceo que te comencement. de cest rent. Est Cognise est horse dl Statute.

Tertio le Stattute de primo E. 6, serroit construe liberallment pur ceo que va
al supportacon de rent que esto et oue common droit. Et sout three kinds del
acts de Parliament primerment est de creation: Secundment Confirmacon. Et
Tiercement preservacon et de cest darraine kind est primo E 6. si cest act de
Parliament avoit ce done rent per express parrolls sans question serroit horse
de 32 H. 8. donque ceo ne, scavoy pur que ne serrit pur le plt eeant sane per
le Stattute. Et ne fait le intent de cest Stattute a sauer cest rent pur temps
infinite, et suffer ceo a devoigne fruitles pur temps finite si le rent navoit
ee pay pur 100 amiss est sane per le Stattute et payment per le Tennaunt a
volunt revivor ceo cap. 11. 5 E. 4. 7. E. 4. 22. E. 4. 7. mes seo agree que
payement de tiel rent per mon bailie nest bone dauer seisin. 5. Rep. 56. sil
navoit mon License Et est diversitye inter Ordinance fait per act de Parliament
per parroll affirmatine and Com. 113. Su nostre case le Stattute de ceo suit
pluis que le common tey puissit sane cur le Common ley avoit destroy te Snorry
Kell. 131. Stattute de de Marlebridge annex le suite de touts les Coparceners
al eigne soer cest suite est horse dl Stattute de 32 H. 8. pur ceo que te
Stattute avoit issuit annex, ceo al eigne que il preserve ceo al Snor: de lui
touts foits a fortiori lou cest rent est sane per un Stattute pluis darraigne
que cest de cy hault nature que le Stattute de 32 est et ne saueing eeaut de si
mult. Judgment car si le rent avoit ee release al Chauntery Priest, one
condicon avoit ee issuit sane Dyer 252. Car le stattute intend a saner lou
fuit, droit et possession et nemy droit sans possessions mes Crook Justice
contra lui: ne Poet ee deny mes devant le Stattute de primo E. 6. suit bone
plea in a vowry pur cest rent ne unque seisu and le question ore est on le
stattute de primo prise seo horse de 32. Avoit ee prise que est rent preserne
per le Stattute de 1. Et si avoit ee express excepcon de cest rent serroit bone
sans seisin a quel jeo agree mes jeo dye que cest reut nest done ou preserne
per le Stattute si ne Poet prender son temps car vigilantibus, and non
dormientibus cest reut est channge per primo mes nemy novellment done non est
res alia sed alterata et ore est reut Secke, distranable mes cest Alteracon
deveigne deins temps de memory, mes quomodo constat quant cest rent commence,
donque est de touts les cases mise per Yelverton Dyer 133. Alton Woods Case 1
Rep. 47.8 Rep. 118. and Strowds Case Latitat que co meant que soiet preserve
uncore il ne Poet aner ceo come devant mes la ley intend a fairer eeo come
matter de profitt al Snor in tiel manor. Et jeo deny le case que si Arreages
fuerout done devaut le Stattute que soit perde car le ley sane le reut come
fuit devaut mes ceo nest quoad le profitte mes quoad le tenure: Voier est que
le avowry est change car doet avowe sur tout le matter donque le reut vucore
eeaut in point de a owrye car avoit come devant, seisin est touts foits
requisite. Et jeo agree touts les cases mise de Scire facias sur record il Poet
aver enx al ascun temps pur ceo que il ne vaier pluis onster le Record. Mes ny
in Monstrans sou Title il doet vaier le Stattute de primo, et monstra son
tenure procedent le act de Parliament; et ceo est son title ex commencement dl
Tenure oue ne appeirt car donque le reut ne Poet ee parcel dl manor, come est
agree dee et le mon. strans dl act de primo est pur ceo que il doet avower sur
le matter donque quant il declare surreut nemy create per sait on record mes
doet allege seisin devant le Presbitery dissolve per touts les livers la
seisin doet ee travers 22 H. 8. 63. 35 H. 6. Avowry. Seisou avowry est le
principal chose 14 H. 4. 2. record. Long 4 H. 6. 2. differt le difference la
est que si single person teignant, per rent in avowry, seisin doet e'e allege
per maynes de ascun person si per Corporation auterment est el seisin allege
generallment est bone 27 H. 8. 4. Et 20 coment que avowry est chainge del
person sur le terre per le Stattute de 21 H. 2. uncore est allege 30 H. 6
Avowry 15 la est dit que seisin est le possession 9 Rep, 24. expressement pur
avowry est possessory Action seisin est le ground de vestre Accon. Et si ne
pores maintainer te seisin allege te Accor fait pur ceo ny seisin ne eeaud
allege son title sail: mes il ditque poies scoviour le Commencement de c^st
reut voier est que si Poet ee monstre per fait ou record le tempr dl
commencement donque per contra formam. Foffamenti, on per monstrans del sait
poies bar le avowry Com. 9. 4. seisin doet ee traverse and confess ou avoid, et
ceo est forsque deux voies. primes per cohersion de distress, ou per monstrans
sait dl tuncore ascun Livers teignant in cest case que vous estis mise al
contra formam Feoffamenti come Long 5 E. 4. 16 E. 3. Avowry uncore ceo concern
que le monstrans dt fait est bien per lui mesme 10 H. 7. 11. 44 E. 3 s Avowry
76. Et auxi seisin per Coheire and lier 12 E. 4. 7. et 5 E. 4. 28. 30 E. 3. 5.
donque cest Act de Parliament nest done novel rei mes de touts chooses ewe devant
et nemy create mes saueone les Quallities come fuit. Et ieo agree, que le reut
coment seisin ne unque ewe pur ioo anns devant est in esse de sane per le
stattute si seisin fuit unque sait Auxi le Stattute fuit fait pur le ease des
Subjects. Et pur ceo le case in les Com. 371. est que lestattute de
Limmittacons et fines fuerunt sait sur un reason silicet pur le quiet del
fubject. Et ne doient ee construe per imaginacon des Judges mes solonque le
parrolls del Stattute, et lou fuit dit que cest Stattute ouste les former
Stattutes de Limittacons mes jeo deny ceo mes il done un shorter cut: Et
veies le common ley devaut cenx Stattutes. Bracton dit. 52. que longa possessio
quasi sunt me possidendi and issuit que cest Liner account de long possession
come de droit Glanvile libr. 3. cap. 14. le limitacon de Avowrye fuit
Westminster 2. Et donque 32. plius ceo restrain, donques quant ley regard le
possession, et le seisin: est le possession si ne unque avoit seisin semble que
navoit droit 8 E. 1. 18 Horn: et jeo deny le case que si navoies seisin per
temps horse de memory que ne poies vuque aver ceo Car sil gain seisin on le
Tenant consesse est bieu mes est object que ceo saneing est un done mes
saneing est reservacon de chos in Esse devaut Com. 563. 35 H. 6. 34. per Danbye
26 ass. 66 le Snor mesine, et Tennaunt: Tenant tieut per soccage mesne in
Chivallrye, le Tenant devaut lestattute de Quia Emptores fact done dl terre
salvo. Forinseco servitio, et le savant fuit void pur ceo que fuit in soccage
8 E. 3. 67. Avowry 154. 9 H. 3. 1. home tieut terres per homage fealtye rent et
auter services Et Snor release al Tenant son services Et le Tenant claim le
terre except 15 s. Et le question est quel rout ceo est et fuit rule; que est
rent service; Et que il avoit fealtye al ceo incident pur ceo que est pur le
faneing: et serroit de mesme quallitye come fuit Parlaments: 776. la le saneing
ne Poet vaier al chose que non est in esse, donque rent reserve per voy de
saneing est cognize nemy dee done ascuns foits, saveing Poet doner come per
Stattute de 34 H 8. primer seisin est sane al lui lou navoit devaut.

Et ceo est rule lou saneing est un Act de Parliament de chose que nest esse
devant la potius quam le saneing seroit idle seroit un express done come si
terre soiet done per Parliament al I. S. savant al I. D. rent de 20 s. per
annum: horse de ceo que navoit devant cest saneing done le rent al I. D. Et si
in cest case le saneing a voit e'e del cest rent in particular al defendant il
avoit comence per cest saneing mes uncore si le saneing avoit e'e de touts
rents et services in particular al defendant seroit auterment. Et est case on
surplusage de rent est al Suor. Et le Suor peramount purchase le Teuauncy ceo
est saneing per common ley al Suor, et le comencement de cest saneing est sane
uncore in Avowry pur cest seisin doet e'e allege et auxi est traverseable 2
E. 2. extinquishment, 20 E. 3. Avowry 26 H 6. H. 67. et Littleton, etc.

Mes est object que le Parliament done cest saneing et les Judges done
construction de ceo: mes jeo conceave que le common ley ne voet permitter tiel
construction car donque poet extend al touts rents extinct per le stattute de
Quia Emptores: Et jeo deny le case que si avoit seisin devant de ceo come
rents service et ceo ne seroit sufficient quaut est secke car le contra 11 Rep.
11 et 5 E. 2. seisin de Rose est bone 20 s. est de'e pay apres per 19 E. 3.
Execucon 163. etc. Darraniement per lauter Construccon cenx mischeefes voient
follow que touts les Chauntery terres serrout rake up arreere et chescun voet
dire que tiel Chauntery Prieest tieut terres de moy per tiel Charge sans, cause
on remedy car devaut cest Stattute fuit remedy per ne unjust vexes ou coutra
formam Feoffament Fittarzb. na. br. 10. mes ore per cest Stattute vous ouste le
Tenant de fairer son remedy ne unjust vexes, ne Poet aver pur ceo que est rent
secke. Et in un Wood et Smiths Case fuit a dindge in cest Court que horse de son
Fee nest bone plea pur ceo que nest rent fervice.

Avoit ee object que seisin de fealty devaut cest Stattute fuit bone seisin de
rent pur avowry mes ore per le Stattute le Fealty est ale pur ceo si vous
deprive lui de un remedy doies doner un auter mes fui^ son folly nemy a
procures seisin devaut lestattute de vigilantibus et non dormientibus etc. and
ceo est le reason dl livers que le plaint ne dira ne unque seisie apres le
temps de Limmitacon 1 M. br. avowry. 107. Seisin Poet ee allege generallment
mes le traverse doet ee deins 40 anns Dyer 315. 14 H. 7. 1. per Brian 16.
Eliza: Warnings Case, et aux les parrolls dl Stattute de 32. sout in le
negative que null person etc. car le intention dl Stattute fuit que homes ne
serrent appell in question pur services lou le title nest scavoye 5 Rep. 12. 4.
que lease pur anns serroit bar per fine pur ceo que est a staier debates. Et
6. E. 6. br. Limmittacons Coppyhold est Bar per le Stattute de Limmittacons.
Et le Stattute de 21 Iacobi dove le reason. Et Heidens Case 3 Rep. 7, touts
mischeefes doient ee deins le remedy.

Objeccon est que le terre est in maynes dl Roy de 60 auns est sans remedy si
ne Poet distrainer, apres sans seisin mes il Poet aner le terre horse dl maines
le Roy per peticon. Et Harvey, al cestui intent et il teigne que le saneing in
primo que et ne done cest rent intant que saneing nest forfaue dl reut horse dl
Stattute et vaier solemeut al chooses preseut Com. Wro. teslyes et Adams Case
primo rep Alton Woods Case, et 17 Eliza. Dyer 332. pl. 27. Et Perkins mist cest
ground et si vous aves novell reut per voy de reservacon ne Poet ee per savaut
mes per parroll reddendo. Et il agree que saueing in Act de Parliament ascun
foits Poet doner come in les cases mise per Crook donque per ceo saneing in
act de Parliament, il navoit plius que il avoit de vaut mes secundo que ceo rent
est solemeut alter in respect dl Tenure, mes est le mesme in proporcou et
parcel dl manor, et est consesse icy in pleading dee parcel del manor, et
tout le alteracon fait est solemeut del tenure propter absurditatem come est
Dyer 313. que le Roy teigneroit dl subject. Et il dit que les Judges in Dyer
313. ne intend que le rent veigne horse dl Stattute, mes que le Stattute save
ceo in mesme le manner come le presbiter primo avoit ceo, et nemy come rent
service propter absurditatem mes que le reut et distress remain, etc. Tertio
que cest distress nest solemeut forsque sou ease et issuit doet ee lou nest
inter very Snor et very Tenant. 2 H. 4. 24. 29 H. 6. 41. 14 H. 4. 17. et 18.
38. H. 8. a Avowry. B. 113 donque le avowrye ne change ceo. Quarto donque le
consequence est que serroit deins 32 H. 8. Et il agree le difference mise in
Sir William Fosters Case. 8 Rep. 65. et in Rep. 108. cited arreere et il dit
que cest case la cite prove ceo mult. Si Snor et Tenant soiet: le Tenant fait
done in tail le remainder in Fee la si le Snor incroach sur le Donee il lier
lui mes nemy son issue. Et le reason que il lier est le seisin donque suppose
que fuit le very Snor et very Tenant devaut le Stattute de primo Snor incroach
sur sou Tenant et donque il release distres al Tenant, et donque le Stattute
de primo est sait uncore seisin doet ee allege ou autermeut vous easyement
leap over le Stattute et il dit que les livers differe mult in lour case de
seisin car ascuns diout ne unque seisie est bone plea 24 E. 3. 26. 39 E. 3. 34.
36. H. 6. 25. mes le Conclusion ore per Donor in authority est que doet plead
ne vuque seisie apres temps de Limmittacon Dyer 315. 4 Rep. Bevills Case et 9
Rep. Bucknalls Case est agree le diversity la mise scilt que cest Stattute de
32 H. 8. doet ee liberallmeut expound pur le repose dl Subjects: and voier est
que B. Limmitacon primo dit que cest Stattute ouste les auters Stattutes de
Limmittacons mes il intend que avoit prist le force del auters Stattutes et le
mischief serroit, si tiels reuts come tiel est, ou comencement ne Poet ee
scavoy ne serra deins le Stattute que people voieat ee idle et negligent in
clamant enx si poieat vener et monstre reut sur ceo Stattute de primo: et prove
seisin devaut le Stattute per le ancient Court roll, ou Bailiffes Accounts
que est bone Evidence al Jury come le reut perhapps navoit ee pay pur 100 anns
et perhapps Poet ee discharge et null cognize de ceo. Et vucore sur tiel
Evidence il Poet recover per lauter construccon and mes Hutton coutra lui: que
cest reut nest deins le Stattute de Limmittacons deux chooses sent dee consider:
primerment coment el in quel manor cest reut est sane; et ore il prise effect,
et avoit sou birthright in cest manor come est dl saueing. Secundment in quel
manor nature cest rent estoiet al cest iour: Tout que est die del auter part
adhunc consiste de 3 obejections solement, etc.

Primerment que cest rent est novel rent et le comencement de ceo ne poet e'e
scavoy donque le consequence est ore seisin est necessary de'e allege Et
tertio que doet e'e liberal Construction de 32 H. Et ils conclude sur le
danger de cest Construction, que le Tenant seroit sans remedy si rent soiet
claim primerment cest stattute de primo est solement confirmation: mes in a
scun manor creation de cest rent in quantity del benefitte on est de'e
consider quel force le saneing avoit car est agree que si jeo done ceo rent
donque dehors ceo stattute de 32. Et appeirt que ceo rent port effect dl
saneing quelcunque doet e'e allege in avowry et sans quel na voit title done
effect al ceo mes ciy le saueing de necessity doet e'e allege ergo, etc.
saneing in le stattute doet aner construction solonque le matter si ne soiet
repugnant. Et le stattute intend que les averont lour Suoryes arreere, per le
saueing in 31 H. 8. de Monasteryes on rent services sout except et ieo avoy
vewe les livers et arguments sur 14 Eliz. Dyer 313. Et la leopinion de Meade
est que le terre serroit ore tenus de deux Suors et Roy et veiel Suor, Et est
reason que le Tenure seroit revive auxi pur ceo jeo agree que le stattute primo
seroit expound liberallment: et compare ceo one auters ancient Stattutes de
tiel nature le stattute de 7 E. 4. cap. 5. est expound que si Tenauncy veign al
roy per attainder, et grant al auter que le Suory dl common person serra
revive br. Revivor 9. Et uncore le stattute est penned, come ceo est issuit que
est Equity que ils que perde lour Suoryes sans lour default que tiel saueing
seroit liberallment expound Carfi le Suory fuit extinct per ascun act dl Suor
cest exposition de distres ne serroit mes sur cest stattute est expound que il
aver distres pur ceo et de common droit and jeo compare ceo al case de rent,
fait sur auter stattute. Le stattute de 27 H. 8. de uses ou si home soiet
seisin de terre al intent a paier rent al estraunger le stattute fait ceux
rents bone, et done distress al party pur eux: et null de ceux rents sout de
deins le Stattute de Limitations, et si feoffment soiet fait al cest iour al
intent a paier rent al estraunger on, etc. si poet destrainer sur cest stattute
coment null clause soiet de distress come Dyer 36. 3 Plo. 21, etc. Et ceux
rents avoient lour birth right de cest stattute per cause de distress done
issuit est in nostre case: voier est mesme le rent in touts quallityes
beneficial: et in mesme le quantity et parcel del manor 2 E. 2 Extinguishment
6. et come est in Bevels Case seisin devant est bone seisin: apres si ne de
veigne rent seck person act demesne et le Signiorye fuit dl part le mier le rent
vaier al heir dl part le mier mes le Stattute done cest Construction: Et le
matter de avowry est sur le stattute, et est tiel avowry que vous allege null
seisin que forsque devant le Stattute. Et un tenure devant que est solement a
fair lui able daner benefit per le Stattute, si avoit e'e un particular
saneing de ceo rent est agree que seroit horse dl Stattute de Limitations. Et
jeo die que ore est tout un car quant il avoit son case appear al nous est tout
un come si cest rent avoit e'e sane, car quaunt un grant est general est
averrement devant les ludges de un particular de'e deins le general est lout un
come avoit e'e grant come le case est 30 E. 3. Avowry on le Roy grant al
Corporation tiels Liberties que auter Corporation avoit, etc. et 6 E. 33.
Balliels case et seroit icy in Chres: et nemy in act de Parliament, et coment le
commencement de rent ne Poet ee conus uncore ceo comiencement est ore per
saueing Poet ee conus come le case est per Athowe quel il agree dee bone ley,
etc. Et si soiet Suor et Tenant per Fealty et rent de 20 s. et le Suor
confirm a tener per rent de 10 s. est fait per le fait et uncore fuit devant.
Et si Judgment est bien ground pur avowry pur ce si ce le Stattute de primo
participate del essee de cest rent est horse del Stattute de 32 H. 8. est
difference inter rents et lauters three chooses limitte and voier est que fuit
fait: pur le repose del Subjects mes coment que null constitution Poet gain
enlargement de temps limit uncore diverse chooses sout horse dl Stattute come ou
release est fait al tenant cy long que I. S. avoit issue de son corpse, etc. Et
in le 3 primer chose-restraine per le Stattute doet e'e seisin mes in Case de
rent seisin in ley est sufficient pur ceo in case de seisin pur in rent
lexposition est pluis favorablemenpur les Subjects. Et in Beovels Case appeirt
que seisin de fealty est sufficient sesin pur le rent, et uncore le Stattute
sout. That none shallt make Titles to any rent, etc. Et Dyer 278. ne un al
Formedon in descender car coment le Stattute est al repose des Subjects uncore
tour droits doet e'e preserve and coment que fait allege on mischief que le
Tenant navoit ascun answer car primerment sil navoit asun Tenure devant le
Stattute ne sane ceo et pur ceo il poet traverse le tenure, Secundment si soiet
null seisin devant le Stattute nest sane donque icy seisin nest allege devant
le Stattute mes, nency apres car nest necessary de'e allege mes on est
traversable si le Roy voet doner License a fair Feoffment a tener del Feoffor
si rent soiet reserve nest requisite de allege seisin come fait dit mes pur
particular respons ceo die que serva inconvenient que il que perde son Suory:
per cest Stattute de 32 H. 8. serra confine al certain temps de aver seisin de
son rent.

Ad e'e object que si null seisin ne soiet bone plea serra difficult a trover si
Chan ntery terres fuerout charge one les rents per quel Avowry est fait quant
al ceo jeo dye que 31 H. 8. de Monasteries ou est enact que le Roy et ses
Pattenntees teuerout Abbey terre discharge de dismes sicome le Abbot eux teigne
est usual issue mise in trial si ne Abbey fuit discharge ou nemy and non
solement doet inquire sil fuit discharge ou nemy al, temps del dissolution come
in Drakes Case est in cest Court ascun voile auerissue de'e prise solement si
le Abbey teigne terres discgarge al temps de dissolution mes sur demurrer fuit
rate que le Sury doet idquire si le Abbee avoit ascun cause a tener les terres
discharge al temps dl dissolution car si sic donque le Pattentee serrout
discharge coment le Abbee teigne discharger al temps de dissolution, etc. Et
uncore ny tiells issues ils inquire de tiel ancient temps come poient deins,
cest stattute de Chaunteryer pur rent due horse de Chauntery terres: Auxi nota
que le plt ne poet traverse seisin in cest case car nest allege per le
defendant et ne auxi, besoigne de'e etc. Dyer 305. 6, mes doet vener eins de
son part que poet aver advantage dl default dl seisin et il doet demand
judgment dl Avowry, pur default del leisin, etc. Admit que fuit necessary mes
quant al ceo le plt avoit bien plead car il ne traverse cest seisin que fuit
allege mes monstre ceo per voy de replication: Mes Richardson Chief Justice
argue pur le Defendant. Est de'e consider primerment si cest rent soiet save.
Secundment coment est save: et cement si le rent est sane per primo E. 6. soiet
tier horse de 32 H. 8. Primetment cest rent est save car le saueing est general
a touts rents, etc. which they have, or of right ought to have or might have
had. Et ceo est untimely et effectual saueing nemy un flattering saueing voier
est si rent soiet un faits extinct per escheate defer al Roy que saueing ne
Poet revive cest mort chose come est 27 H. 8. br. Parliament 77. mes per cest
liver. Et Davyes 264. a. appeirt que chose in esse come nostre rent al temps dl
fea ans de un act Poet e'e bien save per un saluo: Et nemy semble al Dean de
Norwiches Case in Wallsinghams Case 563. lou leases merge ne Poet e'e save per
un saueing. Et issuit. Dyer 23 Plo. 2. Le Stattute de Monasteries done al Roy
terres del Abbots in mesme le plight sauaut droit dl Estraungers. Et donque le
Abbott de Ramsey apres le act grant le prochin avoidance al Mountagne Chief
Justice que donque surrender uncore cest de saluo ne extend al cest future
droit et title de Monntague Carper le former part dl act de Abbot fuit disable
a graunter ceo et il cite 313. and in primo Rep. 47 a. et Kell. 104 a. ore le
averment in le pleading que le Suor Windsor fuit seisie de cest rent per le
maynes darraine Presbyter prove per moy que ceo fait rent in possession and
issuit bien save, que nest solement rent in droit. Et uncore jeo teigne que le
rent in droit de quel naver seisin devant le Stattute de primo E. 6. uncore est
sane per le Startute. Et si poies happen seisin apres, le stattute and si
fuerout arreages due devant le Stattute jeo teigne que ceux sont sane: Car ex
vi termini le Suor Windsor doet aver cest rent in the same Manor come devant
le Stattute et devant ceo il doet aver Arreages. Et nest semble al Ognells Case
4 Rep. car la le Suory fuit determine per le act dl Suor mesme et donque est
reason serra perdue mes icy est determine per le Act in ley. Et si ceux
Parrolls rents in such Manor ne voient sane Arreages al Suor uncore sont
expressement sane al lui per auters Parrolls deins le saueing. All commodities,
duties, etc. deins quel sans doubt Arreages fout includes Et jeo ne conceive le
reason pur que les feasons de 31 H. 8. de Monasteries except rents horse de long
saueing intant que fuerout verement due horse de les Abbey terres. Et le
exception des rents fuit omittant cest exception in primo E. 6. monstre de lui
de'e que rents sout sane icy. Secundment donque coment cest rent est sane: car
Crook ad dit que saluo est solement Parroll de exception et nemy create chose
de novo jeo agree in proper Parlaunce doies aver Parolls de revewing si vous
create rent chofe de novo create contra reddendo 2 H. 3. Graunts 89. Grant de
parsonage savant al Graunter presentation del viccaridge est bone 35 H. 6. 34.
12 E. 4. 1. saluo sane solement chose in esse et issuit saluo dominico ne sane
solement le ancient services et release al Tenant per fealty et rent sauant
le rent uncore cest rent est rent service come devant and fealty incident
intant que est le ancient rent et 26 Asss. 66 et ouster coment les Parolls in
le saueing in primo E. 6. sout such rents. Et cest Parroll such nest Parroll de
similitude uncore jeo ceo voile agree que sout Parolls de fealty, et tant
amount come le mesme in quantity profit and temps de payment mes nemy the same
in formality, et in quallity les Parrolls del Stattute ne alter ceo mes le
Construction del ley sur les Parrolls de primo ad alter cest rent service dee
rent seck si fuit devaut le Stattute. Tenant pur vie dl Suory le remainder
ouster in Fee le rent alera accordaut pius le Stattute si Issuit si suory
devant fait descend dl part le mier loufuit sur condition de rent pius primo E.
6. serra, in mesme le plight mes in quallity nest cest rent est meerement un
rent seck: Jeo agree que le veiel seisin serve pur cest rent quia le Suory est
extinct per Parliament nemy per le Suor mefme 4 Rep. 11. mes pur ceo que le
Parliament ad destroy le Suory et save solement le reut est reason que ceo serra
favor et jeo teigne que primo E. 6. done distress pur cest rent deins ceux
Parrolls sane in like manner, as if this Act had not been made. Et in Littleton
232. le common ley done distress pur ceo que le measualty est extinct sans son
act; mes ny in nostre case rent est novel in natute et quallitie primo E. 6.
suit ore rent seck and eeaunt distrainable de common droit, etc.

Tiercement ceo teigne que est horse del Stattute de 32 H. 8. car le Stattute
extend solement al Avowries and Conusances, null Actions and Conusances souts
horse de ceo come appeirt per 9 Rep. 33. Bucknlals Case, and 4 Rep., 11. Bevells
Case Com. 94. and Woodlands Case, 8 Rep. 64. Fosters Case, Avowry pur saueing
Fealty pur covering sale del Suor ou pur writing sur liu sout horse de cest
Stattute et issuit touts accidental services et un uncore les Parrolls sout
shall make avowry for any rent seck est horse de cest Stattute, pur ceo que done
null Avowry pur cest Charge de rent per fait rent service due per Reservation
deins temps de memory est deins ceo. Et jeo teigne encounter Yelverton que rent
per prescription est deins cest ley carnient obstant que seisin doet ee
alledage in avowry pur ceo uncore le seisin nest traverseable mes les
prescription ou composition que est le foundation de cest rent 26 H, 8. plo. a.
un Avowry pur rent per prescription que un doet paier lui pur common en son
terre la al fine Fitz herball: dit que le Avowant doet allege seisiu mes jeo
teigne que ceo nest traverseable and nest pardon pur default de seisin car
uient obstant que est and 14 H. 7. primo. Si rent charge est Grant devant
temps le memory and null possession monstre de ceo deins temps de memory que le
Grauntee est sans remedy ceo doet inee intend que ne poet compeller le Graunter
a dover seisin mes sil happa seisin un foits est bone and ou apres mency le
seisin mes le prescription doet ee traverse: Et jeo agree que est mult regarded
in nostre ley, ceo eeant de droit. Et que seisin per manes de Stranger ou de un
Infant est bone come est in Bucknalls Case, mes ceo est solement in cases lou
seisin est requisite. Et seisin est solement necessary la lou il est
traverseable et lou il est traverseable and lou il eeunt ewe per incroachment
il liera seisin and verbum operativum deins le Stattute de 32 H. 8. est matter
inter very Suor and very Tenant pur rent service come Fosters Case mes nostre
Case est de de Avowry per rent seck and in ceo seisin. Jeo teigne que nest
material. Et jeo teigne que seisin nest traverseable mes lou seisin; per
incroachment le in Bucknells Case and Woodlands Case: le difference sout mise
lou Tenure serra traverse and lou Seisin. Et sur tout ceo appeirt que Seisin
nest matteriall lou incroachment ne nomminer donque ceo mitt le Case que Suor
Windsor pius le Stattute de primo Ed. 6. use incroach un Chien ceo ne noyer le
Te. naunt in Avowry pur ceo que le Stattute de primo E. 6. est le title dl
Suor. Et il poet avow pur null chose si non ceo que est sane lui per le Stattute
mes quant al Case mise per Harvey devant le Stattute. Suor Windsor la incroach
20 s. lou son ancient rent fuit 10 s. et donque veigne le Stattute south
favor. Jeo conceive que il in apres bien Avower pur cest 20 s. pur ceo que
seisin est bone Title inter. Suor and Tenant in Avowry apres le Stattute le
Tenant est laise in mesme le plight come Stattute troue lui Aux le Stattut de
primo E. 6. sane touts such rents as any have, or might have had issuit que il
ayunt cest rent per Incroachment quant est fait per le Stattute ceo est sane al
lui, etc.

Mes ore est a voier coment doies demean vous icy in Avowry pur rent Seck 9
Rep. Ascoughs Case monstre quant avows nemy sur very Tenant doies a vower sur
le matter and mitttomus de rent Grant per Equallity de partition quel est
distrainable common droit el Poet ee Grant sans fait horse de mesme terre quel
est in partition 33 H. 6. and doet intend sur le cest in a que le Grant 21 H.
6. 2. 6. 15. 8 E. 3. 16, etc. Mes ore pur le rent si avows ne doies allege
seisin. Et si vous alleadger ceo uncore nest traversable mes avowry doet ee sur
le matter. Et Incroachment ne avoyer issuit lou measnalty nest conveigh forsque
al surplusage seisin nest traverseable Incroachment ne noier. Et pur ceo est
horse de 32 H. 8. Et ceo ne scavoy Cases lou de rent seck est distrainable de
commrn droit seisin Poet ee traverse si foret allege. Et si ascun puist ee
monstre jeo ne doubt mes ceo voet ee allege per ascuns des freres and come
rent sur partition attend sur le terte, etc. issuit cest rent seck que est sane
per cest Stattute ala one le manor, et est parcel de ceo come 21 As. 23. rent
seck est parcel est manor ou auterment le defendant ad Title al ceo, etc.

Objection est que est cy veiel que le comencement de ceo ne Poet ee conus et
est null fait de cest rent. Et coment ne doies allege seisin de ceo in Avowry
uncore jeo poy monstre que navera seisin deins 40 anns. etc.

Respons est que cest rent comence dee rent seck per primo Ed. 6. and cest
Stattunte avoit mesme le force a preserver cest rent horse de 32 H. 8. come un
fait ou record ad e'e. Et le Stattute al rent est sicome le prophette que raise
de mort le fitts dl widow and done vie al lui de fitts fait in vie devant mes
uncore bien Poet ee dit que le prophet done vie al lui issuit cest rent fuit
occide per les premises del Stattute per 1 E. 6. le saueing sait ceo un in vie
que est le al me de cest rent, Et pur ceo ceit saluo doet ee monstre in avowry
pur cest donque 7 E. 4. 27, 29. E. 44. St le comencement del Suory Poet ee
monstre ne doet ee alleadger seisin issuit de rent et coment que jeo doye in
mon Avowry monstre que la fait ou rent service devant cest Stattute uncore ceo
doye rely sur le saueing de cest Stattute 35 H. 6. 3, 4. 22 H. 6.3. Avowry 73.
Si Suor confirm a tener per meinder services si soiet recite in Avowry est
sufficient sans seisin and null inchroachment pius tiel Confirmation noyer,
donque est un fait original ou un confirmation sur in case dee horse de ceo
Stattute de 32 H. 8, issuit voile le Stattute de primo E. 6. Crook ad agree si
le saueing ad ee particular de 18 al Suor Windsor que est que cest case nest
deins 32. donque averment fait ceo cy certain. Et si le saueiug est ee al le
Suor Windsor. All rents by which the Land is held of him donque avoit est bone:
et horse de 32 H. 8.

Objection est icy est general que nihil certi implicat, etc. mes certum est
quod certum reddi potest come les cases mise cite per Hutton quel jeo conceave
auxi sur le matter al primes, le Roy grant easdem Libertates que S. avoit Poet
ee fait certain per averment que S. ad tiels Liberties, etc.

Objection 32 H. 8. doet ee prise liberallment^ Voier que all Avowries and
Conusances mes le Stattute est de petit fair car si replevin soiet convert al
trespass est horse de de cest Stattute 10 H. 6. 1. Long 5 E. 4. 87. Et in
trespass poier traverse le tenure non solement le seisin horse dl Avowry in que
le Avowant est Actor, etc. Objection 32 H. 8. suit sait pur le repose and quiet
des homes, etc.

Respons solement in Actions deins cest Stattute and in eux le Stattute avera
liberal Construction que urors ne serra inveigle quel danger cest icy pur ceo
que le Stattute fait Title ee Accounter and est null mischief car poies traverse
le tenure ou seisin devant le Stattute de primo E. 6. etc.

Mes adee dit que Stewards books Courts Rolls ou Bailiffs accounts poieat ee
monstre and port eins pur Title al rents extinct per leases ou, etc. uncore jeo
die que ceux matters doient ee laise al Jury and tiels chooses in eux mesmes
sout bone Evidences. nous veiennus 7 Rep. Farmors Case que le stattute de Fines
est avoid per fraud and agreement des parties and ad ee confess poiet toller.
Le Case horse de 32 H. 8. come release.

Executrix of Henry Hassel.
IOne Hassel makes a Lease to H. Rassel of 3 Closes for 20 years, if he should
so long live. Henry Hassel dies, and debt is brought against his Executor for
rent reserved upon that Lease, who pleads that before the day of payment, he
assigned two of the Closes to a Stranger. And upon demurrer Judgment was given
for the Plaintiff. For if there had been an assignment of Henry: If he did not
give notice to the Lessor in acceptance of the rent, he shall be charged. Quod
nota.

Judgment in Debt.
IF Judgment be given in debt, and a Scire facias brought against the
Executor, who pleads ne unque Executor, ne unque Administrator. etc. And it was
found against him, yet it was agreed by the Court that the Execution shall be
de bonis Testatoris tantum. For that, that the Execution shall have relation to
the Judgment. And the Scire facias is to make known that they had not
Execution upon the first Judgment, which extends to the goods only of the
Testator. And so it was said by Moyle Prothonotary, that it was ruled in 5 lac.
in this Court.

If a Judgment be given in Debt, and the money is paid to the Attorney of the
Plaintiff. Although that the money miscarry with the Attorney, yet the payment is
good. But if a Scrivener is employed generally to put money to use for a year;
and the money is paid to the Scribener, who breaks, or does not pay the money,
The payment does not excuse the party. But if he receives it by special
Command, etc. that is a good cause of Equity.

In Avowry.
IN an Avowry for Damages feasant, the verdict is found for the Avowant; And a
Returno habend. granted for the Cattle, and a Capias ad satisfaciendum for the
Costs and Damages are paid. The Sheriff cannot execute the Returno habendo.
But if it be executed and Costs afterward paid upon the Returno habendo; A
Writ De si constare poterit shall issue to the Sheriff, for delivering the
Cattle, upon a surmise and payment of the costs, etc.

A Prohibition.
DAvenport moved for a Prohibition, for that, that an Executor who resided
within the Tower, (which is a peculiar Jurisdiction as it was surmised) was
sued in the Prerogative Court for a Legacy; and that upon the Statute of 23 H
8. cap. 9. And Henden said, that a Prohibition might not be granted, for two
causes.

First, The Statute is general, That no person, etc. then there is a proviso,
That this Statute does not extend to any probate of Wills in the Prerogative
Court. Then a Legacy cannot be recovered in any other Court. For if a Will be
proved there, no inferior Ordinary will meddle with that Will; and always
they had the execution of all Wills proved there in that Court

Secondly, It is pretended, that the party is cited out of a particular
Jurisdiction. But that is not a Jurisdiction within this Statute. For no
Jurisdiction is intended, but where there is an Ordinary; But in the Tower of
London there is no Ordinary. But it is but as a Lord of a Manor, who had
probate of Wills: which is but a lay Jurisdiction, etc.

Thirdly, There is no Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction there. But Davenport replied,
That although for the present time, no Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is executed
there, because the Lord is dead; Yet Spiritual Jurisdiction is executed there.
Hutton said, If there he cause de bonis notabilibus, Then the Archbishop had
the Prerogative, and might cause the proving of the Will. But it stood with
reason, That where an Executor is tied to perform the Will, which may be there
sued, and the property of suit ought to be there, where there is cause of
Prerogative. Harvey, If there be cause of Prerogative, and proof of the Will in
the Prerogative Court. Yet in the inferior Jurisdiction, the party will be
compelled to prove the Will also. But by Crook and Hutton minus just.

An Action of Battery.
AN Action of Battery is brought against two, and one dies before trial, and
it was entered upon the Roll, But the Venire facias was awarded against both,
and damages assest. And by Yelverton, it cannot be amended. For it was not the
Act of the Court, but of the Jury; So that now damages cannot be severed. For
although he may have the entire damages against which he will, yet if they be
severd you will then oust him of his Election. Quod non fuit negatum.

A Prohibition.
IN a Motion for a Prohibition, where the Ordinary would make distribution, It
was agreed ( Richardson being absent.) That if the Ordinary commits
Administration to the Wife of the Intestate; that he cannot revoke that. But if
he grant Administration to one as Prochein de Sank, and another more near of
Blood comes; He may revoke. And because the Administration being granted all
the power of the Ordinary is determined, and then he cannot make distribution;
And if the Administration be one time justly granted, the Grantee had a just
Interest which cannot be revoked. And although it was urged that those
Prohibitions were not granted until of late time; yet they say, those things
passed Sub silentio. Yelverton, They cannot grant Admistration before a
division was made. And by Crook and Harvey. An Action upon the Case lies
against the Ordinary, if he will not grant Administration, where he ought. And
at an other day it was moved by Finch Recorder, That such a Prohibition could
not issue in one Davyes Case. And Richardson said, That because, that that Case
was a Case of Extremity. For Davyes had not any thing or portion allotted him
by his Father who was dead. And his Mother who was Administratrix, turned him
out of her House without any maintenance; stopped the Prohibition which was
granted before. And said that it was in the discretion of the Court to grant
such a Prohibition or not. But Harvey and Crook said secretly between
themselves, that it was not in the discretion of the Court.

Garton against Mellowes
AN action of Battery was brought by Garton against Mellowes. And the Plaintiff
pleaded a Recovery by the same Plaintiff for the same Battery in the Kings
Bench against another who joined in the Battery. And the Piaintiff replies Null
tiel Record. Upon which they were at issue; and the Record was brought in at
the day assigned. And these variances were objected for to make it fail of a
Record.

And first, The award of the Did. jurat. in the Kings Bench is Coram domino
Rege. and there it was Coram domino nuper rege. But not allowed. For the King
died before the Plea there, and then it ought to be so pleaded.

Secondly, That in one Record the Plaintiff is Generosus, in the other Armiger.
Brampston said, That that was such a variance which could not be amended. Dyer
173. One recovers in debt by the name of I. Cives and Sadler. And the Defendant
brought Error, and removes the Record inter I. Civem and Salter, etc. And it
was ruled that the Record was not well removed upon that Writ. Dyer 178. Plo.
8. Upon Null tiel Record there was a variance in the day of the Return of the
Exigent, and in the place where the Outlary was pronounced; And adjudged a
variance which could not be mended. And now here there cannot be an amendment
because it is after trial. And by amendment, there might be a cause of
changeing the Plea. For he took that Issue, by reason of the variance, and
after verdict there cannot be an amendment, Mich. 2 Jac. Kings Bench, Tailor
and Fosters Case. In an Ejectione firm. upon a Lease made 10 Iunii, and upon
not guilty pleaded it was found for the Plaintiff. And in Error, it was
assigned for error, that the Imparlance roll was 10 Iunii, and Issue roll the
12 Iunii: and it appeared there was a rasure. And it was agreed, that if it was
after verdict it could not be amended. Atthowe, This variance is not
substantial. And the cases put do not make to this case. For Salter and Sadler
are two several Trades. And it cannot be intended the same man; for he may
vary in his action as he pleases. But the Court said nothing to that Exception.

Thirdly, In the Record of Nisi prius there was another fault. It was agreed,
that a Material variance cannot be amended. Yelverton said, That he might have
new Execution. For he pleaded a recovery and execution in Bar, and that they
came to take, whereof he had failed; For that it stood now as another battery.
For it does not appear by the Declaration of the Plaintiff, etc.

Smith against Sacheverill.
AN Action of Wast is brought by Smith against Henry Sacheverill, and declares,
Whereas Henry Sacheverill the Grandfather was seized of these Lands, he levied
a Fine of them, to the use of himself for life, with power to make a Lease for
three lives, and after to Smith his son for his life, the remainder to the
first begotten son of Smith in tail. The Grandfather makes a Lease for three
lives, and dies, and Smith and his first begotten son bring this Action of Wast
against the Lessee; and they assign their wast in killing red Deer in a Park;
and upon null wast pleaded, it was found for the Plaintiff; and Finch Recorder
moved in arrest of Judgment first, for that they assign the wast in a Park,
where the wast is in Land, etc.

Secondly, Because that that Action did not lie for them both alike; for if the
Grandfather, and he in the remainder in tail, had joined in a Lease, yet they
could not join in wast. The Books are, If Tenant for life, and he in the
remainder join in a Lease, they may also join with wast. 21 H. 8 14. Although
19 H. 7. be put otherwise. And 2 H. 5. Sir William Langfords Case. Two joint
Tenants to the Heirs of one of them, and they make a Lease for life: And it was
adjudged that they might join in wast; for the Tenant for life had a reversion
for life, and had not made any Forfeiture. If the Grandfather and he in
remainder had joined in a Lease, and afterward in wast, it had been naught;
for the lease came out of the first root. And it was resolved Tr. 2 Jac. Kings
Bench, Poole and Browses Case, That one in remainder cannot have wast, where
there is an intermediate Estate for life. Yelverton and Hutton did not believe
the Case of 2 Jac. Crook. If there be Tenant for life with such a power, etc.
of Lands held in capite, he may make Leases for life without License of
Alienation, and well proves this cause, Yelverton and Hutton. For the wast
being assigned in a Park, it is good; for a Park is Land. Sed adjournatur.

Hodges against Franklin.
TRover and Conversion is brought by Hodges against Franklin. The Defendant
pleads sale of the Goods in Marlborough; which is a Market overt, and the Bar
was well pleaded; and an Exception was taken; For that, that it is not said
that Toll was paid. It was said by Hutton, That there are diverse places where
no Toll is to be paid upon sale, in Market; And yet the property is changed,
and Judgment accordingly.

Grimston against an Innkeeper.
IN an Action upon the Case, it was said at the Bar, and not gain-sayed, That
they ought to say in the Declaration, Trasiens hospitavit, for if he board or
sojourn for a certain space in an Inn, and his Goods are stolen the Action
upon that is not maintainable: And for omission, although the Verdict was given
for the Plaintiff, Judgment was given Quod nihil capiat per billam, upon fault
of the Declaration, and he paid no Costs.

Wilkins against Thomas.
IT was said by the whole Court, That a consideration is not traversable upon
an Assumpsit, but they ought to plead the general issue, and the Consideration
ought to be given in Evidence.

Ireland against Higgins.
IReland brought an Action upon the Case against Higgins, for a Greyhound, and
counts that he was possessed ut de bonis suis propriis, and by Trover came to
the Defendant; and in consideration thereof promised to re-deliver him. It
seemed to Yelverton, that the Action would not lie, and the force of his
Argument was, that a Greyhound was de fera natura, in which there is no
property, sed ratione fundi, live Deer and Coneys, and vouchd 3 H. 6. 56. 18 E.
4. 24. 10 H. 7. 19. for a Hawk; for Hares are but for pleasure, but Hawks are
Merchandable. This difference in 12 H. 8. is allowed, so long as a Dog is in
the possession of a man, an Action of Trespass lies, detinue or replevin. But
no Action if he was out of his possession, and so had not a property, then
there is no consideration, which is the foundation of an Action. Hutton to the
contrary, and said the whole argument consisted upon false grounds; as that a
Dog is ferae naturae. Which if it were so, he agreed the difference in 12 H.
8. But he intended that a Dog is not ferae naturae; for at first all Beasts
were ferae naturae, but now by the industry of man they are corrected, and
their savagenesse abated, and they are now domesticae, and familiar with a man;
as Horses, and a tame Deer, if it be taken, an Action lies. Rogers of Norwich
recovered Damages pro molosso suo interfecto. And 12 H. 8. So of a Hound called
a Blood-hound. And a Dog is for profit as well as for pleasure. For a Dog
preserves the substance of a man in killing the Vermin, as Foxes. And now is
not an Horse for the pleasure of a man? for a man may go on foot if he will,
and an Horse is meat for a man no more than a Dog. Therefore an Action may
lie for the one, as for the other. And for a Hawk, he ought to show that it was
reclaimed, for they are intended ferae naturae. One justifies in 24 Eliz. 30.
for a Battery, because he would have taken away his Dog from him. A Repleavin
was brought for a Ferret and Nets, and a Ferret is more ferae not. than a
Dog. Seal brought 25 Eliz. Trespass for taking away his Blood-hound; and
there it was said to be well laid. And then now if he has a property, the
consideration is good enough to ground an Assumpsit: It is adjudged that a feme
dowable: The heir promises to endow her before such a day, and the Action is
maintainable upon that by the Court. Intraturudic. pro quer. if no other matter
were showed by such a day.

Jenkins Case.
HE brought an Action upon a promise to the Plaintiff, That if he married her
with the assent of her Father, she would give him 20. l. Adjudged a good
consideration by the Court.

3 Car. rot. 414
Sir Edward Peito against Pemberton.
SIr Edward Peito is Plaintiff against Pemberton in a Replevin, and the
Defendant was known as Bailiff to H. Peito, and said that H. Peito the
Grandfather had granted a Rent for life to H. Peito the Son, to commence after
his death. The Plaintiff confesses the grant, but says, that after the death
of Peito the Grandfather, these Lands out of which the Rent issued, descended
to Peito the father, who made a Lease for a thousand years to the Grantee, and
dies. The Avowant confesses the Lease, but says, that before the last day of
payment, he surrendered to the Plaintiff. Upon which there was a Demurer; and
the question was whether the surrender of the Lease would revive the rent.
Harvey, If he had assigned the Lease to a stranger, the rent had been
suspended. 5 H. 5. One grants a rent charge (who had a reversion upon a Lease
for life) to commence immediately; there the question was, when the Lease was
surrendered, whether the rent now became in esse, because that the Lease, which
privileged the Land from distress, is now determined in the hands of the
Grantor himself. Crook. If the Grantor had granted reversion to a stranger, and
the surrender had been to him; It was clear that the suspension had been for
the term. Hutton. If a man seized of a rent in Fee, takes a Lease of Lands, out
of which, etc. for years, and dies; the Executor shall have the Land, and yet
the heir cannot have the rent. Harvey. In this Court it was the case of one
Asham, who had a purpose to enclose a Common, and one Tenant was refractory,
wherefore Asham made him a Lease of the soil, in which he had Common, and
afterward he surrenders it again. And it was agreed that the Common was
suspended during the term. Crook. A Lease for years is by the contract of both
parties, and the surrender may revive the rent; but by the surrender the
arrearages shall not be revived. And suppose that the surrender was by
Indenture, and a recital of the grant, that is a grant; and then it is
express, that by the surrender their intent was, that the rent should be
revived. 3 H. 6. A surrender determines the interest of all parties, but of a
stranger. But it is determined to themselves to all intents and purposes.
Crook. It was one Cooks Case against Bullick, intrat. 45 Eliz. rot. 845. Com.
ban. It was there adjudged, and this diversity was taken, If one devise Lands
in Fee, and after makes a Lease for years of the same Lands, to the Devisee, to
commence after his death, it is a countermand of his will; if the Lease was to
commence presently, it is no countermand; and the reason is, In the first case
both cannot stand in Fee, the Devise and the Lease. But when the Lease
commences immediately, he may outlive the Lease. And this Case is put upon the
intents of the parties. But Henden, This Case is also adjudged, If two Tenants
in Common are, and one grants a Rent charge, the Beasts of the other are not
distreinable. But if a Tenant in Common takes a Lease for years of another, his
Cattle are discharged again. But Yelverton and Hutton doubted that Case, and so
it was adjourned to be argued, etc.

Thomsons Case.
THompson libells for delapidations against the Executors of his predecessor,
and Henden moved for a Prohibition; for that that Thompson is not incumbent,
for his presentment. was by the King ratione minoritatis of one Chichley, and
the King had not any such Title to present; for where the King mistakes his
Title, his Presentment is void, and he is no Incumbent. 6 Rep. 26. Greens Case.
And Sir Thomas Gawdys Case, where the King presented jure praerogat. when he
had another Title; and the present Action was adjudged void, and whether he is
incumbent or not, that shall be tried. But by the Court a Prohibition was
denied, because that he was now incumbent. And the Judges would not take notice
of the ill Presentment of the King. But in case of Symony the Statute makes the
Church void, and then the Judges may take notice of that, and grant a
Prohibition, if the Parson sues for Tithes. But if a quare impedit be brought,
and appears that the King had not cause of Presentment, then a Prohibition may
be granted: which also was granted by all the other Justices.

Richard Youngs Case.
RIchard Young was Demandant in a Formedon, and admitted by Prochein amy, and
the Warrant was allowed by a Judge, and it was certified and entered in Gulstons
Office in the Roll of Remembrance, but it was not entered in the Roll as the
course in the Common Bench is, and after Judgment is given for the Plaintiff.
And for that Formeden the Defendant brought a Writ of Error, and removed the
Record, and assigned it for Error. And before in nullo est erratum pleaded.
And Davenport moved that it might be mended, for he said that there was a
difference between that Court and the Kings Bench, as it is in the 4 Rep. 43.
Rawlins Case; for the Entry of the Roll was Richard Young came et obtulit se
per atturnat. suum, where it should have been proximum amicum. And the Entry in
the Remembrance Roll was, That he was admitted per Gardianum, Richardson said,
that all the Books are, That an infant ought to sue by Prochein amy, and defend
by his Guardian, and so is a Demandant. But the Court agreed, That that should
be amended according to the Certificate. As a special Verdict should be
amended, according to the Notes given to the Clerk. And Davenport said that he
would venture it, although it was by Guardian, for he held it all one, if it
were by Guardian, or by Prochein Amy. See afterward more of this.

The Vicar of Cheshams Case.
THe Earl of Devonshire had a Manor in the Parish of Chesham, in
Buckinghamshire, which extended to Latmos, where there is a Chapel of Ease;
and the Vicar of Chesham Libells for Tithes, against one of the Tenants of the
Manor. And Henden moved for a Prohibition, for that that the Earl prescribed,
that he and all his Tenants should be acquitted of all the Tithes of Land
within Latmos, paying 10. s. per. ann. to the Chaplin of Latmos. And he said
that such a Prescription is good, as it was adjudged in Bowls Case. And a
Prohibition was granted.

Wildshieres Case.
IT was agreed by the whole Court, That for Executing of a Capias utlagatum, or
for a Warrant to Execute it, or for a return of it, no Fee is due to the
Sheriff, etc.

It was afterward agreed upon an Habeas corpus sued by Wiltshiere, who was
imprisoned, being Undersheriff, by the Lord Chamberlain, for arresting Sir
George Hastings Servant to the King, upon a Cap. utlagat. That he may well do
it upon the Servant of the King: for it is the Suit of the King himself, and he
is sworn to serve it; and there is no cause of the Commitment returned, but
only a recital of the Commitment, unless he was released by the Lord. And the
Judges took exception to that, and said that it ought to be, unless he can be
released by the Law; and said, if no cause be returned, they ought to dismiss
the Prisoner: And they ordered the Keeper to inform the Lord Chamberlei^; and
that their Opinion was, and so was the Opinion of all the Judges of England,
That he who procured the Commitment of the under Sheriff, ought to pay all the
Charges and Expenses. Quod nota.

Wentworth against Abraham.
THe Lord Wentworth brought an Action upon the Case, against Abraham, upon an
Assumpsit, and declares that the Defendant 1 die Maii, Anno Dom. 1625. in
consideration that the Plaintiff would permit the Defendant to re-enter in a
Message, and Croft, in which the Defendant had dwelt before, promised that he
would pay to him 30. s. yearly, during the time that he should enjoy it. And
that he permisit ipsum reentrare, and that he should enjoy it a year and an
half, which ended at Michaelmas, 1626. And for that he would not pay 45. s. he
etc. And upon non Assumpsit pleaded, it was found for the Plaintiff. And it was
moved by Davenport, in Arrest of Judgment, for that that the Assize is to pay
30. s. Annuatim; then before the Action be determined, nothing is due, and the
Plaintiff cannot divide the Rent, 5 R. 2. Annuity 21. Debitum Judex non
leperat. Then when it does not appear that the Action lies for the 15. s. for
the half year, and the Jury assessed Damages entirely, it is void, as 10 Rep.
130. Osborns Case. And it appears that by his computation of time, it is not a
year and an half from the time of the Assumpsit made. Richardson said, That it
is not secundum ratum, for then he might divide the Rent; and no day is limited
for the payment of it; for if a Lease be made for two years, or at will, paying
annually at Michaelmas, 30. s. and the Lease is determined after half of the
year; although that it be by the Lessee himself, he cannot make any Rent. But
Yelverton said that that is not a Rent, but a collateral sum. And debt does
not lie for that. And in the Declaration it is said, Quod permisit ipsum
reentrare, and does not say what time, which was naught by all but Hutton. And
it ought to be also that he did de facto re-enter. Hutton said, There being it
is said, So long as you shall occupy the Land, you shall pay annually, etc.
That he may demand half of the year. But the whole Court against him, and so
Pro hoc tempore, judgment was stayed.

Grange and his Wife against Dixon.
A Lease was made by Baron and Feme, and another Feme, and the Lessee Covenants
by the same Indenture, to find sufficient man's meat and horse meat, to the
Baron and Feme, and to the other Feme, or to their Servants at their coming to
London, at his house in Southwark. The Baron and Feme dye, and the other Feme
takes an husband. The Opinion of the Justices was, that he was not bound to
find sustenance for the husband, but only for the wife, or for her servants,
and not for both at one and the same time, because the Covenant was in the
disjunctive. But it was doubted if he shall find them Victuals for one meal
only at their coming, or for all the time of their staying there.

Johnson against Williams and Uxor.
IT wad said, If an Obligation be made by a Feme sole, and afterward she takes
an husband, and an Action of debt be brought upon that Obligation against the
Baron and Feme, and they deny the Deed; the Baron shall be taken for the Fine
as well as the wife, for the wife had nothing whereof to pay the Fine. And so
in Trespass against Baron and Feme, dum sola fuit, and they are both found
guilty, both shall be taken for the Fine, which the Prothonotaryes agreed.

Jeakill against Linne.
IN a Writ of Covenant, the Plaintiff counts upon an Indenture of Lease of the
Parsonage of Dale, by which the Defendant Covenanted to pay him the Rent, the
which he had not paid. And the Defendant said, that before any day of payment
of the said Rent incurred, one A. Ordinary of the same place sequestered the
said Parsonage for non payment of the first fruits. Judgment. If an Action,
etc. And by the Court, that is not a Plea; for he does not show that any Act
was done by the Plaintiff himself in his default. Nor he does not confess and
avoid the interest of the Lessor, as to say that the Lessor was a disseisor,
and made a Lease to him after that the disseisee re-entred; and so he might
confess and avoid the Lease, notwithstanding the Deed indented. But he cannot
say that the Lessor had nothing, at the time of the Lease made. And if the
Defendant had been bound in an Obligation for the payment of the said Rent, in
debt brought upon that, that should not have been a Plea; for he had bound
himself to pay the said Rent. And the occupation is not material where the
Lease is for years or for life. But otherwise of a Lease at will.

Davies against Fortescue.
IF a man (it was said) be seized of a Manor, whereof there are diverse
Copyholders admittable for life or for years; and he Leases the Manor to
another for term of life, the Lessor may make a Demise by Copy in reversion, to
commence after the death of the first Copyholders, and that is good enough.
But the custom of some Manors is to the contrary, and that is allowed.

Doyly an Infants Case.
A Man seized of Lands makes a Feoffment in Fee by Deed indented, rendering a
Rent, with a clause of Distress, and afterward he is bound in a Statute, and
the day is incurred. Upon which an Execution is awarded to the Conusee; and
upon the Extent, the Sheriff returns that the party was dead, and that he had
extended the said Rent. And the heir of the Conusor being within age (because
the Rent was extended during his nonage) brought an Audita querela, and Hutton
said, That it is maintainable enough, because there is an Exception in the Writ
of Extent, That if Land be descended to any Infant, that the Sheriff shall
surcease to extend. And although that Writ issued against the party himself who
made the Conisance, yet when it appears by the return of the Sheriff, that he
is dead, the Infant shall be aided by an Audita querela, or otherwise the
Extent shall be void, which is made upon the possession of the Infant.

Jeffryes Case.
IN a Formedon, the Plaintiff counts of a gift to his Father, and to his heirs
of his body engendered during the life of I. S. and makes the descent to him
during the life of I. S. And Yelverton seemed that the Writ is good enough; for
a Tail may be made so determinable, as well as a Fee simple. And if a man
Warrant Lands to the Feoffee, and his heirs, against him and his heirs during
the life of I. S. That he had a Fee simple in the Warranty determinable upon
the life of I. S. So here.

Warberlyes Case.
IN a Writ De valor maritagii, it was moved by Henden, If the Lord shall
recover his Damages according to the value of the Land held of him only, or
according to all his Lands held also of others. And Hutton and Crook said that
the value of the Marriage shall be accounted, as well in respect of the lands
held of him, as of other lands held of other Lords by Posteriority, or in
Soccage; for there the woman by the Marriage to him shall be more advanced. And
the better the advancement is, the better is the Marriage of the heir, and the
person more to be esteemed.

Norbery against Watkins.
ONe Devises the Manor of S. to two and their heirs between them to be equally
divided, so that they shall have part and portion alike. If by that they have a
Ioynt-tenancy, or a Tenancy in common was the Question, because there was an
Act to be done for making the division. And if the words had been equally to be
divided by I. S. it had been clear that they had been Ioynt-Tenants. But Harvey
said, That upon such a gift made to them, if the one of them dyed before
partition, yet their heirs should hold severally, according to the intent of
the Will; for otherwise the Surviver should hold place, which against the will
of the Devisor.

Northens Case.
A Man seized of a Manor, having all the Goods of Felons de se within the same
Manor, and makes a Lease for years of parcel of the same Manor to a man, and
afterward makes another Lease of the same Lands to commence after the
determination, surrender, or forfeiture of the first Lease. The first Lessee
was a Felo de se, the Lord Lessor of the Manor enters into the lands Leased as
forfeit, and the second Lessee ousts him; and it seemed to Crook that the Entry
was lawful enough. Harvey said, That the Lessor to whom the Frank-Tenement
belonged, entering into the land, the Frank-Tenement drowned the lesser Estate;
and the Lease for years is extinct in the Frank-Tenement. And it was said, That
therefore the first Lease extinguished. But if before that the Lord had aliened
the Manor saving to him the liberty, and after had entered for the Forfeiture,
the second Lessee could not enter; for it is not any determination of the first
Lease. Crook said, That if the Lessor infeoffed the first Lessee of the Manor,
that is a determination of the first Lease, and the second Lessee may enter.

The Bishop of Winchester against Markham.
THomas Bishop of Winchester, brought an Action upon the Statute of West. 1
cap. 4. de scandalis magnatum, against Markham, for that he preferred a
slanderous Bill against him before the President of the Council, surmising that
he was a covetous and malicious Bishop. And the Opinion of the Court was, That
the words were sufficient to maintain the Action.

A man seized of a Manor held in Chivalry, devises two parts of it to two men
in severalty, and all the Remnant he devises to his heirs in Tail, the
remainder over in Fee. Hutton said, It seems to me that the devise is void for
the third part to the heir; for he might devise the two parts by his Testament,
and he had done all that he could do by the Statute; and then the devise of
the third part is out of the warranty of the Statute; for it is not reason that
by the limitation of the third part (the which he could not do) that the
devise of the residue which was one time good, shall be defeated; which Harvey
granted, but Crook to the contrary; for although the two parts were devised by
the premises of the Testament, and the third part in the end of it, yet in
operation of Law the one part is not before the other, but the will is entire,
and took effect in all its parts at one and the same time, by the death of the
Devisor. By which it seemed (for the benefit of him in the remainder) that he
shall take the third part devised to him; for if a man seized of three Acres of
land held in Chivalry, and devises them severally to three several persons in
Fee, the heir shall have the third part of every of the three Acres, and not
the Acre last devised, which Hutton granted. So also for the benefit of a third
person, he ought to be judged in the third part as a Purchaser, and not of an
Estate by descent, and so is the better Opinion in 3 H. 6. But if he had
devised the Tenements to his Son in Tail without limitation over of the
remainder, there he might choose to be in of the Estate limited by the Devise,
or as heir. Hutton. I doubt of that, for the Book is not agreed, 3 H. 6.

Wilkinsons Case.
THe Baron seized of lands, makes a Feoffment upon condition to enfeoff him and
his wife for life, the remainder over to a stranger in Fee. Atthow demanded if
the Feoffee shall be bound to make the Feoffment before request made by the
Baron. Hutton and Crook thought that a request ought to be made by the husband.
And because the particular Estate which is the foundation of the remainder
limited to the stranger, ought to be made to the husband, who is party to the
condition; and it is his will to take the Estate for life, or refuse it, and
the Feme is at his will. But if the Baron dies, then it behooves him to make
the Feoffment to the wife, without request, because she is a stranger to the
condition, by Act in Law. And so where she dies also before the Feoffment, the
Estate ought to be made to him, to whom the remainder is limited, without any
request. Yelverton. But if the condition was to re-enfeoffe the Feoffor and a
stranger, there it behooves the Feoffee to tender the Feoffment to the stranger,
for he had not notice of the condition, and he ought to be party to all the
Estate. And by the Livery made to him, the Feoffor shall take well enough.

Waterton against Loadman.
VVaterton makes a Feoffee to the use of Loadman, in Fee to the use of another
in Tail, the remainder to his right heirs in Fee. Cestui que use in Tail
dies, the first Feoffees enter, for to recontinue the use. Crook said, That
when Tenant in Tail in use makes a Feoffment, nothing passes but for his own
life. For it had been agreed, where cestui que use pur vie, makes a Feoffment
in Fee, (for it was not a Forfeiture of his Estate) because nothing passed but
for his life) then when the Feoffee dies during the life of cestui que use in
Tail, that cannot be any descent of the Fee, but as an Estate for life, the
which determines by the death of cestui que use in Tail. And all the Justices
were of the same Opinion; for the descent was, when he had not any Title of
entry; for by the Feoffment he had a Title during the life of cestui que use in
Tail. Wherefore during his life they could not enter, nor make continual
claim. But if the descent had been after the death of cestui que use in Tail,
then otherwise it shall be; for they had a Title to enter before the descent,
and by their laches they are told of that. Hutton seemed, That the Feoffees
cannot enter in that case; for they cannot have the same Estate that they had
before the alienation of cestui que use in Tail; for by the Feoffment the
Estate of the Fee simple which was to their right heirs, passes clearly; and it
is lawfully in the Feoffee. Wherefore if they enter to re-continue the use in
Tail where they shall he seized of another Estate, where they shall be seized
of a Fee simple also; and so there shall be two Estate of Fee simple of the
same land, which is inconvenient. But the Justices said, That cestui que use in
Tail, had no other remedy, unless by the Entry of the Feoffees.

Harris against Mar.
A Man seized of certain lands in Fee, makes a Feoffment in Fee to his use, and
afterward makes his will, by which he devises, That the Feoffees shall make an
Estate of the same lands to all his Sons, except H. And if all his Sons dye
without issue, that then the remainder shall be to an Estranger. Hutton said,
That because H. was not excepted in the last clause, that he had an Estate Tail.

The Mayor and Commonalty of Winchesters Case.
THe Bishop of Winchester grants to the Mayor and Commonalty of the same City,
That they might Edify in the vacant places of the same City, and inhabit
there. And that Grant was confirmed by the Dean and Chapter; and the Opinion of
Hutton was, That notwithstanding that Grant, the soil is to the Bishop, and by
consequence the Houses. Quia quioquid plantatur solo cedit solo. And that grant
does not enure, but as a Covenant or License, and not otherwise.

One Tomkins Case.
IT was said by the way, That if a man be in Execution for the Debt of another
man, in the Fleet, the King cannot take him into his Protection, into his Wars,
out of Prison, until the Debt be paid, because that he is in Execution for the
said Debt; and the letting him out of Prison, is to let him out of the
Execution, which the Law will not suffer. But if he was in Execution in the
Fleet, or other Prison, for the Debt of the King, there he may discharge him,
and take him into his Protection, or into his wars; for he may well discharge
his own Debt.

Skore and Randalls Case.
THe Case was thus. A Lease was made to Robert Chichester, for 99 years, to
him, his Executors, Assigns, or Administrators, if Robert Chichester, or John
Bellew, or James Bellew, or any of them shall so long live, yielding and paying
therefore yearly and every year unto the said Randall, his Heirs and Assigns,
the sum of 40. s. at the four most usual Feasts, and also yielding at or upon
the death of Chichester, Bellew or Bellew, his or their best Beast in the name
of an Herriot, or 40. s. etc. Provided that if Bellew or Bellew dye in the life
of Chichester, no Herriot to be paid after their deaths. A Distress is taken
upon Skore the Assign of Chichester, for his own Beast. Ashly. The Question is
whether his or their refer to Chichester, Bellew, or Bellew only, or may refer
to Executors and Assigns of Chichester the Lessee. And so whether the Beasts of
the Assignee may be taken for an Herriot. And it seemed to him not; for that,
that a Reservation ought to be taken strictly, 27 H. 8. Comment. 171. 21 H. 8.
Dyer 45. So that if the words are words of Reservation, or of Declaration which
he will favor, they shall not be extended further than the words, etc. Bing.
contrary, And he conceived that the Lessee or his Executors before Assignment,
ought to pay the Herriot, and afterward the Assignee; for he who took the
benefit, ought to sustein the burden. Sic transit res cum onere; and none took
the benefit but the Assignee, or his Executors. And that is so strange an
intendment, that in the Habend. it is not named who shall yield or pay, but it
is intended he who had the land; and that Herriot comes in in the render of the
Rent, and render does suppose a Prender. And it is coupled with the reservation
of Rent, and it may be granted that the Tenant shall pay the Rent. And then it
immediately follows, And also his or their best, etc. which then ought to be
the Beast of him in possession.

Secondly, The other Exposition should be impossible to be performed; for none
shall be charged but those that are either privy in contract or Estate; and the
Executors of Chichester are not privy to any, and Bellewes are the persons only
named by the limitation of the Estate, and not any ways privy. It may be said,
that the Tenant shall pay the Beast of Chichester, and so his Beast. But no man
may give the Beast of another. And if it be said, That he may buy him, then the
Property should be altered, and it would be his own Beast. Yielding his or
their Beast, It cannot be intended, that Bellew or Bellew, might yield; but the
Lease is granted to him, his Executors or Assigns, then his or their Lessee, or
their Executors or Assigns. And you cannot have a foreign intendment of Bellew
or Bellew. Then the Exposition is good, that the Herriot ought to go with the
Estate. Hutton. That Reservation is not of a thing that agrees with the Rent,
but it is of a collateral matter, and it is of a thing against common right;
and for that it ought to be taken strictly, and to be the Beast of him that
dyed; for if it had been, Yielding the best Beast of a stranger, it had been
good; but th^e is Election of the Herriot, or of 40. s. Then by Assignment one
part is become impossible; for the Assignee cannot pay the Beast of Chichester,
but the Forty shillings he may pay. And because the Distress may be taken for
the 40. s. therefore the Avowry is naught Richardson. If Chichester dye Tenant,
then his Beast shall be paid. And his Executors, if the interest come to them,
shall cause that it be paid; for Chichester made the Contract, and that goes to
his Executors, but not to the Assigns. And for the 40. s. that is demandable
against the Executors of Chichester. Yelverton. The case is doubtful, but I
incline, that the Avowry is not good; for the words in the Reservation of the
Heriot are special. If it had been said, And also yielding after his and their
death, his or their best Beast. There it would be the Beast of the Lessee, his
Executors or Assigns. But also he had severed it from the Rent, and had taken
out of the course of the Estate; for otherwise it concurred and went with the
Rent; But also he had made it collateral; for it is to be paid after the death
of the stranger. For his or their cannot be carried but to the persons named by
the limitation. And the Proviso explains that, that it should not be paid
after the death of the Assignee. But if it had been rendering the best Beast
after the death of the stranger, It should be paid by him that had the
Inheritance. But he held for the 40. s. that the Executors shall not pay it.

Perryman against Bowden.
PErryman brought a Replevin against Bowden and Brown, who made a Recognisance
in the name of Bedle. And the Case was thus. A rent is granted payable at
Michaelmas and the Annunciation; And if it be in arrear by 40 days after any
day of payment, upon the demand at such a place, he might distrain. And it is
not showed that he demanded it; And for that a demurrer. Atthowe, it is not
requisite to show a demand, for the distress it self is a demand. And it was
adjudged in this Court; If a Rent be granted, and that he may without demand
distreyn; and good without demand. And the words (if it be demanded) are
material; Because it is demandable in a Collateral place, out of the Land
charged. Crook, Grant of a rent, and that I pay it at Michaelmas allwaies, if
it be demanded at my House; there ought to be a demand. And suppose it was to
be demanded in such a place, upon the Land; I conceive the demand ought to be
made accordingly. Yelverton, A Lease was made rendering a rent payable at such a
day: upon Condition that if the rent be not paid at such a day without demand,
That the Lessor may reenter. And adjudged that no demand is now requisite. For
modus et conventio vincunt legem, etc. Sed adjurnatur.

Wolfes Case before.
THe Plaintiff was an Attorney who sued by attachment of Privilege; And now the
Court would not permit the amendment; Because there was a material Error, for
it is to the disadvantage of the King. For if the party be non-sute, or a
verdict passes against him, the King shall have a Fine for false clamor, and
may recover them against the pledges. But now where it is the Act of the Court
or of the Clark or Attorney, and not the party himself, there may be amendment.
As warrant of Attorney may be entered after the Record removed. And although
that pledges were entered upon the Issue roll, where it ought to have been upon
the Imparlance roll. But not on the contrary. For the Issue roll is the
inferior. Harvey, If a Suit be by Bill, as an Attorney being Defendant, there
are always pledges entered in the Bill. But if by Attachment also as so, Then
the Declaration is the Original. Crook 12 Eliz. Dyer. There Judgment was
reversed for want of Pledges. And although that Case was before the Statute of
8 Eliz. yet that Statute does not aid substantial Errors. And in one Husseys
Case in the Kings Bench, That was adjudged for Error.

Wilknsons Case.
CRew moved, that two were bound in a Statute, and one dies, his Heir within
age. That the extent shall demur; Because that usura recurrit contra haeredem
infra aetatem existentem And he cited 17 Ass. 24. by Mawbrey. And so it was
agreed by the Court. And Richardson said, That in that respect, the Statute is
an ill assurance. Quod nota.

Waddingtons Case.
AYl^ff moved for a Prohibition for one Waddington, for that, that he was
executor, and was sued in the Council of York, upon an Obliligation for the
payment of a Legacy. And he alleges that a Lease which was put in the
Inventory, was aliened to him by the Testator in his life time. And so the
Question will be whether that should be Assets, which ought to be tried at the
Common law. And therefore prayed a Prohibition. Richardson said, The Council of
York have power of all Obligations; And therefore having Jurisdiction of the
principal, they have Jurisdiction of the accessory. Davenport, It is seen that
they may proceed upon an Obligation of all sums; If they proceed Suo genere, as
in the Court of Equity. But if a thing tryable at Common law, as Assets or not
Assets come; they cannot proceed, etc. Richardson, If a Suit be there for a
Legacy, and payment be pleaded; they may try that. But if they meddle in matter
of Title, then a Prohibition shall be granted. Hutton, There has been many
motions upon these Ecclesiastical Obligations for Prohibitions; and allwaies
they were denied. And so it was in this Case.

Comins Case.
IN one Comins Case, it was agreed by the Court, That a Subject may have a
Forest, But cannot have a Justice Seat. But he may have a Swanmark Court, and
the other Courts, and a Commission to execute them. Then a Forest in the hands
of a Subject shall pay Tithes. And it was agreed that in the hands of the King
it is privileged. And by Henden, Davenport, and Atthowe Sergeants, It is only
his personal privilege, which extends to the Lessee of the King; But not to
the Feoffee. And it was agreed, That where the right of tithes comes in
Question between a Parson and the Vicar, who are both Ecclesiastical persons.
It shall be tried by the Ecclesiastical Court. But Richardson said the Books
make a doubt; Where it is between the Servant of the Vicar, and the Parson. But
it seemed to him to be all one.

Margery Rivets Case before.
RIchardson, Hutton, and Harvey said, That the Devastavit ought to be to
Margery for Necessity sake, For it cannot be intended otherwise. For none can
satisfy the Debt but Margery. And the intention of the Replication was to
charge her de bonis prop. for waste: and no other can be intended to waste. And
the Case put of I. S. so being seized, feoffavit; There it is good without
praedict. I. S. But for the thing it ought to be Feoffavit inde, 21 H. 7. There
if W. S. be named again. It shall be intended the same W. S. if there be not
quidam I. S. and then otherwise: and also it is much mended by the Replication.
For there it is ipsa Margareta non devastavit. But Crook and Yelverton on the
contrary, according to their reasons before; that no Issue is joined* And then
the Statute does not aid it; For there is not any Nominative Case to which it
may refer. If it had been quo die Margery habens bona devastavit, had been
good. But being bona habuit, no Grammarian can make Construction of it. And the
Replication or Declaration ought to be certain to all intents, 27 H. 6. 3.
Wrotesleys Case, In an information of Tithes, It was said, That the Defendant
cognoscens him to be in suit: being ruled, that Congnoscens is not positively
an affirmation, but it ought to be cognovit; And Judgment was had upon it; and
yet after for that fault reversed. 1 R. 3. There the Case was; After verdict
was entered that the Jury appeared, et electi and triati dicunt super
sacramentum suum. There it was reversed, because it was not lurati, and yet
that was employed by sacramentum strongly. But Implications ought not to be
allowed in Replicatious; then we should introduce so many incertainties. But by
Crook Judgment shall be given against the Plaintiff upon his own Replication.
For that, that the waste is supposed after the Son came at full age; and then
the Administration that determines. And Judgment was given for the Defendant.

Roberts and others.
ROberts and others in East Greenwich, were cited in the Spiritual Court to pay
money that the Wardens had expended in reparation of the Church. And the
Inhabitants alleged, That the tax was made by the Churchwardens themselves,
without calling the Freeholders, and also that the monys were expended in the
re-edifying of Seats which belonged to their several Houses: And they never
assented that they should be pulled down. And now that allegation was not
allowed, but sentence was given against them. And then they appealed to the
Arches, where this allegation was also rejected; And for that he prayed a
Prohibition; And the Court agreed, That the tax cannot be made by the
Churchwardens; But by the greater number of the Inhabitants it may, and a
Prohibition was granted. But by Yelverton, If it be cited by ex Officio, a
Prohibition will not lie. For so it was ex insinuatione, etc. For the Wardens
came and prayed a Citation, etc. But by Richardson, Harvey, and Crook
privately, a Prohibition will lie in both Cases.

Commin against Carre.
COmmin brought Trespass against Carre for taking of two Heifers. The Defendant
pleads, that the King was seized of a Wapentake in Yorkshire; And had so large
Jurisdiction as another Turn of the Sheriff. And then he said, that the
Plaintiff played at Cards within that Wapentake, in the House of such an one;
and said that that is contra formam Statuti, 33 H. 8. ca. 9. And said then,
that he played at Cards another day. And thirdly, that he broke a Pin-fold, etc.
And that the 24 Martii, 21 Iac. warning was given to the Plaintiff, he being an
Inhabitant, for a year before, within the Jurisdiction of that Court, that he
ought to appear the last day of March following; And said that the Court was
then held, and those offenses were presented, and that for his not appearing he
was amerced 12 d. and for the playing 6 s. 8 d. and for the breaking the pound
3 s. 4 d. And now for all those amerciaments he distrained, by virtue of a
Warrant of the Steward of the Court (and does not say what warrant) And then
justifies the selling of the said Heife^s for 20 s. and that he retained 17 s.
and offered the surplusage to the Plaintiff. Atthow, there is not any thing to
prove any sorfeiture by the Plaintiff. For the Statute is upon two branches.

First, That no Common house of play be kept.

Secondly, If any use those Houses, and play, etc. That it is not said that
that is a Common house of play. But then it will be said, that it is alleged
contra formam Statuti; and that will imply that. But now that is not
sufficient; For if any inform contra formam Statuti, If by his own showing it
does not appear contra formam Statuti, He shall not have Judgment. Richardson,
A Common house of play, is a House for lucre, maintained for play; And there
the Law makes a difference between Common persons and private, etc. But contra
formam Statuti will not serve. For the offense ought to be alleged fully.
Yelverton made four causes of Distress, selling the Distress; If it be good for
any it is sufficient. And if there be a Justification for three causes in
Avowry; If it be good by any, It is sufficient. 9 H 6. But so it is where a
trespass, etc. Harvey, A Justification in a Leet; That he distreyn'd and sold,
and delivered the overplus to the party, in the Case of the King it is good,
But in the Case of Common persons I doubt whether he may sell; And in the Case
of the King he ought to deteyn the distress for 16 days before sale. But by
Yelverton and Hutton, All Leets are the Courts of the King; and they may be
used as the Courts of the King. And it was said afterward by Richardson, That
the Statute was grossly mistaken. And that diverse amerciaments were wanting. And
so Judgment for the Plaintiff.

Traver against the Lord Bridgewater et Ux.
TRavers brought an action upon the Case against the Lord Bridgewaters and his
Wife, Administratrix of T. D. her Husband deceased. For that the said T. D. in
consideration that the said Travers, tradidisset and deliberasset to the said
T. D. diverse Merchandises, he promised to pay, etc. The Defendant pleads that
the said T. D. non assumpsit. And 'twas found for the Plaintiff, and pleaded in
Arrest of Judgment, that it was no Consideration. And adjudged for the
Defendant. For when he said tradidisset and deliberasset, That they might be
his own Goods. Otherwise if he had said vendidisset de novo, E. 4. 19.
Accordingly.

Palmers Case.
IT was held by the Court, If a man assume to pay money due, in consideration to
forbear to sue him paululum temporis. And if he forbear for a convenient time;
It is a sufficient consideration, upon which to ground an Assumpsit The case
was between Palmer and Rouse P. 40 El. rot. 537. The Plaintiff counts that I.
S. was indebted to him upon an Obligation, and he forfeited it and dies, and
made the Defendant his Executor. And that the Plaintiff was forced to sue the
Obligation, and in consideration of the premises. The Defendant assumed that if
the Plaintiff would forbear him pro brevi tempore that he would pay him. And
the Paintiff fidem adhibens, etc. forbore 4 years to sue him; and said that the
Defendant had Assets. The Defendant said absque hoc that he had Assets. And
upon that the Plaintiff demurred; and adjudged for him. For the alleging of
Assets in the Count is surplusage. And now the consideration was sufficient,
for he had counted he had forbore for four years.

Panton against Hassel.
PAnton brought an action upon the Case of trover and conversion against
Hassell, who declared, That whereas he was possessed of certain Jewels 16 April
he lost them, and 20 Ian. they came to the hands of the Defendant, and he
converted them. And this was supposed to be done in Huntingtonshire; The
Defendant pleads, that time out of mind, etc. the City of Bristow is and has
been a Market overt, in Shops et locis apertis, and the Defendant bought them
in his Shop. And further shows that he is a Goldsmiths, by reason of which he
was possessed of them as his proper Goods, and converted them to his own use,
which is the same conversion. Hutton, When the Defendant had supposed an
absolute property by the sale in the Market overt, that Conversion after,
cannot be a Conversion of the Goods of the Plaintiff For of necessity there
ought to be a mean time between the change of the property, and the conversion.
Also the Custom is naught; for he ought to say in locis apertis and shops
apertis; For the cause of the change of the property is, Because every one may
come thereto and see if they are his Goods, and there challenge them. So that
by some intendment in this prescription, that Shop might he a private Shop. And
although that it be averred in facto that that Shop is apert; Yet when the
prescription is mislayed, the Bar is naught. For if Issue be taken que fuit
shop apert: That is not a good issue.

Also he prescribed, that there was a Market overt every day, except Sunday and
Festivals; and that it was not Sunday or Festival, where it should have been
nec Festival per que, etc. Harvey said, That word apertis shall have relation
as well to shops as to locis; Hutton at Newgate Sessions seven of the Justices
being present, there was a Question, That if a man having Cloth stolen from
him, and that was sold in a Scriveners Shop, Resolved that there was no change
of the property. For by intendment if a man had Drapery stolen from him) he
would not seck it there. So if a man fells stolen Plate, and sells it in the
High street under his Cloak, It does not change property. And if a man sells a
thing in a Silkmans Shop in London (the Curtain being drawn) That does not
change the property. And now to the principal Case, Although he said that he
was a Goldsmith and that that was his Shop, It is not necessary to be intended,
that he used the Trade of a Goldsmith in it; And that ought to be averred. For
every Shop is a Market overt: for these Causes only, which appertain to the
same trade.

Williams against Bickerton.
Williams brought an action upon the Case against Bickerton for saying, He
has forsworn himself, and i will teach him the price of an Oath, for I will have
his Ears cropped. And it seemed that it lay. For although it was not said at the
beginning, where it was that he forswore himself, Yet by the circumstance it
shows that he was in such a place, for which it was punishable. And M. 29, 30
Eliz. Dantsleys Case. Thou art a Pillary Knave, remember that thou have
deserved the Pillary; and the Action maintainable. And the Plaintiff paid the
Box for his Judgment.

Bradyes against Johnson.
BRadye brought an Eject. firm. against Johnson, and declared upon a Lease of
Land habend. a die dat. Indentur. praedict. And does not speak of any Indenture
before. And for that the Declaration adjudged naught. And so it was between
Bell and March. And this same term between Spark, Where it was showed quod
concessit per eandem Indent. Where he had not spoke of any Indenture before.

Lowen against Cocks.
IN Debt by Lowen against Cocks, the Case was thus, A man seized of an house in
St. Edmonds Parish in Lumbard-street in London, devises it to his wife for
life, the remainder to his Son George, and if he dye without Issue, then to
John and Thomas his Sons equally, and to their Heirs. The wife dies, George
dies without Issue, l. and T. make a Lease for years, rendering 5. l. to the
one, and 5. l. to the other, l. devises the reversion to his wife, and dies,
and for that Rent the Action was brought by the Wife. And the Question was, if
they shall be Joint or Tenants in Common. (For if joint the devise of the
Reversion is void.) And Secondly, If by any Act which makes partition (viz.)
the several Limitations of the rent to them. If seemed to Hutton that they are
Tenants in Common; By reason of that word equally, which in it self makes a
Division. In 33 Eliz. in Boucher against Marsh. It was held, that where a man
devises Lands to three Children equally to be divided; they are Tenants in
Common. And so it was 14 lac. in case of Goods. And it is clear (as it is said)
If a Man devise 100 l. to two equally, the Executors shall pay 50 l. to the
one, and 50 l. to the other. For if that word equally does not make tenancy in
Common, it shall be all otherwise void. And every word of a Will ought to be of
some force. And in these Cases the word divided was not the force of the
matter, but only equally, And it was the Case of a Shepherd in the Courts of
Wards. Where a man devises, that after the death of his Son all my woods shall
remain equally to his Daughters and their Heirs of their bodies. And it was
there held by Dyer and Manwood that they were Tenants in Common. If Parceners
agree to hold by, That is sufficient partition. And if the one Ioyntenant
confirms to the other; that does not give any thing, but severs the Ioynture.
Harvey to the contrary.

First, They are Joint, For Ioynture is the greatest equality, for every one is
seized by himself, and the one has as much of the profits as the other. And so
equal interest and equal benefit to the Survivor. 6 E. 6. in Dyer. A difference
was taken between a Demise to two, when it is said equally divided. That they
shall be Tenants in Common; If equally to be divided they shall be joint. But
it was never adjudged. 17 Eliz. A man having 3 Sons, devises Lands to them
equally to be divided. The Question was what estate they had. For if the
younger had not a fee, they could not have an Estate equal with the eldest, for
he had a fee. Resolved, that they shall have a fee-simple: and also that they
shall be Tenants in Common. And held that to be divided and divided was all
one. And it was held also that the word divided makes the Tenancy in Common,
and not equally. 2. As to that reserve of 50 l. to the one, and 50 l. to the
other, clearly being a joint Lease, and a joint reversion. And the Rent as
accessory to the reversion, and shall not change the nature of it. Yelverton,
They are Tenants in Common. A Will shall be construed according to the intent
of the Testator. And exposition shall be made of the words to supply his intent.

Tomlins's Case.
IT was agreed by all, That if one sojourn in the House of another; and the
House is broken in the night, and the Stranger robbed in the House, without
being put in fear of his life, In law. He that robbed shall have his Clergy,
notwithstanding the Burglary. For it is out of the Statute of 5 and 6 of E. 6.
cap. 9.

Dicksons Case.
AT Sergeants Inn in Chancery lane this Question was debated, If a man steal
Goods, and the very Owner makes fresh suit to take the felon; So that he waives
the Goods and flies; And before the Owner comes, the Goods are seized as Goods
waived, and afthe Owner comes and challenges them. Now if he shall have them,
or they shall be forfeited was the Question. And it was held by Harvey and
Crook, That they are not at all forfeited; for that the Owner had done his
endeavor and pursued from village. And that the Goods shall not be said to be
waived, but where it cannot be known to whom the property is. Hutton Chief
Justice, and Yellerton said. That Goods waived shall be said those which are
stolen, and that the Felon being pursued, for danger of apprehension waives
and flies. Now if they are seized before that the Owner comes, the property is
presently altered out of the Owner in the Lord, although that he made fresh
suit, If that Suit was not within the view of the Felon allwaies. But they all
agreed, if the Felon do as not fly, but is apprehended with the Goods, That
then the Owner shall have his Goods without Question. Or if the Owner comes and
challenges the Goods before seizure; and after the flight of the Felon. Harvey
said, The Statute of 21 H. 8. cap. 13. does not remedy any thing, as to the
restitution of the Goods stolen. But upon the evidence of the party, or by
others by his procurement in the same manner. As it was in an appeal upon a
fresh suit at the Common Law.

It was said by all, That although the custom was of Burgage lands in soccage;
Yet if the Lands came by gift or otherwise to tenure in Chief, or service of
Chivalry, That that now changes not the Custom, which always goes with the
Land, and not with the tenure: As the Lands in Gavelkind, by the Custom are
soccage tenure; Yet if they are changed to service of Chivalry, the Custom is
not altered, But that all the heirs shall inherit.

It was agreed by all, That if sir persons compass and imagine to levy war
against the King; And there is an agreement between them, that two shall do
such an act in such a Country, and the other two another act in such a County.
And so diverse acts by diverse in several Counties for to assemble the people
against the King. And after two do the Act according to their purpose, and
assemble the people, and the other do nothing. Yet the Act done by two upon the
agreement, is Treason in all. But otherwise it is if there had been only a
compassing, etc. and not any agreement, and afterward one of them does the act
unknowing to the others; there it is not Treason, but in those that do the
fact, and not in the others. As it happened in the Case between the King and an
other.

Wilkins against Thomas.
IT was adjudged upon good advise; That if an Infant he impleaded by any
precipe of his Lands; And loses by defending. Now he shall have a Writ of
Error. And because that he was within age at the time of the Judgment, it
shall be reversed. And the Infant shall be restored to all that he lost. As it
happened in the Case of John Ware against Anderson and others in the County of
York, lost while they were infra aetatem. Where it appeared that they appeared
by their Guardian (admitted to them by the Court) to the Grand cape; and that
they were within age. But there was an inspection by Nurses and Friends, and
they were found not to be within age.

John Symons against Thomas Symons.
NOte it was said by all the Justices; That if the Disseisee enter upon the
Feoffee or Lessee of the Disseisor, That he shall not have an Action of the
Trespass for the same Trespass against the Feoffee or Lessee; Because that they
come in by a Title. And at Common law before the Statute of Gloc. No damages
for mean occupation against the Feoffee or Lessee.

Bromleys Case.
IF a man steal goods, and be arraigned upon an Indictment of felony, and the
goods are valued to 6 s. and the Jury upon their verdict say, That he is guilty
of the said goods, but that the value was but 6 d. That is a good verdict; And
the Justices shall vanish him as for patty Larcenny. In the same manner it is,
If a man be arraigned for wilful murder, and the Jury find it but
Manslaughter. That is a good verdict by all the Justices.

Pease against Thompson.
A Man seized of Lands in see makes a feoffment from that day, to diverse, to
the use of his Wife for her life, and after to the use of the heirs of the body
of the Feoffor. The Feme dies, and the Feoffor makes a Lease for years and
dies* Now her Issue shall not avoid that Lease, because a man cannot have Heirs
in his life: So that at the time of the death of the Feme there was none to
take by the remainder. And for that the Feoffor had the fee; the Lease is good
and shall bind the Heir. As if a Lease be made for life, the Remainder to the
right Heirs of I. S. and I. S. dies in the life of the Lessee: then the
remainder is good, otherwise not, but it shall revert. But otherwise it shall
be peradventure in such a Case in a demise.

Hillary 3 Car. Com. Banc. Skore against Randall.
SKore brought Debt against Randall, and recovered, and had execution by
Elegit, and it was found by the Inquisition that the Defendant was seized of
the moiety of a Message and Lands for life, and other Lands in right of his
Wife. And the Sheriff returns that virtute brevis, et deliberat, feci meditatem
omnium praemissorum cum pertinentiis, etc. Nec non duo pomaria, nec non unum
clausum vocat, etc. And that he had delivered the moiety of the Lands in right
of his Wife, and his Chattells, and recites them, and that Elegit was filed.
And the Question was, whether he might have a new Elegit, Because that the
Sheriff ought to have delivered to him the moiety of the moyetic of the Lands
held in Ioint-tenancy. So that the Tenent by Elegit might be Tenant in Common
for a fourth part with the Joint tenants, as it was agreed. But also by that
Delivery he had but in effect the eighth part; For the other Ioynt-tenants, may
occupy the Land delivered with him in Common. Richardson said, For part of the
Lands and goods, in right of his Wife, the return is good; And being filed he
cannot have a new Election. For if part shall be evicted, you cannot have a new
Extent upon the Estate. But if it had been in the Genitive Case Duorum
pomorariorum, etc. it had been good. But it was granted by the Court, That the
Plaintiff makes a surmise, that the Sheriff male se gessit in the Execution of
that Elegit, and then he may have a new Elegit at his peril, etc.

Edward Thomas against John Morgan, et al.
EDward Thomas brought an Ejectione firmae against Morgan, Kemmis, and others,
and upon Not guilty pleaded, a special Verdict was given to this effect, for
Morgan and Kemmis, (for the other some were dead before issue, and the other
not guilty) and they found a Judgment dated 12 Sept. 23 Eliz. and delivered
the 15 Iunii next ensuing. Which was between the then Bishop of St. David's of
the one part, and Richard Thomas of the other part. And it was in consideration
of a Marriage to be had between him and the Daughter of the Bishop, That before
the end of Hillary Term next ensuing, he would levy a Fine of all those Lands,
and all the other lands in Mountmouth, and that should be to Thomas Morgan, and
Roger Sise of Lincoln-Inne. And that he suffered a recovery with double voucher
to the uses in the Indenture, But the words are, that the Conusees should stand
seized to the use. And by Atthowe, the Recovery is idle, for the uses shall be
executed, and then there shall be no Tenant to the Precipe, (viz.) That of all
the Lands mentioned in the Indenture Morgain and Sise shall stand seized to the
only uses hereafter, etc. that is to say, They shall be seized of in part of
the Lands and Tenements, that is so much thereof as shall amount to the clear
value of 30 l. by the year, to the use of Richard, and Anne Daughter of the
Bishop, after marriage, for their lives. Which Lands and Tenements to the value
of 30 l. per annum shall be appointed and limited out by meets and bounds, and
put in writing before Hillary Term next, and delivered to the use of Edward
Thomas, and Walter Thomas for their lives, which were Uncles of Richard, if
Richard and Anne had Issue male. When the Survivor of them dies without Issue
male, or if all the Issue male dye without Issue male; Then the use to Edward
and Thomas to cease. Also there be two Conditions, the one Precedent, the other
Subsequent; And the precedent Condition makes that a contingent Remainder. But
Atthow would have that settled without Issue born to Richard, etc. But if all
their Issues dye before the Survivor; It can never be settled. For the words
(scil.) at the death of the Survivor, etc, And then before the contingency
happen, it cannot be settled. If the contingency had been void at the time of
the limitations; I agree it should be void. Now if the particular Estate be
contingent; all that depends upon it is contingent also. And Edward and Walter
took nothing but after the death of the Survivor of Richard and Anne without
Issue. And then it is as in the Case of Cook 10. 85. A Feoffment to the use of
A. for life, and after the death of B. to the use of C. and his Heirs. That
Remainder is contingent, Because that B. ought to dye in the life of A. or the
Remainder shall never vest. So also to Richard and Anne for their lives, and
after their deaths without Issue to Edward and Walter. And if they ever take an
Estate, it ought to be after their deaths, etc.

Secondly, For the uses of the Residue. To the use of Richard for life, and if
he dye living A. without Issue male engendered of the body of A. Then to A. for
life, that is contingent, then of the residue, after the death of Richard to
the use of Edward and Walter, if Richard had not issue of Anne at the time of
his death. Whether it vests after his death see before, etc. That is contingent
also. And it is contingent whether he will dye without Issue male. As if a
Feoffement be made to the use of one for life, and if he had no Heir of his
body, to another in fee; that is contingent during the life; And he had not but
an Estate for life, by that limitation; and then that is destroyed by the Fine
also. And now if nothing was in Edward, nothing can be settled in his Son. And
then those contigent Remainders being destroyed: there is a good estate in the
Purchasors; and this special verdict was not found for any doubt, but for the
intricacy of the Indenture. And therefore he prayed Judgment for the Defendant.

Harvey against Fitton.
HArvy the Administrator of Edward Fitton brought an Action of debt upon an
Obligation of 200 l. against Edward Fitton, and declares of Letters of
Administration committed to him by the Archbishop of Canterby, etc. The
Defendant says, That the Intestate became possessed of Goods in Chester within
the County of York. And before the purchase of the Writ, and after the death of
the Intestate, I. S. Chancellor of Chester committed Administration to Richard
Fitton of all the goods, etc. And that he released to him, and upon that de
murs. Bramston, He does not show what person that Chancellor was, or how he had
that Authority to grant Administration, quod fuit concessum per Cur. That for
that it was naught. And it was agreed, that the Prerogative of Canterbury does
not extend to York.

Dame Buttons Case.
DAme Button was Administratrix of Goods and Chattels of her Husband. And the
Sisters of the Husband would compel her in the Prerogative Court to make
Distribution; And after sentence given prays a Prohibition, and diverse causes
were alleged. But Richardson rejected all, unless it was upon the Statute 21
H. 8. And upon that Statute he said, that upon conference with the Judges, He
conceived that it was in the discretion of the Court to grant a Prohibition in
such Cases or not, etc. Hutton said, That a Prohibition in such cases ought to
be granted, For he said, if Sisters may come in for portions by Distributions,
where Cousins cannot. And Sisters have not any color to have Distribution. For
although that the Statute of Magna Charta cap. 18. extend a pueris, Yet not All
Freres or Sisters. And the Ordinary although heretofore would compel an
Executor to make Distribution; yet now they never meddle with an Executor. And
has not an Administrator the same power as an Executor? And in Isabel Towers
Case a Prohibition was granted. For when they have executed their Authority one
time lawfully, they cannot make a Distribution. Harvy to the same intent. The
Ordinary had not such a power upon the Goods of any, especially where
Administration is granted; For then they have put the Property in the
Administrator to pay debts, etc. And there may be a sleeping debt which by that
means shall never be satisfied. For if the Ordinary might grant Administration,
and afterward make Distribution, His Authority is not warranted, and he does
and undoes, and so mocks the Statute. In Flames Case it was said, that if they
are not permitted to make Distribution, They will compel it before
Administration shall be granted. But they have not any such power; for he ought
to commit Administration if it be demanded. And it was so in one Clarks case In
which the whole Court was of opinion. But Yelverton would not show his op'nion
in the power of the Ordinary. But he consented to a Prohibition without other
cause.

John Owens Case. Mich. 3. Car. Com. Banc.

John Owen lived apart from his wife; And upon petition of the Wife to the
Justices of Assise for maintenance, they referred it to the Bishop of Bangor;
who ordered that he should pay to his Wife 10 l. per annum, which was
afterward confirmed by decree in the Council of Marches of Wales. And because
that John Owen disobeyed that Decree, and did not pay the 10 l. per annum, the
Council sent a Messenger to apprehend his body; and caused his Goods, and the
profits of his Lands to be sequestered. And Henden prayed a Prohibition; for
that that Alimony was not within their instructions. Richardson demanded of him
if they could grant Prohibitions; If they meddle with a thing, which belongs to
Ecclesiastical power, where they themselves have power. Harvey was of the same
opinion. For this Court should preserve other Courts in order. Yelverton said,
For the sequestration of the Lands, they could not do that. Richardson, They
have not any power to sell the goods. The Ecclesiastical Court is the proper
Court for Alimony; And if the person will not obey, they cannot but
excommunicate him. And by Yelverton, when that comes to them from the Bishop to
be confirmed, They cannot but walk in the steps of the Bishop. And a day was
given to show, why a Prohibition should not be granted. And so it was ruled.

Feakes against --
ONe -- was sued in the Council of Marches upon a Bond of 500 l. to pay 40
marks per annum; And he alleged, that he did not intend to take the forfeiture
of the Bond, but to compel him to pay the 40 Marks per annum. And a
Prohibition was granted to the Court at the motion of Hoskins. For that their
instructions were not to hold Plea but for, etc. And if this should be
permitted, it is but a window to draw more within their Jurisdiction, and also
the King would lose his Fines. But he ought to have an Action of Debt. Harvy,
If an Obligation was to perform an Annuity of such a sum by another Deed. The
party may bring his Action upon the Obligation or Annuity, And Yelverton said,
If it were to perform a Collateral thing, or if the Condition was all one with
the Obligation, they cannot sue for the performance there. Quod nota.

Intra Mich. 3 Car. rot. Banc. 633.
Watson against Vanderlash.
Watson brought an Action upon the Case against Vanderlash, for scandalous
words, and declares, that whereas he was skillfull in the art of Surgery,
and that he made much gain of that Art of the Kings Subjects that now is, etc.
Et colloquio tunc and ibidem habito de peritia sua in art Chirurg. etc. et de
quodam Matthews nuper ante sub cura ejus, who is now dead. He spoke these
words, Thou did kill Mr. Matthews, thou did kill him. And upon not guilty
pleaded, it was found for the Plaintiff, and an hundred pound damages given.
And now this was urged in arrest of Judgment by Crew. That he does not allege
that he was a Chirurgean at the time of the words spoken. So that his
allegation to be a Chirurgean, does not include the time etc. that he spoke
those words; And then his profession is not discredited. Secondly, he does not
allege, thac he died under his cure, but that he is dead; For if those had been
alleged, it would have been more questionable. And for that the words are not
Actionable. Now a man may kill a man diverse ways, and justify it. As a
Minister of Justice, 14 Eliz. in the Kings Bench, Yates and Bostocks Case. Thou
wast the cause that I. S. did hang himself, and that I. N. did cut his own
throat. And adjudged that they are not Actionable; for he might have committed
an Offense, and because the other prosecuted him, he might cut his own throat,
or hang himself; and so this man might be under his cure, and he do his best
endeavor to save him; but yet he might dye. And the Court does never extend
words further than the Law directs them. Coo. 4. 15. Stawloeps Case and Hexts
Case, fol. 20. Barhams Case. The Court there does not supply that which the
words do not directly imply. And here in this Case where the words may have a
qualification, they shall be taken in mitiori sensu. Henden. The word kill
generally will bear an Action, because that it shall be intended to be
felonionsly, as in the Lady Cockains Case. Although it was not Felony in facto.
But here the words so spoken and particularly applied, they will not bear an
Action They had a discourse of his skill in Surgery, and of one Matthew, who
was sick of a dangerous disease. Then that cannot to be intended, it was
Felony; objecting the fayler of skill, will not bear an Action. As if I should
say of a Lawyer, He has lost his Clients Cause. And as it may be taken in
mitiori sensu, it cannot be strained to Perjury. And so here there can never be
intended a voluntary killing. But Bramston and Finch on the other side. That
although there are not these words Tunc existenti Surgeon, yet there are
other words which supply them; for it is, That when Matthews was under his
cure, he was a Surgeon, etc. And the words are actionable without other
reason; for that he impeaches his credit, and implies misbehaviour in his Art.
Hutton. For the Exceptions we ought to intend that he continued a Surgeon, and
that his skill continued. And also it is supplied. Then being speech of his
skill, etc. Which proves that then he was a Sureon. And Then ought to be
intended that he is a Surgeon; for it is not to be supposed that he laid
aside his profession in the mean time. And for the words if he had said, For
lack of skill of Surgery, etc. thou did kill him, will bear an Action; for
that is a slander to his profession. And if one had said, Go not to such a
one, for he has no skill in Surgery, if he be a Surgeon, if is
actionable. Or if of a Lawyer, Go not to such a one, etc. for he will deceive
you. And the Question will be, whether it ought to be intended that he killed
him for want of skill. If one says* Such a one was found dead, and you killed
him, there it should be intended murderously. And for the Case put by Crew. I
agree that a man may be a cause that another hangs himself by imagination. But
if one says, You did kill such a one as hanged himself, or cut his own throat,
that will bear an Action. And so it ought to be intended also, that when he
says of a Surgeon, etc. That it was for want of skill. Go not to such an
Inn, the Plague has been lately there. These words are actionable, for it
drives away Guests. Then these words were spoken to hinder him in his
profession and benefit. And because that he dyed under his hands, it ought to
be necessarily intended, that it was for want of skill. Harvey of the same
Opinion. Also there is sufficient matter to prove that he was a Surgeon at
the time of the speaking the words, etc. When he came to the words, it is say
that there was a speech between them, etc. and the speech was of his skill, and
of Matthews death. If he had said, Thou have killed I. S. or murdered I. S.
whereas he is living, that will not bear an Action. And so also it was that he
dyed of his disease it must be by consequence, that he did not kill him. But it
is said that he dyed, that may be by killing. And for that, the word kill
without doubt will bear an Action; for if it be not murder, it may be
Manslaughter And so it shall be intended if you cannot make a Justification,
as a Minister of Justice, or se defendendo. And then when he says that he
killed him, it shall be meant for want of skill, which is actionable. I. S.
has no more Law than a Horse. If he had resembled him to any thing but a
Beast, it would not maintain an action. But if he said, Go not to such a one.
etc. it is actionable without question. Slander of one in his Trade, will bear
an action. And so all being connexed alike, it ought to be intended that he
killed him in respect of his skill. In Cases of Defamation Sir George Hasting's
Case, Thou did lie in wait to kill me with a Pistol, were actionable. So if
one touch another in respect of his skill in that that he professes, it will
maintain an action, etc. And Yelverton to the same purpose; for there is a
difference between a Profession, and a particular Calling. As if words are
spoken of one that is a Justice of Peace, he ought to show that he was then a
Justice of Peace, for he is removable, and may be changed every Quarter
Sessions. But as to a Calling, the Calling of every man is his Free hold, 43 E.
3. Grant of an Annuity to one pro consilio, and he professes Divinity, Physic,
and Law, there the grant is pro consilio generally, for Physic if that be his
usual Profession. And it is intended that a man always dies in his Calling.
If he said to I. S. Thou art a murderer, it shall not be intended of Hares for
the Judges are not to search so far for construction. Loquendum ut vulgus
intelligendum et sapiens. If one says of a Merchant, Put not your Son to him,
for he will starve him to death. These words are actionable; for that that it
comes within the compass of the disgrace of his Profession. And so of a
Schoolmaster, Put not your Son to him, for he will come away as very a dunce as
he went. Harvey. If one says of a Judge, He is a corrupt Judge, it cannot be
meant of his body to be corrupt, but it shall be intended of his Profession.

Peitoes Case, before.
HEnden for the Defendant, the Case is thus* A Rent is granted for life out of
Lands which descend to the Heir, and he makes a Lease of parcel of the Land to
the Grantee for years, who surrenders the term. Whether the Rent shall revive
or suspend during the term. And it was said by him, it shall revive. First, For
that that it is the act of him, who is liable to the Rent, to accept the
surrender. And there is a difference, where there is a determination barely by
the act of the party, there it shall not be revived. For the first, 21 H. 7. 9.
Tenant in Tail of a Rent is infeoffed of Land, and he makes a Feoffment of Land
with a warranty to B. with Voucher, as of land discharged of that Rent. And so
it is 19 H. 6. 55. Ascue put this Case, Grantee of a rent in Fee and Donee in
Tail of Land, infeoffs the Grantee, who grants that over; and afterward the
issue in Tail recovers in a Formedon, yet the rent shall not be revived. But if
it had been the joint act of the parties, as so by surrender, it should have
been revived.

First, It is clear, that if a Chattell personal be suspended by Suit, it
shall be gone for ever. As if a Feme marries the Obligor. 11 H. 7. 25. unless
suspension be in another right; if it be by the act of the party, there it
shall be revived: As if a Feme Executrix marry with the Obligor, and he dies,
the suspension is determined, and they are revived against the Executors. 7 H.
6. 2. In one Gascoines Case. Lessee surrenders to the Lessor, upon condition
the rent be suspended; but if the Lessor enter, for conditions broken, the Rent
is revived. Which in effect is our case. A rent is granted to the Daughter, and
the land descends to her and her other Sister, who make partition. The Rent is
revived: for it is the joint act of both parties. Plow. 15. If a man had a
Rent, and disseises the Tenant of the land, and after the Disseisee reenters.
Where there is a revivor of the land, there is a revivor of the Rent; for the
disseisin was the cause of the suspension, and that now is gone.

Secondly, Because that when the Lessee for years surrenders, the term is
determined to all purposes, and the Lessor is in of his Estate is Fee; and
there is a diversity of surrender in respect of a stranger; for to a stranger
it may have Essence after surrender. But as to himself it is otherwise extinct.
And he cannot say that it had any Essence. 5 H. 5. 12. But in respect of a
stranger it has continuance, as if an Executor surrenders, yet it shall be
assets. And all acts done upon Lessee for ltfe before surrender, shall have a
continuance after. And so he prayed Judgment for the Avowant. But more after.

Wakeman against Hawkins.
IT was said, That if an Executor was sued in this Court by Original, he shall
not put in Bayl. But if he be arrested in an inferior Court, and removed by
Habeas corpus, he ought to put in Bayl.

Stamford and Coopers Case.
STamford and Coopers Case was thus. I. S. acknowledges a Statute to Cooper the
22 January, and afterward he confesses a Judgment to Stamford the 23 of
January next ensuing the Statute. And it is extended. And Stamford brought a
Scire fac, against Cooper (to wit now) because he ought not to have the land by
Elegit. And the Question was, whether the Judgment by relation shall defeat
the Statute. And it was resolved, That the Judgment shall have relation to the
Essoin day, which is the 20 day of January, for that is the first day of the
term legally; and the fourth day after is the first day of the Term open. Dyer
361. Pla. 10. A Release was pleaded after the last continuance, and it bore
date the 21 of January, which was after the day of Essoin, de Octab. Hill. And
for that naught, because that it came late; for it ought to have been after the
last continuance, and before the last day, etc. 33 H 6. 45. Nisi prius was
taken after the day of the return, and before the fourth day after; and
adjudged naught, because that the day of the return, which is the Utas, is the
first day of the term, and the fourth day after but a day of Grace, and that is
the difference. If a man be obliged to pay money the first day of the Term, he
shall not pay it but upon the fourth day after, for that is the first day in
all common acceptance. But in all legal proceedings, the first day is the
Essoin day. And so it was adjudged. 16 Eliz. And in the Kings Bench it was in
one Williams Case. A Judgment was given the 20 of January, and a Release of
all Errors the 21 January, and adjudged that that bars the Judgment given the
20 January; although it was not entered the fourth day after. A Justice in the
Kings Bench examined an Infant upon inspection the Essoin day, and found him to
be under age and would not permit him to confess a Judgment, although that he
would have come to full age the fourth day after. The Court agreed that one may
be nonsuited the Essoyn day; and if he confess an Action that day, it shall be
good. And thereupon Judgment was given that by the relation, the Statute
should be avoided, etc.

Crookes Case.
A Feme sole leases at the will of the Lessor, and after the Feme takes an
husband. If by the taking of the Baron, the will of the Feme be determined, and
it was thought not.

Fenne against Thomas. Hill. 3 Car. Com. Banc.

A Man inhabiting in the most remote part of England, was arrosted eight times
by Latitat, and no Declaration is put in. Banco Reg.
And the Counsel prayed Costs for the Defendant. The Prothonotary said that he
shall not have Costs, unless he come in person. But Richardson said on the
contrary, and he shall have Costs; for it appears that he had been put to
travel, and a day given to show cause why the Costs shall not be given.

Spark against Spark.
SPark brought an Ejectione firmae against Spark, for lands in Hawkschurch in
the County of Dorset. The Case was, a Copy was leased for a year except one
day, and that was found in the Verdict to be warranted by the Custom. The sole
Question is, if an Ejectione firmae lies. And by Hutton, If Tenant at will
makes a Lease for years, an Ejectione firma lies; but if it be a Copyhold for
years, an Ejectione firmae will not be maintained.

Deakins's Case.
IT was said at the Bar, and not gain-sayed, If a man perjure himself against
two, the one by himself cannot have an Action upon the Statute, but they ought
to join; for he is not the only party grieved.

Bentons Case.
A Man Leases for life, and afterward Leases for years to commence after the
death of the Lessee for life, rendering Rent, the Reversion is granted. Tenant
for life dies, Lessee for years does not attourn. And it seemed, That the
reversion passes without Attournment. And he shall have Debt, or shall Avow.

Williams against Thirkill.
AN ^ion of Debt was brought by Williams against Thirkill, Executor of I. S.
who pleads a Receipt against him of 300. l. over and above which non, etc. The
Plaintiff replies that the receipt was by Covin. And so they are at issue, and
it was found for the Plaintiff, and judgment was entered de bonis Testatoris.
And it was said by the by in this Case, That Debt by Paroll may be forgiven or
discharged by Paroll.

Ploughman a Constables Case.
PLoughman a Constable suffers one, who was arrested pro quadam felonia antea
fact. to Escape. And because it is not showed what Felony it was, and when it
was done (for it may be it was done before the General Pardon) the party was
discharged.

Hobsons Case.
Upon an Indictment of Forcible Entry Quod ingress. est unum Messuag. inde
existens liberum Tenement. I. S. And because he does not say Adtunc existens;
and without that it cannot refer to the present time (scilicet) of the
Indictment, He was discharged.

Sir Thomas Holt against Sir Thomas Sandbach.
SIr Thomas Holt brought Trespass against Sir Thomas Sandbach quare vi and
armis. Because, whereas the Plaintiff had used time out of mind, etc. to have a
Watercourse by the Land of the Defendant; So that the water run through the
Land of the Defendant, to the Land of the Plaintiff. The Defendant (he said)
had vi and armis made a certain Bank in his own Land, so that the water could
not have his direct course as it was wont to have. Harvey, It seems to me that
the Action does not lie. For a man cannot have an action of Trespass against me
vi and armis for doing of a thing in my own Soil. But Trespass vi and armis
lies against a Stranger, who comes upon the Land and takes away my Cattle; And
such like things: but not in this Case. But he may have an Assise of Nuisance.
As in Case where one makes an House joining to my House; So that it darkens my
House, by the erection of a new House; I may have an Assise of Nuisance against
him who does it. But Crook was on the contrary. But it seemed to Richardson,
that he shall have Trespass on his Case, but not vi and armis. And to that
which has been said, That if one build a House to the nuisance of another upon
his own Land, That he to whom the nuisance is done, may have an Assise of
Nuisance, that is true; And also if he will he may pull and beat down such an
House, so built to his Nuisance; if he can do if upon his own Land. But he
cannot come upon the Land of the other, where the Nuisance is done to beat it
down per que, etc. Hutton of the same opinion. By which it was awarded that the
Writ shall abate. And he put to his Action upon the Case.

Hitcham moved a Case to the Justices. One I. by Indenture covenants with an
other that he should pay him annually during his life 20 l. at the Feast of St.
Michael, or within 20 days after, 10 l. and at the Feast of our Lady, or
within 20 days after, 10 l. The Grantee before the 20 days pass, and after
the Feast of our Lady dies. If the Executors of the Grantee shall have the Rent
or not. And the Justices, Hutton being absent said, That it was a good Case.
And said that the Executors shall not have it; Because it is not at all due,
until the 20th day be past.

Fawkners Case.
A Lease was made to one for 40 years, the Lessee makes his Testament, and by
that devises it the term to I. S. for term of his life, if he shall live until
the said term be expired; And if he dies before the years expire, then the
remainder of the years to F. for term of his life, and if he die before the
term be expired, the remainder of the years to the Churchwardens of S. I. If
the remainder to the said Church shall be good or not was the Question. Because
that the Wardens of the Church are not coporate so that they may take by that
Grant. Hutton and Harvy said that the Remainder was not good to them. And said
that the first Remainder was not good.

Peter's against Field.
A Bill obligatory was showed to the Court, in Debt brought upon it; And in the
end of the Bill were these words, In witness whereof I have hereunto set my
hand, and he had writ his name, and put to his Seal also. And because no
mention was made in the Bill of no Seal to be put to the Bill, It was moved to
the Justices, If the Bill be good or not. And it was agreed by the whole Court
that the Bill was good enough.

Tomlinsons Case.
A Parson makes a Lease for 21 years, The Patron and Ordinary confirm his
Estate for 7 years; the Parson dies, The Question is, Whether that confirmation
made the Lease good for 21 years, or but for 7 years. And it seemed to Hutton,
that the Lease was confirmed but for 7 years. But Richardson was of the
contrary opinion, and took a difference, where they confirm the Estate, and
where they confirm the Land for 7 years; That Confirmation confirms all his
Estate; But where they confirm the Land for 7 years; That Confirmation shall
not enure but according to the Confirmation. And that difference was agreed by
Crook, and all the Sergeants at the Bar. And afterward Hutton said, That that
was a good Case to be considered, and to be moved again.

Jacobs's Case.
A Man was indicted at Newgate, For that he feloniously vi and armis had robbed
a man in a certain Kings foot-way leading to London from Highgate. And upon
that he was arraigned and found guilty; And having his judgment, he prayed his
Clergy for that he was a Clark And the Justices of Gaol delivery doubted if he
should have his Clergy or not, Because the Statute, if any man be taken upon
Felony committed on the High way, he shall not have his Clergy. But the
Indictment was in this case, that the Felony was done in alta via reg.
pedestri. So that the words are not alta via regia, nec in magna via regia, nec
in via regia. For if that word pedestri had been put out of the Indictment, he
should not have had his Clergy clearly. Some of the Justices were of opinion,
that that word added in the Indictment made that he should not have his Clergy.
The Lord chief Baron of the contrary opinion.

Perkins against Butterfield.
HItcham moved to the Justices, If one takes Beasts Damage feasant, and
impounds them in an House, and leaves the Door open, So that the Owner may see
them and give them sustenance; And afterward for default of Sustenance they
dye in the Pound. Whether he who distreyned them shall be charged or not.
Hutton, when one takes Beasts Damage feasant in his Land. It is at his
Election, if he will impound them in an open place where the Pound is, or in
some place in his own Land. And if he impound them in the common Pound, and the
Beasts dye, the Owner has no remedy. But if they be impounded upon the Soil
where they did the Damage: or in the Houses of him who distreyned them, and
they dye for want of Food, In this he who took them shall be charged. For the
Common Pound is common to all Persons, so that they may come to give them food.
Otherwise in this case, For there the Owner cannot have notice where he has
made his Pound. Richardson of the same opinion. And I believe that the Owner
shall have an action upon his Case against the Owner for the recovery of the
value of his Cattle. For trespass does not lie; For the taking of them and the
impounding was lawful. And it is reason that he should recover the value of
them by an Action. For if the Owner had come to have given them food, the
Terre-tenant would have an action against him. Hitcham, The taking of them is
made a Trespass ab initio, when the Beasts dyed in Pound.

Wimberly against Tailor et alios.
VVImberly had entered a Plaint in a Court Baron against two jointly, for taking
of his Goods; And the Plaintiff had removed the Plaint by a Recordare jointly,
as the Plaint is. And now at this time the Plaintiff counts of taking of Goods
severally. So that it varies from the Plaint and the Recordare also. And Ward
moved that the Writ might abate. And so it was adjudged by Hutton and the
Justices.

Wilkinsons Case.
IT was moved at the Bar, If a Man makes a Lease for years to I. S. I. N. and
I. D. If the aforesaid I. S. etc. should so long live; And now one of the
Lessees is dead. If the whole Lease should be determined or not was the
Question. And Hutton and Harvey said, That it was without doubt that the Lease
was determined by the death of one of them. But if the words had been
generally. If the Lessees should so long live, and had not named them, Then
perchance it should have been more doubtful.

The Executors of Tomlins's Case.
ATthowe demanded this Question of the Justices. A Lease is made for years, the
Lessee grants over his Estate and reserves to him and his Heirs during the term
a certain Rent. If the Executors or the Heir of the heir shall have that Rent.
And it seems to me, that it shall enure to the heir well enough. As a Grant
made by the Grantee of the estate of the same Rent. So the Heir shall take by
the Grant Harvy, May the Heir take Chattel as Heir to his Father And this Rent
is but a Chattel. And in the Book of Assise; there is a Case where Lands are
given to I. S. et uni haeredi suo, et uni haeredi ipsius haeredis tantum. And
that was taken to be no Fee-simple; Nor no such Estate that the Heir might
claim as Heir to his Father. But I am in doubt of your Case truly. For which I
will advise. Hitcham, Upon that I have seen a Diversity. Where Lands are given
to I. S. et haeredi suo, et haeredi haeredis I. S. In that Case he shall have a
Fee-simple; Otherwise it is, where Lands are given to I. S. et haeredi suo;
There no Fee-simple passes. Richardson, There no Fee-simple passes in any of
the Cases. And it was said in the Argument, That Lessee shall not have Trespass
vi et armis against his Lessor.

Whiddon's Case.
A Man devises by his Testament to his Daughrer Jane all his Land in D.
habendum sibi et haered. de corpore suo legitime proc. And by the same
Testament he devises to his Daughter Anne, all his Land in the tenure of I. S.
in the County of Hertford. Whereas in truth D. was in the County of Hertford,
and parcel of the Lands were in the tenure of I. S. Whether Jane shall have the
Lands in D. in the tenure of I. S. by the first words; Or Anne shall have them
by the last words. Harvey; The Testator had given them by his first words to
Jane. Wherefore he cannot revoke his Gift, and give it afterward to another
Daughter. But all the Justices were of the contrary opinion.

A Case of Executors.
IF Executors come to the Ordinary for to prove the Will; He ought to prove it
ex communi jure. And that he may do without great examination of the Witnesses.
But if other Executors come afterward to prove a later Will; Then the Ordinary
ought to be circumspect in the probation of that Will, and to do it by proofs;
For that is de mero Jure. And it is the better and of more effect, by Atthowe.

Challoner against Ware.
A Man makes a Lease for years, reserving a certain rent payable at the Feast
of St. Michael. And for default of payment at the said day, and by the space of
40 days after, That it shall be lawful to the Lessor to reenter without any
demand of the Rent. The Rent is in arrear by 40 days after the Feast of Saint
Michael, and no demand of the Rent made by the Lessor; Whereupon the Lessor
entered. If that Entry were lawful was the Question. And by Hutton it is not.
For a demand of the Rent is given by the Common law between Lessor and Lessee:
And notwithstanding the words (without any demand) it remains as it was before.
And is not altered by them. But if the Rent had been reserved payable at
another place, than upon the Land; There the Lessor may enter without any
demand. But where no place is limited but upon the Land, otherwise it is.
Richardson to the contrary. For when he had covenanted that he might enter
without any demand; The Lessee had dispensed with the Common law by his own
Covenant. As the Lessor might by his Covenant, when he makes a Lease Sans
impeachment dl waste, He had dispensed with the Common law, which gives the
Action of Waste. Harvey of the same opinion. If a Man leases Lands for years
with a Clause, That if the Rent be in Arrear by forty days after the day of
payment; That the term shall cease; If the Rent be in arrear by the said forty
days after the day of payment, The Lessor may enter without request.

Conyers's Case.
ONe Thompson makes a Lease for forty years, to Conyers by Indenture, and in
the same Indenture covenants, and grants to the Lessee, That he shall take
convenient House-boot, Fire-boot, and Cart-boot in toto bosco suo vocato S.
wood within the Parish of S. And those Woods are not parcel of the Land leased,
but other Lands.

Atthow, I would fain know your opinion, if that Grant of Estovers out of an
other place, than was the Lease, be good? Also what Estate the Grantee of
House-boot, and Fire-boot shall have by that. For the words are from time to
time, and has limited no time in certain. And lastly, If the Lessee be
excluded to have House-boot and Fire-boot in the Land leased; or if he shall
have in both places. Also if the Executors by that Grant to the Lessee shall
have House-boot and Fire boot. And it was agreed by Hutton and Harvey, That
that Grant was good, and that the Grantee shall have it during the Term. And
that that grant does not restrain him But that he shall have house-boot and
fire-boot in the land leased also. Atthowe. If there be no great Timber upon
the land leased, and the houses are in decay* if the Lessor ought to find and
allow to the Lessee sufficient Timber for the making the reparations; or if the
Lessee at his own costs ought to find the Timber for the reparations of the
house. Hutton said, That the great Timber shall be at the costs of the Lessor,
if no Timber be upon the land leased, nor no default be in the Lessee in
suffering the great timber to go to decay or to putrify. And it was agreed, if
the Lessor cut a tree and carry it out of the Land, That the Lessee may have an
Action of Trespass; And if Stranger cut a tree, the lessee shall have an action
of Trespass and recover treble damages; As the lessor should recover against
him in an action of waste

Wakemans Case,
A Man seized of a Manor parcel demesne, and parcel in service, devises by
his Testament to his wife during her life all the demesne lands; and also by the
same Testament he devises to her all the services of chief Rents for 15 years.
And moreover by the same Testament he devises the same Manor to another after
the death of his wife. And it was agreed by all the Justices, That the devise
shall not take effect for no part of the Manor, as to the stranger, until
after the death of the wife. And that the heir after the 15 years passed,
during the life of the wife, shall have the services and chief Rents.

Jenkins against Dawson.
IN a Formedon, the Demandant makes his Conveyance in the Writ, by the gift of
I. S. who gave it to ^. D. er haeredibus de corp. suo legitime procreat. And
shows in the Writ that he was heir to the Son and heir of I. D. Son and heir
of W. D. the Donee. And Hitcham demanded Judgment of the Writ, for this Cause.
And the Court said that the Writ was not good; for he ought not to make mention
in the Writ, of every heir, as he does here. But he ought to make himself heir
to him who dyed last seized of the Estate Tail, as his Father or other
Ancestor. Also that word procreat. ought not to be in the Writ, but Exeuntibus.
But the Court thought that it might be amended. And Harvey said, If false Latin
be in the Writ, it shall be amended; as if in a Formedon the Writ be
Consanguineus, where it should have been Consanguineo. Hutton and all the other
Justices said, that that might be amended by the Statute.

Saulkells Case.
IN an Attaint the grand Jury appeared, and the petit Jury and the parties
also, and one Rudstone Master of the Servant in the Attaint, came to the Bar,
and there spoke in the matter, as if he had been of counsel with his Servant.
Crawley said to him, Are you a party to this Suteor for what cause do you speak
at the Bar? And he answered, that he had done this for his Servant And if he
had done any thing against the Law he knew not so much before. Hutton, You may,
if you did owe any money to your Servant for his wages, give to his Counsel so
much as is behind of it, and that is not maintenance: Or you may go with your
Servant to retein Counsel for him; So that your Servant pay for his Counsel.
But that that you have done is apparent maintenance. And the Kings Sergeant
prayed; That he may be awarded to the Fleet and pay a Fine. And Hutton upon
advise sent him to the Fleet.

Wiggons against Darcy.
DArcy was in Execution upon a Statute Merchant, and his Body and Goods were
taken. And the Conisee agreed that the Conisor should go at large, and he went
at large. Atthowe moved, If that were a discharge of the Execution or not. And
Richardson said it was. For his imprisonment is for his Execution. And if he
release his imprisonment he releases his Execution. And so if two men be in
Execution for one Debt, and the Plaintiff releases to one of them, That is a
release to both. And so if one had two acres in Execution, and the Plaintiff
release the Execution of one of them, It enures to both. Harvey on the contrary
opinion. Yet I will agree, That if a man be one time in Execution, The
Plaintiff shall not another time have an Execution. For after a cap. ad
satisfac. an Elegit does not lie. But in the Case where the Conisee does
release the imprisonment only, and not the Execution (for it is not but a
liberty given by the Conisee to the Conisor to be at large) That does not
release the Execution.

Dolbins Case.
IN a Replevin the parties were at Issue, and the Plaintiff sued a Venire f. c.
returnable such a day, at which day the Sheriff does not return the Writ;
Wherefore the Avowant by Ward prayed a Venire fac. with a proviso for him. And
it was granted by the whole Court.

Fossams Case.
A Man after the Statute of 27 H. 8. makes a Feoffment in Fee to the use of
himself for term of his life, and after his decease, to the use of I. S. and
his Heirs. The Feoffor does waste; And I. S. brought his Action of Waste. And
now if his Writ shall be general or special was the Demur in Judgment. And
Hutton, and the other Justices were clearly of opinion, That the Plaintiff
ought to have a special Writ. And so it was adjudged afterward.

Doswell against James.
IN Debt brought upon an Obligation, James shows that the Obligation was
endorsed with a Condition to perform all the Covenants comprised in an
Indenture, and he pleads that all the Covenants were fulfilled; And does not
show in certainty the Covenants, nor how they were performed. And Hitcham said,
that the Plea was not good. For there is a Diversity, when one pleads in the
Affirmative and when in the Negative. For if in the Affirmative he shows in the
certainty how the Condition or Covenants were performed. And there is no
diversity in my opinion, between the Conditions which were upon the dorsed
Obligation, and the Covenants in the Indenture. And it is to be thought, that
he who knows more of the Truth, should show it in his Plea. And therefore he
who pleads the Affirmative, shows how the Conditions are performed. Because it
lies much in his knowledge; Whether he has performed them or not. But where he
pleads in the Negative otherwise it is. For there he is not to show the
certainty. And yet I will agree, that if one brings an Action of Debt upon an
Obligation indorsed with a Condition, The Defendant may plead the Conditions
performed generally. But otherwise it is of Covenants in an Indenture. And in
an Obligation with a Condition endorsed, if he pleads the Conditions performed,
and he shows what thing he has done; If it be in the Affirmative, he ought to
show the certainty of it also. So that for that cause the Plea will not avayl.
Also it is uncertain and doubtful to the Jury. For if in that Case, we are at
Issue upon such a general Plea, Although it shall be tried by the Jury, Yet it
would be strange to enquire of such general things. Wherefore, etc.

Gerrard against Boden.
AN Annuity was brought by Gerrard against the Parson of B. And the Plaintiff
counts, That the said Parson granted an Annuity of 40 l. pro bono consilio suo
imposter. impenso, for term of life of the said Parson. And for 30 l. of
arrerages this Action was brought. Finch, thought the Count not to be good. And
first it is to be considered, If that Annuity might be assigned and granted
over or not. And as I think it cannot. For an Annuity is not but as a sum of
money, to be paid to the Grantee by the Grantor. And not at all to the realty,
if the Land be not charged by express words in the same Deed. And to prove it,
If a man grant an Annuity to me and my Heirs, without naming of my Heirs; If
the Annuity be denied, it is gone; Because my Person is only charged with the
Annuity, and not the Land. So if a man grants to you the Stewardship of his
Manor of D. and to your Heirs, you cannot grant that over. And so of a
Bayliwick. But peradventure it may be said, That an Annuity may be granted over
in this Case. Because in the Habendum, It is said to the Assignees of the
Grantee. But that is nothing to the purpose, as I think. For I take a
difference when a thing comes in the Habendum of a Deed, which declares the
Premises of the Deed; For there it shall be taken effectual, but otherwise
not. As if Lands be given to a man and his Heirs habendum sibi and haered de
corpore suo procreat. That is a good tail. But if a thing comes in the Habend.
which is repugnant to the Premises of the Deed, and to the matter of the thing
which is given by the Deed, Then the Habend. is void for that parcel. As in the
Case at Bar, it is merely contrary to the nature of the Annuity to be assigned
over to another. And there is no remedy given for it but an Action, and it is
Common learning, that a thing in Action cannot be assigned over unless it be by
the grant of the King. Also by their Declaration, they have acknowledged it to
be no more than a chose in action. Then a Rent seck for which he had not any
other remedy but an Action after Seisin. For he said that he was seized in his
Demesne as of Franktenement of the Rent aforesaid. Then it ought to be a
Rent-seck. For of no other Rent can a man be seized in his Demesne; because they
lie in prend. As of Advowsons common for years, and of Estovers. And I will not
agree that difference put by Littleton in his Book to this purpose. For of such
things which lie in manual occupation or receipt, A man shall not say that he
was seized in his Demesne as of a Rent. Because it lies in the prend. Pasc. 4
Car. Com. Hanc.
And in the 21 E. 4. The Case is doubtful. And Crawley of the same opinion.
Hitcham of the contrary. And at another day Hutton said that the parties were
agreed. Hitcham, We desire to have your opinion notwithstanding for our
learning. Hutton said, We are agreed, that the Annuity may be granted over, and
it is not so much in the personalty as has been argued by Finch. And in some
Books it is said, that a Release of personal Actions is not a Plea in a Writ of
Annuity.

Groves against Osborn.
THe Case was thus, A man makes a Lease for life, the Remainder for life upon
Condition, that if the second Lessee for life dye in the life of the first
Lessee; That the Remainder in fee shall be to another. And it was said, That
that Remainder might commence upon that Condition well enough. It was said by
Atthowe, That where a Remainder depends upon a determination of another Estate,
So that none shall take any Estate by the Remainder upon Condition, then the
Remainder is good. As if a man give Lands to A. for life, upon Condition, that
if I. S. pay me 40 s. before such a day: That the Remainder shall be to him;
That is a good Remainder. But when an Estate is to be defeated by a Remainder
depending upon that, Then the Remainder is not good. As if I lease Lands for
life, upon Condition, That if the Rent be in arrear that the Remainder shall be
to a Stranger, that Remainder is not good. Hutton said, that in my opinion my
Brother Atthow spoke well, and so it was affirmed.

Bateman against Ford.
AN action of the Case was brought against Ford, who had called the Plaintiff
Thief, and that he had stolen from him a yard of Velvet, and a yard of Damask.
The Defendant said, that he said that the Plaintiff had taken and bribed from
him as much money, as he had for a yard of Velvet and Damask, and justifies
Hitcham said, that the Justification is not good. For the words that he
justifies do, not amount to so much as to affirm a Felony in the Plaintiff,
where the Plaintiff counts that the Defendant slandered him of a Felony. Hutton
said. What difference is there, when you say that I have bribed your Horse, and
when you say that I have robbed you of your Horse? Henden, one may take Goods,
and yet it is not felony.

Termino Pasc. Anno 4. Car. Regis Com. Banc.
Norris against Isham,
IN an Eject. firm. by Norris against Isham, These things happened in Evidence
to the Jury. First it was cited by Richardson and Hutton to be Hurtltons Case.
That an Eject. firm. cannot be of a Manor, Because that there cannot be an
Ejectment of the Services: But if they do express further a quantity of acres
it is sufficient. It was said by Crook Justice, and not denied; That if a Lease
is made of 5 acres to try a Title in an ^eject. firm. And of the 3 acres he
will make a lease. But in the other a he will not; If the livery be in the 3
acres the other 2 does not pass. Part of the Evidence was, That the Countess of
Salisbury being seized of the Lands in Question, makes a Lease of them by words
of Demise, Bargain, and Sale to Judge Crook for a Month, to begin the 29
September, habendum a datu, and it was deliveted the 3 of September. And the
same day he bargains and sells the Reversion. Davenport, Because that no Entry
appears by the Lessees by virtue of the Demise, he submitted to the Court, If
there was any such Reversion in the Grantor he bring in possession, And this
difference was a greed; That if one demises Lands for years, and Grants the
Reversion before Entry of the Lessee. The Grant is void. As it is in Saffins
Case. Cook 5. 12. 46. But if a man bargain and sell for years, and grants the
Reversion before Entry of the Lessee, it is good. For the Statute transfers the
Possession to the use. As if a man bargain and sells in fee or for life, and
the Deed is enrolled. The Bargainee is in possession of the Frank-tenement. And
so it is of a Lease for years which is a Chattell. And by Crook, In the Court
of Wards that very point was resolved. Davenport, Also there are words of
Demise, and Bargain, and Sale, before which the Lessee had his Election to take
by which he would. As Sir Rowland Heyards Case is. But by Hutton, and it was
not denied. He should be in by the Bargain and Sale before Election; For that
is more for his advantage. Further the Evidence was, That George Earl of
Salisbury made a Lease of those Lands which were a Manor, And makes a
Conveyance from himself for life with diverse Remainders; and then to the use of
the Daughter or Daughters of the said George. And the heirs males of thrir
bodies the remainder to the heirs of the body of the said George, etc. and had
3 Daughters to whom the Remainder. The first dyed without Issue the, 2 d. dyed
having Issue male, the 3 d. bargains and sells all her half part, and pur part
to Edw. Earl of Salisbury; Who now being seized of a third part of the Estate
of Inheritance, and of the other two parts for his life, and the lives of the 3
Daughters, suffers a common recovery by the name of the moiety of the Manor.
And the doubt was, what passed. Richardson, By that there is not passed but the
moiety of the third part. Hutton, Crook, and Yeiverton were on the contrary
opinion, and said that by that, All the third part passed also. Yelverton, If a
man be seized of the manor of Dale, and buys half for life of another in fee,
and makes a Feoffment of the half of the Manor; The moiety which he had in Fee
shall pass. And there shall be a forfeiture for no part. Which was agreed by
the Court. If a man be seized of the third part, and grants the moiety, perhaps
the moiety of the third part only passes. But he is seized of all. Richardson,
There are several Estates, and moiety goes to that Estate which he had in the
Manor. For when I grant more than I can grant, that which passes passes. Crook
I had the third part of a Manor, and grant the moiety of the Manor; all my
third part passes. But in the Bargain and Sale, the words were part et pur
part. Which as it was passed all. And also the Covenant to the Lessor; The
Recovery was of the half part and pur part. And by Hutton, Crook, Yelverton,
All was intended to be recovered, And then the word Moiety carries that
tresbien. Richardson, That Indentures of Covenant much mends the Case. Another
Question upon the Evidence was, Whether when a Bargain and sale is made of
Lands; And the Bargainee before inrollment makes a Lease for years, and
afterward it is enrolled. If the Lease now be good. Richardson and Yelverton,
It shall be, that although it be after acknowledgement, and before inrollment,
yet it is naught. And by Yelverton and Crook it was so adjudged in Bellingham
and Hortons Case; That if one sells in fee, and before inrollment, the
Bargainee bargains and sells to another; And afterward comes an Inrollment.
That second Bargain and sale is void. And an other Question was. Pasc. 4. Car.
Com. Banc.
If one makes a Lease for years, by Indenture, of Lands which he had not; If
the Jury be estopped to find that no Lease. And by Richardson, If the finding
that no Lease be subject to an attaint. But they should find the special
matter. And then the Judges would judge that a good Lease. And Sergeant Barkley
cited Rawlins's Case, Coo. 4. 43. to that purpose. Crook and Hutton against
him. And Crook said, That it was adjudged in London in Samms case, That that is
not an Estoppel to the Jury. Which was affirmed by Hutton. And that they may
find the special matter; And then the Judges ought to find that it is not a
good Lease. And Hutton said, That there is a difference between a special
Verdict and pleading in that case. For in special pleading and Verdict is
confost by all parties* That he had not any thing in the Lease. And then the
Judges gave Judgment accordingly.

The King against Clough.
IN the case of a Quare impedit by the King against Clough before, Richardson
showed how the Quare impedit was brought by King James, and Demurrer joined
then, and after they demised to the King, whereof the Court was not before
informed. Wherefore although that for the matter they then showed their
opinions; Yet they were all resolved, That the Quare impedit ought to abate.
And that Brownlowe chief Prothonotary had showed them, a Resolution in King
James's time in this Court, by all the Judges to this purpose, and the
difference of the Information. For after the Demise to the King, the
information stood. As it is so it cannot be aided by the Kings Court. Nor is it
within that Statute of 1 E. 6. 7. For that Statute is between party and party.
In debt for Recusancy where another brought an action in Right of the Crown.

Jacob against Jacob.
IN Debt, The Issue was, Whether the money was paid or not. And the venue was
laid of the Parish of Ipswich, and the return of the Sheriff was of Woolbridge.
And Hitcham said, That there is not any venue. And the Defendant upon the
Statute (if there be any trial) if any part of the venue be laid in the Trial)
is aided. But if there be not any part laid, then he is not aided. Richardson
said, If an action of Debt be brought of Trespass done at Dale, where not
guilty being pleaded, the visue is de vicenet. de Dale, and the return is de
Dale, That is not good. Hi^cham Sergeant affirmed that it was. Richardson and
Hutton also agreed. Nomina Iurata to be good; And then what Action soever the
Sheriff does is not material, and the Writ is right. Hitcham, I confess for any
man (collaterally) to inform that there is not any thing of Ipswich shall not
be allowed. But so it appears to us upon the Record. Richardson, it may be
intended. That Woolbridge is de vicenet. de Ipswich. And adjourned. But
afterward it appeared, That the Venire fac. was of Woolbridge. And then all
agreed that it was naught. And a new Venire fac, ought to issue, etc.

Swintons Case.
SWinton assigns Debt upon an Obligation to another, who sues in his name, and
declares upon an Ohligation of 70 l. And the Defendant pleads non est factum.
And a special verdict was found, That the Defendant was bound to Swinton, per
quoddam scriptum Obligatorium gerens dat. eisdem die and anno, As the
Obligation upon which the Declaration was, cujus tenor sequitur in haec verba,
etc. And the Obligation was in 70 l. and that that is the same Obligation which
was given in evidence. But whether that is the same, as it should be, which
they declare, Juratores penitus ignorant, etc. Davenport, for the Defendant
prays Judgment: and alleges that the Verdict is per quoddam. And therefore it
cannot be intended to be the same obligation upon which he declared. For then
it ought to be praedict. But Hutton and Yelverton thought the Verdict to be
good. For they found the same date, etc. But your Question to us is, Whether
that Variance makes pluralities of Bonds. But for the matter of Variance,
Davenport thought that it is material. In the Kings Bench it was one Parryes
Case in an Obligation of 500 l. There it was quimpe pro quinque. And adjudged
to be naught. Richardson, I confess the Case in H. 6. where it is Wiginti for
Viginti, and yet good. For there is some color of likeness. But if the word be
no latin word; So that nothing can be known what was intended; it is
otherwise. So one Randalls Case, One was bound by these words, in quatuor
centum libris. Whereupon it was doubted, Whether it was to be intended 400 l.
or 104 l. And it was adjudged naught. Upon which it seemed to be naught here.
And so seemed Hutton and Yelverton being only present.

Gammon against Malbarn.
IN an Assumpsit to pay 34 l. which accrew'd upon several promises, First he
surmised that one was indebted to him in 12 l. And that he would trust him
more; The Defendant came and prayed him to trust him, and if he would, he would
pay him the old debt. And whatsoever he should be in arrear more, if it did not
exceed 100 l. he would pay, and shows how he afterward sold to him diverse
pieces of Flesh at reasonable prices; And that he lent him 3 l. which he
promised to pay. And then he came and requested him to pay the whole 34 l. But
he would not pay the 19 l. for the price of Flesh, nor the 12 l. etc. Henden
moved in arrest of Judgment ( non Assumpsit being pleaded and found for the
Plaintiff) because that he does not allege before, That the Flesh that he sold
amounted to the price of 19 l. And Secondly, because that he makes but one
Request for the several Debts, where it ought to have been several, etc. Hutton
and Yelverton thought all good. For the first, Because that he refused to pay
the 19 l. pro pretio, etc. But it had been better if he had alleged; That the
Flesh amounted to such a price. But for the Demand, that it was sufficiently
made. And adjourned, etc.

Benson against Sankeridge.
IN an Assumpsit upon an Insimul computaverint, The Plaintiff declares, That he
accounted for diverse sums of money to him due; And that the Defendant was found
in arrear as much as he assumed to pay; And does not express for what the sums
were due; And by Richardson, therefore naught. For such an account for debt upon
an Obligation in specialty it is void, etc. Hutton If he declared, That the
Defendant being indebted in diversis denariorum summis, assumed; it is void,
without showing for what. But here the action is grounded upon the Account.
Richardson, It ought to be expressed in general, the debts were for Wares sold,
etc. But otherwise if the Account was for debt upon an Obligation or specialty,
he recovers double. For the specialty remains notwithstanding the recovery in
the Assumpsit. Hutton, We cannot think that it is for any thing, but such
things which lie in account. Which Harvey agreed. But the Court commanded to
search Presidents.

Holford against Gibbes.
HOlford brought an Action upon the Case against Gibbes and his wife, who was
Administratrix, upon a promise of the Intestate, which appears in the
Declaration, that it was 16 years since the promise made. And Sir Thomas Crew
prayed to be discharged of the Declaration upon the Statute of 21 Iac. cap. 16.
But the Court would not discharge him without pleading or demurrer. But it was
agreed, That if upon the showing of the Plaintiff himself, the Action appears
to be out of the Statute of Limitations; Then the Defendant ought to plead the
Statute, And he shall be aided by the averment. Richardson, If the Defendant
pleads non Assumpsit, and the verdict finds that the Action grew out of the
time of Limitation: whether it shall be aided by a special Verdict. Crook said,
Yea, But Yelverton seemd not; For it is not pertaining to the Issue.

Ganfords Case.
ONe Ganford was bound in an Obligation of 200 l. to Char. Rogers, to pay him
100 l. But that was in trust to the use of Mary Watkins, during her life, and
after to George Powell. Powell cannot release that bond, neither in Law nor
Equity, during the life of the Wife. For then it destroys the use to the Wife;
As it was agreed. But if it was to her benefit solely, The Release is good in
Equity.

Woolmerstons Case.
ONe libells against Woolmerston for the herbage of young Cattle, (^cil.) for a
penny for every one. And Hitcham moved for a Prohibition; And said that he
ought not to have Tithes, If they are young Beasts brought up for the Cart or
Plough. And so it has been adjudged. As if a Parson prescribe to have Tithes
for hedgeing stuff, he cannot. Because that he preserves the Land out of which
he had Tithes. And then a Parson libells for Tithes of an Orchard, for that
that it was a young Orchard. And the Custom of the place was, to pay 4 d. for
an Orchard. Hitcham said, There is not any such difference between old and new
Orchards. For if the Custom be that he shall pay 4 d. for every Orchard, It
will reach to the new Orchard. And then he libells for a Harth-penny, for the
Wood burnt in his House. Hutton said, the Harth-penny etc. is more doubtful.
For it is a Custom in the North parts to give an Harth-penny for Estovers
burnt. For which he prescribes to be free of every thing which comes to the
Fire. And in some parts by the Custom they had pasturage for the Tenth Beast,
or the tenth part of the Gains which is barrain for the time. But he and
Yelverton who only were present, That no Tithes are due for them without
Custom. Hitcham, they also will have Tithes for a thing before it comes to
perfection, which would be tithable afterward. But I agree, If he sells them
before they come to perfection, then the Parson will have tithes. But by Hutton
and Yelverton, There may be a Custom to have every year a penny for them. Sed
adjournatur, etc.

Viner against Eaton.
VIner against Eaton, Where a Suit was between them in the Spritual Court, for
striking in the Church, which by the second branch of the Statute of 5 E. 6.
cap. 4. It is excommunication ipso facto. By which he surmised him incidisse in
poenam excommunicationis. And being granted if, etc. And Ashley showed cause
why it should not issue. (viz.) There ought to be a Declaration in the
Christian Court of the Excommunication: before any may prohibit him the Church.
Richardson said, That their proceedings are not contrary to the Statute. But
stood with the Statute. And it was said by Yelverton. It is seen that there
ought to be a Declaration in the Spiritual Court. But the difference is, where
it is officium Judicii or ad instantiam partis, they will give costs, which
ought not to be. Hutton and Richardson, If the party will not follow it, none
will take notice of it. And they proceed to give costs. Then a Hrohibition may
be granted. And if he be a Minister he ought to be suspended for an offense
against that Statute. And it ought to be first declared, and so to
excommunication. And that cannot be pleaded if it be not under Seal. Dyer 275.
And after all, these were agreed by the Court, and no Prohibition was granted.

Fox against Vaughan and Hall.
SIr Charles Fox was Plaintiff in a Replevin against Sir George Vaughan, and
Jacob Hall, for taking of his Beasts in Rustock, The Defendant was known as
Bailiff of Tho. Vaughan at the day quod William Vaughan was seized of the
place, quo, etc. And being seized the 9th of Maii, 10 Iac. by Indenture granted
to Thomas Vaughan a Rent of twenty Nobles per annum out of the place in quo,
etc. to commence after the death of Anne Vaugham, for life, payable at the
Feasts of St. Michael, and the Annunciation. And if the Rent be in Arrear at
any day of payment, or fourteen days after the demand at a place out of the
Land, scil. his Capital Message in Orleton; Then it should be lawful for him
to distrein; And he shows that twenty Marks were in arrear. And that 22 Iac. 22
October. He demands it at Orleton, etc. And the Plea in Bar was, That the Grantor
was not compos mentis at the time. Upon which Issue was taken. But it appeared
upon the evidence that at the time of the Grant Gaudebat lucido intervallo.
Whereupon it was found for the Defendant. And Sergeant Barkley moved in arrest
of Judgment; For that the Demand appears to be after the 14 days. And he took
a difference where the Demand ought to be made upon the Land, But there it may
be demanded at any time. And the Distress it self is a Demand. As it was
adjudged 20 Iac. in Skinners Case. But otherwise it ought to be out of the
Land. Henden objected, because the Issue was joined, That cannot be showed.
Richardson, Although there was Issue joined; Yet it appears that you cannot
distreyn without demand: if there be not actual demand of the Distress alleged;
It is illegal. And for the matter he cited Maunds Case, 7 Rep. 28. And he
doubted if such a difference would hold, Berkley, This difference was taken by
me before cited. But lecto recordo the Demand is not ex tunc petito. But if it
be in arrear, and required at the Capital Message, upon which he demanded, it
does not refer to any place. Richardson, If there be a nomine poenae, then it
ought to be demanded strictly at a day. And when it is to be demanded upon the
Land, it may be at any time. For that, that Littleton says, That a Tenant is
intended always present upon the Land; But when the Demand is to be made at an
other day, it is only to give notice, and so it is demandable upon the Land.
Hutton, by that exposition if he does not hit the demand upon the day, he shall
lose his Rent. Richardson, He had lost his Distress by that day only, but not
his Rent; For if he demand it after upon the Land, he may have an Assise.
Hutton, you would make that partly a Rent-seck and partly a Rentcharge.
Harvey, If the Rent be not gone, but that he may have an assise. Richardson, It
is a Rentcharge generally by the clause of the distress. And for that he may
have an Assise, which is a remedy for a Rentcharge as well as a Distress.
Hutton, If you may make it a Rent-seck, you have lost the Rentcharge for ever.
If a Grantee of a Rentcharge or Rent-seck brought an annuity. Richardson. If
he proceed to Declaration he had lost the Rentcharge. Et adjournatur.

Note, It was said, if one coming upon an Attachment in any Court; And the
other does not put in Interogatories against him, He shall be dimissed with
costs, and may appear gratis if he will.

Warner against Barret.
ELizabeth Warner libells for a Legacy in the Spiritual Court against one
Barret, who moves for a Prohibition. Because he had there pleaded plene
administ. and proved that, by one Witness, and they would not allow it.
Richardson, before the Statute of E. 6. The proper Suit for Tithes was there,
and they allow one Witness to prove payment; a Prohibition shall be granted.
And he put Morris and Eatons Case in the Bishop of Winchesters Case. Where it
was ruled, if the Spiritual Court will not allow that plea which is good in our
Law, a Prohibition shall be granted, as in Case of Tithes. And he said that the
Case of a Legacy is all one. Crook, When one comes to discharge a thing by due
matter of Law, and proves it by one Witness, If it be not allowed, no
Prohibition shall be granted there. Richardson, Our Case is proof of plene.
Administ. pleaded, which goes in discharge. But if there be enough pleaded,
which goes in discharge, and proves that by one Witness, and not allowed; A
Prohibition shall be granted. Hutton said, that properly for a Legacy the suit
is in the Ecclesiastical Court, although they may sue in the Chancery for it;
yet the proper Court is the Ecclesiastical Court; And they said, they used to
allow one Witness with other good circumstantial proofs. If they be not in some
criminal Causes, where of necessity there must be two Witnesses. In one Hawkins
Case. Farm or of a Propriation, libells for Tithes of Lambs for seven years:
And there he proved payment by one Witness; and a Prohibition was granted for
not allowance. Yelverton, There may be a difference where the Suit is merely
Ecclesiastical for a sum of money; as for a Legacy there the payment of the
legacy is of the nature of the thing. And the Ecclesiastical Court shall have
Jurisdiction of the proof and matter. But if one gives a legacy of 20 Oxen; And
the other pleads payment of as much money in satisfaction, there they cannot
proceed, but upon Common law; For that that the legacy is altered. And if a
proof of one Witness is not accepted, a Prohibition shall be granted. For now
it is a legal Trial. 35 H. 6 If the principal is proper for their Court, the
accessory is of the same nature. Also the Suit is commenced for a Legacy: and
the other pleads plene administ. There they proceed upon the Common law. For
they sometimes take that for Assets, which our Law does not take. It was
adjudged in the Kings Bench, that a proof by one Witness of a Release of a
Legacy was disallowed, a Prohibition shall be granted. Crook, In this Case a
proof of setting out of Tithes by one Witness a Prohibition shall be granted.

Hawkeridge's Case.
IT was agreed by all in Hawkeridge's Case, That in a forcible entry or
Trespass brought against one; If the Defendant is found guilty by verdict, and
before Judgment the Plaintiff releases to him; Because that by that the
Plaintiff is barred, The King is also barred of his Fine.

Falkners Case.
ATthow Sergeant said, That if these words were wanting in a Deed. In cujus rei
Testimon. That the Deed is not good; And he said, that all Covenants, Grants,
and Agreements which came after those words in a Deed, are not of force, nor
shall be pleaded as parcel of the Deed.

It was observed by the Court, That the Wife of a Duke, Earl, or Baron, in all
writings they shall be named Ladies. But the Wives of Knights shall be named
Dames.

And it was likewise observed, that if a Wife of a Duke, Earl, or Baron, takes
a new Husband of a more base degree, That she loses her name of Dame or Lady,
and shall be named in every Writ according to the degree of her Husband. As it
happened in the Case of the Lady.

Johnsons Case.
IT was said, if a Parson leases his Rectory for years, or parcel of his Glebe,
reserving a Rent, and dies, his Successor accepts she Rent. That acceptance
does not make the Lease good. Because by his death the Franktenement is in
abeyance, and in no Man. And also a Parson cannot discontinue. And by
consequence, That that he did without Livery is determined by his death. And it
is not like to the Case of an Abbot, Prior, or Tenent in tail.

Joyce Norton and Thomas Ducket against Harmer.
Joyce Norton and Thomas Ducket Plaintiffs against George Harmer the Vicar of,
etc. In a Prohibition, the Libel was for Wood employed in Hedging, and for
Firewood. Issue was joined, that there was in the Parish a great quantity of
Land enclosed; And that they used to take Wood for Hedge-boot and Fire-boot,
and they were discharged of Tithes, in consideration that he paid Tithes in
kind of Hay and Corn, etc. And it was found for the Defendant. Crowley moved,
That a Consultation cannot be granted, for that that they ought to be acquitted
of Tithes for those of Common right. And for that although prescription was
alleged, it is nothing to the purpose. Atthowe, For Firewood it was proved
that Tithes always were paid. Richardson, There is no doubt but the discharge
also ought to be by Custom, and to be grounded upon modus decimandi. Yelverton
and Crook otherwise, that it is not upon modus decimandi, But by the Common
law. And the reason is, for that, that when a man is Owner of arable Land, and
he pay tithe-milk and Corn; And for that they are discharged of things consumed
in the House; Which are to make Masters and Servants fit to manure the Land,
etc. Richardson said, It is seen that it shall always be discharged, in
consideration it is alleged, how a small consideration will serve. Crook, It is
not modus decimandi, but the discharge is for that, that the Parson for them
had a benefit, for he had by them better means of Tithes. Hutton, If a man had
an House of Husbandry, and demises all the Lands but the House; He shall pay
tithes for them absumpt. in the House. Crook not. No profit is made by them to
the party; but the Parson had a benefit by him. And a day was given to search
Presidents.

Bibble against Cunningham.
BIbble brought an Action upon the Case against Cunningham, and declares, That
there was a Communication between him and the Defendant of the sale of a Banck,
and an acre of Land. And that in consideration thereof, and that the Plaintiff
would assure and deliver to the Defendant possession of all the Banck as soon as
he could; and that at all times upon request to be made to the Plaintiff by the
Defendant, the Plaintiff would become bound in a Statute Merchant to make the
Assurance to the Defendant; The Defendant promised to pay to the Plaintiff 72
l. at the end of 3 years from Michaelmas next ensuing. And that in the mean
time for the forbearance he would give after 8 l. in the 100 l. and that he
became bound in a Statute Merchant for the payment of 72 l. And he alleges that
the Defendant did not become bound in the Statute; but that he himself
delivered possession as soon as he could. And upon non-assumpsit pleaded, it
was found for the Plaintiff. And Atthowe moved in Arrest of Judgment; It is
not a good consideration or promise. He said that there was a Colloquium and an
Agreement, and in Consideration thereof, etc. That is not a good Consideration.
And the second Consideration that he delivered, etc. tam citius quam potuit; It
is not good, for it is uncertain. For it may be a year, or two years, or a day
after. And the other promise to pay 8 l. in the hundred deferendo diem, And
there is not any deferring the day; for it is not shown that it is due before,
and that he shall be bound in a Statute, and that no sum is expressed which is
uncertain. Richardson, There is a good Consideration, and a good promise. There
was an Agreement touching the sale of a Banck, and an acre of Land: and take
all alike, and that perfects the Agreement. And it is plain that the Agreement
was for 72 l. and the delivery of the possession, or making of assurance, is
not any Consideration. But the promise is all the Consideration. And he might
have omitted the averment of the delivery of the possession. But there is a
cross and mutual promise upon which the Action might lie. As many times it had
been adjudged in this Court, and in the Kings Bench. And for the words tam
citius quam potuit, the Law appoints the time (scilicet) so soon as he can go
and remove his goods and things out of the House, etc. As in Case, where one
sels goods for money the Vendee shall have for telling the money. And so here at
the most, till request be made. And although it is not expressed in what sum he
shall be bound by the Statute, Yet it appears, that it is for the payment of 72
l. And then the sum ought to be double in which he is bound. As if one
arbitrate that he pay 72 l. and enters into an Obligation for the payment of
it. That shall be in the double sum. In which Case he said, that he could show
several Judgments of it. Crook, If one promise to me diverse things, some of
which are certain; It is good. But also for the time of the delivery, there the
Law adjudges of that; And the sum of the Statute shall be double, as it had
been said. But for the Case of the Arbitrament, it is adjudged contrary; as 5
Salmons Case. And admit that it be uncertain, It is a reciprocal Assumpsit, and
an Action will lie upon that. Hutton, If a promise to enter into an Obligation,
there ought to be a reasonable sum, as the Case requires for it. And in this
Case it being in a Statute, which is more penal than an Obligation, I conceive
the same sum of 72 l. will serve. And for the time of the delivery of the
possession; It ought to be in convenient time, or upon request. As 2 H. 6. And
the Law adjudges of the inconveniences of time. And although that he fails in
the sum of his promises, the end of his promise is good enough; and the other
is not concluded by that Action. But he might allege other considerations, in
actions brought by him. Yelverton, There is but one promise against another;
And the sum in the Statute ought to be the same sum. As the Case where an
Annuity is granted of 20 l. until the Grantee be advanced to a benefice; That
ought to be a benefice of the same value. But I doubt whether it should be
double. Harvey, It is there by way of promise. And then one promise is the
consideration of another, and there is no breach, for it ought to be upon
request. And then the Action being brought upon that side, the request cannot
be alleged: and one promise good against another. Then be the sum what it will,
ought the Defendant to be bound single or double? The Assumpsit not being
performed, all agreed that the Action well lies.

A Verdict against an Infant.
NOte that it was said, If a verdict pass against an Infant, and the Defendant
dies after verdict, and it is shown, Judgment shall not be given against him.
For the Court does not give Judgment against a dead man: and that is matter
apparent, and the other is doubtful matter.

Fortescue against Jobson.
A Man seized of certain Lands has Issue two Sons, and devises one part of his
Land, to the eldest Son, and his Heirs, and the residue to the youngest Son and
his Heirs; And if both dye without Issue, that then it shall be sold by his
Executors, and dies. The eldest Son dies without Issue. And the opinion of
Hutton, That the Executors could not sell any part before that both are dead.
For the youngest Son has an Estate tail in Remainder, in the part of his
eldest Brother. So that the Executors cannot sell it; And if they do sell it,
yet that shall not prejudice the younger Brother; So long as he has Heirs of
his Body. Richardson said, That although that the eldest Son aliens, and after
dies without Issue, That the Ex^cutors may make sale. For that that no interest
was given to them; But only an Authority to sell the Lands.

Dicksons Case.
A Writ de partitione fac. against two, the one appears and grants the
Partition, the other makes default. Hutton said, a Writ shall issue to the
Sheriff to make Partition, but cesset executio, until the other comes; For
Partition cannot be by Writ; but between the whole. Otherwise it is of
Partition by agreement.

Rothwells Case.
IF a Man makes a Lease for life, and the Lessee for life makes a Lease for
years, And afterward purchases the reversion, and dies within the Term, yet
the Lease for years is determined; And the Heir in reversion may oust him, and
avoid. But if one will make a Lease for years where he had nothing, and
afterward purchases the Land; and the Lessor dies; If that be by Deed
indented; The Heir shall be estopped to avoid it. By Hutton, Crook, and
Richardson.

Sir Charles Foxes Case.
THe Case of Sir Charles Fox was now moved again by Henden. It was objected
that there ought to be an express demand at the day, or otherwise he ought not
to distreyn.

But first it appears, that he had a good Title to the Rent, then there being a
verdict found, he ought to have Judgment upon the Statute. But not admit that;
Yet the Demand is good; for the words are legitime petit. and no time
expressed. And although the Demand is after the day, yet it is sufficient for
all the arrerages, for the words are tunc et ibidem, but, etc. And the
Difference is between the Demand which intitles to the Action, and to the thing
it self. Maunds Case, 7 Rep. 20. 40 Eliz. between Stanley and Read. Where it
was agreed, That the day of the Demand cannot be made parcel of the Issue. 31
Eliz. rot. 1137. Com. Banc. Dennis and Varneys Case. There the Book was agreed.
If it be to be demanded generally, it may be at any time, if it be tunc petit.
otherwise. For otherwise it would be a Rentcharge at one time, and a Rent-seck
at another. And the Distress it self is the Demand; As it is in Lucas Case. If
one be obliged to pay money upon Demand; The Action brought is a sufficient
demand. And Barkley Sergeant. He shows in the Avowry that such a one was seized
of 20 acres, and grants a Rent out of them and others, by the name of all his
Lands in Rustock and Ollerton. For that he said that Ollerton is not charged.
Because that it is not pleaded, that he was seized of that. But the whole Court
on the contrary. And that it is an usual manner of pleading: And that it shall
be intended, that he was seized of Ollerton. First the words are per scriptum,
etc. he granted a Rent, and then he pleads, that per scriptum suum, he gave a
power to distreyn; And then it shall be taken that it was not made by any other
Deed; and the Distress given by the second Deed, shall not make the Rent a
Rentcharge. And he cited Buts Case. Then if it be a Rent-seck, and the
Distress gives a nomine paenoe, There ought to be an actual Demand, and that
upon the day; as it appears by Maunds Case. And Pilkintons Case, 5 Rep. and 5
Eliz. Dyer. If it was a Rentcharge, the Distress it self serves for a Demand;
As it was many times adjudged.

Secondly; The words are, If the Rent be in arrear, any day of payment, or 14
days after. The last instant of the 14th day is the legal time for demand of
it. And the words existent. legitime petit. ought to refer to the days
expressed immediately before. As 39 H. 6. A man obliges, that his Feoffees
shall do such an Act, si quisuerunt. Those words shall have reference to the
Feoffees. And Dockwrays Case, If a Man be obliged that his Children, which he
now has, so also existent. Being words of the Present tence, refer to the days
now mentioned: and otherwise there would be a great inconvenience. For it
cannot be intended the same tenant to be always upon the Land. Barrows Case,
20 Eliz. A Feoffment upon Condition to re-enfeoff upon demand at such a place.
It cannot be demanded without notice to the Feossee; For that that he shall not
be compelled to be there always expecting. And the same inconvenience always
would follow, If the demand should not be upon the day of payment, by which,
etc. Richardson, If the Rent had been granted out of 20 acres in Rustock, and
then he had granted by another Deed, that he should destreyn in other Lands,
being in the same County or not, and is the same, That that is but a Rent-seck.
10 Assise. 21 Ass. And the Distress is not but a penalty. And if that Rent is
granted by one Deed, and the distress upon the Land by another Deed, If it be
not delivered at the same time, then there shall be a Rentcharge, and there
shall be also a Rent-seck. And when also it is said, that ulterius he grants
per scriptum suum, and does not say praedict. It shall be intended another Deed
then, without averment, that it was delivered at the same time, It shall be
intended at another time. But admit that it be a Rentcharge, and that it issue
out of Ollerton where the demand of it was; Yet he ought to maintain that
actually. In Maunds Case. The distress is a sufficient demand; For it is not
but to enable him to destreyn, and that is where the demand is limited
generally. But if a Rent be granted, and if it be demanded of the person of the
Gruntor, he may destreyn; Then there may be an actual demand, that was
adjudged. As in the Court, 15 Jac. Com. Banc. Iackson and Langfords Case, and
in one Armerys Case. And in another upon the same point. So if you will grant a
Rentcharge demandable at a special and particular place; If it was at another
place than the Land charged, Without doubt there ought to be an actual demand.
So if it be upon a special place from the Land charged or demanded; for the
distress ought to be pursued as the Grant is. And that is upon such a demand.
But where it is restrained by the words of the Grant. And the same Law is where
you will limit the time of the demand; If the Rent be granted payable at such a
day, and grants over that ad tunc being demanded: there a legal and general
demand will not serve; But there ought to be an actual demand; And also it is
as much although not in express words; for the sense and meaning carries it. If
it be arrear at such a day existent. petit. The demand ought to be at the day
mentioned before. If I be bound in Obligation, the Condition to pay money at
such a day, being demanded; There ought to be a demand at the day of payment,
or there shall not be a forfeiture. And now then there is not a demand at the
time, so no cause of distress. And although the Verdict be found, if it be
collateral matter, yet it will not help. For when it appears upon the whole
matter, that there is not any Title to distreyn; the Trial will not help it.
And so Judgment shall be given for the Plaintiff. Hutton, Harvy and Yelverton
agreed, That if it was a Rent-seck, and the distress a penalty, there ought to
be an actual demand at the time limited. But in case of a Rentcharge,
although the demand is limited to be made upon parcel, Yet they all held, that
a general demand will serve; And that shall be at any place, at any time. For
Harvey said, There is no odds whether it is limited to be demanded generally,
or to be demanded upon Dale. If it be material, it ought to be observed in the
one Case as well as in the other.

Stanleys Case.
IN one Stanleys Case, in an Action of Battery, Sir Thomas Crew moved for
mitigating the damages; Where the Judgment was given upon a non sum
informatus, and afterward a Writ of enquiry of damages. But the Court said,
That in such Cases they never will alter the damages. And Crook said, that he
was once of Council in an Action of Trespass pedibus ambulando in the Kings
Bench in such a Case, upon a Writ of enquiry of damages, 10 l. was given. That
he could never have a mitigation by the Court, etc.

Outlary.
NOte, it was said, That an Outlary in the same term for error may be reversed
in the Common Bench; Or in any term, if it be void upon any Statute. As for
want of Proclamations, etc. And an Outlary was reversed for that the Writ was
praecipimus tibi where it should have been vobis to the Sheriffs of London.

Gammons Case before.
IT was now moved again, And the Court was of the same opinion. For take the
sale for a reasonable price, and the Conclusion alike, and by that the price
appears. And although he said 19 l. he might have found less.

Secondly the Request shown in the end shall be referred to all the particular
sums reservando singula singulis. And Harvey said, He was of Council in the
Kings Bench, Where the Writ was pro diversis barrellis of Bear. And in his
Declaration he shows, that at one day he delivered one, and at an other day
another. And it was ruled, that the Declaration well maintained the Writ.

Thornills Case.
A Parson libels for the tithes of young Cattle preserved for the Cart. And the
Question was as before, Whether in such Cases a Custom ought to be surmised.
And Crook, Fitz-Herberts not. brev. is, That of right Tithes shall not be paid
for such things. Richardson, In all such Cases the Parson ought not to have
Tithes, if there be not a Custom alleged, by which the Parson had any thing,
or recompense, or by which his other Tithe is better. And he said, that he had
searched the Books, and the Book of Entries, And there is not any such Case,
but some surmise is made, as for that, that he had tithe of Corn in specie
where the Land is enclosed; And so the Corn better. Hutton, It ought to be
tried if the thing in his nature be tithable, or if there be any usage to
discharge it or not, as the Cattle are in their nature titheable, then you
cannot prohibit it; But the usage ought to be surmised so. And it may be Law,
as the Parson had better tithes. Harvey, If a Libell be for tithes of Hedgeing
and Fenceing; there a surmise ought to be made to discharge that. But when it
is for tithes of Heyfars, which in apparency ought to be spared by the Law of
the Land, Otherwise it is, etc. Richardson, For the herbage of those Heyfars,
tithe is due by the Ecclesiastical law. And we never can take tithe of them
without express custom or other recompense. Harvey, There was a Case 16 Jac.
Com. Banc. A Parson sues for the herbage of Horses, and the other alleged, that
he kept them for the carrying of Coals. There he ought to surmise something to
be discharged; And if he allege that he kept them in his house for serving of
Husbandry; the other may allege that he kept them to carry Coals, and the
allegation is traversable. Richardson, There was a case, where the question
was, A Husbandman keeps an Horse to ride up and down about his business;
whether he shall pay for the herbage of him. And a prohibition in that case was
granted; But a surmise ought to be made. Crook said, that in the Kings Bench he
had 20 times seen a prohibition granted in such cases, without any surmise. And
a libel is for dry Cattle; If it be alleged that they are kept for the Plough,
the other may allege that he keeps them to sell, without that, that he keeps
them for the plough. And before there is any profit of them, it is not reason
they should be tithable, and the Parson shall have the benefit for them after.
And for hedging it is lex terrae that he shall pay no tithes. Richardson, It is
lex terrae ne consuetudo loci facit legem terrae. And if he had used to pay
tithes for the Cattle or for hedging, he ought not to pay that still. If an
ignorant man will pay tithes for those things, and after upon a livell a
prohibition is granted; if the other does not allege a custom, the prohibition
shall stand; or if they allege a custom, which is found against him, no
consultation shall be granted And for a Garden penny, the reason of that is
apparent: for otherwise tithes shall be paid in specie: And so for Harth-penny,
if he had always paid it, it ought to be paid. Hutton, If a man had an ancient
garden for which he paid a penny, and that is enlarged, of that enlargement
tithes ought to be paid in specie.

Row and Dewbancks Case.
IN a prohibition for slanderous words. Brampston showed cause why a
prohibition should not issue. The words were, That one Harvey and Row should
report that Mary Marrian should say that Dewbanck and one Anne Row were
together in such a ones house, in an upper Room, and that the bed there was
tumbled; And reported that she said, a pox of all Whores and Bawds; And that
the Husband of Anne Row came to demand his wife at the house, and they denied
her to be there; And that after they were both seen to go out of a Broomy
field, and that one should wish he had been in a tree to have seen what they
did. And he said, that a prohibition shall not be granted; for that these words
may have dubious interpretations; for they may be spoken in mirth, or in heat,
as well as to defame: But when other words are joined with them, they shall not
be granted. And these words so cannot be taken, but that they were advisedly
spoken to slander. As in Ayliffs case before, when it is added, that he lay
with such a woman, a prohibition shall not be granted. Richardson. These things
are requisite in every action, forwords.

First, That the parties of whom the words are spoken be certain.

Secondly, that the words tend to slander. By imputing a direct offense, that
should not be punishable; there now there may be a great familiarity, and no
hurt done. And he is not directly charged with any offense, as it was in
Ayliffes case; wherefore it was ruled that a prohibition should issue.

Eaton against Ayliffe.
EAton libells against Ayliffe, pretending that a seat that the other claimed
always, belonged to his house, and sentence in the spiritual Court was given
against Eaton, and costs pro falso clamore. And he appealed to the Arches, and
there when they were ready to affirm the sentence, he prayed a prohibition. And
it was moved by Davenport, that it might be granted; and he cited one Treshams
case 33 Eliz. Where in such a case a prohibition was granted after an appeal.
Richardson, There is no cause for any prohibition, but in respect of the costs.
Hutton said it was a double vexation, and the party shall not have costs for
that, Hitcham said they came too late to have a prohibition for the costs.
Richardson, That is not like to the probate of a Will, where a thing may fall
out tryable at the Common Law. But there the principal was tryable at the
Common Law, for they had it as in right. Hutton, Seats in the generalty is in
the power of the Ordinary to dispose: It is the prescription which makes that
not tryable at the Common Law; And if prescription be made there, and it is
found, that he shall pay costs. Richardson, All disturbances appertain also to
them: If it be not upon the Statute of 5 E. 6. But if a title be made there by
prescription, it is merely coram non Judice; and if they cannot meddle with the
principal, it is not reason that they shall tax costs. And a prohibition was
granted.

Fawkner against Bradley.
FAwkner and others against Bradley. In false judgment given before the
Sheriff of B^rkshire, Bradley brought a replevin against Fawkner, and the
others; who commanded the Sheriff to deliver the goods, and summon the parties
to appear. The parties being demanded at the day, they appeared, and then the
Plaintiff declared, upon which it was proceeded to Judgment. And it was held
to be naught; For that he declared before any appearance. But upon the default
he might have an attachment, and a distress ensuing.

Dame Sherleys Case.
DAme Sherley wife of Sir Henry Sherley sued in the High Commission Court for
Alimony. And Hitcham moved for a prohibition. And said that alimony is not
within the jurisdiction of the high Commssion; For the Court of high Commission
is to try ardua regni, which are not tryable by the Common law. Richardson, The
power of the high Commission is not de arduis regni, but of heresies, and of
such other things Ecclesiastical. And he said that the Court of high
Commission, had special words in their Commission, but not in the Statute of
primo; and that the Statute de primo had no prerogative in that. And so the
question is, if the King may by the Common Law grant such a Commission. Hutton
said, that by the same reason as he may grant such a Commission; They may grant
Commissions for all other things. Yelverton, I marvail how that came within
their Commission: he said, that in tempore Iacobi, upon a debate before him,
Sir Edward Cook so fully satisfied the King. And this matter of Alimony was
commanded to be put out of their Commission. And upon that Richardson said to
Hitcham, Move this again when the Court is full, for we may advise of this; Et
adjournat.

Lynne against Coningham.
LYnne against Coningham in an action upon the case, the matter was thus. An
action of debt was brought by the Plaintiff, and he recovered, and had a capias
ad satisfaciendum to take the party. The Sheriff arrests him, and the Defendant
made a rescous. And in that if an action lies for the Plaintiff was the
question. And Ayliff said, that the action did not lie against the party who
made the rescous, but against the Sheriff. And he cited Fitzher. Not. Brev. 16
E. 4.3. where the difference is. If an arrest be made upon a mean process, and
a rescous made, There the Sheriff is not responsable. Because that the
Plaintiff might continue his process against the Defendant. But if it be upon
Execution after Judgment; Now an action does not lie against the party, but
against the Sheriff: And if he had an action against the party, he shall have
an action against the Sheriff also, and so twice satisfied. And the Sheriff
shall have an action against the party, and so he shall be twice charged.
Richardson said, That the action well lies for the Case in 16 E. 4. It is seen
there, that it is doubted upon the mean process and execution, as to the
rescous, the party may have an action either against the Sheriff or the
rescoussers. And in some cases a man shall have his election of the actions,
and both actions are but to recover damages. A man had an execution against
one, He saw the man, and conveyed him out of his sight, And it was adjudged
that an action upon the case lies against him. And peradventure the Sheriff is
dead, then he should have no remedy, if he had not an action against the party,
and no inconvenience follow; For he that will do such a wrong, it is no matter
if he be charged by both. If the Sheriff suffer one to escape, it is an escape
as to the Sheriff; but the Plaintiff may have a new execution against the party
if he will, as it was resolved in this Court; but Hutton on the contrary, and
that the action does not lie. As if a man be imprisoned, and an other help him
out of prison; yet an action will not lie against him by the Plaintiff; And the
difference is good, where a man is arrested upon a mean process, and rescued,
and afterward becomes non solvend. so that they who rescued him is the cause
of the loss of my debt; It is a wrong upon which he may be indicted. Yet the
party shall not have a remedy against him, because that he may proceed. And
then he should be the cause of multiplicity of actions. Yelverton was of the
same opinion, and agreed that difference put before. And that there is no
difference between this case, and the case put by Hutton. For a rescous made
half an hour after the arrest is all one as if it were a year after. And
Fitzherb. not. brev. 102. satisfies me. Harvey on the contrary, He who was
injured, the law gives him a remedy against the party who did the wrong. In the
Kings Bench, the case how one came to take in execution by a fire. fac. the
goods being in an house, and one seeing the Sheriff came and shut close the
door, and adjudged that an action upon the case lies against him. And there is
no difference between our case and that, where one comes to make execution, and
the other makes a rescous. Richardson in Greshams case; Gresham was possessor
of the glass house at Black-fryars. Beresford was a Glass-mamaker, and had
many glasses in Greshams house. Seaman recovers in debt against Beresford, and
coming to make Execution of those glasses, Gresham standing at his door, seeing
them coming, and knowing their purpose, shut the doors. Seaman brought an
action upon the case against him, and judgment was given for the Defendant,
because that the Sheriff never demanded the Key to open the house, 18 E. 2. If
he had demanded the Key, it had been adjudged against Gresham. And there if an
action upon the case will lie for hindering to make execution, a multo fortiori,
when it is actually done, and then the party rescued. And he denied the case
put by Hutton, where one is rescued out of prison. And said, if one be rescued
from the Bailiffs, the Sheriff ought to have the action. Hutton upon a mean
process, the Sheriff never had remedy for the rescous, but he shall return the
rescous. But upon an execution, he shall not return the rescous, but he shall
have an action, and that the party is not prejudiced; for he shall have an
action against the Sheriff, who in judgment of law is the party liable. Crook,
That the action will lie is a mischief on both parts. The Defendant may be
twice charged, and the Plaintiff may lose his Debt. But I conceive the action
well lies against him who made the rescous, etc. And if the Sheriff brings the
action he may plead the recovery by the Plaintiff; when the Sheriff makes his
return of the rescous, there is no remedy against him, as it was adjudged; And
the difference is, that when he goes to make execution, it is at his peril if
he does not take power enough with him, so that he may do it. And if the Gaol
be broken, it is no excuse for the Sheriff. Also if the party taken before he
come to the Gaol is rescued, there is no remedy against the executors of the
Sheriff. If debt be brought against the Sheriff for an escape, and in that a
recovery, the Plaintiff shall never take the party again: And so also if he
brought an action against the party, and recovered, the Sheriff may plead that.
And for the book in Fitzh. Not. brev. cited, it remains doubtful. Hutton, a
Stranger commits waste, and the Lessee dies, yet no remedy against the party
who committed the waste; for the Lessee is charged of waste. And so also the
Sheriff of an escape. But after, as it was told me by one who was present,
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Humbertons Case.
IT was said by Richardson, and agreed by Hutton, That a term evicted upon an
Elegit is grantable; but upon a Statute Staple, or Merchant, not. And
Richardson said, That Fillwoods case in the 4 rep. 66. if it be well observed,
will prove that difference.

Isham and Lawnes Case.
NOte, in evidence to the Jury in an Ejectione firm. between Isham and Lawne,
It was said by Richardson and Hutton, and by diverse Sergeants at the bar, and
not denied by any, If a Son disseise his father, and levy a fine with
proclamations to a Stranger: upon whom the Father enters and dies, The son may
re-enter against his own fine.

Allen against Westley.
IN evidence to the Jury between Robert Allen, and Isaac Westley, upon the 5.
Eliz for perjury: Richardson there remembered, that there was one charged with
perjury, and it was laid; that one swore that he drew his dagger, and beat and
wounded another; And it was found to be with a staff; and it was agreed not to
be perjury; for the beating was only material. It was one Styles's his case;
and it was agreed by the Court in that case, that although a witness swears the
truth; yet if it be not truth of his own knowledge, as if he shows how one
revoked a will by paroll, in his hearing, when the words were spoken to another
in his absence, he does not swear truly, and it is a corrupt oath within the
Statute. And it appears in the case in which this perjury was supposed to be
committed, which was between Allen and Westley; also that these words were good
words of revocation of a will. I utterly renounce and detest that Will, and
will make a new one; But if they were, That Will shall not stand, I will make a
new one, they are not; For the first shows a present purpose of revocation, the
last a fortiori; but more afterward.

Thomas and Kennis's Case before.
DAvenport argued for the Plaintiff. And the Question here is, Whether there
was any Estate in Edward and Walter settled at the time of the Fine levied? Or
their Estate was only in contingency? Because that Richard was then living. For
I agree, that if at the time of the Fine levied, Edward and Walter had not any
Estate settled or vested but all in contingency, That then the Fine destroyed
all the Remainders. For it is clear when Tenant for life is, and the Remainder
in contingency levy a Fine; That is a forfeiture; and destroys all the
contingent Remainders. 1 Rep. 131. I hope that they will agree, that if there
be an Estate settled in them, that Tenant for life levies that Fine; Although
that they in the Remainder do not enter within 5 years after the death of
Tenant, or after the estate escheated. And that was adjudged 21 Jac. Tooker and
Lawns Case in the Kings Bench. But the Case was Mich. 33 and 34 Eliz. The
Question then is, whether Edward and Walter having any Estates settled in them,
two Estates are so limited to them jointly for their lives, so long as Richard
and Anne shall have issue male of their bodies living.

Secondly, The Estate to them was to their own use, and that was not jointly
but successive. And if any of those uses were in esse at that time of the Fine,
then they fall out clearly with the Plaintiff. I conceive that both their
Estates were in them. First, concerning the first Remainder limited to their
joint use, in which it is to be considered; Where the not setting forth of the
Lands makes it contingent. It is a strange Case. That if the directions for the
setting out had been observed, that then there might have been a present Estate
settled upon a subsequent Condition, and not upon a precedent Condition. Where
it ought to be agreed, when the Indenture is made with a Covenant to levy a
Fine, That no use will rise before the Fine. Coment. 302. Then although some
things ought to be done before the uses will rise. If those things had been
done, the use ought to be raised. For certum est quod certum reddi potest. 17
E. 4. 1. When contracts are upon incertainties, when the thing uncertain is
become certain; when the Indenture was sealed, that made a contingent use in
the limitation, but when the thing had been done, it shall make a perfect use
in the limitation. But now it is become impossible by the nonperformance, etc.
It had been urged that so there shall be a double contingent, which is
concerning the Houses, etc. I say there is a great difference, between a
Collateral use which does not depend upon the other Estates, and an Estate
limited in course of a Remainder. I agree, if they be contingent Remainders,
the Fine will destroy and overthrow them: but if there be a collateral clause
by which a use is limited; As if there be a Proviso, that if such money be not
paid, it shall be to such an use; That contingent use is not destroyed by
Fine. 1 Rep. 130, 134. Chidleys Case, where the difference is directly taken;
If a Feoffment be made to the use of the Feoffee for life, with diverse
contingent Remainders over. If Tenant for life makes a Feoffment, all the
contingent Remainders are destroyed. But where the contingent came in by a
collateral Clause, and not by way of Remainder, otherwise it is. As a Feoffment
to the use of a man and his wife, which shall be a Remainder over. That is a
good use to the wife, and cannot be destroyed by feoffment. Dyer 274. and
Bracebridges Case cited in Chudleys Case 133. It was adjudged accordingly. In
the third branch here it is; If he dies, then she should have the Houses during
widdowhood. But the course of the Remainder came in the fourth clause; And that
had relation to the first. And as to the second as it is shown: that at the
time of the limitation it was not the intent, that the Remainder shall be
contingent to Edward and Walter. If I grant to a man, that if he mary my
Daughter, he shall have my Manor of Dale for years, the marriage ought to be
before he shall have any thing in the Manor. But if it had been, that he
should have had my Manor for 7 years, if he mary my Daughter; Then the marriage
is conditional subsequent, that if he does not mary, I shall have my Manor
again. 10 E. 3. 44. The Abbot of Bosneys. The difference is there put by
Brerewood. Trin. 4 Car. Com. Banc.
36. H. 6. An Annuity granted until he was promoted to a benefice; That is
conditional from the Defeasance. But if it was, that the Grantee did such an
Act, that he should have an Annuity. And ex vi termini there is a perfect
Estate before the if, and the former if is well explained by the last; That if
there be not issue male, then the Estate shall cease. 10 Rep. 41. A Condition
in its nature is not to precede an Estate. As if the Lands be given to a woman
for years, si tam diu vixerit. 35 Assise plo. 14. The Case in point of a
Remainder, which comes to our Case, and conteyns both the parts of that
difference. As it is in Colthursts and Binshams Case. The Prior and Covent of
Bath leases Land for life, the Remainder to W. Si ipse inhabitare et residens
esse velit infra praedict. terram. And if it shall happen that the said W.
should mary before H. Then the Remainder to P. And the Question is, whether it
is a Condition precedent or subsequent. Resolved, that the second is precedent.
For that, that the (Si) precedes, and for that makes the Estate contingent. But
for the other (Si) after the Estate limited, Si ipse inhabitare vellet. They
were the very words of Mountague Chief Justice, It cannot be denied but that it
is subsequent, and then goes in Defeasance; and the other ought to show the
nonperformance of it. And that Case is more strong than our Case is, For that
Estate is by way of Livery, not by use. For in Case of Livery, there he ought
to have a time to do the thing. And our Case then, he should have for life
determinable upon the (Si) etc. And that construction of Uses shall be clear by
the intent, which appears that there ought to be a present Estate; Where uses
are by Indenture, if by one construction the Intent is frustrate; and if by
another upheld, That ought to be taken ut res magis valeat, etc. The Lord
Sturtons Case. Where a Lease was made of a Manor to two Hubbards, to have to
them, and to two others for their lives: the first two dye. And it was ruled,
that it was good but to the first two for their lives, and not for the lives of
the four. Because they shall take but in point of Estate. See more after.

Termino Trin. 4 Car. Com. Banc.
The King against the Bishop of Canterbury.
THe King brought a Quare impedit against the Bishop of Canterbury, Sir John
Hall, and Richard Clark, for the Church of Marleborough in Northamptonshire.
And declares that Richard White was seized of the Manor, to which the Advowson
belonged. And the 6 Iac. by Indenture, he covenanted to stand seized to the use
of himself and his wife for their lives, and to the Heirs of Richard White, And
after White presents one Boynton, and dies, and his wife mary's with Sir John
Hall. The first of June 6th Jacob. by Deed grants proximam advocationem to two,
to this intent, that he might receive of such a Parson, that he presented, all
money as should be agreed between Grantor and Grantee; And that this was done
Boynton lying in extremis. And then the 26 Ian. 16 Jacob. there was a corrupt
agreement between Sir John Hall and one of the Grantees, That for 200 l. to be
paid by the Clark Blundell, That the other Grantee should present him. And the
first of February Blundell pays Sir Richard the money, and the second day he was
presented, instituted, and inducted accordingly. And that upon this it
appertained to the King to present: The Bishop pleads but as Ordinary: Sir John
Hall makes a Title, and traverses the corrupt agreement. The Incumbent pleads
by Protestation that there was not any corrupt agreement, as it was alleged,
and not answers whether the money was paid or not; But that he is Parson
imparsonee of the presentment of But 16 Jacob. after such an agreement (scil.)
17 Feb. he was presented by the Letters Patents of the King to this Church, and
never answers to the Symony. And it was held by the Court to be naught, and
only pleaded to hinder the Execution before the Justices of Assise, If the
Trial went against the Patron.

Upon a Prohibition.
ONe libells against another in the Spiritual Court for the tithe of two pecks
of Apples, and for feeding the Cattle upon the Ground. And the Defendant for
the Apples answered, That there were two Pecks only growing in his Orchard, and
that they were stolen and never came to his use; and for the Cattle, that they
were ancient Milchbeasts, and that they growing old were dry; And that for a
month they depastured with other Heyfars, and that after they put them in a
Meadow, out of which the Hay was carried; And afterward he fed them with hay
in his House. Atthowe, Because that the Answers were not admitted, prayed a
Prohibition. Hutton, If Appples are upon the Trees, and taken by a Stranger,
shall the Parson be hindered of his tithe? Yelverton. If I suffer one to pull my
Apples the Parson shall have tithes. But if they be taken by Persons not known,
the Parson shall not have tithes of them; Which was granted. For they are not
tithable before plucking. And for that if he suffer them to hang so long by
negligence, after the time, that they are imbessed, By Yelverton he shall pay
tithes. For the second matter it was agreed by the Court, and for the
depasturing in the Meadow, and for the Hay with which they were fedd,
afterward tithe shall not be paid. Because that the Parson had tithes of them
before. But if the Question is for the tithes when he went with the other
Heyfars, By Crook, that is no cause to excuse the tithe. Harvey, If I have ten
Milch-kine, which I purpose to reserve for Calves, and they are dry, The Parson
shall not have tithe for their Pasture. But if I sell them, by which it appears
I kept them for fatting, There tithes shall be paid. Hutton agreed, That
although that there was so small time, yet when they went with the Heyfars he
shall pay tithes for them.

Goddard and Tilers Case.
GOddard against Tiler in a Prohibition. Tiler sued for tithes of Milk and
Calves, upon which modus decimandi surmised. A Prohibition was granted (viz.)
That every Inhabitant should pay 4 d. for every Cow, and 2 d. for every Calf,
which they proved that there was never tithe paid in specie; But that every
Inhabitant should pay 6 d. and some 7 d etc. And because that that was not the
proof of the suggestion, Atthow prayed a consultation, and by the Court upon
that reason it was granted: But it was agreed, that if the modus was alleged 20
s. and proved 40 s. it is good, because it is but to entitle the Court to the
jurisdiction; but in the principal case no modus is proved, for it is mere
incertainty. More afterward.

Farrington against Kemarre.
FArrington brought an information against Kemarre upon the statute of 32 H. 8.
cap. 4. for selling of Beer for more than the Justices assest. And upon the
issue of not-guilty joined, he had a verdict found for him against the
Defendant. Atthow moved in arrest of Judgment, that the Court had not
Jurisdiction; for that the Statute 21 Jacob. cap. 4. It is enacted, That all
informations which may be before the Justices of peace, nisi prius, Assize,
Gaol delivery, Dyer and Terminer, shall be before them, and not elsewhere. And
he said, that an information for this matter may be before the Justices of
Peace, etc. But he argued upon the statute of 33 H. 8. cap. 10. 17 H. 8. cap
11. that they may inquire of Vagabonds, etc. Victuals, and Victuallers, and
Inneholders. So that the point is, whether it was an offense within the Statute
of 33 H. 8. For if there be an Information, it is given by express words. But
that statute does not oust the Jurisdiction of this Court; but the Subject had
his Election, until the Statute of 21 Jac. which confirms such Informations. So
that the question is, whether now Brewers be within the word Victuallers, or
Beer within the word Victuals: And I conceive that beer is victuals, and
Brewers are Victuallers; which I prove by common experience, and by another
Statute. There is no Statute in England but make informations against Brewers,
before the Justices of Peace; And they are all erroneous if they be not within
the word Victuallers. For by 23 H. 8. A remedy is only given against them by an
action of debt, bill, etc. in which no protection, Essoyn, or wager of Law
shall be allowed but at the Courts of Westminster: Then they ought to be upon
that Statute of 33 H. 8. And Lambert and Crompton are much deceived; For it is
an article of their Charge to enquire of Brewers. But another statute, (viz.) 2
E. 6. cap. 15. The Brewers are called Victuallers, The words are, If any
Butchers, Brewers, Bakers, Poulterers, Cooks, Coster-mongers, etc. conspire to
sell their Victuals, etc. And what victuals shall be sold by a Brewer but Beer?
And there the whole Parliament were mistaken if Brewers were not Victuallers:
And for that he concludes, that because that that offense at the making of 21
Iac. was punishable by Information before the Justices of the Peace. For that
by this Statute this Court shall not have Jurisdiction. But Hitcham on the
contrary. The Statute of 21 H. 8. says; That for offenses of Brewers they shall
be inquired of by the Courts of the King; That it is meant the four Courts at
Westminster is clear. And when one Statute is made which confirms a suit at the
four Courts of Westminster: yet if by a second Statute you will alter that, you
ought to have precise words: And if you bring that within the word Victual, you
abrogate the Statute by general words, against the wisdom of Parliament before,
which provided that those offenses should not be inquirable in the Country, and
then the Statute of little force. Et loquendum ut Vulgus. It is improper to
say, that a Brewer is a Victualler, for they are such who sell in specie. And
in the Country if it he inquired, whether it be an Alehouse, or a Victualling
house: It is said that this is he who sells victuals, which is for the
sustenance of a man, by the Statute of 2 E. 6. you will say a Brewer there to
be a Victualler; for in every Statute the intention ought to be respected. For
if it goes to Cost ermongers, it is more clear in reason that Brewers shall be
within that; and Corn and Beer are the chief things which conserve a
Commonwealth. And for that within. And the Statute extends to them for
conspiracy, for inhauncing the prizes. For they take their Courts to be within
the Courts of the King. For those words were not explained until Gregory's
Case, Co. lib. 6. And being one time within their charge, they observe their
old tract.

Henden argued and divided his matter into three parts.

First, He showed how that Statute consists upon the Statute upon 23. 33. 37 H.
8. And it is clear upon 23 H. 8. what informations ought to be in those Courts,
7 Eliz. Dyer. 23. b. 37 H. 8. repeal 33. Only for a particular thing (viz.) of
the time to enquire of those Offenses by the Justices, and makes them
inquirable at the Sessions.

Secondly, Whether the Statute 33. took this thing from 23 H. 8. And he thought
it did not: Neither by the intention of the scope of the Act, nor by the words.
First the intention of the Statute was not to enlarge the power of a Justice of
Peace, but to provide that some things should be duly executed. Which appears
first by the Title, and then the Preamble. And if they have not particular
Statutes, they cannot meddle with that by the general words: By which it
follows, that they had not power for Victuallers. Now the 35 H. 8. cap. 3.
provides that Victuals shall be sold, and at what prices: then when that
Statute of 33 H. 8. came within 8 years, certainly there was a respect to that;
And the Statute before concerning Victuals only is, that Victuallers might
contain Brewers. For to say generally, that Victuallers should be Brewers,
shall be absurd. 8 Rep. Bonhams Case. A Brewer is a Trade, and may be intended
under general words: But it shall be always secundum subjectam materiam. As
some Statutes which punish the selling of Victuals at anj unreasonable rate,
and Beer there is not Victual. And by 2 E. 6. cap. 15. There is not an express
name of a Brewer. Which imports, that it was not contained within the general
word Victualler. 2 E. 3. 6. Where there is a Common price for certain things to
be sold at reasonable prices; Where Brewers, etc. are named, 28 H. 8. Hostlers,
Brewers, and other Victuallers, etc. Then these Statutes prove that you ought
to have Brewers expressly named; If you will have them taken as Victuallers. But
(posito) that Brewers are within the general words of 33 H. 8. yet the power of
this Court is not taken away by the Statute of 21 Iac. In the Kings Bench. An
Information was upon the Statute of Usury, which was inquirable before the
Justices of Peace, at the time of the making of 21 Iac. And the Question was,
Whether Informations are taken by 22 Iac. in Case of Usury from the Courts of
Westminster. And adjudged that they were not. Because that it is expressly
limited to those Courts in a branch of the Statute of 37 H. 8. cap. 9. In one
Fosters Case, 11 Rep. it is plain, that Affirmative words cannot take that from
those Courts at Westminster. For those are excepted by the Law; If this Statute
extends to take the power given to another Law, you will repeal former Statutes
without express words. And there is a good rule, take 18 Eliz. Dyer 247. pl.
12. which see.

Thirdly, It ought to have been pleaded, For to deprive the Court of
Jurisdiction; A motion does not stand with the intention of the Statute or the
dignity of the Court. For, because the Court had a general Jurisdiction, it
cannot be ousted of that without pleading upon 31 Eliz. Richardson said, that
this Case is upon consideration of 3 Statutes. 21 Jac. 23. and 33 H. 8. By the
Statute of 21 Iac. Where the Justices of the Peace had some power upon
Informations; There Courts at Westminster are bound up. For that, he said to
Henden, That he did not well understand him in his second point But he said I
hold; That if that Court only from the time of the making of 21 Iac. had power;
Then it is clear, that it so remains now. But if this Court had the sole power,
Then the same Informations may be so either before the Justices of the Peace,
or of Oyer and Terminer. Then the Jurisdiction of this Court is ousted by 21
Iac. For the words are in that, plain; It was not the intention of the Statute
to enlarge the power of the Justices of Peace, but to confine those things to
them. Pasc. 4 Car. Com. Banc.
So that here will be the Question, whether the Justices of the Peace at the
time of the making of 21 Iac. might take Informations against Brewers upon the
Statute of 23 H. 8. before, to avoid the vexation of the Subject; That he shall
not be liable to the Information at Westminster, and in the Country too. But
that the Statute ought to favor; For when such persons were subject to many
informations, they would be more afraid: So that all the question will be upon
the 33 H. 8. And admit that Beer-brewers are within that Statute; yet the
jurisdiction of that Court continues before the 21 Jac. Then that construction
does not repeal the former Statute, as it was taken by Henden. But both may
stand, and the Statute of 37 H. 8. alters only the six weeks sessions, and
gives the power at the general Sessions; So the case may rest merely upon the
word Victuallers within 33 H. 8.

First then if they are within the words, which is proved by the Statute 23 E.
3. 4 H. 4. cap. 21. which Statute confounds Victuallers, and sellers of
Victuals and 21 H. 8. cap. 17. Which says precisely, that Beer-brewers and
Bakers which have been Victuallers, But whether they are Victuallers within the
intention of the Statute, is the doubt. They may be within some Statute of
Victuallers, and not within others. For if he brew their beer unwholsomly, he
may be punished, but not by Information. And it was well observed that the
words; That they ought to put in execution certain Laws, which ought to be
intended, such in which they had Jurisdiction before. It was said that Brewers
are not like to a Graster, Butcher, or Miller, for they prepare that which is
made Victuals by others; but beer is beer in the hands of the Brewer
immediately, and nothing is done to it afterward to make it more beer. But a
Brewer although he be a victualler in general; yet not being particularly
named, he is not within the power of a Justice of peace. Butcher, Fishmonger,
and by the Statute of Rich. 2. Vintners are Victuallers, and are these within
this Statute? Certainly not. But because that Inneholders are named, there
ought to be other words; And there are Alehouse-keepers and Cooks; For all
sellers of victuals are not within that Law, nor Brewer, nor Baker, which are
particular trades of themselves. And if it had been intended that they should
have been within the Statute, the Law would have named them. And Crompton and
Lambert naming Brewers in their charge, is by the Common Law: For that, that
for the unwholsomness of their Beer in their Assize, they are inquirable by
presentment. But by that it does not follow, that a Justice of peace may take
information of them. Now the question is upon 33 H. 8. In generalty, Brewers
are Victuallers. There is one Statute which enacts, that no Mayor shall be a
Victualler, And afterward there is another Statute made, that he may be a
Mayor although he was a Victualler; So it was intended that they were
Victuallers, for they prepared Victuals. But yet it is not within this Statute;
for it appears by the preamble, that he is to enquire of things whereof they
had power before, either by the Statute, or by the Common Law; but it was not
the intention to give them other authority. They may enquire of a combination
in their prizes, and such things; but not by information. Then when the Statute
gives power to execute, it does not give power of new things, because, etc.
Harvey argued to the like purpose; but said, that the Jurisdiction of these
Courts ought to be preserved as much as may. For the true execution of the Law
is in these Courts. For in the Country, if an Informer inform against his
neighbor, he will compound the matter, and so the King shall lose his profit
of the penal Laws. And so the Statute is made as a stawking horse to help a
friend. Crook, It is true that Brewers shall be construed to be Victuallers
secundum subjectam materiam, Trin. 4 Car. Com. Banc.
as the Statute is of shipping of victuals out of the Land. Beer shall be
within that Statute. And he argued in omnibus, as before; Wherefore I do not
report it at large. But he said that the Statute of 21 Jac. was upon the matter
of all penal Statutes repealed; because that it was so ill executed in the
Country, And so Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Howsons Case.
A Libel was against Howson the Viccar of Sturton in Nottinghamshire in the
high Commission Court at York. Because that he was not resident, but lived at
Doncaster, and neglected to serve his cure; And that diverse times he, when the
high Court visited, spoke so loud, that he was offensive to many, and being
reproved for that, he gave a scornful answer; And that there was one Wright in
the Parish, who had a seat in the Church, and that the Vicar would spit in
abundance in the seat, and that when Wright and his Wife were there. And that
afterward he said with a common voice, That the Wife of Thomas Howson was as
good as the wife of Wright, And that in his Sermon he made jests, and said,
That Christ was laid in a Manger, because he had no money to take up a Chamber,
but that was the knavery of the Inne-keeper; he being then in contention with
an Innkeeper in the Parish, and that in divine service he thrust open the door
of Wrights seat, and said, that he and his wife would sit there, in disturbance
of divine service. And for that a prohibition was prayed and granted; for the
high Commission cannot punish non-residency, nor breaking the seat in divine
service: And the other were things for which he shall be bound to his good
behavior; and the complaint ought to be to the Ordinary, etc.

Hall and Blundells Case before.
DAvenport said, This Parson being presented by Simony, is disabled to this
Church for ever, and cannot he presented to this Church again, although another
avoidance: As it was adjudged in the Lord Windsors case. But it was said by
Richardson, if he had said absque hoc, that he was in ex praesentatione of Sir
George, it had been good. Which was granted. Henden, Two exceptions had been
taken.

First, that the Incumbent does not show what estate or interest the King had
to present him, which does not need, if the King brought a Quare impedit, then
it is a good answer to say, That he is in of his presenting. But if it be
brought by a Stranger, then he ought to show the title in his presentment. And
he alleged the Statute of 25 E. 3. Which inables the Incumbent to plead by writ
of the Law. 41 Eliz. There was a Quare Impedit brought for the Church of Danel;
A presentation was pleaded by the King, without making a title, and it was
admitted good. And in many cases it is more safe not to make a title.

Secondly, Because that he pleaded a presentation by the King he is disabled;
As to that he said, that before he be convicted of Symony, he may be presented.
But by Crook in Sathers Case, That if he be presented before conviction, yet it
is a void presentment. And it was so agreed by the Court, and they resolved the
plea was naught, because he enswers nothing to the Symony; for the protestation
is not any Answer: Wherefore judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Den against Borough.
Den against Borough, alias Spark, in a prohibition it was agreed by
Yelverton and Crook, the other Justices being absent, If a man makes his will,
and makes his wife Executrix, and devises the residue of his goods after debts
and legacies paid to his Executrix; His wife dies before probate, that now
because that the Executor had election to have them, and dies before he did so
All the Goods belong to the Administrator of the first Testator, But otherwise
by Henden, If there was a Legacy of a particular thing. Quaere what difference.

Newton against Sutton.
RIchard Newton and James Elliot against Sutton in debt, upon an Obligation to
perform Covenants in an Indenture. There was a Covenant that the Defendant
ought to do such an act, thing, or things, as the Plaintiff or his Council
learned should devise, for the better assurance of certain Lands by himself to
the Plaintiff: and said, that a Counselor advised him to have a Fine; And upon
the Declaration there was a Demurrer. And upon the opening the Case Crook and
Yelverton being only present agreed, That it ought to have been pleaded, that a
writ of Covenant was shown, and the tender of the note of the Fine is not
sufficient; But the breaking of the Covenant ought to be laid after the Dedimus
potestatem sued by the Plaintiff. And upon their advise the action discontinued
without costs.

Sacheverills Case before.
ATthowe said, that the action lies. For a Lease made by Tenant for life, is a
Lease derived out of all the Estates; and not as a Lease made in Remainder. But
he who made the Lease had a Reversion in possibility of a Reversion; and for
that he might join with him who had the Inheritance in that Action. 27 H. 8.
Tenant for life, and he in Reversion join in a Lease for life; And Tenant for
life the place wasted; and he that had the inheritance the treble damages; And
in this Case had but a possibility of the Reversion, and yet for that
possibility they join in waste. And it is all one whether there is but a
possibility of reversion, or a reversion; If Tenant for life, and he in
remainder in fee make a Lease for years, they join in waste, and the reversion
does not hinder; Because that the Lease is derived out of both. And the Lessee
shall make attendance, first to one, and then to the other. 13 H. 7. 17. And if
it be upon such a Lease or Covenant which is not collateral but goes with the
Land; the Tenant for life shall have the benefit of them during his life, and
the other after. But if one makes a Lease for life rendering a Rent, and grants
the Reversion to one for life, the Remainder to another in fee; Where the lease
issues out of the whole reversion, Yet the division by reversion being by the
party himself, they shall join in an action, 22 H. 6. 24 b. Tenant in fee makes
a Lease for life, and their grants the reversion to A. and B. and the Heirs of
B Waste is committed, and they join in waste; And yet this Statute which comes
to our Case is made after the Lease. And in this case, if he who had the
Inheritance, his Son and the Survivor should join in waste. For the Law makes
the division of the reversion. If Baron seized in right of his wife, and they
join in a Lease for years, or for life, rendering a Rent, the wife dies, the
Husband being entitled to be Tenant by the courtesy, it is now his Lease, and
he shall have the Rent. And the Book seems that he and the Heir shall have an
Action of Waste; For the Law makes that division. If Tenant in fee makes a
Lease for years, and takes a wife and dies, and the Feme recovers Dower; That
Lease is not dispunishable with the devision by the Act of Law, and that Lease
is derived out of all the Estates, and it is all one as if they had all joined;
Admitting that the words were, that the said Henry had Authority to make Leases
for lives; And that that makes it as effectual and as good as if all had
joined. Then it will be agreed, that it is the Lease of all. As if I give
Authority to make a Lease of my Land; It is my Lease, and ought to be made in
my name: and so the Authority is good against all those. And if the Covenants
had not been collateral, Iacinth shall have benefit of them; For although they
are not parties to the Lease, yet the Law makes them so. And as they shall have
those benefits which grow by the Reversion, so they shall have the waste also.
It will be objected, this Lease by Henry is derived out of the first Fine, and
the Conusees shall stand seized to that use. I agree, if it be merely without
reference to the Authority; for otherwise the Lessee shall not be attendant to
the Tenant for life. As suppose at the first the limitation was to the Lessee
for life, the Remainder to Iacinth, etc. rendering Rent, he in the Remainder
shall never have the Rent. But in this Case it is otherwise.

Holmes against Chenie.
IN an Assumpsit the Plaintiff declares, that there was an account between him
and the Plaintiff of diverse sums of money; And it was found that the Defendant
owed to the Plaintiff 3 l. And upon that he promised being required, he would
pay it. And in arrest of Judgment, it was said. Because the Plaintiff does not
show for what thing the money was due, the Declaration was naught. To which
Atthowe answered, That if it was upon an indebitatus Assumpsit generally, that
the Action will not lie, although there had been many Presidents ante hac to
the contrary. But in Case you will give a years day to pay, upon which the
Defendant assumes; the Action will lie. But there is a difference upon that and
our Case put. That one was indebted upon a real contract, and other things,
and appears by account, that upon all Debts 40 l. is due, etc. Now by that the
promise is upon the Account, and that had made all certain. Yelverton, There
cannot be a debt upon an Insimul computassir, without showing of what nature
the Debts were. Richardson, An account cannot be of a thing certain. Debt upon
an Obligation is and rent certain; And if those with other things come in
Account, and upon that an Action is brought, what shall be pleaded by the party
upon the specialty? Crook, Debt certain does not lie in Account. But suppose
that part of the Obligation is paid; And afterward by an Account it appears
what is paid, and what not, and then he promises to pay the arrerages, which
is proved, as he ought: For although Debt implies a promise, yet an Account
not. Now when things are truly in certainty he may have an Action upon a
general Insimul compurassit. For the Law avoids prolixity of the Declaration,
which would be infinite, if all petit Debts were named. And he agreed, that the
difference put by Atthowe in the Case of an Action. etc. upon an Indebitat.
Assump. Richardson and Yelverton also agreed. Atthowe, It is sufficient in an
Action of the Case upon an Account, to prove the Account, without showing what
the Debt was. And he cited 3 H. 4. That a Debt certain with other things
uncertain may lie in Account, as in our Case there may be double charge
prevented by a verment; Although all the things in special, by which the debts
did arise shall not be shown, yet he ought to show of what nature the debts
were, as upon contracts so much, or upon mutat. so much, etc. and so
infiniteness shall be avoided, etc. Moyle Pregnotary; That 22 Jac. That a
general indebitatus is now in peace: For it was ruled by all the Justices in
the Exchequer Chamber to be naught. Et adjournatur.

Walsingham and Stones Case.
IT was said by Huttnn in this case, That a Parishioner compounding for his
tithes for his life, was naught without deed. And it was said by Yelverton,
That the use in the Kings Bench is; That if a Defendant in a prohibition dies,
his Executors may proceed in the spiritual Court. And it may be a rule for the
Judges in the Ecclesiastical Court to proceed also. And then the Plaintiff may
if he will have a new prohibition against the Executors, etc.

Binge and Hodges.
IN Binge and Hodges case, one of the Jurors was named, Richard Smith in all
the process against the Jurors; And after the trial, Ward moved in arrest of
Judgment, for that, that Rise Smith, was sworn upon the trial, and not
Richard. And by the Court he cannot make such an averment against a Record: For
then an Affidavit overthrowes a trial. And that which is aided by 21 Jac. cap.
13. is when a Iuror is named by one name in one place of the of the Record, and
by another name in an other place of the record; There now it shall be aided
upon this Statute by averment, that he is the same man, etc.

Bristowes Case.
IN the case of one Bristowe, The suit was in the Court of Requests, for that
that the Plaintiff and the Father of the Defendant had made such an agreement
to pay money, etc. And it was moved for a prohibition. And by the Court it was
granted; for that that a mutual agreement is a sufficient consideration upon
which an action upon the case will lie. And that notwithstanding that there was
a decree in the Court of Requests against the Defendant there; And for that the
suit is against the heir, which is against the rule of Law, that the heir shall
be charged in the place of his father; Whatsoever agreement the father makes,
is nothing to the purpose to charge the heir, although he had assets, either by
Law or equity: And the Court of Equity ought to give relief in such cases. For
this agreement, although it be in writing, being without Seal, It is not but an
Ecclesiastical agreement.

Mrs. Peeles Case.
MRs. Peele moved for a prohibition to the High Commissioners. King Charles 15
Feb. anno primo regni sui granted a Commission to diverse to enquire Dyer and
Terminer, of all incests, adulteries, and misbehaviours, and all other crimes
punishable by the Ecclesiastical Law, Afterward there were diverse articles
exhibited to them against the Lady Purbeck for adultery, and Mrs Peele, and
others; That she in Annis Domini 1621, 1922, 1623, or 1624. in some one or all
of these was an Abettor of this Adultery. For which she was sentenced to pay
200 l. etc. and that she made a poenitential acknowledgement of her offense,
and farther that she shall be imprisoned until she found security for the
performance of that order. And upon the Articles and the sentence, the general
pardon of 21 Iac. was pleaded. Henden prayed a prohibition, and agreed that
they might aver that the whole offense was committed before the pardon. And he
cited a case in the Common Bench, 6 Iac. rot. 142. Longdale was charged with
adultery, and the charge was laid after the pardon. Yet that charge did not so
conclude him, but that he might aver that to be before, to have the benefit of
the pardon. It was urged on the other side, that such averments would overthrow
infinite sentences given before. Bramston, It is pretended to be done after,
for the averment is not but a monstrans of the truth of the matter, and the
Subject shall never have benefit of the pardon without such averments. Atthowe,
it appears that there was an offense, and it was proved also. And if you allow
a prohibition, you overthrow all sentences there. And also a prohibition ought
not to be grounded upon several matters, but one only. Yelverton said that a
prohibition may be grounded upon twenty matters. Crook, Admitting that all the
offense was committed after the pardon, yet you may suggest it to be before.
Henden and Bramston, That so it was Pas. 50 Eliz. In one Prat and Husseys Ease;
One that had a benefice took another, but was not inducted. Yet that was the
irregularity upon which he was deprived, and a prohibition was prayed upon the
general pardon; And it was concluded, That if the libel contained, that the
irregularity was before any pardon; and it appears also, that it continued
after, yet a prohibition shall be granted. Crook, the offense is laid 1621,
1622, 1623, etc. in one or every of them. Now for a prohibition, there are two
clauses in our case. Although it be that the offense was before, and part after
pardon, yet we ought to grant a prohibition; for that which was before is
involved. 5 Iac. Conveys case. He and his wife after the death of Sir Blunt,
were sued before the high Commissioners, for that that his wife committed
Adultery with Sir Richard Blunt, and he himself was the Pander. And a
prohibition was granted for two causes: The one, for that Adultery was not
inquirable there, the other, because it was pardoned. And although the word
Adultery be in their Commission, yet that does not give them Jurisdiction. They
cannot meddle with Alimony was one Condiths case upon the Canons in 1 Iac.
Which gives to the Parson jurisdiction to appoint the Clark of the Church:
There was a custom there that the Parish should appoint it; and several Clarks
being appointed, they set several Psalms in the Church, to the disturbance of
it. And a prohibition was granted to the high Commissioners for meddling with
it. Richardson objected diverse things with much earnestness, but so apparently
contrary to Law, that I have omitted it. Yelverton said, she ought not to put
in security to obey the sentence. For if it be averred that all was before the
pardon, then there was no cause of sentence, and if no sentence, then the
prohibition ought to be for all. Crook, The sentence is to pay a fine, and to
make submission, and to be imprisoned, until she found security to obey the
sentence; That is void. Richardson said, That they had not any means to make
the party to pay the fine, and if she would pay it presently she might be
discharged. But by the other Justices the High Commissioners, cannot demand the
sine; But they may Estreat it into the Exchequer. At another day it was said,
Sir Will. Chamcer before the high Commissioners was by sentence fined and
imprisoned, and by the opinion of all the Judges of England, They may proceed
by fine and imprisonment; and his case was for Adultery. Hutton 44 Eliz. It was
resolved that they cannot impose a fine, but for Heresies, Schisms, and
Errors, etc. Richardson, The words of the Statute are, that the high
Commissioners may proceed according to the tenor and effect of the Letters
Patents of the King* Yelverton, The sentence is the fine and the penance, and
there is the end of the sentence; and when it is said, she shall be imprisoned
until, etc. That is no part of the sentence, If it was that she should pay a
fine, do penance, and should be imprisoned three months; Then all should be
the Sentence. Richardson said, that they may proceed against other things than
Heresies, and Schisms, upon that Statute de primo. For there are the words
Abuses, Contempts, Offenses, and Enormities. Hutton, The words in that Statute
shall have exposition according to the meaning of the first intent. It was that
they had Authority to punish the Bishops and Prelates for Errors and Schisms,
and the change of Religion. For that that they did not regard the power of the
Ordinary. But they had incroached many other things. And if those words include
any thing, they might punish anything whereof the Gcclesiastical Court had
Authority; As working upon Saints days. But there was a Case of one that was
sentenced there for such a Cause. And the Fine estreated. And upon Argument in
the Exchequer their proceedings adjudged void. Richardson, The word Enormity
contains a thing of lesser nature; For quicquid est contra regulam et normam
Juris is Enormity. And therefore in Trespass, quare clausum fregit, et alia
enormia ei intulit. But Yelverton, The word ought to be intended of a grand
offense; For so in common acceptance it imports. Harvey, The Fine being
pardoned, all is pardoned. Richardson said, that they should proceed by
excommunication and not by fine and imprisonment. No more at this time was said
in this Case.

Humlocks Case.
A Man makes a Lease for 21 years reserving 20 l. rent per annum, payable at
two days, and if he fayl of payment, that it shall be lawful to the Lessor to
enter. At the day of payment the Lessor came and demanded the Rent by these
words, I demand my half years rent. And it was moved by Atthowe, If that demand
was sufficient for the Lessor. Hutton and Yelverton seemed that it was
sufficient. For the thing that he demanded is enough certain and known. Crook
on the contrary. For although it appears by the circumstances, how much of the
Rent he demanded, Yet the words are not so plain as they ought to be. For if a
man makes a Lease for years, reserving such a Rent as the ancient Farmor was
wont to pay from time to time to this day. When the Lessor comes upon the Land,
and says to the Lessee, Pay me my Rent: that is not sufficient or good: because
it is not certain in Terms; And yet it appears by the circumstances. And when a
man pleads a demand, He shall show the Lease, and the Rent reserved, and shall
say, That he demanded redditum praedictum. And as I remember it was adjudged
very lately; That such a Demand shall be certain. Hutton, I hold a difference
between such things which lie in notice of the person to whom the demand is
made, and where not. For in a praecipe quod reddat; if there be a recovery by
default, and the Tenant brings a desceit; and by examination of the Summoners
it appears, That they came to the Land, and summoned him in the Land, but they
do not show to him at what day he ought to appear. So the Lessee knows well
enough that the Rent ought to be paid: for it is certain by the Lease, to which
he is party and privy. But Crook said in the Case that Hutton put. If the
Summoners had read the Writ upon the Land, and had summoned him to appear at a
day comprised in the Writ; It had been certain enough. And so in this Case, if
he had read the Indenture upon the Land, and after demanded the Rent, as before
it had been. Without question it appears to me it should be good enough. And so
in our Case also.

Leech against Watkins.
IN Debt upon an Obligation. The Condition was, that if the Obligor and his
Heirs did, or suffered to be done, every such assurance as the Council of the
Obligee should devise, when he should be thereunto required. And it was shown
by Ward, That the Obligee made such a request (scil.) That the Obligor and his
wife should levy a Fine; If that Request were sufficient was the Question.
Hutton, I think that the Request is not sufficient; Because it is not pursuant
according to the Obligation. Richardson, I think although the request be void
for the wife, and that she is not bound to make an assurance, Yet the Obligor
is bound to do it. For against him the Request is good enough.

Thompson against Thompson.
IT was said by Hutton, In debt against Executors, if the Plaintiff had
Judgment against the Defendant, and sued a levare fac. de bonis Testatoris. If
the Sheriff upon that return a Devastavit; the better form is upon that, to
award a scire fac. against the Executor before, that a fieri fac. shall issue
of their own goods. For that writ of Execution is warranted by the first
Judgment, which was but of the Goods of the deceased. But now if there be
issued a fieri fac. de bonis testat. si habuerint, et si devastaverint de bonis
propriis, Then I will agree that upon that shall issue a Capias against the
Executors ad satisfacieudum.

Dixson and his Wife against Blyth.
IN this Case a Question was demanded by Atthowe; If a man seized in right of
his wife, leases for life, the Remainder over, in Fee; And afterward he and
his wife recover the same Land in a Writ of Entry in the post against the
Lessee for life; If the Wife by that shall be remitted. Hutton seemed that she
shall be remitted, As well as where a Feoffment is made to Baron and Feme, For
that Recovery countervails a Feoffment, and no laches shall be adjudged in the
Wife; For the purchase of the Writ shall be adjudged the Act of the Husband
only, and not the Act of the Wife. But it is good to be advised of that, for
peradventure she shall be estopped by the Record.

Bromefields Case.
IT was agreed by all the Justices, That if Tenant in tail by Indenture, upon
consideration of marriage, covenant with an other that certain persons should be
seized to his use for term of his life, and after his decease to the use of his
Son and Heir apparent; That by that Covenant there is not any use changed
unless only during the life of Tenant in tail.

Nortons Case, before.
FInch Recorder, said de comuni jure for Estovers burnt in an house, tithes
ought not to be paid; by the Common law there was not any tithes paid for wood:
And although the Statute of 25 E. 3. gives a prohibition for timber, yet
Underwoods were discharged of tithes. See Doctor and Student 171. It is express
that Estovers are not tithable, because they are not renewing every year, and
it is parcel of the Inheritance, for to destroy all the underwoods is waste.
And there is another case put, where tithes of wood had not by the custom been
paid, neither ought they to be paid in law or conscience: But that is not to be
intended, the conscience of every particular man. Dawleys Case was resolved for
the Wild of Sussex, and Michaelmas 13 Iac. Banc. Roy. in the case of Porter
and Dike for the Wild of Kent of the same prescription, resolved to he good;
And so is the common experience that a whole County may prescribe so. And the
reason is for that, that by the Common Law it was not due, but by the
consideration of Winchelsey Linwood 104. It was ordained to be paid, For then
the prelates imputed a great pestilence that then was, for the negligence of
paying tithes, and appointed tithes of wood. And the Commons were desirous to
have the Statute of silva. etc. otherwise explained than the Clergy declares
it, For they say that they ought not to pay tithes of any wood that is of the
growth of 10 years. Hutton, Wood is tithable in their nature, and then there
may be a custom to discharge them. And the case of Harthpenny cannot be
answered; for if he sues for the penny, a prohibition shall not be granted,
quod concessum fuit. Crook and Yelverton. But of things not tithable, tithes of
them cannot be sued, without alleging a custom. Crook, It is known that
Harthpenny is good by prescription: This Case is when there is not land
belonging to the house, so that the Parson is not answered for his tithes
another way. But when there are ten servants kept for the maintaining it, Then
by the Law of the land it appears, that tithe ought not to be paid; although
custom had been alleged it is nothing to the purpose, as if a custom is alleged
to pay 4 d. for every acre in discharge of tithes, and the verdict finds 3 d.
no consultation shall be granted. And so for wood to fence the ground, or dry
cattle to manure the ground: Although custom be alleged there in discharge of
it, and found against the party, yet no consultation shall be granted. Hutton,
the herbage of barren Cattle is tithable, because there is a custom which
discharges those which are for the Cart. And he said that the Custom only makes
that legem terrae. And he cited Doctor Graunts Case. He libels for tithe of an
house, and the party brought a prohibition, and alleged modus decimandi, etc.
And it was alleged in arrest of Judgment, as houses were not tithable de
communi jure, and yet a consultation was granted. And there Cook put this case,
which I do not remember in the printed book, that one libelled for tithes of
trees, and custom alleged, and there was found no such custom in discharge; yet
it was ruled that no custom was granted.

Brown against Hancocke.
Brown brought an action upon the case, upon an assumpsit against Hancocke,
and declares, that whereas the 10. of May, 16 Iac. there were some
controversies between Charles Nichols, and the Brother of the Defendant,
concerning arrerages of rent, and it was desired that Nichols would part with
his term. And 19 l. and a cloak and a gelding were offered to the lessee for
his term, which he refused. Afterward the Defendant in consideration that the
Plaintiff would labor with Charles Nichols to take the offer, and make an end
between them; Assumed, that whatsoever the Plaintiff undertook for the
Defendant, he would perform, and also save him harmless for any thing that he
should do in that business: and then he said that he procured Charles Nichols
to assign his term, and to accept the cloak and gelding, which the Defendant
did not perform, and also that the Plaintiff covenanted with Charles Nichols
to perform the agreement, and obliged himself to that in 50 l. And that
afterward Charles Nichols filed a bill of debt for the money, whereupon he
compelled him to pay it, and upon non assumpsit pleaded it was found for the
Plaintiff, and three things were moved in arrest of Judgment, which Sergeant
Barkely answered. There was a covenant to enter into an obligation at
Michaelmas, and the Plaintiff shows that he entered before; So he does not
perform the consideration, which he conceived to be a good performance. For if
a man be bound to do an act, or pay money at Michaelmas, a payment before is
good. H. 7. 17. 2. pasc. It is shown that an action of Covenant was brought
after; And they say, that upon his showing covenant does not lie, but debt: but
he said, that the Plaintiff had his election here to have debt or covenant. As
in the Lord Cromwels case, the words covenanted provided and agreed, give
advantage of a condition or covenant. If a covenant had been sor 30 l. then
debt only lies; But here it is to perform an agreement. Thirdly that it appears
within the declaration that the action of the case was 6 years before the
action brought; And so by the Statute of 21. Jac. the action does not lie. I
agree if the cause was 6 years before; yet the breach was within the 6 years,
and that is the cause of action. 6. rep. 43. In a covenant, there is the deed,
and the breach of the covenant, and that is the cause of the action; And
therefore being matter in Deed, an accord with satisfaction is a good plea to
it. 13. E. 4. Attaint is grounded upon matter of record, but the false oath is
the cause of it. For that there also, accord is a good plea; So in our case,
the non performance by default was not at the time limited, which was before
the 6 years: but no action was brought against the Plaintiff, until within the
six years; And then he is not damnifyed until within the six years 5 Rep. 24.
Richardson. For the two first exceptions he agreed with Barkley, as to the
third, he said, that there can be no action before the breach of the promise,
or covenant; But the breach here is before the six years; for the non
performance of the agreement is a breach and a breach is a damnificationn. In
one Boughtons case, the non payment is a damnification But all the question
here was whether that ought to be pleaded but I conceive that it need not; for
by the Statute Law the action is taken away. And it being a general law, the
court ought ex officio to taken notice of it. For in that after verdict, if it
appears that there is no cause of action, although the verdict be found for the
Plaintiff, he shall never have Judgment. And upon the matter that latches in
time amounts to a release in law, and the proviso cannot aid you. For every man
shall be intended without those disabilities: for that, that he would show that
he would have advantage of it. And Crook of the same opinion for the reasons
given before, and said, that although the Statute took away the Common law; yet
it is good law, and done for the ease of the subject, and for that shall be
favored, as the Statute of limitations in all cases. But he said, the non
performance was not a damnification before the action brought. As if I be bound
as for surety for A. who is bound to save me harmless; Although he does not
pay it at the day, There is not a breach before the arrest or Judgment. For by
the Judgment, the lands and goods are liable; But for the arrest, his body is
troubled, for that now the Scriveners put in such obligations that they save
harmless the party, and pay the money at the day; But for the other matters,
in all he agreed, and cited Richardson and Buroughs Case. Where a payment
before the day, was adjudged a payment at the day. Yelverton, That is not found
that there is any sufficient notice given to the Defendant by the Plaintiff of
the agreement made, which he ought to have. And he agreed in omnibus with
Richardson, and said, that Scriveners use things, ex abundanti. Richardson, It
is said, habuit notitiam in the Declaration, but does not say by whom. Yet
after verdict it shall be intended a good notice. And although that Nichols had
given the notice, it is sufficient. If there be a Lease for years upon
condition, that he do not assign, the other accepts the rent of the Afsignee
before notice, He shall not be bound by that acceptance before notice. But if
notice may be proved either by the Plaintiff, or by any, although it be by a
mere stranger; It is sufficient. Yelverton denied that, for he said; That none
but privies can give the notice of it, as the case is. Et adjournatur.

Den and Sparks Case, before.
RIchardson, If a will be of lands and goods, and that was the occasion of this
will: the revocation is only tryable at the Common Law; But when the will is of
goods only, the occasion of it shall be tried only in the Spiritual Court; For
it is incident to the probate of the will, quod fuit concessum; And he said,
that in the case before, if the will be not revoked, the devise is good, at the
time, and the administration shall be granted as of his goods; for the Law will
not change the property of the residue, after debts and legacies paid. Crook,
The case here is that the Testator makes his will of his lands and goods, and
devises the residue of his goods, ut supra, to his wise his Executrix, who dies
before probate. Den sues to be administrator, as the goods of the first
Testator; and alleges revocation; which because that his Proctor did not go
and swear that in fide Magistri, sentence was given against him. Upon that he
appeals, in which there was the same Obligation, and affirmed by the Oath of
his Proctor; Yet sentence was given against him; And a prohibition ought to be
granted for three reasons.

First, For that the Will is of Lands and Goods, and the occasion of that
tryable here.

Secondly, they offer injustice in giving the allegation.

Thirdly, The Wife here dying before the probate, the administration ought to
be granted as of the goods of the Testator, and not as of the wife. And also
they here would enforce Den, if he had the administration, to take it cum
testamento annex.; Which shall be an admittance by him, that there was not any
revocation. Richardson, for the first reason he agreed, that the revocation
shall be tried by the common law. But the goods here are only in question, and
all the usage and practice is, that a prohibition shall be granted, with a
quoad the lands. For the second, That they will not allow the allegation: If
they will not pursue their rules and order of Justice; That is not a cause of a
Prohibition, but appeal for the third. It is fit that there shall be an
election if debts and Legacies are owing. But it does not appear here that
there are any debts or Legacies to be paid; but after Harvey agreed with Crook
and Yelverton, And a prohibition was granted.

Holmes against Chime, before.
PResidents were shown, that such actions were brought, scil. Hill. 3. Car.
Elwin against Atkins, and Hill. 1. Car. Cophin against Cophin. both in this
Court. And Richardson said, although the book makes a doubt of it; yet his
opinion was that the action would lie; For it would be a miserable thing that
all things should be showed precisely; And so Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff.

Port against Yates.
IN a replevin the case was, The Defendant was known as Bailiff to Thomas Kett,
and the land was Copyhold land. And 10 Maii. 3 Car. When it was granted by the
Lord of the Manor to the wife of Thomas Kett. The Plaintiff confesses that the
Land is Copyhold land, but that the Lord granted, 1 Jacob. to Robert Salter in
Fee, who had two daughters; the wife of the Plaintiff, and the wife of Thomas
Kett, and dyed seized, and that the land descended to them; upon which they
demurred. Berkely, The first grant shows that the Defendant was in of all, and
the descent to the wife, but for the moiety, whereupon the grant of the whole
is not traversed nor confessed and avoided. And he cited Dyer 171. Pl. 8. to be
the same case in effect, and so ruled. But Hutton Harvey and Crook held what
difference there was between this case, and the case in question. Hutton, the
descent here which is pleaded, makes the second grant void. But by Richardson,
although that it be avoided, Yet it is not confessed. And afterward for that
that upon the whole truth of the matter disclosed, It appears that a Copartener
cannot distrein the lands of another damage feasant, and the matter of form in
pleading ought not to be regarded by the Judges, upon the Statute of 21 Eliz.
cap. 5. Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Cockett against Delayhay.
COcket brought an action upon the case in Bristow against Delahay for these
words, Cockett has forged a deed, and because of that came out of his own
Country And the Defendant justifies that he did forge a Deed in Middlesex of
lands in Hartfordshire, without that that he spoke in Bristowe. Richardson
said, that that plea was naught, either with traverse, or without the Traverse.
Whereupon Henden altered his plea, (scil.) That he forged a deed of those lands
at South Mimms in Middlesex, where the lands lie. By virtue of which he
justified the words at Bristowe Richardson, It is a good plea; for now the
other can plead nothing, but de injuria sua propria. And then the trial shall
be in Middlesex. And by Crook, if there be a Demurrer, there shall be a writ
of inquiry of damages issue to Bristowe.

Issue.
IF the issue be not made up, it may be tried by Proviso. But if the Plaintiff
neglect that, there may be called a non-sute upon the roll, for there it shall
be discontinued, quod nota.

Page against Tailor.
PAge brought an Action against Tailor as Receiver, etc. which was found
against him, etc. And Judgment was given that he accounted, and before the
Auditors he pleaded that before the Action brought, there was an arbirement,
that he should pay to the Plaintiff 11 l. in satisfaction of all accounts and
demands, which he had performed. And it was ruled by the whole Court, that that
was not a good plea, in discharge before Auditors, but a plea in bar of the
account. And by Crook, an accord with satisfaction may be pleaded in Bar, not
in discharge. Which the Court seemed to agree. And by Crook, If the Defendant
had any other matter to show on the Declaration before Auditors, it might be
shown, etc. Richardson, Although that the Arbitrament was made, after the
action brought, it cannot now be pleaded but he ought to have his Andita
querela.

Manninghams case.
In Manninghams case. The doubt was this, A condition of an obligation made to
Manningham, was that he should pay after his death to his Executors after his
death 10 l. per annum to the use of the Children of Manningham. And Manningham
dyed, and there was no Executor, whether the payment should be to the
Administrator, and so the obligation forfeited. Berkly said, that it ought to
be paid to the Administrator: for an Executor includes an Administrator; And
this money is as assets, if not to satisfy debts, yet to perform this case
which is illsgal. 5 H. 7. 12. 26 H. 8. 7. And also if a man limit a thing to be
done to his Executors, that may be done to his Administrators. So that the
nominating of the Executor, is not but an express intention to whom the money
shall be paid ( viz. to him who presents his person. And he compares that to
the case of 46. E. 3. 18. A rent upon a condition reserved to the Executors,
goes to the Administrators. 15 E. 4. 14. Die. 309. Cranmers case. Where it
seemed that if a lease be made to one for life, and after to his Executors for
years; that the Executors shall not have the term as assets, 32. E. 3. A quid
juris clamat Fitzharb. A Lease for life, to his Executors for years in
remainder, Lessee for life atturns saving the term; which proves that the
Executor had that as privy, not as strangers. And he cited Chapmans and Daltons
case, the principal. So that the Infant and the Executors shall have the money
in right of the testator: and therefore it goes to the Administrator.

Secondly The Executor extends to an administrator. 8. rep. 135. there kinds
of Executors: and an Administrator is an Excecutor datinus. 3 H. 6. An action
is brought against diverse executors by the Statute: when some appears upon the
distress, it answers, that extends to an Administrator although the Statute
names only Executors.

Thirdly, It does not appear here that Manningham made not Executors, for it
may be that he made Executors, and that they dyed intestate or before probate.
And he cited 18. H. 8. And Shelleyes case 1. rep. and 33. Eliz. If Executors
dye before probate. It is in Law a dying intestate, Richardson. Here is but
mere trust; and as it has been said; It does not appear whether he had made
Executors or not. For if he dye, and makes Executors, and they dye before
probate, or refuse, he dies ab intestato, but not intestate; Nor shall it be
questioned, if the obligation had been to pay to Manningham only, or to him and
his Executors. But it goes to the administrators. But because that he had
specially put his Executor; Whether he ought to have the forfeiture of the
obligation, or whether he ought to have the sum to be annually paid to the
Administrator. Berkley, the letters of administration make mention, that he
dyed ab intestaro. Atthow, That is matter de horse, but by the declaration it is
clear that he dyed intestate. And the action brought by Administrator who who
had not any cause of action. Secondly, admit that there was an Executor, and
the money paid to him; that is not assets; For it is not the money of
Manningham, but taken by him to pay to another. And Richardson said: If the
party had dyed intestate, by the Common law, the Administrator is Executor, and
all things that were to be performed by the Executor, are to be performed by
the Administrator. There was an obligation to A. to pay to the Executors of B.
It shall be more doubted there: whether it shall be paid to the Administrator.
But the obligation here is to Manningham himself. Now his Executors comprehend
Administrators: And Needhams case is plain in that. And the mention was that
the money shall be paid to these that succeed him in his personal Estate. Now
it was not the intent that it should be lost if he dyed without Executors.
Crook an action of debt being brought against an Executor upon an obligation;
plene administravit is pleaded. Then Administrator being included in the word
Executor, there is a good cause of Action. And the Court seemed to be of the
same opinion. Sed adjournatur.

Fowlers Case.
FOwler libels for tithes, and a Prohibition was prayed upon a suggestion that
he came to the Church by Symony. By the Court, a Prohibition ought to be
granted upon a surmise only, that he came to the Church by Symony. Then Henden
showed, That it was found by verdict in the Kings Bench, That he came in by
Symony. And upon that verdict there was a decree in the Court of Wards
accordingly. And then the Court inclined to grant a Prohibition. And the Case
here was, That Fowler being convicted of Symony, the King presents Glapthorn,
who was admitted, instituted, and inducted; And afterward he takes another
benefice above the value of 8 l. by which the other was void. Yet by the assent
of the Lord Windsor Patron, Fowler continued possession. And by Richardson, He
cannot be any way removed until laps incur.

Strange against Atthowe.
SIr Hamond Strange brought trespass against Christopher Atthowe. And the
trespass was done 8 years after, but with a continuando unto the time limited
by the Statute 21 Iac. And by Richardson the action is tolled by the Statute.
For the continuation within the time; makes the Trespass within the time; And
it is not like the Case in Dyer, 119 pl. 17. In the turning of a Cock; It was
adjudged a new diversion, for it was a new action. But here is not a new act
done. Richardson, the Statute of 21 Iac. may be well pleaded in this discharge
of that action. And you ought to commence for all not done after the time of
the limitation within the Statute; otherwise the Statute should be overthrowed;
For by that means the continando may punish a trespass done 20 years past, with
the alleging of a continuando. Hutton and Crook of the same opinion. Yelverton
on the contrary, who said, that it was not material if the Statute was
overthrown. But the other Justices said, it was a good Statute. Crook, Suppose
that you cannot prove your continuando, for in trespass it is not requisite
indeed to prove it; For it is only put for increase of damages. But Hitcham
said, Now by the Statute the continuando shall be proved. Then by Richardson,
Hutton, and Crook. You will make a fraction That the trespass shall be partly
upon the Statute, and partly upon the Common law.

It was ruled again according to that before; That when a Will was proved in
the Prerogative Court; The Executor or Administrator may be cited out of ^e
Diocese where he lives to the Prerogative Court, Because that the Will cannot
be executed a libi than where it was proved. And so that is out of the Statute
of 23 H. 8. But by Richardson, Hutton, and Yelverton, Where a Will is proved in
the Prerogative Court; That it shall be proved in the proper Diocese also of
the Executor, then it may be executed there. Richardson said, The privilege for
them of the upper House continued 30 days after the Session; where the
Parliament of the lower House but for 20 days. And that the privilege extended
to Person, Goods and Lands.

Nortons Case. Mich. 4. Car. Com. Banc.

IN Nortons Case before; A Consultation was granted, because of a Custom
alleged, and found for the party. But by Crook and Yelverton, There are diverse
Presidents, where in that Case a Prohibition was granted, without alleging a
Custom.

Allen against Westby before.
IT was ruled, That the Defendant shall not have costs against the Informer,
they being found against the Informer. And Brownlow affirmed that the course of
the Court is, That upon the Statute the Defendant shall never have costs
against the Informer; Although Binge cited a President to the contrary.

Termino St. Mich. Anno 4 Car. Reg. Com. Banc.
Gosse against Skipton.
IN the Court of Requests, Gosse borrowed money of the Testator of Skipton, and
gave a term whereof he was possessed, for five years, to him for security, by
Indenture with a Proviso of redemption; And shows further in his Bill, that
there was a verbal Agreement between them; That if the money was not paid at the
day, the Testator should take the profits growing upon the Land; And if the
profits amounted to the value of the sum of money, that then he shall have his
term aagain. And that he reaped the profits accordingly, which well satisfied
him, and yet he continued possession of the term; Which afterward came to
Skipton, and is now expired. And so he prayed that the Defendant might account
for the profits. And the Defendant moved for a Prohibition. Richardson,
Although the trust is contrary to the Indenture, yet such an averment is good,
notwithstanding the Proviso. But for that that the Executor shall account to
none but the King; and the years are now spent. And although he occupied the
same, yet the profits shall be Assets. And if it shall be received in the Court
of Equity, there shall be a Devastavit against the Executor. And by the whole
Court a Prohibition was granted.

Rolls against How.
A Man arrested upon a Latitat makes an Obligation to the Sheriff with a
Condition to appear. And the Question was, if it be good. For he may make his
appearance by his Attorney. Although Hutton thought it was not good. For the Law
intends that he is in person when he is in custodia Marescall. And Brownlow
said, it was adjudged accordingly, when Mr. Tomkins Bailiff of the liberty of
St. Andrew took an Obligation in his own name, for a personal appearance upon a
Latitat. At an other day Atthowe moved, that the Bond was void. For the Statute
is general that he shall take a Bond for his appearance. And now the Sheriff
here had taken a Bond for his personal appearance. And there he might answer to
the Action by his Attorney. But that he ought always to be in custodia
Marescal. which is meant in proper person, and he ought to put in bayl which is
good enough. It was ruled, that Judgment should be entered for the Plaintiff,
if cause was not showed within two 2 days. And Bents Case and Hoptons were
adjudged accordingly. See 30 Eliz. rot. 126. In the Case of a Sheriff there.

Wroth against Harvey.
DOwer was brought against an Infant, and upon default Judgment was given
against the Infant, and there was something assigned for error, but
notwithstanding Judgment was affirmed as to that, But afterward an other
error was assigned in the record; For that that the entry is obtulit se per
Clerk atturnatum suum, and names him not: And so was the Case, where such an
one, by Higgius atturnatum suum obtulit se; And for that cause naught. And Dyer
93. Because in waste the obtulit is per atturnatum suum, and names him; it was
naught. But Richardson said upon the first obtulit se, it is not requisite to
name the Attorney, but upon the second.

Barleys Case.
NOte, It was said by Richardson, If a man says in his sickness, I give 20 l.
to I. S. and does not make Executors; Yet I. S. shall recover against him who
has the goods. Crook said that, 3 H. 4. That a devise is void, if a Legacy be
given, and no Executors made.

Winchcombe against Shepard.
IN an action of the case for cutting of the bank of the River, of Charwell, by
which the water run forth and drowned his meadows. The Defendant pleads in bar,
that one Brook was seized of a Mill called Gammons Mill, and that there is a
certain rivulet between Gamors Mill aforesaid, and Clyftons: And that he and
those whose Estate he had, in Gamons Mill, have used time out of mind, etc. as
often as the said Gammons mill should be ruinous, to cut the aforesaid bancks
of the aforesaid rivulet in which the Trespass aforesaid is supposed to be
done, and to let out the water in old Charwell to repair the mill. And he shows
that the mill was ruinous, and that he cut, as aforesaid, to repair; and the
water run out of the said old Charwell, and so justifies. And there was an
exception taken by Atthow to this bar. For that that he does not answer nor
justifies to the place where the Trespass was done: For he said that there is
quidem Rivulus, which is always to be intended of a strange thing. As 6 E. 6.
Dyer 70. In Trespass the Defendant said, quod quidam I. S. granted the part to
him; and afterward said again, quod quidam I. S. granted. And because that he
conveys two grants to himself by two persons, for so the second quidam shall be
intended: And it shas ruled to be naught. See the 33 and 34 Eliz. Debt by Low
against Wotton. The Defendant pleads that a long time after the Obligation was
made by himself and Bassett, quod quidam Johannes Bassett acknowledged a
Statute to the Obligor; And because that he says quidam, which shall be
intended a strange person, it was no plea. And the debt upon the Obligation is
gone by the acknowleging the Statute. See 9 H. 6. 16, 17. In a quare impedit for
the King, of the Chauntry of St. Tho. and alleges a presentation. The Defendant
says, that there is a Chapel of St. Thomas in the same Village, and that the
Defendant and all his Ancestors have been Patrons of the same Church. It was
held no plea, for there is no answer to the title made by the King; For it
shall be intended of another Chapel. But here because that he said virtute
cujus, he cut the aforesaid banks of the rivulet aforesaid, in quo transgressio
praedict. fieri supponitur. A sufficient answer was made to the same place; so
ruled by the opinion of all the Justices. But it was objected, that this bar
was not good upon the matter; For although he might let it out, yet he ought
not to drown any ground. But because that the fault was in the banks of old
Charwell, He is not punishable for that lawful Act, which he had done.
Otherwise if he had not prescription, 6 E. 4, 6. If I have a pond, I cannot so
let it out that it shall surround the ground of my neighbor. Another exception
was taken for not pursuing the prescription; For he does not show that the
place, where the cutting was alleged, was between them two mills, whereof he
makes mention; Yet adjudged contra querentem. And afterward, this judgment
was reversed by error; because he had made his prescription local, and that
ought to be pursued: But for the overflowing after the letting out, It was by
all held, that it is not punishable.

Ienkins's Case.
THomas Ienkins as heir to John Ienkins brought error upon a Judgment, given
upon an indictment upon the Statute of 1 Eliz. of Recusancy, and assigns this
error; For that the Indictment was contra formam Statut. edit. 23 Ian. 1 Eliz.
Where the Parliament began 25 Ian. And for that it was held erroneous. 3 Eliz.
Dyer 203. Other matter was alleged, for that that the Statute is, that it shall
be taken before Justices of the Peace, or Gaol delivery. The Indictment was
before the one, and the conviction before another: But that was thought a small
matter. And it was beld by the Justices that the heir might have a writ of
Error upon such a Judgment. As upon execution of a Statute, after the death of
his father. It was objected that he brought error as heir, but does not show
how he is heir. But nothing is answered to that.

Keen against Cox.
IN an action upon the case brought by Keen, for saying, He is falsely forsworn
before the Justices of Assize between A. and B. Adjudged that it lies.

Mercer and Ux. against Cardock and Ux.
MErcer and Ux. brought debt against Cardock and his Wife as Administrators of
one Tox. And upon plene administr. pleaded: The Plaintiff replies, that they
had assetts to satisfy the aforesaid Defendant, (whereas it should have been
Plaintiff.) And because that it was but the misprision of the Clark, It was
held that it might be amended, the record now being brought before them by
error.

Calthrop against Allen.
IN Debt the demand was of 19 l. 17 s. and declares upon five several
contracts, and shows the certainty upon every of them, which being cast up
amounted to 20 s. more than was demanded. And because that he does not show how
he was satisfied of the remnant, It was held, quod nihil cap.

Goodridges Case.
AN Indictment of Murder was brought against Goodridge, and this exception was
taken, because that the Indictment was: That the said Francis who was murdered
such a day apud quondam Down, vocat. Westmen Down in the County of Hampton,
insultum fecit, and quod ibidem habuit and tenuit quoddam gladium in his right
hand, and praedict. Franc. percussit, and does not say ibidem percussit; And
therefore naught: For it is not of necessity to be intended, that the
percussion was at the same place. Also he said, whereof instanter obiit, that
is no certainty, but by argument that he died in the same place. And for these
faults, and because it was Body for Body. It was ruled that the Indictment was
insufent.

Braces Case.
If a Feme sole Executrix of a term, mary him in the Reversion, and dies, the
term is not drowned, but the Administration of it shall be committed. Otherwise
perhaps if she had purchased the Reversion; And it was the Case of one Owen,
That if the Debtee mary the Debtor; That the Debt is not gone, but the
Administrators of the Feme shall have it.

The Marquess of Winchesters Case.
THe Marquess of Winchester prayed a Prohibition, and the surmise was, that
whereas the late Marquess his Father had made the three Lamberts his Executors,
which were his Bastards. He also devised that they should sell as much of his
Lauds as should amount to 100000 l. and does not limit any employment of the
money inde proveniente. And also that whereas by the Statute of 34 H. a man de
non san memori is unable to make a Will of his Land. And that the Marquess at
the time of the making of the Will, was not of san memori. And it was held by
the Court, that although Land be not a testamentory thing whereof the Spiritual
Court ought to intermeddle with. Yet being conjoined in the Will with the
Goods, they cannot do any thing with the one, without the other. Therefore a
Prohibition shall be granted. Because that for the non compos mentis, it is
more fit to be tried in our Law. And if cause be, a Consultation shall be
granted for part (scil.) his Goods again. And such a Prohibition was in Case of
Lloyd against Lloyd.

Monday against Martin
Monday brought an Action upon the Case against Martin. And declares, That
whereas at the request of the Defendant in November, delivered to him and his
Father, 30 Kerseys for which the Defendant assumed to pay 40 l. to the
Plaintiff; The one half in hand, and the other half a year after. Upon non
^ssumpsit pleaded, It was found by verdict, that the delivery was made to the
Defendant in August 31 next before the November mentioned in the Declaration.
The Question if that will maintain the count or not. Ward, That it will, for
the delivery in August, is the delvery in November. As upon payment of money
upon an Obligation before the day, is a payment at the day. And then if he does
not pay it within a year after November, he does not pay it with a year after
August. Richardson on the contrary. For that cannot be intended the same
promise. For upon such a variance the Defendant may wage his Law. And so it is
if a man declares upon Debt of one day, and the Deed bears date at an other
day. Also it is, that the delivery was to the Defendant and his Father, and it
is found that it was to him only. So that that cannot be intended to be the
same Consideration: Upon another Cause upon the Declaration he cannot have
Judgment. For it is in consideration, quod delibera^set which is in the Preter
tence, and therefore naught, As 10 Eliz. Dyer 272. In consideration that he was
bayl for his Servant, the Defendant assumed, Not good. 37, 38 Eliz. Between
Gereny and Goteman, in Consideration quod dedisset duas, etc. he promised to
pay 10 l. at the day of his marriage. Held no Consideration Crook, To the Case
of the variance of the date contained in the Deed. There it varies from that
which is his warrant. And the date in November cannot be the date in August;
Nor on the contrary. The delivery raises the Consideration, and the time is not
material as to the Delibera^set. It was one Warthingtons Case, That where in
consideration that you will stand my bayl, I will save you harmless. A good
Consideration. Hutton* For the delivery, the time of the contract is not
materially necessary to be shown for certain; But the day of the payment ought
not to be mistaken, as it is here; For if the delivery was in November, the
payment ought to be in November too. But it appears by verdict, That the
delivery was in August, And then so the payment ought to be. And then
consequently the day of payment is mistaken. Yelverton, The Plaintiff cannot
have Judgment. For then he might charge the Defendant again, upon a delivery
in August. Atthowe, If upon an Obligation the money be paid before the day of
payment, It is a payment at the day, if the Obligee dies not in the mean time.
But I do think that if he dies before, that payment cannot be pleaded in an
action of Debt brought by the Executors against him. Sed adjournatur.

Sir John Spencer against Scroggs.
SIr John Spencer brought Debt against Scroggs, who pleads per minas. The
Venire fac^ was returned, and the Jurors appear; And the Array was challenged
by the Defendant for Cosinage between the Sheriff and the Plaintiff. Whereupon
a new Venire fac. was awarded to four Coroners who return the Venire fac. and
subscribe A. B. C. D. Coronatores. And in the Habeas corpus A. B. C. D. only;
And Judgment was given; And upon that Error, It was argued, that does not lie.
First, For that it is aided by the Statute of 18 Eliz. That no Judgment shall
be reversed after Judgment for an insufficient return. Also as it appears by 8
H. 6. Such a Return at the Common law, made by the Sheriff, shall be good,
although he was not called Sheriff. But that Law was afterward changed, And
only Sheriffs, and Bailiffs of Franchises was provided for. By which Coroners
were not in. Hutton, The Statute of 18 Eliz. extends to insufficient matter of
the Return; But does not intend to toll the Statute of York. He said also; that
he thought it was not requisite at the Common law, for the Sheriff to put his
name of Office upon the back of the Writ. But he demanded how it might appear,
that they are Coroners, if they are not named so. Crook, It has been adjudged
that, Coroners ought to put their name of Office; And their names are parcel of
the Return. So that defective insufficiency is remedied by the Statute of 18
Eliz. Richardson, Without putting their names, it does not appear that they are
Coroners.

Luvered against Owen.
HE declares upon the Statute of E. 6. for tithes; and an exception was taken.
For that, that it was said tam pro dom. rege quam pro se ipso. But it was
affirmed to be good, For the King is to have a Fine. Hutton, If an Action be
brought upon the Statute de scandalis magnatum; The Plaintiff may declare tam
pro domino Rege quam pro se ipso. And so upon the Statute of Hue and Cry. It
was objected, that one Tomlins Case was adjudged to the contrary. But that Case
was, Because that he demanded in this manner, and the Statute when it says,
that he shall forfeit, it shall be intended to him who had the loss, So it
could not be demanded for the King. And at length it was adjudged, that the
Declaration was good.

Harding against Turpin.
IT was agreed by Hutton, If a Copyholder makes a lease for years, to commence
at Michaelmas; it is a forfeiture presently, None gainsaid it.

Hutchinson against Chester.
AN action upon the case was brought against Chester, And declares how the
Plaintiff was in doing of certain business for the Defendant. The Defendant
said to him, Do it, and I Will repay you whatsoever you lay out. And shows that
he had expended 4 l. and does not show in certain and particular circa quid.
And for that cause it was held naught.

Read against Eaglefield.
IN debt by Read against Eaglefield, and others, who were Sheriffs of Bristowe:
The case being that they being Sheriffs, took the Plaintiff by a Capias ad
satisfaciend. and detained him in prison, until the party Defendant, and now
Plaintiff paid the money to the Sheriff. It was held that that was contrary to
his warranty, which is ita quod habeat denarios hic in curia. And for that he
did not so, he is chargeable to him that was in Execution.

Stone against Walsingham.
STone libels against Walsingham in the spiritual Court, and he pleads an
agreement, that for five years, he ought not to set forth his tithes but to pay
for them 6 s. 8 d. upon which matter a prohibition was granted. Richardson, you
ought not to have a prohibition. A lease for tithes ought to be by deed; but by
way of contract it is good for a year only without deed. Upon the Book M. 26 H.
6. But for 4 or 5 years by parol, Such an agreement is not good. Richardson,
May a Parson bargain and sell his tithes happening 4 years after by parols.
Yelverton, It had been so adjudged in many Cases in the Kings Bench, and the
difference is, where it is by way of demise, and where by discharge. Hutton,
The reason why it is good for years is, for that that the contract moves
severally. But by way of devise between Parson and Parishioner it is not good.
And Weston and Biggs case, where it was resolved. If there was an agreement
made between Parson and Parishioner for discharge for tithes, for years, it was
good without deed: otherwise if it be for life. Davenport, not. Richardson,
Then for more than a year that contract is void: And you cannot bargain and
sell the profits of beasts which a man has not in his possession now; but for
those which he has in his possession, he may sell any profits. Quod concessum.

Intr. 4 Car. rot. 670, or 870.
Litman against West.
LItman brought an action upon the case against West for words. And he
declared, he being an Attorney, etc. and colloquio habito between them
concerning his office. The Defendant spoke these words. He is a Cozener, and
has cozened me of 20 s. And Sergeant Henden objected, that the words were not
actionable. For that, that they are too general. And although they had
Communication of his Office, As Attorney. Yet when the words were general, and
might be applied as well to other things as such as touch his place; yet for
that, etc. As if one says of an Attorney, Thou art a Common Barrettor. Is not
actionable. And it was adjudged where one said to a Wheeleright, Thou art a
Cousener and have cousened me of a pair of Wheels. Is not actionable. And Sir
Will. Fleetwoods Case. One said of him, He is a Cousener, and has consened me
in entering the Kings Accounts. So here he might cosen him of 20 s. twenty ways
and not as Attorney. Richardson said, the words were actionable. Some words
spoken of some men would bear an Action, although the same words spoken of
another would not. As the Case of an Attorney especially, as the Case is laid
here: And he had spoken of him as an Attorney. Then it ought to be taken that he
was a Cousener in his profession. If one said of an Attorney, Thou art a
Cousener, and have delivered cousening Bills, etc. If it had been laid here
that he had been an Attorney for the Defendant. It would be actionable. And this
Case is more strong than Birchleys Case in Coo. lib. 4. One said of Chomely
Recorder of London, That he could not hear but of one side of his head. And
that was adjudged actionable. And that being spoken of an Attorney there, it
would bear an Action, One said in the North Country, That one was a
Daffidowndilly, and adjudged actionable; Because that the word there used
expresses an Ambidexter, being a flower of party color. Hutton said, That the
action would lie. In one Gardleys Case, who was an Attorney, One said of him, he
was his Attorney, and he had cousened him. So of a Goldsmith. Thou have consened
me, and sold me a Sapphire for a Diamond. These words are not actionable,
because that the Goldsmith himself might be deceived in the stone. And here
these words spoken of an Attorney, cannot be otherwise but to disgrace him in
his profession. An action in the Kings Bench. Thou art a cousening Knave
Coroner, and adjudged actionable. One said of a Lawyer, He has no more Law
than an Horse, an action lies: for both are applied to his profession.
Yelverton agreed, that the Jury had found that the words were spoken of him as
Attorney; For they have found the words in the Kings Bench. The Case was, An
Inne-keeper, and an other were in communication and he said to him, No man
comes to thy House, but thou cousenest him. And adjudged actionable. And so
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Middleton against Sir John Shelly.
MIddleton recovers in Debt against Sir John Shelly, and had Execution. And
afterward Sir John purchases the Land of the Plaintiff. And long after the
Execution was sued by Elegit, and that land extended. But before Livery by any,
the Plaintiff dies; Yet the Sheriff returns that he delivered the Land. Hutton,
We will not credit that he is dead. But you bring a Writ of error. Yelverton
agreed, The return of the Sheriff Richardson the return of the Sheriff does not
prejudice a third person although it concludes the parties. And if the
Execution was made, if the party brings an Ejectione firm. Whatsoever the
Sheriff returns, his proceedings ought to be proved legal. See if the Sheriff
deliver possession where the party is dead, if any thing lies: It was urged to
have a writ of restitution. But where the Sheriff gives possession contrary to
the rule of the Court.

Coventries case.
IN Coventries case before, Ashley brought a Copy of the sentence given in the
high commission Court: which was, that the parties shall be excommunicated, and
be fined 30 l. and imprisoned. Whereupon he prayed a prohibition, Richardson If
they had gone but to excommunication they had been well. Yelverton Justice,
they have power by fine, and imprisonment in some cases; but here where the
party grieved may be fined at, Common law, not. For if the party be fined in
the high Commission and be afterward indicted etc. he cannot plead this. But e
converso if he be indicted, and afterward sued there, he may plead that in the
high commission Court. Richardson, they that deny their power to fine and
imprison, say that they may so proceed only in two cases (scil.) of Heresy, and
and incontinency of Priests: which is also by the Statute of 8. H. 3. 7. But
ecclesiastical censure by excommunication is more grand, if it were so
regarded. And they may enjoin penance, and put the party in prison until he
does it. But before he granted a prohibition he would have the parties present.
Harvey, They in the high commission Estreat their presentiments, and then the
prosecutor shall have the third part in such unreasonable fines. Which ought
not to be permitted by us, etc.

Bramston the Law at first gave them power to fine and imprison, in cases which
were not fineable before by the Common law, to strengthen their jurisdiction.
But that was fineable before. But afterward a prohibition was granted as to
the fine, but not for the imprisonment; But for that he ought to have his
habeas corpus.

The King against the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Thomas Prust Clark
intratur, trin. 4. Car.
THe King brought a quare impedit against the Bishop of Canterbury, and Thomas
Prust, for the advowson of the Church of Islinstock, in the County of Southton,
and recited the Statute of pluralityes; and afterward declared that the
Marquess of Winchester was seized of the Rectory, to which the Advowson of the
Vicarege belonged: and that he made a lease of it to Sr. Austine Mayn; He
presents John Shelton Clark 12. Jac. and the Vicarege was above the value of 8
l. And Shelton 15 Jac. took the Vicarege of Holcumbernel, which was with the
cure of Souls, also by which the first became void, and so remained until 3.
Car. And being void the King presents to it, and was disturbed. The Archbishop
claimed nothing but as Metrapolitan, during the vacancie of the Bishop of
Winchester. And Prust pleads in bar, that he is Parson imparsonee from the
presentation of Foil, who confessed the Statute, and the Demise for years from
the presentation of Shelton: and that he took a second benefice with the care.
But he said that he continued possession as Incumbent, and then pleads the
general pardon of 21. Jac. a quare impedit is not excepted out of it. And that
Shelton continued possession after the Parliament, and the resigns to Foil and
presents him. Prust replies and confesses the pardon, but that there is an
exception of all titles and actious of quare impedit, other than such titles
and actions of quare impedit, as his Majesty has or may have by reason of laps
incurred above three years past for or concerning any benefice or
Ecclesiastical living is, or at the last day of the Session of this Parliament,
shall be in actual possession, by the presentation of any Patron, or collation
of any ordinary. Upon which it was demurred. Atthowe for the Plaintiff, That
Shelton here is incumbent in possession by presentation or Collation by By the
Stat. the presentation and induction of that is void. In Coo. 41, 51. There is
in Hollands case, a difference between voidance by act of Parliament, and void
by Ecclesiastical Law. For before the Statute, by the taking of the second
benefice, the first Church was void. But not so that the lapps incurred upon
it. Greens Case, If the Bishop collate before the 6 months incur, the
Collatee is Incumbent, but the Patron may present at any time after, for that
fills the Church, but not against the Patron, and hinders that no laps may
incur to another. In Sir Henry Gawdies case for the Church of Walsocken. The
Church there became void, and within 14 days after, The King presented one to
it jure prerogativ. suae. The presentee continues possession above 30 years,
and then the Manor and the Advowson came to Sir Henry Gaudy, the Church is
void, and the King presents again, and was disturbed by Sir Henry. For that the
King brought a Quare impedit. And adjudged that the presentation of the King
within the six months, was not an usurpation. But if he had presented in his
own right, there should have been an usurpation. When a title by laps is in the
King, if any present, the King may remove him during his life, by Quare
impedit. All this appears hy Baskervills case; but if the Incumbent die, the
term of the King is gone; but if he resign not, but the King may present during
the life of the Incumbent, And that was a grand inconveniency, that after so
long possession in that manner the Incumbent may be removed by the King. And
for that purpose was the Statute in the first clause of the exception made.
That the King intended to pardon, it would be a wrong to him, and an exception
ought to be of the same nature. The taking of the second benefice, is not a
tort, and therefore a title of the Quare impedit accrewed to the King. As for
the pluralities, the words of the Statute are, that it shall be doid, as if he
was naturally dead, and therefore it is merely and actually void. If a man
takes a second benefice and dies, issue ought to be taken whether the first
vacabit per mortem. And it was found that, not; For it was sold before the
death of the Incumbent. Yelverton If he took the second benefice, yet he might
have the tithes of the first. And there are words in the Statute, which shall
be construed more beneficially for the subject.

Pinsons Case.
PInson was collated, instituted and inducted by the Bishop of Exceter's
Patron, Doctor Hall. The Bishop collates another pretending that the first
Incumbent had taken a second benefice, whereupon hhe first was void, or revera
the the first Incumbent had a dispensation. And notwithstanding that the Bishop
sequesters the benefice; Upon discovery whereof to the Court, a prohibition was
granted.

Nihil.
WHen a nihil is upon a writ of Covenant, pro licentia concordandi secundum
consuetudinem antiquam, only 6 s. 8 d. ought to be ever paid for the post fine,
which is in case of the Lord Keeper, and some other who are excused of a Fine,
pro licentia concordandi.

Brag and Bristowes Case.
IT was agreed by the Court, that where there was a difference between one, and
another who had married his daughter, which difference was referred to a friend
to compound. And he ordered that the Father and the Son to enter into a bond to
pay so much to the Daughter; And afterward the Son promises to do it: That
here might be a sufficient consideration between Father and Son for the making
of that promise.

Corporation Court.
IT was agreed by all the Justices, that in a Corporation. If the Defendant
pleads a foreign plea, which is collateral. As if he be sued in debt upon an
Obligation, and he pleades a release made in a place out of the Jurisdiction of
this Court, it ought not to be received without Oath, etc. But if in Covenant
or debt for money to be paid at another place, he pleads payment accordingly,
or the Covenants performed in the place limited, which was out of the
Jurisdiction, it ought to be received without Oath, quod not.

Double delay.
BY the course of the Court double delay cannot be allowed; as if the Defendant
in debt plead, that the Plaintiff is a Recusant convicted, and had a special
imparlance, afterward the Plaintiff conforms, The Defendant cannot plead
Outlawry in the Plaintiff.

John Felton's Case.
MEmorand. quod Thursday 29 die Novembr. 1628. John Felton was arraigned in the
Kings Bench, for the murder of George Duke of Buckingham. And the Justices of
the Common Bench demanded of the Sergeants of the King, who were present in the
Kings Bench, what was done with Felton. And Ashley answered, That he had
confessed the fact, and that the ordinary sentence of death was given against
him. But they marvelled that for so notorious offense, the sentence was not,
that he should be hanged in chains. Yelverton, That any other sentence than the
ordinary sentence cannot be given. But after that he is dead, his body was at
the disposition of the King, which was not denied by the other Justices.

Turner against Hodges.
TUrner brought Trespass quare clausum fregit against Hodges. The Defendant
said that loco in quo etc. is Copyhold, and that the Lord Dudley is seized of
the Manor of Sedgley, and granted the Copyhold in Fee to Roger Turner, and he
makes a Lease to the Defendant Hodges for a year. The Plaintiff replies that
there is custom within that Manor. If a Copyholder makes a lease without
license of the Lord for a year, and dies within the term, it shall be void
against the heir. And upon the issue of Null tiel record, it was found for the
Plaintiff. And Atthowe prayed Judgment, and shows that the custom is good, and
not contrary to reason. 4 rep. 26. It was resolved that lessee of a Copyhold,
without license, for a year, may maintain an Eject. firm. for his term is
warranted by the Law, by force of the general custom of the Realm. But that
ought to be intended by the custom within every Manor within the Realm,
Whatsoever a Copiholder does is by Custom. The Case here is that it shall be
void by the death of the Lessor which is an Act of God; That was, that if
Copiholder made a Lease for years, and afterward aliens: that to be void
against the Alienee would be unreasonable. 39 Eliz. There was a Case referred
to the Judges out of Chancery which was debated in Sergeants Inn. Littleton,
59 b. Armesstrong Lord of a Manor prescribes that a Copiholder upon the change
of every Lord; should pay a Fine. But by all the Judges it was ruled a void
Custom; For the Lord might change his Manor every day. But if it had been,
That after the death of the Lord he should have a Fine. That is a good custom
For it is the act of God. So in our Case, the custom is void against his Heir,
which is by the act of God. In some Cases a custom alters the nature of a
Freehold land. 5 Rep. 84. Perrymans Case. A Feoffment shall not be good until
it be presented in the Court of the Manor, a good custom. If a freehold
estate may be controlled by a custom a multo fortiori a Copi-hold estate.
Barkley argued on the other side. Although it be found for the Plaintiff. Yet
if the custom be void; a void custom is no custom. And for that it is said
in the Earl of Lecesters case. That a void custom cannot be confirmed by Act
of Parliament. And that is a void custom. We ought to consider the nature of a
Copyhold Inheritance; By the Common law it is but an Estate at will: But the
Common law so takes notice to establish it by a custom. That there may be
possessio Fratris of it, and he may have Trespass against his Lord. If Tenant
at will be outlawed, his Estate is determined. But Copyhold is not determined
or forfeited by Out-lawry. As it was adjudged, 44 Eliz. So that the Law takes
notice of it as of an other Estate of Inheritance. Where an Heir after his
death may enter as Heir at Common law, and have Trespass; because that it
descends. At Common law he had power to make a Lease for a year. For it is not
the custom of the Manor that he may make such a Lease; For then it is
pleaded, If a Copiholder makes a Lease for diverse years without alleging a
custom or License of the Lord, he cannot maintain an Ejectione firm. against
his Lord, but perhaps against a Stranger. It may be, then if it be the very
Law, if he may make a Lease for one year, if this custom be good; It will be
contrary to the very liberty of the Estate, 19 Eliz. Dyer Solomon's Case.
Custom, that Tenant in Fee-simple shall not make a Lease for more than 5 years
is void. So Littleton says, That a Condition that the Feoffee should not alien,
was void. And a Condition that Tenant in tail should not suffer a Common
recovery is void. Because that it restrains that Liberty which is annexed to
the Estate. And for the difference between the Father and the Heir in our Case
there is not any difference; For the Heir is all one with Father and in loco
patris. For he might have Trespass by descent of a Copihold. Sir William
Herberts Case. And then if the Father shall be bound by the Lease, so shall the
Heir. Richardson said, That Judgment ought to be given for the Plaintiff.
Copihold as it is created by Custom, so in all it is guided by Custom; For at
the Common law a Copiholder could not make a Lease for a year, But because that
it is a general custom of all Manors in England: For it is not but a mere
Estate at will by the Common law. Then this custom is not against the Liberty
of the Estate. For a Custom inables that the Lease, and a Custom ought to
destroy it upon a Contingency as here by the death of the Father; For that the
Lord may know his Tenant. And therefore the Case is reasonable, and not to be
compared to the case of a Freehold in Dyer. A Freehold may be restrained by
Custom.
And yet a Freeholder may be restrained by custom; As ancient demesne, which he
passes by the delivery of a Turf or a pair of Gloves, and it is not convenient,
for it is at the peril of him who takes the Lease. Copyholder makes a Lease for
a year. But if he dye within the year, his Heir within age, it shall be void
against the Lord. So that the Lord during the nonage shall have the Copihold to
hold for his Services is a good Custom. And so in our Case. Hutton agreed,
That at the Common law it might be restrained by custom. And a Condition, that
a Lease for 3 years shall be void, if the Lessor dye during the term, is a good
Condition. Without doubt the custom is as old as the Estate, then it is as
good to abridge the Estate, as to the other to create it is: It is reasonable
too. For the Lord should have his Tenant in possession, by which he may the
better pay his Fine. But if the Lease be made by License of the Lord, It is a
Confirmation. For that, if the Copiholder makes a Lease for years with License,
and dies without Heir, The Lord shall not avoid the Lease. In some place the
custom is, If a Copiholder dies before Candlemas, the Executor shall have it
for that year, to remove and dispose the Copiholders Estate; Custom in this
Case you see tolls the Heir. And he agreed the Case and difference cited by
Atthowe out of Cook, Littleton. Harvey agreed, That it is a good custom for
the Lord, and for the Tenant; For the Lord to know his Tenant, and for the
Tenant to have the Estate, and pay the Fine. Yelverton agreed also, the Lease
for a year is in it self made by custom, And the same custom may confound it;
For there is a concurrence of others, or one may control another. 21 H. 7. 14
H. 8. A Lease for years, provided the Lessor may enter at his will that is a
good lease, determinable at will, being uno flatu so. So in our Case; But it is
done, that a Copiholder within the year surrenders his Copihold, that the Lease
shall be void. That is an unreasonable custom. In the Kings Bench, It was
adjudged, A Copiholder makes a Lease for years by License, and the custom, if
the Lessee was not in possession at the time of the death of the Lessor, that
it shall be void. Lessee assigns that over, and the Assignee holds it; For
custom ought to be taken strictly. And he agreed the Case put by Hutton, of an
Executor; And the difference that against the Lessor it should not determine;
And the reason put before. And so judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Stone against Walsingham before.
THe case was again moved in Court, which was that they agreed de anno in annum
so long as the one should be Parson, and the other Parishioner, si ambobus
partibus tam diu placuerit, he should retain his tithes for 6 s. 8 d. per
annum. And Richardson Justice said, and it was not denied, that the suggestion
is naught for the incertainty of it; and a Prohibition cannot be granted upon
that. For the words de anno in an. make an estate for a year. And the next
words make an estate for life, and the last but an estate at will: and what
shall be traversed here. It is seen that for years it is good without Deed, but
not for life; And if it be but at will; when the other demands his tithes, the
Will is determined. But at an other day, the suggestion was made, That he made
several agreements with his Parishioner, that he pay 6 s. 8 d. for his tithes
for 4 years. And then a Prohibition was granted. Harvey sufficit, If an
agreement be proved for those 4 years.

Wilson against Peck.
WIlson brought an action upon the Case against Peck, and declares; A Man may
justify in maintenance that he was a Solicitor.
That the Defendant in consideration that the Plaintiff should be his
solicitor in several suits depending against him, in this Court, affirmed that
he would give to him for his pains as much as he deserved. And he said that he
deserved five marks: And upon an Assumpsit pleaded, it was found for the
Plaintiff. And it was moved in arrest of Judgment, that the consideration was
against Law; because that it was maintenance. But Henden on the contrary. And
that it was lawful to have a solicitor. 5 H. 7. 20. There it is said, that a
man may justify in maintenance that he was a solicitor. And the fees of an
Officer, 3 Iac. cap. 7. gives satisfaction in that case. It was said that a
solicitor is not a man known at the common law, but an Attorney, and had his
fees set out by the Law. 9 Eliz. Dyer. Onelyes case. But Munson and Manwood
held that it was maintenance in a solicitor to prosecute and pay money for
another. And Dyer did not oppose that opinion. Pas. 13, Iac. Rot. 75. Com.
Banc. Solomon Leeches case. An Attorney of this Court brought an action upon
the case for soliciting of suits. And there it was conceived, that it was an
ill consideration, and could never have judgment. But Richardson said that in
Solomon Leeches case, he brought an action for the money disbursed, and not
only for as much as he deserved for his labor; And said that a Solicitor is a
person known in the Law. 1 H. 7. And it was one Snowdens case. One brought an
action against him. And he justified, that such an one made a title to his
Clyents land, and that he was his Solicitor in the suit; And ruled to be a
good Justification. By which it appears, that a Solicitor is a person known in
the Law. And the Stat. 3 Iac. much prevails with him for to be of that opinion.
And it would be a miserable case if you would allow no Sollicitors, but
Attourneys in the Star Chamber, and Chancery. For there the Attournies will not
move out of their Chambers. And also it is convenient that Attournies of this
Court follow businesses in the Kings Bench, And the case was in consideration
that he would be my servant, and follow my suits, I promise him as much as he
deserved: An action will clearly lie here, and a Solicitor will not alter the
Case. For he is not but a servant. Hutton on the contrary. I may retain a man
in my service, he may follow my suits, but then he ought to maintain the action
upon the Statute. For a Solicitor is within the Statute, and a Solicitor of
suits is one kind of maintenance, and we ought not to allow it. And so it was
taken in Leeches case, That there was no remedy for a Solicitor, if he had not
an obligation. And he said that in the Star Chamber, in the time of Egerton, a
Solicitor was punished there. Yelverton agreed with him. Harvey said, that the
same case is now depending in the Kings Bench. And the opinion is, that an
Attorney or a Counselor, who had a profession toward the Law, might
solicit any suit in any Court, and it is not maintenance; But another person
not. Yelvert. agreed to that, but said that he ought to show in his Declaration
that he is an Attorney. And afterward the parties agreed, etc.

Scire facias against the Bail.
IF a Scire facias be brought against the bail, and Judgment be, Debt be
brought against the bayl.
that the Plaintiff be satisfied out of the lands and chattels of the bail,
and so a capias does not not lie against them. But if debt be brought, as it
may be against the Bail, otherwise it is.

Hill. 4 Car. Com. Banc.
Plummers Case.
IF a Recusant bring an action, etc. and the Defendant pleads that he is a
Recusant Convict, and then the Plaintiff conform, which is certified under the
Seal of the Bishop; And upon that, orders that the Defendant plead in chief;
and then the Plaintiff relapses, and is convicted again: The Defendant cannot
plead indisabilitity again, As it was adjudged by the Court.

Sir John Halls Case.
SIr John Halls case in a quare impedit, It was given for the Plaintiff, who
was presented by the King to a Church void by Symony; That it was apparently
proved, that the Plaintiff had a writ to the Bishop of Winchester, who returns
before the writ accepted (scil.) Such a day, (which was after the Judgment)
the Church was full by presentation out of the Court of Wards, because that a
livery was not sued. These returns, that the Church was full before the receipt
of the writs, are always ruled to be insufficient. For the Bishop ought to
execute the writ when it comes to him. 9 Eliz. Dyer in a scire fac. etc. 18 E.
4. 7. The difference here is, That the King presented, If the presentee of one
without title is admitted and instituted, the Patron may bring a quare impedit
with presentation, for it is in vain for him to present when the Church is
full. But if a common person recover, and had a writ to the Bishop, if the
Ordinary return that it is full before of his own presentment, it is good; As
if one recover, he may enter if he will, without a writ of execution to the
Sheriff. And in this case the second presentation does not make mention of the
other presentation, or revoke it. But if the Ordinary had returned an other
presented by Symony, under the great Seal; And that the other in that was
revoked, that is good. For it is an execution of the Judgment, and may be
pleaded in abate of the Writ. But if this return should be allowed by this
trick, all the recoveries in a quare impedit should be to no purpose. Harvey
only present, agreed that the Judgment ought to be executed, and that that is
a new devise. And if the presentment under the seal of the Court of wards was
returned, then the question would be, whether the great Seal, or this Seal
should be preferred, but the presentation is not returned. Whereupon they two
agreed, That the Bishop should have a day to amend his return, And not that a
new writ should be taken against him.

Hill. 4. Car. Com. Banc.
Andrews against Hutton.
Hutton Farmer of a Manor, Andrews and other Churchardens libels against him
for a tax for the reparation of the Church. Henden moved for a prohibition,
because that first the libel was upon a custom, that the lands should he
charged for reparations, which customs ought to be tried at the Common law. And
secondly he said. That the custom of that place is that houses and arrable
Lands should be taxed only for the reparations of the Church, and meadow and
pasture should be charged with other taxes. But the whole Court on the
contrary. First, That although a libel is by a custom, yet the other lands
shall be dischargeable by the Common law; But the usage is to allege a custom;
and also that houses are chargeable to the reparations of the Church, as well
as land. And thirdly, that a custom to discharge some lands is not good.
Wherefore a prohibition was granted.

Sir John Halls case again.
IT was moved again, and Henden endeavored to maintain that the return was
good. And he said, where the King had Judgment upon the Statute of Symony, The
King may choose, if he will have the Writ to the Bishop: For if he present, and
the Bishop admits his Clerk, it is a good performance of the Judgment. And
admit that the King had a former title, this title remains notwithstanding that
Judgment. And it is not necessary to return it. For if the title be returned,
it is not traversabe. Henden, If the return was that the Church was full by
presentation of a stranger, it is clearly void. Richardson in Bennet and Stokes
case, there was a rule, and adjudged that if a Clerk be admitted pendente lite
ex praesentatione of a stranger, who is not a party at all to the suit. Yet
such a plenarty returned, is not a good return. And upon superinstitution,
their titles ought to be tried. Yelv. The King presents one under the great
seal of the Court of Wards, this second presentation is not a revocation of the
first, but it is void. Richardson, And so is the second void, because the King
is not fully informed of his title; but if he be, then perhaps it would be
otherwise. Henley, One is Patron, and a Stranger presents, who has not title by
Symony; all is now void. But the King is not bound to present by Symony, but
may present as Patron. Yelverton and Richardson, The Bishop ought to obey the
Writ of the King. And when the Clerk is instituted, that the incumbents may try
their rights in trespass in Ejectione firm. or otherwise the parson who
recovered should be shut up.

Dawthorn against Sir John Bullock.
IN a Replevin for taking of his goods and Cattle. The cattle and goods were
delivered in pawn to the Defendant for money, and the Plaintiff did not pay the
money at the day, yet in the absence of the Plaintiff coming with the Sheriff,
who replevyed them. The Defendant avows for the cause aforesaid. And Atthow
demurred upon the avowry generally. For that that it appeared that the
Defendant had a special property in the goods, and therefore he ought not to
avow, but justify the same. Richardson and Yelverton being only present,
awarded that judgment should be for the Defendant; because that now by the
Statute, they may give Judgment upon the Right; and the Avowry is but a form,
upon which the Replevin is barred; But he cannot have a returno habendo.

The Countess of Purbecks Case.
HEnden moved for a prohibition for the Countess of Purbeck, who was censured
in the High Commission Court for Adultery with Sir Robert Howard, son to the
Countess of Suffolk, and the sentence there was, that she should be imprisoned
without bayl or mainprise, until she found security for to perform the
sentence, and she was fined 400 marks. But Henden alleged, that they had not
power to inflict such punishment; For the offense is spiritual, and the
punishment temporal. And the High Commission had not power to impose a fine,
and imprison for Ecclesiastical causes. For the liberty of the Subject is
Precious. And therefore the censure in the Ecclesiastical Court ought to be
only by excommunication; before the Statute of 1 Eliz. there was not any
question of it, as appears by Articuli Cler. And the Statute does not make
alteration of it, but only in the things there named. Hill. 42 Eliz. Smiths
Case, who was censured for Adultery with the wife of Stock, and censured as
here. And an House was broken to apprehend, and a Prohibition was afterward
granted, for that, that nullus liber hom^, etc. ought to be imprisoned, etc.
without lawful proceedings. Secondly 23 H. 1. 8. appears the particular course
of proceeding in Spiritual causes. Richardson, The first part of the sentence
is not part of the punishment. But that she shall be taken until she gave
security, etc. And it is not but agreeable to the Ecclesiastical course. For if
she be taken by a Writ de excommunicat. capiendo, and then to perform the
sentence or make agreement for the second part; It is express within their
power. Brampstone said, she is a feme Covert, and part of the sentence is
impossible (scil.) that she should pay the Fine; and then by that means the
imprisonment would be perpetual. Yelverton, They cannot imprison without bayl.
Their Commission does not give them such power. And at another day Richardson
said, That it was out of the High Commission, and the Fine estreated. For that
now no Prohibition may be granted, etc.

Smith et al. against Panel.
SMith et alioc Church wardens of Bignel in Essex, presented to the
Archdeacon, that one Panel was a Rayler and a sower of Discord amongst his
Neighbors; Whereupon the Archdeacon enjoined him purgation, et sur motion the
Court granted a Prohibition; for this Case belongs more perhaps to the Leet,
than to the Spiritual Court, unless the railing were in the Church, or any
ways tending to the Ecclesiastical rights.

Wats against Conisby.
ELizabeth Wats Wife of Edward Wats libelled in the Spiritual Court, against
Jane Conisby for a legacy of 100 l. the Defendant pleaded a Release of Wats the
Husband after marriage, and there were no Witnesses to the release to prove the
same, in regard they were dead, and therefore it was not allowed, but upon
averment of the party, that there were Witnesses that could prove the Release
to be the hand of the party, and that had heard the party confess so much, that
he had subscribed to the Release. Prohibition was granted concerning this
averment.

Lashes Case.
John Lash brought to the Bar by a Habeas corpus cum causa directed to the
Mair, Aldermen, and Sheriffs of London, who certified the cause, as follows,
That there has been a Court of Orphans time out of mind in London, and that
the custom has been, that if any Freeman or Free-women die leaving Orphans
within age unmaried, that they have had the custody of their Bodies and Goods;
And that the Executors or Administrators have used to exhibit true Inventories
before them, and for the Debts due to the deceased, to become bound to the
Chamberlane to the use of the Orphans in a reasonable sum, to make a true
account upon Oath of them after they be received; And if they refuse to become
bound, to commit them till they become bound, and then shows that one Joan
Cather Widow, being a Free woman-Fishmonger died, leaving diverse Orphans, and
that John Lash was Administrator and had exhibited an Inventory of 1000 l. debt
unreceived, and was required by this Court to give bond in 1000, who refused
per quod. And it was alleged for the Prisoner by Sergeant Atthowe, that he was
already bound in the Ecclesiastical Court to make account, and so he should be
twice bound, also he was informed that there was no such custom for Widows of
Freemen; But the Court resolved, that they could not examine the truth of the
custom, but the validity of it, and they held it reasonable, if it were true,
which is returned, but if the Ecclesiastical Court would impugn a lawful
custom, the Court would grant a Prohibition.

Scot against Wall.
SCot moved to have a Prohibition, that whereas he had 20 acres of wheat, and
had set out the tenth part for tithe, the Defendant pretending that there was a
custom of tithing that the Owner should have 54 Sheaves, and the Parson 5, and
so he sued for tithes, for that there was no such custom, for the Court said,
that the modus decimandi must be sued for as well in the Ecclesiastical Court
as for the tith it self; and if it be allowed between the parties* they shall
proceed there, but if the custom be denied it must be tried at the Common law,
and if it be found for a custom, consultation must be granted, if not, then the
Prohibition is to stand.

Farmer against Sherman.
John Farmer brought Prohibition, and the Case was thus. And Abbot having a
Privilege to be discharged of tithes quam diu manibus propriis, etc. in the
time of E. 4. made a gift in tail, 31 H. 8. the Abbey was dissolved, question
whether upon the clause of discharge of tithes within the Statute of
Monasteries, the Donee and his Heirs should be discharged, and held that he
should not; for that Statute discharges none, but as the Abbot was discharged
in the time of the dissolution, so that they must claim the Estate, and
discharge under the Abbot; but if by a common recovery, the reversion had been
barred before or after the Statute, it had been otherwise.

Napper against Steward.
NApper against Steward, the Parson had a Prohibition against diverse of his
Parishioners that libelled in the Spiritual Court to make proof by Witnesses of
diverse manner of tithing in perpetuam rei memoriam.

Hide against Ellis.
A Prohibition for Hide against Ellis farmor of the rectory of Stanfield in
Com. Berks, and prescribed that all tenants and occupyers of meadow had used to
cut the grass, and to strew it abroad called Tetting, and then gathered it into
wind-rows, and then put it into grass-cocks in equal parts without any fraud,
to set out the tenth cock great or small to the Parson, in full satisfaction,
as well of the first as of the latter math; Upon traverse of the custom it was
found for the Plaintiff, and exception was taken, that the custom was void,
because it imports no more than what every Owner ought to do, and so no
recompense for the 2 maths, But the Court gave Judgment for the Plaintiff, for
dismes naturally are but the tenth of the Revenew of any ground and not of any
labor or industry; where it may be divided as in gross, it may, though not in
corn, and in diverse places they set out the tenth acre of Wood standing, and so
of grass, and the Jury having found out his form of tithing there it is
sufficient, and the like Judgment upon the like custom in the Kings Bench,
Pasc. 2 lac. rot. 191, or 192. inter Hall and Symonds.

Int. Hill. 2 Car. rot. 2445.
Bells Case.
AN action of Debt was brought by Bell upon an Obligation against one as heir
of the Obligor, (scil.) Brother and Heir. And the Defendant pleads riens per
descent. from the Obligor; And upon that issue there was a special verdict
found, that the Obligor seized of Lands which descended to his Son W. who died
seized of the Lands which descended to his Uncle, who was the Defendant.
Crawley, Two things are required to maintain the action; Whether the Defendant
be heir. Secondly who held lands by descent from the Obligor now is heir at
Common law. And now the heir by the Manor shall be charged in debt, as well as
the Heir at Common law. Dyer 228. All Brothers in Gavelkind shall be charged.
11 H. 7. 12. The heir of the party of the mother shall be charged, and so shall
Bastardeign, 4 E. 3. 14. Heir by Borrough-English. And in this Case R. is not
heir but by the Manor. Yet he shall be charged, 32 Eliz. Dyer 368. by 4 the
Justices. And the Defendant here had Lands by descent from the Obligor, by
which he shall be charged, which was agreed by the whole Court. But by
Richardson, It is not sufficient that he be heir in Blood, and heir by the
Manor. But he ought to have also Land to him by descent from the Obligor. But
here the Plea is that the Land descended to him immediately. And for that you
ought to have pleaded, that the Obligor died and Lands descended to W. his Son
and Heir, who died without issue seized of the said Land which descended to R.
his Uncle, as Brother and heir to the Obligor. Quod fuit concessum per totam
Curiam.

Grays Case.
HEnden showed cause that a prohibition should not be granted to the
Ecclesiastical Court; where the case was, That one Brother had taken
administration, and the other would have distribution of the goods of the
intestate; And said, that issues might enforce distribution of it; And it is
grounded upon Magna Charta, cap. 18. Where there is a saving to the wife, and
the issues their reasonable part. And upon the same reason that there may be a
division between the issues, so there may be between the Brothers, but more
remote degrees have no distribution. And it is hard that one Brother shall have
the whole estate, and the others nothing. And the Ordinary here is the most
indifferent man to make distribution. Hutton, if the eldest son had lands
descended to him, and the youngest took Administration, It is reason that the
eldest shall have distribution. And by him and Harvey a Writ de rationabile
part bonorum lies only where there is a custom. And they said, if it should be
admitted that the Ordinary should distribute to the Brothers; by the same
reason he may to more remote degrees; And he declared their opinions, that many
terms before they were against those distributions; But they said, That now the
Ordinary would have an Obligation before they granted a Prohibition, and they
colored their Obligation with the Statute of 31 E. 3. cap. 11. That an
Administrator shall be count able to the Ordinary. And Harvey said, that be
knew where a man that was rich died, and the Ordinary had 600 l. to pious uses,
before he would grant administration. But he said that in the time of Sir John
Bennet, such an Obligation was questioned, and they would not endure the trial
of it. Hutton said, that now for that that they could not distribute, they
might invent a new way (scil.) divide the Administration. As if the Estate be
400 l. they might grant Administration of the Goods, of the value of 100 l. to
the other. But by him and Harvey, That is illegally granted.

Doctor Wood and Greenwoods Case
DOctor Wood libels against Greenwood in the Ecclesiastical Court for tithes of
Wool, Wood, and Apples, etc. And he shows that he was Vicar there; and that the
8 E. 1. there was a composition that the Parson should have the tithes of Grain
and Hay, and praeterea the Viccar should have Alteraginum; And for that that
those tithes did not belong to the Viccar, he prayed a prohibition. And Henden
objected, that the Parishioner ought to set forth his tith, and not dispute the
Title of the Parson or Viccar. But the Viccar ought to come in the Spiritual
Court pro interesse suo; but notwithstanding that, and notwithstanding the
Viccar refuses to claim those tithes, and that always within memory they have
been paid to the Parson, yet a prohibition was granted: And in the end (upon
this Composition) power is reserved to the Ordinary, if any doubt or obscurity
be in the composition, to expound or determine it; And if he please to increase
the part of the Viccar. And there was not power of diminution. As by Hutton, It
is also usual in such compositions; And they say that the word Alteraginum shall
be expounded according to the use. As if wood had always been paid to the
Viccar by virtue of this word; so it shall continue, otherwise if not. And so
it had been ruled in the Eschequer. And upon that president it was ruled
accordingly in this Court. And by them, wood is minuta decima, as in the case
of St. Albans it was ruled.

Sir Richard Dorrel against Blagrave.
SIr Richard Dorrell was Plaintiff in action of debt upon an Obligation of 400
l. against Blagrave, who demanded oyer of the condition, which was, that if
Blagrave fulfilled and kept all Covenants and agreements in an Indenture, etc.
between him and the Plaintiff, which on his part is to be performed and kept;
Then the Defendant pleads that he had performed all the Covenants on his part
to be performed, etc. And the Plaintiff shows that Blagrave the elder, by his
Indenture granted a rent of 20 l. per annum, to one that he intended to marry,
for her jointure, which was to commence after his death; And that it was out of
all his lands in Watchfield. And afterward by the same Indenture, he Covenants
that he was seized of a good and perfect estate in Fee simple of lands and
tenements in Watchfield to the value of 40 l. per annum. And he assigns for
breach that Blagrave was not seized of an Estate in Fee of the lands and
tenements aforesaid in Watchfield. Whereupon the Defendant demurred: And
Heidley moved two questions; First, that admitting the breach here well
assigned, yet the obligation is not forfeited. And then when the Defendant is
bound, that he perform all Covenants on his part to be performed, and not to
the Covenants broken. As if Lessee for years (rendering a rent at Michaelmas and
the Annunciation) covenant to pay the rent at a day, and afterward he fail;
and then a Stranger is bound that he perform all Covenants, etc. That extends
to the failer of payment, which is past here in our case. And by the whole
Court not allowed: For by such means all assurances of England should be
deluded. And now in this case the Indenture and the Obligation shall be sealed
and delivered at the same time. But if the Obligation had been sealed
afterward at another day, yet it was allowed. For by Richardson, Suppose that
the Condition of the Obligation recites the grant, etc. And the condition is,
that if the land charged be to the value of 40 l. per an. that will be a good
condition, and the Obligation shall be forfeit. If the condition was that the
Land was then of such a value, it was presently a breach of the Condition. The
second matter was, whether the breach was well assigned or not And Richards.
and Yelvert. held that the breach is not well assigned. There are two things in
the Covenant, one of the Estate, another of the value. Here may be a breach to
be assigned upon the Estate, but then it ought to be general: For the grant out
of all his lands and tenements in Watchfield, is not a conclusion to him who
had lands and tenements in Watchfield, then the Obligation is forfeited. As if
one be obliged to make a Feofment to I. S. of all his lands which he had by
descent in D. If he had no lands there, it is not a forfeiture. So here. But if
the rent was granted out of particular land, as out of the Manor of D. There
the grantor is included to say, but that he was seized of the Manor of D.
which was granted. As to this diversity, the word praedictis had relation to
lands and tenements in Watchfield, for no lands were named. But the material
thing is the value, etc. And if praedict. goes to all the Lands, then the
breach goes to more than the Covenant, and then it is not met with. But admit
that it goes to all, yet it is all one: For the intention of the parties was,
that the value of 40 l. jointure per annum shall be mentioned. But the
Plaintiff does not mention the value. And it is sure that the word praedict.
may go to all the lands in Watchfield, or to lands of 40 l. And if the
Defendant had rejoyned, he might have rejoyned generally, scil. That he was
seized of lands in Watchfield in Fee simple, and he is not forced to show his
particular estate in the lands. And admitting they had gone to trial upon that
issue, what might the Jurors find. And if they had found the value, it is
nothing to the breach; That is more than was in their charge, and so void. But
Hutton and Harvey on the contrary, and said, that the breach is well assigned.
And Hutton took this difference, That if the Covenant was that he was seized of
such particular lands of such value; The breach ought to be assigned in
particular also; but where it is, that he was seized of lands of such a value,
the breach is now well assigned, and here it is a recital of lands, of the
value of 40 l. per an. and to that predict has relation. And it does not appear
to us if he had more lands in Watchfield, than of 40 l. per an. But these
things were agreed by all. First that the ancient pleading in the time of H. 6.
is now changed, and the general pleading of all Covenants in the Indenture in
form, although that the affirmative is good: And the Plaintiff ought to show
the particular Covenant broken, etc. Secondly, in the principal Case, if the
Plaintiff had replied, that he was not seized of lands and tenements in
Watchfield in Fee-simple without praedict. or deque fuit seize de nullis terris
vel tenementis praedictis in Watchfield of the value of 40 l. in modo and
forma, and secundum formam conventionis, is a good assignment of the breach;
And the Defendant forced to show the particulars. The Plaintiff discontinued
the principal suit, and begins again; but that he might not do without the
license of the Court, as they said, Because that they might agree afterward to
give Judgment.

Tailors Case.
Tailor was Plaintiff against Waterford in debt upon an Obligation, and the
Defendant demanded Oyer of the Condition, quae legitur ei in haec verba. If the
Defendant should pay such costs as should be assist at the Assizes (without
showing for what) the Obligation should be void, And the Plaintiff replies,
that post confectionem Obligationis, Pasch.. 4 Car. Com. Banc.
the aforesaid words were written upon the Obligation; and the truth is, that
they were endorsed upon the Obligation, by memorandum, after the Delivery. And
Atthowe moved that the Plaintiff might not reply in that manner, because that
when Oyer of the condition was demanded, that was entered for a condition, and
so was admitted by the Plaintiff. And for that he is concluded to say the
contrary. But Sergeant Davenport replied on the contrary. And said first, that
the words of themselves, will not make a condition. It is Litletons case, That
some words do not make a condition, without a conclusion, as what is
contingent, 39 H. 6. And admit that the words will make a condition, yet they
were written after delivery. 3 H. 8. Kellways reports. Hutton, If there be an
Obligation made of 20 l. and if it be written upon the back of the Obligation,
before the sealing and delivery, The intent of this Bond is to pay 10 l. for
such costs, That is no good condition. Which Justice Harvey only being present
agreed. And if any thing may be part of the condition, it ought to be written
before the sealing and delivery, But it is no condition if it be written after.
And by them, here is no conclusion but that the Plaintiff may plead, that the
words were written after sealing and delivery.

Termino Pasch. Anno 5. Car. Regis Com. Banc.
Mericke against King.
IN evidence to the Jury, he who had purchased the land in question (It was
said by the Court) he shall not be a witness if he claim under the same title.
Richardson said, that the conveyance may be proved by other circumstances. And
the same reason was also agreed by the Court, That if a Feoffment be made of a
Manor to uses, that if the tenants have notice of the feoffment, that although
they have not notice of the particular uses, their attornment to the Feoffees
is good; For the Feoffees have all the estate. And Harvey said, that so it was
agreed in one Andernes's case.

Sir Richard Moors Case.
IT was said in evidence to the Jury. The case was, that a man prescribes to
have common in 100 acres, and shows that he put his cattle in 3 acres, without
saying that those three acres are parcel of the 100, yet good. And Hitcham
said, that so it was adjudged in this Court. And Richardson said, it was an
Huntingtonshire case, Where a man alleged a custom to put his Horses, etc. And
the custom was for Horses and Cows. And adjudged good. Hutton said, there can
be no exception to the Witness, who is Cozen to the party, to hinder his
evidence in our law, To which all agreed.

Clotworthy against Clotworthy
THe case between Tenkely and Clotworthy was cited. One grants an Annuity for
him and his heirs, to be paid annually, at two usual feasts, for 30 years,
which was to begin after the death of the grantor. And it was agreed by all (
Richardson being absent) that, Hill. 4 Car. Com. Banc.
that is a good Grant, and charges the Heir, although it first commenced upon
him. Yelverton said, he charges himself; And the Grant is for him and his
heirs. And warranty, which is so granted to commence 40 years after, although
the Father dye before the commencement of it, yet it binds the Heir. And so it
is of an Obligation to be paid 40 years after. Quod concessum fuit.

Beckrows Case.
IN one Beckrows Case, in evidence to the Jury, etc. Beckrows intending to a
mary a Widow makes a conveyance by Deed of Feoffment of his Land, to several
uses, by which he settled his Land upon the issue of the Feme, having issue by a
former wife. But after the marriage, he by much importunity procured the Deed of
conveyance into his hands, out of the custody of the Wife, and also an
Obligation which makes mention of it, and it was for performance of Covenants,
and then he cancelled the Deed, and the Obligation, and took off the seal from
them; And afterward settles his Land upon his former Children, and dies
(having Issue by his last wife.) And in actions under these conveyances; It was
permitted by the Court that the cancelled Deed should be read in evidence. But
first there should be Testimony given of the truth of that practice, before it
should be read, etc.

A Copiholders Case.
IT was said by Richardson to Harvey privately. That there is almost no
Copyhold in England, but the Fine in truth is uncertain. For if the Rolls make
it appear, that some time a lesser, and sometime a greater sum had been paid
for a Fine, that is an uncertain Fine. And he said that he was of Council in a
Case, where the Jury found that the Fine was certain, And afterward by Bill in
Chancery, It was decreed upon search of the Rolls, to be a Fine uncertain. And
that is now the ordinary course (scil.) by decree in Chancery.

Francis Bill against Sir Arthur Lake.
FRancis Bill was Plaintiff in an Assumpsit against Sir Arthur Lake, who
assumed to the Plaintiff, that in consideration that he would make for his wife
certain apparel, and prepare stuff and lace for it; That he would pay for the
stuff and making as much as should be required. And he shows that he provided
Satin and Gold-lace, and made the Apparel, and shows of what value the Stuff
was, and what he deserved for his labor, which amounted to the value of 39 l.
and that he required the Defendant such a day to pay him, which was within six
years before the action brought, but the promise was laid to be 7 years before.
The Defendant pleads the Statute of Limitations, and that the Plaintiff did not
bring his Action within the six years after the promise made, nor within the 3
years after the Parliament ended. But he does not show when it ended. Upon
which there was a Demurrer. And by the Court the ending of the Parliament needs
not to be shown here; For the Question is not upon the 3 years after the ending
of the Parliament, but upon the matter in Law, whether an Action ought to be
brought within six years after the promise, or after the request. Richardson
said, That it ought to be within six years after the promise. Here are two
causes of Action (for the words of the Statute are within six yenrs afcer the
cause of Action) the promise, and the request, and the promise is the
principal, Trin. 5 Car. Com. Banc.
and the Action took its denomination from that, (scil.) an action of the Case
upon an Assumpsit. And if there be a demand which is the case of Action: Here
it will be answered, the promise for a Request without promise is no cause of
Action. And the mischief that the Statute intended to remedy was, that a man
was should not be put to the proof of the matter de facto so long time after.
And if the request is said to be the cause of Action, the promise may be laid
20 years before, and although that may be proved. But the other 3 Justices were
against him, and said, That the intention of the Statute is, within 6 years
after the cause of the Suit given, which is not until after request. As if one
promised to another so much when he should mary his Daughter. The 6 years there
shall be after the marriage; Or if one promise such a sum to one at his return
from Rome, or such a place, from whence it is not impossible to return within
six years; The payment shall be after the return, and there is not a cause of
Action before: and also the promise and the Request are entire; For the request
is part of the promise, and the promise is not entire until the request. They
agreed, if a man makes a request, and suffer the 6th year to pass before an
action brought, and then makes a new request. And this Case was more strong,
because the consideration was future. Heidley said, there was a difference
where the request is necessary, and where it is alleged but for form. As if I
sell a Horse for 10 l. generally, and after the 6 years brought an Action upon
the Case upon an Assumpsit against the Vendee, and shows in his Declaration,
that he was to be paid when he would require it, and licet saepius requisite.
etc. within the six years; Here the Plaintiff is barred; For it was due by the
contract, and the request is but formal. If a man brings an Action within the 6
years, and afterward is non-suted for want of request shown where it was
necessary, and makes a new request after the 6 years, and brings his Action; It
is good; Which was granted by the Court. And in this Case, the Court taxed
Henden, for advising the Defendant to plead the Statute, and hazard it upon
Demurrer. When he might have tried first the matter in fact. But Henden said,
it was dangerous not to plead the Statute. For the opinion of the Kings Bench
and Exchequer seemed to be, that it ought to be pleaded. By the Court, when it
is apparent within the Record, that the Action is brought after the 6 years
certainly, they doubted not but the Statute ought to be shown in arrest of
Judgment. But the doubt is when a general issue is pleaded in an Assumpsit or
Trespass, and it does not appear in the Trespass or Assumpsit, that it was
above the six years, the Statute now may be given evidence.

Trin. 5 Car. Com. Banc.
Starkey against Tailor.
STarkey an Attorney of the Common Bench brought an Action against Tailor for
slanderous words, and declares that he being an Attorney of the Common Bench,
of honest fame, etc. and that he gained much by that profession, which was his
Livelihood, the Defendant maliciously and to hinder him in his profession spoke
these words of him, Thou art a Common Barrettor, thou art a Judas, and a
Promoter, and a Destroyer, and a Viper, and a Villain, and afterward at
another time he spoke these words of him, That he was a Common Barrettor, and a
Villain, and he would make him lose his practice. And upon not guilty pleaded,
it was found that the Defendant spoke th^se words, Thou art a Common Barrettor,
and a Judas, and a Promoter. But not the other words; And 50 l. damages was
given to the Plaintiff. Upon which Ayliff moved in arrest of Judgment, because
the words were too general. And if they had been spoken of another person, they
would not lie, Hill. 30 Jac. Hawk against Moulton, I will not leave thee any
thing, thou art a common Barrettor. And there was demurrer joined upon the
Declaration, but no Judgment. The words are here found without relation to his
profession. But if the last words had been found it would have been
questionable. Mich. 41 Eliz. Hather an Attorney brought an action for these
words, Thou art a Flagging Jack, and a Cousener, and would have cousened me.
And adjudged not actionable, Because it does not appear, that they were spoken
with relation to his profession. But Hitcham, Barkley, and Heidley of the other
side. And that the words were actionable, being spoken of an Attorney, (scil.)
to say he is a Common Barrettor. For although there is a doubt, if it be spoken
of a Common person; Yet these are scandalous to an Attorney, for no man now
will retain him in his Business. If one had said of an Attorney, That he is a
Common stirrer up of Suits, and a disturber of the peace, and so a mover of
unjust actions without doubt it had been actionable. And a common Barrettor
comprehend a^l that. Hill. 8. It was doubtful whether a Thief were actionable
without alleging when and what he had stolen. But it was adjudged actionable,
For Thief intimates, that he had done all that which might make him a Thief.
And so Banckrupt to a Merchant. A Common Barrettor in 8 Coment. is said to be a
Common mover of strifes, and there it is said, that he ought to be fined and
imprisoned, if he be convicted. Westminster 2. cap. 32. There it is ordained,
that a Sheriff shall not permit a Barrettor to remain in the County, much less
this Court will not permit him to be an Attorney. For it is, that an Attorney
ought to be discreet and of honest behavior 4 H. 4. cap. 18. 3 Jac. cap. 7.
They ought to be men of sufficiency, and honest disposition. These words touch
him in his honesty and disposition. An Attorney ought to be a man of good
conscience. 20 E. 4. 9. There it is said, that if a Clyent will put in a Plea
which the Attorney thinks in his Conscience is not true, He may plead non sum
informatus, and disceit does not lie against him; then if the words should be
true he touches him in his profession, and he might never more be an Attorney.
In Birchleys Case, 4 Rep. You are a corrupt man; These are smaller words, and
more general, yet actionable. Yet such words make a man to mistrust him, and
trust next skill is most requisite in an Attorney. 14 Jac. Com. Banc. Rot. 1753.
Small an Attorney against Moon. He is a forgeing Knave, adjudged actionable,
yet to a common person they shall not be accomptable, and the case before.
Distrey an Attorney brought an action against Dorrel in the Common Bench for
these words, Take heed of him, for he is the falsest Knave in England, and he
will cut your Throat. And judged actionable, and that the words shall be
understood, false as an Attorney. And a Common Barrettor is more infamous than
any of these. And the word Judas here ought to be accepted according to the
usual understanding of it (scil.) for a betrayer. And what can be more
scandalous to an Attorney, than to be a Betrayor of his Clyents? For which he
prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff. Richardson said, It is doubtful, whether
the words will bear an action; Barrettor is a notorious offender, and if he be
to be convicted he is to be fined and bound to his good behavior. And it is
hard to make a definition of a Common Barrettor, but a description may be made,
that he is a mover of Suits and contentious in dispositions and practice. But
whether the words shall have relation to him as Attorney is the Question.
Birchleys Case, A corrupt man. This directly relates to his practice, so of
Cousener. But such a thing which ought not to be applied to him as Attorney is
not actionable. Common Brabler, Swaggerer, Breaker of the Peace, which
Barrettor comprehends, being spoken of an Attorney, are not actionable. For
they do not refer to him as Attorney. And the Statute cited before of
Westminster 2. It is to be intended, if he be found to be a Barrettor. And then
he should be put out of the Court. And here if there had been a communciation
of him as an Attorney, then it would be actionable. But it ought to be laid
habens Collequium of him as Attorney; For then of necessity it ought to be
understood of his Office. And so also the words, Trust him not, he will cut
your Throat, ought to be understood of him as Attorney, he will cut the throat
of your Cause. Hutton and Harvey on the contrary. And said the words here are
as well applicable to his profession, as if it had been found, that there was a
Colloquium of him as Attorney. For it is laid that he was an Attorney, and that
he lived by that profession: and that the Defendant maliciously to hinder him
in this profession spoke these words. It has been said what a Common Barrettor
is, and his punishment is appointed by 24 E. 3. Littleton also mentions,
speaking of Feoffments made to Barrettors, (scil.) Quarrellors, then being
spoken of an Attorney: none but quarrelsome men will go to quarrelsome
Attorneys. For although he deals in Suits, yet his carriage and practice ought
to be fair and peaceable. And without Question if it be said, Thou art a
cousening Attorney, an Action lies; But by Harvey, perhaps Cousening generally
will not. And if of a common person it be said, He is convicted of common
barretry, It will bear an Action. And by Hutton, to say of an Attorney he is a
Recusant convicted, it will bear an Action. If it be said of a Judge that he is
a Common Barrettor, an action lies. And if it be actionable for speaking so of
a Judge, it is so of an Attorney; For he is in an inferior rank a Minister of
Justice, and he ought to be chosen of the most honest, discreet and religious
men: and these words if true, make him incapable of being Attorney here. As in
Smalls Case before, it was held, To say of a Bishop, he is a Papist will bear
an Action; For then he cannot hold his Bishopric. If one said of a Merchant,
he is a poor man, is not actionable. But if he said he is worth nothing, had
been questionable. Because that it tantamounts to a Banckrupt. And by them the
word Judas is material here, for loquendum ut vulgus. If he had said you have
played the Judas with your Clyent, without doubt is actionable. Which Richardson
also agreed, and said if one says of an Attorney, that hes a false Attorney, an
action lies. Sed adjournatur.

Hawes's Case.
IN Dower the Defendant pleads ne unque seize que dower. It was found by the
Jury that the Husband was seized, and died seized, and assess damages to the
Plaintiff generally. And it was moved in arrest of Judgment, because that the
Jurors did not enquire of the value of the land, and then ultra valorem terrae,
tax damages, as much as is the usual course, as the Prothonatories informed
the Court. For the Statute of Merton gives damages to the Wife (scil.) valorem
terrae. And the Statute of Glouc. cap. 1. gives costs of suit. But by the Court
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff; although the damages are given
generally, and certainly intended for the value of the Land. And there might be
in the Case a Writ of Error.

Hill. 5. Car. Com. Banc.
Simcocks against Hussy.
SImcocks brought waste against Hussy for cutting 120 Oaks, and the Jury upon
null. wast. pleaded, found him guilty of cutting 20 in such a field, and so
sparsim in other fields, which was returned upon the Postea; but nothing said
of the other 20. where in truth the Jury found him not guilty of them, but the
Clark of Assizes took no notice of that. By the Court, If the Clark had taken
notice, there might have been an amendment by them; But here they gave
direction to attend the Judge of Assize to examine the truth of it. And if they
could procure the Clarks to certify the residue, they would believe it.

Dower.
DOwer was brought for the moiety of 45 acres of land, and for part non tenure
was pleaded, which was found for the Plaintiff, and for other part Ioyntenancy,
which was after imparlance; Whereupon the Plaintiff demurred, and Bramston
prayed Judgment, and answered farther, for that that it was after imparlance,
and cited one Doctor Waterhouses case in Dower, where it was adjudged, that
non-tenure after imparlance was not a plea; And by the same reason shall not
joyntenancy be, 32 H. 6. 29. And by the Court it was adjudged quod respondeat
ouster. But otherwise it would have been, if there had been a special
imparlance tam ad breve quam ad narrationem. And it was prayed to have
Judgment upon the verdict. And by the Court it was said, that they should have
Judgment. And that there might be two Judgments in this action for the
several parts of the land.

Sir Francis Worthly against Sir Thomas Savill.
HE brought an action against Sir Thomas Savill for battery; In which it was
found for the Plaintiff in not guilty pleaded, and 3100 l. damages was given.
Which verdict was last Term. And in this Term it was shown to the Court, that
the Declaration entered upon the imparlance roll, was without day, month, and
year, in which the battery was committed. Which was observed by the Atturneys,
and Counsel of the other part, and that a blank was left for it. But afterward
in the time of this vacation in the night time, the Key of the Treasury being
privily obtained by a false message from Mr. Brownlow Prothonotary, the record
was amended, and some things, were interlined to make it agree with the Issue
Roll, which was perfect; And these things were affirmed by several affidavits.
Whereupon Atthowe moved, that those parties privy to this practice might be
punished, and that the record might be brought in Court and made in statu quo
prius. Crew on the other side demanded Judgment for the Plaintiff, for whether
there is an imparlance Roll or no. If none, then the matter is discontinued,
and that aided by the Statute: If you will have an Imparlance Roll, then I
think these omissions are amendable by the Clerks although after verdict.
Harvey, The Course of the Court is, (for I am not ashamed to declare, that I
was a Clark for 6 years in Brownlowes Office) If the Declaration was with a
blank, and given to the Attorney of the other side, if in the next term, the
Atturneys of both sides agree upon the Issue Roll, Upon this agreement, the
Clark for the Plaintiff had always power to amend the Declaration; Because,
that by the acceptance of the other side there was an assent. Richardson, The
imparlance Roll is the original Roll, and ground for the Issue Roll, which is
the Record of the Court: And I agree that it is reason to amend the nisi prius
Roll. Harvey gave an excellent reason, whereupon the Pregnotaries were
demanded, what was the course of the Court. Brownlow, Gulston, and Moyle all
agreed that the course is; That an imparlance roll may be amended if no
recorda^u^.
That if no recordatur or rule be to the contrary, and a Declaration delivered
with blanks, the Clarks have always amended it. And Brownlow showed where the
book of 4 E. 4. was objected to the contrary, and he had seen the Record, and
there was a recordatur granted. Richardson, Debt is brought against one as
heir, and there is omitted ad quam quidem solutionem haeredes suas oblig. shall
that be amended. And it was said by all the Pregnotaries it should. And Moyle
said that in 13 Iac. there was a case between Parker and Parker, upon a trover
and conversion, and the Imparlance Roll was entered with a blank as here, and
upon non-guilty pleaded, it was found for the Plaintiff, and I fear it will be
mended. By the Court this difference will reconcile all the books, scil. where
there is a recordatur, and where not. It was agreed by some one of the Judges,
that a recordatur might be granted out of the Court. And so Brownlow cited a
president, Pas. 4 E. 4. rot. 94. to the same purpose. And so Judgment was
given for the Plaintiff.

Starkeys Case before.
IVdge Yelverton now being in Court, the Counsel of the Plaintiff prayed his
opinion, and showed the reasons given before to have Judgment. And Yelverton
said, that the word Judas here, did not bear an action. It was two of the
Apostles names; and the betrayer Judas was a Traitor to Heaven, and therefore
this reason should not be drawn to earth, to cause Actions between men. But for
the word common Barrettor, being spoken of a common person is not actionable,
until conviction, he is not punishable for it. If he called him convicted
Barrettor, Convicted Barrettor to a common person is actionable.
it is actionable: But being spoken of an Attorney, or an Officer of Justice,
it is actionable. Littleton tells us what they are, they are meant stirrers up
of unjust suits, which is a grand offense in an Attorney. And they put the case
of Sir Miles Fleetwood. One called him the Kings Deceiver, which was adjudged
actionable, and that it ought to be understood of his Office. And for that in
the principal case Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

John Costrell against Sir George Moor.
JOhn Costrell and Joan his wife brought an action upon the Case, against Sir
George Moor, and declares, That whereas the said John and Joan were seized of a
Message and lands in right of his wife Joan, A man having land in right of his
wife in trust. they cannot both join in the action, but the Husband only.
and that the said John and Joan, and all their predecessors, time out of mind,
etc. had common in such a waste, which is the soil of the Defendant, pro
omnibus a veriis levantibus and cubantibus, etc. and the Defendant had enclosed
20 acres of the said waste, and made a fish pond of it there, so that they
could not take the profits, as before with their cattle: Upon the general issue
pleaded it was found for the Plaintiff. And Crawley moved in arrest of
Judgment; For that the prescription is ill made, and that the Husband and wife
cannot join in this action, but the Husband might bring the action only. And
also where it is said, that they cannot take the profits with their Cattle,
when the wife cannot have Cattle during the Coverture. Richardson said the
prescription is good, and it would have been better if he said all those whose
estate the wife had; But this tantamounts, and is as well in substance, for
that goes merely to the estate of the Wife, Trin 5 Car. Com. Banc.
which was granted. But for the second, I doubt if the Wife may join in this
Action. If a man be seized in right of his Wife, he may have Trespass, for
Trespass done upon the Land, there the Wife shall not join, for she cannot have
the damages if she survive. And there is no difference between this Case, and
the principal Case; It is Trespass on the Case, and for the personal and
temporary trespass, and such for which the Wife should have the Action after
the death of the Husband, unless that the Defendant continue the Pond, etc. I
agree if Battery be done to the Wife, they both shall join, for the Wife might
have had the Action if she survived. And so it was resolved in the Cooks of
Grays-Inns Case they might join. For the wrong was done to the Wife. But here
the Husband only lost the benefit of the Common, and the wife could not take it
with her Cattle; For she had not any Cattle during the coverture. And Yelverton
also was of the same opinion. But Hutton said, In a Quare impedit the Husband
and Wife shall join; And yet the avoidance goes to the Executors of the
Husband. Hitcham, In an Ejectione firm. or ravishment of Ward the Feme joins,
quod concessum fuit. Yelverton said, that in 4 E. 4. it is express that the
Wife shall not join in trespass done upon the Land of the Wife, for damages
shall be recovered in lieu of profits.

Moor against Everay.
MOor and his Wife brought dower against Everay. To parcel he pleads non
tenure, and to the other parcel ne unque seize de dower, which goes to the
trial, and there the Tenant makes default, and upon that a petit cape is
awarded, and now at a day in bank, one Lumbard prays to be received upon the
Statute of Gloucester to save his term, etc. But Henden alleged to the
contrary. First, That Statute is not to this purpose in force by the Common
law. Tenant for years cannot falsify 6 Rep. Periams Case. Then because it was
hard that a recovery should be had by Covin, and the Lessee for years without
remedy for his term, the Statute of Gloucester was made, which gives a receipt
for the Lessee for years, after the Statute. 21 H. 8. was made, which gives the
Lessee power to falsify. The Common experience of the Court is, If an habens
facias seisinam issue, there is not any saving of the term of Lessee for years.
Hill. 39 Eliz. in Bests Case, A receipt was moved and denied. For if the Lessee
had a good term, he might have trespass for entry upon him. Littleton though
says in his Chapter of Tenant for years, that he shall be received. Hutton, The
Statute of Gloucester aids them only, who knew and had notice of the Recovery,
21 H. 8. aids them who had not notice of it. And it is better to prevent
mischief than to remedy it after, and as to that a final Bar. I was of Counsel
in some Cases, where the Lessee was received. And if the Lease be not good, the
Lessor may avoid it by Plea (scil.) Traverse or Demurer; And I remember the
issue taken upon the Term, and found against the Termor. And it was Mr. Fulhams
Case against Sergeant Harris. Sed adjournatur.

Fawkenbridges Case.
IT was moved (he having Judgment before) to have costs, where the Court
doubted, because that it was a special Verdict: and the Statute of 23 H. 8.
cap. 15. says, That where a Verdict is found against the Plaintiff. But in a
special verdict, it is neither found for or against. But it may be said, that
when it is adjudged against the Plaintiff, then it is found against him. And 4
Iac. cap. 3. which gives costs in an Ejectione firmae, had the same words if
any verdict, etc. But it may be answered, That as in Demurrer no costs shall be
recovered, no more in a special verdict, For that the Plaintiff had a
Prohibition causam litigandi. And the Statute may be intended of vexatious
Suits, etc. But Brownlowe said, that he had many times given costs upon the
Statute of 4 Jacob. For that the Prothonotaries were commanded to search
Presidents.

The University of Cambridge.
THe University of Cambridge claimed by their Charter to be Clarks of a Market,
and that they had power by their Office to make orders, and execute them. And
they made an Order that no Chandler should sell Candles for more than 4 d. ob.
the pound. And because that one R. sold for 5 d. he was imprisoned, and a
Prohibition granted. But it seemed that an Habeas corpus was more proper, For
he was not presented.

First, For that they could not imprison without course of Law.

Secondly, Because that as Clarks of a Market, they have nothing to do with but
Victuals, and Candles are not Victuals.

The Sheriff of Surrey against Alderton.
THe Sheriff of Surrey returns a rescous against one Alderton. That whereas
there was a Judgment had against B. and a fieri facias awarded upon that, by
virtue of his Warrant directed to R. to take the Goods of B. By virtue whereof
such a day the said R. diversa bona and catalla ipsius did levy, and had them
in his custody, No rescous can be of Goods.
and one Alderton rescued them from the Bailiff, contra voluntat. ipsius Rich.
The return is naught.

First, For that, that it is rescued from the Bailiff.

Secondly, It is of Goods whereof a rescous cannot be returned. Yelverton,
contrary in both, If a man hinder the Sheriff to make execution, and assault
him, will not a Rescous lie in such a Case? Richardson, Hutton, and Henden,
that it will not, That no Rescous can be upon a Fieri facias, but the party
shall have an Action upon the Case. And Rescous lies only upon a Capias, which
lies against the Person himself.

Iohnsons Case.
IF a Prohibition be granted upon matter at Common law, as upon a personal
agreement between Parson and Parishioner for his Tithes, and not upon matter
within the Statute of 2 E. 6. 13. the suggestion shall not be proved within the
6 months as the Statute limits, and as it is agreed by the whole Court.

Termino Mich. 5 Car. Com. Banc.
Common Recovery.
A Common Recovery was suffered, and a writ of Entry was not filed: and for
that a writ of Error was brought. And Hitcham moved that it might be examined
whether any writ was filed or no. But the Court denied that; But if it might
appear upon Record, That there was a writ filed, Mich. 5 Car. Com. Banc.
then they would consider, whether a new one should be filed or or not. And
they said that the Recovery should be exemplified, by the Statute of 23.

Knight against Symonds.
THe Plaintiff being cast put this exception in to avoid costs, that the Venue
was mis-writen, and it was allowed by the Court. And because the Defendant
might have Judgment, for that he cannot have costs. And Richardson said, that
in the Kings Bench, one Grimston brought an Action upon the Case against one
Hostler, and it was found against him, and the Plaintiff alleged that the
Declaration was not sufficient, for the prevention of costs, and allowed. But
if the Plaintiff be non-sute* he shall not have benefit of the Exception to
prevent costs, by reason of the unjust vexation.

Harris against Lea.
HArris Warden of the Fleet is Plaintiff against John Lea in Debt upon an
Obligation, where the Condition was, That one Lea should be his true Prisoner,
and pay every month for his diet, and the fees due to the Plaintiff by reason
of his Office. The Defendant pleads the Statute of 23 H. 8. and that this
Obligation was made for the ease and favor of the prisoner by color of his
office. And the Plaintiff replied, that the Fleet is an ancient Prison, and
that time out of mind, etc. they used to take such Obligations, absque hoc,
that this Obligation was made for the ease and favor contrary to the Statute,
That the Warden of the Fleet and Westminster. never may take Obligations for Dyer,
etc.
upon which the Defendant demurred generally. But Atthowe prayed Judgment, for
that that the traverse waives the matter before, which was but an inducement,
and in 23 H. 6. There is an Exception of the Warden of the Fleet, and the
Warden of the Palace of Westminster, That they might take such Obligations
which they used; to which the Court agreed. And for that that the Traverse ever
destroys the Bar, the Defendant ought to have joined in that, upon which
Iudement was given for the Plaintiff. If, etc.

Wardens Case.
Ej^ctments not he of a Manor.
IT was said by the Court, Although an Eject. firm. lies of a Manor or of the
moiety of a Manor, if Attournment of the Tenants may be proved, yet it is not
safe to bring an Ejectione firmae of a Manor, etc.

Hides Case.
IN one Hides Case the Defendant was outlawed before Judgment, and procures a
Charter of pardon, and the Question was, whether he should put in bayl. And it
was agreed by the Court, that he should put in bayl. For although the Statute
of 5 E. 3. cap. 12. goes only to a Charter of pardon, not to the reversal; Yet
by the Equity of that Statute he must put in bayl: for it is that he stand
right in Court, which is, that he appear and put in bayl. And although the use
of the Court has been otherwise, yet perhaps in some Cases the Plaintiff never
required bayl. New Entries, title Pardon, pl. 1. So if an Out-lawry be reversed
by 31 Eliz. for want of Proclamation; The Defendant puts in bayl at the Common
law. Manucaptors were only fined for the Defendants default. But now the use is
for the bayl to enter into a Recognisance, etc. And if at Common law upon a
scire fac. he revive the suit, he shall find Manucaptors, by the same reason he
now found bayl.

Wood and Carverner against Symons.
THe Defendant here in the Prohibition libels for tithes of Hay in the
Spiritual Court. Intrat. Hill. 3 Car. and Pas. 4. Car. rot. 454.
The Plaintiff suggests that the Hay was growing upon Greenskips, Deals, and
Headlands, and that within the same Parish there is a Custom, that Parishioners
in a meadow there used to make the tithe Hay for the Parson, and in
Consideration of that to be discharged of all tithes of Hay growing ut supra,
and also that for the Hay of the land, no tithe ought to be paid of such Hay;
but does not aver that the Hay was growing upon Greenskips, etc. And an
exception was taken by Henden: First, That the exception is double; The Custom
and Common law: But by Yelverton, that is not material; For you may have 20
suggestions to maintain the suggestion of the Court. But Richardson was against
that, that a suggestion might be double here, for the suggestion of the Common
law is a surplusage. As in Farmer and Norwiches Case here lately. One
prescribes to be discharged of tithes, where the law discharged him, and so was
discharged by the Common law. Second exception is, that he does not apply the
Custom to himself in the suggestion. For he does not show that the Hay grew
upon the skips, upon which a Plow might turn it self; That had laid the Custom.
And for this cause by the whole Court, the suggestion is naught. And here
Richardson moved, how that two should join in a Prohibition. Yelverton, if they
are joined in the libel, they may join in the prohibition, and that is the
common practice of the Kings Bench. Richardson, the wrong to one by the suit in
the Spiritual Court, cannot be a wrong to the other. Hutton, they may join in
the writ, but they ought to sever in the Declaration, to which Harvey agreed.
Yelverton, the Prohibition is the suit of the King, and he join tan^. as in a
writ. Richardson, But it is as the suit of the party is, and if any join here,
I think good cause of consultation. Richardson. It is against the profit of the
Court to suffer many to join; And it is usual in the case of Customs of a
Parish in debate, to order proceedings in the 2 Prohibitions, and that to bind
all the Parish and Parson. And it was said by them all, That the consideration
of making Hay is a good discharge, because it is more than they are bound to do.

Rises Case.
IN evidence to the Jury, it was agreed clearly, that a Covenant to stand
seized of as much as should be worth 20 l. per annum, is merely void. And so by
the Court it was lately adjudged.

Flower against Vaughan.
FLower sued Vaughan for tithes of hay, which grew upon Land that was heath
ground, and for tithes of Pigeons. And by Richardson, If it was mere waste
ground, and yield nothing, it is excused by the Statute of payment of tithes
for 7 years; But if sheep were kept upon it; or if it yield any profit, which
yield tithes, then tithe ought to be paid. As the case in Dyer. And for the
Pigeons which were consumed in the house of the Owner; he said that for Fish
in a Pond, Conies, Deer, it is clear that no tithes of them ought to be paid of
right; wherefore then of Pigeons? Felony to take Pigeons out of a Dovecoat.
quod nemo dedixit, and a day was given to show wherefore a Prohibition should
not be granted. And the Court agreed, that it was Felony to take Pigeons out
of a Dovecoat. And afterward a Prohibition was granted, but principally that
the Pigeons were spent by the Owner. But by Henden they shall be tithable if
they were sold.

Clotworthy against Clotworthy.
IN Debt upon Obligation against the Defendant as Heir to Clotworthy (scil.)
son of Clotworthy, without showing his Christian name. And Judgment was given
against the Defendant upon default, and upon that Error brought, and that
assigned for error, and after in nullo est erratum pleaded; But Henden moved
that it might be amended, and he cited one Wosters and Westlys Case, Hill. 19.
Iac. rot. 673. where in a Declaration in Debt upon an Obligation, there was
omitted obligo me and haeredes, and after was amended. And he said, that in
this Case, the Plea roll was without Commission of the Christian name, then by
the Court the Plea roll may be amended by the Imparlance roll: but not e
converso. And the Case of the Obligation is the misprision of the Clark; But
here there was want of instructions.

Dens Case.
IN Dens Case of the Inner Temple, issue was joined in a Prohibition whether
the Will was revoked or not, and for a year the Plaintiff does not prosecute,
nor continue it upon the Jury roll; And by the Court, now it is in our
discretion to permit it to be continued or not: which the Prothonotaries agreed.

Mosses Case.
IN one Mosses Case in an Assumpsit for debt which was out of the 6 years
limited by the Statute of 21 Iac. part within the time. If the Jury found for
the Plaintiff, and taxed damages severally; The Plaintiff recovered for that
that is within the time, and not for that that was without. But if damages are
entirely taxt, the Plaintiff cannot have Judgment of some part. Which was
granted by the Court. And by Richardson, where an Action is brought upon an
Assumpsit in Law, and the Request is put in, which is not more than the Law had
done, the Request there is not material; But where a Request is collateral, as
in Pecks case; there it is material. Hutton said, that in Pecks Case it was
agreed by the whole Court, that a Request was material, but they conceived that
the postea requisitus was sufficient; For which afterward it was reversed in
the Kings Bench. Richardson said, if one sells an Horse for money to be paid
upon Request, and no Request is shown, he can never have Judgment, which was
not denied.

Boydens Case.
BOyden Executer of Boyden brought a scire facias to execute Judgment given
against Butler for the Testator, which was directed to the Sheriff, and upon
nihil habet returned, and testatum, a scire fac. is directed to the Sheriff of
S. who returns Ployden terretenant of the Manor which Butler was seized of at
the time of the Judgment. Ployden appears and demands Oyer of the scire fac.
and of the return, and pleads that long time before A. B. and C. were seized of
the Manor in fee, and before the first return makes a feoffment to the use of
one Francis Boyden for life, who makes a Lease to the Defendant for 80 years.
And because that Francis Boyden aforesaid is not returned terretenant, demanded
Judgment of the writs aforesaid. Bramston said, that the conclusion here to
the writ is naught: for a writ shall never be abated, where we cannot have a
better. The matter here is the return of the Sheriff, that Mr. Ployden is
terretenant, to which he makes no answer, but by Argument; And in all Cases
where a special non tenure is pleaded it is used to be a Traverse, upon which
issue may be taken. 8 E. 4. 19. 7 H. 6.16.17. But in our case no issue was
taken, and here all the matter alleged may be found, etc. For the matter,
although general non tenure is no plea, yet a special non tenure may be
pleaded, 7 H. 6. 17. 25. 8 H. 6. 32. In real actions non tenure of a
Franktenement is good. But here a Chattel is only in question. 2ly. he may
plead non tenure of Franktenement, where the Lessee shall be concluded, and
bound; But here here Edw. Boyden is not bound. Crawly said, that the plea is
good, and for the matter, the difference is between the general and the special
non tenure. The general non tenure is no plea, but in a praecipe quod reddat as
it is; But a special non tenure is a good plea in a scire facias nomina
praecipe. 31 H. 6. non tenure, 21 Statham scire fac. The Plaintiff in a scire
fac. does not demand Land but execution. Yelverton, In Holland and Lees Case,
in the Kings Bench this point. It was adjudged that the Writ shall abate.
Richardson, This Writ is a judicial Writ, and by that Plea a better Writ given
you. For where before it was against the Terre-tenants generally, he might have
now a particular scire fac. against Francis Boyden: and both ways are good,
either to demand Judgment of the Writ, or Judgment of the Court, if execution
ought to be against him; quod concessum per totam curiam. And agreed also by
the Prothonotaries, that a special scire facias might issue against Francis
Boyden.

Turner against Disbury.
TUrner against Disbury in Trespass; Where the Writ was quare domum and clausum
fregit, but the Declaration was, quare domum, and clausum, and canem molossum
cepit, which was found for the Defendant. And it was moved by Hitcham for the
Plaintiff in arrest of Judgment to prevent costs for it; That there is not a
material difference between the Original and the Declaration. For that that
there is more in the Declaration than in the Original; And then here is no
Original to warrant part of the Declaration. But this variance was between the
Original it self which remained with the custos brevium, and the Declaration;
For the Original as it was recited in the Declaration, according to the usage
in this Court, agreed with the Declaration. But by the Court, it is after
verdict. For the Original for part cannot be applied to this Declaration, and
it shall not be taken as the Original for it; And then there is no Original,
which is aided by the Statute, and so it had been frequently ruled. By Harvey
it was one Blackwells Case here, where the Writ was bona and catalla cepit, and
the Declaration was (viz.) unicum discum plumbi. And that was ruled to be no
Original.

The Wife of Cloborn against her Husband.
THe Wife complains against her Husband in the Spiritual Court Causa saevitiae,
For that he gave her a box on the ear, and spat in her face, and whirled her
about and called her damned whore. Which was not by Libel, but by verbal
accusation, after reduced to writing. The Husband denies it, and the Court
ordered the Husband to give to his Wife 4 l. every week, pro expensis litis and
Alimony. Barkley and Henden moved for a Prohibition. The Suit is originally
Causa saevitiae, and as a Case that they assesse Alimony. And now for a ground
of a Prohibition. It was said, that Cloborn chastised his wife for a reasonable
Cause, by the Law of the Land as he might, which they denied, and said, that
they had Jurisdiction in these matters de saevitia, etc. And afterward that
the wife departed, and that they were reconciled again. And then that
reconciliation took away that saevitia before as reconciliation after
elopement. Richardson, It was said here, that the Suit was now held and without
Libel, but that is no ground of a Prohibition, for he proceeded upon that
matter reduced in Articles, and we cannot grant a Prohibition if they proceed
to their form. For we are not Judges of their form. But if they will deny a
Copy of the libell, a Prohibition lies by the Statute. And you you will say, that
an Husband may give reasonable chastisement to his Wife, and we have nothing to
do with it: But only that the Husband may be bound to his good behavior by the
Common law. And the sentence in causa saevitiae is a mensa and thoro, and we
cannot examine what is Cruelty and what not. And certainly the matter alleged
is Cruelty; For spitting in the face is punishable by the Star Chamber. But if
Mr. Cloborn had pleaded a Justification, and set forth a Provocation to him by
the wife, to give her reasonable castigation; Then there would be some color
of a Prohibition. Henden, We have made such an Obligation, as it is absolutely
refused. Hutton, Perhaps he is in contempc, and then they will not admit any
Plea. As if one be outlawed at Common law, be cannot bring an Action. But the
Plaintiff they advised to tender a Justification, and if they refused it, then
to move for a Prohibition.

Bachus and Hiltons Case.
HUtton cited one Bachus and Hiltons Case in the Kings Bench, Where a Bill was
of Lands 17 Maii, and the Declaration 20 Mail, which was after, and so the
Original before the trespass, and after verdict. Because it was mistaken,
Judgment was stayed.

Mortimores Case.
AMhurst desired the opinion of the Court in this Case. Copiholder is ousted,
and so the Lord disseised, and the Copiholder releases all his right to the
Disseisor, and dies, his Heir enters, and brings trespass against the
Disseisor, who pleads his Franktenement. And by the Court the Release is
clearly void, the Disseisor never being admitted Copiholder. But they ought not
to teach him how to plead. And Hitcham cited a Case in which he was of Council;
Two Copiholders in fee, the one release to the other by Deed. And that was
adjudged a good Release, which was now also agreed by the Court.

Earl of Mulgrave Ratcliffes Case.
Intratur Exchequer Chamber, 18 Iac. Rot. Argued by Sergeant Atthowe.
Do You Mercurii post festum Sanctae Margaret. 17 Edwardi 2d. John de Malo lacu
gave to Peter de Malo lacu, and the Heirs of his body, the Castle and Manor of
Mulgrave, by diverse mean conveiances the Land came to Sr. Ralph Bigod 11 Ian. 6
H. 8. Sr. Ralph Bigot made a Feoffment to William Ever and others to the use of
his last Will, and died, and the right of the Land, together with the Entayl
and the use, also after the Will performed* descended to Sr. Francis Bigot.

10 Dec. 28 H. 8. Sir Francis Bigod made a Feoffment to John and others to the
use of himself and Katherine his wife, and the Heirs of their bodies. and they
had issue Ralph Bigod and Dorothy, then the Statute 16 H. 8. cap. 13. for
forfeiture, for treason is made, and 26 Maii, 29 H. 8. Sir Francis Bigod was
attainted of Treason committed 7 Ian. 28 H. 8. and was executed, and Katherine
survived. H. 8. by the special act of attainder of Sir Francis Bigod, and his
forfeiture is made, 4 Novem. E. 6. Ralph Bigod Son of Katherine and Sir Francis
was restored in blood, and died without issue. Dorothy married Boger Ratcliff,
and they had Issue Francis Ratcliff.

5 October. 8 Eliz. Katherine died, and Francis Ratcliff died, having issue Roger
Ratcliff 1 Febr. 34 Eliz. Francis Ratcliff, Roger Ratcliff entered 11 Aug. 33
Eliz. Office found for the Queen.

28 April. 34 Eliz. The Queen by Letters Patents granted the same to Edward
Lord Sheffield and the Heirs males of his body begotten, at the rate of 9. 18.
3 d. Roger Ratcliff upon the whole matter sued his Monstrare de droit in the
Exchequer, and had Judgment for him, and Writ of Error being brought by the
Lord Sheffield to reverse the Judgment formerly given in the Case.

Points 2. First whether Francis Bigod who had Estate in special tail in
possession, had also any right in the ancient entayl left in him at the time of
his Attainder, or whether it were not in abeiance in respect of the Feoffment
made 21 H. 8. and whether that right did accew unto the King by the Attainder
of Francis, and the general Statute of 26 H. 8. cap. 13. or by the particular
act of Attainder of 31 H. 8. and I am of opinion, that there was a right of the
old entayl remaining in him, and that the King ought to have it, together with
that estate in special entayl in possession freed and discharged thereof as
long as the Estate entayl endured.

In the handling of this point, I shall occasionally speak of rights of Actions
real, given or not given to the King upon Attainder of Treason, by force of
Statute 26 of H. 8. or of the general Statute of 33 H. 8. for this Statute is
so near of kin to that conservation of ancient Rights, that we must foresee
that we do not in the Judgment of this Cause prejudice the Statute ex aliqua.

Secondly, Whether there be a Remitter in the Case after Attainder of Treason,
and if there be such a Remitter here, when the Remitter begins and in whom,
whereas nothing has as yet been distinctly said. I am of opinion, that there
ought to be no remitter in this Case to the old Entayl, and thereby I add
more, that if there be a remitter, it is but for a time, By the Office
following it is remitted and ended, I must profess that whatsoever I have
thought upon this Case, and advised upon it with my self, I have met with two
strong affections, Zeal and Indignation; Zeal in the behalf of the King to
preserve the ancient Rights of the Crown, and against the invasion of Rebels
and Traitors. Bigod that sometimes brought a puissant Army into the field to
depose the King, failing in that enterprise, now to rise in Question against
him, that what he could not gain by the sword, he might supplant by the Law;
for though Ratcliff bear the name of this Case, yet I see nothing but the hand
of Francis Bigod his Estate, his Right, his Title, Land per descent that
maintains it, therefore let it not seem strange that I am warm in this Case,
for Zeal and Indignation are fervent passion, and I do profess to give
Prerogative to the rights of the Crown in my care and vigilance, and it is
nobile Officium judicis and debitum due by Oath of Office to watch for him who
works for us, ne quid detrimenti capit respublica, and if Charity begins at it
self, so ought Justice to do, that the King who grants Justice to all should
not be wanting to himself. Because I desire to be plain and clear in my
Arguments, I will make the Questions as single as is possible, for multiplex
judicii nunc parit consusionem, et quaestiones quo sinpliciores eo laudiores,
ergo will I make this first point a single Question. Tenant in tail of Land in
possession makes a Feoffment in fee, Question, whether any right of the Entayl
remains in him still against his own Feoffment, and to what ends and uses,
and what he may do or suffer by force of this right in this Question. I take no
exception at the validity of the Feoffment made by Francis Bigod at cestui que
use in tail by the Statute of R. 3. and not the then Tenant in tail in
possession, yet notwithstanding taking the Case at the worst, I am of opinion,
that this Feoffment gives away all the Estate of the Tenant in tail; and as
concerning the Issue in tail inheritable to that Entayl, and to him in the
reversion, there remains still in the Issue a right to that Entayl by force of
the Statute de bonis condi. and it is confessed on both sides, that there
remains a right of that Entayl by force of the Statute, for their use, and
good, and whether it be for the Lessor himself sleeping till there be an Heir
to claim it, or in the preservation of the Law which is termed an abeyance, or
in nubibus is the Question, by which it appears that the exact enumerations of
Rights, as jus habendi, redimendi, percipiendi, possidendi, recuperandi, and
finendi, infers that there was no right, because it was none of these
rights, makes but a noise, for there is jus recuperandi when the time comes,
but it is in the mean time till the person inheritable appear, which may put
this right in execution, which the Lessor cannot do against his own Feoffment,
it is the only Question, and upon this exact division of Rights, they have left
out one whole member of Rights, such are the Rights to depart with an Estate,
and not to get or keep are omitted; such are the Rights to give or release or
jus extinguendi, or jus renunciandi, to renounce or disclaim, of which kind
this very right is, That Tenant in tail has after the Feoffment, which had not
discontinued finally to Bar the whole Entayl; for by that Right which is left
after the Feoffment, the Estate tail may be recontinued again, for the root of
the Entayl is left alive still. Now see the reason of this, and let the Statute
of West. of Estates tail, and the pleading and practice upon that Statutes,
which are the expositions of Law judge, the Statute recites the form of
Fee-simple conditional which now are intayls, and then shows 2 mischiefs,
that the Donces after issue had power to alien and disinherit their Issues, and
that the Donors were defeated of their reversions, both being against the minds
of the Givers, and the remedy provided in these words, It is ordained that the
Will of the Giver according to the force of his Gift expressed in his Deed,
shall be from henceforth observed, so that they to whom the Land was given
under such Conditions, shall have no power to alien, but that it shall remain
to their Issue after death, and shall revert to the Donor after death, and if a
Fine be levied of such Lands finis ipsi jure sit nuilus, but if neither Fine or
Feoffment be void, for they are but voidable, not as before when they bound
both Heirs and Donors absolutely, so that it appears, whereas before the
Statute the Donee had power absolute post prolem suscitatam; and so totally and
in a sort rightfully to disinherite their Heirs, the Act being not against the
rules of positive Law, to bar to all purposes as well his Issue as the Giver, as
also himself.

Now since the Statute that very power of Alienation remaining against himself,
not restrained by the Statute, though he may still disturb and discontinue it
against them by exposition, which the Statute has received which as Littleton
says Discountenance cap. 171. is a wrong to the Issue and the Giver, So that
upon this Statute I reason thus, that the Tenant in tail has the whole Estate
in tail, and all the right of it in himself, and may finally and totally bar it
as well against his Issue, as against himself by Common recovery, but by
Feoffment or Fine he could not, by reason of this Statute. And that ergo summum
jus, or verum jus intayl, though it be discountenanced, is not barred by the
Feoffment, for it is not in his power by that kind of conveiance, and a non
posse ad non esse valet argumentum necessario negative, so that the Argument
stands thus, What the Tenant in tail had and has not parted withal remains
in him still; but the main right in tail he had, and has not parted, ergo it
remains in him still; for qui non habet potestatem alienandi, habet
necessitatem retinendi. If you say that he has parted with it, I deny it, for
the Statute has taken from him that power by Fine or Feoffment only, finis
ipse jure sit nullus, which before he could have done; and the practice of the
Law is answerable to this, both toward the Donor and toward the Issue; The
Donor has two things whereby he may be benefitted and prejudiced, the one in
his Rent reserved, the other in his reverter, but the Issue prejudiced only in
his Descender. Now for the Donor, when the Donee has made a Feoffment and has
excluded himself from all rights as concerning himself, yet the Donor shall by
force of this Statute, which at the Common law he could not. And if the Donor
will release all his right in the Land to the Donee after a discontinuance by
Feoffment, his release though it will extinguish no right to the very Land, yet
it will extinguish Rents, which proves that the Donee by his Feoffment cannot
dismiss himself of all his right, but that by the Statute of West. his
alienation is disabled as to that, but that the Donor may avow for the Rent.
But wheresoever Tenant in tail suffers a Recovery, or levies a Fine, the Rents
together with the entayl ceases. And the answer as to that is imperfect to
resemble it to the Case of tenant in see simple does alien, and yet the Lord
may avow upon him, for the Cases have no resemblance, for as Littleton well
distinguishes, when Tenant in fee has departed with his whole Estate, he is
no more Tenant to the Lord to avow upon; though the Lord if he Will may avow
upon him for the arrerages, and if the Lord after future alienation release to
him all his rights in the Land, the Release is void to release the Rents and
Services, in all which it differs materially from the other Case, and it is an
equal proportion of the Law, That when the Lord aliens his signory, the Tenant
is to he acquainted, that all Arrearages may be paid, that he may have no
after-reckonings, for after notice and the Arrerages paid, the avowrie
vanishes. Now for the Heir in tail claiming from his Ancestor after his
Feoffment by descent from him, thereby allowing a right to remain in him
against his Feoffment; The Case is more difficult, because during the Feoffor
there can be no motion of that right, neither by the Feoffor who has hard
himself, nor his Issue, because his Right is not yet come; yet let me put this
Case upon the Statute 11 H. 7. upon the opinion of Mountague Chief Justice. If
Tenant in tail Iointress make a Feoffment, the person to whom the land does
belong after her death may enter and hold it according to his right. Now till
such Entry there is a discontinuance, but when the Issue enters he is an Heir
intayl, et quasi eins per descent. But now generally when Tenant in tail has
made a Feoffment and dies, the Heir shall bring a Formedon in the Discender,
and shall count that descendere debet from that Ancestor that made the
discontinuance performam doni, and therefore the Writ says discendit jus, it
is as much devenit jus.

It is true that regularly a Feoffment bars all former rights and future
rights; yet respect to be had to Estrangers. Albanies Case, 2 Rep. Archers
Case, 1 Rep. 66. 9 H. 7.
And therefore in Archers Case, Lands were demised to one fore life, remainder
to his first Heir male; Tenant for life made a Feoffment in fee and died, his
next Heir was barred of his right for ever by the Feoffment.

A man seized of Land by right of his Wife, makes a feoffment in fee, and then
the Estate is made back to the Wife, she is thereby remitted, and her Husband
shall never be Tenant by the Courtesy, and therefore well resolved, if Tenant
in tail discontinue, and levy fine with Proclamations, is no bar to the Estate
tail.

Now this Case is irregular, because it stands by Act of Parliament, which is
able to make the same Act good to one purpose or person, and void or voidable
to another, as the Statute of Ecclesiastical persons, and binds the party, but
is void or voidable against the Successors, and shall nevertheless when they
enter, be in by succession.

And that there is still a right remaining in the Tenant in tail, appears in
that he has still in him a power to bind it more finally and totally by fine
and recovery if he pursue them rightly, and therefore note Cuppledikes Case. If
Tenant in tail with diverse remainders over make a Feoffment, and Feoffee vouch
not the Feoffee Tenant in tail in possession but the first in Remainder, by the
Statute the Feoffees are not bound, but are remitted; and Maunsells Case there
is cited, where one recovery is a bar to 3 several Intayls with double voucher.

And this is called jus extinguendi; which he could not extinguish and
discharge, if not in him and in his power; and therefore there is no cause to
frame Abeyances needless and in vain, but the Law allows not nor admits not but
in Cases of necessity, as in the vacancy of Bishops, Parsons, and other
Ecclesiastical persons, or the like Remainders to right Heirs upon Freehold,
abeyances are not allowed, but where the original Estate required them, or
where the consequences of Estates and Cases do require them. As for the first
in Case of single Corporations, Bishops, Deans, and Parsons which must dye, and
a vacancy of freehold or a Remainder to the right Heirs of I. S. yet living. Or
Secondly in Case of congruity, as if a man gives a Warranty and die, his Heir
in ventre sa mere may not be vouched, but if there be Heir he may be vouched,
and a Vouchee may take and plead a Release quasi tenens, or may lease a Fine to
the Defendant of the Land in Question.

But for Estates that of their own nature and origination, creation, are
perfect and entire as this Estate entayl is, the Law permits not vain affected
abeyance or fictions by the voluntary Act of the party, as this, to no good,
which should preserve a right to serve the Heir, and to defraud the King, which
was one of the principal reasons for the making the Statute 27 of H. 8. for the
transferring of uses into possession; Uses being but a kind of abeyance and
shift to keep the profits to the use, and defraud the King and Lords of their
Escheats, and them that had a right to know against whom to bring their
Actions. Littleton was confounded in himself when he made an abeyance of totum
statum suum, and yet made an Estate for life, which is condemned in Walsinghams
Case by the Judges. Again, though fictions take place amongst common person,
the King is not bound by fictions, and therefore the King is not bound by his
remainders by recompense feigned upon a common recovery, warrant collateral
binds not the King, but warranty with real and actual Assets, nor the King is
not bound by Estoppels of his own recital certa scientia, as it is in
Altenwoods Case.

And I hold plainly, that as the Land in possession is distinctly and literally
given to the King, so the right is as literally directly and plainly given to
the King by discharge of that ancient right whereof formerly it was bound; for
when the Statute says, that the King should have the Lands, saving the right
of all persons, other than the Offenders and their Heirs, and such as claim to
their use, it is plain, that the eye of the Statute was not only upon the Land
in possession but also the rights to the same, the one in point of Giving, The
other in point of renouncing.

The Land in possession could be but in one, that is in the Offenders, and so
it was given, but the rights to the same Lands might be in sundry persons in
the Offender, or in his Heirs, or in Strangers.

Now when the Statute says the King shall have the Land without saving the
Rights of the Offenders or his Heirs, or any claiming to their use, Tenant in
tail discontinues, and after disseiseth his Discontinuee, and is attainted of
Treason, he forfeits his Estate gained by the Disseisin, and also his right of
Entayl, for he cannot take benefit of his ancient Right against the King, by
force of the Statute of 26 H. 8. and 32 of H. 8. and this agrees with the
reason, and the rule in the Marquess of Winchesters Case; for if the Traitor
have right to a Strangers land, that shall not be given to the King for the
quiet of the Stranger being Possessor for the quiet of his possesion, but such
right shall be given to the King being Possessor for the quiet of his
possession, and the word Hereditament in the Statute 26 H. 8. are both
sufficient and fit to carry such right in such Cases, and no man will dispute
but they are sufficient to save naked rights to the Lands of strangers, and
therefore it is not for the count of words, but because it is alleged it was not
meant, and so it was said in Digbies Case, and so has Antiquity expounded it
for the good of the Subject against the King, and against the letter of the
Law. But can any man imagine that the Parliament that gave the Land to the King
should leave a right in the Traitor, in the same Land, to defeaf him again of
it, since the Statute gives the right and the Land, and this gives a forfeiture
of all rights belonging to the Person attainted of Treason and their Heirs, for
the benefit of the Kings forfeiture is of so great importance, that if it be
not taken as large as I take it, it is an avoiding of all the Statute, even
that 33 H. 8. cap. 20. for though they have the word Rights in both Statutes,
even that of 33. does not include the right of Action to the Lands of
Estrangers by an Equity against the Letter. So for this time the Case was
abruptly broken off, by reason the King had sent for all the Judges of every
Bench.

Springall against Tuttersbury.
IN Springall and Tuttersburies Case. It was agreed by the Court, If a verdict
be given at a nisi prius, and the Plaintiff or Defendant die after the
beginning of the Term: yet Judgment shall be entered, for that relates to the
first day of the term.

Overalls Case.
ONe Overall was sued in London, and for that that he was of the Common Bench,
a Writ of Privilege issued, which is a Supersedeas, and staid the Suit wholly,
and not removed the Cause; And if the Plaintiff had cause of Action he ought to
sue here. And then by the course of the Court, a Clark shall not put in bayl.

Foxes Case.
THe Lord Keeper in the Star Chamber cited one and Butchers Case to be adjudged
38 Eliz. An Undersheriff makes his Deputy for all matters except Executions,
and restrained him from meddling with them. And it was adjudged a void
Exception. So if it be agreed and covenanted between them, that the Deputy
should not meddle with matters of such a value, It is a void Covenant. And that
was agreed by Richardson to be good Law.

Hill. 5 Car. Com. Banc.
Overalls Case.
IT was agreed at another day in Overalls case by all the Clarks and
Prothonotaries of the Court, that the Course always was, that if an Attorney or
Clark be sued here by bill of Privilege, he needs not put in bail. But if he be
sued by original, and taken by a Capias, as he may be if the Plaintiff will,
Then he ought to put in bail. quod nota.

MEmorandum, that on Sunday morning in the next term ensuing, which was the 24.
day of January. Sir Henry Yelverton, puisne Judge of the Common Bench dyed, who
before had been Attorney general to King James; and afterward incurring the
displeasure of the King, was displaced, and censured in the Star Chamber, and
then he became afterward a practicer again at the bar, from whence he was
advanced by King Charles to be a Judge. He was a man of profound knowledge and
eloquence; and for his life of great integrity and piety, and his death was
universally bewailed.

Termino Hill. 5 Car. Com. Banc.
Honora Cason against the Executor of her Husband.
HOnora Cason sues Edward Cason Executor of her Husband, and declares by bill
original in nature of debt pro rationabili part bonorum, in the Court of Mayor
and Aldermen of London, and alleges the custom of London to be, That when the
Citizens and Freemen of London die, their goods and chattels above the debts,
and necessary funeral expenses, ought to be divided into three parts, and that
the wife of the testator ought to have the one part, and the Executors the
second part to discharge Legacies, and dispose at their discretion; And the
children of the Testator male or female, which were not sufficiently provided
for, in the life of the Father, to have (notwithstanding the Legacies in the
will) the third part. And the custom is, that the Plaintiff in this action
ought to bring into the Court an inventory, and sue before the Mayor and
Aldermen; And that she had here brought an Inventory, which amounted to 18000
l. so that her third part was 6000 l, and demanded it of the Executor, who
unjustly detained, etc. And it was removed to the Common bench by writ of
Privilege. And now Hitcham Sergeant moved for a procedendo. And the Court
seemed to be of the opinion to grant it. Because that the custom is, that the
suit ought to be before the Mayor and Aldermen, and then if they retain the
action here, the custom would be overthrown. But they agreed that a rationabile
part bonorum may be remanded here, and that they may proceed upon it in this
Court; And that there be diverse presidents to this purpose. And they agreed
that a rationabile part bonorum is the original writ by the Common Law, and
not grounded upon the Statute of Magna Charta. But that it does not lie, but
where such a custom is, which custom they ought to extend to all the Province
of York beyond Trent. Richardson chief Justice said, that in the principal
case. The Plaintiff in London might have declared without alleging the custom.
As it is in 2 H. 4. Because that the custom is well known. But otherwise, Where
custom ought to be showed, and where not.
where an action is upon the custom, in a place where the custom does not
extend; There it ought to be shown. And afterward, at another day, a
procedendo in this case was granted.

Sir William Cave against Sir William Fleetwood.
IN debt the Plaintiff had judgment, Hill. 5 Car. Com. Banc.
and a cap. ad satisfac. was awarded against the Defendant, upon which he was
outlawed. And Crawley moved that the Plaintiff might have an Elegit, and cited
21 H. 7. 19. There are but four manners of Execution Two by the Common law,
levari and fieri fac. And two by the Statute, elegit and capias, and none of
them is a bar to the other, unless there be satisfaction of it. A fieri fac.
is no bar to the cap. although part of the Debt be satisfied.
22 Ass. 47. E. 3. Exec. 41. If the party pray execution of the body, and had
it, then he shall not have resort to a new Execution; For if the Defendant die
in prison, it is adjudged in Bloomfields case, that the Plaintiff shall have an
Elegit, which proves that it is the satisfaction the Law looks upon, and
respects. A fieri fac. is no bar to the capias, although part of the debt be
levied by fieri fac. and a capias may issue after. Secondly the process is
determined by the Outlawry, although it be after Judgment And for that the
Plaintiff resorts to his satisfactory execution again. 17 E. 4. 4. Execution by
Statute does not oust execution by the Common law, no more than the execution
by one Statute ousts the execution by another. Hutton Justice If upon an Elegit
brought, it be executed, he can never have an execution; And if a man be taken
upon a capias, the party now may have another execution; but the outlawry here
determines the process, and then the Plaintiff by scire fac. revives the
Judgment again, and he may resort to which process he will. If a man had a
Judgment, and taken a capias, and done nothing upon it, but died, the Executor
is not bound by that. But after a scire facias he may have an Elegit, or what
other execution he will. Hudson and Lees case, Common Bench, The Plaintiff took
an Elegit, but because he could not (upon the Inquisition find sufficient to
satisfy, he resorted to a capias. And it was agreed that he might, for that,
that the Elegit was not awarded upon Record. But if an Elegit be awarded by the
Roll, and so shall be recorded, the Plaintiff ought to proceed upon that. But
the course is not to award it upon the Roll; and he said that Bloomfields case
is not Law. For if the party die in execution by Elegit by capias, the
Plaintiff had his execution, and might not have any execution again. And so it
was adjudged in Iacksons Case in this Coutt. And the making of the Statute of
21 ^ac. shows that so the Law was taken.

Wollaston Dixye against the Bailiffs and Burgesses of Derby.
IN a quare impedit, the Plaintiff declares that Justice Beamont was seized in
Fee of the Advowson, of St. Peter's in Derby, and presented his Clerk to it, who
was instituted and inducted, etc. and dies, and that the Advowson descended to
H. Beamont his son and heir, and he died, and the Advowson descended to Barbara
his daughter and heir, and that she being seized in fee, and under the age of
21 years, the Church became void, and Barbara her Mother, who had not any right
of presenting, presents her Clerk, who was instituted and inducted and admitted
to it. And Barbara the Daughter took the Plaintiff to Husband, and became of
full age, and then the Church became void. And because the Bailiffs and
Burgesses presented, and the Church so full within the six months, the husband
alone brought that action, upon which there was a demurrer. Davenport said the
action did not lie for the husband alone, but the wife ought to join with him.
For that usurpation upon the Infant which he had by descent, by the Statute of
West. the 2d. does not turn the Infant to his writ of right. Yet the Usurper
gets the inheritance, and turns his estate to a right. And for that he cited
Cook, 6. 50. Boswells case, and 16. E. 3. there cited. Where one seized of a
Manor with an advowson appendant dies, his heir within age, who suffers an
usurpation, and then grants the Manor, Resolved that the advowson does not
pass, because that the heir had but a right in the advowson after the
usurpation. So in our case, the wife had but a title of action: and than the
wife ought to join. As where an obligation is made to a woman who takes a
husband; the wife ought to join with the husband in the action upon the
obligation. But Henden said, that the Husband only might have an action. If a
feme covert be seized of an advowson in fee, and the Church void, the Husband
only may have an action without question. Which was granted by the Court. Then
here, the wife being of full age before the avoidance, now the feme being in
possession of the Advowson again to all intents and purposes. And for that by
the exposition of the Statute of Westminster, the force of the usurpation being
upon the Infant, who had it by descent, continued but during the incumbency and
nonage of the Infant. And it was said by Richardson, That the Infant at full
age might present, and so regain the possession without action, at the Common
Law, by usurpation she was turned to her writ of Right. And if it was a
purchase, he was without remedy. Now I demand in this case, If there be a death
during the avoidance, whether the Executor shall have it, or the Husband upon
tenant by Courtesy. And he cited the Lord Stanhops Case; which was, That the
Abbot of the Monastery of Shelford, was seized of the advowson in gross, and
there was an usurpation in the time of the Abbot; And then came the Statute of
dissolutions, which gave a right, and title to the King; So that that which was
in the Abbot was now in the King. Afterward the King grants that Advowson by a
general grant without recital of the case. And adjudged a good grant. But by
Hutton, Warberton, and Winch Justices, were of the contrary opinion to Hubbard;
But that was because that there are words in the Statute; that the Subject
shall have all the King had; which was to induce purchasers. Hutton, If it
might appear that the Plaintiff (scil.) the Husband, presented before the
Usurpation, and was disturbed; that perhaps would have been a claim, and so a
remitter. For at the Common Law, the remedy for an Infant, was to present, and
upon admission and Institution, etc. of his Clerk he should be remitted, or
might have a Writ of right if he pleased. But by the Court, the husband only in
this case might have presented; And then upon disturbance, he only shall have
the action. But here the Church was full before the presentation. Henden said,
the intention of the Statute was to give to the Infant at full age all his
Interest which he had before usurpation, During the life of the Incumbent, and
nonage of the Infant, the Usurper had an Estate in fee. But after the death of
the Incumbent, and full age of the Infant, the Estate of the Usurper ceased.
And the reason is upon the Statute of Westminster. 2. Infans habeat candem
possessoriam actionem qualiter antecessor. And 33 H. 6. 42, is, that an Usurper
puts an Infant out of possession; Infans habeat eandem actionem possessoriam
qualiter antecessor.
But that ought to be understood during the Infancy only, Et adjournatur.

Rawlins's Case.
HE was Plaintiff in a Replevin and was non-suted after Evidence given to the
Jury, and the Jurors did not find Costs and Damages; And afterward a Writ of
Enquiry of damages was granted. And Ashley moved, that the writ might not be
filed. Because that the Writ of Inquiry of damages could not issue, but
awarded from the Court; And the Plaintiff here being non suited was out of the
Court, and that nothing might be done against him. And the Prothonotaries said,
That in Case of a Verdict, where the Jurors omit to find damages, a Writ of
Enquiry is many times granted. Writ of Enquiry may be granted after a verdict,
when Jury omit the damages.
But they were commanded to search for Presidents in Case of a non-sute.
Richardson cited one Grimstons Case in the Kings Bench. Which was, one
Plaintiff in Action upon the Case against an Inne-holder was non suited, and the
Declaration was insufficient. And for that the Plaintiff might not have costs.
But by Henden, It is ordinary now in the Kings Bench; If the Defendant had a
Verdict, although the Declaration be insufficient, Yet he shall have Costs.

Nurse a against Pounford.
NUrse a Barrester of Grays-Inne, brought an Action upon the Case against
Pounford. And declares, that he is a Counselor, and was of Council with
several Noble men, and that he was Steward to the Lord Barkley of 20 Manors,
and also the receiver of his Rents for those Manors; And that the Defendant
maliciously, intending to disgrace him to the Lord Barkley, writ an infamous
Letter against him to the Lord Barkley; Which Letter was here recited, and it
was to this effect briefly, ut sequitur. (scil)

Your wonted Courtesy to Strangers incourageth me to desire your Honor not to
protect your Steward in his unlawful Suits. He has unjustly vexed his own
Brother by Suits, and caused him to be arrested and taken out of his Bed
forcibly by Catchpoles; He has likewise almost undone me, who have married his
own Sister, notwithstanding his entertainment at my House, for himself, Wife,
Servants, and Horses for several years. And now instead of payment, thinks to
weary me out with Vexations and Suits at Law. I hope your Lordship will give no
countenance to him in these things.

By reason of which Letter the Lord Barkley turned him out of his Office. The
Defendant pleads not guilty, which was found for the Plaintiff. And it was
moved in arrest of Judgment, that the Action here would not lie. Atthowe said,
that the Action would lie well, by reason of the particular loss the Plaintiff
had. And that is proved by Anne Davies Case, Coo. 4. Such words that there are
spoken of a married woman, are not actionable; But of a Feme sole who had a
Suter, the Action will lie. If one said of a Feme sole, That she is a Whore,
and such a man's Whore; It will not bear an Action in our Law: But in the
Spiritual Court it will. And perhaps for Whore generally there. And in the Case
of Anne Mayes there was a loss of preferment which she might have. But here the
Plaintiff lost the preferment which he had. If a man said to the Ordinary of a
Clark presented to him, that he is a Bastard, seditious or heretic, by reason
of which words the Ordinary refuses him; An Action lies for the Clark, for the
temporal loss; and he cited Butchers Case and Stewkleys Case, Cook 4. Also he
cited Sir Gilbert Gerrards Case, Cook 4. 18. If one said, Take not a Lease of
such an one, I have a Lease of it, an Action does not lie. But if the party by
reason of those words could not demise it to one with whom he had Communication
for the Lease* Then it lies. Or if he said that another had a Lease of that,
also an Action lies, 6 E. 6. Dyer 72. One saying that a Merchant would be a
Banckrupt is Actionable; Because that no man will trust him, 7 E. 4. 24. One
threatens another if he will come abroad he will beat him; For the threatening
an Action does not lie; But if for that Cause he could not go abroad about his
Business, an Action will lie.

Secondly, It has been objected, that the Action does not lie, Because that it
appears that the Letter was written out of the time of Limitation, by the
Statute of 21 Iac. which is for Slander. That the Action ought to be brought
within two years after the Slander. I agree, if it be brought for slanderous
words. But this is an Action upon the Case only. An Action upon the Case for
slandering of a Title is not within the Statute 21 Jac. for the two years, but
for the six years. So here the Action is not for slanderous words; For the
Letter does not bear an Action. But for the temporal loss. But it was resolved
by the Court, That the Action did not lie. For by Richardson Chief Justice, In
all Cases where you will maintain an Action, for words, there ought to be some
particular words of Slander spoken or written, by which the particular loss
came. Here is a Letter it had not any Slander in it; And it cannot be
conceiceived that the Lord turned him away out of his Service or Office by that
Letter, which does not touch him in his Office of Stewardship nor his
Receivorship. If he had written that the Plaintiff was a contentious and
troublesome man, that had been more questionable than this is; Yet it would not
bear an Action. And Richardson said, that they always conceived Sir Gilbert
Gerrards Case not to be Law. For if a man said that he himself had a Title to
the Land of an other, it is not actionable, although he lost by that. But if he
had said, that another man had Title to the Land of another, that is
actionable. And no Case can be shown, where an Action upon the Case lies upon
a particular loss, unless the words carry some slander with them. Hutton said,
the words of the Letter are not actionable. But if being said to be done
maliciously and falsesly, and to the intent the Lord Barkley should put him out
of his place, and upon that the Lord displaced him, then there would be more
doubt of it. But here the Jury had found the Defendant guilty, and that seemed
only to the writing of the Letter, and it might be false notwithstanding. But
if the Jury had found that all was false, and written of set purpose, and that
for that the Lord displaced him, it would be more difficult. But for any thing
as appears to us, there is not any thing for which he might be justly
displaced. And also it was not said in the Declaration that the Defendant had
any fee for his Office. And Richardson also said, That if it had been found as
my Brother Hutton said, Yet it is known that it should be more strong. But then
I conceive that the Action does not lie. For it is apparent that nothing in the
Letter may be applied to a particular misbehaviour in his Office. And by the
Court, Although the Declaration be laid falsely and maliciously; Yet if the
words be not scandalous, yet it ought to be laid falsely and maliciously. And
he said that it was adjudged in this Court, Where an Action upon the Case was
brought for conspiracy to indict a man, and upon the Indictment the Jury found
Ignoramus. There the Indictee was clear; And yet for the conspiracy the Action
laid, which was Blakes Case. And it was said by Hutton, If I have Land which I
intended to sell, and one came and says maliciously, (and on purpose to hinder
my sale) that he had a Title to it, That that is actionable, Which Harvey
agreed without Question, if he does not prove that he had a Title; If one says
of an Inue, Go not to such an House, for it is a very cutting House. Agreed by
the Court not Actionable. Mich. 5 Car. Com. Banc.
And Judgment was given quod querens nil cap. per bil.

Pasc. 6 Car. Com. Banc.
THis Term there was nothing worthy the reporting, as I heard of others; For I
my self was not well, and could not hear any thing certum refer, etc.

Trin. 6 Car. Com. Banc.
Tomlins's Case.
IF the Husband makes a Feoffment to the use of himself for life, the Remainder
to his Son in tail; By the Court, That is a dying seized in the Husband. For
the Wife shall have damages in Dower. And so it was adjudged in the Lady
Egertons Case; But the Husband ought to dye seized of an Estate tail, or Fee
simple which might descend to his Heir.

Mich 6 Car. Com. Banc.
MEmorandum, That Sergeant Atthowe died at his House in Northfolk, who was a
man somewhat defective in Elocution and Memory, but of profound Judgment and
Skill in pleading.

NOte, it was was said by Hutton and Davenport, That if an Inferior Court
prescribe to hold Pleas of all manner of Pleas except Title to Freehold; That
that is no good prescription. For then it may hold Plea of Murder, which
cannot be, etc.

Note, It was said by Richardson chief Justice, that if two conspire to indict
an other of a Rape, and he is indicted accordingly; If the Jury upon the
Indictment find Ignoramus; Yet that Conspiracy is not punishable in the
Starchamber.

Father purchases Lands in his Sons name, who was an Infant at the age of
seaventeen years, and he would have suffered a Common recovery as Tenant to the
Praecipe. But the Court would not suffer him.

Rawling against Rawling.
THe Case was thus, A man being possessed of a Lease for 85 years, devises it
as follows (viz.) I will that R. Rawling shall have the use of my Lease, if he
shall so long live, during his life, he paying certain Legacies, etc. And after
his decease I devise the use thereof to Andrew Rawling the residue of the term
with the Lease, in manner and form as R. Rawling should have it. Crew said,
That after the death of R. Rawling and Andrew, the term shall revert to the
Executors of the Devisor. But by the Court, not. But it shall go to A. Rawling
the last Devisee, and in manner and form shall go to pay Legacies. And by all a
strong Case. And together with the Lease, be by strong words.

The Archbishop of Canterbury against Hudson of Grays-Inne.
THe Archbishop of Canterbury prosecuted against Hudson of Grays-Inne, in an
Information upon the Statute of E. 1. of Champerty. Henden Sergeant for the
Plaintiff moved upon the Plea, that it was insufficient, Because that the
Defendant had prayed Judgment of the Writ, when he ought to have pleaded in
Bar; For the Statute of E. 1. had appointed a special Writ in this Case, as the
Defendant said. But by him the Information is upon the Statute of 32 H. 8.
which gives that Action by suit in Chancery, which before was only by suit at
Common Law. Richardson chief Justice said, That the Plea is not to the matter,
but to the manner; for the Plaintiff had mistaken his Action. For the Action is
given to the King only. And therefore said to Henden, demur if you will. The
Case was that the Defendant purchased Lands in another Name, hanging the Suit
in Chancery for it; And after rules for Publication was given in the Cause.

Malins Case.
AYliff moved in arrest of Judgment, in an action of Battery, etc. And the
cause that he showed was; An issue mistaken cannot be amended.
It was brought against William Malin of Langlee, and in the Record of nisi
prius, It was William Langley of Malin: But by the Court it ought to be
amended; For it is a misprision apparently of the Clark. For the whole Record
besides is right; And the Record of nisi prius ought to be amended by the
Record in the Bench, according to the 44 E. 3. But if the issue had been
mistaken otherwise it had been.

Arrerages for rent upon an estate for life, cannot be forfeit by Outlawry.
NOte, That it was agreed by the whole Court, That arrerages of rent reserved
upon an Estate for life, are not forfeited by Outlawry, because that they are
real, and no remedy for them but a distress, Otherwise if upon a Lease for
years, etc.

Hill. 6 Car. Com. Banc.
MEmorandum, that this term Sir Humfrey Davenport puisne Judge of the Common
Bench, was called into the Exchequer to be Chief barron.

Browns Case.
AN Information upon the Statute of 5 Eliz. pro eo, that one Brown was retained
an Apprentice in Husbandry until the 21 year of his age, and that he before his
age of 21 years went away; And the Defendant, absque ullo testimonio detained
him contra formam Statuti, And by Hutton and Harvey Justices, only showed the
branch of the said Statute, which says, And if any servant retained according
to the form of this Statute depart from his Master, etc. Hill. 6 Car. Com. Banc.
And that none of the said retained persons in Husbandry, until after the time
of his reteiner be expired shall depart. That is not to be intended of an
Apprentice in Husbandry, but of an hired servant. For the Statute did not
intend to provide for the departure of an Apprentice, because that an
Apprentice ought to be by Indenture. And then a writ of Covenant lies upon his
departure, to force him to come again. And by the Common Law, an action upon
the case lies, for retaining the servant of another. And by them the retainer
without being testimonial, which is an offense against that Law, is after the
years of reteiner expired; For so are the words of the Statute. But they said
that the Information was naught; because that it does not appear, that the
Defendant did not retain him out of the Parish where they served before. For
the Statute says, out of the City, Town, or Parish, etc. except he have a
testimonial. And the words secundum formam Statuti will not aid it. And in the
same Village or City, etc. The Statute does not require a testimonial, because
that there it was known, etc. And for these reasons after here said for the
Plaintiff, Judgment was stayed, if, etc.

Jennings against Cousins.
IEnnings brought a Replevin against Cousins, who avowes for damage feasant,
The Plaintiff replies, that post captionam and ante deliberationem -- he
tendered 3 s. which was a sufficient amends for the Trespass and the Defendant
notwithstanding detained his Cattle contra vadum and pleg. etc. Upon which they
demurred. And by the whole Court the Replication is naught. For Pilkintons Case
was agreed to be good Law: that the tender ought to be before pounding, but any
time before the impounding it is sufficient. But here ante deliberationem
implies that the Cattle were impounded, and it is not shown in certain that the
tender was before. And it was agreed in trespass, That the Defendant may plead
the Trespass to be involuntary, and disclaim in the Title without pleading the
Statute of 21 Iac. for the Statute is a general Statute. Whereupon Judgment
was given for the Defendant.

Butts against Foster.
THe Plaintiff in an Action upon the Case, the Plaintiff declared, That whereas
he was a man of good fame, carriage, and behavior, and free from all blot or
stain. Yet the Defendant with purpose to draw his life in Question, and traduce
him amongst his Neighbors, in presentia multorum, etc. crimen felonae ei
imposuit, and ea occasion illum arrestari causavit, et per spatium duarum
dierum in custodia detineri and coram Iohanni Pettyman uno Justic. ad pacem,
etc. duci procuravit and nequisfime prosecutus est, etc. The Defendant pleads
not guilty, which was found for the Plaintiff. And Hitcham moved in arrest of
Judgment, that the Action would not lie: And of that opinion was Hutton,
because that he did not proceed to indictment; For there an Action of that lies
in the nature of a Conspiracy. But if an Action should lie here, it would be a
mischievous Case; for by that every man would be deterred to question any
person for felony. And it was said by Hutton. If one said, You have broken the
Peace, and I will cause you to be arrested, and procures a Warrant from a
Justice of Peace, by which he is arrested. No Action here will lie. But Berkley
on the other side said to the contrary, and of that Opinion was Richardson
Chief Justice, that the Action will well lie. And by Richardson, The Defendant
ought to have justified, that there was a Felony done, and that he suspected
him, etc. But he pleads not guilty. And it does not appear by the Declaration
what was done with the Plaintiff, after he was brought to the Justice of Peace,
and by that it shall be employed, that he was dismissed upon his examination.
And here the Plaintiff was imprisoned, and carried before a Justice of Peace;
which is an act done as well as in the case where there is an Indictment. And
an Attorney of the Court cited one Danvers and Webly's Case, In that very case
it was adjudged that the Action lay. But it was adjourned to another day.

Champues Case.
OUnson makes his will and gives 200 l. to Tho. Champues son of Jeremie
Champues, Also to other Children of Jeremy 20 l. a piece to be paid at their
several marriages, or ages of 21 years. And after wills that his Executor
should enter into bond to the several parents, to pay the several Legacies to
the several Children at the ages of 21 years, or their marriages. And his
Executor after his death, gave an Obligation to Jeremy Champues to pay the 200
l to Thomas at his full age or marriage. But in the Spiritual Court afterward
upon libell it was ordered, that he pay the legacies presently. Thomas being
under age, of tender years. And for that Henden moved for a prohibition.
Richardson, although the suit for a Legacy be properly in the Spiritual Court;
yet if there be an Obligation given for the payment of it, it is not turned to
a duty in the Common Law, and then it is not tryable there. This is one reason
why a prohibition shall be granted. Secondly, another reason is; because that
they sentenced the payment of the Legacy against the Will, and against Law, and
the Obligation here will not alter the case; for it is given to another person,
not to the Legatee, and then the Legatee, notwithstanding the Obligation may
sue in the spiritual Court. But by Richardson it is all one, for here the Will
orders the Obligation to be made. Which Hutton changing opinion, and Harvey
agreed. For now because the Obligation is given, if the sentence shall be
given, the party is liable to the Obligation also, to perform that. And by
Richardson it seemed that the clause in the will of the Obligation to be
entered into by the Executor, to pay at the marriage, or 21 years of age, the
several Legacies, etc. extends to the first Legacy of 200 l. to Thomas,
although it be coupled to the last Legacy, which should be by a new and several
Item. And by that clause the intention of the Testator appears, that the 200 l.
which is given generally, and no time of payment named; It shall not be paid
until marriage of 21 years of age. And a prohibition was commanded to be
granted.

NOte, It was said by Richardson chief Justice, If a man had a way over the
Land of another for his Cattle; and upon the way he scares his cattle, so that
they run out of the way upon the land of the owner, and the party who drives
the Cattle freshly pursues them, etc. That in Trespass he who had the way
might plead this special matter in justification.

Green against Brouker and Greenstead.
IN Trover and reversion the Plaintiff declares; That whereas he was possessed
of a bag of hops, and a bag of flax to the value of, etc. And that the
Defendant found them, and the third day of October converted them, And the
Defendants plead that Sandwich is an ancient Village, and that the custom of
foreign attachment is used there as in London, and that these goods were lost
upon default in November, and traverses absque hoc that they were guilty of any
conversion in October, Pasc. 7 Car. Com. Banc.
or any other time or day than the times before, which are contained in the
Declaration. That the Defendants were guilty before, (scil.) October, Upon
which the Defendants demurre, and Judgment was given for the Plaintiff,
Although it was objected that the Justification here, by the Custom before had
taken away the property, And I shall be debarred in Detinue, and so in Trover.
But the Court was of the contrary opinion, That the Defendants Plea in bar
here shall not be good without traverse, as it is, and therefore the time is
not made material, but any time before is sufficient. Mere possession suffices
to maintain a Trover.

Pasc. 7. Car. Com. Banc.
Eaglechildes Case.
FInch Sergeant said, that 6 Car. in the Kings Bench it was ruled, upon Bill of
Exchange between party and party, who are not Merchants, There cannot be a
Declaration upon the Law of Merchants, but there may be a Declaration upon the
Assumpsit, and give the acceptance of the Bill in Evidence

Crompton against Waterford.
WAterford was sued in the Spiritual Court for saying these words of the
Plaintiff, she will turn tail to tail with any man, intimating that she would
be naught with any man: And sentence was given for the Plaintiff. Whereupon he
appealed to the Delegates propter gravamen, And the Delegates overruled it, and
assesse costs for the wrong appeal. Then there was a prohibition granted,
because the words were idle words and not punishable in the Spiritual Court.
Hutton seemed, That the costs taxed by the Delegates are not taken away by the
Prohibition. Richardson on the contrary. For the principal is prohibited, and
the costs are incident. And because that a prohibition stays all proceedings,
the costs are taken away. If the costs are to be executed by the Delegates,
then the prohibition to them will help: But if the costs are remanded to the
inferior Court as well as the cause, then the prohibition to the Inferior
Court will help. So quacunque via data the costs are to be discharged. And the
party if excommunicat be dissolved. And so agreed by the Court.

Alleston against Moor.
ALleston an Attorney of this Court brought an action upon the Case against
Moore for calling him cheating knave, and it was not upon speaking of him as an
Attorney. And for that by the Court in arrest of judgment, It is not
actionable, If he had said, you cheat your Clients, it would be actionable. One
said, That my Lord Chief Baron cannot hear of one ear colloquio praehabito of
his administration of Justice; And it wad adjudged actionable. Otherwise it had
been if they had had no discourse of his Justice.

Trin. 7 Car. Com. Banc.
Coxhead against Coxhead.
IN Debt upon an Obligation, the Condition was to perform an Arbitrament, and
the Defendant pleads nullum fecere arbitrium, The Plaintiff replies that they
made such an arbitrament, and recites it, the Defendant rejoyns, that the
Condition was to make an arbitrament of all things in controversy, and that
other things were in controversy, whereof no arbitrament was made. The
Plaintiff sur-rejoynes, that the Defendant did not give notice of those, upon
which issue was taken, and no place alleged, where notice was given. And that
exception was moved in arrest of Judgment. And upon that Judgment was stayed.

Trin. 7. Car. Com. Banc.
NOte, It was said by Richardson Chief Justice, If a man sends his servant to a
Draper to buy cloth for his Master, and makes not the contract in his own
name: That the Master shall be charged, and not the Servant. Which was not
denied 11 E. 4.6.

Tomlinsons Case.
IF an Executor is sued in the Ecclesiastical Court, for a Legacy; and the
Executor pleads plene administravit, a Prohibition shall not be granted, if
they will not admit that plea. For they ought to judge there, if he had
administered fully or not. But upon suggestion that they did not reject any
administration, which our law allows; A prohibition shall not be granted, as
Richardson said; which was not denied by the whole Court

Williams against Floyd.
WIlliams was Plaintiff by an English Bill to the Council of Marches against
Floyd, in the nature of Debt upon an Escape, and there was a Latin Declaration
upon an Escape turned into English, because that the Defendant, being Sheriff
of Canarvan, suffered one, against whom the Plaintiff had a Judgment (being
taken by capias utlegat.) to escape, To his damage of 40 l. And by the whole
Court a prohibition was granted; Although that by their Instructions, they had
power of personal actions under 50 l. For this is intended a mere personal,
action. As debt, detinue, etc. But Debt upon a Judgment, or debt upon an
escape, or upon the 2 E. 6. for not setting forth of tithes, an action upon 8
H. 6. or any other action upon matter of Record or Statute; In such cases they
have not Jurisdiction. And the Defendant there might have pleaded null. teil.
record, and then he might have proceeded further. But the misdemeanour here, in
permitting the party to escape, might have been punished there by Information.

Gee against Egan.
GEe an Attorney of this Court brought an Action upon the Case against Egan,
and declares, that he was an Attorney for many years late past, and still is,
and that he had taken the Oath of an Attorney to do no fraud nor deceit, in his
Office as Attorney. And that colloquio habito et moto inter one Rise Brother in
Law to the Plaintiff, and the Defendant, concerning the Office of the Plaintiff
as an Attorney, and concerning a Bill of Costs and Expenses, by the Plaintiff
in defense of a Cause prosecuted by one Treddiman in the Common Bench against
the Defendant laid out and expended; The Defendant 1 Augusti 4 Car. spoke those
words to Rise, Your Brother and Mr. Treddiman have cheated me of a great deal
of money, etc. by which the Plaintiff is in danger to lose his Office. And it
was moved (after verdict for the Plaintiff) in arrest of Judgment by Ayliff.
Because that here is not any certainty in the Declaration that the words were
spoken of the Plaintiff as Attorney; And then they are not actionable. For he
does not show at what time the speech was of him as Attorney. Richardson upon
reading of the Record said, It was true that no time of the speech is shown,
neither is it after the speech shown, upon whom he spoke those words; Which
might help it. Neither is it said (afterward) that is to say primo die, but
primo die Augusti he spoke, etc. And if it can be intended, that those words
were spoken of the Plaintiff as Attorney; That would enforce the words to bear
an Action. But if such words are generally spoken of an Attorney, without
speech of his Office, they are not actionable. For he may be a Cheater at dice,
or in a bagain, etc. And here non constat that the words were spoken of the
Plaintiff as Attorney.

Secondly it does not appear that the Plaintiff was was an Attorney in the
Cause, but says that there was a conference of a Bill of Costs laid out by him,
etc. and does not say laid out by him as Attorney. And the whole Court seemed
to be of the same opinion. But it was adjourned. If it had been said, that
habente colloquio primo die, etc. he spoke, it should have been good. But
habito implies time past.

Hitcham against an Attorney of this Court.
HItchsm Chief Sergeant of the King, brought an Action upon the Case against
James Cason an Attorney of this Court; And he declared that he was now Sergeant
to the King, and so was to his Father, and that the King made him Justice of
Peace for his County of Suffolk, and that he for many years theretofore, and
yet, did exercise the Office of a Justice of Peace. And that the Defendant on
purpose to disgrace him, and to make him to be removed from being a Justice of
Peace, in the Court openly spoke these scandalous words, In a matter wherein I
was questioned at the Quarter Sessions in Suffolk, Mr. Sergeant Hitcham being
there, was Witness, Judge, and Party, and did there oppress me. And moreover
he said, In Articles there presented against me, he did me injustic^, and has
contrived those Articles. And moreover he said, Mr. Sergeant Hitcham bound my
Son Finch to the Quarter Sessions, and there indicted him, and was Witness,
Judge, and Party, and counts to the damage of the Plaintiff 1000 pound. The
Defendant to some of the words in the Declaration pleads not guilty, to the
residue he justifies, and says that the Plaintiff was made a Justice of Peace 1
Apr. 1 Car. And as to the words, In a matter wherein I was questioned in the
Quarter Sessions in Suffolk, Mr. Sergeant Hitcham being there, was Witness,
Judge, and Party. And all but the last words, That the Plaintiff at the
Sessions 8 Sept. 2 Car. at W. in Suffolk, quosdam falsos Articulos scribi fecit
exhibuit et produxit. And recited all the Articles being in number eleaven.
Hill. 5 Car. Com. Banc.
And that after the exhibiting the Articles in open Court, The Plaintiff there
said that they were true, and counseled the Clark of the Peace to read them,
and then said he should be tried upon them. But the Plaintiff denied that and
said, that he would proceed now no further upon them, but took the Articles and
carried them with him, by which the Court was dispossessed of them; And would
not proceed against him upon them. And upon the last words (scil.) Mr. Sergeant
Hitcham bound my Son over to, etc. He said that his Son was bound to appear at
the Quarter Sessions; And caused an Indictment to be preferred against him,
Because he being elected Constable refused to take his oath, or to execute his
office; And upon that Indictment the Sergeant gave evidence to the grand Jury,
and they found the Indictment; And upon that Judgment was given, that he
should be amerced, that estreated. And upon this bar the Plaintiff dumurred.
Finch for the Plaintiff. And first he answers to the Exceptions which were
taken before to the Declaration etc.

First that it did not appear by the Declaration that the Plaintiff was Justice
of Peace at the time of the speaking of the words. To that he answers, That is
sufficient in the Declaration to show that he was a Justice of Peace at the
time. For it is, per multos annos jam ultime elapsos et adhinc est, and that
the Declaration coming in M. 5 Car. If it was per multos annos ulterius, etc.
It was at the time of the speaking: For it was Paululum before the Action
commenced. And also the Defendant says in his Bar, that the King made him a
Justice of Peace, and that he was not a Justice of Peace at the Sessions; And
although that he was not a Justice of Peace at the Parlance, Yet the words are
actionable, which charge him with Injustice, when he was, etc.

Secondly, It was objected, that part of the words were not alleged to be
spoken of the Plaintiff: But the Declaration is, That in a matter, etc. Mr.
Sergeant did, etc. which is directed to the first words. But the subsequent
words are induced such like afterward. Ad tunc and ibidem, the Defendant said,
And he did me injustice, etc. And although the first words were laid to be
spoken of the Plaintiff, yet the last words not. But and he did me, etc. which
ought to be taken, That they were spoken of the Plaintiff. For it is ad tunc
and ibidem, upon the same Communication. And also the Defendant cleared that.
For he justifies those words as spoken of the Plaintiff.

Thirdly, It was objected, that the words themselves are not actionable. In
Actions for words, it is as in Wills; The best argument will be from the words
themselves, yet we can borrow light from other words in the same Will. Which I
will recite The proverbial Verse. Quid de quoque viro and cui dicas saepe
caveto. Quid, etc. Some words declare all malice, which are not actionable of
some persons they may be spoken of, (quo) some only actionable being spoken of
such a man 4 H. 8. The Duke of Buckingham has no more conscience than a Dog.
Those words upon the Statute of Scandala magnatum are actionable. 10 Iac. the
Earl of Northamptons Case. It was resolved in the Starchamber, that to publish
false rumors of any of the Peers of the Realm was punishable at the Common law.
And if one heard such words, and reported them again, it is punishable, But not
in a Common persons case. But this difference there was resolved; That to say
of Commons person generally that he heard so, is not actionable, if he name the
person. If one says of a Merchant he is a Banckrupt, it is actionable; not of
the Defendant. If one said of the Defendant he is an Ambidexter, it is
actionable; not, if of a Merchant. It is a general rule, that slander of every
man in his profession is actionable; Much more of the Plaintiff in his
profession being a Justice of peace. For the words themselves, if they be taken
together or asunder are actionable. The ground of the speaking was, that there
was a communication of Injuries done to him by the Plaintiff, but take them
asunder, Trin. 7. Car. Com. Banc.
and none of them but with the circumstances here will bear an action. First,
that he was a Judge, Witness, and party; That is against the Law to be Judge
and party. They who are Duellists are Judges and parties and Executioners.
Judge and party is as much as to say he is partial, and he did oppress me.
That shows that he was not Judge and party fairly. But they have objected that
this word oppress is uncertain; for he may be oppressed with overwait, or
hunger and cold. But this case cannot have any such such sense. But here it is
intended the perverting of Justice. But this case was put off till the next day
by nine in the morning.

Collins against Thoroughgood
AN action of Covenant was brought against the Executor and the breach assigned
for default of reparation committed in the time of the Executor, and damages
were assessed. And the question was moved by Atthow whether the Judgment shall
be de bonis propriis, or de bonis Testatoris. And upon view of presidents, it
was adjudged that it shall be de bonis Testatoris, For this is the Testators
Covenant, and obliges the Executor as representing him. And therefore he ought
to be sued by that name.

Waters against Thomson.
IN an action of slander for calling him Bankrupt, Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff. And it was afterward moved in arrest of Judgment. Because that in
the Declaration it is said, that he was a seller of Wool. And Sergeant Ward
said, because he did not allege that he was a Merchant, that it would not hold.
But the Court overruled him.

Tomkin's Case.
A Man cannot plead a former Judgment had against the Plaintiff, in an action
brought by the Plaintiff against the Defendant. But Outlawry he may. Which was
not denied.

Baker against Webberly.
THat if a man's Dog runs at the Sheep and kills them, not with his consent,
there will no action lie. But otherwise if with his consent.

Recovereis suffer per gardens of the lands of the Infant.
MEmorandum, That the 26 December. 21 Iac. that letters under the privy signet,
and sign Mannual, came unto the Judges of the Com-Pleas, importing that the
King had been humbly petitioned by Mountioy Blunt, being under the age of 21
yoars, as well by himself as his kindred and Feoffees, into whose custody the
late deceased Earl of Devonshire did commit his estate in trust, that he would
declare unto us his liking, that he might be permitted to suffer a Common
recovery of the Manor of Wansled, for payment of his debts, and further
advancement of his means to the use of the Duke of Buckingham, which his
Majesty by his said Letter did accordingly. Now although the Judges did never
hold such Recoveries unlawful or void in Law, yet diverse motions in the like
kind have been refused as holding it very inconvenient. But inconveniences are
best discerned by circumstances, and therefore my L. Chief Justice Richardson
acquainting the other Justices therewith, it was determined that he should send
for the young Gentleman, and examine him sole and secret of the reasons of this
Recovery, and of his own free will, Which I did, and being of 18 years of age
or thereabouts suffered me of his own good liking, and that he did conceive it
to be necessary for his estate; yet not therewith contented, the Chief Justice
caused the Earl of Southampton, the L. Davers and Mr. Wakeman, the persons to
whom the world knew he and his Estate was committed in trust, and that they had
worthily performed, and calling them in an open Court, and questioning with
them, they confessed to us all, that it was necessary for the young Gentleman,
and for his good to part with this thing, and that therefore they had made
means to his Majesty for this Letter in that behalf, whereupon the Recovery was
passed openly at the Bar the last day of Michaelmas Term against Mr. Blunt in
person, and the Earl of Southampton, the Lord Daver^, and Mr. Wakeman were
admitted his Guardians.

Brownlow and Moyle Prothonotaries showed Presidents of the like Recoveries
against Infants, M. 23 H. 8. rot. 441. et P. 38 H. 8 rot. 128. Tr. 28 El. rot.
17, et M. 26, et 27 El. rot. 45. 572 P. 42 Eliz. rot. 1. 5. 63, 44. 45, 69, 70,
89, 91, 94 P. 32 El. rot. 60 T. 38 El. rot. 41, 44, 40 El. rot. 62. 124, and
112 M. 40, et 41 El. rot. 13 M. 34, et 35 El. rot. 166. per Zouch, M. 39 and 40
Eliz. rot. 82. and 173. M. 41, and 42 El. rot. 24. and 106. et 72 T. 42. El.
rot. 20. M. 42 et 43 El. rot. 173.

Chamberlines Case.
HE brought an Action upon the Statute of Hue and Cry, and after Issue, joined
and entered. The Record was, that the Robbery was done 30 October. It was ordered
by, the Court of Common Pleas that the Record shall be amended, and made the
30th. of September upon the Affidavit of the Attorney for the Plaintiff, that
he had given direction accordingly. And shows to the Court the Book of the
Office.

Male against Kett.
HE brought an Action against Kett for these words, Thou have stolen my Corn
out of my Barn; and verdict was given for the Plaintiff. And after verdict it
was moved in arrest of Judgment. That perchance the Corn was not of the value
of a penny. Yet Judgment was given for the Plaintiff. For it is felony,
although it is not great.

Hitcham against Cason before.
NOw they urged, 5 Eccles. If thou see the oppression of the poor and
perverting of Judgment. Perverting of Judgment is the Oppression: But then he
did not again manifest Injustice. It was objected that he might give erroneous
Judgment, and that is Injustice. If they are taken all alike, it is clear that
they are actionable, and the party himself ought not to interpret but the
Judge. The Case between Palmer and Boyer, M. 37, 38 El. He has as much Law as
a Iackanapes, spolton of Palmer being a Lawyer, and adjudged actionable. And
they were spoken to disgrace him in his profession. 7 Iac. Thou a Barrester,
thou a Barrettor, and thou durst not show thy face. Thou study the Law, thou a
Dunce; actionable upon he same reason. Mich. 14 Iac. Com. Banc. Beck against
Barneby. Spoken of an Attorney, Thou art a Common maintainer of Suits, and a
Champerter, etc. It was objected there, that it was lawful for an Attorney to
maintain suits. Yet because he said Champertor it was actionable. And Trin. 12
Iac. Com, Banc. Yeardlies case He said of the Plaintiff being an Attorney, Your
Attorney is a bribing Knave, and has taken 10 l. of you to cosen me; Answered
that the words shall be intended of him as Attorney, and so actionable. One
exhibites a Petition, where it was first against the Lord chief Baron. In which
he said Tanfield is a great Oppressor of the Country, and did remove the
Boundaries between his Land and mine. And it was adjudged actionable, Pasc. 4
Iac. Banc. Roy. Master Kebbe is a Basket Justice, and a partial Justice, and
I Will give him 5 l. a year for all Gifts that are brought to him for Injustice
done. And adjudged actionable. And the word Partial Justice bears an Action
Hill. 40 Car. Kings Bench. Denson is a sweet Justice of peace, who gave a
Warrant to apprehend I. S. and sent him notice of it, Is actionable For it is a
misbehaviour in a Justice of Peace to do so, H. 6. Iac. Com. Banc. rot. 1159.
Lonsman against Peck The Plaintiff shows that he had been impannelled upon
several Iuries upon life and death; and the Defendant said, Thou art a Jury
man, and by subtle and false means thou have been the death of 100 men. For
before verdict against them, and the words were that he was their death by
false verdict.

As to the Bar. That is naught. it appears by the Bar, that the Defendant was
not called to answer the Articles aforesaid. For he said the Plaintiff would
not proceed upon them; Then the Plaintiff might be Judge, witness and party,
and not oppress me, etc. And it is not Justice for one Justice of Peace to
refuse to proceed. As here, If Articles be given to him, the Witnesses perhaps
are not ready, and although he request the Plaintiff to proceed, it is not the
Office of a Justice of peace to promote a Cause. For the words continue he
justifies scribi fecit. And that is no justification to contrive, which is a
word well known, and apt to signify the framing or inventing of Articles, etc.
And the words are in the Declaration, and did then oppress me. And there is
nothing answered to then, or justified to it. Pasc. 24 Kings Bench Actions for
words in London, and the Defendant justifies the words in S. the Plaintiff
demurred and had Judgment M. 27 Eliz. Kings Bench. An Action for calling the
Plaintiff Thief. The Defendant pleads the Plaintiff guilty in 3 several
Felonies. And issue was taken de injuria sua propria, absque aliqua tali causa.
And the Plaintiff was found guilty of two Felonies, but not of the third. And
it was adjudged for the Plaintiff, because he failed of his tali causa: upon
which he concludes, etc. Bramston at an other day on the contrary. And said
that the Declaration is not good.

First, it must appear plainly that the Plaintiff was a Justice of Peace at the
time of the speaking of the words. and implication will not serve. I agree that
necessary intendment shall be sufficient: And if there might be other
intendment, it is not sufficient 13 Eliz. Dyer 304. Mich. 20 Jac. Kings Bench.
Arundel Plaintiff, Mead and Harvey Defendants in an Ejectione firmae brought
upon a Lease made for 5 years, if a Woman should so long live. And after
verdict for the Plaintiff. It was moved that the Declaration is not good.
Because that it was not averred that the Woman was living at the time of the
Ejectment. But it was adjudged that the words virtute cujus he was possessed,
and termino nondam finito, he was ejected supplies that; Dyer 254. Debt upon a
Lease for years rendering rent, the Plaintiff declars upon the lease by him made
to A. who devises it to the Defendant and he enters. And it was objected that
the Declaration was naught, because that he does not show the assent of the
Executors, and it is not said virtute Legationum, etc. But that he entered and
that may be by any other Title, and for that naught. And in our Case that he
was a Justice of Peace many years before, and at the time of the speaking. And
the words premisor. non ignorant. the Defendant intending to remove him, etc.
does not aid it. For it might be meant when he was not a Justice of Peace: It
is not but by argument that he was then a Justice of Peace.

Secondly, The second Objection. The second words are not laid to be spoken of
Roberti Hitcham aforesaid. It is to be observed that the words, And he did
then, etc. be distinguished in time. For it is postea ad tunc et ibidem. By
which it ought to be meant spoken at another time of the same day, and then all
the subsequent words not actionable. And it is not sufficient (as it was
objected) that he was a Justice of Peace, when the Injuries were supposed to be
done. There are two reasons why a Justice of Peace shall have his Action for
words.

First, That if the words be true, they expose him to punishment or pain, and
either of them is sufficient cause to make the words actionable. And when the
words are such, that they do not expose the party to punishment, but only
discredit him in his profession, and make him subject to be removed, they are
not actionable unless spoken at the time that he is a Justice of Peace, And
here the words are of such nature. But words which expose him to punishment for
a misdemeanour when he was a Justice of Peace are actionable, although spoken
after he was removed.

Secondly, If the Declaration was defective in substance, for want of a
precise, showing, that he was a Justice of Peace at the time; Nothing in the
Bar will help it. But defect in circumstance may be so aided (scil.) by the
Bar, as time or place failing in the Bar may be supplied by the Bar. 6 E.
4.16.6 E. 4.2.7 Rep. 24. Buts Case, Mi. 37.38 Eliz. Badcop against Atkins, Thy
Father has stolen six sheep. It was moved in arrest of Judgment: Because it
was not shown in the Declaration that the words were spoken to the Son, or in
his presence of his Father the Plaintiff. And as to that it ought to be
intended. For it is not sense to say thy Father to any but the Son. Secondly
the Defendant admitted it in his Bar. But resolved by the whole Court it is not
necessarily employed that they were spoken to the Son. And then it was agreed by
all, that the Declaration was defective in substance, and is not aided by any
admittance in the Bar.

Thirdly, The third Exception here is, there wants an Innuendo to make the
Declaration good, where the place is necessary to make the words actionable.
there ought to be an Innuendo for the place, etc. Barham did burn by Barn,
there no Innuendo will make the words actionable. But if there be a
Communication of the Plaintiffs Barn, and that it was full of Corn; there with
an Innuendo horreum praedict. will serve. H. 37 Eliz. Banc. Roy rot. 334. Thou
art a Thief, thou have stolen half an acre of my Corn, Innuendo half an acre
of Corn severed. Adjudged that the Innuendo does not serve. So for Slander of
title, Entties fol. 36. A. was seized of the Manor of S. and there was a
Communication of that Manor of S. And the Defendant said I have enough in my
Study to make I. S. Heir to the Manor of I. S. Innuendo manet. praedict de S.
It is sufficient.

Secondly, The words are not actionable. Witness, Judge and party is not a
scandal without a violent construction of the words. To say, he did oppress
me. That of a Justice of Peace, without more, is hard to maintain an action;
for it does not appear that he was damnified. And words of themselves which are
actionable, joined with others are not sometimes actionable. If one says of a
Lawyer, he did reveal the secrets of my Case; that is not actionable, for he
might reveal it to a Judge: But if he said, Go not to such a one, he did
reveal the secrets of my case, that is actionable. Suegos case in the book of
Entries. If one said of a Surgeon, he did poison the wound of his patient.
That is not actionable, for it might be for the cure of it. But if he said, as
it was in 33 and 34 Eliz. Com. Banc. He did poison the wound of his patient to
get money; That is actionable. And the words here are allayed, if they be
joined with the first; For being spoken of a Justice, his power and greatness
may oppress him, without fault in the Plaintiff. One said M. 37 Eliz. of a
Justice of Peace, That he was a Bloodsucker, and thirsts after blood; yet if
you will give him a couple of Capons he will take them, Not actionable, for they
are too general. As to the Justification, all is justified clearly. It was
objected (then) is omitted in our justification. It is true if he complain of
oppression one time, and we justify at another time, it shall be insufficient.
But the matters of Justification here well enough meet with the time, By which,
etc.

Gosse against Brown.
Gosse brought an action upon an Obligation against Brown, dated 23 Feb. 20
Iac. to pay money upon the 30 of December following, It was then said, that the
money was not to be paid until the 30 day of December. For it is all one, as if
the bond had been without date. But if the condition had been to have been paid
the 33 Febr. It was then presently due upon demand, because it was an
impossible date.

Gibbs against Ienkins.
GIbbs brought an action upon the case for scandalous welsh words spoken in the
presence of diverse understanding the language, And witnesses were sworn to the
Jury who deposed that the signification of those words were to steal, or at
least to carry away. Which words in English not being able to bear an action,
Judgment was given against the Plaintiff.

Ravyes Case.
A Sheriff had taken one by capias ad satisfac., a Stranger assumes to him,
that if he will let him go at large, that he would pay him what damages he
should sustain thereby. No action upon the case will lie for that promise,
because it is against the Common Law. And 23 H. 6. 2 H. 5. If a man oblige
another in a bond not to follow his trade, It is void.

Darlyes Case.
SErgeant Atthow showed to the Court, that an action upon the case was brought
by the Sheriff of S. And declares that the Defendant assumed that if he would
put such an one in Execution into the Castle, of which he had recovered against
him, to save him harmless. And shows that he did take him in execution, and
that for that he was indicted for a forceabie entry, and sues in the
Star Chamber ad damnum, 500 l. And the Court seemed that it was not a
sufficient consideration: For it was no more than by his office he ought to
do. But if it was upon an other matter, otherwise it should be. And for that
they said to the Sergeant, that he might have demurred to the Declaration.

NOte that it was said that an Ejectione firm. does not lie de una pecia
terrae; although that it was added, containing by estimation half an acre of
land vocat. It is not good. But he ought to show the longitude and latitude.
And it is otherwise in an assize, and that, for the view. And so it was held by
the Court.

Hadves against Levit.
AN action upon the case was brought, That in consideration the Plaintiff would
consent that his Son should marry the Daughter of the Defendant, and that after
the Coverture, upon request of the Defendant, the Plaintiff shall make a
jointure of 20 l. to the wife, That the Defendant should give 200 l. to the Son
in marriage, they are married, the money is not paid the Father of the Son
brings this action, and shows how he is indamaged by it, because that he is
constreined to give more to the Son and his Wife for to allow them maintenance
then otherwise, with an averement, that be is forced to make that Ioynture, if
the other will make the request. Richardson, This action should have been more
properly brought by the Son, for he is the person in whom the interest is. And
he put the case 22 Eliz. A man had a license to transport Herrings to Spain,
and the Daughter one of the parties had a license. And a stranger comes to the
Father, and says to him, procure me that license, and I Will give you 100 l. and
100 l. to your daughter. It was held that the Daughter should have the action
for the one 100 l. for more specially it concerns her. And put the case of
lorning and Iorning, 37 Eliz. Where A. was indebted to B. a stranger follows
the suit for B. A. comes to the stranger and says to him, leave the suit, and
I Will pay your Master. The Master shall have the action upon the case. And now
in our case, the father does not demand the 200 l. but only the damages which
will happen to him by the non-payment to the Son. Hutton, There is a difference
when the promise is to perform to one who is not interessed in the cause, and
when he has interest. In the first case, he to whom the promise is made shall
have the action, and not he to whom the promise is to be performed. If A.
promise B. to pay I. S. 10 l. (upon a consideration) which is not done, B.
shall have the action, and not I. S. If there be two joint of a Horse, and the
one conditions with the other to go to Market to sell it, who does it, and
appoints the payment to be made to another; In this case he only to whom the
payment is to be made shall have the action. So also if my servant, by my
command, sell my Horse; the money to be paid to me; I shall have the action,
and not my Servant, for the interest is in me. So here the interest is in the
Son, and he is to have the money. It was said at the bar between one Cardinal
and Lewis. It was adjudged that where two fathers promise upon marriage between
the daughter of the one, and the Son of the other, that the Father of the Son
will give 100 l. stock, and the Father of the Daughter 100 l. in money; The
money was paid, and the stock not delivered; And the action was maintained by
the Father. And the Justices said that they would see that Record. viz. 27 H.
8. Tathams case of a promise made to the wife, etc. They put at the bar one
Cores Case, That a man promised to one, to make satisfaction of all debts in
which he was indebted to another, who was then absent. He to whom the
satisfaction was to be made, brought the action upon the Case, and well
maintainable, ve Mich. 43 and 44 Eliz. int. Rixon and Horton.

Stone against Tiddersly.
THe action was brought upon an Obligation, the condition whereof was, that a
conveyance of a Manor shall be made to one P. and two others, to the use of
Richard Tiddersly, and the heirs males of his body; The remainder to the heirs
males of Rob. Tid. Upon issue, whether conditions were performed. And it was
found by verdict, that it was to the use of the heirs males of his body, the
remainder to Rob. Tid. and the heirs males of his body. Held no performance,
for they agreed not to the words of the Condition.

IT was agreed by all, That ancient Demesne was a good plea in Ejectione firm.
but not after imparlance.

Crosses Case.
THere was error brought, because the appearance was by Anthony Goodwin
Attornat suum. And there was not any such in rerum natura, The Court said that
this averment shall not be received against the Recorder of the Court.

FINIS.

