OBSERVATIONS ON THE HISTORY Of the Reign of KING CHARLES: Published by H. L.
Esquire.

FOR Illustration of the Story, and Rectifying some Mistakes and Errors in the
Course thereof.

Horat. de art Poet. Hunc veniam petimusque, damusque vicissim. Tacit. Hist.
Lib. 1. Fidem professis in corruptam, nec amore quicquam, nec odio dicendum
est. LONDON, Printed for John Clarke, at his shop under S. PetersChurch in
Cornhill, 1656.

To the worthily esteemed H. L. Esquire. The Author of the History of the Reign
of King CHARLES.
Sir,
I Have read your History of the Reign of King CHARLES, and am sorry I had not
so much acquaintance with you, as to see your Papers, before you put them to
the Press: which had I done, I should have advertised you of many things,
wherein I find, that either your intelligence, or your diligence failed you,
or your judgment is not well informed, or that you have been biased from the
mark of truth, by the excess and transport of your own affections. But being
as it is, I beseech you to accept with a friendly hand, that which with
ingenuity mixed with freedom, is here offered to you, and hope you will not be
offended, if your History is become the text of so free a Commentary. I know
full well quam facile sit inventis addere, how easy a thing it is to add to
another man's endeavors, and raise a superstructure upon that foundation, which
has been laid without our trouble; but I am not ignorant withal, that many
times the pains of the Commentator, are greater than their were whom he does
illustrate. Without which helps to guide us to the understanding of most
ancient Writers, how many of them had been thrown aside with disdain and scorn
(as S. Ambrose is reported to have dealt with the Satyrs of Perseus) because
no^ easily intelligible even to Learned men. I doubt not but it was your
purpose, faithfully and impartially to inform your Reader in the truth of
things; in which if you have failed by reason of any of the respects before
recited, these following Observations, will serve both as a Supplement, to make
good some points wherein. I find your Book defective, and a Correction of
some other passages, in which I find you are mistaken. Between us both the
History will be made more perfect, and consequently the Reader will be better
satisfied: which makes me somewhat confident, that these few Notes, will be so
far from making your History less vendible than it was before, that they
will very much advantage and promote the sale. And if I can do good to all,
without wrong to any, I ^ope no man can be offended with my pains and industry.
For my own part, as I first undertook this business with a mind free from
love, or hatred, or any of those other affections, which preingagements in a
party do possess men with, so I have carried it all along with such
impartiality and confidence, as may witness for me that I prefer Truth
before Interesse; and that none of Hugh Peter's his three great Giants, that is
to say, Gyant-Fear, Gyant-Selfe, and Gyant-Relations, (which commonly obstruct
the passage to all good intendments) have been able to prevail upon me. And
for your self, I desire you would please to know, that I have your parts and
person in an high esteem, and have not took this task in hand, to detract any
thing from those just honors which you have acquired, but only to rectify
your judgments, and lay before you and your Reader the true state of things.
That modest freedom I have used, in these Observations (especially the first
and last) many perhaps at the first sight seem unpleasing to you. And yet so
far I am from d^spair of pardon, that I conceive my ingenuity at the last may
deserve your thanks: it being ordinary with most men, who are under the hands
of the Surgeon, to be impatient with him, and exclaim against him whilst
their Wounds are dressed, and yet to honor and commend him when the Cure is
wrought; howsoever you will gain this by it, that if you do proceed to the end
of the Story, as you somewhere intimate, you will be hereby made more careful
of the grounds you go on, and render the Second Part less capable of such
Animadversions than the First has been: which I more earnestly desire, than to
engage my self in a second trouble, to which I hope you either will give no
occasion, or pardon me if I do.

October 8.
An Advertisement to the READER.
Reader,

THou (...) here some Obser^tions upon the History of the Reign of King
CAARLES, not long since published, which had come s^ner to thy hands if there
had been as much spend made at the Press, as there was at the Pen. But this is
not the only injury the delay has done us; for the extreme cold weather
overtaking the Printers at their first entrance on the work has so benumbed
the fingers of the Compositors, and dulled the eyes of the Correctors, that
thou art like to find a greater Errat^ than thou could^ reasonably expect in so
small a Volume. The principal and most material I have here subjoyned, by which
I desire thee to amend and correct the Book before thou set thy self to the
Reading of it. That pains being taken, the Book will be more acceptable unto
all that read it, and I hope every one that reads it, will receive both profit
and contentment (...) to his pains and charge. ^or though t^se Observations
may probably be of most satisfa^ion to such as have the Hi^ory by them, yet I
conceive that even to those who have it not, they will yield some benefit, by
giving them a (...) account of many passages (exceeding necessary for the right
understanding of the ^ate of things) which our Author either has omitted, or
else misreported, or finally, not so clearly apprehended as he should have
done. The disputations of Machiavell may be read with light and profit, without
recourse unto the Decads of Titus Livius, whom he makes the Argument of his
discou^ses; and we may read with like content the Observations of Malvezzy on
the beginning of the Annals of Co^nelius Tacitus, and yet not have that Author
by us. This said, I have no more to add, but to commend my pains to thy good
acceptance. And so fare thee well.

OBSERVATIONS On the History of the Reign of King CHARLES.
INtending a few Observations on the newly publ^d History of the Reign of King
Charles, to make it thereby the more useful to my self and others, I have
thought it fit and necessary to prepare my way, by offering some considerations
at the Authors style, which by reason of many lofty, but (...) words, no
English Reader can climb over. And the first word of this kind which I take
notice of in the Book it self, is,

Repandous] a new Latin, English word Fol. 1.
of our Authors making; of which, and others of that stamp, extracted from the
Greek, Latin, French and Spanish (but all disguised, like the Soldiers of the
Duke of Britain, in an English habit) his book contained so vast a medly, as if
it had been framed at Babell, before the scattered company were united into
Tongues and Languages. The History of a King of England, intended for the use
and b^nefit of the English Nation, ought to be given us in such words, as
either are originally of an English stock, or by continual usage, and long
tract of time, are become natural and familiar to an English ^are; and not in
such new minted terms, and those too of a foreign, and outlandish Race, as
are not to be understood without help of Dictionaries. It is true indeed, that
when there is necessity of using either terms of Law, or Logical notions, or
any other words of Art whatsoever they be: an Author is to keep himself to
such terms and words, as are transmitted to us by the Learned in their
several Faculties. But to affect new Notions, and indeed new Nothings, when
there is no necessity to incite us to it, has something in it, which deserves
^ more strict inquiry. It is observed of the Romanists, by Docter Fulke, and
other^ of our Divines, that when they could n^ longer keep their followers from
having the Scriptures laid before them in the English tongue, they so
endeavored to dim the light thereof by a dark Translation, that seeing they
might see, but not understand; and to that end did thrust into it many obscure
words, both Greek and Latin, which neither by long use were known, nor by
continual custom made familiar to an English Reader. Of which sort, you may
take these few as a taste of the rest. That is to say, Acquisi^ion, Advent,
Adulterate, Agnition, Archisynagogue, A^imos, Comm^ssations, Condign,
Contristate, Depositum, Didrachme, Dominicall day, Donaries Evacnated from
Christ, Euro- Aquilo, Epinanited, Holocaust, Hosts, Neophite, Paraclete,
Parasceve, Pasch, Praefinition, Presence, Prevaricator, Proposition, Loaves,
Repropitiate, Resuscitate, Sabbatis^, Super-edified, Sancta-Sanctoru^, Victims,
words utterly unknown to any English Reader, unless well grounded, and
instructed in the Learned Languages, and consequently their whole Translation
useless to most sorts of men. I cannot say that the Author of the History
which we have in hand, was under any such neces^ity of writing, as the R^mists
were, or that it did affect obscurity on any such design, as the Rhemists did;
but I may very warrantably and justly say, that in the Coining of new words,
not to be understood by a common Reader, he has not only out-vied the
Rhemists, but infi^tely exceeded all that have gone before him. A vein of
writing, which two the great Masters of the Greek, and Roman Eloquence had no
knowledge of, who used such words in their addresses to the people, as were
illius temporis auribus accommodata (as it is in Tacitus) accommodate and
fitted to the times they lived in, and easily intelligible unto all that heard
them. Loquendum est cum vulgo, was the ancient rule. And certainly to speak so
as to be understood by the meanest hearer, to write so, as to be comprehended
by the vulgar Reader, is such a principle of Prudence, as well becomes the
practice of the greatest Clerks. But it is with this our Author, as with many
others, who think they can never speak elegantly, nor write significantly,
except they do^ it in a language of their own devising, as if they were
ashamed o^ their Mother Tongue, or thought it no^ sufficiently curious, to
express their fancies. By means whereof, more Frenc^ and Latin words have
gained ground up on us, since the middle of the Reign o^ Queen Elizabeth, then
were admitted by our Ancestors (whether we look upon them as the British or
Saxon race) not only since the Norman, but the Roman Conquest, a folly
handsomely derided in an old blunt Epigram, where the spruce Gallant thus
bespeaks his Page or Laquay:

Diminutive and my defective slave,
Reach my Corpse coverture immediately,
It Is my complacency that rest to have;
'T insconse my person from Frigiditie.
The boy beliv'd all Welsh his Master speak
Till railed English, Rogue go fetch my Cloak.
I had not given my self the trouble of this Observation, but to meet the
humor of some men, who if pretenders to French or Latin tongues, pretend to an
authority also of creating words, and giving us new forms of speaking, which
neither King nor Keiser has the power to do. Moneys and Coins are forthwith
current, and universally admitted, as soon as they receive the stamp of Supreme
Authority. But it is not in the power of Kings or Parliaments to ordain new
words, without the liking and consent of the common people. Foreign
Commodities, not Customed, are not safely sold; and Foreign words, till
licensed, and approved by custom, are not fitly used. And therefore it was
well said by an able Grammarian, to a great Emperor of Rome, Homines donare
civitate potes, verba item non potes; that is to say, that he might naturalize
whole Nations, by giving them the privileges of a Roman Citizen, but that it
was not in his power to do so with words, and make them Free (as one might
say) of the Latin tongue. In this case, Custom and Consent, and the general
usage, are the greatest Princes, and he that does proceed without their
authority, has no authority at all to proceed upon: It being no othsrwise with
new Words, then with new Fashions in Apparel, which are at first ridiculous,
or at least unsightly, till by continual wearing, they become more ordinary.
And so it is resolved by Horace, in his Book, De Art Poetica.

Multa renascenter quae nnnc cecidere cadentque,
Quae nunc sunt in honor vocabula, si volet usus;
Quem penes arbitrium est, and vis and norma loquendi.
In English thus,
Many old words shall be resumed and some,
Now in great honor, shall as vile become,
If use so please; to which alone belongs,
The power to regulat^ and di^ect our tongues.
But lest our Author should affirm with Cremulius Cordus in the story, Adeo
factorum innocens sum ut verba m^a arguantur, that we are feign to cav^l with
him for his words, for want of greater matter to except against; I shall
forbear the prosecution of this Argument, till the close of all, and pass to
such material points as shall come before me.

To whom the Prince returned answer, Fol. ^.
that he would empower the Earl of Bristol, to give his Master all satisfaction
in that particular,] that is to say (for so you must be understood in the words
foregoing) that he would make a Pr^xie to the Earl of Bristol to celebrate (in
his name) the Marriage with the Lady Infanta* But there was no such Proxy made
to the Earl of Bristol, that being a power and trust thought worthy of the
Catholic King, and Don Charles his Brother, as appears plainly by the
public Instrument made to that effect, bearing date August the 8 Anno 1623.
which being sealed by the Prince in due form of Law, it was indeed committed
to the custody of the Earl of Bristoll, by him to be delivered to the King of
Spain, and Don Charles his Brother, or to either of them, as soon as the
Dispensation should be brought from Rome, and this was all the Power which the
E^rle of Bristol had, which yet he had no power to execute, as it after proved.

The Loyal hearted English could not distinguish ^ol. 3.
between the Spanish match, and Charles his ruin.] That some of the Loyal
hearted English were of that opinion, I shall easily grant, but they had other
Opinions also, which did Bias with them; especially one opinion, that the near
Allianc^ with that Crown, would arm the King with power to suppress that
F^ction, which began then to be dreadful to him, and have since been the ruin
of Charles, and his whole Posterity. But other English hearts there are, of no
less Loyalty, and of as great affection to the Royal Family, and as great
Zealots of the true Protestant Religion here by Law established, who think
otherwise of it, and that the ruin of Prince Charles might by this match have
been prevented. The Spaniard for the most part found a more steady friend, then
the wavering French. What else there was (which might confirm them on the
Post-fact) in this persuasion I shall reserve unto my self. But you proceed
and tell us, after Folio 5. That England ever found the Spaniard a worse
Friend, then an Enemy.] For this I think you have no reason, the amity and
correspondence between the Nations having continued firm, and most inv^olate
for many Ages, and never broke (if not of late) but by the English, or on their
occasions. First, by the Invasion of Spai^e by the ^lack Prince, in the time of
Don Pedro of Castile, and the War carried thither not long after by the Duke of
Lancaster; n^xt, on the breach made with Charles the fifth, by King Henry the
Eighth, in pursuance of the injury done unto him, in casting off Queen
Katharine, that great Emperors Aunt; and finally by Queen Elizabeth,
supporting the revolting Netherlands against Philip the second, their natural
and most lawful Prince. If on this last and greatest provocation the Spaniard
took up arms against us, he had all the reason in the world for his
justification.

Who per^iving upon the whole sum, ^bid.
that the sly Spaniard practiced to make an after-game of the Palatinate.]
King James was not to be told that now (I mean upon the Prince's return from
Spain) there being no such thing as the restoring of the Palatinate to the
Prince Elector, i^ all the Articles of the Treaty, which were sworn between
them. That was reserve^ as an after-game, but yet intended to b^ played by the
Spanish Court, to the mos^ honor and advantage of the Engli^ Nation, thereby
to gain the better welcome to the Royal Bride, when she cam^ amongst us. For
thus I find it in a Letter from the Earl of Bristol, dated the 28. of
October, not long after the Prince'^ coming home.

For the business of the Palatinate, as (...) will appears by the joint
disppatch which Si^ Walter Aston, and my self wrote of the 23. of November,
that we were assured, not by the Conde of Olivares, only in this Kings name,
but severally, by all the Counselors, that a settled resolution was taken in
Council, on the 16. of November, that this King should procure his Majesty's
entire satisfaction, and hereof the Cardinal Ca^ala, and diverse other
Counselors that prof^ssed themselves particularly affected to the King and
Prince's service, came to give Sir Walter Aston and my self the P^rabein. The
Conde of Olivares entreated (...) both, in this Kings name, to assure his
Majesty thereof, upon our honors, and upon our lives if need were. And thus
much was to have been delivered unto us in writing, before we would have passed
to the Disposories, as will plainly appear by this above mentioned dispatch,
of the 23. of November. Besides, the Princess had now made this business her
own, and had therein most earnestly moved the King her Brother, and written
unto the Conde of Olivares, and had set her heart upon the making of her self
graceful, and welcome to the King and Kingdom, by overco^ing this business.
These are the words of Bristol's Letter, and these give me no small assurance
of the integrity and good meaning of the Court of Spain, as ^o that particular.

Which being met, and the business propounded, Fol. 4.
it was entertained with an unanimous consent, and a motion made, that an
Ambassador should be sent over to negotiate the Treaty.] I somewhat doubt of
your intelligence in this relation, the Marriage of the Prince, containing such
a Branch of the Royal prerogative, as King James was not likely to communicate
with his Houses of Parliament. For when he was Petitioned by both Houses not
long before, that for the avoiding of some dangers, which did seem to threaten
the whole Kingdom, he would Marry the Prince to a Lady of the Protestant
Religion; he entertained the motion with no small disdain, and checked them in
his answer, for intrenching on his just Prerogative. And though King Charles
acquainted the two Houses of Parliament with his intent of Marrying the
Princess Mary, to the Heir of Orange, yet we must look upon him at that time,
as encumbred with the greatest difficulties, that ever any Prince lay under;
one that had wholly lost himself on their Love and Courtesy, and therefore
was to hold fair with them in the greatest matters. And yet he did not bend
thus low, nor communicate the affair unto them, till the Articles of the
Marriage were in a manner concluded, as appears plainly by his Majesty's
Speech in the House of Lords, Fol. 213. But when it was required of him as a
Duty, not an Act of Grace, in the fifth of the nineteen Propositions which were
sent to Yerke, that none of his Children should be Married without their
consent; though he was then in such a necessitous condition, as few Princes
ever were reduced to, yet would he by no means s^sfie their demands therein.

In the style of the Court he went for Great Ibid.
Britains Solomon.] It cannot be denied, but that he was an Universal Scholar,
as you tell us afterward, the greatest Scholar (without doubt) for so great a
King, that these last Ages of the world have presented to us; but that he was
Great Britains Solomon, that is to say, either the wisest Man, or the wisest
King of the British Nations, I am not Courtier enough to defend or say. It is
true indeed, that he much pleased himself with boasting of his Kings craft, as
he used to call it, but as Imbold a French Captain was wont to say, that he
could never see where that great wit of the Florentines lay, which was so much
talked of in the world; so I have heard many wise men say, that they could
never find what that Kingcraft was: It being no hard matter to prove, that in
all public Treaties and Negotiations, and many private Conferences and debates
of Council, he was outwitted, and made use of unto other men's ends, by almost
all that undertook him. And on^ might say, (I fear^ too truly) that by putting
off the Majesty belonging to a King of England, that so he might more liberally
enjoy himself; neglecting the affairs of State, and cares of Government, to
hunt after pleasures; deserting the imperial City, to sport himself at
Roiston, Newmarket, and such obscure places (which were to him as the Isle of
Capre was to Tiberius Caesar) and finally by letting loose the Golden reins of
Discipline, held by his Predecessors with so strict a hand; he opened the first
gap unto those confusions, of which we have since found the miserable and
woeful consequences. But I know not what temptation has drawn this note from
me, I go on again.

A stout adversary he was to the Arminians, Fol. 5.
and Semi-Pelagians, whom he called, as Prosper before him did, the Enemies of
Gods grace.] In this short sentence there are many things to be considered. 1.
What these Arminians were, which our Author speaks of. 2. Whether they were
the Enemies of Gods grace or not? and 3. what the reason was why King James
showed himself so great an adversary to them, as you say he did.

And first for the Arminians (as you call them) they were a branch of the Sect
of Calvin, to whose Discipline in all particulars they conformed themselves,
and to his Doctrines in the most, differing only in the matter of
Predestination, and the points subordinate; but managing tho^ differences with
a better temper, then their Opposites did. Nor were these differences only
controverted in the School of Calvin, but had been many times disputed with
great heat and passion, betwixt the Franciscans and Dominicans in the Church of
Rome. The rigid and moderate Lutherans in the Churches Protestant. The rigid
Lutherans, who look on Flacius Illyricus (a man of a turbulent and fiery
nature) as their Head and Captain, and with them the Dominieans (or black
Friars) go the same way as Calvin and his followers do^; and these proceed
upon the authority of Saint Augustine, whose zeal against the P^lagian
Heresies transported him into such inconvenient expressions, as the wis^st men
may fall into on the like occasions. The moderate Lutherans, of which
Melancthon, a sober and right learned man (and therefore not unfitly called the
Phoenix of Germany) was the principal leader, and with them the Franciscan
Friars (and of late the Jesuits) go the same way which the Arminians since
have followed; grounding themselves upon the constant current of the ancient
Fathers, who lived and flourished, ante mala certamina Pelagiana, before the
authority of Saint Augustine, in canvassing and confuting the Pelagian
Heresies, carried all before it. For Doctor James Hermin, the University
Reader, in the University of Leidon, preferring the Doctrine of Melancthon in
these points, before that of Calvin, not only maintained it in the Schools,
but preached it also in the P^lpit as occasion was; not that he was the first
of the School of Calvin, that professed this way, but that he was of better
parts, and of greater Learning, then any who before had undertook it. And being
he was a man of such parts and Learning, and that his doctrine was conceived to
be more Rational in it self, far more agreeable unto the Justice and Mercy
of Almighty God, and more conducing unto Piety, then that of the Rigid
Calvinist was esteemed to be, it quickly found great multitudes of followers in
the B^lgique Churches; and these, not only of the Vu^gar, but the Learned
sort, of which last rank I may reckon Episcopius, Corvinus, Bertius, Tilenus,
John G^rard, Vossius, (for his abilities in Learning, made a Prebend of
Canterbury) and that great magazine both of Divine and Humane literature, Hugo
Grotius: These are the men who commonly are nicknamed Arminians, and these the
rigid Calvinists have endeavored to oppose, to the public hatred, by fastening
on them many horrid Blasphemies, and gross absurdities, which cannot properly
and of right be charged upon them. For in the continuation of the History of
the Netherlands, writ by one ^rosse (as I remember) a fellow of no Parts, or
Judgment, and so more apt to be abused with a false report: It is affirmed that
there was a Synod called at D^rt, to suppress the Arminians, and that the said
Arminians held amongst other Heresies; first, that God was the Author of Sin,
and secondly, that he Created the far greatest part of mankind only, of
purpose for to damn them, with several others of that kind; which every man
of Reading knows, not only to be the Consequence and Results of Calvin's
Doctrine, but to be positively maintained and taught by some of his followers.
By these, and such like sub^ill and malicious practices, they endeavored to
expose their adversaries to the public hatred, and make them odious with the
people; till at the last, those poor men might have said most justly, as once
the Primitive Christians did, under the burden of the like Calumnies and
Imputations, Condemnati sumus quia nominamur, non quia convincimur, as
Tertullian has it; the name of an Arminian carried a Condemnation in it self,
without any conviction:

2. But if they were the Enemies of the Grace of God, and that King James so
conceived of them, they did undoubtedly deserve all this and more; but
certainly whatsoever King James might please to call them, I am sure he had
little reason for it, those whom you call Arminians, speaking as Honorably and
Religiously of the grace of God, as the most Orthodox writers in the Primitive
times. It is true ind^d, that the Pelagians did ascribe so much to the powers
of Nature, in the Conversion of a Sinner, and the whole work of Regeneration,
ut gratiam Dei necessariam non putarent, that they thought the Grace of God
(...) be together unnecessary (as Lyrinensis tells us of them.) If the
Arminians (as you call them) were of this opinion, they were the Enemies of
Gods Grace, there is no doubt of that. But look into the five Articles which
they exhibited in their Remonstrance to the States of Holland, and after to the
Assembly at Dort, and you will find the contrary; it being there affirmed
expressly in these following words, Gratiam Dei Staiuimus esse principium,
progressum and complementum omnis boni; ^deo ut ne ipse quidem regenitus absque
praecedente sive praeveniente ista, excitante, prosequente, and cooperante
gratia, bonum cogitare velle, aut peragere possit, u^isve ad malum
tentationibus resistere: It a ut bona opera actionesque quas quis cogitando
potest adsequi gratiae Dei in Christo adscribenda sint. We teach say they, that
the Grace of God is the beginning and promotion and accomplishment of every
thing that is good in us; insomuch that the Regenerate man can neither think,
will, nor do any thing that is good without this grace preventing,
Cooperating, and Assisting, and consequently that all good works which any man
in his life can attain unto, are to be attributed and Ascribed to the Grace of
God. Call you those men the Enemies of Gods grace, as you seem to make them? I
hope Saint Augustine was no enemy of the grace of God, in giving us this Golden
sentence; since gratia Dei praeveniente ut velimus, and subsequente ne frustra
velimus, ad pietatis opera nil valemus; that is to say, Without the grace of
God preventing, that we may will the things which are good, and following or
assisting that we do not will them to no purpose, we are not able to do any
thing in the works of piety. Say not these men the same as S. Austin does? and
saying the same, why are they called the Enemies of the Grace of God, whilst he
is honored with the title of the Champion and Defender of it? But some will
say that they ascribe more unto the freedom of the will, then may stand with
Grace, and consequently overthrow all the former building. If so, they are more
cunning then I thought they were. But these plain dealing men do assure me
otherwise, for thus they say, (in the same Articles as before) Homo salvificam
fidem non habet a se, neque ex liberi sui arbitrii viribus, sed necesse est ut
ab ^o in Christo, per spiritum ipsius sanctum regeneretur at^ue renovetur
intellectu, affectibus, voluntate, omnibusque viribus, ut salutaria bona recte
possit intelligere, meditari, velle, atque perficere; That is to say, A man
has not saving Faith in, and of himself, nor by the strength of his own Free
will, but it is necessary that he be regenerate, and renewed in Christ by the
Holy Ghost, in his understanding, affections, will, and all the other powers of
Nature, that so he may both understand, meditate, will* and bring to pass the
things which appertain to his Salvation. I grant indeed, that they ascribe
somewhet more to the will of Man, then the rigid sort of Lutherans and
Calvinians do^, who will have a man drawn forcibly and Irresistably, with the
cords of Grace, velut in animalon quiddam, like a senseless stock, without
contributing any thing to his own eternity; but they ascribe no more unto it,
then what may stand both with the Grace and Justice of Almighty God, according
to that Divine saying of Saint Augustine, viz. Si non est Gratia Dei quomodo
salva^ mundum? si non est liberum arbitrium, quomodo judicat mundum? were it
not for the Grace of God, no man could be saved, and were there not a Freedom
of Will in M^n, no man with justice could be damned. If they that speak so much
of the Grace of God, and so little of the Will of Man in the workings of it,
must notwithstanding be the Enemies of the Grace of God; I fear the Church of
England will be found in a sorry case, whose Doctrine in these points is the
very same, and thus delivered in the tenth Article of her Confession, viz. The
condition of Man after the Fall of Adam, is such, that he cannot turn and
prepare himself by his own natural strength, and good works to Faith and
calling upon God: wherefore we have no power to do good works pleasant and
acceptable to God, without the Grace of God by Christ preventing us, that we
may have a good Will, and working with us, when we have that good will. Saint
Augustine, and the Church of England, and all Orthodox Christians are as much
Enemies of Gods Grace (for ought I can see, as any of those poor despised
ones, whom you call Arminians.

3. But then it may be justly asked, what moved King James to be so stout an
stout of theirs, as you say he was? and for that the reasons may be many, for
1. he had his education in the Kirk of Scotland, where all the Hetrodoxies of
Calvin were received as Gospel, and therefore could not suddenly cast off
those opinions which he had sucked in as it were with his nurses milk. 2. He
was much governed at that time by Doctor Montague then Bishop of Winchester,
and Dean of his Majesty's Chapel Royal, who having been a great stickler in
these Predestinarian Controversies, when he lived in Cambridge, thought
himself bound to beat down all opponents by the Kings Authority, which he
could not overbear by the strength of Argument; and finding the Kings will
inclineable to his own persuasions in these points, put him upon many harsh,
and severe expressions against these poor men, especially in his Declaration
against Vorstius, where he strikes most at them. But thirdly, the greatest
motive with K. James, was, Reason of State the Arminians (as you call them)
being united into a party, under the countenance and command of (...) Olden
Barnevell and by him used to undermine the power of Mawrice, then Prince of
Orange; who as he was a great Patron of the Rigid Calvinians, so was he to that
King a most dear confederate. Besides, the King considered this division in the
Belgic Provinces, as a matter of most dangerous nature, and utterly
distructive of that peace, unity, and concord which was to be the greatest
preservation of the States United: whom therefore he exhorts in the same
Declaration to take heed of such infected persons, their own Countrymen being
already divided into Factions upon this occasion, which was a matter (as he
says) so opposite to unity (which was indeed the only prop and safety of
their State next under God) as of necessity it must by little and little bring
them to utter ruin, if wisely and in time they did not provide against it, So
that K. James consid^ring the present breach as tending to the utter ruin of
those Estates, and more particularly of the Prince of Orange, his most dear
Allie, he thought it no small piece of King-craft to contribute toward the
suppres^ion of the weaker party; not only by blasting them in the said
Declaration with reproachful names, and sending such of his Divines to the
Assembly at Dort, as he was sure would be sufficiently active in their
Condemnation; which being done, his own turn served therein to his full
contentment, and Bishop Montague his great Directour in those businesses being
also dead; he began to show himself more favorable unto their opinions than
before he did: especially on the coming out of the Answer to the Romish Gaggar,
composed by another Montague then Pr^bend of Windsor, and afterward L. Bishop
of Chichester, and at last of Norwich, (a man of less Courtship, but of far
more Learning than the other was) whos^ judgment in those points he liked very
well, as being more consonant to the Doctrine of the Church of England, and
more agreeable to the Tenor of approved Antiquity. But I have stayed too long
on this Observation. I must now go forwards.

The Kings Corpse on the 4th of May was Fol. 6.
conveyed to Westminster, and there inhumed, etc.] Our Author tells us in the
end of his Preface what an esp^ciall care he has of his Temporalities (as his
own word is) in assigning unto every action its own proper time, and yet he
fails us here in the first beginning: For, neither was the body of that King
interred on the 4th of May, nor the Letters of procuration kept undelivered
till the 8th (as he after te^ls us) nor the Marriage celebrated after the
Funeral of the King, as is there declared: though possibly in the intention of
King Charles (for the reasons there delivered) it had been so resolved on at
the first designation of those Royal pomps: For, upon Sunday May the 1st, the
Marriage was celebrated at the Church Nastre Dame in Paris; on Tuesday May the
3d, the news thereof came unto the Court, and was welcomed the same night with
Bells and Bone-fires in all parts of London; on Saturday May the 7th, was King
James interred, and on Sunday morning May the 8th, there came an Order from the
Lords of the Council to the Preachers appointed for St. Paul's Cross (as I have
heard him say more than once or twice) requiring him that in his Prayer before
the Sermon he should not pray for the Queen by the name of Henrietta Maria, but
by the name of Queen Mary ouely. And yet it is true too which he after tells
us, that is to say, That the Marriage was celebrated in Paris on the 11th of
May. But then he is to understand that this was on the 11th of May in the
French Account, which following the Gregorian Calender anticipates ten days in
every Month; that being the 11th day of the Month to them, in the new Style
(or stylo novo, as they phrase it) which is the first day of the Month in the
old Style and Account of England.

He sent Letters of Prolucution to the Ibid.
Duke of Chevereux.] If it be asked why the King when he was only Prince of
Wales should look no lower for a Proxy than the King of Spain, and being now
the mighty Monarch of Great Britain, should pitch upon so mean a Prince as the
Duke of Chevereux; it may be answered that the Duke of Chevereux was a Prince
of the house of Guise, from which his Majesty was extracted: Mary of Loraine
Daughter to Claud of Loraine the first Duke of Guise, being Wife to James the
fifth of Scotland, Grandmother unto James the sixth, and consequently great
Grandmother to King Charles himself.

From Canterbury his Majesty took Coach Fol. 7.
for Whitehall, where the third after his arrival, etc.] If our Author means
by this, that his Majesty went in Coach but some part of the way only, he
should then have said so; but if he mean that he went so all the way to
Whitehall, he is very much out: their Majesty's passing in Coach no further
than Gravesend, and from thence in the^r Royal Barge by water unto his Palace
at Whitehall, accompanied or met by all the Barges, Boats, and Wherries which
could be found upon the Thames; the Author of these Observations beholding from
Tower-wharfe that magnificent passage.

For as man is without a female Consort, Fol. 9.
so is a King without his supreme Council a half formed sterill thing.] Our
Author in these words, and the rest that follow, maintains a Paradox most
dangerous to supreme Authority in making Parliaments so necessary to all Acts
of State, as if that Kings, or they that have the Supreme power could do
nothing lawfully but what they do with their assistance, and by their consent;
which were it so, a Parliament must be Coordinate to Kings (or such as have
the power of Kings) not subordinate to them. Nor need the Members write
themselves by the name of His Majesty's most loyal and most humble Subjects,
but by the name of Partners and Associates in the Royal power: which doctrine,
of what ill consequence it may be in Monarchical Government, I leave
Counselors of State to consider of.

His speech being ended, the King veiled Fol. 11.
his Crown, a thing rare in any of his Predecessou^s.] Our Chroniclers tell us
of King James, that at his first coming to the Crown of England, he used to go
often to the Tower to see the Lion (the reputed King of Beasts) baited
sometimes by Dogs, and sometimes by Horses; which I could never read without
some r^gret, the baiting of the King of Beasts seeming to me an ill presage of
those many baitings which he (a King of Men) sound afterward at the ha^s of
his Subjects. And Mr. Prin tells us of K. Charles, that on the day of his
Coronation he was clothed in white, contrary to the custom of his
Predecessors, who were on that day clad in purple. White is we know the color
of the saints, who are represented to us in White robes by S. John in the
Revelation: And Purple is we know the Imperial and Regal color, so proper
hereto sore unto Kings and Emperors, that many of the Constantinoplitan
Emperors were called Porphirogeniti, because at their first coming into the
world they were wrapped in purple. And this I look upon as an ill presage, that
the King laying aside his Purple, the Robe of Majesty, should cloathe himself
in White, the Robe of Innocence; as if thereby it were foresignified that he
should divest himself of that Regal Majesty which might and would have kept
him safe from affront and scorn, to rely wholly on the innocence of a virtuous
life, which did expose him finally to calamitous ruin. But as all ill
presages, none like that which our Author speaks of, I mean the veiling of his
Crown to this his first Parliament; which I consider of the Introduction to
those many veilings of the Crown in all the Parliaments that followed: For,
first he veiled his Crown to this, in leaving Mountague in their hands, and his
Bond uncancelled, (as you tell us after Fol. 12.) notwithstanding that he was
his sworn Chaplain and domestic Servant, and that too in a business of such a
nature as former Parliaments used not to take cognizince of; he veiled his
Crown unto the next, when he permitted them (as you tell us, Fol. 25.) to
search his Signet Office, and to examine the Letters of his Secretaries of
State, leaving him nothing free from their discovery; a thing not formerly
practiced: he veiled his Crown unto the third, first in the way of preparation
to it, releasing all the Gentlemen whom he had imprisoned, for their refusal
of the Loan, many of which being elected Members of the following Parliament,
brought with them both a power and will to avenge themselves by the restraint
of His Prerogative within narrower bounds; next in the prosecution of it, when
hearing that the Parliament had granted him some Subsidies, not a man
dissenting, he could not restrain himself from weeping, (which tenderness of
his was made good use of to his no small damage) adding withal, and bidding
his Secretary tell them (as our Author tells us, Fol. 77.) he would deny them
nothing of their Liberties which any of his Predecessors had granted to them;
and finally in the close thereof when He enacted the Petition of Right, and
made it pass into a Law, of which our Author tells us, Fol. 87. That never
Arbitrary power since Monarchy first founded did so submitters fasces, so veil
its Scepter; never did the prerogative descend so much from perch to popular
lure, as by that Concession. He veiled his Crown unto all three, by suffering
the House of Commons to set up a Commit for Religion, to question Manwaring,
Sibthorp, and diverse others for Doctrinall matters, which if erroneous were
more proper to be censured in the High Commission or the Convocation, to which
the cognizance of such Causes does of right b^long; and not unto a Consistory
of Lay. Elders, which though it might consist of the wisest men, yet were they
for the most part none of the greatest Clerks. He veiled his Crown also unto
the Scots, when having power to bring them under his command, he yielded to the
Pacification at Barwicke, not more unto his own dishonor than to their
advantage; which drew him on first to abolish the Episcopal Government (the
greatest prop of hi^ Estate) in the Church of Scotland, and after at their
instance to call a Parliament in England, and by the terrou^ of their Arms
first to give way that the Lords of the Privy Council (in referenc^ to the
Trial of the (...) of Strafford) should be examined upon oath, in points
debated and resolved on at the Council Table; that being done, to yield to a
Triennial Parliament, to be called (upon his default) by Sheriffs and
Constables, and finally to perpetuate that Parliament to his own destruction.
What other vailings of the Crown followed upon this, we shall hereafter see
upon another occasion.

In this Session of Parliament was Mr. Ibid.
Mountague questioned for publishing certain Books prejudicial to the
Protestant cause, etc.] Somewhat of Mr. Mountague we have seen before, and
shall now add, that his Books contained nothing prejudicial to the Protestant
Cause, or to the established Doctrine of the Church of England, but only to
the Calvinisticall Sect who had imposed their Heterodoxies upon credulous men
for the received Doctrines of the Church. This Mr. Mount^ disavowed in his
Answer to the Romish Gagg^r, and severing private men's Opinions from the
Churches Doctrines to be defended by their own Patrons and abettors* which so
offended that whole Party that an Information was intended and prepared against
him, which being made known unto King James, he did not only give him his
discharge and quietus est, and grant him leave (in regard the Accusation was
divulged, and the clamor violent) humbly to appeal from his Defamers unto His
most sacred cognizance in public, and to represent his just defense against
their slanders and false surmises unto the world, but also to give express
order unto Doctor White then Deane of C^l sle (cried up, when L^cturer of St.
Paul's, for the stoutest Champion of this Church against those of Rome) for the
authorizing and publishing thereof, which was ^one accordingly. So he in his
Epistle Dedicatory to the late King Charles. These are the Books, The Answer to
the Romish Gagger: and, the Defense thereof, called, Appello Caesarem: so
prejudicial (is you say) to the Protestant Cause, and therefore fit to be
in^ed on by the House of Parliament.

The cause of that restraint (v^z: the grant F^l. 12.
of Tonage and Poundage for no more than one year) being a design to reduce
it to the rate settled in Qu^n Maryes days.] And had they brought it unto that,
their Grant would have been like the Apples of Sodom, goodly and beautiful to
the eye, sed levi tactu pressa in vagum pulverem fatiscunt (says the old
Geographer) but never so gently handled fell to dust and ashes; a nut without a
kernil, and a painted nothing. And yet they might have made the King some fair
amends, if they had brought the Subsidies to the same rate also, or to the
rates they were at, in her Fathers days, when as one single Subsidy of four
shillings in the pound was estimated to amount to eight hundred thousand pounds
of good English money, which is as much as eight whole Subsidies did amount to
when King Charles come unto the Crown.

The Divinity School was appointed for Ibid.
the House of Commons.] And qu^stionlesse this giving up of the Divinity School
unto the use of the House of Commons, and placing the Speaker in or near the
Chair^ in which the Kings Professor for Divinity did usually read his Public
Lectures, and moderate in all Public Disputations, first put them into a
conceit that the determining in all points and Controversies in Divinity did
belong to them: As Vibius Rufus in the story, having married Tully's Widow, and
bought Caesar's Chair, conceived that he was then in a way to gain the Eloquence
of the one, and the Power of the other: For, after this we find no Parliament
without a Committee for Religion, and no Committee for Religion but what did
think it self sufficiently instructed to manage the greatest Controversies of
D^vinity which were brought before them: with what success to the Religion
here by Law established we now see too clearly.

Most of the Voters of this Remonstran^ Fol. 15.
flew high, and impetuously pressed in upon the Duke.] And this makes good that
saying of the wise Historian, Quam breves and infausti Romani populi amores,
that the D^rlings and Affections of the Common People (take which sense you
will) are of short continuance. It was not long since that this very man was
cried up in Parliament for the great ornament and honor of the English Nation,
the chief preserver of this Kingdom from the Spanish practices, no attribute
sufficient to set forth his praises, no honor large enough to requite his
merits. Now on the sudden he is become the subject of a popular h^d, tossed
from one Parliament to another like the Ball of Fortune, many times struck into
the hazard, and at last quite tossed out of the Court, and-tumbled into his
grave by a desperate Ruffion. But as I have been told by some intelligent man,
this sudden alteration came another way, and not from any premeditated purpose
in the Parliament men, who after voted this Remonstrance: For having an ill eye
to the Bishop of Lincoln, and a design to make him lighter by the Seal; the
Bishop to prevent the danger, and divert the humor, proposed the Duke of
Buckingham unto some leading men amongst them as the fitter game, offering to
furn^sh them with matter, and to m^ke good that matter by sufficient evidence;
which coming not long after to the ears of the Duke, to whom he had done many
ill* offices when he was in Spain, he procured the Seal to be taken from him;
of which more anon.

And who (i.e. Sir Robert Mansell) had Fol. 17.
an unquestionable right to the chief conduct of this Enterprise upon the Dukes
default.] I b^lieve not so. For though Sir Robert were Vice Admiral, and had
the subordinate power to the Duke of Buckingham in all things which concerned
that Office, yet in the present Enterprise he had not any thing at all to
pretend unto: the Lord Admiral himself not acting in occasional services or
great employments at the Sea in regard of his Office, but as he is empowered by
special Commission from the King, which he may grant to any other as He sees
cause for it. A thing so obvious in the course of our English stories, that I
need bring no examples of it to confirm this truth.

And the first thing resolved upon was. Fol. 20.
His solemn Initiation into Regality, and setting the Crown upon His head.] As
sol^mne as the King esteemed it, yet our Author as it seems thinks more poorly
of it: For, he not only censureth it for a vanity, though a serious vanity,
but thinks that Kings are idle in it, though idle to some better purpose than
in (...) and Dances. Are not all Christian Kings wi^h whom the Rites of
Coronation are accounted sacred, much concerned in this, and the Scriptures
more? are not the Ceremonies of Anointing and Crowning Kings of great antiqu^ty
in all Nations throughout the World directed by the holy Spirit in the Book of
God? exempl fi^d in Saul, David, Solomon, but most particularly in the
inauguration of Jehoash, the 2 of Kings 11. 12. where it is said that Jehojada
the high Priest brought forth the Kings son and put the Crown upon him, and
gave him the testimonies, and they made him King and anointed him, and clapped
their hands, and said, GOD SAVE THE KING. Was this a Pageant think we of the
high Priests making to delight the Soldiery, or a solemnity and ceremony of
Gods own appointing to distinguish his Vicegerents from inferior persons, and
strike a veneration toward them in all sorts of men whether Priests or people?
He that shall look upon the Coronation of our Savior, the placing of the Crown
upon his head, and putting the Scepter into his hands, and bowing of the knee
before him, with this acclamation, Hail King of the Jews, will therein find
a pattern for the Inauguration of a Christian King: In which there is not any
thing of a serious vanity, (as our Author calls it) but a grave, pious, and
religious conformity to the Investiture and Coronation of their supreme Lord. I
could enlarge upon this subject, but that I think better of our Author than
some of our Historians do of Henry Duke of Buckingham, of whom it is observed
that at the Coronation of King Richard the third, he cast many a squint eye
upon the Crown, as if he thought it might be set on a fitter head. But our
Author passes from the Coronation to the following Parliament. In order
whereunto, he tell^ us that

The Lord Keeper Williams was displaced Ibid.
and his place was disposed of to Sir Thomas Coventrie.] Our Author is here
out again in his Temporalities, the Lord Keeper Williams not being displaced
betwixt the Coronation and the following Parliament but some months before: For
the Great Seal was taken from him in October three months and more before the
day of the Coronation; Sir Thomas Coventrie sitting in (...) as Lord Keeper,
both in the Michaelmas Term at Reading, and in the Candlemas Term at
Westminster. The like mistake he gives us in his Temporalities touching Bishop
Land, whom he makes Bishop of Bathe and Wells, at the time of his affl^cting in
the Coronation; whereas indeed he was at that time Bishop of St. David's only,
and not translated to the Bishopric of Bathe and Wells till September
following. And that I may not trouble my self with the like observation at
another time (though there be many more of this nature to be troubled with) I
shall crave leave to step forth to Fol. 96. where it is said, That the Articles
of Lambeth were so well approved of by King James, as he first sent them first
to the Synod of Dort as the Doctrine of our Church, where they were asserted by
the suffrage of our British Divines; and after that commended them to the
Convocation held in Ireland to be asserted amongst the Articles of Religion
established Anno 1615. and accordingly they were] This is a very strange
Hysteron Proteron, setting the cart before the horse, as we use to say. For,
certainly the Articles of Lambeth being made part of the Confession of the
Church of Ireland, Anno 1615. as indeed they were, could not before that time
be sent to the Assembly, or Synod at Dort, which was not held till three years
after, Anno 1618. And this I take to be from what more than a superannuating as
to call it in his Temporalities, though he be confident in his Preface that he
stands secure not only from substantial falsehoods, but even from
circumstantiall also, in assigning all both things and actions their proper
times. How ill this confidence is grounded we have seen in part, and shall see
more hereof hereafter, as occasion serves.

Who loved the Bishop (if Fame belies her Fol. 21.
not) better than was fit.] I think our Author with more prudence might have
spared this Note, especially having Fame only for the ground thereof, which is
so infamous ^n Historian (as a learned Gentleman has well noted) that no wise
man would build on the credit of it. If Fames and Libels should once pass for
H^storicall truths, few Kings, or Favorites, or Ministers of great affairs (or
indeed who else) would go with honor to their graves, or live with glory in
the mouths of the next Posterities. Wilson, a creature and dependent of the
Earl of Warwick, whom you accuse elsewhere of partiality in the business of
the Earl of Essex, leaves the like stain upon his Lady; but out of zeal to the
good cause indevoureth to acquit the Bishop from the guilt thereof, by saying,
that he was Eunuchus ab utero, an Eunuch from his Mothers womb, which all that
knew that Prelate most extremely laughed at. And what had he for his authority
but Fam^ and Libels, purposely scattered and divulged amongst the people to
disgrace that Family, by the malicious Contrivers of the Public ruin. The
honor of Ladies in the general is a tender point, not easily repaired if
wronged, and therefore to be left untouched, or most gently handled. For which
cause possibly S. (...) advises that we give honor to the Woman as the weaker
vessel, and weaker vessels if once cracked by ungentle handling, are either
utterly broken: or not easily mended. And for this Lady in particular whom
these two Authors toss on the breath of Fame, I never heard but that she was
a person of great parts and honor, and one that never did ill offices to any
man during the time of her great power and favor both with King and Queen. So
that we may affirm of her, as the Historian does of Livia that great Emperors
Wife, Potentiam ejus nemo sensit, nisi aut levatione periculi, aut accessione
dignitatis, that no body ever found her power, but either in lessening his
deserved punishments, or adding some respects to him for his welldeservings.

Nor seemed the question in the sense of Fol. 29.
many, which was the Traitor, but which was the most.] That is to say, whether
the Duke of Buckingham, or the Earl of Bristol were the greater Traitor,
though it appears not (for any thing which our Author tells us) that any
treason was proved against either of them: For had the Duke proved his Charge
of Treason against the Earl, he had both power and opportunity enough to have
wrought his ruin; or had the Earl proved the like Charge against the Duke,
the Commons needed not have troubled themselves with a new Impeachment,
containing nothing but Encroachments on the Royal favor, and some
miscarriages which at another time, and in another man would have been connived
at. Our Author gives us a sull Copy of the Earls Charge against the Duke; but
of the Dukes Charge against the Earl (whether out of Partiality or want of
Information) he affords us nothing. I shall therefore add so much in the way
of supplement, as to subjoyn three or four of the principal Articles of the
Charge against him, leaving them here as they were left in the House of Peers,
without any further prosecution than the Narrative only. It was then charged
upon the Earl,

1. That having certified King James by several Letters out of Spain that the
Treaty of the Match was in a very good forwardness, the Prince at his arrival
there, found it nothing so, there being little done in relation to it. 2. That
in the time of his negotiation by Letters unto his late Majesty and otherwise,
he counseled and persuaded the said Kings Majesty to set at liberty the
Jesuits and Priests of the Romish Religion, and to grant and allow unto the
Papists and Professors of the same, a free toleration, and silencing the Laws
made and studing in force against them: 3. That at the Princes coming into
Spain, the said Earl of Bristol cunningly, falsely, and traitorously moved and
persuaded the Prince (being then in the power of a foreign King of the Romish
Religion) to change his Religion, and used many dangerous and subtle
insinuations to that effect. 4. That in pursuance of the said traiterous
design, he used these words unto the Prince, That the State of England did
never any great thing, but when they were under the obedience of the Pope of
Rome, and that it was impossible they should do anything of note otherwise. 5.
That a Proposition being made by the King of Spain touching the Palatinate,
which was, That the eldest Son of the Prince Palatine should marry with the
Emperors Daughter, but must be bred up in the Emperors Court: the said Earl
delivered his opinion, That he thought it unreasonable. And when the danger was
presented, in regard of the alteration of the young Princes Religion, which
must needs follow thereupon, the said Earl answered, That without some great
action the peace of Christendom would never be had.
Comparing these with those that were charged upon the Duke, it will appear
that they both concurred in one design, which was to ^ender each other
suspected in matter of Loyalty and Religion, though by so doing they made good
sport to all their Enemies and the world to boot; Many good men (as our Author
calls them) being passing jocund at the contest.

But it was resolved by the Judges, that by Fol. 45.
their Restraint (i. e. the Restraint of Sir Dudley Diggs, and Sir John Eliot)
no reason being given to the House for it, the whole House was Arrested.] The
Judges were wise men, and would not strive against the stream (as the saying
is) for otherwise I can see no reason of their resolute precedents to the
contrary, there are many in the times foregoing, of which I shall instance in
two only, and those two in a Parliament held in the 35 year of the so much
celebrated Reign of Queen Elizabeth. The first is this, Mr. Peter Wentworth
and Sir Henry Bromely delivered a Petition to the Lord Keeper, desiring the
Lords of the Upper House to be Suppliants with them of the Lower House unto Her
Majesty for entailing of the succession of the Crown, whereof a Bill was ready
drawn by them. Her Majesty was highly displeased herewith as contrary to Her
former strait command, and charged the Council to call the parties before
them. Sir Thomas Henage (being then Vice-Chamberlaine and one of the Lords of
the Privy Council) sent for them, and after speech with them, commanded them
to fo^ar the Parliament, and not to go out of their several lodgings: After
they were called before the Lord Treasurer, the Lord Buckhurst, and Sir Thomas
Henage; Mr. Wentworth was committed by them to the Tower, Sir Henry Bromely
with Master Richard Stevens, to whom Sir Henry Bromely had imparted the matter,
were sent to the Fleet, as also Mr. Welsh the other Knight for Worcestershire.
In the same Parliament one Mr. Morris Attorney of the Duchy of Lancaster (who
is to be my second instance) moved against the hard courses of the Bishops,
Ordinaries, and other Ecclesi^sticall Judges in their Courts, used toward
sundry learned and godly Ministers and Preachers, and spoke against
subseription, and oaths; and offered a Bill to be read against Imprisonment
for refusal of such Oaths: which coming to the Queens knowledge, and Mr.
Coke (afterward Sir Edward Coke) then Speaker of the House of Commons, being
sent for and admonished not to admit of that or any such Bills if they should
be offered, the said Mr. Morris (as I have been credibly informed) was taken
out of the House by Sergeant at the Arms, but howsoever, sure I am, that he
was committed unto Prison for the said Attempt. And when it was moved in the
House by one Mr. Wroth, that they might be humble Suitors to Her Majesty, that
she would be pleased to set at liberty those Members of the House that were
restrained. To this it was answered by all the Privy Counselors which were
then Members of the House, that Her Majesty had committed them for causes best
known to Her self, and to press Her Highness with this suit would but hinder
them whose good is sought: That the House must not call the Queen to account
for what she does of her Royal Authority, That the causes for which they were
restrained, may be high and dangerous, That Her Majesty l^h no such questions,
neither does it become the House to search into such matt^rs. Whereupon the
House desisted from interposing any further in their beha^f. And thus we see
that no fewer than five Members (that is to say, Wentworth, Welsh, Bromely,
Stevens, and M^rrice) ^ut off at one time from the House of Commons without any
remedy, or any Decl^ration of the Judges, that any such Arrest as is here
pretended was laid upon the House by their Imprisonment. So resolut^ was Queen
Elizabeth to maintain Her Prerogative; though King Charles yei^ded to the times
and released His Prisoners upon this Declaration of the Judges, and a
Remonstrance of the Commons in pursuance of it; which was another vailing of
his Crown, before no^ mentioned, because reserved unto this place.

For the Lords feared an ancient Order* Ibid.
that no Lords created sedent^ Parliamento, should have voice during that
Session, etc. Upon which, their suffrage was excluded.] The Lords had been to
blame indeed, if when the Judges had declared for Law in (...) of the House of
Commons, they could not make an Order to serve them both ancient alike* and of
like Authority, because both contrary to the practice and proceedings in
foregoing Parliaments. But whereas our Author* writes, that upon the finding
out of this Order, the suffrage of the new Lords (that is to say, Kimbolton,
Imbercourt, and Tregote) was excluded for this Session: I somewhat doubt his
intelligence in that particular, and that I do for these two Reasons, First,
because in the long Parliament which began in November. An. 1640. when the
prevailing Parties in both Houses were better backed than they were at this
present; the Lord Seymour, Littleton, and Capell, created sedente Parliamento,
and the Lords Digby, Rich, and Howard of Charleton called to the House of Peers
by especial Writ were all admitted to their Votes in that S^ssion of Parliament
without any dispute. And secondly, whereas it was offered to the King (being
then in a far lower condition than He was at th^s present) in the last of the
Nineteen Propositions which were sent to York, That His Majesty would be
graciously pleased to pass a Bill for r^straining Peers made hereafter, from
sitting or voting in P^liament, unless they were admitted thereunto with the
consent of both Houses of Parliament; the King did absolutely refuse to assen^
unto it; as appears clearly by his Answer unto those demands.

The affection of the Peers so elevated Ibid.
him, that he received the Attorneys Charge with such an undaunted spirit, and
returned so home an Answer as the House was amply satisfied with it.] In all
this there was nothing strange, that either the Earl of Bristol should receive
the Attorneys Charge with such an undaunted courage (as you say he did) being
so backed and elevated by the affection of the House of Peers, as you say he
was; or that the House should be so amply satisfied with his Answer, to whom
they had before showed so great affections. It was not the Answer but the
Person which prevailed most with them; as on the other side in the business of
the Duke of Buckingham, the Answer fared the worse for the Persons sake, of
whom you tell us in this place, That the ill opinion which the Peers had of
him, did as much depresse him, as it did elevate the other. For though the Duke
his Answer to his Impeachment so contrived and inlaid with mod^sty and humility
that it was like to have a powerful influence toward the conversion of many,
(as our Author tells us, Fol. 53.) yet was it so far from giving any (and
much less ample) satisfaction, as Bristols did, that it b^came a new grievance
to his Adversaries, who thereupon resolved on the prosecution, for fear it
might be thought that themselves were worsted, if the poor Gentleman should
have m^de but a saving game of it. So true is that of Velleius Paterculus,
saying, Familiare est hominibus, invidiam non ad causam sed ad voluntatem
personasque diriger^, that is to s^y, that it is usual with most men to govern
themselves in m^tters of this inviduous nature, not by the merits of the cause,
but by the intercesse of their own passions, and the ^espect or disrespect
which they bear the persons*

But all would not smooth the asp^rity of Fol. 64.
this illegal Tax, etc.] The money which was then required of the Subject, was
not imposed on them in the way of a Tax* (if I remember it aright) but required
of them as a Loan^, and that too in a way which might seem to have some Loyal^y
in it: For whereas the Parliament had passed a Bill of Subsidies, and that the
said Parliament was dissolved before the Bill passed into an Act; His Majesty
was advised that He had good grounds to require those Subsidies of the Subject,
which the House of Commons in their names had assented to; and yet not to
require them by the name of Subsidies, but only in the way of Loan, till the
next Parliament should enable Him to make payment of it, or to confirm His
Levying of those moneys by a subsequent Act. But this devise, though it brought
in good sums of money for the present, yet by the Articles of some men, who were
resolved, That the King should have no other assistance toward the maintenance
of His wars than what He could procure-by His compliance with His Houses of
Parliament; it brought forth those effects which our Author speaks of. So
miserable was the Kings condition at this time, that having formerly been made
the Instrument to break off all Treaties with Spain, and declare a War
against that King, at the earnest solicitation of the House of Commons, He was
so wilfully deserted (I dare not say betrayed) by those that engaged Him in it.

Where for three days all was so calm on Fol. 69.
both sides as if they had sworn a Truce, etc.] This was the first great error
in the Enterprise of the Isle of The: And the second was as bad as this, viz:
their not taking in of the little Fort called La Pree: For, had the Duke
marched directly on, he had in all probability taken both the Town and Citadel
of St. Martin, the Fortifications being then unfinished, and the people in no
small dismay for the rout of their Forces; whereas the loss of those three
days gave time and leisure enough to Mounseiur de Toyrax Governor of the
place to complete his Works in such a manner that they were thought impregnable
by our ablest Soldiers. Or had he took the Fort of La Pree in his pissage by
it, he had not only hindered the French from bringing new Forces by that
Postern to the relief of the Town, but might have used the same to make good
his Retreat, when the necessity of his affairs should compel him to it. Both
which miscarriages I have heard a Person of great Honor well skilled in the
Art M^litary, and no professed friend unto the Duke, not to impute so much to
the Duke himself, who was raw, ignorant, and unexperienced in the Wars; as to
Sir William Courtn^y, and Sir John Borrowes, two great Soldiers, who had the
Conduct of his Counsels, the one being no less famous for his service at
Bergan ap Zone, than the other was for his courageous holding out in defense of
Frankendale. And yet there was another thing no less contributing to the loss
of the whole design than these two miscarriages, viz: the negligence or long
stay of the Earl of Holland, who being sent out with a new Fleet for carrying
Ammunition, Arms, and Victuals toward the continuance of the Siege, and
guarding the passages into the Island, trifled out so much time at Court, and
made so many Halts betwixt that and Plymouth, that he had not found his way out
of that Haven when the Duke came back. Its true, the issue of this Action was
not answerable to the Expectation, and yet I cannot be of our Authors mind,
(who tells us, Fol: 71.) That the Isle of The was so inconsiderable, as had
we lost there neither blood nor honor, and gained it into the bargain, it
would have ill rewarded our preparation and charge of the Expedition.] For, had
the English gained the Island, they had not only preserved the Town of Rochel,
but by the advantage of that Town, and the Isle together, might easily have
taken in the Isle of Oleran, and made themselves Masters of the greatest part
of the loss of Aquitaine, if the ambition of the King had carried Him unto
F^rraign Conquests.

And a Commission granted by the King Fol. 71.
to five Bishops, Bishop Laud being of the Quorum to execute Episcopal
Jurisdiction within his Province. The cause impulsive to it was a supposed
irregularity, etc.] In this and the rest which follows, and touching the
sequestration of the Archbishop of Canterbury, our Author runs himself into
many errors. For, first Bishop Laud was not of the Quorum, no more than any of
the other, the Commission being granted to the Bishops of London, Durham,
Rochester, Oxford, and Bathe and Wells, or to any four, three, or two of them,
and no more than so. Secondly, the irregularity or supposed irregularity of the
said Archbishop was not touched upon in this Commission, as the impulsive cause
unto it, the Commission saying only in the General, That the said Archbishop
could not at that present in his own person attend those services, which were
otherwise proper for his Cognizance and Jurisdiction, and which as Archbishop
of Canterbury he might and ought in his own person to have performed and
executed, etc. Thirdly, this supposed irregularity was not incurred upon the
casual killing of the Keeper of his (the Archbishops) game, as our Author
tells us, but for the casual killing of the Lord Zouches Keeper in Bramhill
Park, where the Archbishop had no game, nor no Keeper neither. Fourthly, it
was conceived by many pious and Learned men, that there was something more
incurred by that misadventnre than a supposed irregularity only; insomuch that
neither Dr. Williams Elect Bishop of Lincoln, nor Dr. Carew Elect Bishop of
Exeter, nor Dr. Laud Elect Bishop of St. David's, (besides some others) would
receive Cons^cration from him, though it be true that the Learned Bishop
Andrews (as our Author tells us) did do the Archbishop very great service in
this business, yet was it not so much for his own sake, or an opinion which he
had, that no irregularity was incurred by that misadventure; but to prevent a
greater mischief: For, well he saw that if the Archbishop at that time had been
made Irregular, Dr. Williams then Bishop of Lincoln, and Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal (a man in great favor with King James, but in more with the Duke)
would presently have stepped into that See; and he knew too much of the man to
venture that great charge and trust of the Church of England to his car^ and
government, the dangerous consequerces whereof he was able to foretell without
the spirit of prophecy.

The King of Denmark being reduced Fol. 73.
almost to a despondence and quitting of his Kingdom.] Which as it was an
occasion of great grief unto his Confederates, so ^o the Emperor himself it
grew no mat^er of rejoicing. For, I have heard from ^ person of great Nobility,
that when the ^ewes came first unto him, he was so far from showing any
signs of joy, that he rather seemed much troubled at it; of which being asked
the reason by some of the principal men about him, He returned this Answer, As
long (said he) as this Drowzy Dane was in the Head of the Protestants Army, we
should have wormed them out of their Estates one after another; but he being
made unusefull to them, by this defeat, we shall have them bring the Swedes
upon us; and there (said he) is a gallant young Fellow who will put us to the
last card we have to play. And so it proved in the event, for the next year the
King of Great Britain and his Brother of France negotiated with Gustavus
Adolphus King of Sweden (then being in war against the Pole) to carry his
Army into Germany, which was done accordingly: what his successes were our
Author tells us hereafter in the course of this story.

They who lately were confined as Prisoners, Fol. 75.
are now not only free, but petty Lords and Masters, yea and petty Kings.] I
cannot choose but marvel what induced our Author unto this Expression of
making the Gentlemen assembled in the House of Commons not only petty Lords,
but even petty Kings. I have heard that K. James once said in a time of
Parliament (but whether in the way of jeare, or otherwise, I am not able to
say) That there were now five hundred Kings besides himself. And I know well
what great advantage has been made of those words of His; whereof to any man
that rightly understands the Constitution of an English Parliament, the Commons
are so far from being either Lords or Kings, that they are not so much as a
part of the Supreme Council; it being easy to be evidenced out of the Writ
which commands their attendance that they are called only to consent and
submit to such resolutions and conclusions ( ad faciendum and consentiendum his
quae tum ibidem de communi Consilio dicti regni nostri (faciente Deo)
contigerit ordinari, So the Writs instruct us) as should be then and there
agreed on by the Kings great Council, or the great Council of the Kingdom.
Think you that men no otherwise empowered than so, could take upon them in
themselves, or be reputed by our Author, as Lords and Kings? And yet it may be
I may wrong them, for our Author tells us that

Their Estates modestly estimated were Ibid.
able to buy the House of Peers (the King excepted) though an hundred and
eighteen. thrice over.] In this there is one thing that I doubt, and two things
which I shall take leave to consider of. The thing I doubt of is that the
Estates of the Gentlemen assembled in the House of Commons howsoever estimated,
should be able to buy the House of Peers, though it had contained thrice as
many as it did, that is to say, three hundred fifty four of the LayNobility.
Assuredly the B^ronage of England must needs be brought exceeding low, when the
Gentlemen by chance assembled in the Lower House (and not called out of purpose
for such an experiment) could buy the House of Peers thrice ov^r; there being
not above five hundred of the one, and thrice one hundred and eighteen, that is
to say, above three hundred and fifty of the other rank: by which account
every Gentleman must be able to buy his two Lords and a half one with another,
the which I think no wise man can imagine. The first thing I consider of is,
why our Author should leave out the Bishops for Spiritual Lords in this va.
luation, as if they were no Members of the House of Peers: for that he does not
reckon them into the bargain is evident enough by the calculation, there being
at that time an hundr^d and eighteen Temporal Lords in the Upper House.
Assuredly the B shops had sat there longer in their Predecessors than any of
the LayNobility in their noblest Ancestors; and had as good right of sitting
and of voting there, as either the Prerogative Royal, o^ the Laws could give
them. And it was ill done of our Author to exclude them now, and not well done
(by him that should have kept them in) to exclude them afterward. The Rights
and Privileges of holy Church, confirmed in the first Article of the Magna
Charta, and sworn to by all Kings succeeding, were never so infringed as by
that exclusion. But the King soon found the sad effect; and consequents of
those ^vil Counselors by which He was persuaded to it; the next thing which
was done in Parliament being the taking away or abrogating of His own Negative
Voice, and passing all subsequent Laws and Ordinances without His consent. And
by this means, they brought to pass another point, which, as it seems, was
aimed at from the beginning of that Parliament; it being told Sir Edward Dering
(as he himself informs us in the Collection of his Speeches) That if they could
bring the Lords to sit in the House of Commons, and the King to be but as one
of the Lords, then their work was done. This brings me to the second thing
which I am to consider of, and that is why our Author should make the King to
be no other than a Member of the House of Peers; for when he tells us that the
Gentlemen in the House of Commons were able to buy all the House of Peers,
except the King, it must needs follow that the King must be accounted of as one
of that House, the said exception notwithstanding. So that by turning the B
shops out of the House, and bringing the King into their place, he has quite
altered the right constitution and form of Parliaments; which anciently
consi^ed of the Lords Spiritual, the Lords Temporal, and the Commons, as the
three Estates, over all which the King presided as the Supreme Head. Its tru^
indeed that the King having passed away the B shops Votes did after by a
strang^ improvidence in a Message or Declaration sent from York on the 17th of
June, reckon Himself as one of the three Estates, which being once slipped from
His pen, and taken up by some leading men in the Houses of Parliament, it never
was let fall again in the whole agitation of those Controversies which were
bandied up and down between them. Nor did many of the Kings own party see the
danger of it, who taking it for granted that the King was only one of the
three Estates (a Member of the House of Peers, as our Author makes Him) were
forced to grant in pursuance of the said disputes, that the two Houses of
Parliament were coordinate with the King, not subordinate to Him: and what
could follow thereupon, but that they might proceed (as they did) without Him,
that of co-ordinat a se invicem supplent, being a most undoubted Maxim in the
Schools of Logic.

The Attorney pleading eagerly though Fol. 78.
impertinently for the King.] How eagerly the Attorney pleaded for the King, I
am not able to say, but it appears even by our Author himself, that his Plea
was pertinent enough, and drew so many of ^he Lords into his opinion, that the
Poular party, or Lower-House-Lords (as ^ome call them) in the House of Peers
^urst not adventure it to vote till the Lord Say (by drawing that House into a
Committee) made this Proposition, That the Lords who were against the Liberties
of the Subject should with subscription of their Names enter their Reasons to
remain upon Record, that Posterity might not be to seek (for so it follows in
our Author) who they were who so ignobly betrayed the Freedom of their
Nation: and that this done and not before they should go to voting. Upon which
terrible Proposition the Lords shrunk aside, as afterward they did in the late
long Parliament, Anno 1641. (when frighted by the menaces of Dr. Burgesses
Myrmidons) in the business of the Earl of Strafford; and in the year 1642.
on the like threatening motion made by Mr. Hollis, for passing the great Bill of
the Militia.

Some say that when the multitude were Fol. 88.
be laboring him with stones and cudgels, they said that were his Master the
Duke there, they would give him as much.] And questionless they meant as much
as they said, the Duke being made so odious by the continual prosecution of
his Adversaries in both Houses of Parliament, and the Remonstrance made against
him by the House of Commons at the end of the last Session; that it was thought
by most men that the Dukes life and the Publiqne safety could not stand
together. On which inducements that fatal blow was struck by Felton as it
after follows, fol. 90, and 94. But whereas our Author tells us, fol. 90.
that he declared as much in certain papers which were sticked to the lineings
of his hat. I think he is something out in that, there being nothing found in
his hat, or elsewhere about him, but a few loose papers, such as might well
become those m^n who make God the Author of their sins. His first ascribing
of the fact to the late Remonstrance was made to one Dr. Hutchenson (Chaplain
in Ordinary ^o the King, and then in the course of his attendance) sent by the
King of purpose as soon as the sad news was brought unto Him, to try if he
could learn out of him upon what motives he committed that most horrible
murder; and afterward again and again, both at the time of his examination
before the Lords of the Council, and finally at the very instant of h^s
execution. But to return again to the threatening words used by the people in
the murder of Doctor Lamb, I well remember, that this bald Rhyme was spread
about not long after in pursuance of them, viz:

Let Charles and George do what they can*
The Duke shall die like Doctor Lamb.
And I remember also that about the same time there came out a Chronogram* in
which the Numerall letters of Georgius Dux Buckinghamiae. viz: M. D. C. X. V.
V. V. I. I. I. made up the year 1628. to which these Verses were subj^yned,
and being made by chance must needs be thought a strange Prognostication of
that which followed, viz:

Since with this year thy name does so agree,
Then shall this year to the most fatal be.
And in the upshot were fined (as was reported) Fol. 89*
six thousand pounds.] And this is all the City suffered for Lambs death, not
that they paid six thousand pounds, or ^t any such Fine was imposed upon them,
but that they were abused with this false Report. But to say truth (I hope my
Masters of the City will excuse me for it) a fine of 60000 li. had been little
enough to expiate such a dangerous Riot, and so vi^e mu^r, in which both Mayor
and Magistrates had contracted a double guilt: Fi^t, in not taking care to
suppress the R^ot, which in a discontented and u^quiet City might have
gathered strength, and put the whole Kingdom into blood before its time. And
^econdly, in not taking order to prevent the murder, or bring the Malefactors
to the B^rre of Justice. The pun^shment of the principal Actors in this
barbarous Tragedy might possibly have preserved the life of the Duke of
Buckingham; and had the City smarted for not doing their duty, it might in
probability have prevented the like Riot at Edinburgh, Non ibi consistunt
exempla ubi coeperunt, says the Court-Historian, Examples seldom and where
they take beginning, but either first or last will find many followers. And
though Lamb might deserve a far greater punishment, than the fury of an
ungov^rned Multitude could (...) upon him; yet suffering without Form of Law,
it may very well be said that he suffered unjuftly, and that it was no small
piece of injustice that there was no more justice done in rev^nge thereof.
Connivance at great crimes adds authority to them, and makes a Prince lose more
in strength than it gets in love. For howsoever ma^ers of Grace and Favor may
oblige some particular persons, yet it is justice (impartial and equal
justice) that gives satisfaction unto all, and is the chief supporter of the
Royal Throne. God has not put the sword into the hands of the supreme powers
that they should bear the same in vain, or use it only for a show or a sign of
sover^ignty; for then a scabbard with a pair of hilts would have served the
turn.

In his Will he bequeathed to his Duchess Fol. 91.
the fourth part of his Lands for her Joynt^.] And that was no gr^t Jointure
for so great a Lady. I never heard that the whole estate in lands which the
Duke died d^d of (of his own purchasing or procuring under two great Princes)
came to Four thousand pounds per annum, which is a very strong Argument that
he was not covetous, or did abuse his Masters favors to his own enriching. And
though he had Three hundred thousand pounds in Jewels (as our Author tells
us) yet taking back the sixty thousand pounds which he owed at his death, two
hundred forty thousand pounds is the whole remainder; a pretty Ald^ans Estate,
and but hardly that. Compare this poor pittance of the Dukes with the vast
Estate of Cardinal Ric^ (the favorite and great Minister of the late French
King) and it will seem no greater than the Widows mit^ in respect of the large
and cost y Offerings of the Scribes and Pha^: The Cardinals Estate being valued
at the time of his death at sixty millions of Franks in rents and moneys, which
amount unto six millions of pounds in our English estimate, whereas the Dukes
amounted not to a full third part of one million only. Such was the end of
this great Duke, not known to me either in his F^owns or his Favors ( nec
beneficio nec injuria notus, in the words of Tacitus) and therefore whatsoever
I have written in relation to him will be imputed (as I hope) to my love to
truth, not my affections to his person.

His body was from thence conveyed to Fol. 94.
Portsmouth and there hung in chains, but by some stole and conveyed away
Gibbet and all.] Our Author is deceived in this, for I both saw the whole
Gibbet standing, and some part of the body hanging on it about three years
after; the people being so well satisfied with the death of the Duke, that
though they liked the murder, they had no such care of the Wretch that did it.
That which might possibly (...) him was, the l^ke injury done by some
Puritanicall Zealots to the public Justice in taking down (by stealth) the
body of Enoch ap Evans that furious Welch-man who killed his Mother and his
Brother for kneeling at the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and for
those (...) fact^ was hang^d in chains not far from Shrewsbury. The Narrative
whereof was published in print by one Mr. Studly, and to him I ref^ the Reader,
if he desire any farther satisfaction in it.

After this Mr. Montague' s Book called Ibid.
Appello Caesarem was called in by Proclamation.] This Proclamation bears
date the 17th day of January: In which it was to be observed that the Book is
not charged with any false Doctrine, but for being the first cause of those
disputes and differences which have since much troubled the quiet of the
Church. His Majesty hoping that the occasion being taken away, m^ would no
longer trouble themselves with such unnecessary disputations. Whether His Hi^
did well in doing no more, if the Book contained any false Doct^ in it; or in
doing so much, if it were done only to please the Parliament (as our Author
tel^ us) I take not upon me to determine. Bu^ certainly it never falls out
well with Christian Princes, when they make Religion bend to Policy, and so it
happened to this King, the calling in of Montague's Book, and the advancing of
Dr. Barnaby Potter (a thorow-paced Calvinian) unto the (...) of Carl^sle at the
same time also, could not get him any love in the hearts of His people, who
looked upon those Acts no otherwise than as tricks of King craft. So true is
that of the wise Historian (whom I named last) inviso s^mel Principe, (...)
been facta* ceu male facta premunt, that is to say, when P^inces once are in
discredit with their Subjects, as well their good actions as their bad, are all
counted grievances.

For (...) informations were Fol. 96.
very pregnant, that notwithstanding the Resolution of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and other reverend Bishops and Divines assembled at (...), Anno
1595. etc.] Our Author in this Folio gives me work enough by setting out the
large spreading of Arminianisme, and the great growth of Popery in the Church
of England. First, for Arminianisme, he tells us that the proofs thereof
were very pregnant. How so? Because the nine Articles made at Lambeth, had not
of late been so much set by, as he and the Committee for Religion did desire
they should. Why m^n? The Articles of Lambeth were never looked on as the
Doctrine of the Church of England, nor intended to be so looked on by the men
that made them, though our Author please to tell us in following words, That
they were made of purpose by the said Archbishop and Divines to deliver and
declare their opinions concerning the sense of the nine and thirty Articles in
those particulars. For though those Articles might and did deliver their
opinions in the points disputed, yet were they but opinions still, and the
opinions of private and particular men are no public Doctrines. Therefore to
set this matter right, I will first lay down the true occasion of the making of
these Articles. Secondly, of what authority they were when made and agreed
upon. And thirdly, what might move King James to recommend them first to the
Church of Ireland, and after to the Assembly at Dort, and not (as our Author
tells us) by a strain Hysteron Proteron to the Assembly at Dort first, and to
Ireland afterward.

And first for the occasion of these Articl^s we may please to know, that the
first Reformers of this Church look neither on the Lutheran or Calvinian
Doctrines as their Rule and Guide, but held themselves unto the constant
current of approved antiquity: To which the Melancthonian way b^ing thought
most consonant, was followed not only by Bishop Hooper in his Treatise on the
Ten Commandments, and by Bishop Latimer in some pass ges of his Sermons; but
also by the Compilers of the Book of Articles, and the Book of Homilies, the
public Monuments of this Church in points of Doctrine. But the Calvinian way
having found some entrance, there arose a difference in the judgments of
particular men touching these Debates; the matter being controverted pro and
con by some of the Confessors in prison in Qu. Maryes days. After whose death
many of our exiled Divines returning from Geneva, Basil, and such other places
where Calvin's Dictates were received as Celestial Oracles, brought with him
his Opinions in the points of Predestination, Grace and Per^everance; which
they dispersed and scattered over all the Church; by whose authority, and the
diligence of the Presbyterian party, (then busy in advancing their holy
Discipline) it came to be universally received for the only true and Orthodox
Doctrine, and was so publicly maintained in the Schools of Cambridge. Insomuch
that when Peter Baro a Frenchman, Professor for the Lady Magaret in that
University, revived the Melancthonian way in his public Lectures, and by his
Arguments and great Learning had drawn many others to the same persuasions;
complaint was made thereof by Dr. Whitakers, Dr. Willet, Mr. Chatterton. Mr.
Perkins, and certain others to the Ld. Archbishop of Canterbury (Dr. Whitgift)
desiring his assistance to suppress that F^ction, which was like to grow by
this means in that University. On which complaint the said Archbishop calling
to him to Lambeth Doctor Richard Flecher then Bishop of London and Doctor
Richard Vaughan then Elect of Bangor, did then and there with the advice o^*
Dr. Whitakers, Dr. Tindall, and some other Divines (most of them Parties to the
suit) agree on these nine Articles (which our Author peaks of) to be sent to
Cambridge for the ^termining and comp^g of the present Controversies. And this
was done upon the 26th of November, Anno 1595. and being so done and sent
accordingly to Cambridge, Dr. Baro found himself so discouraged and
discountenanced, that at the end of his first three years he relinquished his
Professourship, and retired not long after into France; leaving the University
in no small disorder for want of such an able Instructor to resort unto. We are
to know also, that amongst others of Baro his followers, there was one Mr. ster
Barret, who in a Sermon preached in St. Maryes Church, not only defended Baro
his Doctrine, but used some offensive words against Calvin, Beza, and some
others of the Reformators, for which he was convented before the Heads of the
University (amongst which Doctor James Montague then Master of Sydney Coll. and
a great stickler in this quarrel, was of great authority) and by them May the
5th next following, was enjoynd to recant, and a set form of Recantation was
prescribed unto him: which though he read publicly in the Church, yet the
contentions and disputes grew greater and greater till the coming down of the
nine Articles from Lambeth, hastened with greater earnestness upon this
occasion.

Secondly, these Articles being thus made and agreed upon, we are next to see
of what authority they were in the Church of England, and how long they
continued in authority in the Schools of Cambridge: concerning which we are to
know, that the making of these Articles being made known to Queen ELIZABETH by
William Lord Burly Lord Treasurer of England, and Chancellor of that
University (who neither liked the Tenets, nor the manner of proceeding in them)
she was most passionately offended that any such innovation should be made in
the public Doctrine of this Church; and once resolved to have them all a^ted
of a Praemunire. But afterward upon the interposition of some friends, and the
reverent esteem She had of that excellent Prelate, the Lord Archbishop, (whom
She used to call Her black Husband) She let fall Her anger; and having
favorably admitted his excuse therein, She commanded him speedily to recall
and suppress those Articles: which was done with so much care and diligence,
that for a while, a Copy of them was not to be found in all that University,
though afterward by little and little they peeped forth again. And having
crept forth once again, it was moved by Dr. Reynolds in the Conference at
Hampton Court, A^. 1603. That the nine Assortions Orthodoxall, as he termed
them, conclu^ed upon at Lambeth, might be inserted into the Book of Articl^s
(that is to say, of the Church of England.) The King was told (who never had
heard before of those nine Assertions) that by reason of some Controversies,
arising in Cambridge about certain points of Divinity, My Lords Grace assembl^d
some Di^ines of especial note to set down their opinions, which they drew into
nine assertions and so sent them to the University for the appeasing of those
quarrels: Which being told His Majesty, answered, That when such Questions
arise among Scholars, the quietest proceeding were to determine them in the
University, and not to stuff the Book with all conclusions Theological, Conf.
p 24. 40. 41. So that these nine Assertions being first pressed at Cambridge by
the command of Qu. Elizabeth, and afterward esteemed unfitting to be inserted
into the Book of Articles by the final judgment of King James; there is no
reason in the world, why any man should be traduced of Arminianisme, or looked
on as an enemy of the true Religion here by Law established, for not conforming
his opinions to their no-authority. It is not the meeting of a few Bishops and
Divines in the Hall at Lambeth, but the body of the whole Clergy lawfully
assembled in Convocation, which has authority in determining Controversies in
Faith, and to require conformity to such determinations and conc^usions as are
there agreed on: When the nine Articles of Lambeth shall be so confirmed, our
Author may declare them for the Doctrine of the Church of England, and traduce
all men for Arminians which subscribe not to them.

Thirdly, in the last place we are to see what moved King James to recommend
these Articles to the Church of Ireland, and afterward to the Assembly at
Dort. And herein we must understand that Dr. James Montague, at that Kings
first entrance on this Crown, was made Dean of the Chapel, (which place he
held not only when he was Bishop of Wells, but of Winchester also) who being a
great stickler in the quarrels at Cambridge, and a great master in the art of
Insinuation, had cunningly fashioned King James unto these opinions, to which
the Kings education in the Kirk of Scotland had before inclined him. So that it
was no very hard matter for him (having an Archbishop also of his own
persuasions) to make use of the Kings authority, for recommending those nine
Articles to the Church of Ireland, which he found would not be admitted in the
Church of England. Besides, the Irish Nation at that time were most ten^ciously
addicted to the E^rours and cor^uptions of the Church of Rome, and therefore
must be bended to the other extreme, before they could be strait and Ortho^ox
in these points of Doctrine, which reason might work much upon the spirit of
that King, who used in all his Government (as a piece of King-craf^) to
balance one extreme by the other, countenancing the Papist against the
Puritan^, and the Puritan sometimes against the Papist, that betwixt both the
true Religion and the Professors of it might be k^pt in sa^ety. On what
account these nine Articles were commended to the Assembly at Dort we have
showed before, and upon what account they were abolished in the Church of
Ireland, we shall see hereafter. In the mean time our Author tells us that

By the prevalency of the Bishops of London Ibid.
and Westminster the Orthodox party were depressed, and the truth they served
was scarce able to protect them to impunity.] A man would think our Author were
Chairman at the least in a Committee for Religion; for he not only takes upon
him to declare who are Orthodox in point of Faith, and what is truth and not
truth in matter of controversy, but censureth two great Bishops (both of them
Counselors of State) for depressing both. This savoureth more of the party
than of the Historian, whom it might better have become to have told us only
that a Controversy being raised in matters of a Scholasticall nature, those
Bishops favored the one party more than they did the other, and not have laid
it down so majesterially that they disfavoured the Orthodox party and deprest
the truth, or that the truth they served was scarce able to protect them to
impunity.] A very heavy Charge which has no truth in it. For I am very
confident that neither of these Bishops did ever draw any man within the danger
of punishment, in relation only to their Tenets in the present Controversies,
if they managed them with that prudence and moderation which became men
studiously affected to the Gospel of Peace; or were not otherwise guilty of
creating disturbances in the Church, or ruptures in the body of the
Commonwealth. On which occasions if they came within the danger of (...)
censures, or fell into the power of the High Commission; it was no reason that
their Tenets in the other points (were they as true as truth it self) should
give them any impunity, or free them from the punishment which they had
deserved. But it has been the constant artifice of the Churches Enemies, not
to ascrib^ the punishment of Factions and scismaticall persons to the proper
cause, but to their orthodoxie in Religion, and zeal against Popish
superstitions, that so they might increase the number of Saints and Confessors
against the next coming out of the Book of Martyrs. But Arminianisme being as
some say, but a bridge to Popery, we will p^sse with our Author over that
Bridge to the hazard which was feared from Rome; and that he tells us came
two ways: First,

By the uncontrouled preaching of several Ibid.
points tending and warping that way by Montague, Goodman, Cozens, and others.]
And here again I think out Author is mistaken: For neither Montague nor
Cozens were questioned for preaching any thing which warped toward Popery, but
the one of them for writing the Book called Appello Caesarem, the other for
publishing a Body of Devotions according to the Hours of Prayer: in neither of
which an equal and judicious Reader will find any Popery, unless it be such
part-boyled Popery as our Author speaks of, whereof more anon: And as for
Goodman (our Author might have called him Bishop Goodman, though now he be but
Goodman Bishop, as he calls himself) though he preached something once which
might warp toward Popery, yet he did not preach it uncontrouled, being not
only questioned for it, but sentenced to a Recantation before the King. He
tells us of some others, but he names them not, and till he names them he
says nothing which requires an Answer. So that the first fear which flowed
from Rome, being ebbed again, we next proceed unto the second; which came,
says he, from

The audacious obtruding of diverse superstitious Ibid.
ceremonies by the Prelates, as erecting of fixed Altars, the dapping and
cringing toward them, and the standing up at Gloria Patri.] Our Author is
more out in this than in that before, for I am confident that no Bishop in the
times he speaks of, did either command the erecting of fixed Altars, or the
bowing or cringing toward them; nor have I heard by any credible report, that
any such fixed Altars were erected, as he charge on them. So that I might
here end this observation without farther trouble. But because the placing of
the Communion Table Altarwise did carry some resemblance to the Altars used in
the Church of Rome, and that some such thing was done in some Churches much
about this time; I shall here show upon what reasons it was done, and how far
they that did it might be justified in it. The Reader therefore is to know that
by the late neglect of decency and good order in most Parish Churches of this
Land, the Communion Table had been very much profaned by sitting on it,
scribbling and casting hats upon it in Sermon-time; at other times by passing
the Parish accounts, and disputing businesses of like nature, to the great
scandal and dishonor of our Religion. For remedy and redress whereof, it
seemed good unto some Bishops and other Ordinaries, out of a pious zeal to the
Churches honor, and for the more reverent administration of the holy
Sacrament, to g^ve way that the Commun on Table might be removed from the body
of the Chancel where of late it stood, and placed at the East end thereof all
along the wall, in the same place and posture as the Altars had been situated
in the former times: For which permission I doubt not but the Bishops and other
Ordinaries had sufficient ground both from law and practice. And first for Law,
there passed an Act (and it was the first Act of Queen Elizabeth's Reig^) for
restoring to the Crown the ancient jurisdiction and rights thereof: by virtue
of which Act, and the Authority which natu^ally was inherent in Her Royal
person, she pub^ished certain Injunctions, Anno 1559. in one of which it was
thus ordered and enjoined, that is to say, That the holy Table in every Church
be decently made and set in the place where the Altar stood, and there commonly
covered as thereto belongs, and as shall be appointed by our Visitors. In the
same Parliament there passed also another Statute for confirmation of the Book
of Common Prayer, wherein it was enacted, That if it shall happen that any
contempt or irreverence be used in the Ceremonies or rites of the Church by the
misusing of the Orders appointed in this Book, the Queens Majesty may by the
like advice of the said Commissioners or Metropolitan, or dain and publish such
further Ceremonies or Rites as may be most for the advancement of Gods glory,
the edifying of his Church, and the due (...) of Christ's mysteries and
Sacraments. And in pursuance of this Act there came out first a Book of Orders,
Anno 1561. and afterward a Book of Advertisments, Anno 1565. so made and
authorized as the Law required. In the first of which it was appointed, That in
such Churches where the steps were not taken down the Communion Table should be
placed on the steps where the Altar stood, and that there be fixed on the wall
over the Communion board the Tables of Gods precepts, imprinted ^or the said
purpose. And in the second it was ordered, That the Parish should provide a
decent Table, standing on a frame for the Communion Table, which they shall
decently cover, etc. and shall set the ten Commandments upon the East wall
over the said Table. Lay these together, and the Product will be briefly this,
that the Communion Table was to stand where the Altar stood, above the steps,
and under the Commandments, and therefore to be placed Altar-wise all along
the wall. And that this was the meaning of them appears by the constant
practice of the Royal Chapels, many Cathedrals of this Land, the Chapels of
great men, and some Parochial Churches also, in which the Communion Table never
stood otherwise than in the posture of an Altar since the Reformation, without
the least suspicion of Popery, or any inclinations to it: But of this more
hereafter in another place.

Secondly, the next thing here objected is bowing or cr^ging (as my Author
calls it) toward the said Table so transposed and placed Altar-wise, which many
of the Bishops used, but none of them ever did obtrude upon any other, who in
this point were left unto the liberty of their own discretion. That adoration
toward the Altar, or Eastern part of the Church (be it which it will) was
generally used by the best and most religious Christians in the Primitive
times, our Author (if he be the man he is said to be) being well versed in the
Monuments and Writings of most pure Antiquity, cannot choose but know; and
therefore must needs grant also that it is not Popery, or any way inclining to
it: or if it be, we shall entitle Popery unto such Antiquity, as no learned
Protestant can grant it. It Is true indeed, that this bowing toward the East, or
Altar, had been long discontinued in the Church of England. And I have been
informed by persons of great worth and honor, that it was first revived again
by Bishop Andrews; of whom our Author tells us, Fol. 64 that he was
studiously devoted to the Doctrine of the Ancient Fathers, and Primitive, not
only in his aspect and gesture, but in all his actions. This in a man so
Primitive in all respects, so studious of Antiquity, as our Author mak^s him;
so great an enemy to the Errors and Corruptions of Rome as his Apology
against Cardinal Bellarmine, his Answer to Cardinal Peron, and his Tortura
Torti, have declared him to be, would blast his Fame by the reviving of a
Popish ceremony: and if it were no reproach nor dishonor to him to be the
first that did revive it, I see no reason why it should be counted an
audaciousnesse in the rest of the Prelates to follow the Primitive and
incorrupt usage of the Church, countenanced by the Example of so rare a man:
though I confess audaciousnesse had been a term too modest, had they obtruded
it on the Clergy by their sole authority, as is charged upon them in this
place.

Thirdly, the next audaciousnesse here spoke of, is the obtruding of another
Ceremony on the Church of England, that is to say, the standing up at Gloria
Patri. Never obtruded I am sure, nor scarce so much as recommended, there was
no cause for it; the people in so many pl^ces of this Realm being accustomed
thereunto as well as unto standing up at the Creed and Gospels, without any
interruption or discontinuance* I grant ^deed that the Rub^cke of the
Common-PrayerBooke neither requires standing at the Gospels, or the Gloria
Patri, and yet was standing at the Gospels of such General usage in all the
parts of this Land, that he that should have used any other gesture, would have
been made a laughing stock, a contempt, and scorn to all the residue of the
Parish. Besides the Rubric of the Church requiring us to stand up at the
Creed, obliges us by the same reason to stand up at the Gospels and the Gloria
Patri; the Gospels being the foundation of the Creed, as the Gloria Patri is
the abstract and Epitomie of it, or were it otherwise, and that the Rubric
which requires us to stand at the Creed gave no authority to the like posture
of the body in the Gloria Patri, yet many things may be retained in a Reformed
Church without special Rubricks to direct them, ex vi Catholicae
consu^tudinis, by virtue of the general and constant usage of the Church of
Christ, especially where there is no Law unto the contrary, nor any offense
committed against Faith and Piety. If it be asked why standing at the Gloria
Patri should be discontinued in some places when standing at the Gospels was
retained in all, there being no more authority for the one than the other; I
will give the Reader one Answer, and my Author shall help him to another. The
answer which I shall give is this, that though the Rubricks did require, that
the Gloria Patri should be said at the end of every Psalm, throughout the
year, and at the end of Benedictus, the Magnificat, and the Nunc dimittis, yet
was this order so neglected in most parts of the Realm, as Puritanism and
Innovation did gain ground upon it that it was very seldom used. And when the
Form it self of giving glory to God was once laid aside, no marvel if the
gesture which attended it was at last forgotten. If this suffice not, I shall
borrow our Authors help for a further answer, who tells us of Archbishop
Abbot, fol. 127. That his extraordinary remissness in not exacting strict
Conformity to the prescribed Orders of the Church in the point of Coremony,
seemed to resolve those legal determinations to their first Principle of
Indifferency, and led in such an habit of Inconformity, as the future reduction
of those tenderconscienced men to long discontinued obedience was interpreted
an Innovation: then which nothing in the world could be said more truly. I have
said nothing of the Ancient and General usage of those several Ceremonies,
because the Question is not now of the Ancient usage, but whether and how far
they were to be used, or not used in the Church of England according to such
Rubricks, Laws, and Ganons which remain in force. Nor shall I add more at the
present, than that I think our Author has not rightly timed the businesses in
dispute between us, the placing of the Communion Table A^tarwise, bowing or
cringing toward it; and standing at the Gloria Patri, not being so generally in
use at the time of this Parliament as to give any scruple or offense to the
greatest Zealots: or if they were, they could not honestly be fathered on
Archbishop Laud, as countenanced or brought in by him in the time of his
government, of which more hereafter: our Author now draws toward an end, and
tells u^ finally,

But th^se were but part-boyled Popery, Ibid.
or Popery obliqu^.] So then the Ceremonies abovementioned how Primitive
soever they were must be damned for Popery, though it be only part boiled and
oblique Popery, as our Author calls it; and with that brand, or by the name of
English Popish Ceremonies (as the Scottish Presbyterians term them) the rest as
well as these may be also blemished: but let them call them what they will, we
see now by a most woeful and lamentable experience that the taking away of
these part boiled Poperies, these English Popish Ceremonies, or whatsoever e^se
the malignity of any men shall please to call them, the substance of Religion
has been much impaired; and by this breaking down of the Pale of the Vineyard,
not only the little Foxes have torn off her elusters, but the wild Bores have
struck at her very root. I have no more to add^ now, but a witty and smart
Epigram made on this, or the like occasion, and is this that follows.

A learned P^late of this Land
Thinking to make Religion stand,
With equal poize on either side,
A mixture of them thus he tried:
An Ounce of Protestant he singleth,
And then a Dram of Papist mingleth,
With a Scruple of the Puritan,
And boiled them all in his brain-pan;
But when he thought it would digest
The scruple troubled all the rest.
The greatest danger was from Popery direct. Ibid.
And from this the danger appeared very great, etc.] And here I thought I
should have heard, that some points of direct and down right Popery had been
obtruded by the Bishop, and Prelaticall Clergy; but on the contrary, I find
all silent in that case, and good reason for it. Whence then appeared so great
a danger? not from the introducing of Popish Doctrin^s, but increase of
Papists, and that not only in some Counties of England, but in the Kingdoms
of Scotland and Ireland also: with those of Scotland and Ireland I forbear to
meddle, though the Committee for Religion having an Apostolical care of all the
Churches, did take them also into their consideration; marvailing only by the
way, how our Brethren of the Kirk, (who stood so high upon the terms of their
Independencie) could brook, that their affairs should be so much looked into
by an English Parliament. But where our Author tells us, that in some
Counties of England, the Papists were multiplied to some thousands of Families,
more than there were in Queen Elizabeth's time, there may be very good reason
given for that: for since the death of Qu^en Elizabeth, the Holidays had been
made days of common labor, and yet all sports prohibited on the Sunday also:
the Common-prayerBook either quite neglected, or so slubbered over, that there
was no face of Regular Devotion to be found amongst us; the Churches in most
places kept so slovenly, and the behavior of the people so irreverent in them,
that it is no mervail that men desirous to worship God in the beauty of
holiness, should be induced to joyn^ themselves to such societies of men, as
seemed to have more in them of a Christian Church.

The King having thus dissolved the Parliament, Fol. 101.
etc.] That is to say, after so many indignities, and provocations, as were
given unto him by the disorder and tumultuous carriage of some of the Members,
which our Author very handsomely and ingenuously has described at large; it
was the opinion of most men, as our Author tells us, Fol. 132. that the
dissolution of this Par^lament was the end of all: And certainly there was very
good reason why it might be thought so, the King never having good success in
any of his Parliaments, since his first coming to the Crown; and withal,
having an exampl^ before his eyes, of the like discontinuance of assembling the
three Estates in the Realm of France, by the King then Reigning, and that upon
far less provocations then were given King Charles. For whereas in an
Assembly of three Estates, Anno 1614. the third Estate, which represents our
House of Commons, entrenched too busily upon the liberties of the Clergy, and
some preheminencies and exemptions which the Nobility enjoyed by the favor of
some former Kings; it gave the King so great offense, that he resolved first to
dissolve them, and never after to be troubled with the like Impertinencies. Nor
was there since that time, any such Assembly, nor like to be hereafter, in the
times ensuing, those Kings growing weary of that yoke, which that great
Representation did endeavor to impose upon them. But because he would not cut
off all communication betwixr himself and his people, he ordained another kind
of meeting in the place thereof, which he called La Assembli des natables, that
is to say, the Assembly of some principal persons; composed of some selected
persons out of every Order or Estate (of his own nomination) whereunto should
be added some Counselor out of every Court of Parliament (of which there are
eight in all in France) throughout that Kingdom; which being fewer in number,
would not breed such a confusion, as the general Assembly of the States had
done before, and be withal more pliant and conformable to the Kings desires;
and yet their Acts to be no less obliging to all sorts of people, then the
others were. Such an Assembly as this, (but that the Clergy had no vote in it)
was that which was called here by my Lord Protector, immediately after the
dissolving of the late long Parliament, who possibly had his hint from this
Institution. And this may teach all Parliaments in the times succeeding, to be
more careful in their Councils, and use more moderation in pursuance of them,
especially when they meet with an armed power, for fear they should not only
interrupt, but cut off that spring, from whence the Blessings both of Peace and
Happiness, have formerly been der^ved on this Church and State. No man can
love his F^tters though they be of Gold. If therefore Parliaments should find
no way to preserve the Liberty of the people, but to put fetters on the Prince
or Power that calls them, if from being Counselors, at the best they shall
prove Controulers, they must blame no body but themselves. In the mean time
that saying of Paterculus may be worth their noting, Non turpe est ab eo vinci
quem vincere esset nefas; it i^ no shame (says he) to submit to those, whom it
were sin to overcome.

To which he answered, that he ever was, Fol. 102.
and wo^ld be ready to give an account of his sayings, and doings in that
place, whenever he should be called unto it by that House, where (as he
takes it) he was only to be questioned.] This is the first seed of that
Doctrine, which after took such deep root in the Houses of Parliament, viz.
that no member ought to be questioned for any thing said or done in Pa^liament,
but by the order of the House, of which he was a Member. And to this resolution
the Judges of this time seemed to give some countenance, who having before
declared, in favor of the House of Commons, that by the Arresting of Digges
and Eliot, the whole House was under an Arrest, did now declare that the Star.
Chamber (in which Court the King intended to proceed against them) had no
Jurisdiction over offenses done in Parliament. But this was only in an
extra-judiciall way, being interrogative to that purpose by the King at
Greenwich, as our Author ^elleth us, Fol. 106. For the same Judges sitting on
the seat of Judicature, where ^hey were to act upon their Oaths, could find
both Law and Reason too, to bring their crimes within the cognizance of the
Courts of Justice. And several Fines accordingly were imposed upon them, most
of which were paid, and the Gentlemen afterward released from their
Imprisonments. If any of them did refuse to pay such Fines as were set upon
them, they were men either of decayed, or of small estates, and so not able to
make payment of the Fines imposed.

Surpassing exultation there was thereat, and Fol. 108.
all the Court kept Jubilee, etc.] And there was very good reason for it, not
only that the Court should keep a Jubilee at the birth of the Prince, but that
surpassing exultation should be thereat in all honest hearts. But I can tell
you it was otherwise with too many of the Puritan party, who had laid their
line another way, and desired not that the King should have any Children;
insomuch that at a great Feast in Friday street, when some of the company
showed great joy at the news of the Queens first being with Child, a leading
man of that Faction (whom I could name were it worth the while) did not stick
to say. That he could see no such cause of joy for the Queens being with
Child; but God had already better provided for us than we had deserved, in
giving such a hopeful Progeny by the Queen of Bohemia, brought up in the
Reformed Religion; whereas it was uncertain what Religion the Kings Children
would follow, being brought up under a Mother so devoted to the Church of Rome.
And I remember very well that being at a Town one days jurney from London,
when the news came of the Princes birth, there was great joy showed by all the
rest of the Parish, in causing Bonefires to be made, and the Bells to be rung,
and sending Victuals unto those of the younger sort, who were most busily
employed in that public joy; But so that from the rest of the houses being of
the Presbyterian or Puritan party, there came neither man nor child, nor
wood nor victuals, their doors being shut close all that Evening, as in a time
of general mourning and disconsolation.

Where was an old skulking Statute long Fol. 110.
since out of use though not out of force, etc.] The Statute which our Author
means was made in the first year of Edward the second, and made more for the
benefit and ease of the subject, than for the advantage of the King; This
Statute requiring non^ to take the Order of Knighthood, but such as had Twenty
pounds per annum of clear yearly rent, whereas before that time all men of
Fifteen pound rent per annum were required to take it. This proves it to be
very old, but why my Author should call it a skulking Statute, I can see no
reason, considering that it lay not hidden under the rubb^sh of Antiquity, but
was an open printed Statute, not only to be seen in the Collection of the
Statutes and the Books at large, but in the Abridgements of the same: and being
a Statute still in force (as our Author ^elleth us) might lawfully be put in
practice whenever the necessities of the King should invite him to it. But
whereas our Author tells us, that the persons mentioned in that Statute were
not required to be made Knights as was vulgarly supposed, but only ad arma
gerenda, to bear Arms, and thereupon tells us a story of a Sword and a
Surcoat to be given unto them, I rather shall believe the plain words of the
Statute, than his interpre^ation of it. The Title of it is in Latin Statutum
de Militibus, or a Statute for Knights as the English has it; the words as
follows, viz. Our Sovereign Lord the King has granted that all such as ought
to be Knights, and be not, and have been distrained to take upon them the Order
of Knighthood before the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord, shall have respect
to take upon them the foresaid Arms of Knighthood until the Utas of S.
Hilarie, etc. where certainly to be made Knights, to take upon them the Order
of Knighthood, and the Arms of Knighthood, are somewhat more than only and
simply to bear Arms, as he feign would have it: were it no otherwise than so,
there were some hundred thousands of none or very little estate as fit or
fitter to bear Arms than men of Twenty pound rent per annum, which was a
plentiful revenue as the times then were; and fitter it had been to have
called such men unto a general Muster in their several Counties than to
command them to attend at a Coronation. Nor had the Sages of the Law been
capable of excuse for their false translations, if they should render ad arma
militiae gerenda (for so I think the Latin has it, though the most
significant word thereof be left out by our Author) by taking on them the Arms
of Knighthood, if there were nothing more intended than the bearing of Arms;
by means whereof the subject of the following Ages might be very much
burdened, and the Noble Order of Knighthood no less dishonored without any
remedy. And besides this, in case the letter of the Statute in French or Latin
had been only to bear Arms, not to take the order of Knighthood; the late
long Parliament would rather have questioned the Kings Ministers for their
acting by it, then troubled themselves with Repealing it, as they after did.
For such was the misery of this King, that all the advantages he had to help
himself, must be condemned, as done against the old Laws of the Land, or else
some new Law shall be made to deprive him of them, that wanting all other
means to support himself, he might be forced to live on the Alms of his
Parliament.

This Winter the Marquess of Hamilton Fol. 112.
was very active in mustering up his forces for the King of Swedens assistance,
etc.] That so it was in the Kings intention, I shall easily grant, but that the
Marquess had no other end in it than the King of Swedens assistance, has been
very much doubted, the rather in regard that he raised all or the greatest part
of his Forces out of Scotland, where he was grown very popular and of high
esteem: For, being gotten into the head of an Army of his own Nation, he had so
courted the common Soldiers, and obliged most of the Commanders, that a health
was openly began by DavidRamsey (a boisterous Ruffian of the Court) to King
James the seventh, and so much of the design discovered by him unto Donald
Mackay Baron of Re^ then being in the Marquesses Camp, that the Loyal
Gentleman thought himself bound in duty to make it known unto the King. Ramsey
denying the whole matter, and the Lord having no proof thereof (as in such
secret practices it could hardly be) more than a confident asseveration, and
the engagement of his honor; the King thought good to refer the Controversy
to the Earl of Lindsey, whom he made Lord high Constable to that end and
purpose: many days were spent accordingly in pursuance of it. But when most
men expected that the matter would be tried by battle, as had been accustomed
in such cases, the business was hushed up at Court, the Lord Ree dismissed to
his employments in the wars; and to the minds of all good men the Marquess
did not only continue in the Kings great favor, but Ramsey was permitted to
hold the place of a Gentleman of the Privy Chamber, which had been formerly
procured for him. As for the Army of Scots which the Marquess had carried into
Germany, they mouldred away by little and little, without doing any thing,
which put the Marquess on new Councils of getting that by practice when it was
less thought of, which he could not get by force of Arms as the case then
stood.

Tilly conducted a numerous Army for the Ibid.
relief of Rostock, then besieged by the King of Sweden; the King alarmed at
his coming, drew out of his Trenches, etc.] In this relation of the great ^out
which the King of Sweden gave to Tilly, there are many mistakes. For neither
was that great Battle sought near Rostock a Hanse town in the Dukedom of
Mecklenbourg, but near Lipsian a chief Town in the Province of Misnia, some
hundreds of miles higher into the Country; nor did the King of Sweden after
this great Victory return back with his Army toward Rostock, but in pursuance
of his blow marched forward, and made himself master of all those parts of the
Country into which he came; nor was this Battle fought in the year 1630,
where our Author places it, (so much does he mistake himself both in place
and time) but in the year next following.

For many had no fancy to the work, merely Fol. 124.
because he was the promoter of it.] Our Author speaks here of the repairing
of Saint Paul's, and tells us that it suffered great diminution for the Bishop
of London's sake, who was the chief promoter of it, in which he is very much
mistaken. The work had been twice or thrice before attempted without any
effect, but by his diligence and power was brought in shore time to so great
forwardness, that had not his impeachment by the House of Commons, in the late
long Parliament, put a period unto his endeavors, it had been within a very
few years, the most goodly pile of building in the Christian world. And
whereas our Author tells us, that many had no fancy to the work, because he
promoted it, it was plainly contrary, his care in the promoting it, being one
great reason why so many had a fancy to it, most of the Clergy contributing
very largely unto it, partly in reference to the merit of the work it self,
and partly in regard of those preferments, which they either had received, or
expected from him. The like did most of the Nobility and Gentry in most p^rts
of the Land, knowing the great power and favor which he had wi^h the King, and
the many good offices he might do them, as occasion served. If any had no
fancy to it, as indeed some had not, it was rather in reference to the work it
self, then in relation to the man; it being more in their desires that all the
Cathedrals should be ruined, then that any one should be repaired witness that
base and irr^rent expression of that known Schismatic, Doctor Bastwick, in the
second part of his Letany, where grudging at the great summ^s of money, which
had been gathered for the repairing of this Church, al'^ding to the name of
Cathedral, he concludes ^t last (pardon me Reader for defi^g my pen, with such
immodesties) that all the mighty mass of money, must be spent in making a seat
for a Priests arse to sit in. And doubt we not, but many more of that Faction
were of his opinion, though they had not so much violence, and so little wit,
as to make Declaration of i^.

But should he long defer that duty, they Fol. 125.
^ight perhaps be inclined to make choice of another King.] I do not think that
any of the Scots ever told him so, whatsoever they though^; or if they did, the
King might very well have seen* that there was more truth in the Lord of Roes
information, then he was willing to believe, and might accordingly have taken
course to prevent the practice. But who can save him, who neglects the means
of his preservation? So true is that of the Historian, Profecto in eluctabilis
fatorum vis cujus fortunam mentare constituit, ejus corrumpit consilia;
Assuredly (^th he) when the unresistable powers of F^te determine on a man's
destruction, they either overthrow or corrupt those Councels, by which he might
otherwise avoid it. A max^me verified in the whole course and carriage of this
Kings affairs, neglecting wilfully (to keep up the credit of an old principle
which he had embraced) all such advertisements as tended to his preservation.
It was a saying of King James, that suspicion was the sickness and disease of
a Tyrant, which laid him open to all the subtle practices of malicious
cunning; and it was a maxim of King Charles, that it was better to be
deceived, then to distrust, which proved a plain and (...) way unto those
calamities, which afterward were brought upon him, as may be plainly seen by
the course of this History.

But the entertainment most of all august Fol. 126.
and Royal was that of the Earl of Newcastle, at Welb^ck, which was estimated
to stand the Earl in at least six thousand pounds.] I have showed our Author
some mistakes already in his Temporalities (as he calls them) and now I shall
show him one or two, besides his misplacing of the battle of Tisfique spoken
of before* in his Localities also (to give him a fine word of his own
complexion.) That the Earl of Newcastle entertained the King at Welb^k in his
passage toward Scotland, is a truth unquestioned. But the magnificent
entertainment so much talked of, which cost the Earl the sum of six thousand
pounds, as our Author tells us, was neither made in the time or place which
are herein mentioned; that in the time of the Kings going toward Scotland, or
returning thence, Anno 1633, but on the last of July, in the year next
following; nor was it made at Welbeck, but at Boalsover Castle in Derby shire,
about five miles thence; nor for the entertainment of the King only, but of
the King and Queen, and their several Courts. The like mistake in matter of
Locality (that I may not trouble my self with it at another time) occurreth,
Fol. 129. where he tells us, the both their Majesty's, with their train of
Court Gran^s, and Gentlemen Revellers, were solemnly invited to a most
sumptuous banquet at Guildhall, where that ^lendent show was iterated and
re-exhibited; whereas indeed the entertainment which the City gave (at that
time) to the King, was at the house of Alderman Freeman, then Lord Major,
scitu^e in Cornhill n^ the Royal Exchange, and the entertainment which the
King gave unto the City, by showing them that glorious Mask, was at the
Merchant Taylers Hall in Thredneedle-street, on the backside of the Lord Majors
House, an open passage being made from the one to the other, which, as it was
the first Act of Popularity, which the King did in all his R^ign, so it beg^ a
high degree of affection toward him, in the hearts of the Citizens, though it
proved only like a Widows joy, (as the saying is) as soon lost as foun^.

Soon after the Coronation followed an Fol. 126*
Assembly of Parliament, etc.] In this Parlmany Acts were passed, one for
s^ling a c^rtain maintenance on the Scottish Clergy, who being robbed of their
Tithes by the Lords and Gentry in the beginning of the Reformation, were kept
to arbitrary Stipends, which rendered them obnoxious to the power of the great
ones, on whose bounty they depended; to remedy this, K. James endevour'd a
se^led maint^nance on them, after He came to the English Crown, but eff^cted by
the great care and industry of K. Charles, and confirmed this Parliament. How
these ungrateful men did requite Him afterward, our Author will inform us in
the course of his History.

This done, he hastened home, that is, unto Fol. 127.
the Embraces of his dear consort, where he ended his progress July the 20.]
The Queen was then at Greenwich, when the King came to her, and to which place
he came both suddenly and privately by Posthorses, crossing the water at Black
Wall, without making his entrance into London, or his passage by it. Whereas
Queen Elizabeth did very seldom end any of her Summer progresses, but she
would wheel about to some end of London, and make her passage to White Hall,
through some part of the City; not only requiring the Lord Major and Aldermen
in their Scarlet robes, and Chains of Gold, to come forth to meet her, but the
several Companies of the City to attend sole^nly in ^hcir Formalities as she
passed along. By ^anes whereof, she did not only pre^erve the Majesty which
did of right be^ong to a Queen of England, but kept the Citizens (and
consequently all the Subjects) in a reverent estimation and opinion of her. She
used the like Arts also in keeping up the Majesty of the Crown, and service of
the City, in the reception and bringing in of Foreign Ambassadors: who if they
came to London by Water, were met at Gravesend by the Lord Major, the Aldermen,
and Companies in their several Barges, and in that solemn sort conducted unto
White Hall stairs, but if they were to ^ome by Land, they were met in the like
sort at Shooters Hill, by the Major and Aldermen, and thence conducted to their
lodgings, the Companies waiting in the streets in their several habits. The
like she used also in celebrating the Obsequies of all Christian Kings, whether
Popish or Protestant, with whom she was in correspondence; performed in such a
solemn and magnificent manner that it preserved Her in the estimation of all
foreign Princes, though differing in Religion from Her, besides the great
contentm^nt which the people took in those Royal actions. Some other Arts she
had of preserving Majesty, and keeping distance with Her people; yet was so
popular withal when she saw Her time, that never Majesty and Popularity were
so matched together. But these being laid aside by K. James who brooked
neither of them, and not resumed by King Charles, who had in this point too
much of the Father in him; there followed first a neglect of their Persons,
which Majesty would have made more sacred; and afterward a mislike of their
Government, which a little Popularity would have made more grateful.

A very learned man he was, his erudition Ibid.
all of the old stamp, sti^y principled in the Doctrine of S. Augustine, which
they who understand it not call Calvianisme.] Of the L^arning of Archbishop
Abbot, and how far it was of the old stamp, I shall say nothing at the
present; But whereas our Author makes Calvianisme and the Doctrine of S.
Augustine to be one and the same, I think he is very much out in that ^ there
being some things maintained by S. Augustine, not allowed by Calvin, and many
things maintained by Calvin, which were never taught him in S. Augustine. S.
Augustine was a great maintainer of Episcopacy, which the Calvinians have
ejecte^ out of all their Churches; and was so strict in defense of the
necessity of Baptism, that he doomed all Infants dying without it to the Pains
of Hell, and thereby got the name of Infant damastiques; whereas many of the
Calvinists make Baptism a thing so indifferent ( si habea^ recte, si careas
nihil damni, as one tells us of them) that it is no great matter whether it
be used or not. And on the other side the Calvinists maintain a Parity of
Ministers in the Church of Christ, conditional obedience to the Civil
Magistrate, the suffering of the Pains of Hell in our Saviors soul, and
putting no other sense than that horrid blasphemy on the Article of his
Descent, the ineffectuality of the blessed Sacraments (as to the power and
virtue which the Ancients did ascribe unto them) and many others of that
nature, which are not to be found in all S. Augustines Works. Therefore the
Doctrine of S. Augustine cannot be called by the name of Calvianisme.

In the year 1618, King James published Fol. 128.
a Command or Declaration tolerating sports on the Lords day, called Sunday.]
Our Author is now come to His Majesti^s Declaration about lawful sports, being
a reviver only of a former Declaration published by King James, bearing date
at Greenwich, May the 24th, in the sixteenth year of that Kings reign; in his
discourse whereof there are many things to be considered: For first, he tells
us, that many impetuous clamours were raised against it, but he conceals the
motives to it, and restrictions of it. And secondly, he tells us that to
satisfy and still those ^lamours, the Book was soon after called in, in which
I am sure our Author is extremely out: that Book being never called in, though
the execution of it (by the (...) of that Kings Government) was soon
discontinued. Now for the motives which induced that King to this Declaration,
they were chiefly four: 1. The general complaints of all sorts of people as he
pas^ed through Lancashire, of the restraint of those innocent and lawful
Pastimes on that day, which by the rigor of some Preachers and Ministers of
public justice had been laid upon them. 2. The hinderance of the conversion of
many Papists, who by this means were made to think that the Protestant Religion
was inconsistent with all harmless and modest recreations. 3. That by (...)
men from all manly Exercises on those days on which only they were freed from
their daily labors, they were made unactiv^, and unable, and unfit for wars,
if either Himself or any of His Successors should have such occasion to employ
them. And 4* That men being hindered from these open Pastimes, betook themselves
to Tippling Houses, and there abused themselves with Drunkenness, and censured
in their cups His Majesty's proceedings both in Church and State. Next the
Restrictions were as many: First, that these Pastimes should be no impediment
or let to the public Duties of the Day. Secondly, that no Recusants should be
capable of the benefit of them. No^ thirdly, such as were not diligently
present at all Divine offices which the day required. And fourthly, that the
benefit thereof should redound to none but such as kept themselves in their own
Parishes. Now to the Motives which induced King James to this Declaration, our
Author adds two others which might move King Charles to the reviving of the
same; That is to say, 1. The neglect of the Dedication Feasts of Churches in
most places upon that occasion. And secondly, an inclination in many unto
Judaisme, occasioned by a Book written by one Brabourne, maintaining the
indispensible morality of the 4th Commandment, and consequently the necessary
observation of the Jewish Sabbath. Though our Author tells us that this Royal
Edict was resented with no small regret, yet I conceive the Subjects had great
cause to thank Him for his Princely care, in studying thus to free their
consciences from those servile yokes (greater than which were never laid upon
the Jews by the Scribes and Pharis^es) which by the preaching of some Zealots
had been laid upon them. But our Author is not of my mind, for he tells us
afterward, that

The Divinity of the Lords day was new Fol. 129.
Divinity at Court] And so it was by his leave in the Country too, not known
in England till the year 1595, when Doctor Bound first published it in his Book
of Sabbath Doctrines; nor in Ireland till just twenty years after, when it was
thrust into the Articles of Religion then and there established; nor in
Scotland till above twenty years after that, when the Presbyterians of both
Nations laid their heads together for the subversion of this Church. So new it
is, that as yet it cannot plead a prescription of threescore years, much less
pretend to the beginning of our Reformation: for, if it could, we should have
found some mention of it in our Articles, or our Book of Homilies, or in the
Book of Common Prayer, or in the Statute 5 and 6 Edward VI. about keeping Holy
days, in the two first of which, we find nothing at all touching the keeping
of this day; and in the two last, no more care taken for the Sundays than the
other Festivals. But our Author still goes on, and says,

Which seemed the greater Prodigy that Ibid.
men who so eagerly cried up their own Order and Revenues for Divine, should so
much (...) the Lords day from being such, when they had no other existence than
in relation to this.] Here is a Prodigy indeed, and a Paradox too, that
neither the Order not Revenues of the Evangelical Priesthood have any
existence, but in Relation to the D^vinity of the Lords day. If our Author be
not out in this, I am much mistaken. S. Paul has told us of himself, that he
was an Apostle not of men, neither by men, but by (...) Christ and God the
Father: And what he tells us of himself, may be said also of the twelve
Apostles, and the seventy Disciples, ordained by Christ to preach the Gospel,
and to commit the like power to others from one generation to another till the
end of all things. S. Paul pleads also very strongly for the Divine right of
Evangelicall maintenance to them that labored in the public Ministry of the
Church, concluding from that saying in the Law of Moses, viz: Thou shall not
muzzle the Ox which treads out the corn, and from the maintenance of the
Priest which served at the Altar, that such as preached the Gospel should live
by the Gospel. And he pleads no less ^outly for the right of Tithes, where he
proves our Savior Christ to be a Priest after the order of Melchisedeck, from
Melchisedecks receiving Tithes of Abraham, or rather from this Tithing of
Abraham, as the Greek imports. And yet I trow the Lords day Sabbath had no
such existence, and much less such Divinity of existence, as our Author speaks
of, when both the Order and Revenue of the sacred Ministry had a sure
establishment, as much Divine right as our Savior and the holy Apostles could
confer upon them. Our Author now draws toward an end, and for our further
satisfaction refers us to something elsc, and that something to be found
elsewhere, concluding thus,

But of this elsewhere.] And indeed of Ibid.
this there has enough been said elsewhere to satisfy all learned and
ingenious men, both in the meaning of the Law, and in point of practice, so
that to speak more of it in this place and time, were but to light a Candle
before the Sun. All I shall further add is this, that if the Rules and
Principles of the Sabbatarians m^st needs pa^se for current, I cannot see by
the best light of my poor understanding, but that Brabournes Book may be
embraced with our best affections; and that obscure and ignorant Schoolmaster
(as our Author calls him) must be cried up for the most Orthodox Divine which
this Age has bred.

And was after styled Duke of York.] Ibid.
Our Author here accommodates his style to the present times, when the Weekly
Pamphlets give that Prince no other Title than the Titulary Duke of York, the
pretended Duke of York, the Duke of York so styled, as our Author here. It is
true indeed the second Son of England is not born to the Dukedom of York^, as
the first is unto the Titles and Revenues of the Dukedom of Cornwall, but
receives that Title by Creation: and though the King did cause this second Son
to be styled only Duke of York when he was in his cradle, yet afterward He
created and made him such by Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England in
due form of L^

The four Innes of Court presenting both Ibid.
their Majesty's at Whitehall with a gallant Masque, as a symbol of their
joint affections.] The Innes of Court used formerly to divide themselves in the
like solemnities, Lincolns Inn joining with one of the Temples, and Graies
Inn with the other, b^t now they all united upon this occasion. One William
Prynne an Utter Barrester of Lincolns Inn had writ a Book (somewhat above a
year before) called Histrio Mastix, intended purposely against Stage Plays,
but intermixed with many b^tter and sharp Invectives against the solemn Music
used in the Cathedrals and Royal Chapels, against the magnificence of the
Court in Masks and Dancings, against the Hospitality of the English G^ntry in
the Weeks of Christmas, and indeed what not? In which were also many passages
scandalous and dishonorable to the King and Queen, and such as seemed
dangerous also to their sacred Persons: For which, an Information being brought
against him in the StarreChamber by Master Noye then AtturneyGenerall, and the
Cause ready to be sentenced, it seemed good unto the Gentlemen of the four
Innes of Court to present their Majesty's with a Masque, thereby to let their
(...) and the People see how little Prynne his infection had took hold upon
them. A pompous and magnificent show it seemed, as it passed the Streets, but
made more glorious by a long train of Christian Captives, who having been many
years insl^ved in the chains of bondage, were sent for a present to the King*
by the H^riffe or Emperor of Morocko, in testimony of the assistance received
from him, in the taking of Salla, and destroying that known nest of Pirates,
effected specially by the benefit and advantage of his Majesty's Ships. An
action of so great honor to the English Nation, of such security to trade, and
of such consequence for setl^ng of a free commerce in those parts of
Christendom, that I wonder why our Author takes no notice of it.

The Kings Dominion in the Narrow Fol. 130.
Seas was actually usurped by the Holland Fishers, and the right it self in
good earnest disputed by a late tract of Learned Grotius called Mare Liberum.]
Our Author might have added here that this discourse of Grotius was encountered
not long after by a learned Tract of Mr. Seldens, which h^ entitled Mare
Clausum. In which he did not only assert the Sovereignty or Dominion of the
British Seas to the Crown of England, but clearly proved by constant and
continual practice, that the Kings of England used to levy money from the
Subjects (without help of Parliament) for the providing of ships and other
necessaries to maintain that Sovereignty, which did of right belong unto them.
This he brings down unto the time of K. Hen. 2d, and might have brought it
nearer to his own times, had he been so pleased, and thereby paved a plain way
to the payment of Ship Money, but then he must have thwarted the proceedings of
the House of Commons in the last Parliament, (wherein he was so great a
stickler) voting down under a kind of Anathema the Kings pretensions of right
to all help from the subject, either in Tonage or Poundage, or any other ways
whatsoever, the Parliament not cooperating and contributing toward it. For
that he might have done thus we shall easily see by that which follows in our
Author, viz.

Away goes the subtle Engineer, and at Fol. 131.
length frem old Records progs and bolts out an ancient Precedent of raising a
Tax upon the whole Kingdom for setting forth a Navy in case of danger.] Our
Author speaks this of Mr. Noye the Attorney General, whom he calls aft^rwards
a most indefatigable Plodder and Searcher of old Records, and therefore was not
now to be put to progging, (a very poor expression for so brave a man) to find
out any thing which might serve to advance this business. For the truth is,
that a year or more before the coming out of the Writs for ship money, he
showed the Author of these Observations (at his house near Brentford) a great
wooden Box, wherein were nothing else but Pr^ts out of all Records, for levying
a Navall aid upon the Subjects by the sole authority of the King, whenever
the preservation and safety of the Kingdom did require it of them: And I
remember well that he showed me in many of those Papers, that in the same years
in which the Kings had received subsidies in the way of Parliament, they levied
this Naval aid by their own sole power; and he gave me this Reason for them
both: For (says he) when the King wanted any money either to support his own
expenses, or for the enlarging of his Dominions in Foreign Conquests, or
otherwise to advance his honor in the eye of the world; good reason he should
be beholding for it to the love of his people; but when the Kingdom was in
danger, and that the safety of the Subject was concerned in the business, he
might, and then did raise such sums of Money as he thought expedient, for the
preventing of the danger, and providing for the public safety of himself and
his. And I remember too, that ^se Precedents were written in little bits and
shreads of paper, few of them bigger then ones hand, many not so big; which
when he had transcribed in the course of his studies, he put into the coffin of
a Pie (as he pleased to tell me) which had been sent him from his Mother, and
kept them there until the mouldinesse and corruptiblenesse of that wheaten
Coffer had perished many of his papers. No need of progging or bolting to a man
so furnished. But more of this Attorney we shall hear anon. In the mean time
our Author tells us, that

The King presently issued out Writs to all Ibid.
the Counties within the Realm etc. enjoining every County for defense of the
Kingdom, to provide Ships of so many Tun, etc.] Our Author is deceived in
this, as in many things else. For in the first year of the payment of
Ship Money, the Writs were not issued to all the Counties of England, as our
Author tells us, but only to the Maritime Counties, which lying all along
the shore, were most exposed unto the danger of a foreign Enemy. But proof
being had, that the preparations of that year were not great enough, for the
ends intended in the next year, and not before; the like Writs issued out to
all Counties in England (that is to say, Anno 1636.) the whole charge laid
upon the subject upon that occasion, amounting to 2360001. or there abouts,
which being in lieu of all payments, came but to twenty thousand pounds a
month, and not fully that. Nevertheless the King upon the Archbishops
entreaty, granted them exemption.] I never heard that any such exemption was
desired by the Clergy, but sure I am, that no such exemption was ever granted,
it being as great an indiscretion in them to seek it, as it would have been a
hinderance to the public service, if they had obtained it. The favor which
the Archbishop procured for them, was no more then this, that on complaint
made by some of the Clergy, how unreasonably they were rated by their
neighbors, some of them at a sixth, some at a fourth part of the Tax, which
had been laid upon the Parish; he obtained Letters from the King, to all the
Sheriffs of Engl^nd, requiring that the Clergy possessed of Parsonages, should
not be taxed above a tenth part of the Land*rate of their several Parishes;
and that consideration should be had of Vicars accordingly. Which though it
were a great and a royal favor (such as became a nursing Father of the
Church) yet was it no exemption, as our Author calls it, unless he means an
exemptien from the A^bitrary power of covetous and malicious neighbors, as
indeed it was. But our Author goes back to the Attorney, of whom he tells us,
that

He became a^ ^inent instrument both of Ibid.
good and ill (and of which most, is a great question) to the Kings
Prer^gative.] I think no question need be made in this particular. The Ship
money had as fair a trial in the Courts of Westminster. as any Cause that ever came
before those Judges. And as for other projects, and Court suites, he used first
to consult the Law, the Kings Honor, and the public good, before he would
pass any of them; insomuch that he was more cursed by the Courtiers (I speak
this on my certain knowledge) for dashing some of their designs, and putting
many difficulties upon others of them, then any man can possibly imagine of a
public Minister. And whereas our Author tells us in that which follows,
that he was drawn into the Kings service by the lure of advancement, I am
confident on the other side, that it was rather a contemplation of doing his
duty to the King, then any thought of advancement by it, which drew him to
accept that office, so much sought by others: in managing whereof, he declined
so much private business to attend the King, and attended that with such an eye
to his Masters honor, that I may very safely say, he did not gain so much in
the whole time of his service, as his Predecessors, or Successors did after, in
any one year of their employment.

But in regard (...) came without Credentiall Fol. 132.
Letters from the Queen of Sweden, he denied him audience, whereupon he
returned in some disgust.] In this short passage there are more mistakes then
lines. For first, it is not likely that young Oxenst^ (whom he speaks of) came
without Credentiall Letters, being treated as he was in the quality of an
Ambassador, which without such Letters had not been. Secondly, I am sure that
he had a public and solemn audience, my curiosity carrying me to the Court
that day, not so much to see the Formalities of such Receptions (to w^ch I
could not be a ^nger) as to behold the Son o^ so wise a Father, who had so
long, with so much p^udence and success conducted the affa^s of the Crown of
Sweden. Thirdly, If he departed in some disgust, (as by accepting of a rich
Ring from King Lewis of France, and refusing (...) present of better value,
^offered by King Charles, it was thought he did) it was not because he was
denied a public audience, but because he had proposed some things to the King,
for carrying on the war in Germany, in behalf of the Swedes, which the King
thought not fit to consent unto, being then in hopes of some accommodation to
be made with the Emperor touching the Palatinate.

At the same time there was also a Synod Ibid.
assembled, wherein the body of Articles formed by that Church, Anno 1615.
were repealed, and in their places were substituted the 39. Articles of the
Church of England, intending to create an uniformity of belief between both
Churches.] And certainly the design was pious, and the reasons prevalent;
first in relation to the Papists, who made great aim at it, that in the
Churches of three Kingdoms, united all under one chief Governor, there
should be three several and distinct (and in some points contrary)
Confessions, yet all pretending unto one and the same Religion; next in
relation to the Puritanes, who in the controverted points about Predestination,
and the Lords*day-Sabbath, when they had nothing else to say, did use to fly
for*refuge to the Articles of the Church of Ireland, where the Predestinarian
Doctrines, and Sabbatarian speculations had found entertainment; and these, and
none but these found themselves grieved and troubled at the alteration. Nor was
this alteration made by the hand of power, but the power of reason. The matter
being canvased and debated in the Convocation there, before it was put unto the
vote; and being put unto the vote (notwithstanding the strong interposition of
the Lord Primate of Armagh) was carried by the far greater part of voices for
the Church of England.

But all the service they did this Summer Fol. 136.
was inconsiderable, in regard they never came to engagement; only their
formidable appearance secured the Seas from those Petit Larcenies and Piracies
wherewith they were formerly so molested.] Had this been all, their service had
been very considerable; the clearing the Sea of Pirates being of so great
benefit and consequence to the trade, and flourishing of this Kingdom. For by
this means, and the well-setled peace which we had at home, the greatest part
of the wealth, in these parts of Christendom, was carried up the Thames, and
managed in the City of London. But this was not all. The King by this
Formidable appearanc^ (as our Author calls it) regained the Dominion of the
Sea, which had been lately hazarded, if not wholly lost: insomuch as the King
of Spain thought it his best and safest w^y, to send the money designed for
the payment of his Armies in Flanders, in the Ships of English Merchants only.
By means whereof, there was brought yearly into England, between 2 and 3
hundred thousand pound in uncoyned Bullion, which being minted in the Tower,
was no small benefit to the King by the Coynage of it, and no less benefit to
the City and the Kingdom generally, in regard the greatest part thereof was
still kept amongst us in lieu of such manufactures, and native commodities of
this Land, as were returned into Flanders, for the use of that Army. And yet
this was not all the service which they did this Summer: The French and
Hollanders had ^tred this year into a Confederacy to rout the King of Spain
out of all the Netherlands, in which it was agreed amongst other things. that
the French should invest Dunkirk and the other parts of Flanders, with their
Forces by Land, whilst the Hollanders did besiege them with a Fleet at Sea,
that so all passages into the Country being thus locked up, they might the
more easily subdue all the Inland parts. And in all probability the design had
took effect in this very year, the King of Spain no^ being able to bring 8000
men into the field, and leave his Garrisons provided; the people of the other
side being so practis^d on by the Holland Faction, that few or none of them
would Arm to repulse those Enemies. But first the formidable appearance of the
English Fleet, which (...) the Hollanders before Dunkirk* and then the
insolences of the French at Die and Tillemont, did so encourage and i^flame
the hearts of the people, that the Armies both of the French and Hollanders,
returned back again without doing any thing more than the wasting of the
Country. And was not this (think we) a considerable piece of service also?
Lastly, I am to tell our Author, that it was not the Earl of Northumberland,
(as he tells us some lines before) but the Earl of Lyndsey which did command
the Fleet this Summer, Anno 1635. The Earl of Northumberland not being in
Commission for this service till the year next following, when all the Counties
of the Realm were engaged in the charge.

So as the Kings discretion was called in Fol. 137.
to part the fray by the committing the Staff of that Office into the hands of
William Juxton Lord Bishop of London, March the 6th, who though he was none of
the greatest scholars, yet was withal none of the worst Bishops.] Our Author
still fails in his intelligence, both of men and matter. For, first the
occasion of giving the Office of Lord Treasurer to the Bishop of London, was
not to part a fray between the Archbishop and the Lord Cottington, who never
came to such immoderate heats, as our Author speaks of; but upon very good
considerations and reasons of State: ^or, whereas most of the Lord Treasurers
of these latter times had rather served themselves by that Office than the King
in it, and raising themselves to the Estates and Titles of Earls, but leaving
the two Kings more encumbered with debts and wants than any of their
Predecessors had been known to be; it was thought fit to put the Staff of that
Offic^ into the hands of a Churchman, who having no Family to raise, no Wife
and Chil^ren to provide for, might better manag^ the Incomes of the Treasury to
the Kings advantage than they had been formerly: and who more fit for that
employment (among all the Clergy) than the Bishop of London, a man of so
well*tempered a disposition as gave exceeding great content both to Prince and
people; and being a dear friend of the Archbishops, who had served the whole
year as Commissioner in that Public trust, was sure to be instructed by him in
all particulars which concerned the managing thereof. But whereas our Author
tells us of him, that he was none of the greatest scholars, I would feign learn
in what particular parts, either of Divine or Humane Learning our Author
reckons him defective; or when our Author sat so long in the Examiners Office,
as to bring the poor Bishop unto this discovery. I know the man, and I know
also his abilities as well in Public Exercises as Private Conferences, to be
as far above the censure of our Aristarchus as he conceives himself to be
above such an ignorant and obscure Schoolmaster as Theophilus Brabaurne. It is
true, he sets him off with some commendation of a calm and moderate spirit, and
so does the Lord Faulkland too, in a bitter Speech of his against the Bishops,
Anno 1641, where he says of him, That in an unexpected place and power he
expressed an equal moderation and humility, being neither ambitious before,
nor proud after, either of the Crozier or white Staff. But there are some whom
Tacitus calls Pessimum inimicorum genus, the worst kind of Enemies, who under
color of commending, expose a man to all the disadvantages of contempt or
danger.

The Communion Table which formerly Ibid.
stood in the midst of the Church or Chancel, he enjoined to be placed at the
East end, upon a graduated advance of ground with the ends inverted, and a
wooden traverse of ^ailes before it.] Of placing the Communiou Table with the
ends inverted, we are told before Anno 1628, and if it were then introduced,
and so far in practice that notice could be taken of it by the Committee for
Religion, no reason it should now be charged on the Archbishop as an Act of
his. But granting it to be his Act (not to repeat any thing of that which was
said before in justification of those Bishops who were there said to have done
the like) we doubt not but he had sufficient authority for what he did in the
transposing of the Table to the Eastern wall. The King by the advice of his
Metropolitan, has a power by the Statute, 1 Eliz. c. 2. on the happening of any
irreverence to be used by the Ceremonies or Rites of the Church, by misusing
the Orders appointed in this Book, (namely, the Book of Common Prayers) to
ordain and publish such further Rites and Ceremonies, as may be most for the
advancement of Gods glory, the edifying of his Church, and the due reverence of
Christ's holy Mysteries and Sacraments. And certainly there had been so much
irreverence done to the Communion Table standing unfenced as then it did in the
middle of the Chancell, not only by scribbling and sitting on it, as before was
noted; but also by Dogs pissing against it (as of common course) and sometimes
snatching away the Bread which was provided for the use of the blessed
Sacrament; that it was more than time to transpose the Communion Table to a
place more eminent, and to fence it also with a rail to keep it from the like
profanation for the time to come. Nor did the Archbishop by so doing outrun
authority, the King having given authority and (...) to it a year before the
Metropoliticall Visitation which our Author speaks of. The Deane and Chapter of
S. Paul's (as being Ordinaries of the place) had transposed the Communion Table
in Saint Gregoryes to the upper end of the Chancel, and caused it to be placed
Altarwise; which being disliked by some few ordinary Parishioners, and an
Appeal made from the Ordinary to the Deane of the Arches, the Cause was
brought before the King, then sitting in his Privy Council, Anno 1633. who on
the hearing of all parties, and the Reasons alleged on both sides, having
first testified His dislike of all Innovations; He concludes at last, That h^
did well approve, and confirmed the Act of the said Ordinary, and also gave
commandem^nt that if those few Parishioners before (...) did proceed in their
said Appeal, then the D^an of the Arches should confirm the said Order of the
aforesaid Deane and Chapter. Here was authority enough, as good authority for
the Archbishop to proceed upon in his Visitation, as the Prevogative Royal,
the new Statute of the Queen, and the old Laws of the Land could give him.
This then was no Anomalous Innovation (as our Author calls it.) The King (it
seems) thought otherwise of it, and so did all men studied in the Rules of this
Church, and the practice of approved Antiquity who looked upon it as a
Renovation of a Rite disused, not as an Innovation or Introduction of a new
Ceremony never used before* But sure our Author had forgotten when these words
fell from him, what he said before, of the Remiss Government of Archbishop
Abbot, the titular Archbishop, as he calls him there (but Titular in nothing so
much as not doing the duties of his Office) of whom h^ tells us, Fol. 127. that
by his extraordinary remissness in not exacting strict conformity to the
prescribed. Orders of the Church in point of Ceremony, he led in such an habit
of Inconformity, as the future reduction of* those tender-conscienced men to
long discontinued obedience was interpreted an Innovation. But the Controversy
is not only managed betwixt our Author and himself, but as he tells us
afterward between Bishops and Bishops, for as he says,

The Bishop of Lincoln published a Tract Ibid.
under a concealed name, positively asserting therein, that the holy Table
anciently did in the Primitive times, and ought so in ours according to the
Dictates of our Church, stand in Gremio and Nave of the Quire.] The Tract here
meant was called The Holy Table, name, and thing: in which the Bishop has said
much, but asserted little: Affirmations are no Proofs in Law, and multitudes of
allegations falsified in themselves, and wrested to a contrary se^ce, make not
one good Evidence; yet this is all we are to look for in the Bishops Book: It
being not untruly said in the Answerers Preface, that he came armed into the
field with no other weapons than impudence, ignorance, and falsehoods. And to
say truth, it can be no otherwise, when a man writes both against his science
and his conscience, as we have very good cause to think this Bishop did. Look
on him in the point of practice, and we shall find the Communion Table placed
Altarwise in the Cathedral Church of Lincoln whereof he was Bishop, and in the
Collegiate Church of Westminster of which he was Dean* and in the private
Chapel of his House at Bugdon, in which last it was not only placed
Altar-wise, but garnisht with rich Plate and other costly Utensils (one of his
own words) in more than ordinary manner. Look on him in his letter to the Vicar
of Grantham, and he tells him thus; that your Communion Table is to stand
Altarwise, if you mean in that place of the Chancell, where the Altar stood, I
think somewhat may be said for that, because the injunctions, 1559. di^ so
place it; and I conceive it to be the most decent situation, when it is not
used, and for use too, where the quire is mounted up by steps, and open, so
that he that officiates, may be seen and heard of all the Congregation. Nor
writes he thus only to that V^ar, but he allows it in that Tract which my
Author speaks of, both in Cathedral Churches, and in the Kings Chapels, and
in the Chapels of great men, which certainly have no more Law for it, then
what the Archbishop had for placing it in the Parish Churches, which as the
Bishop tells the Vicar, are to be presidented, by the forms in his Majesty's
Chapels, and in the Quires of their Cathedralls. If it be asked what moved the
Bishop to stickle so stoutly in this business, it may be answered, that he
loved to fi^sh in a troubled water, that being a man which considered only his
own ends, he went such ways as most conduced to the ^ccomplishing of the ends
he aimed at. Being in Power and place at Court in the time of K. James he made
himself the head of the Popish Faction, because he thought the match with
Spain, which was then in treaty, would bring not only a connivance to that
Religion, but also a Toleration of it: And who more like to be in favor if
that match went on, then such as were most zealous in doing good offices to the
Catholic cause. But being by King Charles deprived first of the Great Seal,
and afterward commanded to retire from Westminster, he gave himself to be the
head of the Puritan party, opposing all the Kings proceedings both in Church
and State (and amongst others this of placing the Communion Table) to make
himself gracious with that Sect, who by their shy practices and insinuations,
and by the Remiss Government, and connivance of Archbishop A^ot, had gained
much ground upon the people. If it be asked what authority I have for this, I
answer, that I have as good as can be wished for, even our Author himself, who
tells us of this Bishop, Fol. 145. That being malevolently inclined (by the
Kings disfavours) he thought he could not gratify beloved revenge better, then
to endeavor the supplanting of his Sovereign. To which end, finding him
declining in the affections of his people, he made his Apostraphe, and
applications to them, fomenting popular discourses tending to the Kings
dishonor, etc. And being set upon this pin, no mervaile if he entertained
the present occasion of making the Archbishop odiou^, and the King himself
less pleasing in the eyes of the Subjects. But of this Bishop, we may perhaps
have some occasion to speak more hereafter. In the mean time we must follow
our Author, who having done with the Archbishop, goes on to his Instruments
(for so he calls them) in which he says, he was most unhappy. Why so? because
says he,

They were not blameless in their lives, Fol. 138.
some being vicious even to scandal.] Our Author needed not have told us in
his Preface by the way of prevention, that he should be thought no friend to
the Clergy* we should have found that here in such Capital Letters* as any man
that runs might read them. Vicious even to scandal? that goes high indeed, and
it had well become our Author to have named the men, that so the rest of the
Clergy might have been discharged of that ^oule reproach. For my part I have
took some pains to inquire after such instruments and subordinate Ministers of
the Archbishop, used in the time of his government, most of them men of great
abilities in learning, and though I think they were not blameless in their
lives (as who can be that carries mortality about him) yet I cannot hear of
any vicious persons taken into employment by him, much less^ so scandalously
vicious, as our Author makes them. Or were there such, it had been fitter for
our Author (who desires to be accounted for a Son of the Church) to have played
the part of Sem and Japhet, in finding the nakedness of their spiritual
Fathers; then to act the part of Cham and Canaan, in making Proclamation of it
unto all the world. It was a pious saying of the Emperor Constantine (reported
by Theodoret, lib. I. cap. II.) that the offenses of the Priests were to be
hidden and concealed from the common people, Ne illis assensi ad delinquendu^
reddantur audaciores, lest else they should transgress with the greater
liberty. As for himself, so tender was he of the credit of his Clergy, that he
used oftentimes to say, that found he any of them (which yet God prohibit) in
the embraces of a Strumpet, obtecturum se paludamento sceleratum facinus, that
with his own Royal robes he would hide from vulgar eyes, both the offense, and
the offender. A noble piety, the piety of Sem and Japhet in the former passage,
and the Lord blessed him for it, and enlarged the Tents of his habitation, and
Canaan, even the whole Countries of the Gentiles became his servants. From
generals our Author passes on unto one particular, of whom he tells us that

He was bold to say he hoped to live to see Ibid.
the day when a Minister should be as good a man, as any Jack Gentleman in
England.] This is a heavy charge indeed, the heavier in regard that the fault
of this one man (if such men there were) must lay a brand of Insolency on all
the rest of the Clergy, thereby to render them obnoxious to the public hatred.
And though our Author has not told us by name who this one man was, yet
telling us that he was a high Flyer, and that this high Flyer was deplumed, he
gives us some conjectures at the man he drives at, a man (I must confess) of
an undaunted spirit, and strong resolutions, but neither so intemperate in his
words, or unwise in his actions, as to speak so contemptuously of the English
Gentry. For first, we are not sure that such words were spoken, our Author
offering no proof for it but only his own word, or some vulgar hear say; too
weak a ground for such a heavy accusation to be built upon. But secondly,
admitting that such words were spoken, I hope our Author has heard long since
of an ancient by word, that every Jack would be a Gentleman; and therefore
cannot choose but know that there is a difference between a Gentleman of Arms
and Blood, a true English Gentleman and such JackGentl^men, as having got a
little more wealth together than their next poor neighbors, take to themselves
the name of Gentlemen, but are none indeed. And such Jack-Gentlemen as these,
as they are commonly most like (either for want of wit, or of manners, or of
both together) to vilify their Minister, and despise the Clergy; so if the
poor party said whatsoever he was, that he hoped to live to see the time, when
a Minister should be as good a man as any Jack-Gentleman of them all, I hope
the ancient and true-English Gentry will not blame him for it. Our Author
having thus arraigned the whole body of the English Clergy, that is to say,
Archbishops, Bishops, and those of the inferior Orders, is now at leisure to
proceed to some other business; and having brought his Reader through the
Disputes and Arguments about the Ship Money, he carries him on to the
Combustions raised in Scotland, occasioned, as he tells us, by sending
thither a Book of Common Prayer for the use of that Church.

Very little differing, as the King was unhappily Fol. 147.
persuaded by them from the English.] The King needed no persuasion in this
point, the difference between the two Liturgies (whether great or little) being
known unto him, before He caused this to be published. It Is true, his first
desire was, that the English Liturgy should be admitted in Scotland without
any alteration, and to that end He gave order to the Dean of His Chapel in
that Kingdom, about the middle of October, Anno 1633. that it should be read
twice every day in the Chapel of His Palace in Holyrood House; that there
should be Communions administered according to the form thereof, once in every
Month, the Communicants receiving it upon their knees; that the Lords of the
Privy Council, the Officers of Justice and other persons of Public trust
about the Court, should diligently attend the same on the Lords days, and that
he who officiated on those days, if he were a Bishop should wear his Rochet,
but if an ordinary Minister only he should wear the Surplice, and thus he did
unto this end, that the people being made acquainted by little and little with
the English Liturgy, might be the more willing to receive it in all parts of
that Kingdom whenever it should be tendered to them. But the Scottish Bishops
being jealous that this might be an Argument of their dependence on the Church
of England, and finding that the Psalms, the Epistles and Gospels, and other
sentences of Scripture in the English Book, being of a different Transl^tion,
from that which King James had authoriz^d to be read in the Churches of both
Kingdoms. had given offense unto that people, desired a Liturgy of their own:
and that they might have leave to make such alterations in the English Book, as
might entitle it peculiarly to the Church of Scotland: which Alterarions being
made and showed to the King, he approved well of them; in regard that coming
nearer to the first Liturgy of K. Edward the sixth in the Administration of the
Lords Supper, (and consequently being more agreeable to the ancient Forms) it
might be a means to gain the Papists to the Church, who liked far better of
the first than the second Liturgy.

July 23. being Sunday, the Deane of Edinborough Ibid.
began to read the Book in S. Gyles Church, the chief of that City, etc.] Our
Author here does very well describe the two Tumul^s at Edinborough upon the
reading of the Book, but he omits the great oversights committed by the King
and the Lords of that Council, in the conduct and carriage of the business.
For had the Book been read in all the Churches of Scotland upon Easter day, as
was first intended, it had in probability prevented these tumultuous Riots,
which the respite of it for so long gave those which had the hatching of this
Sedition, both time enough to advise, and opportunity enough to effect at last:
or had the King caused the chief Ringleaders of this Tumult to be put to
death, according to the Laws of that Kingdom, as soon as justice could have
laid hold on them, He had undoubtedly prevented all further dangers: The
drawing of some blood in the Body politic by the punishment of M^lefactors,
being like letting blood in the Body-naturall, which in some strong distempers
does preserve the whole. O^ finally, if the Tumult had been grown so high, and
so strongly backed, that justice could not safely be done upon them, had the
King then but sent a Squadron of the Royal Navy, which He had at Sea, to block
up their Haven, He had soon brought the Edinbourghers unto His Devotion, and
consequently kept all the rest of that Kingdom in a safe obedience. But the
Edinbourghers knew well enough whom they had to deal with, what friends they
had about the King, and what a party they had got in the Lords of His Council
which governed the affairs of that Kingdom; and they knew very well (none
better) by the unpunishing of the Londoners for the Tumult in the death of
Lamb, that the King had rather patience enough to bear such indignities, than
resolution to revenge them: So that the King at last was come to that misery
which a good Author speaks of, Cum vel excidenda sit natura, vel minuenda
dignitas: That he must either outgoe His nature, or forgo His authority.

The King nothing pleased with these affronts, Fol. 150.
yet studious to compose these surges of discontent, sent the Marquess of
Hamilton down in the quality of an high Commissioner, etc.] We are now come to
the rest of the oversights committed in the conduct of this weighty business,
whereof the first was, that having neglected to suppress the Sedition at the
very first appearance of it, and to strangle that monster in the cradle, he had
let a whole year pass^ without doing any thing, but sending one Proclamation
after another, which being publicly encountered with contrary Protestations,
did but increase their insolences and his own disgraces; the party in the mean
time being so well formed, that Po^-guns and such Paper-pellets were able to
do no good upon them. The second was, that when it had been fitter for the
preservation of his authority to send a Lord General in the head of an Army,
for the reducing of that Kingdom by force of Arms, He rather chose to send an
high Commissioner to them, to sweeten the distempers and compose the
differences; which could not be, but by yiedling more on his side, then he was
like (by any fair imparlance) to obtain from that. Thirdly, that when he was
reso^ved on an high Comm^ssioner, he must pitch on Hamilton for the man, whom
he had such reason to distrust, as before was hinted; but that the old Maxim
of the Lenoxian Family, (of being deceived rather than distrustful) was so
prevalent with him. And this he did against the opinion and advice of many of
the Lords of that Kingdom, that is to say, the Earl of Sterling principal
Secretary of State, the Bishops of Rosse and Breken privy Counselors both,
Sir Robert Spoteswood Lord President of the College of Justice, and Sir John
Hay Clerke-Register (or Master of the Rolls as we call him here.) These having
secret intimation that Hamilton was designed for this great Employment, came in
Post to London, endeavoring to persuade the King to change his purpose, and
commending Huntley for that service, who being a man of greatest power in the
North of Scotland, and utterly averse from the Covenanters and the rest of that
Faction, was thought by them the fittest man for that undertaking. But the King
fatally carried on to his own destruction, would not hearken to it, and
hereunto the Duke of Lenox did contribute some weak assistance, who being
wrought on by the Scots of Hamiltons Faction, chose rather that the old Enemy
of his House should be trusted with the managing of that great affair, than
that a Country Lord (as the Courtiers of that Nation called him) should carry
the honor from them both.

June the six^, his Commission was read Ibid.
and accepted him.] And well it might, it was the fish for which he had so long
been angling: For, having lost the Scottish Army, raised for the aid of the
King of Sweden without doing any thing, and no occasion being offered to
advance another, he fell upon more secret and subtle practices to effect his
ends: First, drawing all the Scots which were about the Court of England to be
his Dependants, and rest at his devotion wholly: and next by getting himself a
strong party in that Kingdom, whose affections he had means enough to
restrain and alienate from the King, and then to bind them to himself,
insomuch as it was thought by the wisest men of both Nations, that the first
Tumult at Edinborough was set on by some of his Instruments, and that the
Combustions which ensued, were secretly fomented by them also. And this was
made the more probable by his carriage in that great trust of the high
Commissioner, thus procured for him; drawing the King from one condescension to
another in behalf of the Covenanters, till he had little more to give but the
Crown it self: For first he drew him to suspend, and after to suppress the
Book of Common Prayers, and therewithal the Canons made not long before for
the use of that Church; next the five Articles of Perth. procured with so much
difficulty by King James, and confirmed in Parliament, must be also abrogated;
and then the Covenant it self (with some little alterations in it) must be
authorized, and generally imposed upon all that Kingdom: And finally, the
calling of an Assembly must be yielded to, in which he was right well assured,
that none but Covenanters should have voices, that not Lord Bishops only should
be censured and excommunicated, but the Episcopacie it self abolished, and all
the Regular and Loyal Clergy brought to utter ruin. By all which Acts (I
cannot say of grace, but) of condescension, the Marquess got as much in
gross, as His Majesty lost in the retaile, making himself so strong a party
in that Kingdom, that the King stood but for a Cipher in the calculation. All
being done from that time forwards (especially when the first shows of a War
were over) as Hamilton either did contrive or direct the business: For the
Covenanters having got all this, thought not this enough, unless they put
themselves in Arms to make good their purchases; and having therein got the
first start of the King, the King could do no less than provide for himself,
and to Arm Accordingly. In order whereunto our Author tells us that

Because it was the Bishops war, he Fol. 158.
thought it requisite they should contribute largely toward the preservation of
their own Hierarchy.] I am sorry to see this passage have our Authors pen,
whom I should willingly have accounted for a true Son of the Church of England,
were it not for this, and some other passages of this nature, which savor more
of the Covenanter, then the English Protestant. It is true, the Covenanters
called it the Bishops war, and gave it out, that it was raised only to
maintain the Hirarchy, but there was little or no truth in their mouths the
while, for the truth is, that though Liturgy and Episcopacy were made the
occasions, yet they were no^ the causes of this War; Religion being but the
vizard to disguise that business, which Covetousness, Sacrilege, and Rapine
had the greatest hand in. The Reader therefore is to know, that the King, being
engaged in a War with Spain, and yet deserted by those men, who engaged him
in it, was feign to have recourse to such other ways of assistance as were
off^ to him: And amongst others, he was minded of a purpose which his Father
had, of revoking all such grants of AbbeyLands, the Lands of B^shopricks and
Chapters, and other Religious Corporations; which having been vested in the
Crown by Act of Parl. were by that Kings Protectors, in the time of his
minority, conferred on many of the Nobility and Gentry to make them sure unto
the side, or else by a strong hand of power ^xtorted from him. Being resolved
upon this course, he intends a Parliament in that Ki^gdome, appoints the E^rl
of Niddisd^ale to preside therein, and arms him with Instructions for (...) of
an Act of Revocation accord^gly, who b^ing on h^s way as far as Barwick, was
there informed that all was in a Tumult at Edenbobrough, that a rich Coach
which he had sent before to Dalkeith was cut in pieces, the poor Horses killed,
the people seeming only sorry that they could not do^ the like to the Earl
himself. Things being brought unto this stand, and the Parl^ament put off with
a sine die, the King was put to a necessity of some second Councels; amongst
which none seemed so plausible and expedient to him, as that of Mr. Archibald
Achison then Procu^ator or solicitor general in that kingdom, who having
first told the King that such as were estated in the lands in question, had
served themselves so well by the bare naming of an Act of Revocation, as to
possess the people (whom they found apt to be infl^med on such suggestions)
that the true intendment of that Act, was to revoke all former Acts for
suppressing of Pop^ry, and settling the reformed Religion in the Kirk of
Scotland; and therefore that it would be very unsafe for his Majesty to proceed
that way. Next he advised, that instead of such a general Revocation as that
Act imported, he should implead them one by one, beginning first with those,
whom he thought least able to stand out* or else most willing to conform to his
M^jesties pleasure; assuring him* that having the Laws upon his side, the
Courts of Justice must, and would pas^e judgment for him. The King resolved
upon this course, sends home the Gentleman, not only with th^nkes and
Knighthood (which he had most worthily deserved) but with instructions and
power to proceed therein: and he proceeded in it so effectually to the Kings
advantage, that some of the impleaded parties being lost in the suite, and the
rest seeing that though they could raise the people against the King, they
could not ^aise them against the Laws, it was thought the best and safest way
to compound the business. Hereupon in the year 1631. Commissioners are sent
to the Court of England, and amongst others, the Learned and right Noble Lord
of Marcheston (from whose mouth I had this whole relation) who after a long
treaty with the King, did agree at last, that all such as held hereditary
Sheriffdomes, or had the power of life and death over such as lived within
their jurisdiction, should quit those royalties to the King; that they should
make unto their Tenants in their several Lands, some permanent Estates, either
for three lives, or one and twenty years, or some such like Term, that so the
Tenants might be encouraged to build and plant, and improve the Patrimony of
that Kingdom; that they should double the yearly rents which were reserved
unto the Crown by their former grants, and finally that these conditions being
performed on their parts, the King should settle their Estates by Act of
Parliament. Home went the Commissioners with joy for their good success,
expecting to be entertained with Bells and Bonefires, but they found the
contrary; the proud Scots being resolved rather to put all to hazard, than quit
that power and Tyranny, which they had over their poor vassalls, by which name
(after the manner of the French) they called their Tenants. And hereunto they
were encou^aged underhand, by a party in England, who feared that by this
agreement the King would be so absolute in those Northern Regions, that no aid
could be hoped from thence, when the necessity of their designs might most
require it: Just as the Castilions were displeased with the conquest of
Portugal, by King Philip the second, because thereby they had no place left to
retire unto, when either the Kings displeasure, or their disobedience should
make their own Country too hot for them. From hence proceeded that ill blood
which the King found amongst them, when he went for that unlucky Crown; from
hence proceeded the seditious Libell of the Lord Ballmerino, which our Author
speaks of, the greatest part of whose Estate was in Abby-Lands; From hence
proceeded all the practices of the great ones on that busy Faction, principled
only for the ^uine and destruction of Monarchies; and finally from hence
proceeded the design of making use of discontented and seditio^s spirits
(under color of the Canons and Common Prayer Book, to embroyle that Kingdom,
that so they might both keep their Lands, and not lose their Power; the Kings
Ministers all this while looking mildely on, or acting only by such influences
as they had from Hamilton, without either care or course taken to prevent those
mischiefs, which afterward ensued upon it. But from the Ground, proceed we to
the Prosecution of the War intended, concerning which, our Author tells us
that

The King had amast together, considederable Fol. 159.
power, whereof the Earl of Arundel had the chi^fe conduct.] And so he had, as
to the command of all the Forces which went by Land, the Earl of Essex being
Lieutenant General of the Foot, and the E. of Holland of the Horse. But then
there were some other forces embarked in a considerable part of the Royal
Navy, with plenty of Coin and Ammunition, which were put under the command of
Hamilton (the King still going on in his fatal over* sights) who anchoring
with his Fleet in the Frith of Edenborough, and la^ding some of his spent men,
in a little Ifland, to give them breath and some refreshments, received a visit
from his Mother, a most rigid Covenanter. The Scots upon the shore saying with
no small laughter, that they knew the Son of so good a Mother, could not do
them hurt. And so it proved, for having loytered thereabouts to no purpose,
till he heard that the Treaty for the Pacification was begun near Barwick, he
left those shores, and came in great Post-haste, as it was pretended, to
disturb that business, which was to be concluded before he came thither. But
this vile dealing makes me Sea-sick, I return to Land, where I find that

All the preparation both of one side, and Ibid.
the other, proved only an interview of two Armies, nothing being acted
considerable in way of Engagement.] That so it was, is a truth undoubted, but
how it came to pass that it should be so, would be worth a knowing. For never
did so many of the Lords and Gentry attend a King of England, in an expedition
against that people, nor never did they carry with them a greater stock of
Animosities, and indignation, then they did at this present. But first, I have
been told by some wise and understanding men about the King, that he never did
intend to fight (as they afterward found) but only by the terror of so great
on Army, to draw the Scots to do him reason: And this the Covenanters knew as
well as he, there being nothing which he said, did, or thought (so far as
thoughts might be discovered by signs and gestures) but what was forthwith
posted to them by the Scots about him. And this I am the more apt to credit,
because when a notable and well experienced Commander offered the King then in
Camp near Barwick, that with two thousand Horse (which the King might very well
have spared) he would so waste and destroy the Country, that the Scots should
come upon their knees to implore his mercy: He would by no means hearken to
the P^oposition. Nor were the Lords and persons of most note about him, more
forward at the last then he. For having given way that the E^rles of Roxborough
and Traquair, and other Nob^e m^n of that Nation might repair to York, for
mediating some atonement between the King and his people, they plied their
busine^s so well, that by representing to the Lords of the English Nation, the
dangers they would bring themselves into, if the Scots were totally subdued;
they mitigated the displeasures of some, and so took off the edge of others,
that they did not go from York, the same men they came thither, on the
discovery of which practice, and some intelligence which they had with the
Covenanters, the Earls of Traquair and Roxborough were confined to their
Chambers (the first at York, and the second at New. Castle) but presently
dismissed again, and sent back to Scotland. But they had first done the work
they came for, for never were men so suddenly cooled as the Lords of England,
never did men make clearer shows of an alteration by their words and (...): in
so much that the Scottish Army beginning to advance, and the Earl of Holland
being sent with a great body of Horse to attend upon them, he presently sent
word unto the King, in what danger he was, and how he stood in fear of being
underridden (as I take it) by the Galloway Naggs, and thereupon received order
to retire Again^. No marvel if things standing in this condition, the King did
cheerfully embrace any overture which rended to a Pacification; or did make
choice of such persons to negotiate in it, who were more like to take such
terms as they could get, then to fight it out. Amongst which terms, that
which was most insisted on by the Scotch Commissioners, because it was most to
their advantage, and the Kings disabling, was

That he recall all his Forces by Land or Ibid.
Sea.] Which he did accordingly, and thereby lost all those notable advant^ges,
which the gallantry of his Army, the greatness of his preparations both by Sea
and Land, and the weakness of an inconsiderable Enemy, might assure him of.
But he had done thus once before, that is to say, at the returning of his
Forces and Fleet from Rochel, Anno 1628. at what time He was in no good terms
with His Subjects, and in worse with His Neighbors, having provoked the
Spaniard by the invading of the Isle of Gadas, and the French by invading the
Isle of The, which might have given Him ground enough to have kept his Army
(and His authority withal) and when an Army once is up* it will keep it self;
necessity of State ruling and overruling those Concessions and Acts of Grace,
to which the Subjects may pretend in more settled times. But His error at this
time was worse than that, the Combustions of Scotland being raised so high,
that the oil of Graces rather tended to increase, than to quench their fl^me.
Had He recalled his Forces only from the Shores and Borders of that Kingdom
(which is the most that He was bound to by the Pacification) till He had seen
the Scots disbanded, their Officers cashiered* (their Forts and Castles
garrisoned with English Soldiers, and some good issue of the Assembly and
Parliament to be held at Edinborough, He had preserved His honor among
Foreign Princes, and crushed those practices at home, which afterward
undermined His peace, and destroyed His glories. But doing it in this form and
manner without effecting any thing which He seemed to Arm for, He animated the
Scots to commit new insolences, the Dutch to affront Him on Hi^ own shoares,
and (which was worst of all) gave no small coffeehouse to the English
Gentry, who having with great charge engaged themselves in this expedition o^
of hope of getting Honor to the King, their Country, and themselves by their
faithful service, were suddenly dismissed, not only without that honor which
they aimed at, but without any acknowledgment of their love and loyalty. A
matter so unpleasing to them, that few of them appeared in the next years Army,
many of them turned against Him in the following troubles, the greatest part
looking on His successes with a careless eye as unconcerned in His affairs
whether good or evil. But from miscarriages in this War, I might pass next
to a mistake which I find in our Author concerning the ancient way of
constituting the Scottish Parliaments, of which he tells us, that

The King first named eight Bishops, then Fol. 161.
those Bishops chose eight Noble men, those Noble men chose so many Barons, and
those the like number of Burgesses* etc.] Not altogether so as our Author has
it; for the King having first named 8. Bishops, and the Bishops named 8. Noble
men, the Bishops and Noble men together chose 8. Commissioners for the
Sheriffdomes, and as many for the Boroughs or Corporations; which two and
thirty had the Names of the Lords of the Arricles, and had the canvassing and
correcting of all the Bills which were offered to the Parliament before they
were put to the Vote.

And persuaded His Majesty that the Fol. 163.
Cardinal of Richelieu would be glad to serve His Majesty or his Nephew, etc.]
That the French Ambassador did endeavor to persuade the King to that belief,
I shall easily grant, but am not willing to believe that the King should be so
easily persuaded to it; it being the opinion of most knowing men, that this
Cardinal had a very great hand in animating the Scots to such a height of
disobedience, as we find them in. And this may evidently appear, first by a
passage in our Author, Fol. 176. in which we find from the intelligence of
Andreas ab Habernefield, that the Cardinal sent his Chaplain and Almoner, M^.
Thomas Chamberlain, a Scot by Nation, to assist the confederates in advancing
the business, and to attempt all ways for exasperating the first heat, with
order, not to depart from them, till (things succeeding as he wished) he might
return with good news. Secondly, from the Letter, writ by the Lord Loudon,
and the rest of the ^ovenanters to the French King, first published in his
Majesty's lesser Declaration against the Scots, and since exemplified in our
Author, Fol. 168. of which Letter they could hope for no good effect, but as
the Cardinal should make way and provide means for it. Thirdly, by the report
of a Gentleman (from whose mouth I have it) who being took Prisoner, and
brought unto the Scottish Camp, immediately after the fight near Nuborne, found
there the Cardinals S^cretary in close consultation with the heads of the
Covenanters; which after his restoring to liberty by the Treaty at Rippon, he
declared to the King, and offered to make it good upon his Oath. Fourthly, by
the impossibility which the Cardinal found in his designs, of driving the
Spaniard out of Flanders, and the rest of the Netherlands, unless the King was
so disturbed and embroyled at home, that he could not help them: it being
heretofore the great masterpiece of the Kings of England, to keep the Scale
even between France and Spain, that neither of them being too strong for the
other, the affairs of Christendom might be poized in the evener balance.
Fifthly, by the free access, and secret conferences, which Hamiltons Chaplain
had with Con, the Popes agent here, during such time as Chamberlain the
Cardinals Chaplain labored to promote the business^. Sixthly, Add hereunto
the great displeasure which the Cardinal had conceived against the King, for
invading the Isle of The, and attempting the relief of Rochell; and we shall
find what little reason the King had to be persuaded to any belief in
Cardinal Richelieu, though the Ambassador might use all his eloquence to
persuade him to it.

And had this presumptuous attempt of the Fol. 165
Hollanders met with a King, or in times of another temper, it would not, it is
like, have been so silently connived at.] Most truly spoken, this action of the
Hollanders being one of the greatest, and unsufferablest affronts, which ever
was pu^ by any Nation on a King of England. I have been told, that complaint
being made of King James, of the barbarous Butchery at Amboyna, he fell into a
terrible rage, throwing his Hat into the fire, and then stamping on it, and
using all the signs of outrageous Passion; but when Time and Sleep had taken
off the edge of his Fury, he told the Merchants who attended his answer, That
it was then no time to quarrel with the Hollanders, of whom he hoped to make
some use for restoring the Palsgrave to his lawful Patrimony. King Charles
might make the same answer on this new occasion, he had his head and his hands
too, so full of the Scots, that he had no time to quarrel with the Hollanders,
though certainly, if he had then presently turned his Fleet upon the
Hollanders, (wherein, no question but the Spaniard would have sided with him)
he had not only rectified his honor, in the eye of the world, but might
thereby have taught the Scots a better lessen of Obedience, then he had brought
them to, by the great preparations which he made against them. But this I look
on in the Hollanders, as one of the Consequents or eff^cts of the Scottish
darings, for if the Scots who were his Subjects, durst be so bold as to baffle
with him, why might not they presume a little on his patience, who were his
confederates and Allies, in husbanding an advantage of so great a concernment;
and having veiled his Crown to the Scots and English, why might he not veil it
to them his good friends and neighbors?

At this close and secret Council, December Fol. 167.
5. it was agreed that his Majesty should call a Parliament to assemble, April
the 13th.] This secret Council did consist of no more then three, that is, the
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and (who must
needs be at the end of every business) the Marquess of Hamilton. By these it
was agreed, that the King should be moved to call a Parliament, the intimation
of it to be presently made; but the Parliament it self not to be assembled
till the middle of April. In giving which long intervall, it was chiefly aimed
at, that by the reputation of a Parliament so near approaching, the King might
be in credit to take up Money, wherewith to put himself into a posture of
War, in case the Parliament should fail him; but then the inconvenience was
as great on the other side, that intervall of four Months time, giving the
discontented party opportunity to unite themselves, to practice on the Shires
and Buroughs, to elect such members, as they should recommend unto them, and
finally, not only to consult, but to conclude on such particulars, which they
intended to insist on when they were assembled. And though it be extreme
ridiculous for me to shoot my Fooles-bable in so great a business, in which
such wise men did concur; yet give me leave to speak those thoughts which I
had of that advice from the first beginning, reckoning it always both unsafe
and unseasonable, as the times then were. I looked upon it as unsafe, in regard
that the last Parliament being dissolved in so strange a rupture, the Closets
of some Members searched, many of them Imprisoned, and some F^ned, it was not
to be hoped but that they would come thither with revengefull thoughts: and
should a breach happen between them and the King, and the Parliament be
dissolved upon it* as it after was, the breach would be irreparable, as indeed
it proved. I looked upon it as unseasonable also, in regard that Parliaments
had been so long discontinued, and the people lived so happily without them,
that very few took thought who should see the next; and (...) that, the
neighboring Kings and States beheld the King with greater veneration then they
had done ^ormerly, as one that could stand on his own legs, and had scrued up
himself to so great power, both by Sea and Land, without such discontents and
brabbles as his Parliaments gave him. But whatsoever it was in it self, either
safe or seasonable, I am sure it proved neither to the men who adv^sed the
calling of it, unless it were to Hamilton only, of which more hereafter.

Yet the King was willing to allow them Fol. 168.
all the fair dealing he in honor could, hoping to gain upon them by the
sweetness of his carriage, but all would not do.] And it is marvel he should
hope it, there are some men of so untractable nature, ut eorum superbiam
frustra per modestiam and obsequium effugeris, that neither modesty nor
obsequiousness can get ground upon them. A Presbyterian and a Scot, are not
won by favors, and he that does endeavor ^t, does but lose his labor. Nor
could the King be ignorant, of the hard temper of the men whom he had in
hammering. I have been told that when the Archbishop of Saint Andrews came to
take his leave of him, then setting forwards toward Scotland, he told him
plainly, that by the long experience which he had of that Nation, for the space
of sixty years and upwards, he knew them to be a people of so cross a grain,
that they were lost by favors, and gained by punishments; and therefore that
he m^ not hope to win upon them by fair dealing, or by the sweetness of his
disposition, as my Author terms it, but must resolve to reduce them to their
duty, by such ways of power, as God had then put into hi^ hands. Which
counsel, if the King had followed, when he was in the head of that gallant
Army, the Scots being then so inconsiderable and so ill appointed, that they
had not three thousand Muskets in all their Army (as I have been in^ormed by
persons of great worth and quality) he had then put an end both to their
Insolences, and his own great Troubles. And hereunto accords one of our
modern wits in these following Verses.

Not Gold, nor acts of Grace, it is Steel must tame
The stubborn Scot; Princes that would reclaim
Rebels by yiedling, do like him, or worse,
Who sadled his own back to shame his horse.
They invited and procured to their service Ibid.
many Commanders from Holland, who still kept their places there, though such
Officers as betook themselves to the Kings Employment, were instantly
cashiered.] ^his was poor pay for so great a courtesy as the King had done
them, by suffering them to beat the Spaniards on his own coasts, under his
protection, and being within the compass of the Kings Chambers, as the Seamen
phrase it, but natuvale est odesse quem laeseris: It is a natural thing (says
Tacitus) to hate the man whom we once have wronged. Nor do men think
themselves safe for an injury done, but by disobliging the wronged party, from
taking revenge, by heaping more injuries upon him. Nor was this all the injury
which the Hollanders offered to the King in the course of this business. They
furnished the Scots with Arms and Ammunition to maintain their War, and
that too for the most part, (contrary to their wonted customs) without ready
money. But the truth is, they had some reason to deal^ thus courteously with
the Scots. It had been once their own case, and so let them go.

To which I answer, true it is, he had too Fol. 182.
much, and too long favored the Romish Faction, but as upon what account it
was he favored them, is uncertain.] Our Author here acquits the Archbishop
from the Popish Faith, but leaves him under a suspicion of favoring the Popish
Faction; which in a man who cannot tell on what account he favors it, may be
thought uncharitable. But both King James and King Charles in several
Declarations, and in their several Answers to Parliament Petitions give this
reason for it; that is to say, that by showing some favors to the Papists
here, they might obtain the like favors for such Protestants as lived in the
Dominions of Popish Princes. And unto this, which was indeed the greatest
motive unto those indulgencies, which had been granted to the Papists by those
two King^: another might be added in justifica^ion of the Archbishop, if he
showed any such favors to the Popish Faction, as he stands here charged with:
which is, that seeing the Puritanes grown so strong, even to the endangering of
our Peace, both in Church and State, by the negligence and remissness of the
former Government, he thought it necessary to show some countenance to the
Papists, that the balance being kept even between the parties; the Church and
State might be preserved (as indeed they were) in the greater safety. And this
appears to be his chief inducement to it, in regard that when the Protestant
p^rty was grown strong enough, to stand and go without such Crutches, he then
declared himself openly against that Faction, as our Author ingenuously
informs us, in that which follows.

He tampered indeed to introduce some Ibid.
Ceremonies bordering upon superstition, disused by us, and abused by them;
from whence the Romanist^ collected such a disposition in him to their Tenets,
as they began to cry him up for their Proselite. In this passage there are many
things to be considered, first that the Ceremonies which the Archbishop
tampered to introduce, are not here said to be superstitious, but only to
border upon superstition. Secondly, that those Ceremonies are said to be
disused, which shows that they were still in force, though not still in use,
as our Author tells us of the Statute concerning Knighthood. Thirdly, that
these Ceremonies ^d been abused by them of the Church of Rome, and therefore
being but abused, might lawfully be restored to the Primitive use, for Abusus
non tollit usum, as the old rule is. Fourthly, that if the Romanists upon these
presumptions cry him up for theirs, it was most ignorantly done, there being
nothing which more tended to their destruction, then the introducing of some
Ceremonies, which by late negligence were disused. And this was the opinion of
the most understanding men amongst them. For I have heard from a person of
known Nobility, that at his being at Rome, with a Father of the English
College, one of the Novices came in, and told him with a great deal of joy,
that the English were upon returning to the Church of Rome, that began to set
up Altars, and to officiate in their Copes, to adorn their Churches, and paint
the picture of the Saints in their Chancell windows. To which the old Father
made reply with some indignation, that he talked like an ignorant Novice, that
these proceedings rather tended unto the ruin, then advancement of the
Catholic Cause; that by this means the Church of England coming nearer to the
ancient usages, the Catholics there would sooner be drawn off to them, then
any more of that Nation would fall off to Rome.

Whereof (that is to say, the Dissolution Fol. 184.
of the Parliament) many laid the blame upon the Bishop of Canterbury.] Though
many laid the blame on him, yet all the blame was not laid on him, some part
thereof being laid upon the Earl of Strafford, but on neither rightly: both of
them avowing in their Answers to that part of their Charge in the following
Parliament, that it was done by the general vote of the Privy Council, not a
man dissenting. Certain I am, that the Archbishop was so far from having any
such thoughts, on Monday morning, May 4. being the day before that unhappy
accident, that he was taking care to provide some materials in a business
which concerned the Church, of which he was resolved to speak in the House of
Peers, on the Wednesday following. Some say that this Dissolution was
precipitated upon some intelligence, that the House of Commons meant that day
to vote against the War with Scotland, then which there could be nothing more
destructive to the Kings affairs. And it was probable enough that it was so
meant. For first, the Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom, does declare
no less, where it is said, that the People were like to close with the King,
in satisfying his desire of Money, but that withal they were like to blast
their malicious design against Scotland, they being very much indisposed to
give any countenance to that War: And Secondly, we find that House to be
highly magnified ^in a Scottish Pamphlet, called the Intentions of the Army, for
their pious zeal in crossing the intended War, and denying any countenance
and assistance toward it. But whatsoever the truth is, most sure I am, that it
was secretly muttered about the Court the night before, that Hamilton had
prevailed with the King to dissolve the Parliament; who playing (as he used to
do) with both hands at once, did with the one, pull back the Commons by his
party there, from all compli^nce with the King, and with the other thrust the
King forwards to dissolve that meeting: that by this means the Kings affairs
being more embroyled then they were before, he might confirm the Scots, and
confound the English, and thereby raise himself to the point he aimed at. A
sad and unfortunate day it was, and the news so unpleasing unto the Author of
these papers whosoever he be, that being brought him by a friend, whilst he was
writing some dispatches, it so astonished him (though he had heard some inkling
of it the night before) that suddenly the pen fell out of his hand, and long it
was, before he could recollect his spirits to return an answer: Having thus
said, I should proceed from the dissolving of the Parliament, to the continuing
of the Convocation; but I must first remove a block which lies in my way: our
Author tells us that

This Archbishops Predecessor Penultime, Ibid.
was Dr. Whitgift.] Whereas indeed it was not Dr. Whitgift, but Dr. Bancroft,
who was the penultimate and last Predecessor saving one unto the Archbishop;
Dr. Bancroft coming in between Whit. gift and Abbot, as any who have looked
into these affairs cannot choose but know:

This Convention was not more unhappily Ibid.
dissolved than another was continued. That is, as a witty Gcntleman said well,
a new Synod made of an old Convocation.] The witty Gentleman here meant was Sir
Edward Deering, who pleased himself exceedingly in one of his witty Speeches
(but made withal good sport to most knowing men) in descantin^ on a Synod and
a Convocation; the one being a Greek word, the other originally Latin, but
both of the same sense and signification: A Provincial Synod, being no other
then a Convocation of the Clergy of the Provinces of York^, or Canterbury; and
the Convocation of the Clergy of both Provinces together, being nothing else
but a National Synod. So that it was the same Synod, and the same Convocation
(call it which you will) as before it was, and not a new Synod, made of an old
Convocation, as the witty Gentleman would have it. A Gentleman he was, more
witty then wise, but more proud then either; one of sufficient Learning to
adorn a Gentleman, but very ill employed in disgracing the Clergy, considering
that the most worthy of his Ancestors was of that Profession, and himself
allied unto it by some mixed relations. But see how ill this Gentleman sped with
his too much wit, being the first that threw Dirt into the Face of the
Archbishop, and preferred the first Information which was brought against him;
he after flew so high in his commendations (in the Preface to his Book of
Speeches) that neither Heylyn whom the Scottish Pamphleters (in their Laudencium
Autocatachrisis) call his Grac^s Herald, nor Pocklington, nor Dowe, nor any of
his own Chaplains, in any of their Speeches of him, or addresses to him, ever
went so farr^. Having propounded to the House in that witty Speech which he
made against the Canons and Convocation, that every one that had a hand in
making those Canons should come unto the Bar of the House of Commons with a
Candle in one hand, and a Book in the other, and there give fire to his own
Canons, he was so far from seeing it done, that on the contrary, he saw (within
a little more then a twelve month after) the Collection of his witty Speeches
condemned by that House unto the fire, and burnt in several places by the
Public Hangman. And finally, having in another of his witty Speeches defamed
the Cathedralls of this Kingdom, and that too with so foul a mouth, as if he
had licked up all the filth of foregoing Libels, to vomit it at once upon them,
he made it his earnest suit not long after to be Dean of Canterbury: which
being denied him by the King, in a great discontent he returned to the
Parliament, though he hought good to put some other gloss upon it in his
Declaration. But of this witty Gentleman we said enough. Proceed we now unto
our Author, who tells us of this new-made Synod, that

By a new Commission from the King, Ibid.
it was empowered to sit still.] No such matter verily, the new Commission
which he speaks of gave them no such power. The Writ by which they (...) first
called, and made to be a Convocation, gave them power to si^; and by that Writ
they were to sit as a Convocation, till by another Writ proceeding from the
like Authority they were dissolved and licensed to return to their several
homes. The Commission, subsequent to that, gave them power to Act, to Propose,
Deliberate and conclude upon such Canons and Constitutions, as they conceived
conducible to the Peace of the Church. And such a Commission they had granted
at their first assembling. But being there was a clause in that Commission,
that it should last no longer, then during the Session of that Parliament; and
that the King thought good to continue the Convocation, till they had finished
all those matters which they had in treaty: his Majesty gave order for a new
Commission to be issued out of the same tenor with the former, but to expire
upon the signification of his Majesty's pleasure. I have been told that it was
some time, before some of the Members of the lower House of Convocation, could
be satisfied in the difference between the Writ, and the Commisston, though one
of the company had fully opened and explained the same unto them: which being
made known to the Archbishop, and by him to the King, it was proposed to the
Lord Finch, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, the Earl of Manchester, Lord
Privy Seal, Sir Edward Littleton, chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Sir John
Banks Attorney General, Sir Robert Heath, and Sir Ralph Whitfield the Kings
Sergeants at Law; who on the 10. of May, subscribed a paper with their hands,
to this effect, That the Convocation being called by the Kings Writ, was to
continue till it were dissolved by the Kings Writ, notwithstanding the
dissolution of the Parliament. Upon the readi^g of this paper, in the lower
House of Convocation, and the satisfaction there by given to all contrary
scruples, they went on to their business, not as a new Synod made of an old
Convocation, (quoth the wit^y Gentleman) but as an old Synod armed with a new
Commission. What they did there we shall see anon, but with what danger they
sat there, I shall tell you now: The dissolving of the Parliament having bred
such discontentments, some papers posted up by Lilborne, so inflamed the
Apprentices, and the Riot upon Lambeth House, created such a terror in the
Members of the Convocation, that the King was feign to set a guard about
Westminster Abbey, for the whole time of their sitting. Poor men, to what a
distress were they brought? in danger of the Kings displeasure if they ros^,
of the Peoples fury if they sat; in danger of being beaten up by Tumults while
they were at the work, of being beaten down by the following Parliament, when
the work was done, and after all, obnoxious to the lash of censorious tongues
for their good intendments. For notwithstanding their great care, that all
things might be done with decency, and to edification, every one, even our
Author himself, must have his blow at them. And first, he strikes at the O^th
enjoined in the sixth Canon, for pre^ervation of the Doctrine and Discipline of
the Church here by L^w established. But to make sure work of it, that the blow
may come home indeed, he prepares his way with a discourse against Episcopacy
it self, for maintenance whereof (amongst other things) that Oath was framed,
telling us positively, that

Bishops and Presbyters in Scripture Ibid.
phrase are of eq^ivalent import, and denote the selfsame persons without the
least distinction. They whom Holy Text calls Bishops, having an Identity, a
s^enesse of Name, of Ordination, of Office, of all qualifications necessary to
that Office, with Presbyters.] I have heard that when Cornelius Burges, was to
go out Doctor, he would needs take upon him to answer the Divinity Act; but
did it so unluckily, and with such a plentiful want of understanding in the
terms of Logic, that Doctor Prideaux said openly to him, Tu possis been
pradicare, sed non potes been disputare, that he might possibly be a good
Preacher, though he were but a very sorry Disputant. The like may be said of
our Author (...) so, when he plai^ the Historian, in relating of such things,
as are buil^ upon good intelligence, he does it very well, few better; but when
he comes to show his opinion, in a matter controverted, and to give his reasons
for the same, he does it very ill, none worse. For first, I do not believe
that our Author can easily prove Presbyters and Bishops to be of equivalent
import, or comprehended under the same name in the Holy Scripture. But
secondly, granting that they be, who that pretends to Logic, can dispute so
lamely, as from a Community of names, to infer an Identity or samen^sse in
the thing so named, which is the ground our Author builds on. Kings are called
Gods in holy Scripture, I have said ye are Gods, Psalm. 82. 6. and God does
fr^quently call himself by the name of King: yet if a man should thence
infer, that from this Community of names, there a^iseth an Identity or
samenesse between God and the King, he might be worthily condemned for so great
a Blasphemer. S. Peter calls our Savior Christ by the name of Bishop* and
himself a Presbyter or Priest (an Elder, as most unhandsomly our English reads
it) the Bishop of your Soule^, 1 Pet. 2. 25. I who am also an Elder, 1 Pet.
ver. 1. yet were it a sorry piece of Logic to conclude from hence, that there
is no distinction between an Apostle, and an Elder, the Prince of the Apostles,
and a Simple Presbyter, or between Christ the supreme Pastor of his Church, and
every ordinary B shop; And thirdly, taking i^ for granted that Bishops have an
Identity or samenesse in Name, Office, Ordination, and Qualification, with
Presbyters, as our Author tells us they have, it will not follow convertibly
that Presbyters have the like Identity, or samenesse of Qualification,
Ordination* Name and Office, which the Bishop has. My reason is, because a
Bishop being first Regularly and Canonically to be made a Priest, before he
take the order and degree of a Bish^p, has in him all the Qualifications, the
Ordination, Name and Office which a Presbyter has; and something farther
superadded, as well in point of Order as of Juvisdiction, which every Presbyter
has not, so that though every Bishop be a P^iest or Presbyter, yet every
Presbyter not a Bishop. To make this clear by an examp^e in the Civil
Government, when Sir Robert C^cill Knight, and principal Secretary of State,
was made first Earl of Salisbury, and then Lord Treasurer, continuing Knight
and Secretary as he was before: it might be said, that he had an Identity or
samenesse in Name, Office, Order and Qualification, with Sir John Herbert the
other Secretary; yet could this be said reciprocally of Sir John Herbert,
because there was something super* added to Sir Robert Cecill, namely the
dignity of an Earl, and the Office of Lord Treasurer, which the other had not.
So true is that of Lactantius an old Christian writer, Adeo argumenta ex
absurdo petita ineptos habent excitus; So ordinary a thing it is for Arguments
built upon weak grounds, to have worse conclusions. Episcopacy being thus
knocked down with a painted club, our Author goes on to tell us what great, but
unprofitable pains were taken in defense thereof, telling us, that though the
Press swarmed with Books, setting forth the right upon which it was founded,
yet all advantaged them little. How so? because, says he,

Such a prejudice there was against them, Ibid.
and the truth contended for lay then so deep, as few had perspicuity enough to
(...) it.] That the Press swarmed with Books* purposely writ about this time,
in defense of the Divine Right of Episcopacy, I remember not; but sure I am, it
swarmed with many pestilent and seditious Libels, in which the B shops were
defamed, and the calli^g questioned: In answer whereunto (if any of them were
thought worthy to receive an answer) it is possible that some^ what may be said
upon the by, for Declaration of that Divine Right on which it was founded. Nor
was this any new claim never made before, but frequently insisted on by the
Bishop, and those that writ in defense of Bishops, in Queen Elizabeth's time; by
Doctor Bancroft (then Bishop of London) in the Conference at Hampton Court, and
that too, in the presence of Doctor Reinolds (incomparably the most Learned man
of the opposite party) who never contradicted him for it, nor confuted him in
it; and finally by Bishop Laud in the High Commission, which gave occasion of
matter to some public Libellors, but never any serious and solid debate till
after the making of these Canons: but be the title never so good, the asserting
of it never so frequent, the Books by which it was maintained never so learned,
and the reasons in those Books never so convincing; yet if once prejudice come
in to persuade the contrary, it is no marvel if all men had not perspicacity
enough to discern the truth. It is an old Maxim in Philosophy, that intus
existens prohibet ali^num; never more truly verified, than when men come with
prejudice and prepossession to a point in Controversy. But howsoever, though
some men blind with prejudice had not the perspicacity of discerning truth,
yet some others had; unless the argument be good, that because God lays such
a spirit of insalvation upon some men, that seeing they should see but should
not perceive, therefore all other men must be like the Idols in the Psalmist
which have eyes and see not. Yet for the opening of the eyes, as well of men
willing to be informed as wilfully blinded, no (...) had the Smectymnians
revived the Controversy, but presently the Divine Right of Episcopacy was
maintained and published by Dr. Hall then Bishop of Exeter in his Answer and
Reply to their several Tractates, by Churchman in the History of Episcopacy,
by Dr. Tailor in a Book, entitled, Episcopacy by Divine Right, by several
Tracts of Dr. Hammond both in English and Latin. But lest these should be as
much suspected of partiality, as others of prejudice, we shall find the like
declared in a Book writ purposely on that subject by Sir Thomas Aston Knight
and Baronet, and in the Aerea Mastiques of John Their Gent. men no may
interessed (but only by their good affections) in the Churches quarrels. And
some there are not altogether of so good affections, who have done the like.
And first the Lincolne-shire Minister, so much cried up for writing against
Altars, or rather against placing the Communion Table Altar-wise, does affirm
expressly, page 64. that the calling of Bishops is founded upon Apostolical,
and (for all the essential parts thereof) on Divine Right. And secondly, the
Lord Faulkland (no great friend to Bishops, as was showed before) in a Tract of
his against Mr. Henderson before he squinted toward the Court, does affirm as
positively, that there is more to be found for Bishops and Episcopacy in the
holy Scripture, than either for the Lords day, or for Infant Baptism. And
thirdly, we shall find, the learned Mr. John Seldom is not totally against us
in this particular, as appears by his retortion of the Argument of Mr.
Grimston in the House of Commons. Mr. Grimstons Argument was this, 1. That
Bishops are Jure Divino is of question. 2. That Archbishops are not Jure Divino
is out of question: 3. That Ministers are Jure Divino, there is no question.
Now if Bishops which are questioned, whether Jure Divino, and Archbishops which
out of question are not Jure Divino, shall suspend Ministers that are Jure
Divino, I leave it to you Mr. Speaker. Which Mr. S^lden (whether with greater
wit or scorn it is hard to say) thus retorted on him, 1. That the Convocation
is Jure Divino is a question. 2. That Parliaments are not Jure Divino is out of
question. 3. That Religion is Jure Divino there is no question. Now Mr. Speaker
that the Convocation, which is questioned, whether Jure Divino, and
Parliaments, which out of question are not Jure Divino, should meddle with
Religion which questionless is Jure Divino, I leave to you Mr. Speaker. And so
much for that: our Author now draws toward the Oath, which (by reason of an
etc. carelessly left in by him who transcribed it for the Press) he falls on
with as much severity, as our witty Gentleman did with scorns, saying of that
etc. That,

It was of so mysterious import, a^ the very Ibid.
imposers, much less the Jurors were not able to decipher what it meant.] And
of a mysterious import i^ had been indeed, if not restrained and limited by the
following words. The whole clause in the Oath stands thus: Nor will I ever give
my consent to alter the Government of this Church by Archbishops, Bishops,
Deans, Archdeacons, etc. as it stands now established, and as by right it ought
to stand. In the construction of which Text the etc. as it now stands is a
mere impertinency; for being left in, it signifies nothing, in regard of the
restriction following; and being left out, the sense is current and complete
without it. And this, our Author, and the witty Gentleman, and he that pulled
down the Cross in S. Paul's Churchyard, and others which writ against this
Oath could not choose but see; but that they were not willing to see any thing
which might make against them. But whereas our Author tells us, that neither
the imposers nor the Jurors (that is to say, neither the men that voted to the
Oath, nor they that were required to take it) were able to decipher what it
meant, I find by that, that our Author has talked with very few of that
Convocation. The truth is, that in many Canons which were made before this (as
all of them in a manner were) there was a particular enumeration of all persons
vested with any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, that is to say, Archbishops,
Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, Deans and Chapters, and other persons having
peculiar or exempt Jurisdiction: which having been repeated distinctly and
particularly in such of the Canons as were first made, was in the first
asserting of this Canon for avoiding of a tautologie so often iterated, cut off
with this etc. with an intention nevertheless to make the enumeration perf^ct
(and consequently to expunge this etc.) before it came to be engrossed. But the
King being weary of the charge and clamor, which the keeping of a Guard on the
Convocation did expose Him to, did hasten them to a conclusion by so many
Messages, brought by Sir HenVane and others, that in that haste this unlucky
etc. was forgotten, and so committed to the Press accordingly. But this etc.
is not all which our Author quarrels in the O^th, telling us next, That

To exact an Oath of dissent from Civil Ibid.
Establishments in such things of indifferency, was an affront to the very
fundamentalls of Government,] Our Author taking it for granted that the
government of the Church by Bishops is a thing of indifferency (which is a
clearer evidence of his own opinion in this point than we had before) is much
aggrieved that the ^lergie should bind themselves by Oath not to consent to
any alteration of it; and this he calls an affront to the Fundamentals of
Government; but on what reason, as he does not tell us, so for my part I am not
able to conceive. It is indeed an affront to Government, no^ to submit or yield
obedience unto civil Establishments, when made and legally established; but it
is no affront not to give consent to any such establishments while they are in
treaty: for then the liberty of assenting or* dissenting, of yea or nay would
be taken away from every Member in the Houses of Parliament, and every man must
give cons^nt to every Bill which is offered to him. Besides there were but few
of the Convocation whose consent was likely to be asked, when any change of
Church Government should be set on foot, so that their dissenting or assenting
was not much material, but as by their readiness of consenting to such
Innovations in the public Government, they might encourage others to proceed
against it. Here then is no affront to Government, much less to the
Fundamentals of it, the O^th not binding any man not to yield obedience, but
not to give consent to such alteration, no more than it is now at this present
time, for many a wellminded man to live quietly and peaceably under the present
Government of the Civil State, who never gave consent to the present change.
But so (I trow) it was not in the solemn Covenant, in which it was not thought
enough to bind men to submit to such alterations as were then contriving, but
actually to endeavor the ^xtirpation of the whole Prelaci^, that is to say, the
Government of the Church by Archbishops, Bishops, D^ans, Deans and Chapters,
Arc^deacons, and all other Officers which depend upon them. Nor was this
^quired of the Clergi^ only which had before taken an Oath of Canonical
obedience to their several and resp^ctive Bishops, but even of the Bishops,
Deans, Archd^acons, and Members of Capitular bodies, who having took a former
Oath for the preservation of the Lands and Privileges of their several
Church^, must by this Covenant be bound to endeavor their own extirpation, and
the subversion of those Churches, and consequently every one of them must be a
F^lo de se, as our Lawyers phrase it. Our Author has not done with the Oath,
for he finds fault n^xt.

That the Juror therein declares he swears Fol. 1^.
willingly, to which he was to be constrained under the highest penalties.]
This is a grievous crime indeed, but such (if any crime it be) as the high
Court of Parliament has been guilty of, in drawing up the Oath of Allegiance,
in the third year of King James: In which the party is to swe^re, that he
^akes that recognition, not only heartily and truly, but also Willingly (...)
and yet the ^aking of that O^th is imposed on all the Subjects under several
Penalties, if any of them should refuse it. A crime it is in both or neither*
and therefore our Author has proceeded with great partiality, in faulting that
as ill done in the Convocation which passed with so great judgment and
authority in the Court of Parliamen^. Our Author having done with the Oath,
goes back to the Canon about Socinianisme, which he excepts against, because

As the Scots condemned the Arminian Ibid.
Tenets, without defining what those Tenets were, so did these the Socinians,
not declaring wherein they were culpable.] I am loath to think our Author to be
a Socinian, though his advocating for them in such manner may invite me to it;
for otherwise the Case he puts is extremely different. The Arminian Tenets
were but few, reduced to five, and not increased in the long agitation of those
weighty Controversies, and so might easily have been reckoned and defined when
the Scots condemned them: But So^inianisme is a complication (as the Canon
calls it) of so many Her^sies, that the bare specification and recital of them
(which must be made by searching into their Books and Papers) might have taken
up the greatest part of the time which the Convocation had to spend in all
other businesses. It was as much as they could do to condemn it under that
general Notion, to interdict the bringing in* printing, and studying such
Books as contained those Heresies. And finally, to lay such a brand upon it, as
men might know how much these Tenets were abhorred by the Church of England.
And yet for all this great care they had little thanks, not only ou^ Author
being displ^ased with their proceedings, but the rise, growth, and danger of
Socinianisme was not long after charged on the Archbishop and diverse eminent
Members of that Convocation, by one Mr. Cheynell, and that too in a printed
Pamphlet written to that purpose, Anno 1643. So hard a thing it is to keep a
good conscience, and to please all parties. From this our Author passes to the
Benevolence which the Clergy granted to the King in that Convoc^tion, being of
Four shillings in the Pound to be paid yearly for six years next following.

Which was beheld (says he) as an act of Ibid.
very high presumption, and an usurpation upon the pr^minence of Parliament, no
Convocation* having power to grant any Subsidies o^ aid without confirmation
from the Lay-Senate.] With ignorance enough in them that beheld it so* or
looked upon it as an Act of very high presumption; The English Clergy being
the greatest slaves which the Sun ever shined on, if they could not give away
their own without leave from others. But whereas our Author puts it down for a
Rule in Government, That no Convocation has power to grant any Subsidies or
aid without confirmation from the Parliament; I must let him (and all that
shall read him) know, that never was any rule more false, nor more weakly
grounded; The Clergy in Convocation having as much power to give away the
money of the Clergy, by whom they are chose to that employment; as the Commons
in Parliament have to give the money of the Cities, Towns, and Counties, for
which they serve. For in the choosing of the Clerks for the Convocation there
is an Instrument drawn up and sealed by the Clergy, in which they bind
themselves to the Archdeacon or Archdeacons of their several Diocesses, upon
the pain of forfeiting all their lands and goods, se ratum, gratum and acceptum
habere, quicquid dicti procuratores sui dixerint, fecerint, vel constituerint,
that is to say, to allow, stand to, and perform whatsoever their said Clerks or
Proctors shall say, do^, or condescend unto on their behalf. Greater authority
than this, as the Commons have not, so why the Clergy in the Convocation
should not make use of this authority, as they see occasion, I can find no
reason. Nor is it a speculative authority only, and not reducible unto
practice and authority which was then in force, but not then in use, as our
Author has distinguished in another place; but very safely praecedented in
Qu^en Elizabeth's tim^. For in the year 1585, (if I remember it right, as I
think I do) the Convocation having given one Subsidy confirmed by Parliament,
and finding that they had not done sufficiently for the Queens occasions, did
after add a Benevolence or Aid of two shillings in the pound to be levied
upon all the Clergy, and to be levied by such Synodicall Acts and
Constitutions as they digested for that purpose, without having any recourse to
the Parliament for it; which Synodical Acts and Constitutions the Clergy of
this present Convocation followed word for word, not doubting but they had as
good authority to do it now, as the Convocation in Q. Elizabeth's time h^d to
do it then; and so undoubtedly they had, whatsoever either our Author here, or
any other Enemy of the Churches power can allege against it. Our Author has
now done with the Convocation, and leads us on unto the War levied by the
Scots, who had no sooner made an entrance, but the King was first assaulted by
a Petition from some Lords of England, bearing this inscription,

To the Kings most excellent Majesty. The Fol. 189.
humble Petition of your Majesty's most loyal and most obedient Subjects,
whose names are underwritten, in behalf of themselfs and diverse others.]
Concerning this we are to know, that a little before the Scots fell into
England, they published a Pamphlet, called the Intentions of the Army; in which
it was declared, That they resolved not to lay down Arms till the Reformed
Religion were settled in both Kingdoms upon surer grounds, the Causers and
Abettors of their present Troubles brought to public Justice, and that Justice
to be done in Parliament: and for the Causers of their Troubles they reckoned
them in general to be the Papists, Prelates and their Adherents, but more
particularly the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Lieutenant of Ireland. In
Correspondence hereunto comes this Petition, subscribed by six Earls, one
Viscount, and four Barons, being no other than a superstructure upon that
foundation, a Descant only on that Plain Song. And presently on the back of
that, another is posted to the same effect from the City of London: So that the
clouds which gathered behind Him in the South were more amazement to the King
than this Northern Tempest, The Petition of the Londoners, (that we may see how
well the business was contrived) was this that follows,

To the Kings most excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition of your Majesty's loyal Subjects the Citizens of London.
Most gracious Sovereign,
BEing moved by the duty and obedience which by Religion and Laws your
Petitioners owe unto your sacred Majesty, they humbly present unto your
Princely and pious consideration, the several and pressing grievances
following, viz:

I. The great and unusual impositions upon Merchandise imported and exported.
II. The urging and levying of Ship Money, notwithstanding which, both
Merchants, their goods, and ships have been taken and destroyed by Turks and
Pirates. III. The multitude of Monopolies, Patents, and Warrants, whereby trade
in the City, and other parts of this Kingdom is much decayed. IV. The sundry
Innovations in matters of Religion; the Oath and Canons newly imposed by the
late Convocation, whereby your Petitioners are in danger to be deprived of
their Ministry. V. The concourse of Papists and their habitation in London,
and the Suburbs, whereby they have more means and opportunities of plotting and
executing their designs against the Religion established. VI. The sudden
calling and sudden dissolution of Parliaments, without addressing of your
Subjects grievances. VII. The imprisonment of diverse Citizens for not payment
of Ship Money, and other impositions, and the prosecution of others in the
Star. Chamber for non conformity to commands in Patents and Monopolies,
whereby trade is restrained. VIII. The great danger your sacred Person is
exposed unto in the present War, and the various fears that have seized upon
your Petitioners, and their Families, by reason thereof. Which grievances and
fears have occasioned so great a stop and destruction in trade, that your
Petitioners can neither sell, receive, nor pay, as formerly, and tends unto the
utter ruin of the Inhabitants of this City, the decay of Navigation and
Clothing, and other Manufactures of this Kingdom.
Your Petitioners humbly conceiving the said grievances to be contrary to the
Laws of this Kingdom, and finding by experience that they are not redressed by
the ordinary Courts of Justice; do therefore most humbly beseech your Royal
Majesty to cause a Parliament to be summoned with all convenient speed,
whereby they may be relieved in the Premises.

And your Majesty's, etc.

The like Petitions there came also from other parts, according as the people
could be wrought upon to promote the business; which makes it the less ma^vell
that Petitions should come thronging in from all parts of the Kingdom (as soon
as the Parliament was begun) craving redress of the late general
exorbitancies both in Church and State, as Fol. 129. we are told by our Author.

And to deny the Sco^s any thing, considering Fol. 194.
their armed posture, was interprered the way to give them all.] In the
Intentions of the Army before mentioned, the Scots declared that they would
take up nothing of the Country people without ready money, and when that
f^iled, they would give Bills of Debt for the p^yment of it. But finding such
good correspondence, and such weak resistance after their en^ry into England,
they did not only spoil and plunder wheresoever they came, but would not
hearken to a Cessation of Arms, during the time of the Treaty then in
agitation, unless their Army were maintained at the charge of the English. And
this was readily yielded to, for fear (it seems) let by denying the Scots any
thing, we should give them all. I know ind^ed, that it is neither safe nor
prudent, to deny any reasonable request to an armed power, arma t^nti omnia dat
qui justa negat, as the Poet has it, and thus the story of David and Nabal
will inform us truly. But then it must be such a power which is able to extort
by force, tha^ those which they cannot otherwise procure by favor, which
whether the Scots were Masters of, I do more th^n question. Exceedingly cried
up they were, both in Court and City, as men of most unmatchable valor, and so
undoubtedly they were, till they found resistance; their Officers and
Commanders magnified both for wi^ and courage, the Common Soldiers looked on as
the Sons of Enoch, ^he English being thought as Grasse-hoppers in comparison of
them, which notwithstanding the Earl of Strafford (then General of the English
Army) would have given them battle, if the King had been willing to engage;
and signified by Letters to the Archbishop of Canterb^y, that he durst
undertake (upon the p^rill of his head) to send them back faster th^n they
came, but that he did not hold it concellable, as the case then stood. It is an
old saying, and a true, that the Lion is not so fierce as he is painted; nor
were the Scots such terrible fellows, as they were reported. For when they met
with any who knew how to (...) with them, they proved such Lions as the Boy saw
the Butcher carry by two and two together upon a Horse; repulsed with shame and
ignominy from the walls of Hereford, driven out of the field with foul
dishonor in the Fight on Marston-Moor, n^r York; totally routed by the
gallantry and conduct of one man in three several battails, in Lancashire, at
Dunbar, at Worcester, the command of their own Country taken from them, and
themselves made (...) to a people, whom they most despised. But (...) they
br^wed, so let them bake, for the thought is taken.

James E^rle of Montrosse having long Fol. 195
and faithfully adhered to the Covenanters, etc.] The reason of which adh^ring
to them, as he afterward averred unto the King was briefly this. At his
return from the Court of France, where he was Captain (as I take it) of the
Sootish guard, he had a mind to put himself into the Kings service, and was
advised to make his way by the Marquess of Hamilton; who knowing the gallantry
of the man, and fearing a competitor in his Majesty's favor, cunningly told
him, that he would do him a^y service, but that the King was so wholly given
up to the English, and so discountenanced and slighted the Scottish Nation,
that were it not for doing service for his Country (which the King intended to
reduce to the form of a Province) he could not suffer the indignities which
were put upon him. This done, he rep^es unto the King, tells him of the Earls
return from France, and of his purpose to attend him at the time appoint^d;
but that he was so powerful, so popular, and of such esteem among the Scots,
by reason of an old descent from the Royal Family, that if he were not nipped
in the bud (as we use to say) he might end anger the Kings interesse and
affairs, in Scotland. The E^rle being brought unto the King, with very great
demonstrations of affection, on the Marquesses part, the King without taking
any great notice of him, gave him his hand to kiss, and so turned aside: which
so confirmed in the truth of that false report, which Hamilton had delivered to
him, that in great displeasure and disdain, he makes for Scotland, where he
found who knew how to work on such humors, as he brought along with him, till
by seconding the information which he had from Hamilton, they had fashioned him
wholly to their will. How he fell off again, we are told by our Author.

Tuesday November the 3. being the day Fol. 196.
prefixed, and the Parliament sat, etc.] Touching this day there was a Letter
wrote to the Archbishop of Canterbury, advertising that the Parliament of the
twentieth year of Henry the Eighth, which began in the fall of Cardinal
Wolsey, continued in the diminution of the power and privileges of the Clergy,
and ended in the dissolution of the Abbeys, and Religious Houses, was begun on
the third day of November; and therefore that for good luck sake, he would move
the King to respite the first sitting of it, for a day or two longer. But the
Archbishop not he^ning to this advertisement, the Parliament had their first
sitting on Tuesday the third day of November, as our Author tells us: which
Parliament as it begun in the fall and ruin of the Archbishop himself, and was
continued in the total dissipation of the remaining rites and privileges of
the English Clergy; so did it not end till it had subverted the Episcopal
Government, dissolved all Capitular bodies, and left the Cathedralls of this
Land (not presently ruined I confess, but) without means to keep them up for
the time to come. I am no superstitious observer of days and times, and yet am
apt enough to think, that the beginning of an Enterprise in a lucky hour, may
much conduce to a fortunate and successful end. Certain I am, that Machiavel
has told us in the first book of his History of Flor^nce, that when Pope
Martin the third had besieged Furly (a chief town of Romondiola or Romagna)
Guido Bonatus (a man renouned unto this day for judicious Astrology) persuaded
the people of that City, that so soon as he gave them a token, and not before,
they should presently assault their Enemies, which they did accordingly, and
sped so well by the advice, that all their Enemies were slain, and the siege
removed. Our Author having thus named Tuesday for the day of the week, and the
third day of November for the day of the month, on which the Parliament began,
proceeds in telling us, that the day prefixed being come

The Parliament sat.] But where the Ibid.
Parli^ment sat, he tells us not, though there be all the reason in the
world why he should have told it: for who could rationally suppose that a
Parliament called at such a time, and on such an occacasion (that is to say,
the overrunning of the Northern parts of the Kingdom by a Scottish Army)
should be held at Westminster; when York (where the King was there in Person)
lay nearer to the danger, and the scene of action, and to the place of treaty
betwixt the Nations. These Reasons were sufficient to have moved the King to
hold this Parliament at York, and not at Westminster, had He known nothing of
the disaffections and engagements of the neighboring City, as He knew too
much. And He had some good presidents too, which might have added no small
weight to those weighty Reasons, for when King Edward the first was busy in
the Conquest of Wales He called His Parliament to Acton-Burnell, being in the
Marches of that Country; and when He turned His Forces to the Conquest of
Scotland, He called His Parliament to Carlisle, (if my memory fail me not)
being on the Borders of that Kingdom. Had the King made choice of the like
place for this present Parliament (which he did afterward endeavor to alter
when it was too late) he had undoubtedly prevented all those inconveniences (or
rather mischiefs) which the Pride, Purse, Faction, and tumul^uousness of the
Londoners did afterward enforce upon him. And yet as if he had not erred
enough in calling his Parliament so near London, the Commissioners for the
Treaty must also be brought thither by especial order, that they might have
the greater opportunity to inflame that City, and make it capable of any
impression, which those of the Scottish Nation, should think fit to imprint
upon them. For never were men Idolized there, as the Scotch Commissioners,
feasted, presented, complemented by all sorts of people; their lodgings more
frequented at the public times of Prayers, or Preachings, then ever were the
Houses of the Ambassadors of the Pop^sh Princes, by the opposite party. What
ensued hereupon, we shall find in our Author, when he comes to tell us, what
multitudes followed Alderman Pennington, and how many thousand hands subscribed
the Petition which the Alderman carried, against the Government of Bishops then
by Law established; what greater multitudes thronged down afterward to the
House of Parliament, to call upon the Peers for Justice on the Earl of
Strafford. The two main points which the Scottish Covenanters aimed at, in
bringing their Army into England. In order whereunto, the E^le of Strafford is
impeached of high Treason now. And

Thereupon requested from the Parliament Fol. 199.
House, and committed to the usher of the black rod.] Which was the least that
probably would be requ^sted upon such an Impeachment, and that being granted, a
question was raised amongst knowing men, whether the Earl of Strafford took his
accustomed wisdom and courage along with him, when he came to the Parliament.
Some think he failed in point of wisdom, in regard he could not choose but
know, that the Scots and scotizing English, had most infallibly resolved upon
his destruction; and that Innocence was no armor of proof against the fiery
darts of malicious power; that seeing such a storm hang over his head, he
rather should have kept himself in the English Army (being then under his
command) which he had gained upon exceedingly by his noble carriage, or have
passed over into Ireland, where the Army rested wholly at his Devotion; or have
transported himself to some foreign Kingdom, till fair wether here (in
reference to his own safety, and the public peace) might invite him home;
that it was no betraying of his Innocence to decline a trial, where partiality
held the Scales, and selfe-ends backed with power, and made blind with
Prejudice, were like to overballance Justice: that if sentence should be passed
against him for default of appearance (which was the worst that could befall
him) yet had he still kept his head on his shoulders until better times, and
in the mean time might have done his Master as good service in the Courts of
many foreign Princes, as if he were siitting in White Hall at the Council
table. On the other side it was alleged, that all these points had been
considered of, before his leaving of the Army; that whilst he lay so near the
Scots in the head of this Army, he had gained (as he thought) certain and
assured evidence that the Scots Army came not in, but by imitation; that there
was a confederacy made between the Heads of the Covenanters, and some of the
leading Members of both Houses, his most capital enemies, to subvert the
Government of the Church, and innovate in that of the Civil State; that he had
digested his intelligence in those particulars into the form of an Impeachment,
which he intended to have offered in the House of Peers, as soon as he had taken
his place amongst them; that Mr. Pym, whom it concerned as much as any, fearing
or knowing his intendments, followed him so close at the heels, and had his
Impeachment so ready in his mouth, that he was ready to give, and did give the
blow, before the Earl of Strafford could have time and leisure to effect his
purpose* This therefore being left undecided, it was said by others, that the
Earl showed not that praesentiam animi, that readiness of courage and
resolution which formerly had conducted him through so many difficulties, in
giving over his design; for though he lost the opportunity of striking the
first blow, yet he had time enough to strike the second, which might have been
a very great advantage to his preservation. For, had he offered his
Impeachment, and prosecuted it in the same pace and method, as that was which
was brought against him, it is possible enough, that the business on both
sides might have been hushed up without hurt to either. And for so doing he
wanted not a fair example in the second Parliament of this King, in which he
served for the County of York in the House of Commons, when the Earl of
Bristol being impeached of high Treason by the Kings Attorney, at the instance
and procu^ement of the Duke of Buckingham, retorted presently a Recrimination
or Impeachment against the Duke, and by that means, took off the edge of that
great adversary from proceeding further. This I remember to have been the
substance of some discourses which that time produced, how pertinent and well
grounded, must be left to the Readers judgment. Certain I am, it was much
wondered at by many, that a man of so great spirit and knowledge should yield
himself up so tamely, on a general Accusation only, without any particular Act
of Treason charged upon him, or any proof offered to make good that Charge, not
only to the loss of his liberty as a private person, but to the forfeiture of
his privilege as a Member of Parliament; all which points were so much
insisted not long after by Mr. Pym, and the rest of the Five Members when they
were under the like impeachment (though not so general as this) on the Kings
behalf. But being all these considerations were not thought of or passed over
by him, and that the Commons sped so well in their first attempt, it was not
wondered at, that they brought the Archbishop (within few weeks after) under the
like general Charge of Treason, or that he yie^ded without any opposition to
the like commitment: of whom our Author tells us, That a mixed accusation,
half Scotch, half English, was preferred against him,

And on the 18 ^e was voted guilty of Fol. 202.
high Treason, and committed to the Usher of the Black Rod.] To give the true
timeing of this business (which our Author does a little fail in, he may
please to know, that on Wednesday the 16 of December. the Canons being voted down
in the House of Commons (of which more hereafter) a Committee was appointed to
draw up a Charge against him; and the same day (not on the 17, as our Author)
he was named an Incendiary by the Scotch Commissioners, who promised to bring
in their Complaint against him on the morrow after, the Lord Paget being made
the Instrument to serve them in it. No complaint coming from the Scots on
Thursday, Mr. Hollis is sent up with the Impeachment on the Friday morning, and
presently came in the Charge of the Scotch Commissioners; upon the reading
whereof, he was committed to the custody of James Maxwell, Usher of the black
Rod, as our Author tells us. There he continued full ten weeks before any
particular Charge was brought against him, during which time he had gained so
much on the good opinion of Ginne Rider Mr. Maxwells Wife, that she was pleased
to say amongst some of her Gossips, That certainly he was a very devout and
religiou^ man, but one of the simplest Fellows to talk with that ever she knew
in all her life. On Friday Feb. 26. on the ten weeks end, the Charge before
spoken of was brought up by Sir Henry Vane the younger from the House of
Commons: And upon Monday March the first he was conveyed unto the Tower,
continuing in the state of a Prisoner from the first to the last above four
years before he came unto his last and fatal Trial. But it is time, that we
go back unto the place where we left our Author, and we shall find there,
that there was not greater care taken to commit this Bishop to the Tower, then
to release another from it; of which he says, that

Monday the 16 of November. the Lord Fol. 200.
Bishop of Lincoln was set free of his imprisonment in the Tower, upon the
suit of the House of Peers to His Majesty, and the next day, being a day of
Humiliation, he was brought into the Abbey Church by six Bishops, and
officiated there as Dean of Westminster before the Lords.] So shall it be done
unto the man whom the People honor. Never was man more honored for the
present both by Lords and Commons, his person looked upon as sacred, his words
deemed as Oracles; and he continued in this height, till having served their
turn against the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Earl of Strafford, he began
sensibly to decline, and grew at last the most hated man of all the Hierarchy.
But he was wise enough to foresee the change, and prepare himself for it: For,
I remember, that congratulating him for the high esteem, to which he had
attained in both Houses of Parliament; and representing to him the many
opportunities which he had thereby of doing service to the King, and good to
the Church: He told me, that he did not think that the Parliament had any
better affections for him than for the rest of his Brethren; that the
difference between them stood only thus, that some of them might be more hated
than he, but that he was not more beloved than any of them; And finally, (such
was the freedom he used with me) that all the courtes^e he expected from them,
was that which Poliphemus promised to Ulysses, that is to say, to eat him last
after he had devoured his fellows. How truly this was said the event has
proved.

It was unanimously voted by the Commons, Fol. 205.
That the Charge imposed upon the Subject for the providing and furnishing of
Ships, and the Assesments for raising of money for that purpose (commonly
called Ship Money) are against the Laws of the Realm.] Nor was it only voted
thus in the House of Commons, but afterward in the House of Peers, and all
proceedings in the Case both at the Council Table, the Star Chamber, and the
Courts of Justice declared null and void: yet for all this, the opinion of the
Legality of it was so fixed in the minds of many understanding men, that it
could not easily be removed: 1. In regard of the great learning and integrity
of the man, by whom it was first set on foot. 2. Because all the Judges had
subscribed unanimously to the Lawfulness of it in time of danger, of which
danger the King was declared to be the Judge. 3. Because being brought to a
public trial, after it had been argued by the Council on both sides in the
Courts of Justice, and by all the Judges in the Exchequer Chamber, there passed
a definitive sentence for it in behalf of the King. 4. Because voted down by
the Houses of Parliament in a mere arbitrary way, than was expected without
being brought to a review, neither the Kings Council being heard, nor the
Judges called to show the Reasons of their opinions. 5. Because it was ordered
by the House of Commons, that the Arguments of Justice Crook, and Justice
Hutton for the illegality thereof should be put in print: those of the other
eight Judges which were for the L^gallity of it, continuing suppressed; which
gave occasion to most men to think that there was more reason for it in those
Arguments than was thought fit to see the light. And last of all, because
notwithstanding all this care to vote down this Assesment, they were feign to
have recourse to the King, for obtaining of an Act of Parliament to secure them
from it for the time to come. In the mean time it was thought fit to impeach
the Judges of high Treason, that having such a rod over them, they might be
sure that nothing should be declared for Law, but as they would have it. Not
being satisfied in this Vote, I fear I shall find less satisfaction in that
that follows, that is to say, that

The Clergy in a Synod or Convocation Ibid.
has no power to make Canons, Constitutions, or Laws, to bind either Laity
or Clergy without a Parliament.] This is a new piece of State-doctrine never
known before, the Convocation having no dependence upon the Parliament, either
in the calling or dissolving of it, nor in the confirmation and authorizing of
the Acts thereof, but only on the King himself; and not upon the Kings sitting
in the Court of Parliament, but in his Palace or Court Royal wheresoever it
be. And this appears both by the Statute made in the 26 of Henry 8th, and the
constant practice ever since. But whereas it was voted also, that the Canons
are against the Fundamental Laws of this Realm, and against the Kings
Prerogative, etc. I am to tell my Author, that before the Canons were
subscribed, they were imparted to the King, and by Him communicated to the
Lords of the Privy Council, the Judges, and the Kings Council, learned in the
Laws of this Realm, being then attending, in the hearing of all which they were
read, and by all approved: which had been strange, if any thing tending unto
faction and sedition, or to the diminution of the Subjects property, and the
Kings prerogative, or otherwise against the known Laws of the Land, had been
found in them. And finally, whereas our Author does inform us, that this
censure passed upon the Canons, upon a full debating of the Cause on both
sides, I would feign know by whom it was debated on the behalf of the Clergy.
I have some reason to believe that none of the Clergy of that Convocation, who
best understood their own business, were called to the debating of it, or that
they did appear there, by their Council learned, sufficiently authorized, and
instructed to advocate for them; and therefore if any such debating was, it
must be managed either by some Members of their own House, or by some London
Ministers, purposely called out of the rest to betray the Cause; and be it
which of these it will, it is not to be doubt^d, but their Arguments were
either fi^ted to the sense of the House, or built on such weak promises, as
nothing but a Vote of Condemnation could ensu^ upon them. Nor was it thought
sufficient to decry the Canons, unless the Canonmakers were kept under by the
hand of terror; And therefore, as before, they impeached the Judges, so did
they Frame a Bill, for Fineing all the Clergy of that Convocation, according to
the place and station which they held therein: By this means keeping them in
such awe, that sew of them durst appear in maintenance of their own
Authority, or in opposing those encroachments, and Innovations, which day by
day were thrust upon them.

Toward which work our Nation was so Fol. 210.
auxiliary, so assistant, yet at the end brought them in no Bill of charges.]
There was no reason why they should, having got more by the bargain then their
charges came to. Mary of Scotland then married to Frances the second of France,
had taken on her (at that time) the style and title of Queen of England; and
the better to pursue that Title, had put some companies of the French into the
Castle of Edenborough, the town of Lies, and other places of that Kingdom.
The Scots being then busied in the Reformation of the Kirk, looked on these
French, as purposely sent thither by the King and Queen to cross their
actions, and hold them under the Dominion of the Popes of Rome; and thereupon
made suit unto Queen Elizabeth, to supply them with Men, Money, and Ammunition,
for driving the Frenchmen out of their Country. And hereunto the Queen most
readily assented, knowing full well how much it did import the safety of her
Person, and the preservation of her Title, Estate, that the French should not
be settled in the Forts and Castles which lay near the borders of this Kingdom.
So that by succouring the Scots in such proportion as they had desired, she
played her own game as well as theirs. For by dislodging the French, and
quitting the whole Country of them, she kept that backdoor shut against all
pretenders; and by feeding the most Popular of the Scottish Nobility, ^ith gifts
and pensions, she got her self so strong a party in that Kingdom, that she
became more absolute there, than ever any King of Scotland had been before her.

The Bishops were excluded by ancient Fol. 219.
Canon Laws of the Council of Toledo, to be assistant in cause of Blood or
Death, as disagreeable to their Function.] That the Bishops were disabled by
some anti^nt Canons, from sentencing any man to death, and (it may be) from
being present when any such sentence was pronounced, I shall easily grant; but
that they were disabled from being assistants in such cases, from taking the
Examinations, or hearing the Depositions of witnesses, or giving council in
such m^ters as they saw occasion, I believe our Author cannot prove^ ^ertaine I
am, that it is. and has been otherwise in point of practice. And that the
Bishops sitting as Peers in an English Parliament, were never excluded before
this time, from any such assistances, as by their Gravity and Learning, and
other abilities, they were enabled to give in any dark and difficult business
(though of Blood and Death) which were brought before him. And I remember I saw
about that time a little M^nuscript Tract entitled, De jure Paritatis
Episcoporum, that is to say, of the right of the Peerage of the Bishops, in
which their privileges were asserted, ^s to that particular: But they not
willing to contend in a business which seemed so little to concern them, or
else not able to strive against the present stream* which seemed to carry all
before it, suffered themselves to be excluded at that time, without protesting
to the contrary, or interposing in defense of their ancient rights. And this I
look on as the first degree of their Humiliation. For when it was perceived
that a business of so great consequence might be done in P^rliament, without
their council and consent, it opened a wide gap unto their adversaries, first
to deprive them of their Votes, and after to destroy even the Calling it self.
But this was not the main point which the Commons aimed at, they were resolved
to have a close Committes, to take examinations in the business of the Earl of
Strafford, and were not willing that any Bishops should be of it, for fear
le^t favoring the Earls Cause or Person, they might discover any part of
those secret practices which were had against him, and thereby fortify and
prepare him for his just defense, when the Cause should come unto a trial. And
now it is coming on apace, for our Author tells us, that

Monday the 22. of March was the day Ibid.
prefixed of the Earls compearing.] That is to ^ay, of his appearing a^
WestminsterHall, where the Lords were to sit as Judges, and the Commons as
Prosecutors and Solicitors only. If it be asked how it came to pass that the
day was prefixed no sooner, considering that he was accused and committed on
the 11. day of November, which was above four months before? I answer, first,
that the Examination of so many Witnesses as were used against him, (many of
which were sent for out of Ireland by especial warrant) took up no small time.
I answer secondly, that in this intervall of time there had been some endeavor
used by the Royal party, to mitigate the displeasures, and take off the edge
of his greatest Adversaries; and it came so far toward an agreement, that
there was a designation of some Offices of the greatest, both Trust and Power,
to be given amongst them: it being condescended too (if my intelligence or
memory fail not) that the Earl of Bedford should be made Lord Treasurer, and
Master Pym Chancellor of the Exchequer, the Earl of Essex Governor of the
Prince, and that Master Hambden should be his Tutor, the Lord Say Master of the
Wards, and Master Hollice principal Secretary in the place of Windebanke, the
Deputiship of Ireland was disposed* of also, and some Command appointed to the
Earl of Warwick in the Royal Navy. And in relation to this purpose, the Bishop
of London delivered to the King the Treasurers Staff, the Earl of Newcastle
relinquished the Governance of the Prince, and the Lord Cottington resigned his
Offices both in the Exchequer and Court of Wards, there being no doubt but that
Bishop Duppa would relinquish the Tutourship of the Prince when it should be
required of him: but before all things were fully settled and agreed on, the
Kings mind was altered, which so exasperated them who were concerned in this
des^gnation, that they pursued the Earl of Strafford with the greater
eagerness. And somewhat to this purpose was hinted in the Kings Declaration of
the 12 of August, in which he signified what overtures had been made by them,
and with what importunity for Offices and preferments, what great s^rvices
should have been done for him, and what other undertakings even to have saved
the life of the Earl of Strafford. By which discovery as he blemished the
repute of some principal Members in the eyes of many of the people, so he
exposed himself to some disadvantages in the eyes of others, by giving them to
understand at how cheap a rate (a rate which would have cost him nothing) he
might have saved the life of such an able and deserving Minister.

Secretary Vane upon some occasion delivered Fol 246.
to his son Sir Henry Vane the key of a Cabinet to fetch some papers laid
therein, etc.] What this occasion was is easy to be seen by the sequel of it,
especially if compared with those Animosities and displeasures which the
Secretary had harbored against the Earl. Sir Henry Vane had obtained of the
King not long before, the Manor of Rabie in the Bishopric of Durham, not
without hope of being made Baron of that place by His Majesty's favor. On the
other side the Lord Lieutenant deriving his descent from the Nevils, Earls of
Westmor land, whose Honorary Seat that was, procured himself to be created
Baron of Rabie in those Letters Patents, by which he was invested with the
Earldome of Strafford. This gave the beginning to that fire which consumed the
Earl, but not till it had been much increased on another occasion. There was a
thrifty design in Court to save the King the charges of a public table; and
to that end it was advised that Sir Henry Vane then Treasurer of the Household
should be made one of the principal Secretaryes in the place of Sir John Cook
then weak with age, but so that he should still hold the Treasurership in the
way of Commendam. Scarce was Vane warm in his new Office when the Earl of
Strafford interposed, alleging to the King, that he had no other Correspondent
in the Court for the businesses of Ireland but Mr. Secretary Cook, and that if
he should be displaced, His Majesty's affairs in that Kingdom might extremely
suffer. On this, a sudden stop was made, and Cook restored, continuing in his
former Office till the Queen openly appeared in behalf of Vane, who so
prevailed that Vane was settled in the place, and Cook dismissed into the
Country, as no longer serviceable; which fuel being added to the former
fire, made it flame so high that nothing but death or blood could quench it.
Insomuch as it was thought by many understanding men, that Sir Henry Vane did
purposely misreport the Kings Message to the former Parliament for abrogating
the Ship Money in hatred to the Earl of Strafford, who had undertook to manage
that Parliament to the Kings advantage: and that seeing him to continue still
both in power and favor, he fell upon that speeding project which our Author
has related in that which follows in the story; that by such a cunning piece
of malice, he might rather seem to offer him up as a sacrifice to the public
justice, than to his own particular hatred, Ah ult io magis public vindictae
quam privato odio dato videatur, as in the like case the Historian has it.

For the C^ons were resalved that day Fol. 152.
should set a total period to the Earls defense, and next to speed their Bill
(...) A^tainder.] The Commons had now spent a Month in prosecuting their
Acousation against the Earl of Strafford, and seeing how little they had
gained in order to the point they aimed at, resolved to steer their course by
another wind. For finding that their proofs amounted not to a Legal evidence,
and that nothing but legal evidence could prevail in a way of Judicature, they
called the Legislative power to their assistance; according unto which, both
Lords and Commons might proceed by the light of their own consciences, without
any further proof or testimony. And so it is affirmed expressly by Mr. St. John
then Solicitor General in his Speech made at a Conference in a Committee of
both Houses of Parliament, April the 29. 1641. where it is said, That although
single testimony might be sufficient to satisfy private consciences, yet how
far it would have been satisfactory in a judicial way where Forms of Law are
more to be stood upon, was not so clear; whereas in this way of Bill, private
satisfaction* to each man's conscience is sufficient, although no evidence had
been given in at all. Thus they resolved it in this Case, but knowing of what
dangerous consequence it might be hereafter, to the lives and fortunes of the
Subjects, a Clause was added to the Bill that i^ should not be drawn into
example for the time to come: which because it may seem somewhat strange to
them that know it not, I will here add so much of the said Bill as concerns
this point: In which said Bill the heads of the Accusation being reckoned up,
it follows thus, viz: Be it therefore enacted* by the Kings most excellent
Majesty, and by the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled,
and by the authority of the same, that the said Earl of Strafford for the
heinous crimes and offenses aforesaid, stand and be adjudged and attainted of
high Treason, and shall suffer such pain of death, and incur such forfeitures
of his Goods and Chattells, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, of any Estate
of Freehold, or Inheritance in the said Kingdoms of England, and Ireland,
which the said Earl or any other to his use, or in trust for him, have, or had
the day of the first sitting of this present Parliament, or at any time since.
Provided that no Judge or Judges, Justice or Justices whatsoever, shall adjudge
or interpret any act or thing to be Treason, nor hear or determine any Treason,
nor in any other manner, then he or they should or ought to have done before
the making of this Act, and as if this Act had never been made. Thus have we
Treason and no Treason in the selfsame action; that being judged Treason in
this one man, which never was to be judged Treason in any other. But whatsoever
it was, it was conceived that many of the Lords began to show themselves more
forwards to comply with the Commons, then they had done formerly.

Whereof the King having notice, he thought ^ol. 253.
it high time for him to interpose, etc. and calling both Houses together, May
the first, said, etc.] This coming of his Majesty, and the Speech then made, as
it relished so ill with the two Houses, that few of them attended on the
solemnit^es of the next day, on which the Kings eldest Daughter was married to
the Prince of Orange, so gave it no contentment to the E^rle himself, whose
death it rather (...), and made sure work of, then it could any wa^es conduce
to his preservation. That passage in the Kings Speech, in which he signified,
that the misdemeanors of the Earl were so great and many, that he was not fit
to serve in the place of a Constable, wrought more impression on the Spirits of
that Noble Gentleman, then any kind of death (whatsoever it were) which his
Enemies could inflict upon him, though with great modesty he did no otherwise
express it, in a letter sent unto the King, then that he could have wished his
Majesty had spared his Declaration on Saturday last. But the Earls friends
were as much unsatisfied in the Kings coming at that time, as in that passage
of his Speech, giving it out, that the King was put upon it by some of his
bosome-Enemies, which were in nearest trust about him, on purpose to set him at
greater odds with the House of Commons, and consequently with the people whom
they represented, by drawing on himself the envy of that business, howsoever
it happened* That if the Earl should be attainted notwithstanding by the Votes
of the Lords, it wo^ld be looked upon as a thing done against his will, and no
thanks to him; but if he were acquitted by them, who but the King must bear
the storm of all popular clamours: That it was possible enough that the curs
could be so considerate of* their own condition, as not to make a rod for
themselves, under color it was intended for another man, and so that Bill of
Attainder might have rested there; but had it passed (which was the worst that
could happen in it) the King had still the liberty of a Negative voice, or
might have yielded at the last, to the importunity of the Commons, with less
dishonor, then after such a Declaration, and so publicly made: And finally
that by dissenting from the Bill when it came to his turn^, it could have
raised no greater tumults then it d^d, to compel him to it, and possibly had
raised none at all, because he had done it in a Parliamentary and regular way;
whereas his coming at that time, and in that manner to the House of Peers, was
looked upon as a forestalling of their Judgments, and interruption of the
Course of Justice by threats and menaces, from whence what fruits could be
expected, but the exasperating of the Commons to such acts of violence, as
should not only make sure work with the Earl of Strafford, but lay a ground
of (...) troubles for himself and hi^. This was the sum of those discourses
at that time, which whether they had*more of truth, or of passion in them, it
is hand to say. But who can go against the workings of that heavenly
Providence, those judgments are past finding out, and his ways unsearchable.
What (...) hereupon ensued, we shall find in our (...), who ^elleth us
withal, of (...) people thus drawn together, that

They posted upon the gate of Westminster Fol. 256.
a Catalogue of those whose (...) were for the Earls acquittall, under the
Title of Straffordians.] This paper was not posted up on the Gate of
Westminster, but on the corner of the wall of Sir William Brunkards house, in
the old Paelace yard in Westminster, with this clause added to the end, This
and more shall be done to the Enemies of Justice. The names of which (...),
since our Author has not pleased to give us, and that I think it neither
dishonorable, nor unsafe to them (being elsewhere Printed) I shall here add
in the same order as they stood in the Paper, That is to say,

1. Lord Digbie. 2. Lord Compton. 3. Lord Buckhurst. 4. Sir Rob. Hatton. 5. Sir
Thomas Fanshaw. 6. Sir Edward Alford. 7. Sir Nicho. Slanning. 8. Sir Thomas
Danby. 9. Sir Geo. Wentworth. 10. Sir Peter Wentworth. 11. Sir Frederick
Cornwallis: 12. Sir William Carnaby. 13. Sir Richard Winn. 14. Sir Gervase
Clifton. 15. Sir William Withrington. 16. Sir William Pennyman. 17. Sir Patrick
Curwent. 18. Sir Richard Lee. 19. Sir Henry Slingsby. 20. Sir William Portman.
21. Mr. Gervase Hallis. 22. Mr. Sydny Godolphin. 23. Mr. Cook. 24. Mr.
Coventry. 25. Mr. Ben. Weston. 26. Mr. Will. Weston. 27. Mr. Seldom. 28. Mr.
Alford. 29. Mr. Floyd. 30. Mr. Herbert. 31. Captain Digby. 32. Sergeant Hide.
33. Mr. Tailor. 34. Mr. Griffith. 35. Mr. Scowen. 36. Mr. Bridgman. 37. Mr.
Fettiplace. 38. Dr. Turner. 39. ^pt. Charles Price. 40. Dr. Parry Civilian. 41.
Mr. Arundell. 42. Mr. Newport. 43. Mr. Holborne. 44. Mr. Noell. 45. Mr. Kirton.
46. Mr. Pollard. 47. Mr. Price. 48. Mr. Travanmian. 49. Mr. Jane. 50. Mr.
Edgecombe. 51. Mr. Chilchly. 52. Mr. Mallery. 53. Mr. Porter. 54. Mr. White
Secret. E. D. 55. Mr. Warwick.
These were the men exposed unto the fury of ungoverned people, so mad and
violent, that some of them were heard to say, That if they could not have the
Lieutenants life, they would have the Kings.

This Protestation being formed was the Ibid.
next day read in the lower House, and generally taken by all the Members.] Our
Author is here out as in that before, the Protestation not being taken the next
day after it was framed, but on the very same day before the Memhers were
committed to go out of the Honse; and though it was taken generally by all the
Members, yet it was not taken by them all, the Lord Digbie and an Uncle of his
refusing it. But being taken by all the rest, it was not long after sent to the
Lords, by whom (neither out of fear or favor) it was taken also; and
afterward imposed upon all the Subjects by an Order of the House of Commons,
July the 30th. 1641. under pain of being thought unfit to bear any Office
either in the Church or Commonwealth; the Lords not only not consenting to
it, but dissenting from it. Which Protestation (being omitted by our Author, I
shall here subjoyn, that we may see how punctually it has been observed by
them that took it, and is this that follows:

I A. B. do in the presence of Almighty God, promise, vow, and protest to
maintain and defend, as far as lawfully I may, with my life, power, and estate,
the true reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the Church
of England, against all Popery and Popish Innovations within this Realm
contrary to the same Doctrine, and according to the duty of my Allegiance to
his Majesty's Royal Person, Honor, and Estate; as also the Power and
Privileges of Parliament, the lawful rights and liberties of the subject, and
every person that makes this Protestation in whatsoever he shall do in the
lawful pursuance of the same. And to my power and as far as lawfully I may I
will oppose, and by all good ways and means endeavor to bring to condign
punishment all such as shall either by force, practice, plots, councels, and
conspiracies, or otherwise do any thing, to the contrary of any thing in this
present Protestation contained. And further that I shall in all just and
honorable ways, endeavor to preserve the union and peace between the three
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland. And neither for hope, fear, nor
other respect shall relinquish this promise, vow, and Protestation.

In this perplexity of thoughts he consults Fol. 257.
with four Bishops, etc.] Not sent for by himself, but sent to him by the
Houses of Parliament to inform his conscience, and bring him to yield unto the
Bill; In the nomination of which Bishops they consulted rather their own ends
than the Kings satisfaction. The persons sent on this employment were the
Primate of Armagh, the Bishops of Lincoln, Durham, and Carlisle: of which, the
two last being men unskilled in Politic and Secular affairs, depended wholly
on the judgment of the other two; and those (as the Houses knew well enough)
carried a sharp tooth toward the Lord Lieutenant upon former grudges. The
displeasure which the Primate had conceived against him, was for the abrogating
of the Articles of Religion established in the Church of Ireland, and settling
in their place the Articles of the Church of England, Anno 1633. And this he
reckoned on his score, because Dr. Bramall (once Chaplain to the Lord
Lieutenant, and) then Bishop of Derrie, had appeared most in it. But he on
whose dextetiry they did most depend for this business, was the Bishop of
Lincoln, of worse affections than the other, in regard that when the Bishop
was under the Star Chamber suit, the Lieutenant then Lord Deputy of Ireland,
put off his going thither for a Term or two, of purpose (as it was conceived)
to have a fling at him before he went. This struck so deep in the Bishops
stomach, that he would not think himself in safety, where the Earl had any
thing to do, and so was like to help him forwards to the other world. Nor
speak I this but on some good ground: For when the Bishop, being then Prisoner
in the Tower, had made means by the Queen to be admitted to a reconciliation
with His Majesty, offering both his Bishopric and Deanery of Westminster, in
confidence that the King would so provide for him, that he should not go much
less than he was: the King upou the Queens desire sent, the Earl of Dors^t
(from whose mouth I have it) to accept the Bishops offer on the one side, and
on the other side to promise him in his Majesty's name, the next good
Bishopric that should fall in Ireland: which Proposition being made, the
Bishop absolutely refused to hearken to it, telling the E. of Dorset, that he
had made a shift, by the power and mediation of his friends, to hold out
against his enemies here for 7 years together, but if they should send him
into Ireland, he should there fall into the hands of a man, who once in seven
months would find out some old Statute or other to cut off his head. Think you
the King was not likely to be well informed in His conscience, when men so
interessed were designed unto the managing, and preparing of it? and so it
proved in the event. For our Author tells us, that on the morrow after being

Monday, May the 10th, in the morning Fol. 158.
His Majesty signed a Commission to the Earl of Arundel, etc. for the passing
of the two Bills; one for Continuation of the Parliament during the pleasure of
the two Houses: the other for the Attainder against the Earl of Strafford.]
And these two Bills he signed (as I have been told) with one pen full of Ink,
by one of which he wa^ sufficiently punished for his consenting to the other.
By his consenting to the Bill of Attainder, he did not only cut off his right
hand with his left, as was affi^med of Valentinian the Emperor when he caused
Aetius to be slain; but found such a remorse of conscience still attending on
him that it never left him till his death: And by consenting to the other, He
put such an irrevocable power into the hands of his enemies, as was m^de use of
afterward not only to His own destruction, but to the disherison of His
Children, and the undoing of all those who adhered unto Him; who drew Him to
the first, we are told by our Author; and who persuaded Him to the last, may be
now enqu^red. Some charge it on the Queen, who being terrified with the
Tumults, persuade the King to yield unto it, as the only expedient for
appeasing the people: some attribute it to the Lord Say then Master of the
Wards, and one of His Majesty's privy Council, who (as it is reported) when
the King asked him if a Continuance for seven years might not serve the turn?
made answer, That he hoped they should dispatch all businesses in so many
months; and that if His Majesty passed the Bill, it should be so far from
making the Parliament perpetual, that he was canfident they would desire to be
dissolved before three years end. Most lay the blame of it (as of all things
else) on the Marquess of Hamilton, who by cutting out so much work for the
King in England, was sure to carry on his designs in Scotland without
interruption: and I have heard from credible persons that he did brag much of
this service when he was in that Kingdom, (...) frequently that he had got a
perpetual Parliament for the English, and would procure the like for the Scots
too before he had done: so hard a thing it is to say by what private
persuasions and secret practices He was drawn to that, which proved so
prejudicial to Him, that it made Him presently grow less in the eyes of His
people; insomuch that a Night before the passing of this Act, a Paper was set
up near the Gates of Whitehall, importing that on the Morrow next there was to
be Acted in the House of Peers a famous Tragie-Comedie, called, [ A King and no
King.] But as for the public outward motives, which were used to induce Him
to, and of the great power He had parted with by this Condescension, you may
hear Himself thus speaking in His Declaration of the 12th of August. Upon
information (says He) that credit could not be obtained for so much money as
was requifite for the relief of our Army, and people in the Northern parts for
preventing the eminent danger the Kingdom was in, and for supply of Our
present and urgent occasions, for fear the Parliament might be dissolved before
justice should be done upon Delinquents, public grievances be redressed, a
firm peace between the two Nations of England and Scotland concluded, and
before provision should be made for the repayment of such moneys as should be
so raised (though We know what power We parted from and trusted Our Houses with
by so doing, and what might be the consequence of such a trust, if unfaithfully
managed) We neglected all such suspicions, which all men now see deserved not
to be slighted, and We willingly and immediately passed that Act for the
Continuance of this Parliament, being resolved it should not be Our fault, if
all those particulars were not speedily provided for, which seemed then to be
the grounds of their desire.

May the 11. he wrote to the Lords this Fol. 160.
Letter, the bearer whereof was no meaner person then the Prince of Wales.] In
t^Letter (which our Author passes ^o slightly over) there are many things
which gave great occasion of discourse to discerning men: 1. That the King
having sped so ill by his last address unto the Parliament on the first of
May, should put himself upon the hazard of another repulse. 2. That he should
send this Letter (of which he could not rationally expect a contenting answer)
by the hands of the Prince, as if he would accustom him from his very
childhood to the Refusalls of his Subjects. 3. That he should descend so much
beneath himself, as to be a Supplicant to his People, and yet be in such a
diffi^ence with them, as not to move his own desires, but by the mediation of
his Peers. 4. That he should put himself to such a hopeless trouble, as to
write to them for the altering or anulling of a sentence passed but the day
before, which they had gained with so much danger, and so many artifices; or to
desire the Respit of two or three days, for the condemned Gentleman, which was
a power he had not parted with by the Act of Attainder. 5. That in the
subscription of the Letter he should give himself the name of their Friend, as
if by passing the Act for the ^ntinuance of the Parliament, he had ^de himself
but as one of them, at the best their Equal; for Amicitia est inter Pares,
true friendship is amongst Equals only, as the saying is. 6. That he should
give himself the title of unalterable, considering that he had publicly
declared not long before, that neither fear nor favor should make him do a
thing so much against his Conscience, as to act any thing in order to the
Condemnation of the Earl of Strafford, with reference to the matters which
were charged upon him, and yet should sign the Bill for his Attainder within
ten days after. And finally (not to say any thing of the Militia) with the
Forts and Navy wherein they had not his consent.

But that which gave matter of most amazement, was, that he should subscribe at
all, it being a thing so contrary to his own custom, and the custom of his
Predecessors, who used to write their names on the heads of those Missives,
which were directed to their Subjects: And then that when the Letter was
brought back to him without any effect, he ordered that it should be registered
in the House of Peers, on a wan hope that they would use to his honor.
Assuredly this under-writing of his name in his Letter to this last
Parliamement, was of as bad presage to him, as the vailing of his Crown to the
first; and his desire to have it put upon the register, did serve as a momento
to them, that they should keep him under, now they had him down. For having
reduced him to this pass, how easily did they gain from him several Acts for
suppressing the Authority of the Clerk of the Market, and the Court of
Stannaries, for intrenching the preambulation of the Forests, and the
Repealing the old Acts for Knighthood* with what a strong hand did they draw
him to the abolishing of Ship Money, the Star Chamber, the High Commission, the
Courts of the Marquess on the North, the Jurisdiction of all the
Ecclesiastical Courts, some privileges formerly enjoyed by the Council
Table; besides the many Concessions at the Treaty in the Isle of Wight, which
either should have been soon granted, or not at all. All of them certain
Testimonies of his being brought under, and all of them encouraged by so
strange a submission of himself to the Power and Courtesy of his People, as
he caused to be registered in this Letter.

Thus died this unhappy Earl. And to Fol. 165.
dye thus by the stroke of Justice, etc.] The highest Acts of Justice are
seldom without some obliquity, or injustice in them. For summum jus est summa
injuria, as the saying is. But whether it were so in this case or not, whether
he were not sent out of the world, per viam expedientiae, rather then per viam
justitiae, as most wise men thought; Posterity free from all engagements of
Love or Hatred, will be best able to determine. And so I leave him to his rest
in the bed of Peace, with this Epitaph of Clevelands making, to be fixed upon
it, that is to say,

Here lies wise and valiant Dust,
Hudled up 'twixt Fit and Ju^t:
Strafford, who was hurryed hence
'Twixt Treason and Convenience.
He spent his time here in a mist;
A Papist, yet a Calvinist.
His Princes nearest Joy, and Grief;
He had, yet wanted all relief.
The prop and ruin of the State;
The peoples violent love, and hate.
One in extremes loved and abhorred,
Riddles lie here; or in a word,
Here lies blood, and let it lie,
Speechless still, and never cry.
An Alphabetical Table.
Containing the uncouth and unusual Words which are found in our Author; those
which are in a different Character, being used by him in a differing sense from
that which commonly they carry.

A
ACquist Accalladoes Ablude Avisoes Affix Adoption Acclaime Asperse Alimprovist
Abstruse Appliated Adoequate Anealed August Anthemes Acul^ated Acquiescing
Amphibious Accostable Aborted Autopsie Atocritie Anniversary A^nasitie
Anomabous Apostrophe Accriminated Agnified Aetiologie Animadverted Articulate
Agression Antagonist Adventitious Alleviate Adiaphorus
B
BOorne
C
COmplicated Cuergo Ceremoniale Conflagration Celebrities Culpabilitie
Condignitie Coition Canceleir Concinnesse Compensate Cognascible Conceded
Commensurate Complacence Combustion Caresses Concrete Cal^lled Causalitie
Clientelary Confraternitie Concriminaries Clancular Consiguration Congelable
Chirographie Chachexie
D
DElatory Duall Destination Depredation Despondence Detrunk Despensation
Decussation Donative D^sponding Decore Decocted Deplumed Desideration
Diaphonous Dilapidation Detrenching Decretory Disopsie Delatorians
E
EXasse Erect Enormitants Exuberancie Externe Elemented Exorated Emerging
Ebullitians Emposted Evacuate Equilebrated Excogitate Equiperate Emrod Ematin
Embryo Epiphonoma Effigies Emergent Emolument Everteth Excoriated Erudition
Eradicated
F
FUligenous Ferocient Fortuitously Foculent
G
GErminated Gust Gestation Grison
H
HOlocaust Halcionian Hectique Hailemen Horizontall Hibernall Hypothesis
I
IMpede Ithacu Incuriou^ Inhumed Iteration Inauspicious Innitiated Intrinsique
Incuriasfitie Individuation Impetuously Incendiary Innitiation Inventioned
Irritateth Judications Infortunium Joco-seriously Intersect Inflame Inaudable
Intend Impunitie Inorganicall Impertinence Insolation Intense Intemorate
Imperiositie Inquietude Incantations Incompassible Identitie Interfered Jurors
Impregned Imminent
L
LUminaries Luxuriancie Leve-se-quere Luminans
M
MOlis Magnetique Metuculossitie Morasse Missivus Metastrophe Meamorphusis Mode
Meliorate Mercurialists Mutulated Mynatorie
N
NOnsen^ Neutralitie Noxiousnesse Narrators Nave Nude
O
OBliqu^ Ocular Organicall Omen Operate Otium Occult Odium Offertory Opine
Officiate Onerous
P
POstlimin^ted Puisnesse Patrite Procluded Principality Ponderous
Postlimineation Pollicitation Parole Precarious Piaculary Protervity
Pare-Royall Portentous Pondulous Periclitations Pact Paramonts Posthume
Presidianes Preponderate Parade Protended Paralious Parashier Philargicus
P^cognition Pr^cation Pan Angliam Placable Portentous Pertrude Penultimo
Palladium Perpending Preterition Promove Propensitio.
R
REverberation Rependans Remora Recondito Ritention R^tualities Reciprocated
Reductive Respond Ranciditie Reparti Renvoy Relax Relatives Refulgent
Recomation Repertory Radiant Rusticitio Researched Recidivatior Recognitante
Resu^ed Ranciditie Reduction.
S
SIngle unite Superinducted Scintillation Superfetation Seminasities Sterill
Synodites Subsortitiously Series Stipulateth Salubrius Stimulated Strictures
Statiurch Salvas Simulary Synopsis Susceptible Salitary Suburbicary
Superannuate Sedulous Symbale Syteme Supinely Succentoriated Stronded Scheme
Sopited
T.
TEmporalities Temerated Temeritie Terrene Trepidation Tendancie
Transfiguration Transpretation Tempestively Treatment
V
VAlediction Unanim Veteran Unite Vigill Virile Vanum Vacuitie Venialitie
Unizon
and so I end this table with the Counsel of an old Grammarian, who advises
thus;

Moribus antiquis, praesentibus utere verbis:

That is to say,
Retain old Virtues, but for bear,
New words, not fitted to the (...).
The End.
ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 7. dele two p. 5. l. 22. for Coins r. Laws p. 6. l. 6. for able
r. old p. 9. l. 23. for no r. on p. 16. l. 12. for (...) r. mola ibid l. 16.
for University r. Divinity. p. 21. l. 15. for animalon r. animatum p. 24. l.
21. for and r. but p. 33. l. 21. for House r. Houses p. 41. l. 18. for his r.
this p. 44. l. 30. for unreasonable r. reasonable p. 45. l. 21. r. resolutions
p. 58. for faciente r. ^vente p. 64. l. 15. for paper r. prayers p. 76. l. 22.
for pressed r. suppressed p. 78. l. 28. for Westmin^ r. Winchester p. 95. l. 6.
to no body but themselves, ad^, in case they should be discontinued for the
times to come p. 105 l. 14. for men^ r. mutare p. 106. l. 23. for that r. not.
p. 140 l. 11. for finding r. hiding ibid. l. 19. for (...) r. offense p. 149.
l. 10. for restrain r. ^range p. 152. l. 11. for then r. therein p. 153. l. 26.
for last r. cast p. 154. l. 2. for 1631. r. 16^0. p. 160. l. 15. for Gadus r.
Gades p. 184. l. 26. for yet could this r. yet could not this p. 186. l. 30.
for insalvation r. in^tuation p. 190. l. 25. for asserting r. offering p. 204.
l. 27. for Enoch r. (...) p. 208. l. 22. for judicious r. judiciary (...) for
(...) more p. 234. l. 8. for cars r. ^ouse p. 238. l. 9. for committe^ r.
admitted ibid. l. 16. for neither r. either p. 143. l. 6. r (...) p. 247. l.
13. del. And finally (not to say any thing of the Militia, with the Forts and
Navy, wherein they had not His consent, and add the same to the end of the 12
line in the page next following. p. 248. l. 10. for intrenching r. retrench

A Table of the principal Observations.
A
DR. Abbot, Archbishop of Canterbury, his Irregularity through killing a Keeper
casually, 55 His Remissness in not exacting Conformity to the Churches Orders,
occasioned the term of Inn^vations, (...) Arminians] what they are, 15 Whether
Enemies of Gods Grace, 18 What caused K. James to be an adversary to them, 23
Montacu's Book, called [Appello Caesarem] licensed by King James his command,
33 Called in again by King Charles, 69 Arminianism called a Bridge to Popery,
80
B
BIshops War] falsely so called, 151 Bishops and Presbyters] terms not of
equivalent import, 183 Their Office*calling defended to be by divine Rght, even
Laymen, 185 Mr. Grimstons Argument against it, retor^ed by Mr. Seldom, 188
Whether they may be assistant in causes of Blood and Death? for which cause
they were excluded the House of (...) at my Lord of Straffords trial, 224
Earl of Bristol, V. Digby, Duke of Buckingham, V. Viliers, Dr. Burgess his
answe^ing the Act at Oxford, 182
C
CAlvinianism, how it differs from S. Augustine's Doctrine, 110 King Charles
crowned in White, an Emblem of Innocence; his Predecessors in Purple, an Emblem
of Majesty, 29 How he veiled his C^owne to his subjects, 30, 48 His Maxim,
['Tis better to be deceived, than to distrust,] 105 His Entertainment at
Bolsover Castle cost 6000^. 106 His neglecting those arts for keeping up of
Majesty, which Qu: ^lizah: practiced, 109 The true cause of the miscarriage of
his Expedition against the Scots, 157 His error in recalling his Forces thence,
160 How the Hollanders affronted him, and made him veil his Crown, 166
Clergy-mens Vices to be concealed, rather than published, 140 A Minister as
good as any Jack-Gentlemen in England well interpreted, 141 The Clergy in
Convocation have a power to grant Subsidies, not confirmed by the Commons in
Parliament, 196 Coronation, Rites thereof no vain Ceremonies, 37
D
SIr Edw: Decring his character, 177 Digby, E. of Bristoll, not empowered by
proxy to celebrate the Marriage with the Infanta, 8 His impeachment by the D.
of Buckingham, 43, 50
F
FAme no ground for an Historian, 41
G
GLoria Patri, standing up at it retained in our Reformed Church, ex vi
Catholicae consuctudinis, 87
H
MR. Hamilton's end in raising Forces for Germany, 101 His being sent
Commissioner into Scotland, 142 His subtle practices against the King, 149 The
Scots speech of him, [That the Son of so good a Mother would do them no hurt,]
156 He the cause of dissolving the short Parliament, 175 Hate, Natural est
odisse quem laeseris, 170
I
K. James, Whether the wisest King of the British Nation, 13 His seeing a Lion
(the King of beasts) baited, presaged his being baited by his subjects, 28 Dr.
Juxon. Bishop of Land. why made Lord Treasurer, 130 His moderation and humility
in that officce, being neither ambitious before, nor proud after, 132
K
KNighthood, the Statute for taking that order, 98
L
DR. Lamb his death, the city not fined for it, 66 Lambeth Articles, when made
part of the confession of the Church of Ireland, 40 When, and why the articles
of Ireland were repealed, etc. or 39 Articles substituted in their places, 127
The occasion of making them the Lambeth articles, 72 Of no Authority in the Ch:
of England, 75 What moved K. James to send them to Dort, 23 And put them into
the Irish Confession, 77 Dr. Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury, Whether a favourer
of the Popish faction, 171 Ceremonies renewed by him, tended rather to the ru
ine, than advancement of the Catholic cause, 173 He no cause of dissolving the
short Parl. 174 His being voted guilty of High Treason, and committed to the
Bl. Rod, 215 Lyturgie-English, endeavored by K. Charles to be brought into
Scotland, 143 His Error in not suppressing and punishing the Tumults at
Edinburgh, when the Scottish service was first read, 145 Bish. of Lincoln, v.
Williams. Londoners Petition for redressing of Grievances, 200
M
Masks; That of the four Inns of Court, how occasioned, 118 E. of Montrose,
the cause of his adhering to the Covenanters, 206
N
MR. Noy, Attorney general, his great parts, 121 Integrity, 124 Parliaments not
coordinate to Kings, but subordinate, 28 The Members thereof have been
imprisoned, 43 Whether Lords created sedente Parliamento, may be admitted to
Vote, 48 House of Commons called by Writ only to consent and submit, not to
judge, 58 Whether the H. of Commons could (...) the H. of Peers (consisting of
118) thrice over, 59 Bishops Members of the H. of Peers, 60 Their Exclusion
thence had this consequent, the abrogating of the Kings Negative Voice, 60 The
King no Member of the H. of Peers, but supreme Head of all, 61 Disorderly and
tumultuous carriage of Parliaments, cause of their change and discontinuance,
94 Members presented not to be questioned without the House's Order, 95 Scotc^
Parliament, how called anciently, 162 The Kings calling a Parliament after the
Expedition against the Scots, unsafe and unseasonable, 167 That Parliament
which was the ruin of Woolsey, and overthrow of Abbeys, began the third of
Novem. the same day of the month began our long Parliament, which ruined the
Archb: of Canterbury, and the whole Church, 207 No reason for holding the
Parliam. at Westminster. it had been better at York, 209 Who persuaded the King to
assent to the Act for a perpetual Parliament, 243 S. Paul's Church, the
repairing thereof, 103 Peoples Darlings of short continuance, 35 Popery,
Montacu and ^osins not questioned for preaching Popery, 81 Placing the
Communion Table Altar-wise, had both law and practice for it, and therefore was
no Popery, 82, 133 Taking away part-boyled Poperies, (or English popish
Ceremonies) an impairing the substance of Religion, 90 The reason of so great
an increase of Papists in England, was the neglect of Holy Days, and
Common Prayer, 92 Prince his Marriage, a branch of the royal Prerogative, 12
Puritans rejoiced not at the Prince his birth, 97 Protestation taken by the
Parliament, and enjoined the Kingdom, 239 Puritan party, how they were to be
sweetened with the great Offices of the kingdom, 226 Religion; House of Commons
set up a Co^^ittee, as a Consistory of Layelders, to take cognizance of Causes
ecclesiastical, 31 They sat in the Divinityschooles at Oxford Parliament, 34
Isle of Rhee, errors in that Enterprise, 52
S
SAbbath; Sports allowed on that day, the motives thereto, and restrictions
therein, 112 Divinity of the Lords day Sabbath, a new Doctrine, 114 The
P^iesthoods O der and Revenue under the Gospel, not grounded thereon, 116
Scots; A certain maintenance settled on the Scots Clergy, 107 Scotch
Service Book, Tumults at reading thereof, 145 The true occasion of raising up
the seditious Scots, 112 Card. Richelieu animated the Scots to rebellion, 162
Scots lost by favors, and gained by punishments, 169 They promised payment for
their quarters at their first coming, but afterward plundered all, 204 Their
cowardly carriag, 205 Why freely helped by the English to drive out the French,
223 Sea; The Kings dominion in the narrow seas asserted by Seldom against
Grotius, 128 The King regained his dominion at sea, and secured our coast from
piracies, through the benefit of ship-mony, 120 Ship-mony, How and why Kings
have levied it as a Navall aid, 121 How the Writs issued our, 123 The whole
charge thereof amounted to 236000 l. which was bu^ 20000 li. per mensem, 123
Clergy not exempted therefrom, 124 Socinianisme charged upon the Members of the
Convocation, who made a Canon against it, 195 Spaniards old friends to the
English, 9 They intended really to restore the Palatinate to the Prince
Elector, 11 Earl of Strafford, v. Wentworth, Synod, or Convocation, rightly
continued by the same Writ that called them, 179 Their danger in sitting after
the Parliament was up, 181 The Oath, etc. how occasioned, 189 Taken for
upholding the Church Government then established. 191 And that willingly, 193
The Clergy's power therein to make Canons binding without a parliament, 220
T
Communion Table, v. Popery, Bowing toward it a primitive custom, (no Popery)
revived by B. Andrews, 85 Its setting up within, the Railes Altar-wise, to
prevent profanation, enjoined by the Kings authority, 133 Bishop of Lincoln's
Book against it, 136
V
SIr George Villers Duke of Bu^kingham, made the Ball of fortune, 36 His
Impeachment by the Birle of Bristol, 43,50 By whom rendered odious to the
people, 63 Feltons motive to murder him, 64 His e^tate at his death not
comparable to Cardinal Richelieu's, 67
W
SIr Th: VVentw: (...). of Straff* not wise in coming to the Parliament, 211
His Trial, why deferred so long, 226 Why ^ecretary Vane was incensed against
him, 228 For want of legal Evidence a Bill of Attainder brought in against him
by Legislative power, 230 The Kings censure of him in the H. of Lords, 233 The
names of those Commons that were for his acquitting, 236 The Bishop of Armagh
and Lincoln, with two Bishops more, sent to resolve the Kings Conscience, 241
The Kings Letter to the Lords in his behalf, 246 Sent out of the world, per
viam expedientiae, His Epitaph, 240 Dr. Williams B. of Lincoln, an instrument
to set the Parliament against the Duke of Buckingham* 36 When, and by whose
means the great Seal was taken from him, 39 Whether he was Eunuchu^ ab utero
or no, 41 Bishop Andrew's opinion of him, 56 His Book called Holy Table, etc.
wrote against his Science and Conscience, 136 He was Head first of the Popish,
then of the Puritan party, 138 He was set free from the Tower much about the
time of the Archbishops impeachment, 217 Words; New coining of them an
Affectation, 4
Y
YOrk, The Kings second Son, not born, but created Duke thereof. 117
FINIS.

